THE PRESENT STATE OF THE Socinian Controversy, AND THE Doctrine of the
Catholic Fathers Concerning A TRINITY in UNITY.

By WILLIAM SHERLOCK, D. D. Dean of St. Paul's, Master of the Temple, and
Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

LONDON: Printed for William Rogers, at the Sun against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetstreet. MDCXC VIII.

THE PREFACE.
I Have little to say to the Reader, having sufficiently Explained the Design
of this Treatise in the First Section. Those who remember how this Controversy
has been of late managed, may possibly expect, what they will not find, some
sharp Resentments of the Ill Usage I have met with, and as sharp Returns; but I
write not to Revenge my self, but to Explain and Vindicate the Truly Ancient,
Catholic and Apostolic Faith of a Trinity in Unity, which requires a Composed
and Sedate Mind both in the Writer and Reader. For this Reason I have thus long
delayed the Publication of this Treatise, the greatest part of which was
Printed Two Years since, that those who will ever grow Cool, might have time to
recover their Temper: And did I not hope that the Publication of it at this
time would tend more to quiet Men's Minds, to stop the Mouths of Heretics, and
to secure the Catholic Faith, than a Passive Silence, it should never see the
Light, how much soever my own Reputation might suffer by it. But I persuade my
self, That the Authority of the Catholic Church, and of the Catholic Fathers,
is not at so low an Ebb, even in this Age, as to be easily despised; and
therefore their Explications, their Arguments, their Answers to the Objections
of Heretics, will have their due weight; and I have not gone one step further.
I appeal to the Catholic Fathers, and am contented to stand or fall by their
Sentence. I have not wilfully misrepresented their Sense in any thing, and have
taken all possible care not to mistake it; and as far as Human Authority is
concerned, here I must leave the matter, for I know of no further Appeal.

The CONTENTS.
CHAP. I.
SECT. I.
THE Present State of the Socinian Controversy; and how to reduce the Dispute
to the Original Question. Page 1.
SECT. II.
How to reduce this Dispute concerning the Trinity to Scripture-Terms. 4 The
Form of Baptism the Rule and Standard of Faith. ibid. That these Names, Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, are more easily understood, and give us a truer Idea of a
Trinity in Unity, than any Artificial Terms. 5, etc.
SECT. III.
That the Title of God attributed in Scripture distinctly to Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, gives us the best Account of their Nature, and must determine the
signification of Ecclesiastical Words. 12 This particularly Explained with
respect to those Terms, Nature* Essence, Substance, Hypostasis, Existence,
Subsistence, Person, etc. 13, etc.
SECT. IV.
These Names, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, prove the real distinction of
Persons in the Trinity. 20, etc.
SECT. V.
These Names, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, prove the Unity, Sameness, Identity
of Nature and Godhead, explained at large. 24
SECT. VI.
Concerning the Unity of God. 33 In what sense the Catholic Church believed in
One God. ibid. Tritheism an old Sabellian and Arian Objection against the
Trinity. 34 How answered by the Catholic Fathers. 37, etc.
CHAP. II. AN Examination of some Considerations concerning the Trinity.
SECT. I.
Concerning the Ways of managing this Controversy. 51 What Ways the Considerer
dislikes. 52, etc. What way he took, viz. consulting Scripture and Natural
Sentiments. 56
SECT. II.
Concerning the Traditionary Faith of the Church with respect to the Doctrine
of the Trinity. 60 What the Catholic Church is, from whence we must receive
this Traditionary Faith. ibid. What Evidence we have for this Tradition from
the Ancient Heresies condemned by the Catholic Church. 64 Of what Authority
the Traditionary Faith of the Catholic Church ought to be in expounding
Scripture. 77
SECT. III.
What is sufficient to be believed concerning the Trinity. 80 His Requisites to
make it possible for us to believe a thing. 81
SECT. IV.
Concerning his state of the Question, That One and the same God is Three
different Persons. 84 His Examination of these Terms, God, Unity, Identity,
Distinction, Number, and Person. And 1. Of the Notion of God. 86
SECT. V.
His Notions and Ideas of Unity, Distinction, Person. His Sabellian Notion of a
Person; that there is but One single Person in the Trinity, as Person signifies
properly, a particular Intelligent Being. 88 This he proves from his Notions of
Unity and Distinction; the Unity and Distinction of Ideas, of Principle, and of
Position. 91 What he means by an obscure confused Knowledge, and a general
confused Faith of the Trinity. 101
SECT. VI.
What the Scripture requires us to believe concerning the Trinity. 103 His
Sabellian Notion of One God, to be adored under Three different Titles and
Characters. Ibid. His Scripture Proof of this Examined. 104, etc. His attempt
to reconcile this with God's being One and Three. 108, etc. And with the
Incarnation of the Second Person of the Trinity. 113 His Account of the Union
of God and Man. 115 What end the belief of the Trinity and Incarnation serve,
not as a Matter of Faith and Speculation, but as an artificial representation
of God's love to man. 120
CHAP. III.
AN Account of the Sabellian Heresy, and by what Arguments the Catholic
Fathers opposed it. 124 The several kinds of Sabellianism 1. Those who made
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to be only Three names, appearances, and offices,
of the same Person. And here the question was, not whether the Son was a
Person, and the Holy Ghost a Person, but whether they were distinct Persons
from the Father. 125 By what Arguments the Catholic Fathers opposed this
Heresy. 127 2. That the Son is distinguished from the Father, only as a man's
word is distinguished from himself. 133 And by what Arguments the Catholic
Fathers opposed this Heresy. 134 3. Some made God a compound Being, and Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost the Three Parts of this one God. 143 By what Arguments the
Fathers opposed it. Ibid.

CHAP. IV.
COncerning the Homoousion, or One Substance of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
150
SECT. I.
The true sense of the Homoousion, from those misrepresentations which were
made of it, and the Answers which were given by the Nicene Fathers to such
Objections. 152
SECT. II.
Some Rules for Expounding the Homoousion. 158
SECT. III.
What the Nicene Fathers meant by the Homoousion. 163
SECT. IV.
A more particular Inquiry into the full signification of the Homoousion, with
respect to the specific Unity of the Divine Nature. 170
SECT. V.
That by the Homoousion the Nicene Fathers did not merely understand a
specific, but a natural Unity and Sameness of Substance between Father and
Son. 180 Damascen's distinction between one in Notion, and one in reality.
Ibid. This appears from their Notion of (...) and (...). 181 And the Catholic
Fathers lay the foundation of this Sameness and Consubstantiality of Nature in
the Eternal Generation of the Son of the Substance of the Father. 184 To which
they added, That the Son receives his whole Substance from the whole Substance
of the Father, totus ex toto. 186 Concerning this mysterious and ineffable
Generation, Whole of Whole. 187 St. Austin teaches, That the Divine Nature and
Essence must not be considered either as a Genus or Species, nor the Divine
Persons as Individuals. 194 What Medium there is between the Unity of
Singularity, and a specific Unity of Nature. 195 The difference between Three
Divine Persons, and Three Individual Human Persons. 199
SECT. VI.
A more particular Inquiry what the Catholic Fathers meant by the (...), the
Sameness and Identity of Substance in the Holy Trinity. 207 Petavius's attempt
to prove, that both the Greek and Latin Fathers taught the Singularity of the
Divine Nature. Ibid. His Notion of Singularity Considered. 208 His Apology for
the Fathers, who, as he says, taught a specific Unity, rejected. 211 His
Authorities for the Singularity of the Divine Nature Examined. 213 By the
Sameness and Identity of Nature the Fathers did not mean Singularity, but such
a Sameness as is between Three real subsisting Persons, without the least
Change and Variation. 217 That the Fathers resolved the Unity of God into this
Sameness and Identity of Nature. 221 Some Examples in Nature of the distinction
betweeen alius and aliud. 227 How the Fathers proved the Unity of God in
opposition to Polytheism from the Sameness and Identity of Nature. 230 That
these Arguments do not conclude against a Trinity of Divine Persons. 232
Gregory Nyssen vindicated from Tritheism, and his Answer to Ablabius Explained.
236 The Philosophy of the Ancients about Numbers. 243 The distinction between
the Unity of Number and the Unity of Nature opposed to the Charge of Tritheism,
and a Confutation of a Sabellian Singularity. 246 In what sense the Schools
asserted the Singularity of the Divine Substan^e. 248
SECT. VII.
Concerning the Distinction of Persons in the Unity and Identity of the Div^ne
Essence. The general Account of this. 254 That both the Fathers and Schools, by
a Divine Person understood the Divine Essence and Substance, and nothing else.
260 This proved from that Ambiguity with which the Fathers are charged in the
use of these Terms, Essence, Nature, Substance, Hypostasis, etc. 261 That these
Terms, Essence, etc. are distinctly applied to each Person of the Holy Trinity.
264 And all those Terms, which are more peculiarly appropriated to signify the
Divine Persons, were always used by Catholic Writers in the Notion of
Substance, and never thought Catholic in any other sense, as Person,
Hypostasis, Suppositum, etc. 265 That a Divine Person is nothing else but the
Divine Nature, proved from the Absolute Simplicity of the Divine Nature, which
admits of no Composition, as both Fathers and Schoolmen own. 272 According to
the Doctrine, both of Fathers and Schools, the Divine Essence and Substance, as
subsisting distinctly in Three, is proper and peculiar to each, and
incommunicable to one another. 273 Whether the Divine Essence either begets, or
is begotten, and how the Fathers and Schools may be reconciled. 274
SECT. VIII.
Concerning the Divine Relations. 281 The true Notion of Relative Substances,
or Subsisting Relations, explained from the Doctrine of the Schools. Ibid.
These Divine Relations secure the perfect Unity of the Divine Essence. 287 What
is meant by an Absolute Substance, and what by Relative Substance. Ibid. This
applied to the Doctrine of the Trinity. 288 Three Absolute Substances are
always distinctly and separately Three; Three Relative Substances may be
essentially One in the same One Individual Nature. 289 This account the Fathers
give of the Unity of the Divine Essence. 290 Concerning the (...), that they do
not signify Personal Relative Substances, but singular Absolute Substances. 293
The Divine Relations prove the Sameness and Identity of Nature in Three. 298
These Divine Relations give us an intelligible Notion of the (...), the
inseparable Union of the Divine Persons, and their mutual (...) inexistence in
each other. 300 This mutual inbeing, can be understood only between the
Relatives of the same Individual Essence and Substance. 305 And this gives an
Account of the Unity of Operation. 308 Concerning the Mutual Consciousness of
the Divine Persons. 313 The Doctrine of Relations necessary to give us a
sensible Notion of a Trinity in Unity. 326
SECT. IX.
A more particular Inquiry into the difference between (...) and (...), or
Nature and Person, with an Account of some Catholic Forms of Speech, relating
to the ever Blessed Trinity. 334 The Faith, and the Philosophy of the Ancients
of a different Consideration. Ibid. All the Heresies relating to the Doctrine
of the Trinity and Incarnation attributed to this one mistake, that Essence and
Hypostasis are the same. 336 This by some charged upon Aristotle's Notion of a
first Substance. Ibid. The Distinction of Nature and Person in Creatures
considered 338 Aristotle's first Substance, and what the Fathers call
Hypostasis, is in Creatures the same thing. 339 What the Fathers mean by (...)
and (...) in every Hypostasis. 340 No real difference between Aristotle and the
Fathers in this Matter. Ibid. The Fathers by a Common Nature did not mean One
Numerical Subsisting Nature common to all the Individuals. 341 For what reason
they reject (...), a particular singular Nature. 343 Hypostasis is Nature with
its peculiar Accidents subsisting by it self; that these Accidents and Personal
Properties do not make, but only distinguish Persons. 345 The Hypostasis or
Person is the common Nature subsisting by it self. This proved from the
Humanity of our Savior. 346 How improper all these Terms are to explain the
Trinity in Unity. 350 How the Catholic Fathers accommodated these Names of
Essence and Person to the Explication of this Mystery. 352 The Common Nature,
(...), One Divinity, is the Divinity of the Father, common to the Son, and
Spirit, by a perfect Communication, whole of whole. 354 The true Notion of One
Individual Nature. Ibid. Essential Internal Productions are in the Individual
Unity of Nature. 356 The Distinction between Nature and Persons, for that is
the true State of the Question, not how Nature and Person is distinguished in
each Single Divine Person; but how One Individual Nature is distinguished from
Three Persons in the Individual Unity of Nature. 360 The (...) explained. 362
This applied at large for the Explication and Vindication of several Catholic
Forms of Speech concerning the Trinity in Unity. 365, etc. The Conclusion, with
a short Application to the Socinians. 385
ERRATA.
PAge 6. l. 31. d. all. p. 9. marg. r. quae. p. 15. l. 3. r. enough. p 86. l. 8,
9. r expressions. p. 180. l. 23. r. (...). p. 165. l. 17. r. (...). p. 188. l.
16. marg. r. ex i^demutabilis. p. 208. l. 24. Identity, p. 216. l. 5. ^. Man's
r. Man. p. 225. l. 34. marg. r. (...). p. 230. l. 2. r. Identity. p. 236. l.
14. marg. (...) p. 245. l. 10. r. an Angel. p. 304. l. 2. marg. (...). p. 322.
l. 12. de Trin. l. 2. marg l. 15. de Trin. l. 7. and l. 32 videri. p. 347. l.
14. r. his. p. 349. l. 12, 13. r. wherever. p 350 marg. l. 8. r (...). The
Curious Reader may observe ^ome other Mistakes, which I hope will not disturb
the Sense.

THE PRESENT STATE OF THE SOCINIAN Controversy.
CHAP. I.
SECT. I. The Present State of the Socinian Controversy; the unreasonableness
of it; and how to reduce the Dispute to the Original Question.
THE Faith of the Holy Trinity is so fundamental to the Christian Religion,
that if Christianity be worth contending for* That is: For if God have not an
Eternal Son, and an Eternal Spirit, the whole Mystery of our Redemption by
Christ, and of our Sanctification by the Spirit, which in its Consequences is
the whole of the Gospel, and distinguishes it from all other Religions, is
utterly lost.

Those various Heresies relating to the Divinity, Person and Offices of Christ
and the Holy Spirit, which began to appear even in the Apostolic Age, and have
ever since under several forms and disguises disturbed the Peace of the Church,
is proof enough, how much the great Enemy of Mankind thinks himself concerned
by all possible means to corrupt this Faith; and that great, unwearied,
unconquerable Zeal, wherewith the Catholic Fathers have always defended this
Faith, shows of what importance they thought it; and therefore it is no wonder,
and ought to give no scandal to Christians, that these Disputes are again
revived among us with as much fury and insolence as ever; for there never was a
more unhappy Season for the Enemy to sow his Tares. But that which is most to
be lamented is, That the lukewarmness of some, and the intemperate Zeal of
others, have given greater scandal to the World, and more shaken the Faith of
Christians, than all the Opposition of our Adversaries could have done. I need
say no more, the Case is too well known, and the Evil Effects too visible among
us.

I will make no new Quarrels, if I can help it, but sincerely endeavor to
prevent the Mischiefs of what has already happened, as far as is nec^ssary to
secure the Faith of Christians, and to wrest those Weapons out of our Enemies
hands, which some professed Friends have unwarily furnished them with.

To do this, I shall endeavor in the first place to restore this Controversy
to its original state, and take off those Vizards which make it appear very
frightful to ordinary Christians.

This Dispute about the Holy and ever Blessed Trinity, has of late been dressed
up anew with some old School-Terms, which how proper soever they may be to give
Learned Men a more distinct Idea and Conception of that Adorable Mystery, only
amuse common Christians, and confound them, instead of teaching them better.

This, as it was at first occasioned by Heretics, who denied or corrupted the
Christian Faith, which forced the Catholic Fathers to use some unscriptural
Term^, which by degrees improved into great Subtilties, and disturbed the
Church with very nice and wrangling Disputes; so our Modern Socinians at this
day place the main strength of their Cause in these Disputes, and think it a
sufficient Confutation of the Faith of the Ever Blessed Trinity, that the
Trinitarians themselves cannot agree about the Sense of Person, Hypostasis,
Substance, Nature, Essence, nor in what Sense God is One and Three; but advance
very different, and, as they think, contrary Hypotheses, to reconcile the Unity
of God with the distinction of Three Persons in the Godhead. As if there were
no difference between what is fundamental in this Faith, and such Metaphysical
Speculations: As if no man could believe in Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
without determining all the Disputes of the Schools. Learned men may dispute
these matters, and things may so happen as to make such Disputes necessary; but
the Faith of Christians may be secured, and Heresies may be confuted, without
them. The Faith is plain and certain, even all that is necessary to the
purposes of Religion; but men may leap out of their depths, where they can find
no footing; and when such Questions are asked, as no man can certainly answer,
it is very likely, that they will be answered very different ways, and upon
very different Hypotheses; and there is no great hurt in this neither, while
these different Hypotheses are neither made new Articles of Faith, nor new
Heresies, but serve only for Hypotheses, to give a probable Answer to such
Questions as ought never to have been asked; and to stop the mouths of
Heretics, when they charge the Catholic Faith with Nonsense and
Contradiction. To distinguish rightly between these two, will set this
Controversy upon its true ancient bottom; which will spoil the Triumph of our
Adversaries, and possibly may rectify the Mistakes, and allay and qualify the
intemperate Heats and Animosities of those whom a common Faith ought to make
Friends.

SECT. II. How to reduce this Dispute concerning the Trinity, to Scripture
Terms.
THE Catholic Fathers have always appealed to the Form of Baptism as the Rule
and Standard of Faith; that as we are baptized, so we must believe, In the Name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. This is a plain simple
Faith, which every Christian may understand, and which every Christian must
profess, That there is an Eternal Father, who has an Eternal Son, and an
Eternal Spirit, of the same Nature* and inseparably united to himself; and that
this Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are the joint Object of the Christian Faith
and Worship.

This is the true Christian Faith, and this is all that we are concerned to
defend against our Adversaries; and would men stick to this, without engaging
in Philosophical Disputes, which we know little or nothing of, and which the
Scripture takes no notice of, we should soon find how weak and impotent all the
Attempts of Heretics would prove. Whatever Disputes there are about the
signification of those words Nature, Essence, Substance, Person, Hypostasis,
Subsistences, Relations, etc. there is no Dispute about the signification of
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; we have natural Idea's belong to these words,
when applied to Creatures; and when God is pleased in Scripture to represent
himself to us under th^se Characters, if we must understand any thing by them,
we can understand nothing else, but what the words signify all the World over:
only allowing for that infinite distance there is between God and Creatures,
which requires us to abstract from all material and creature imperfections. We
must not think that God begets a Son as men do, by corporeal passions, or
division of his substance; or that he begets a Son without himself, or separate
from himself* or that because a Creature-father is always older than his Son,
therefore God cannot beget a Son co^ternal with himself; for all these
Circumstances do not belong to the essential Notion of a Father, but of a
Creature-father: But then it is essential to the Notion both of Father and Son,
that the Father communicates his own Nature to the Son, and that the Son
receives his Nature and Being from his Father; that Father and Son do truly and
really subsist by themselves, though they may be, and when we speak of God the
Father and his Son, are inseparably united to each other: that the Son, with
respect to his Nature, is perfectly the same that his Father is: the son of a
man, as true and perfect Man as his Father is; and therefore the Son of God, as
true and perfect God.

By these Arguments the Catholic Fathers confuted both the Sabellians, who
made Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, but Three Names; and the Arians, who denied
the Consubstantiality of the Son, or that he had the same Nature with his
Father, For both these Heresies destroyed the essential Notion and Idea of
Father and Son; which includes in it both a real distinction and sameness of
Nature; that they are as really Two, but infinitely more one and the same, than
any other Father and Son in Nature are.

Now I cannot see, but that as these Names and Characters are better
understood, and liable to less dispute; so they convey to our Minds a more
distinct conception of God the Father and his Eternal Son, than any other
artificial Terms.

Were there no Controversy about Nature, Essence, Person, Substance,
Hypostasis, yet they immediately convey no Idea of God the Father and his
Eternal Son to my mind, much less give me a more distinct Conception, than
these Terms Father and Son do: For they neither acquaint me what God is, nor
what Father and Son is; and as the Schools themselves assert, cannot be
Univocally, or in the same sense spoken of Creatures and of God, who is
Super-Essential, above all Praedicaments and Terms of Art; that is, Nature,
Essence, Substance, Hypostasis, Person, do not, and cannot signify the same
thing, when spoken of God, as when applied to Creatures. And this has
occasioned all those Disputes concerning the Use and Signification of these
words, when applied to God; which indeed is no reason for wholly discarding
these Terms, which the Perverseness and Importunity of Heretics has forced the
Church to use, and which have now been so long used, that the Ecclesiastical
Sense of these Words is very well known to Learned men, if they would be
contented to use them in that Received Ecclesiastical Sense in which the
Catholic Fathers have always used them; but yet it is a reason not to clog the
Faith of ordinary Christians with them, who are not skilled in Metaphysical and
Abstracted Notions; and it is a reason to reduce the Controversy, as much as
possibly we can, to Scripture Terms; when these Artificial and Metaphysical
Terms divide even the Professors of the Catholic Faith, and give too just
occasion to the vain Boasts and Triumphs of Heretics.

To represent this matter plainly, I observe, That all all those Unscriptural
Terms which the Catholic Fathers made use of for the Explication of this
Adorable Mystery, were intended for no other purpose, but to give us some
distinct Ideas and Conceptions of what the Scripture teaches concerning the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, by using such Terms as signify something
in Creatures, which bears some, though a very imperfect, anology and
resemblance to what we are to conceive of God. And therefore the Fathers
justify the use of such words, by showing, That all they mean by them is
contained in Scripture, and reject any Words, and any such Sense of Artificial
Words, as cannot be justified by Scripture: Which, by the way, is a more
infallible Rule than all Metaphysical Subtleties, to find out in what sense the
Fathers used such Words, by observing to what Scripture-Notions they apply
them, and how they justify their use from Scripture, when they are Disputed.

If this be the truth of the Case, as it certainly is, then the Catholic Faith
does not depend upon the use of these Terms, for it was before them; for they
were intended only to explain and illustrate the Catholic Faith, and to
comprise Scripture-Notions in Terms of Art, which must be acknowledged to be of
great use, and was by experience found to be so in the Disputes with ancient
Heretics, while the Fathers agreed in the sense of these Terms. But when these
Terms themselves are become the great matter of Dispute; and men who, as is to
be hoped, agree in the Catholic Faith, cannot agree about the Propriety and
Signification of such Terms, nor how they are to be applied and used, whether
in the singular or plural Number, whether substantively or adjectively, in
recto or obliquo; and our Adversaries abuse such Disputes to the Reproach of
the Catholic Faith, as a perplexed, uncertain, contradictious Riddle and
Mystery, which men can know nothing of, or can never agree in; it becomes
absolutely necessary at present to take this Controversy out of Terms of Art,
and to let our Adversaries see, That our Controversy with them is not concerned
in these Disputes: That it is not about the Signification and Use of such words
as Essence, Nature, Substance, Person, etc. but, Whether the Supreme, Eternal,
Self-originated Father, have not an Eternal Son, eternally begotten of himself,
and an Eternal Spirit, the Spirit of the Father and of the Son, eternally
proceeding from them: And whether this Eternal Son, and Eternal Spirit, are not
True and Perfect God.

In this all sincere Trinitarians do heartily agree with each other, and are
ready to join issue upon this State of the Controversy, with all their
Adversaries, of what denomination soever. And if we can prove from Scripture,
That God has an Eternal Son begotten of himself, and that this Eternal Son is
True and Perfect God, as the Father is; and that the Father and Son have an
Eternal Spirit, who is True and Perfect God, as Father and Son is; I hope this
is a sufficient Confutation of Socinianism; and yet all this may be proved,
without concerning our selves in any Metaphysical Disputes: And therefore such
Disputes as these, though they give opportunity to our Adversaries to make some
Flourishes, and to cast Mists before peoples eyes, are not of that moment as
they would represent them; they neither prove Socinianism to be true, nor the
Catholic Faith of the Trinity to be false or uncertain.

I do not intend at present to dispute this Point with the Socinians, Whether
the Son and the Holy Spirit (for there is no dispute about the Father) be not
each of them True and Perfect God: This has been proved often enough already,
to the satisfaction of all sober Enquirers, who pay a just Veneration to
Scripture; and shall be done again, when a fair occasion offers: But the
Question under Debate now is, Whether we cannot explain and defend the Doctrine
of the Trinity, without the use of Ecclesiastical or Scholastic Terms; and
whether the Disputes of Divines about the Use and Signification of such Terms,
proves any D^sagreement in the Faith, when they all consent to the Scripture
Explications of it. The great Dispute is about the Distinction and Unity of the
Godhead, and by what Terms to express this Wonderful Distinction, and Wonderful
Union, as some of the Fathers call it. All sincere Trinitarians do agree, That
God is Vnus and Trinus, One and Three; but we having nothing in Nature like
this, we know not by what Names to call it: Those who have most critically
examined the force of words, find them all upon some account or other
defective, or improper for this purpose: That St. Austin well said, That in
these Sublime Mysteries we can no more express what we conceive of them in
Words, Qua nec dicuntur ut cogitantur, nec cogitantur ut sunt. Aug. de Trinit.
l. 5. c. 3.
than we can conceive of them as they are. When we profess to believe that
there are Three in the Unity of the Godhead the next question is, What Three
they are? That is, By what common Name to call them, which may be multiplied
with them, or spoken of them in the Plural Number; which St. Austin thinks not
easily found. Cum ergo quaeritur quid tria, vel quid tres, conferimus nos ad
inventendum aliquod speciale vel generale nomen, quo complectamur haec tria,
neque occurrit animo, quia excedit supereminentia divinitatis usitati eloquii
facultatem. Aug. de Trin. l. 7. c. 3.
The Greeks called them Three Hypostases, which signifies Three Individual
Substances: This seemed hard to the Latins, who acknowledged but One Substance
in the Godhead, and therefore they called them Three Persons; though this did
not satisfy St. Austin, Ad se quippe (Pater) dicitur Persona, non ad Filium,
aut Spiritum Sanctum. Aug. de Trin. l. 7. c. 6.
who looked upon Person as an Absolute, not a Relative Term, and therefore the
Plural Predications would not agree with his Rule, quae ad se dicuntur; that
what is predicated absolutely, must be predicated only in the Singular Number:
And in truth, if this be a good Rule, it is a demonstration that there can be
no common Name for these Three; for whatever is a common Name for them all,
must be absolutely predicated of each of them: And therefore St. Austin could
give no other reason why we say Three Persons, and not Three Essences, or Three
Gods, but only this, That since we acknowledge there are Three, it is fitting
to agree upon some common Name to denote the Trinity by; and Ecclesiastical Use
had given this Signification to the word Person. Cur ergo non haec tria simul
unam Personam dicimus, sicut unam Essentiam, and Deum, sed tres dicimus
Personas, cum tres Deos, aut tres essentias non dicamus, nisi quia volumus vel
unum aliquod vocabulum servire huic significationi qua intelligitur Trinitas,
ne emnino taceremus interrogati, quid tres, cum tres esse fateremur. Ibid.
Quidigitur restat, nisi ut fatcamur, loquendi necessitate partita haec
vocabula, etc. l. 7. c. 4.


But then besides this, the great Dispute is, What is meant by a Person, when
applied to the Three in the Blessed Trinity: Some adhere to the old approved
Definition of a Person, That it is the Individual Substance of a Rational
Nature; which is the very definition of the Greek Hypostasis, No^ h^c
definitione eam quam Graeci (...) dicunt terminavimus. Boet. de Una Persona
Christi.
as Boethius owns. Others are afraid of this; for if every Person be an
Individual Substance, and there are Three Persons, they know not how to avoid
the Consequence, That then there are Three Individual Substances in the
Trinity. And consequently, since we can have no other Notion of the Divine
Substance, but Infinite Mind and Spirit, there must be Three Infinite Minds and
Spirits in the Godhead, which they think infers Three Gods. And therefore they
will not allow a Person to be a Substance, at least not an Individual
Substance, but a Mode, or at most a Mode of Subsistence, or Relation, or
Property, or a Person, in the Tragedian or Comedian sense of a Person, as one
represents and personates another; or to signify an Office or Magistracy, and
so one man may be as many several Persons as he has Offices.

I cannot answer for all these different significations of the word Person, as
applied to this Sacred Mystery, especially as they are used by some Modern
Writers; for I believe there is no such material difference between the Fathers
and the Schools, as some men imagine; of which more hereafter: But as to my
present purpose, I must profess, I can see no necessity why we must find out a
Common Name for the Three in the Blessed Trinity, when the Scripture has given
us no Common Name for them; much less why we should dispute eternally about the
propriety and use of such words, to hazard the Catholic Faith, at least the
Honor and Reputation of it, together with the Peace of the Church. If I am
asked not only Who but What the Three in the Ever-blessed Trinity are? I know
no better Answer to make, than what the Scripture has taught me, That they are
God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost; which signifies all that
can be expressed by any Artificial and Unscriptural words; is an Answer liable
to no Exceptions or Misrepresentations, and in which all must agree, who
believe a Trinity; and it shames and silences all those Disputes which are
often occasioned by other words, though never so wisely and reasonably chosen.

This Answer shows us what their Nature is, what their Distinction is, and what
Relation they stand in to each other; which is the most perfect knowledge we
can have of the Ever-blessed Trinity in this world.

SECT. III. That the Title of GOD, attributed in Scripture distinctly to
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, gives us the best Account of their Nature, and
must determine the Signification of Ecclesiastical Words.
1. AS for the first, the design of some common Name for these Three, is to
form some common Notion and Idea of them, in which they all agree: And is any
thing else so common to them? Is there any thing else which is common to them,
but the Name and Nature of God? Can any thing else give us so true and perfect
a Character and Idea of each of them, as this does? When we say the Father is
God, the Son is God, the Holy Ghost is God, we attribute every thing to each of
them, which signifies any Perfection; for the Idea of God comprehends all
possible Perfections: And we reject every thing which has the least
signification of Imperfection; we abstract our minds from all Material and
Creature-Images, which Names common to Creatures are apt to impose upon us; and
when we are forced to apply any such Names to God, we learn from hence in what
Notion to understand such Words, when applied to God.

Men may very subtly distinguish between the formal Conceptions of Nature,
Essence, Substance, Hypostasis, Existence, Subsistence, Person, Personality,
Suppositality, and the like, and neither understand God nor Creatures much the
better for it: But let them but tell us what they mean by these Terms, and then
every Child can tell whether they belong to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, or
not: For as far as they are included in the Notion of God, and signify true
Divine Perfections, so far they belong to all Three: For if the Father be God,
the Son God, and the Holy Ghost God, then Father, Son and Holy Ghost, each of
them by themselves are whatever is included in the Notion and Idea of God,
excepting their Relations of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, whereby they are
distinguished into Three.

As for Example: If by Nature, Essence, Substance, Existence, Subsistence,
however they may differ in their formal Conceptions, they only mean a true and
real Being, who actually, perfectly, completely is what it is; God is Essence,
Substance, Subsistence, in the most perfect sense of all; for he is All Being;
his Name is Jehovah; which as Learned Men most probably conclude, signifies a
Plenitude and Perfection of Being, which is such a Perfection as includes all
other Perfections in it; for Perfect Being is every thing which perfectly is.

This is the peculiar Name and essential Character of God, and of God only: God
is, that is, is Eternal, Essential, Immutable Life and Being; in which sense
the Apostle tells us, That He only has Immortality. Creatures are, but are not
Essential Life and Being: Being is not included in the formal Conception or
Definition of any Created Nature. Man is a Reasonable Creature, was a true
Definition of Human Nature, before any man was created; and would be so for
ever, though all mankind were annihilated. And therefore we may reasonably
enough in Creatures distinguish between Nature, Substance, Existence,
Subsistence; if by Nature we understand that Idea or Pattern according to which
they are made; and by Substance, that which is made, whatever it is, whether
Matter or Spirit, which is the Subject of those Moral or Natural Perfections
which belong to the Idea of such a Creature; and by Existence and Subsistence,
their actual Being which they receive from their Maker, with regard to their
complete or incomplete manner of Existence.

But now we can form no Idea of God without perfect life and being; for
whatever else, according to our imperf^ct manner of conceiving, is contained in
the Idea of God, is nonsense and contradiction without it: Infinite Wisdom,
Infinite Power, and Infinite Goodness, is the Idea of nothing, without Eternal
and Necessary Being; and an Infinitely Perfect Nothing is a contradiction in
the very Notion. But Infinite, Perfect, Life, and Being, includes all other
Perfections, and is the most simple and comprehensive Idea of God; for whatever
perfectly is, is whatever is any real Perfection. So that there is no
foundation, nor any occasion, for such Distinctions, of Essence, Nature,
Substance, Existence, Subsistence, in God; for his Essence, Nature, Substance,
is his Being; and his Being is perfect Existence and Subsistence. These Terms
differ in their formal Conceptions, when applied to Creatures; but in essential
Life and Being, these cannot be formally distinguished; for we cannot conceive
Existence or Subsistence, as superadded to Nature, as we do in Creatures;
because Necessary Essential Being, is the Divine Nature: Nor can we distinguish
between Essence, Nature, and Substance, because there is no distinction in God
between the Subject, and its Faculties and Powers, which is the Foundation of
that distinction in Creatures. Men, who do not love to use words without any
Notion belonging to them, find themselves extremely puzzled to fit any distinct
Ideas to these words when applied to God.

When the Fathers and Schoolmen apply these Terms to God, they take care to
show how differently they are used when applied to God, from what they signify
when applied to Creatures: They assert the most absolute simplicity of the
Divine Nature without the least composition, and indeed expound all these Terms
to the sense of (...) and Esse, to signify the most Absolute Being, or the most
Perfect Is, the (...), who is Simple, Perfect Existence: One. St. Austin, whose
Authority is sacred in the Schools, Prima and summa vita, cui non aliud est
vivere, and aliud esse, sed idem est esse and vivere. Primus and summus
intellectus, cui non est aliud vivere, and aliud intelligere, sed id quod est
intelligere, hoc vivere, hoc esse est, unum omnia. Aug. de Tr. l. 6. c. 10.
will furnish us with sayings enough to this purpose. Nothing is more certain
with him, than that in God, to Be, to Live, to Understand, or whatever else we
can attribute to God, is all the same, is Perfect Being, or Essence: And
therefore he owns the impropriety of those Terms, Substance, Si tamen dignum
est, ut De^^ dicatur subsistere. -- Deus autem si subsisti^ at substantia
proprie dici possit, inest in co aliquod tanquam in subjecto, and non est
s^^plex. -- N^fas est autem dicere ut subsist^t, and subsit Deus bonitati suae.
-- Unde manifestum est, Deum abusiv^ substantiam vocari, ut nomine usitatiore
intelligatur essentia, qu^d vere and proprie dicitur, ita ut fortasse solum
Deum dici oporteat esse essenti^m. -- Ego sum qui sum, and qui est misit me ad
vos. Id. l. 7. c. 4, 5.
and Subsistence, when applied to God. But notwithstanding this, that God is
the most Pure Simple Being, without any imaginable composition, yet since we
cannot comprize all that is necessary for us to know of God, in one simple
uncompounded thought, we must unavoidably conceive the Idea of God by Parts,
under different formal Conceptions, such as his Wisdom, his Power, his
Goodness, his Truth and Faithfulfulness, etc. for such distinct representations
as these, God makes of himself in the Holy Scriptures; they are what we can
distinctly apprehend, and are absolutely necessary for the Government of our
lives, and to know what we are to expect from God. But such distinctions as we
can frame no distinct conceptions of, as are apt to corrupt our Notions of God
with corporeal Representations, and perplex our Minds with endless and
inextricable difficulties, ought to be cautiously used, and carefully
explained, to prevent all mistakes, and to reduce them to such plain and simple
Notions, as come nearest to the absolute simplicity of the Divine Essence.

And now, I suppose, it will admit of no dispute, Whether the Father, who is
God, be Essence, Substance, Subsistence; or whether the Son, who is God, be
Essence, Substance, Subsistence; and so in like manner the Holy Ghost. For this
signifies no more than To Be in the most perfect and absolute sense of Being,
which is the first and most simple Idea of God, Absolute Essence and Being. So
that if the Father is, the Son is, and the Holy Ghost is; each of them is
Essence, Substance, Subsistence, in the most Perfect and Absolute sense of
these Terms: For if each of them is, and each of them is God; each of them is,
only in that Notion of Being, which is included in the Idea of God, which
contains the most absolute Perfection of Being; that is, all that is absolutely
Perfect. And will any Trinitarian deny, That the Father is, the Son is, and the
Holy Ghost is? And then I know not what other Dispute there can be about this
matter; if the Father be God, the Son God, and the Holy Ghost God, then the
Father is, the Son is, and the Holy Ghost is, in the most Perfect Notion of
Being, and that is all that is meant by Essence, Substance, Subsistence, when
spoken of God.

In the same manner we may examine the signification of the word Person, which
has occasioned no small Dispute. We say that there are Three Persons in the
Godhead, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and each of these Divine Persons is in
himself True and Perfect God. Now if we must call these Divine Three, Three
Persons, (which long Use and Custom has made Reasonable, and in some measure
Necessary) the most certain way to determine the signification of Person, when
applied to God, is to consider in what sense one who is True and Perfect God,
may be called a Person; for GOD is the Scripture Name and Character which is
distinctly attributed to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and therefore that must
give the Signification to all other words of Human Use and Institution, as far
as relates to this Mystery.

These words Person and Hypostasis, were very anciently used, without any
Definition to determine their Signification, till they became matter of
dispute. Boethius has given us a definition of Person; which has been generally
allowed of ever since, that a Person is an individual Substance of a rational
Nature. Let us then examine whether this definition can belong to a Divine
Person, to one who is True and Perfect God.

As for Substance, Boethius tells us, That it is essential to the Notion of
Person; Personam in accidentibus non posse constitui, relinquitur ergo, u^
Personam in Substantiis dici conveniat. Boet. de una Christi Persona.
for a Person cannot subsist in Accidents, (much less in Modes, which are less
than Accidents); and it is certain no other Notion of Person can belong to one
who is God: For a Person who is God, must be Substance in the most Perfect and
Absolute sense; that is, as I have already explained it, Perfect Being and
Essence: As St. Austin expressly tells us, That in God, Non enim aliud est Deo
esse, ali^d Personam esse, sed omnino idem.

Neque in hac Trinitate, cum dicimus Personam Patris, aliud dicimus, quam
Substantiam Patris. Aug. Tr. l. 7. c. 6.


to Be, and to be a Person, is the same thing; and that when we say the Person
of the Father, we mean nothing else but the Substance of the Father; and thus
it is with respect to the whole Trinity.

It is certain St. Austin never dreamed of defining a Person, much less a
Divine Person, by a Mode: For to make a Person, who is God, and therefore the
most Perfect Being, a Mode, which if it be any thing, is next to nothing, no
Substance, but a mere Modification of Substance, is both new Divinity, and new
Philosophy, unknown either to Fathers or Schoolmen.

But mere Substance cannot make a Person, unless it be a Living, Personam in
Substantiis dici conve^^at -- non autem in non viventibus corporibus, vel s^nsu
carentibus, vel intellec^^s and ratione. Boet. ibid.
Understanding Substance, the Substance of a rational Nature: And this must be
the Notion of a Person, when applied to God; for God is Pure Infinite Mind and
Intellect, the First and Supreme Life and Intellect; in whom, to Live, to
Understand, and to Be, is the same thing; as I observed before from St. Austin;
and if a Divine Person signifies One who is God, every Person in the Godhead is
Supreme Absolute Life and Intellect: And this is what we must understand by a
Person, when we say, That the Father is a Person, the Son a Person, and the
Holy Ghost a Person; for no other Notion of a Person can belong to any one, who
is True and Perfect God.

There is another Term of great consideration in this definition, which still
remains to be Explained, and that is Individual, That a Person is an Individual
Substance of a Rational Nature; which Boethius opposes to Universal Substances,
In universalibus Persona dici non potest, sed in singularibus atque individuis.
Boet. Ibid.
which are nothing else but the abstracted Notions of generical or specific
Substances; which have no real and actual Subsistence, and therefore are not
properly Substances, Cum ipsae Substantiae in Universalibus quidem sint, in
particularibus vero capiant Substantiam, jure Substantias particulariter
Subsistentes (...) (Graeci) appellaverunt. Id.
but only the Ideas of Substances, and therefore are not Persons neither; for
Substance and Person are only in Singulars and Individuals, which Subsist by
themselves. Thus Human Nature considered in general as common to all Mankind,
has no actual Subsistence, and therefore is not a Human Person, but it subsists
only in particular Men, and that makes every particular Man a Human Person; for
the Person of the Man, is nothing but the Man himself. And so St. Austin tells
us it is in the Holy Trinity; the Person of the Father, is the Father himself;
and the Person of the Son, is the Son himself; and if Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, are Three, they must be Three Persons; for each of them is himself, and
not the other; and Three Selfs are Three Persons; I, and Thou, and He, are
Personal Pronouns: I my self, Thou thy self, He himself; by which Argument the
Catholic Fathers prove against the Sabellians, that Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, are Three Persons, by these Personal Pronouns, which the Scripture
applies to them; as our S^viour speaks of himself in the first Person, I and my
Father; of his Father in the Second Person, I thank Thee, O Father; of the Holy
Ghost in the Third Person, when He the Spirit of truth shall come. Now I, and
Thou, and He, must signify Three distinct Persons, or Three Selfs: Person
indeed, as St. Austin observes, is not a Relative Term, but is spoken ad se of
the thing it self: For if Person were a Relative, then as we say, The Father is
the Father of his Son, so we must say, The Person of the Father is the Person
of the Son, which is absurd; but yet Person must be praedicated Plurally
according to the number of Selfs; for as many Selfs as there are, so many
Persons are there; for Selfs make numbers, because one self is not another.
Three singular intelligent Selfs, singulares intelligentes, as Melancton calls
them, is the proper Notion of Three Persons; and in this sense, Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, are Three Persons, if each of them be True and Perfect God. For God
is certainly himself. If the Father be God, the Father himself is God; if the
Son be God, the Son himself is God; if the Holy Ghost be God, the Holy Ghost
himself is God. This is the plain express Doctrine of Scripture, and what every
man may understand, and what every one who believes a Trinity must profess, and
no man needs believe more.

SECT. IV. These Names, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, prove the real Distinction
of Persons in the Trinity.
II. THESE Names, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, especially when the Name GOD is
Attributed to each of them, That the Father is God, the Son God, the Holy Ghost
God, proves a real and substantial distinction between them; for these are
opposite Relations which cannot meet in the same Subject: For a Father cannot
be Father to himself, but to his Son; nor can a Son be Son to himself, but to
his Father; nor can the Holy Ghost Proceed from himself, nor in this sense be
his own Spirit, but the Spirit of the Father and Son, from whom he Proceeds.
And therefore the Father is not the Son, nor the Holy Spirit; nor the Son the
Father, or Holy Spirit; nor the Holy Spirit either Father or Son: And yet, if
each of them be God, each of them Perfectly is, or is Perfect Being, and
therefore are as Perfectly Distinct, as three which perfectly are, and are not
one another. To talk of Three Distinct Beings, Substances, Minds, or Spirits,
may be Misrepresented by perverse Wits, to the prejudice of the Divine Unity,
though the Catholic Fathers, besides Hypostasis, did not scruple to use the
same, or other equivalent Expressions, concerning the Holy Trinity, when they
disputed against the Sabellians; yet if we believe a Trinity, whether we will
or no we must acknowledge Three; each of which Perfectly Is, or is Perfect
Being, and no one is the other: For if we deny this, we must either deny, that
the Father Is, or that the Son Is, or that the Holy Ghost Is; and to deny
either of these, is to deny a Trinity.

And if it be Objected against this, That according to St. Austin's Notion,
(though it was not peculiarly his, but common to all the Greek and Latin
Fathers, nay to the Schoolmen themselves, and must be owned by all Men of
Sense) that esse, vivere, intelligere, sapere, velle, bonum esse, magnum esse,
etc. to be, to live, to understand, to be wise, to will, to be good, and to be
great, or whatever else we can attribute to the Divine Nature, is but unum
omnia, all one and the same in God: I say, if it be Objected, that the
consequence of this is, That to say, that in this sense of Is, the Father Is,
the Son Is, the Holy Ghost Is, is equivalent to asserting Three Distinct
Substances, Minds, Spirits, Lives, Understandings, Wills, etc. in the Trinity,
I cannot help it. St. Austin was never yet charged with Tritheism. Let them
either deny what St. Austin and the rest of the Fathers teach about this
matter, and try if they can defend the absolute S^mplicity of the Divine Nature
without it; or let them deny, if they think good, that the Father Is, the Son
Is, and the Holy Ghost Is, in this Notion of Perfect and Absolute Being; or try
if they can find such a medium between Perfect Is, and is not, as can belong to
any Being which is True and Perfect God; or allow (which is the true solution
of it) that Is, and Is, and Is, Essence, and Essence, and Essence, are but One
Eternal Is, One Eternal Essence, as they are but One God: Of which more
presently.

I always was of opinion, that these Terms in the plural number, ought not to
be familiarly used, because few Men can conceive of them, as they are worthy of
God; and therefore the Fathers were v^ry cautious in using them, which they
very rarely did, but when they were extorted from them by the perverse
importunity of Heretics; but I cannot see how it is possible to deny three
Selfs, or three Is's in the U^ity of the Godhead, without denying a Trinity;
and if each of these Three be himself and not another, and each of them Is, and
Is by himself; this is the least we can say of the Ever Blessed Trinity, and
this is all with respect to their Distinction, that we need say of them. So
that if Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be so in a true and proper Notion, are in
truth and reality what these Names of Father, Son, and Spirit, signify: That
the Father is (...), a true, proper, natural, Father; the Son (...), a true,
proper, genuine, Son; and the Holy Ghost, (...), in a true, proper sense, the
Spirit of the Father and the Son, as the Catholic Fathers always Professed;
they must be as truly and perfectly Distinct, as Father and Son are.

The only Question then is, Whether these Names, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
signify naturally and properly when spoken of the Holy Trinity, or are only
metaphorical and allusive Names; though what they should be Metaphors of, is
not easy to conceive, and as absurd to conceive, that there should be any
Metaphors in God, who is all Perfect Essence and Being. The Divine Nature and
Perfections, which we cannot conceive of as they are, may be expressed by
Metaphors taken from some thing which is analogous in Creatures; upon which
account we read of the Hands, and Eyes, and Ears, and Bowels, and Mouth of God.
Creatures may serve for Metaphors, for Shadows, and Images, to represent
something of God to us, but the reality of all is in God. So that we may allow
Father and Son in some sense to be Metaphorical Names, when applied to God; not
that God the Father is not in the highest and most perfect sense a Father; and
his Son a most proper, natural, genuine Son, but because the Divine Generation
is so perfect a Communication of the Divine Nature and Being from Father to
Son; that Human Generations, Creature-Fathers and Sons, are but obscure,
imperfect images and resemblances of it. When any thing is spoken
Metaphorically of God, the Metaphor and Image is always in the Creatures; the
Truth, Perfection, and Reality of all in God. And if this be a certain and
universal rule, then if God be a Father, if he have a Son, an only B^gotten
Son, Begotten Eternally of himself, not Made, nor Created, but Begotten; though
this Eternal Generation be infinitely above what we can conceive, yet it is
evident, that God the Father is more Properly and Perfectly a Father, and his
Son more Properly and Perfectly a Son, than any Creature-Fathers or Sons are.

But, I think, this will admit of no Dispute, if we own, that God has a Son,
who is himself True and Perfect God* For a Son, who is Perfect God, is God of
God. That he is a Son, proves that he receives his Nature from his Father, for
this is Essential to the Notion of a Son; That he is Perfect God, proves the
Perfection of his Generation from the Perfection of his Nature: For to be
Perfect God, of Perfect God, is to receive the Whole, Perfect, Undivided Nature
of his Father, which is the most perfect Generation that is possible, for a
Whole to beget a Whole. And if God the Father, and his Son, be Truly and
Perfectly Father and Son, they must be Truly and Perfectly Distinct; That is,
they are in a proper sense Two, and by the same reason, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, are Three: And we need no other proof of this, but the very Names of
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, if we understand them in a proper and natural
Sense.

SECT. V. These Names, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, prove the Unity, Sameness,
Identity of Nature and Godhead.
III. THESE Names of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as they signify and prove a
real Distinction between these Three, so they also signify and prove the Unity,
Sameness, Identity of Nature, and Godhead: Which reconciles the Faith of the
Trinity with the Faith of one God: The same One Divine Essence and Godhead,
being and subsisting, Whole, Perfect, and Entire in each of these Divine Three.

I shall Explain and Confirm this matter more at large hereafter; and therefore
at present shall only briefly represent this Notion, and the reason of it.

One Eternal Self-Originated Divine Nature, is One Divinity and One God; and
nothing can destroy the Unity of God, but what destroys the Unity of the Divine
Nature, by Division or Multiplication: And if this be the true Notion of the
Unity of God (and if it be not, I would desire to know, why this is not, and
what is) then the Unity of God may be preserved in Three, each of whom is True
and Perfect God, if the same One Divine Nature, or Divinity, subsists
distinctly in them all: And the very Characters and Relations of Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, do necessarily infer and prove, the same One Divinity in them
all: And therefore the Christian Trinity is so far from contradicting, that it
establishes the Faith of one God: As to explain this in a few words.

All Christians agree, That God, whom we call the Father, is an Eternal
Self-Originated Being, who had no beginning of Being, and received his being
from no other, and that there is no other Self Originated Being, but himself.
This is the Notion which all Mankind have of One God, That there is one
Infinite, Eternal, Self-Originated Being or Nature; and if there be (as it is
certain there is) but one such Nature and Divinity, there can be but One God.
And this is Established in the Christian Faith, which owns but One God the
Father, who is therefore in Scripture, in a peculiar manner, called the One
God, and the Only True God.

Thus f^r all Christians are agreed; but here our Arian and Socinian
Adversaries stop: For how can the Son be God, and the Holy Ghost be God, if the
Father be the only Self-Originated Being, and the One True God?

Now the very Notion of a Son Answers this difficulty, or at least proves, that
so it is, however it may exceed our finite Comprehension.

It is Essential to the Notion of a Son, to be of another, of him, whom we call
his Father, and to receive the same Nature from him. Man begets a Man, and God
begets God; but there is an infinite distance between these two, as there is
between God and Creatures.

When Man begets a Man, he does not Communicate his own whole entire numerical
Nature to his Son, but with part of his own Substance Communicates the same
specific Nature to him, or a Nature of the same kind; and therefore a Man and
his Son are two Men, as having two particular Natures, though specifically the
same.

But if we believe, that God has a Son, begotten by him of himself, I say, not
created out of nothing, nor made of any other prae-existent Nature or
Substance, but eternally begotten of himself, we must acknowledge, that the
Father and the Son are perfectly One, excepting that one is the Father, and the
other the Son.

All men, who know any thing of the Divine Nature, know, that God is the most
Pure, Simple, Uncompounded Being; and if God, who has no parts, and cannot be
divided into any, begets a Son, he must Communicate his Whole, Undivided Nature
to him: For to beget a Son, is to Communicate his own Nature to him; and if he
have no parts, he cannot Communicate a part, but must Communicate the Whole;
that is, he must Communicate his whole self, and be a second self in his Son.

Now a Whole, and a Whole of a Whole, are certainly two, but not two Natures,
but one Nature, not merely Specifically, but Identically One; for it is
impossible that a Whole, which is Communicated without Division, or Separation,
should have the least imaginable diversity from it self, so as to become
another Nature from it self; for a Whole of a Whole must be perfectly and
identically the same with that Whole of which it is; for a Whole can be but
One. This is that (...)* Sameness and Identity of Nature, which the Fathers
assert, and whereon they found the Unity of the Godhead. And this is the
meaning of that distinction of the Schools, between unum numero, and re
numerata, one in number and in the thing numbered. Two must always be allowed to
be Two in number, as Father and Son are, though they are but One in re
numerata, in the Sameness and Identity of Nature, as Christ tells us, I and my
Father are One; (...) in the Neuter-Gender, which must relate to Nature, not to
Number.

To distinguish or multiply Natures, there must be some real or notional
diversity and alterity between them, as Boethius observes: But a Whole can never
differ in the least from the whole of which it is, no more than the same Whole
can differ from it self; and it is this Sameness and Identity, which is called
a Numerical Unity of Nature, and is peculiar to the Divine Nature, there being
nothing like it in Creatures: Not that the Divine Nature considered as in the
Father, is the same in number with the Divine Nature as communicated to, and
subsisting distinctly in the Son; for then the Father and the Son cannot be two;
for the Person of the Father and his Divinity, or Divine Nature, is the same;
and the Person of the Son, and his Divine Nature is the same; and if this
Oneness relate to number, there can be but One Person, as there is but One
Nature: but a Numerical Unity of Nature does not exclude a Number of Persons,
each of whom has the whole Divine Nature Perfectly and Distinctly in himself;
it does not exclude the actual and perfect communication of the same Divine
Nature to more than one, but only excludes all imaginable diversity and
alterity; and what is not aliud, is unum; that which is not another thing,
another different Nature, is but One: That is, the Divine Nature is numerically
One, in opposition to any other Absolute, Self-originated Divinity, not in
opposition to the Eternal Communications of its self to the Son and Holy
Spirit. If the Divine Nature, as actually and distinctly subsisting in Three,
be as perfectly One, as the Idea of God is One, as any specific Notion,
suppose of Human Nature, is One; then it is Identically and Numerically one and
the same. And indeed this is the true reason why the Catholic Fathers so often
represent the Unity of the Divine Nature by Allusions and Metaphors signifying
a specific Unity; because the Divine Nature, as subsisting in Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, is as perfect^y one and the same, as the specific Notion and Idea
of any Nature is, which abstracts from all the diversities and differences
which are found in Individuals. Which one Observation will help us to expound
several disputed passages in the Fathers, as I could easily show, were that my
present business.

Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, though they have one undistinguished,
undiversified Nature, and therefore are One in Nature; yet are Three in Number,
because they have this one undivided, undistinguished, undiversified Nature,
after a different manner, which the Greeks called (...), the manner of
Existence, or the manner how they come to be, which though it sounds very
harshly when applied to that which has no beginning of Being, (as most other
expressions do, when applied to God, and Criticized on by perverse and Comical
Wits) must be allowed in such a qualified sense as is proper to an Eternal
Being, or we must deny Eternal Generation and Procession, which is, though not
the beginning, yet a Communication of Being: And thus the Fathers (...), or
Mode, or manner of Existence, and Being is, that he is Self-originated, and
receives his Being from no other; the Son's is, that he is Eternally Begotten
of the Father, and receives his Nature and Being without any beginning, from
the Father; the Holy Ghost's is, that he Eternally Proceeds from Father and
Son; and this is all the distinction that is between them: They have but one
undivided, undiversified Nature; but these opposite Relations necessarily prove
them Three in Number, as I have already shown; though the Divine Essence, the
res numerata, is but One; it being Communicated from Father to Son, and from
Father and Son to the Holy Ghost, Whole of Whole; which makes it perfectly one
and the same Undivided, Undiversified, Essence, Subsisting Distinctly, but not
Separately, in Three.

That this is the true Notion both of the Fathers and Schools, and all that the
wisest Schoolmen meant by the Singularity of the Divine Essence and Nature,
which they acknowledged to subsist in Tribus Suppositis, or Personis, whole and
entire in Three distinct Persons or Subjects, may appear in due time, when Men
have recovered their Temper so far, as to be capable of hearing Reason, and of
understanding plain Sense. But my only design at present is to show, that these
Relations in the Ever Blessed Trinity, of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
Vindicate the Faith of the Trinity from the Imputation of Tritheism.

Three Gods must signify Three Absolute, Independent, Self-originated
D^vinities, Three such as we acknowledge the Person of the Father to be, who is
Infinitely P^rfect, and is of himself; and all the Catholic Fathers
acknowledge, that Three Fathers would be Three Gods: Three such Absolute
Beings, though equally Perfect, and every way alike, would be Three Divine
Self-originated Natures, or Three Individuals of the same specific Nature;
that is, Three Gods, as Three Individuals of Human Nature are Three men.

But Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are not Three Absolute Divine Natures, nor
Three Individuals of One specific Nature, but are Three Singulars of One
Individual Nature, Communicated whole and entire from Father to Son, and from
Father and Son to the Holy Ghost: So that there is but one and the same Divine
Nature in all Three, and therefore but One Divinity, and One God; unless one
and the same Divine Nature can be Three Gods. To number Three, each of whom is
himself True and Perfect God, does not prove Three Gods, unless you can
multiply and number Natures too; for One Divine Nature is but One God; but
Three Gods must have Three Appropriate, and Incommunicable Divine Natures;
which the very Relations of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, deny in the Christian
Trinity. There is but One Self-originated Divinity in the Person of the Father;
and the very Name of Son proves that he is not of himself, but has, and is, all
that he has, and is, from the Father, and is all that the Father is: H^ i^ G^d
^f G^d; now God of God, is Another, and is True and Perfect God, but is not
Another God, because he receives all from his Father, has the same Divine
Nature that his Father has, has nothing but what his Father has, and has all
that his Father has; T^tus ex Toto, Whole of Whole; which is but One Undivided,
Undiversified, One Numerical Whole, One God.

This seems to be the true Reason why St. Austin, and after him the Schoolmen,
lay such stress upon the Relations in the Trinity, to salve the Unity of the
Divine Nature. For by Relations the Schools mean, Relationes Subsistentes,
Subsisting Relations, or Relatives, not Relations without a Subject; which St.
Austin rejects as absurd: For nothing can be Predicated Relatively which has
not some Being and Substance of its own to be the foundation of that Relation:
A Man who is a Master, Omnis essentia, quae relative dicitur, est etiam aliquid
excepto relativo, ut homo dominus, homo servus -- ad se dicuntur, and
substantiae sunt vel essentiae: dominus vero and servus -- ad aliquid relative
dicuntur: sed si non esset homo, id est, aliqua substantia, non esset qui
relative dominus diceretur. -- Quapropter si and Pater non est aliquid ad se
ipsum, non est omnino qui relative dicatur ad aliquid. Aug. de Trinit. l. 7. c.
1.
a Man who is a Servant, must be a Man, or he could not be the Subject of any
Relation, either of Master, or Servant; and thus, as he adds, Father must
signify a positive Being, something that he is himself, or else there is
nothing to sustain a Relation to another; and the like must be said of the Son
and Spirit.

Now these Relations in the Trinity, of Father, Son, and Spirit, though each of
them have the whole Divine Nature and Substance, do yet prove that there are
not Three Absolute Independent Divinities, but only One Divine Nature and
Substance: As St. Austin speaks of Father and Son, utrunque Substantia, and
utrunque Vna Substantia; they are both of them Substance, and both of them One
Substance; for the Son must receive his whole Being from his Father, and
therefore have the same One Nature and Substance that his Father has; which
proves, that a Trinity of Relatives can be but One God, because they can have
but One Divine Nature in them all. But this is beyond my present design.

Thus I have given a short view of the Catholic Faith of the Holy and Ever
Blessed Trinity: We are B^ptized into the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost; and if we are Christians, we must Believe in Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, and we need not believe nor understand any more than what
these Names, when applied to God, do plainly and necessarily signify. This I
have explained as easily and familiarly as possibly I could, that ordinary
Christians, who are not skilled in School Terms or Subtilties, may know what
they are to Believe, and see the plain Reasons of it. This is what all
Christians, who sincerely Believe a Trinity, are agreed in; That there is an
Eternal Father, who has an Eternal Son, and an Eternal Spirit, of the same
Nature with himself: That the Father is God, God of himself; The Son is God,
God of God, True and Perfect God, Begotten of his Father from all Eternity;
That the Holy Ghost is God, True and Perfect God, Eternally Proceeding from
Father and Son: That the Father is not the Son, nor the Son the Father, nor the
Holy Ghost Father or Son; but they are Three, truly and really distinct from
each other: But that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, have all the same One
Divinity, Communicated from the Father to the Son, and from Father and Son to
the Holy Spirit, and therefore are but One God. All this, as I have shown, is
necessarily included in the Names and Relations of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost;
which if they be not empty Names, but signify any thing real, must signify all
this.

And what is there unintelligible in all this? Such a Distinction, and such an
Unity as is signified in the very Names of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
necessarily prove that God is Three and One: If the Father is himself True and
Perfect God, the Son himself True and Perfect God, the Holy Ghost himself True
and Perfect God, and the Father is not the Son, nor the Son the Father, nor the
Holy Ghost either Father or Son, then there are Three, each of whom is in
himself True and perfect God, and that is a Divine Trinity: And if the Father
communicates his whole Nature without division or separation to the Son, and
Father and Son communicate the same whole Nature to the Holy Spirit, they are
in the most perfect notion One, there being one and the same whole entire
perfect Divinity in all Three. A Whole, a Whole, and a Whole, are Three in
number, but are but one Identical Nature; for a Whole of a Whole must be the
same Whole; and in this Unity of Nature consists the Unity of the Godhead.

I grant a Whole of a Whole is very unconceivable to us; and so is the Notion
of an Eternal self-originated Being, and of Creation, to the full as
unconceivable, as the Eternal Generation of a Whole from a Whole: But this is a
difficulty in the Notion of an Eternal Generation, not of a Trinity in Unity:
If God begets a Son, as the Scripture assures us he has an only begotten Son,
he must communicate his own Nature to him; and besides the Testimony of
Scripture, That all the Father has is the Son's, his whole Nature and Divinity,
Reason assures us, that God being a pure simple Being, without composition or
parts, if he communicate his Nature to his Son, he must communicate it whole
and entire, without division or separation; and if this be so, it is certain,
that Father and Son, he who begets, and he who is begotten, are Two; and it is
as certain, that the same whole Divinity, communicated by the Father to the
Son, is but the same One Divinity; and One Divinity, though actually subsisting
in Three, can be but One God, not Three Gods. It is certain, this is the most
perfect Unity that can be, between Three who are truly and really the same, and
yet distinct; for they can never be more One, than to be Three Sames, and Three
Wholes; for the Communication of a Whole may make a Number, but cannot
distinguish or multiply Nature.

SECT. VI. Concerning the Unity of God.
BUT our Socinian Adversaries, and some who would not be thought Socinians,
have espoused such a Notion of One God, as makes the Faith of a Trinity
absolutely irreconcilable with the Faith of One God.

By One God, they mean One who is God; but the Faith of the Trinity owns Three,
each of whom is by himself True and Perfect God; and I grant it is as
absolutely impossible to reconcile these two, as it is to reconcile
Contradictions; for to say that there is but One who is God, and to say that
there are Three, each of whom is God, is a manifest Contradiction; and yet
without saying this last, we must deny a Trinity. It is in vain to think to
solve this with Words without Sense: If there is but One who is God, we must
either make Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Three Names, or Modes, or
Manifestations of the same One Numerical Divine Person; which was the ancient,
exploded, anathematized Heresy of Noetus and Sabellius; or we must make the Son
and Holy Spirit to be mere Creatures, if we allow any Personality to them, as
Arius, Macedonius, Paulus Samosatenus, and such like Heretics, and our Modern
Socinians do.

But we, with the Scriptures and the Catholic Church, reject this Notion of
the Unity of God, which is to assert the Unity, but to deny a Trinity. And
because this seems to be so prevailing a Notion at this time, I shall shelter
my self as well as I can, under the Authority of the Catholic Fathers, and the
Catholic Church.

That there is but One God, was always the Faith of the Catholic Church, as
appears from all the Ancient Creeds; but then they did not believe in One God,
as One God signifies One Divine Separate Person; which is never expressed in
any Christian Creed, but in One God the Father, who has an only begotten Son,
and an Eternal Spirit, in the Unity of the same Godhead. There is no Christian
Creed, which teaches the Belief of One God who is not a Father; and if the One
God be a Father, he must have a Son of his own Nature and Substance; and the
Son of God, consubstantial with God the Father, must be God the Son. This is
what Tertullian tells us, Nos vero unicum, quidem Deum credimus, sub hac tamen
dispensatione, quam aeconomiam dicimus, ut umci Dei sit and filius, and sermo
ipsius, qui ex ipso processerit, per quem omnia facta sunt, and sine quo factum
est nihil. Tert. cont. Prax. c. 2. p. 501 Oxon.
That there is One God, with his Economy, that is, with his only begotten Son,
and Eternal Spirit. The Catholic Church so believed in One God, as to
acknowledge Three Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, each of which is truly
and really God, Dum unicum, Deum non alias putat credendum, quam si ipsum
eundemque and Patrem, and Filium, and Spiritum Sanctum dicat, quasi non sit
quoque unus sit omnia, dum ex uno omnia, per substantiae scilicet unitatem, and
nihilominus custodiatur aeconomiae sacramentum, quae unitatem in Trinitatem
disponit, tres dirigens Patrem, and Filium, and Spiritum Sanctum. Ibid.
as they must necessarily do, if they believed a Trinity: And upon this account
they were charged with Tritheism, or with asserting Three Gods, because they
owned a Trinity of Divine Substantial Persons, really distinct from each other,
each of which is truly and perfectly God. So that this is no new Charge against
the Asserters of a Real and Substantial Trinity; and the Ancient Christians had
no regard to it; for Tritheism in this Objection signified no more than the
B^lief of the Trinity, or of Three Divine Persons in the Unity of the Godhead,
which is the true Christian Faith. As to show this briefly:

In answer to this Objection against the belief of a Real Substantial Trinity,
from the Unity of God, they tell us it is Judaism and Heresy, to place the
Unity of the Godhead in the Unity of a Person; to teach that there is but One
Divine Person, as there is but One God. Iudaicae fidci ista res est, sic unum
Deum credere, ut Filium adnumerare ei nolis, and post Filium Spiritum. Tert. c.
Prax.
We may find enough to this purpose in Tertullian against Praxeas, and
Athanasius against the Sabellians; in St. Hilary, St. Austin, and many others.

Athanasius commends the Jews for opposing the Polytheism and Idolatry of the
Gentiles: (...). Ath. cont. Sabell. Tom. 1. p. 651. Paris.
But then he charges them with as great Impiety themselves, in denying the Son
of God, by whom all things were made, and in accusing those of Polytheism who
worship the Father by the Son. (...). Ibid.
-- And he exhorts his Readers to separate themselves from those Iudaizers who
corrupt Christianity with Judaism, who deny God of God, and teach One God in
the Jewish Notion of it: In which he taxes the Sabellians, who taught that the
Word of God is like the Word and Wisdom of a Man, (...). Ibid.
within him, in his Heart and Soul; and therefore that God and his Word are but
One Person.

St. Hilary frequently takes notice of this Corruption of the Evangelical
Faith, as he calls it, Quidam ita Evangelicae fidei corrumpunt Sacramentum, ut
sub unius Dei pia tantum professione, nativitatem Unigeniti Dei abnegent -- Qui
sub unius Dei sola sane utili ac religiosa praedicatione, aut Deum natum
Christum negant, aut verum Deum non esse contendunt, ut Creatio potentis
Creaturae intra unum Deum fidei Sacramentum relinquat, quia nativitas Dei extra
unius Dei fidem religionem protrahat confitentium.
under the Pious Profession of One God, to deny the Only begotten God, to deny
Christ to be born God, or to be True God, but only a Powerful Creature, thereby
to preserve the Faith of One God, which they think the Birth of God does
overthrow. In which he distinctly charges the Sabellians and Arians; the first
for making God but One Person, for fear of introducing a Trinity of Gods with a
Trinity of Persons; the other for making Christ a mere Creature, though the
first and most powerful Creature, for fear of making a Second God, should they
have owned him to be God of God, of the same Substance with the Father.

In opposition to this, he tells us what the true Faith is, Sed nos edocti
divinitus, neque duos Deos praedicare, neque solum, hanc Evangelici ac
Prophetici praeconit rationem in Confessione Dei Patris and Dei Filii
afferemus, ut unum in fide nosira sit uterque, non unus; neque cundem utrumque,
neque inter verum and falsum aliud confitentes: quia Deo ex Deo nato, neque
eundem nativitas p^rmittit esse, neque aliud. Hilar. de Trin. lib. 1.
which they have learned from Divine Revelation, Neither to preach Two Gods,
nor One Solitary Divine Person (for so solus must signify in this place); and
undertakes to prove both from the Evangelists and Prophets, That when we
profess our Faith in God the Father, and God the Son, we must neither own God
the Father and God the Son to be One Person, as the Sabellians did, nor Two
different Substances, as the Arians did: For when God is born of God, this
Divine Nativity will neither admit a Unity of Person, nor a Diversity of
Nature: For Father and Son, he who begets, and he who is begotten, must be Two
Persons; and the Son who is begotten of the Substance of his Father, must be
consubstantial with him.

It were easy to multiply Quotations to this purpose, both out of these and
numerous other Ancient Writers; but this is Proof enough, that the Primitive
Fathers would not be frighted out of the true Catholic Faith of a Real and
Substantial Trinity, by the loud Clamours of Tritheism; but rejected such a
Notion of One God, as confined the Godhead to One Single Solitary Person, as
Judaism, and an Anti-trinitarian Heresy. For we know in what sense the Jews
owned but One God; viz. in the very sense that the Socinians and all
Anti-trinitarians do; that is, That there is but One who is God, but One Divine
Person; and in this sense these Ancient Fathers rejected it.

But besides these general Sayings, they industriously confute this Notion of
the Unity of the Godhead, which confines it to one single Person; that the One
God is so One, that there is and can be but One Divine Person, who is true and
perfect God.

The Scriptures both of the Old and New Testament do expressly teach, that there
is but one God; This the Ancient Heretics perpetually objected against the
Doctrine of the Holy and Ever Blessed Trinity: And St. Hilary observes, Cum
enim unum Deum prophanae assertio infidelitatis ingereret, and rursum unum Deum
negare fides sana non posset, tractari de eo non sine ancipitis periculi
conscientia potuit, quod non minus impie confirmaretur, quam negar^tur. Hill. de
Trinit. lib. 5.

Non ignorans, quantum in eo sit, vel responsionis periculum vel silentii, and
e^ utraque opportunitatem impietatis expectans.

Atque ita sapientia mundi, quae stultitia apud Deum est, specie blandae and
pestiferae simplicitatis illuderet, cum hoc fidei suae constitu^ret exordium,
in quo sibi impie assentiremur aut adversaremur. Et per hoc utriusque rei
periculum, Dei filium Deum non esse obtineret, quia Deus unus est; aut
extorqueret alterius haeres^os necessitatem, si and patrem Deum and filium Deum
confitentes, unum Deum praedicare secundum Sabellii opinionem impiam
existimaremur. Ibid.


what danger there is in answering this Objection, if it be not done with great
caution: For it may be equally impious to deny, or to affirm it. For the True
Catholic Faith of One God lies between two such contrary Heresies, as are
ready to take advantage one way or other, whatever Answer you give. If you own
that there is but One God, without taking notice, that this One God has an only
begotten Son, who is True and Perfect God, the Arians take advantage of this
against the Eternal Godhead of the Son: If you say, That the Father is God, and
the Son God, and yet there is but One God, the Sabellians hence conclude, That
Father and Son are but One Person, as they are One God.

But in opposition to both these Heresies, he tells us, Non n^gantes Deum,
unum, sed -- Deum and Deum -- Praedicantes, and Deum unum non per unionem
docentes, neque rursum ad diversitatis numerum des^cantes; neque contra in
nominibus tantum confi^entes, sed Deum and Deum. Ibid.
That though the Catholic Church did not deny One God, yet they taught God and
God, and denied the Unity of the Godhead both in the Arian and Sabellian Notion
of One God. And consequently, That they professed to believe God, and God, and
God, though not Three Gods, but One God; yet in that very sense which both
Ancient and Modern Heretics call Tritheism.

There is no dispute but the Scripture does very fully and expressly teach us,
That there is but One God. Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord, 6.
Deuteronomy. 4. which our Savior himself approves, 12. Mark 29. and the Scribe
expounds 32. Well master, Thou have said the truth, for there is One God, and
there is none other but He: And this is often confirmed both in the Old and New
Testament: But then the Fathers think that they have an unanswerable Argument
to prove, That by One God, is not meant, that there is but One who is God,
because the same Holy Scriptures which teach us, that there is but One God, do
attribute the Name, and Dignity, and Power, and all the Natural Perfections of
God, to more than One.

St. Hilary explains this Argument at large; Nemini dubium esse oportet ad
divinarum rerum cognitionem divinis utendum esse Doctrinis -- Non subeunt
ingenia nostra in coelestem scientiam, neque incomprehensibilem virtutem sensu
aliquo infirmitas nostra concipiet. Hilar. l. 4. de Trin.
the sum of which in short is this: That we must learn the knowledge of God
from Divine Revelation; for Humane Understandings, which are accustomed to
Corporeal and Bodily Images, are too weak of themselves to discern and
contemplate Divine things; nor is there any thing in our selves, or in Created
Nature, that can give us an adequate notion and conception of the Nature and
Unity of God: We must believe God concerning himself, Ipsi de se Deo credendum
est, and iis, quae cognitioni nostrae de se tribuit, obsequendum; aut enim more
Gentilium denegandus est, si testimonia ejus improbantur; aut si, ut est, Deus
creditur, non potest aliter de Deo, quam ut ipse est de se testatus, intel^igi.
Ibid.
and his own Nature, and yield a ready assent to what he reveals to us. For we
must either deny him to be God, as the Heathens do, if we reject his Testimony;
or if we believe him to be God, we must conceive no otherwise of him, than as
he himself has taught us.

This is very reasonable, if we believe upon God's Authority, To believe all
that God reveals, and to expound the Revelation by it self; not to put such a
sense upon one part of the Revelation, as shall contradict another; but to put
such a sense upon the words, as makes the whole consistent with it self.

As in the present Dispute concerning the Unity of God. The Scripture assures
us, that there is but One God, and we believe that there is but One God.
Excepting the Valentinians, and such kind of Heretics, all Christians, both
Catholics, and Heretics, agree in this Profession. But the Question is, In
what sense the Scripture teaches that there is but One God? Whether this One
God signifies One single Divine Person, or One God with his Only begotten Son
and Eternal Spirit, who have the same Nature and Divinity?

The Arians and Socinians embrace the first Sense of the words, That One God is
One Divine Person, and for this reason will not own Christ, or the Holy Spirit,
to be True and Perfect God, because there is but One God, and Three Divine
Persons, they say, are Three Gods. Now unless we will pretend to understand the
Divine Nature, and the Divine Unity, better than God himself does, we must
refer this Dispute to Scripture; and if we have the same Authority to believe
more Divine Persons than One, that we have to believe but One God, then the
Unity of God in the Scripture-notion of it, is no Tritheism, nor any objection
against the belief of a Trinity; for there may be but One only God, and yet
Three Divine Persons in the Unity of the same Godhead.

This is St. Hilary's Argument, Non negantes Deum unum, sed eo ipso Autore Deum
and Deum, per quem Deus unus praedicatus est, praedicantes. --
and it is a very good one, That Moses himself, who has taught us, that there
is but One God, Atque ita non autoritati contrarium est, sed ex autoritate
responsum est, ne per id filium liceret Deum negare, quia ad Israel Deus unus
est: cum confitendi Dei filium Deum idem Author est, qui Author est Dei unius
praedicandi. Hilar. de Trin. l. 5. prope initium.
has taught us to confess, God and God; that we have the same Authority to
believe the Son of God to be God, that we have to believe One God. And
therefore, though we do, and must believe One God, we must not so believe One
God, as to deny the Son of God to be God, for this is to contradict Moses and
the Prophets.

This Argument he prosecutes at large throughout the IVth and Vth Books of the
Trinity, and alleges all those Old Testament Proofs for the plurality of
Divine Persons, and for the Divinity of Christ; which, whatever opinion some
Modern Wits and Critics have of them, have been applied to that purpose by all
Christian Writers from the beginning of Christianity; and were that my present
Business, might be easily vindicated from the Cavils and Exceptions of
Heretics.

St. Paul tells us, That there is One God the Father, of whom are all things,
and we in him; and One Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him, 1
Cor. 8.6.

St. Hilary finds this God of whom are all things, Habes ergo Deum ex quo,
habes Deum per quem; aut si id negabis, necesse est, id quod factum est, per
quem factum sit, doceas.
and this Lord by whom are all things, in the Mosaical History of the Creation.
And God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters, Quod ergo
dictum est, fiat firmamentum, in eo quod pater sit locutus, ostenditur; and
quod fecisse Deus dicitur, in eo persona efficientis est intelligenda, qui
faciat. Hilar. de Trin. lib. 4.
and let it divide the waters from the waters; and God made the firmament, and
divided the waters, etc. 1. Genesis 6, 7. Where, as he applies it, the Father
commands, and the Son, his Almighty Word, makes all things. So the Psalmist
tells us of the Father, He spoke, and it was done; he commanded, and it stood
fast, 33. Psalm. 9. Or as it is in the 148th Psalm. 5. He commanded, and they
were created. And by whom they were created, St. John tells us; In the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. All
things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made, that was made,
1 John 1, 2. This he thinks proves a plain distinction of jubentis Dei, and
facientis Dei, God that commands, and God that does; for common sense will not
allow that they should be one single Solitary Person, much more reason have we
to distinguish them, when both the Old and New Testament distinguish them.
Sensus communis intelligentiae non recipiet, ut in eo quod dictum est, jussit
and facta sun^* solitarius atque id^m significatus credatur. Ibid. Caeterum,
etsi ubique teneo unam substantiam in tribus cohaerentibus, tam^n ahum dicam
oportet ex necessitate sensus, eum qui jubet, and eum qui facit: nam nec
j^ber^t, si i^se faceret, dum juberet fieri per eum: tamen jubebat, haud sibi
jussurus si unus esset; aut sine ^^ssit facturus, quia non expectasset, ut sibi
juberet. Tert. adv. Prax. c. 12.


But whatever dispute this may admit, that Account Moses gives of the Creation
of Man, he takes to be an unexceptionable Proof of a Plurality of Divine
Persons; And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness. -- So
God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him, 1. Genesis
26.27. Now if we understand these words as spoken by God, Haec aut nega
Scripta, aut quis es, ut non putes accipienda qu^madmodim Scripta sunt; maxim
quae non in Allegoriis and Parabolis, sed in d^finitionibus, and certis and
simplicibus habent sensum. Tert. adv. Prax. c. 13.
in the same sense as we should and ought to understand them, had they been
spoken by men, (which St. Hilary lays down as a Principle, That God speaks to
us as we speak to one another, and expects to be understood by us according to
the common use and acceptance of such forms of speech) then let Us make man in
Our Image, Deus enim per Legistatorem secundum intelligentiam nostram locutus
est: Verbis videlicet quibus uti ipse nos voluit, cognitionem little nobis, quae
gessit, imperticus. Hilar. Ibid.
after Our Likeness, cannot signify a singular and solitary Person; Sustulit
singularis intelligentiam prof^ssione consortu: Consorti^m autem esse aliquod
solitario ipsi sibi non potest.
for such a form of speech naturally imports a Plurality of Persons, and a
common Nature and Likeness. No single solitary Person speaks to himself to do
any thing, but only wills and chooses what to do, Quid enim tam alienum ab eo
qui solus ^sset, ut sibi faciendum diceret, cum voluntate tantum opus est, ut
fieret.
and exec^^es his own purposes; much less does he speak to himself in the
Plural Number, which in common use signifies some Companions and Partners in
the work. N^one rursum recipit solitarii solitudo, F^ciamus, r^que quisq^ un
alieno a se Nostram loqui^^^ uterque sermo, and faciamus, and nosi (...)
silitarium ^^ndemque non patitur, ita neque divers^^^ a se alienumque
significat.
Let Us make, cannot signify One single Person, nor can Our Image admit Two
Persons of an unlike and different Nature, when the Image is but one and the
same; Cognita per id, quod nost^am imagin^m dicit, non etiam imagines nosiras,
^mus in utroque prepietate naturae. Hill. Ibid.
and therefore this must prove, that there are more Divine Persons than One,
and that they have all the same Divine Nature.

Were God but one single and solitary Person, this would be a most
unaccountable form of speech; and there can be no pretense to put such a harsh
sense on the words, unless we certainly knew that there was no other Divine
Person, but he who spoke; but then if instead of knowing this, we certainly
know the contrary; that when God made the World he was not alone, but had his
Eternal Substantial Wisdom, the Person of the Eternal Word with him, by whom he
made the world, this puts the matter out of doubt: And this St. Hilary proves
from that account which Solomon gives of Wisdom, 8 Prove. 22, etc. The Lord
possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of old. I was set up
from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was. -- Then I was by
him, as one brought up with him, rejoicing always before him: And therefore the
Father was not alone, and did not speak to himself when he made the world; Non
ergo in fabricatione mundi solitarius Pater sibi loquitur, sapientia sua secum
and co operante, and consummata co operatione gaudente. Ibid.
his own Wisdom, a Divine Eternal Person, cooperating with him, and rejoicing
in the Perfection of his Works.

But besides this, he proves at large, that the Angel which so often appeared
to Abraham, Hagar, Jacob, to Moses in a Burning Bush, and is in express terms
called God, the Judge of the world, the God of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob,
was not a Created Angel, nor God the Father, and yet was True and Perfect God,
even the Son of God, who in the fullness of time became Man; and adds several
Passages in the Psalms and Prophets, which plainly own a Divine Person,
distinct from God the Father, to be True and Perfect God.

I need not tell those who are acquainted with the Writings of the Ancient
Fathers, that they all insist on the same Arguments to prove the same thing;
that there is not in any one point a more universal Consent amongst them, which
is too Venerable an Authority to be overruled by Criticism; it being no less
than a Traditionary Exposition of Scripture from the Apostolic Age. But I am
no further concerned in this at present, than to show what Notion the Catholic
Fathers had about the Unity of God. These Fathers did not fence against the
Objection of Tritheism, by distinguishing away the Divinity of the Son, and of
the Holy Spirit, by making the Son God ex accidenti, and secundum quid; for
they knew nothing of an accidental or secundum quid God; which I must own
sounds to me very like Blasphemy and Contradiction; that when this Name God,
signifies the most necessary and absolutely Perfect Being, any Person to whom
this Name does naturally and essentially belong, should be God by Accident, or
only in a limited and qualified sense: But without fearing the Charge of
Tritheism, they with Moses and the Prophets own another Divine Person distinct
from the Father, but as Real and Substantial a Person, and as truly and
perfectly God, as the Father is: Insomuch that Tertullian, when he had alledg^d
that T^xt, 45. Psalm. 6, 7. which the Apostle to the Hebrews applies to Christ,
1. Heb. Thy throne, O G^d* is for ever and ever, the scepter of thy Kingdom is
a right scepter. -- Therefore God thy God has anointed thee with the oil of
gladness above thy fellows; was not a^raid to add, Te^t. a^v. Pra^^a^^.
Ecce Duos Deos! Behold Two Gods! That is* Two Divine Persons, each of whom is
by himself truly and essentially God; for notwithstanding this, he would not
say there are Two or Three Gods, and gives his reason for it: He owned a
Plurality of Gods, even Tritheism it self, in that sense of the word Tritheism
which the Arians and Sabellians objected against the Faith of the Trinity, as
Three Gods signify no more than Three Divine Substantial Persons, each of whom
is truly and perfectly God, as having distinctly in himself the whole and
perfect Divine Nature; but this he and the other Fathers deny to be Tritheism;
they are God, and God, and God, but not Three Gods: And they think it a
sufficient proof, (as any man would, who believes the Scripture) that this is
not the Scripture-Notion of Tritheism, because the same Scripture which teaches
us that there is but One God, attributes not only the Name and Title of God,
but the Divine Nature and Perfections, to more Persons than One. And this is
the only Answer that need be given, and the best Answer that can be given to
this Objection of Tritheism; for God knows his own Nature, and his own Unity
best: And it is enough for us to acknowledge God to be One, as the Scripture
teaches him to be One; that is, that there is but One God, but that this One
God has an Eternal only begotten Son, and an Eternal Spirit, in the Unity of
the same Godhead.

This is the account Tertullian gives us of those Expressions, Salvo enim filio
recte unicum Deum potest determinasse, cujus est filius. Non enim definit esse
qui habet filium ipse unicus, suo scilicet nomine, quotiens sine filio
n^minatur. Sine filio autem nominatur, quum principaliter determinatur ut prima
p^rsona, quae ante si^i^ nomen erat proponenda; quia pater ante ^^gn^^citur,
and post patrem fi^ius nominatur. Igitur unus Deus Pater, and ali^s absque ^o
non est. Quod ipse infer^us non ^^lium n^gat, sed alium Deum. Cae^^rum alius a
Patre filius non est. D^nique, inspice sequentia hujusmodi pronuntiationum, and
invenies fere ad Id^lorum factitatores atque cultores definitionem carum
pertinere; ut multitudinem falsorum Deorum unio Divinitatis expellat, habens
tamen filium quanto individuum and inseparatum a patre tanto in patre
reputandum, etsi non nominatum, atquin si nominasset eum, separasset, ita
dicens, alius praeter me non est, nisi filius me^us; alium enim etiam filium
fecisset, quem de aliis excepisset. Puta solemn dixisse, ego sol, and praeter me
^on est, nisi radius meus, nonne denotasses vanitatem, quasi non and ra^ius in
sole deputetur. Tert. adv. Prax. c. 18.
when the Scripture asserts that there is but One God, and that there is none
besides him. For without denying the Son, we may truly affirm, That there is
but One only God, whose Son he is. For though he has a Son, he does not lose
his Name of the One and only God, when he is named without his S^n; and so he
is, when what is said, is appropriated to him as the first pers^n; for in the
order of Nature, a^^ of ou^ Conceptions, the Father is before ^he Son, and
therefore must be named b^^ore him: So that there is but One God the Father,
and besides him there is no other; which does not deny the Son, but another
God; which rejects the multitude of False Gods which the Heathens worshipped;
but the Son, as being inseparably united to him, is included in the Unity of
the Father's Godhead, though not named; which as he well observes, he could not
be, without making another God of him. Had the Father said, There is no other
God besides me, excepting my Son, this had made the Son another God, a new
separate Divinity; and would have been as improper, as if the Sun should say,
There is no other Sun besides me, excepting my Rays.

The Sum of which is this: That the Title of the One and only God, and besides
him there is no other God, does in a peculiar manner belong to the Father, who
is the One only God with his Son and Spirit; but this does not exclude the Son
or Spirit from being true and perfect God; for they are not other Gods from the
Father, but have the same Divinity, and are inseparably ^mited to the Father,
and therefore are included in the ^^ity of the Godhead, without being named;
whereas th^^r being named would have excepted them out of the Unity of the
Godhead, and made other Gods of them: And though the Son when he is named
al^ne, Qui etsi De^^^^catur, quando nominatur sing^^^ (...) non igitur du^s
Deos faciat, se^ (...), hoc ipso quod and Deus ex unitate patri^ vocari habeat.
Ibid. c. 19.
is called God, this does not make Two Gods, because he is God only by his
Unity with his Father.

St. Hilary gives much the same account of it; Non alter ad eum Deus deputatur
(filius) non enim ex alia substantia, sed ex Deo Deus est. Nihil itaque in eo
novum, nihil extraneum, nihil recens est. Hilar. de Trin. l. 4. in fine.
That when the Scripture teaches that there is One God, and no other God
besides him, this does not exclude the Son of God from being true and perfect
God, because the Son is not another God: Reliquus autem nunc omnis s^rmo ad id
proficiet, ut qui Deus verus esse intelligitur, non in Deum alterum deputetur:
Et quod in alterum non proficit, id unum intelligatur.
He being of the same Substance with God the Father, God of God, and
inseparably united to him: Another God does not signify another Divine Person,
Non enim aliud quam Deus subsistit, quod non aliunde quam ex Deo Deus
subsistit: Nam cum ipse Deus sit, tamen etiam per naturae virtutem in eo Deus
est: Et per id quod ipse Deus, and in eo Deus est, non est Deus praeter eum:
Cum non extet aliunde quod Deus est, and in eo Deus sit, habens in se and quod
ipse est, and ex quo ipse subsistit. Id. l. 5.
but another Divinity, another separate and independent Principle and Fountain
of Deity. And besides this, St. Hilary endeavors to prove at large from
several Texts of the Old Testament, that this very expression, of one God, and
no other besides him, Quoniam ego sum Dominus, and non est Deus praeter me: Est
enim unigenitus Deus, neque consortem unigeniti nomen admittit, sicut non
recipit innascibilis, in eo tantum quod est innascibilis, participem. Est ergo
unus ab uno, neque praeter Deum innascibilem Deus innascibilis alius est; neque
praeter unigenitum Deum Deus unigenitus quisquam est. Uterque itaque Unus and
Solus est, proprictate videlicet in unoquoque and innascibilitatis and
originis. Ac sic uterque Deus unus est: Cum inter unum and unum, id est, ex uno
unum, Divinitatis aeternae non sit secunda natura. Hill. l. 4.
is applied not only to the Father, but to the Son, and is very justly
applicable to each of them, because each of them have a Personal and
Incommunicable Unity. The Father is the One God, and there is none besides him;
for he is the only Deus Innascibilis, the only God, who is God of himself,
without any Communication of the Divine Nature to him from any other Divine
Person. The Son is the One God, and there is none besides him; that is, the
Deus Vnigenitus, the only begotten God; and there is no other begotten God but
he: So that each of them is the One God: For between One and One, that is One
of One, there is no Second Nature of the Eternal D^ity.

I shall not dispute these matters now, which will be more proper in another
place; it is enough at present, that we learn from them what Sense these
Fathers had concerning the Unity of God; viz. That it is not the Unity of a
S^ngle Person, so as to exclude all other Persons from the Name and Nature of
God, but a Unity of Nature and Principle; That there are not Two different
Divinities, nor Two Principles of Divinity, which have no Communication with
each other; but that there is One Self-originated Being, who communicates his
own Nature, without Division and Separation to his Eternal Son, and by and with
his Son to his Eternal Spirit. Thus St. Hilary concludes this Dispute, That to
confess One God, but not a solitary God (that is, In his ergo si unum magis
quam solitarium Deum intelligis, ecclesiae religionem profiteberis, quae Patrem
in Filio confitetur. Sin vero unum Deum ad solitarii significationem,
sacram^nti coelestis ignarus oltendis, extra cognitionem Dei es, Deum i^ Deo
esse non confitens. l. 5.
not one single solitary Person) is the Faith of the Church, which confesses
the Father in the Son: But if out of ignorance of this Heavenly Mystery, we
pretend that One God signifies One single Divine Person, we know not God, as
not owning the Faith of God in God.

This is plain sense which every Christian may understand, and what every one
must believe who will be a Christian: We must believe in Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, that the Father is not the Son, nor the Son the Father, nor the Holy
Ghost either Father or Son; and that each of these Three is in himself, as
distinguished from the other Two, true and perfect God; but though they are
Three, and each of them true and perfect God, yet they are not Three Gods,
because there is but One and the same Divinity in them: The same individual
numerical Divine Nature, being whole, perfect, undivided in them all;
originally in the Father, by Generation in the Son, and by Procession in the
Holy Ghost, as I have already explained it, which is the most perfect Unity we
can conceive between Three Wholes, or Three, each of which have the same whole
undivided Nature distinctly in themselves.

If this will not be allowed to be such a Unity as is included in the Notion of
One God; that the natural Notion of One God is of One only who is God, which is
contradictory to the belief of Three, each of whom is in himself true and
perfect God; the answer the Catholic Fathers give to this (as I have now
shown) ought to satisfy all Christians; that this is not the Scripture-notion
of One God, That there is but One, who is God; because the same Holy Scriptures
which teach us, that there is but One God, do also teach us, that there are
Three in the Unity of the Godhead. That not only the Father is God, as an
Infinite, Eternal, Self-originated Being, and upon this account in a peculiar
manner called the One and only true God; but the Son also is true God, and the
Holy Ghost true God, by the Communication of the same Divine Nature to them.
Now God knows his own Nature and Unity best, and if he declares himself to be
but One God, but yet requires us to believe his Eternal Son to be true and
perfect God, and his Eternal Spirit to be true and perfect God; it is certain
that the Divinity of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost is very reconcilable with
the Unity of God. For as far as Revelation must decide this Dispute, we are as
much obliged to believe, That the Father is God, the Son God, and the Holy
Ghost God, as we are to believe, That there is but One God.

Those who will not acquiesce in this, must appeal from Scripture to Natural
Reason, which is a very absurd and impudent Appeal; for the plain sense of it
is this, That they will believe their own Reason before the Scriptures, in
matters relating to the Divine Nature and Unity, which all wise men acknowledge
to be so much above human comprehension: That is, That they know the Unity of
God better than God himself does; or, which is the same thing, That they will
never believe any Revelation to come from God, or any thing, how express soever
the words are, to be the meaning of the Revelation, any farther than their own
Reason approves it: Of which more elsewhere.

And yet I dare appeal to any man of a free and unbiased Reason in this Cause,
What is that Natural Notion we have of One God? Is it any thing more, than that
there is and can be but One Eternal Self-originated Being, who is the Principle
or Cause of all other Beings? And does not the Scripture, do not all
Trinitarians, with the whole Catholic Church, own this? Do not all the
Christian Creeds teach us to profess our Faith in One God the Father, from whom
the Son and the Holy Spirit receive their Godhead? Thus far then Scripture, and
Reason, and the Catholic Faith agree: Does Reason then deny, that God can
beget of himself an Eternal Son, his own perfect Image and Likeness? If it
does, then indeed Scripture and Reason contradict each other: But I believe
these men will not pretend to prove from Reason, That God could not beget an
Eternal Son; and if this cannot be proved by Reason, as I am certain it never
can, then Reason does not contradict Scripture, which teaches us that God has
an only begotten Son: And if God have an only begotten Son, Reason will teach
us that the Son of God must be True and Perfect God, and yet not another God,
because he has one and the same Nature with his Father.

This is all that any Christian need to believe concerning this matter, and all
this every Christian may understand; and all this every one who sincerely
believes the Faith of the Holy Trinity, does and must agree in: Those who do
not, I will at any time undertake to prove to be secret Heretics, and Enemies
to the Christian Faith: and as for those who do, I will never dispute with them
about some Terms of Art, and the Propriety of Words, in a matter which is so
much above all words and forms of speech.

And here I leave this matter upon a sure Bottom; and here we are ready to join
Issue with our Socinian Adversaries. Our only Controversy as to the Doctrine of
the Trinity with them is, Whether the Son, and the Holy Spirit, each of them,
be True and Perfect God: If we can prove this, which has been the Faith of the
Catholic Church in all Ages, we need dispute no other matters with them; nor
can any Disputes among our selves give any Support to their Cause. A Dispute
about Words may look like a difference in Faith, when both contending Parties
may mean the same thing; as those must do, who sincerely own and believe, That
the Son is True and Perfect God, and the Holy Ghost is True and Perfect God,
and that neither of them are the Father, nor each other.

And therefore those different Explications of the Doctrine of the Trinity
which the Socinians of late have so much triumphed in, and made more and
greater than really they are, and more senseless too by their false
Representations, can do them no real service among Wise Men, tho it may help to
amuse the Ignorant. If any men have subtly distinguished away the Catholic
Faith, they may take them to themselves, and increase their Party by them: But
if this were the Case, as I hope it is not, it is no Objection against the
Catholic Faith, that some men openly oppose it, and others, at least in some
men's opinions, do secretly undermine it. There is reason to guard the Christian
Faith against all inconvenient or dangerous Explications, which seem to
approach near Heresy, if this be done with due Christian Temper and Moderation;
but I hope the Disputes of the Trinitarians are not so irreconcilable, but that
they will all unite against a Pestilent and Insolent Heresy, which now promises
it self glorious Successes only from their private Quarrels.

CHAP. II. An Examination of Some Considerations concerning the Trinity.
SECT. I. Concerning the Ways of managing this Controversy.
BEfore I put an end to this Discourse, it will contribute very much to the
better understanding of what I have said, and give a clearer Notion of the Use
of it, to apply these Principles to the Examination of a late Treatise,
entitled, Some Considerations concerning the Trinity. The Author I know not;
he writes with Temper; and though he takes the liberty to find fault, he does
it Civilly, and therefore he ought to meet with Civil Usage, and so he shall
from me, as far as the bare Censure of his Principles will admit.

I was, I confess, startled at the first entrance, to find him own the
Uncertainty of our Faith in these Points (concerning the Trinity);
Considerations, p. 1.
for if after the most perfect Revelation of the Gospel that we must ever
expect, and the Universal Tradition of the Catholic Church for above Sixteen
Hundred years, this Faith is still uncertain, it is time to leave off all
Enquiries about it. As for the many absurd and blasphemous Expositions that
have been made of this Doctrine; if by them he means the Ancient Heresies which
infested the Church, they are so far from rendering our Faith uncertain, that
(as I shall show him anon) the very Condemnation of those Heresies by the
Catholic Church, gives us a more certain account what the true Catholic Faith
was. I agree with him, that the warm and indiscreet Management of contrary
Parties, has been to the Prejudice of Religion, among unthinking people, who
hence conclude the uncertainty of our Faith; and it concerns good men to remove
this Prejudice, by distinguishing the Catholic Faith from the Disputes about
Ecclesiastical Words, and the Catholic Sense of them; and I hope I have made
it appear this may be done, and then the Faith is secure, notwithstanding these
Disputes; and as for any other Offense or Scandal, let those look to it, who
either give or take it.

This Considerer dislikes all the Ways and Methods which have hitherto been
taken to compose these Disputes.

1. He dislikes those who are for reverencing the Mystery of the Trinity,
Consid. p. 2.
without ever looking into it at all; who think it proposed to us only as a
Trial and Exercise of our Faith; and the more implicit that is, the fuller do
we express our Trust and Reliance upon God.

Now if by not looking into it at all, he means not enquiring what they are to
believe concerning the Trinity, nor why they believe it; this I acknowledge is
a very odd sort of Faith; but I believe he cannot name any such men whose
avowed Principle this is: An Implicit Faith is only meritorious in the Church
of Rome, but then an Implicit Faith is to believe without knowing what or why;
but these Ignoramus or Mystery-Trinitarians (as some late Socinian Considerers
have insolently and reproachfully called them, and whom our Author ought not to
have imitated) never teach such an Implicit Faith as this, much less admire the
Triumph and Merit of Faith in believing Contradictions, and the more the
better. Under all the appearance of Modesty and Temper, these are very severe
and scandalous Reflections upon some of the Wisest and Greatest Men amongst us,
and which this Considerer had little reason for, as will soon appear.

The Doctrine of the Holy Trinity is the most Fundamental Article of the whole
Christian Faith, and therefore an explicit Knowledge and Belief of it is
essential to the Christian Profession, and thus all Protestant Divines teach;
and whatever Voluminous Disputes there may be about it, the true Christian
Faith of the Trinity is comprised in a few words, and the Proofs of it are
plain and easy: For the Scriptures plainly and expressly teach us, that there is
but One God; and that the Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is
God; that the Father is not the Son, nor the Son the Father, nor the Holy Ghost
either Father or Son; as I have already explained it: This we all teach our
people to believe upon the Authority of Scripture (which is the only Authority
we can have for matters of pure Revelation), and expound those Texts to them
which expressly contain this Faith, and vindicate them from the Cavils and
perverse Comments of Heretics: And this, I think, is not to reverence the
Mystery, without ever looking into it at all, when we look as far as we can,
till Revelation bounds our prospect: And this is to look into it as far as God
would have us, and as far as is necessary to all the purposes of Religion; that
is, as far as the knowledge of this Mystery is of any use to us.

Now when this is done, there are a great many wise men who think we ought to
look into this Mystery no further; and there seems to be a very good reason for
it; viz. because with all our looking, we can see no further. There are indeed
some curious Questions started about reconciling the Unity of God with the
belief of a Trinity, in which there are Three, each of whom is by himself True
and Perfect God; for if there be but One God, how can there be Three, each of
whom is True God? Now whatever Answer may be given to such kind of Objections
and pretended Contradictions, these Learned Men think there is no reason to
clog the Christian Faith with them, nor to disturb the minds of ordinary
Christians with such Subtilties: That the Authority of God who has revealed
this, and the acknowledged Incomprehensibility of the Divine Nature, is a
sufficient Answer to all Objections; and as ridiculously as a Witty Man may
represent this, That is the truest Faith, not which can believe Contradictions,
but which can despise the pretense of Contradictions, when opposed to a Divine
Revelation; for that resolves Faith wholly into Divine Authority, which is the
true Notion of a Divine Faith.

To say that this will not suppress any of our Doubts or Disputes in Religion,
is a manifest mistake; for such a profound Veneration for the Authority of God,
would silence them all: And whatever is the Natural Propension of the Soul to
the search of Truth, Natural Reason will tell us, that there are a thousand
things which we can know nothing of, and that it is in vain to search after
them; but that the Divine Wisdom is unsearchable, and therefore God is to be
believed beyond our own knowledge or comprehension; and when we are agreed
about the Truth and Certainty of the Revelation, that will silence all our
Disputes about what is revealed, and set bounds to our Enquiries.

And I never knew before, the danger of submitting our Reason to Faith, of a
blind resignation of judgment (as he is pleased to call it) to a Divine
Revelation, Consid. p. 3.
for that is the matter in debate. Blasphemies and Contradictions may, and have
been imposed upon men's Faith, under the Venerable Name of Mysteries; but such
Blasphemies and Contradictions were never revealed in Scripture, and therefore
belong not to the present Enquiry, which only concerns believing what we allow
to be revealed, without looking any farther into it. We allow all men to
examine the Truth and Certainty of the Revelation, and to examine what is
revealed; but here we must stop, and not pretend to judge of what is revealed,
by the measures of human Reason, which is so inadequate a Rule for Divine and
Supernatural Truths. This is all very plain; and if he will allow the Truth of
this, he must confess, that what he has said upon this first Head is nothing to
the purpose. It is a very popular thing to decry Mysteries, and to cry up
Reason, but to be very cautiously imitated, because it is generally found that
such men are either no great Believers, or no very deep Reasoners.

2. In the next place he tells us of a very strange sort of men, who call the
Doctrine of the Trinity an Incomprehensible Mystery, P. 3.
and yet are at a great deal of pains to bring it down to a level with Human
Understanding; and are all very earnest to have their own particular
Explications acknowledged as necessary Articles of Faith. An Incomprehensible
Mystery is what Human Reason cannot comprehend; to bring an Incomprehensible
Mystery down to the level of Human Understandings, is to make it comprehensible
by Reason; and those are notable men indeed, who undertake to make that
comprehensible by Reason, which at the same time they acknowledge to be
incomprehensible: It is to be hoped this Considerer does a little mistake them:
Men may bebelieve the Trinity to be an Incomprehensible Mystery, and yet speak
of it in words which may be understood, which does not pretend to make the
Mystery comprehensible, but to deliver it from Nonsense, Jargon, and Heresy;
that is, not to explain the Mystery, which is and will be a Mystery still, but
to secure the true Christian Doctrine of the Trinity, which they desire may
continue an Article of the Christian Faith still.

P. 5.
There are, he tells us, a third sort of men who are for no Mystery; that is,
the Socinians; and I was glad to find them censured and rejected, but wondered
how they came to be numbered among those men who have labored in this good
design of explaining the Trinity, P. 2.
and reconciling the Disputes about it.

Well: All these Methods have proved ineffectual; let us then (to omit other
matters) enquire what Course our Considerer took to make himself a fit and
competent Judge of this Controversy: Take the account of it in his own words; I
have endeavored to deliver my self from Prejudice and Confusion of Terms, and
to speak justly and intelligibly: P. 9.
And not being yet prepossessed in favor of any particular Explication, the
better to preserve my freedom of examining the Subject in hand, I have
purposely forborne to search the Fathers, Schoolmen, or Fratres Poloni, or read
over any later Treatises concerning this Controversy, while I was composing the
present Essay, resolving to consult nothing but Scripture and my own Natural
Sentiments, and draw all my Reflections from thence, taking only such which
easily and without constraint offered themselves.

Thus Des Carts made a New Philosophy, and this is the best way that can be
thought of to make a New Faith. This has an appearance of great Indifferency
and Impartiality, but it is a great mistake when men boast in this as a virtue
and attainment, and an excellent disposition of mind for the Examination of
Matters of Faith. I never in my life yet saw any one example to the contrary,
but that when men who had been educated in the Christian Faith, and tolerably
instructed in the meaning and the reasons of it, could persuade themselves to
be thus perfectly indifferent whether it were true or false, but this
indifference was owing to a secret bias and inclination to Infidelity or
Heresy. It is in vain to pretend such an absolute freedom of Judgment, without
being perfectly indifferent which side is true or false: For if we wish and
desire to find one side of the question true, and the other false, this is a
Bias, and our Judgment is not equally poised. And certainly in matters of such
vast consequence as the Christian Faith, and especially that great Fundamental
Article of the Holy Trinity, such an Indifferency as this is, can never
recommend either an Author or his Writings to sober Christians. Will this
Considerer then own, that it was indifferent to him when he undertook this
design, whether the Doctrine of the Trinity should upon Examination appear true
or false? If it were not, the Socinians will tell him that he had not preserved
a Freedom of Judgment, and then he did well in not consulting the Fratres
Poloni, for he had condemned them without hearing; or if he were persuaded
concerning the Doctrine of the Trinity, Was it indifferent to him whether the
Sabellian, or Arian, or True Catholic Notion of a Trinity, contained in the
Nicene and Athanasian Creeds, were the True Faith? That is, Was it indifferent
to him, whether the Ancient Heresies condemned by the Catholic Church, or that
Faith which the Catholic Church has always owned and professed, be the True
Faith? For my part, I confess, I am not thus indifferent; I will never shut my
eyes against plain Conviction, which is all the Freedom of judging which is
allowable; but my Prejudices are, and I hope always will be, on the side of the
Catholic Faith. No wise man can be thus indifferent. And we shall find this
Considerer was not so very indifferent; for the main Principles he reasons on,
are some Popular Mistakes and Prejudices, which he seems to have espoused
without due Consideration.

But let us allow him to be as free and unprejudiced as he pleases, I cannot
think that he took a good method to understand this Sacred Mystery. He laid
aside Fathers, Schoolmen, and other later Treatises concerning this
Controversy, and consulted nothing but Scripture, and his own natural
Sentiments. To consult Scripture is indeed a very good way, and absolutely
necessary in matters of pure Revelation, which can be certainly known no other
way; but the Fathers at least are very good Guides, and have very great
Authority in expounding Scripture; and our Natural Sentiments, otherwise called
Natural Reason, is a very bad, a very dangerous Expositor of Scripture in such
Supernatural Mysteries, and has no Authority in these mattters; and how our
Considerer has been misled by his Natural Sentiments, will soon appear.

A few words might serve for an Answer to the Considerer; but since this is the
great Pretense of Socinians and other Heretics, to set up Scripture and
Natural Reason, against Scripture and the Traditionary Faith of the Catholic
Church; and our Considerer and some other unwary Writers chime in with them, it
will be very necessary to show how this betrays the Catholic Faith, and makes
Reason and Criticism the Supreme Judge of Controversy; and then men may dispute
on without end, and believe at last as they please.

P. 10.
The Considerer tells us, I take it for granted in a Protestant Country, that
Scripture is the only Standard of all necess^ry Revealed Truths: Neither in the
present Case is there any room for a Traditionary Faith. For besides that all
the Fathers and Ancient Writers ground their Exposition of the Trinity wholly
upon Scripture, I cannot conceive that the Subject is capable of a plainer
Revelation; as I shall endeavor to show more fully in the following Discourse.
What this last Clause means, we shall understand better hereafter; but his
denying a Traditionary Faith, is very extraordinary; for if we can prove from
the most Authentic Records, what the constant belief of the Catholic Church
has been, especially in the first and purest Ages of it, This I take to be a
Traditionary Faith; nor is it the less Traditionary because the Fathers and
Ancient Writers sound their Expositions of the Trinity wholly upon Scripture:
For if this be true, then we have a Traditionary Faith of the Trinity, and a
Traditionary Exposition of the Scripture, for the Reason and Proof of that
Faith, both in one; which I take to be a greater Authority, and safer Guide,
than mere Scripture and our Natural Sentiments: And though Protestants allow
Scripture to be the only Standard of Faith, yet he might have remembered, that
the Church of England requires us to expound Scripture as the Ancient Fathers
expound it.

But this Wholly is a Mistake; for the Primitive Fathers pleaded Tradition as
well as Scripture against the Ancient Heretics, as two distinct, but agreeing
Testimonies; as this Author might have known, would he have been pleased to
have consulted Irenaeus and Tertullian de praescriptionibus, with diverse
others. What he means by a plainer Revelation, I cannot tell; it makes it
somewhat plainer, to know what the Catholic Faith has always been, and what
the Catholic Interpretation of Scripture has always been; which is the
plainest and strongest Answer to Wit and Criticism, and Natural Sentiments,
when they contradict this Traditionary Faith. But to discourse this matter more
particularly, I shall enquire,

1. What that Catholic Church is, from whence we must receive this
Traditionary Faith.

2. What Evidence we have of this Tradition concerning the Trinity, in the
Catholic Church.

3. Of what Authority this ought reasonably to be in expounding Scripture,

SECT. II. Concerning the Traditionary Faith of the Church, with respect to the
Doctrine of the Trinity.
FIrst then, Let us consider what that Catholic Church is, from whence we must
receive this Traditionary Faith.

Now since Christ gave the Supreme Authority of preaching the Gospel, and
planting Churches, to his Apostles, those only must be reckoned the true
Apostolic Churches, from which we must receive the true Christian Faith, which
were planted by the Apostles, or by Apostolic men, and lived in Communion with
them.

It is not sufficient to prove any Doctrine to be the true Primitive Faith,
That it was preached in the Apostles days, but that it was the Faith of the
Apostolic Churches, which were planted by the Apostles, and received their
Faith from them; for that Only is the Primitive and Apostolic Faith. And
therefore though Arians and Socinians could prove their Heresies to be as
Ancient as the Apostolic Age, (as we grant something like them was) this does
not prove theirs to be the true Christian Faith, if it were not the Faith of
the Apostolic Churches.

And this was very visible in those days, what these Churches were which were
planted by the Apostles, and lived in Communion with them, and is very visible
still in the most Authentic Records of the Church. For the Heretics which
sprang up in that Age, separated themselves from the Apostles, and thereby made
a visible distinction between the True Apostolic Churches, and Heretical
Conventicles: And in after-Ages they either separated themselves, or were cast
out of the Communion of the Church. This St. John accounted a great advantage
to the Christian Church, and an Infallible Proof of False Doctrine and Heresy,
as it certainly was at that time; for if the Apostles taught the True Faith,
those who separated from the Apostles, and preached another Gospel, which they
never learnt from them, must be Heretics; 1 Ioh. 2.18, 19. Little Children, it
is the last time; and as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come* even now
there are many Antichrists; whereby we know that it is the last time: They went
out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they no doubt
would have continued with us; but they went out, that they might be made
manifest, that they were not all of us.

The Separation of Heretics in that Age was a visible renouncing the
Apostolic Faith and Communion; and therefore how many Heresies soever started
up, it was still visible, where the Apostolic Faith and Tradition was
preserved; and this was of admirable use to preserve the Faith of the Church
sincere and incorrupt: For had these Heretics continued in Communion with the
Apostles and Apostolic Churches, and secretly propagated their Heresies, and
infected great numbers of Christians, without dividing into distinct and
opposite Communions, it would have been a great dispute in the next Age, which
had been the true Apostolic Faith, when the Members of the same Churches,
which all their time lived in Communion with the Apostles, should preach
contrary Doctrines, and pretend with equal confidence, Apostolic Tradition;
which the greatest Heretics might very plausibly have done, had they always
lived in Communion with the Apostles: But they went out from us, says St. John,
that they might be made manifest, that they were not all of us; that the world
might know how to distinguish between Catholic Christians, and Heretics; and
between the True Catholic Faith, and the Corrupt Innovations of Perverse men.

And this I take to be a good reason to this day, why we should keep the
Communion of the Church sincere and incorrupt, and not set our doors open for
Arians and Socinians, and all sorts of Heretics to mix with us* For though,
since the C^mmunion of the Church has been so broken and divided by Schisms,
and Factions, and H^resies, it is no proof of the True Apostolic Faith, merely
that it is the Faith of such a Church, (though the Church of Rome still vainly
pretends to such Authority) yet it would soon ruin the Christian Church, and
the Christian Faith, to have no distinction preserved between true Apostolic
Churches, and the Apostolic Faith, and the Conventicles of Heretics, the
impure Offspring of Cerinthus and Ebion, of Photinus or Arius. And therefore I
cannot but abhor that Accommodating-Design which some men have expressed so
warm a Zeal for, to Comprehend away the Faith of the Holy Trinity, in some
loose general Expressions, without any particular determined Sense, and to
purge our Liturgies of every thing that savours of the Worship of the Blessed
Trinity, that Arians and Socinians may join in Communion with us: Which is a
plausible Pretense, under the Notion of Christian Charity and Communion, to
betray the Christian Faith: Not expressly to renounce it, but to bury it in
silence, as a Useless and Church-dividing Dispute. I am satisfied this Holy
Faith can never be Confuted; but could these men prevail, it might soon be Lost.

But to return: This is a sure Foundation for our Enquiries into the Faith of
the Primitive Church, To know what the Primitive Church is; for otherwise we
may mistake Old Heresies for the Primitive Faith. But those Churches which were
planted by the Apostles or Apostolical men, and received their Faith from them,
and lived in Communion with them, are the true Primitive and Apostolic
Churches, and their Faith is the true Primitive Apostolic Faith; and what that
was, Justin Martyr and Irenaeus assure us; The Faith and Worship of Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost: And what their Faith was as to all these Three Divine
Persons, is evident from the Writings of those Ancient Fathers, who preserved
the Succession and Communion of these Apostolic Churches. But this is not what
I intend at present; but from hence it appears, That those Ancient Heresies
which were rejected and condemned by the Apostolic Churches, as soon as they
appeared, could not be the Apostolic Faith. These Heretics separated from the
Apostles, and Apostolic Churches, and therefore could not receive their Faith
from them; nor did they pretend to this, while the Apostles lived, though they
forged new Gospels, and Acts, and Revelations for them when they were dead. And
thus all the Heresies of Simon Magus, Menander, Cerinthus, Ebion, Valentinus,
and all those other Divisions and Subdivisions of Heretics, who denied or
corrupted the Doctrine of the Divinity of our Savior, or his Incarnation, are
all rejected from the Apostolical Faith; for these Heretics did not receive
their Doctrines from the Apostles and Apostolic Churches, as they themselves
owned by their Separation from the Apostolic Churches; and these Churches gave
Testimony against their Corruptions, as soon as they were known; and there is
no need of any other Confutation of them, if we allow the Doctrine of the
Apostles to be the only Infallible Rule of Faith.

This is the Argument from Prescription, which Tertullian insists so largely
on, and is frequently urged by Irenaeus, and other Catholic Writers; which is
not, as some mistake it, an Argument merely from Antiquity; for though the true
Faith was ancienter than any Heresies, yet some Heresies had Antiquity enough
to make them venerable, if that alone would do it; but the Argument was from
the Tradition of the Apostolic Churches, which were planted by the Apostles,
and had preserved an uninterrupted Succession from them, and all the world over
taught the same Faith, without any material change or variation: Whereas none
of these Heresies, how Ancient soever they might be, could pretend to such an
Original, were never taught by the Apostles, or any Apostolical men, nor were
received or owned by any Churches planted by them. And this is an unanswerable
Argument, as long as we can reasonably suppose the Tradition of the Catholic
Faith, and the Communion of the Church, was preserved entire, which it visibly
was, at least till the first Nicene Council; and during all this Period, had we
no other ways to know it, we might learn the Faith of the Catholic Church, by
its opposition to those Heresies which it condemned.

2 dly. And this is the only Evidence which I shall at present insist on for
the Catholic Tradition of the Faith of the Holy and Ever blessed Trinity; for
we may see the plain Footsteps of the Ancient Catholic Tradition concerning
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in those Ancient Heresies.

Simon Magus was the first Heretic we read of, and may be very justly
accounted the Father of many of the Ancient Heresies, having led the way, and
sown the Seeds and Principles of them.

Now if we believe that Account which Epiphanius gives of him, this wicked
Impostor pretended himself to be God, both Father and Son, and affirmed that
his Lewd Woman, who was called sometimes Helena, sometimes Selene, was the Holy
Ghost.

These Names and Distinctions of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, he could not
possibly learn from any persons, but only from the Christian Church, in which
he was baptized in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost. And therefore we may observe, that before his Baptism he only pretended
to be some Great One, and the deluded people thought him to be the great power
of God, 8. Acts 9, 10. But when he was baptized, and soon after apostatized
from the Christian Faith, the Devil, whose great Power he was, set him up for
the God of the Christians, both Father and Son. And though he blasphemously
attributed these Titles of God the Father and Son to himself, and wickedly
corrupted this Faith, by making the Father and Son but one Person under
different appearances; that he appeared to his Countrymen the Samaritans as
God the Father, and to the Jews as the Son; yet there had been no pretense for
this, had not the Christian Church owned Jesus Christ, the Son of God, to be
true and perfect God. For had the Father been God, and the Son a mere Man, it
is certain Father and Son could never be the same Person: And besides the
Wickedness and Impudence of the Impostor, in pretending himself to be Father
and Son, it had been ridiculous to pretend this to Christians, had he not known
that the Catholic Faith taught the Son to be True and Real God, as well as the
Father; and then if he could persuade them that he was God the Father, he might
with the same ease persuade them that he was God the Son too, under a different
appearance.

Thus when he pretends that his wicked Strumpet was the Holy Ghost, by whom he
created the Angels, which created the World; the very Profanation of this Holy
Mystery shows what the Faith of the Church in that Age was concerning the
Divinity of the Holy Ghost; for he could have no other Inducement to make his
Woman, whom he calls the Holy Ghost, such a Divine Power, but because he knew
the Christian Church believed the Holy Ghost to be God, and the Spirit of God,
as he made her to be his Divine Creating Intelligence.

Another Heresy concerning the Person of Christ, attributed Divinity to him,
owned him to be the Son of God, though not of the Maker of the world, (who they
said was but an Inferior Angel), but of the Unknown and Incomprehensible
Father; and that he appeared indeed in the world like a Man, but was no true
and real Man. Now what should put such a wild Conceit as this into their heads,
had they not known this to be the Catholic Faith, That Jesus Christ was the
Son of God? Their eyes could not see him to be God, Alii qu^que Haeretici ^sque
adeo Christi manifestam amplexati sunt Divinitatem, ut dixerint illum fuisse
sine Carne, and totum illi susceptum detraxerint hominem, ne decoquerent in
illo divini nominis potestatem, si humanam illi sociassent, ut arbitrab^ntur,
nativitatem. Novat. de T^init. c. 18.
but they saw him to be a Man, and yet they deny him to be a Man, and teach
that he was the Son of God, in the form and apparition of a Man: Which is a
plain indication what the Catholic Faith was, That Christ was both God and
Man. This they could not believe, that the Son of God would so unite himself to
Human Nature, as to become true and real man; and yet they thought it so
evident that he was the Son of God, or at least saw that this Faith was
accounted so sacred, that they would not venture to deny that, and therefore
chose to deny his Humanity, and make a mere Apparition of him.

But then on the other hand, Cerinthus and Ebion thought it too evident to be
denied, That he was a true and real Man; and therefore they taught, That Jesus
was a Man, and no more than a Man, born as other Men are, of Joseph and Mary.
But then it is worth considering, how they came to make this the distinguishing
Doctrine of their Sect, That Christ was but a mere Man, if the Apostolic
Churches, whom they opposed, and from whom they separated, had not taught, That
he was more than a Man, That he was God as well as Man. Was there ever any
Dispute either before or since, concerning any other Man in the world, who was
owned to be a Man, Whether he were a mere Man or not? When one sort of
Heretics deny Christ to be a Man, and another deny him to be God, and both of
them in contradiction to the Apostolic Faith, it is a very strong presumption
at least, what the True Catholic Apostolic Faith was, That Christ was both
God and Man.

And yet Cerinthus himself, though he makes Jesus to be a mere Man, owns Christ
to be a Divine Person, and that this Christ descended on Jesus at his Baptism,
in the form of a Dove, and rested on him, or dwelt in him, and wrought Miracles
by him, but left him at his Crucifixion, and flew up again to Heaven.

So that, according to Cerinthus, from the time that Jesus was baptized, till
he was crucified, the Divinity was very nearly and intimately united to him;
not that he was God and Man in one Person, as the Catholic Faith teaches, but
yet that Jesus Christ was a Divine and Human Person, though Christ was one
Person, and Jesus another. And therefore as the Nicene Creed (which we find
also in the Ancient Oriental Creeds) teaches us to believe in One God the
Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth, and of all things visible and
invisible; not to exclude Christ from being the Maker of the World, but in
opposition to those Heretics who would not allow the Supreme God, who is the
Father of Christ, to be the Maker of the World, but attributed the Creation of
this World to one or more Inferior Angels; So they add, And in One Lord Jesus
Christ, the only begotten Son of God, in opposition to those who made Christ
and Jesus Two Persons. And yet in this very Heresy we may see what the Ancient
Catholic Faith was, That Jesus Christ was God and Man; as Cerinthus himself
owned, though he would not unite Christ and Jesus into One Person, nor make the
Union inseparable.

The Valentinian Heresy, though dressed up after the mode of the Pagan
Theology, was a manifest Corruption of the Christian Faith, under a Pretense of
a more perfect knowledge of Divine Mysteries; and we may still see the broken
Remains of the Catholic Tradition of the Trinity among them.

Their Pleroma, by which they seem to understand the Fullness of the Deity, as
St. Paul uses that Phrase, 2 Col. 9. (...), That the fullness of the Godhead
dwelt in Christ bodily. I say, this Pleroma consisted of several Aeons or
Divine Persons, which were propagated from the Unknown and Incomprehensible
Father in gradual Descents, and all together made up the Complete and Perfect
Deity; which were more or fewer, according to the various Fancies of Heretics.

Now from these wild Conceits we may in some measure learn what the Catholic
Faith was: That the Godhead was not confined to one Single and Solitary Person,
but that there is such a Foecundity in the Divine Nature, as communicates it
self to more Persons than one. For had it been the known and received Faith of
the Christian Church, That there is but One Person in the Godhead, as well as
but One God, there had been no pretense for these Heretics, who called
themselves Christians, and boasted of a more perfect knowledge of the Christian
Faith, to have invented such a number of Aeons, which they included within
their Pleroma, as the several Emanations of their Deity. And we may observe,
that most of the Names which they gave to their several Aeons, are
Scripture-Names and Titles, which the Pagan Theology knew nothing of, and which
they could learn no where, but from the Christian Church.

Basilides, I think, was one of the first who gave us any distinct account of
these Aeons, which was new modeled by Valentinus, and other succeeding
Heretics; and his first and Supreme Aeon, Epiph. l. 1. Tom. 2. Haer. 4. five
24.
as Epiphanius tells us, was (...); The Unbegotten One, who only is the Father
of all, and by others is called the Propater, and the Unknown, Invisible,
Incomprehensible Father.

Now though the Heathens very familiarly call their Supreme God, the Father of
Gods and Men, with respect to his Creating Power; yet as the Notion of Father
is founded in a substantial Generation, as these Heretics plainly understood
it, so it is the peculiar Character of God under the Gospel, who is the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, his only begotten Son. It is certain the first Person
in the Godhead was never called the (...), the One that is unbegotten, but to
distinguish him from One who is begotten; the (...), the only begotten; who is
God also, but God o^ God. And it is observable what Tertullian tells us of
Heracleon, Tertul de praescript. Haeret.
That he made his first Ae^n to be illud quod pronunciat, which some Critics
not understanding, think to be a defect in the Copy; but the sense is plain,
that his first Aeon is he that pronounces, or speaks; by which he
represented the Eternal Generation of the Word: So that his first Aeon is the
Pronouncer or Speaker, that is, the Father of the Eternal Word, which St. John
tells us was in the beginning, was with God, and was God: Which shows that this
is nothing else but a disguized Corruption of the Catholic Faith, concerning
the Eternal Generation of the Word from the Eternal Unbegotten Father.

To confirm this, I observe farther, That most of the Names which they give to
their other Aeons, are such Names, Titles, or Characters, as the Scripture
gives to Christ, or the Holy Spirit, which they have multiplied into so many
distinct Persons or Aeons, such as the Mind, Word, Prudence, Power, and Wisdom;
Truth, Life, Light, the Only begotten, the Paraclete, and the like.

Valentinus indeed, as Epiphanius observes, did model his Thirty Aeons
according to Hesiod's Genealogy and Number of Gods, and with some manifest
allusions to them; but yet he retained as many Scripture-Names as he could, the
better to reconcile unwary people to his fabulous Genealogi^s, as the hidden
and mysterious sense of Scripture. And it is impossible such Fables should ever
have obtained any Credit, had they not been grafted on the Catholic Faith, and
pretended to improve it with new degrees of Light and Knowledge.

When these Heresies were pretty well silenced, up start Noetus and Sabellius,
who ran into the other Extreme. The Valentinians had corrupted the Doctrine of
the Trinity, by multiplying Three Divine Persons into Thirty Aeons, besides all
their other Pagan and Fabulous Conceits about them: This offended these men, as
downright Polytheism (as indeed it was no better); and to avoid this, they
reject a Trinity of Real and Substantial Persons, for a Trinity of Names; that
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are but Three Names of the same Person, who is
sometimes called the Father, at other times the Son, or the Holy Ghost, with
respect to his different Appearances or Operations: Or they made the Son and
Holy Ghost not Two Persons, but Two Personal Attributes in God, his Wisdom, or
Power: Or they made the Trinity but Three Parts of One Compounded God, as a Man
consists of Body, Soul, and Spirit; which of late have been revived among us,
under different Names.

After these men, arose Arius and his Followers, who out of great Zeal also for
the Unity of God, framed a New and more Subtle Heresy: They were sensible that
Father and Son were not Two Names, but Two Real Distinct Persons, and therefore
they attributed the whole entire Divinity to the Father, and made the Son not
to be God by Nature, but the most Perfect and Excellent Creature, as Perfect an
Image of God, as any Creature can be, but not Consubstantial with God, nor
Coequal and Coeternal with him.

All these Heresies were rejected and condemned by the Catholic Church in
their several Ages, as soon as they appeared, and were taken notice of: And
this is one very good way to learn what the Catholic Faith was, from its
Opposition to those Heresies which the Catholic Church condemned, and from the
Corrupted Remains of the Ancient Faith which appeared in them. For these
Heretics were originally Christians, and professed themselves Christians, and
therefore did not wholly renounce the Christian Faith, but grafted their
Heresies on it.

As to confine my self to the Subject of the present Dispute, What we are to
understand by Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Whether Three Distinct, Real,
Substantial Persons, or not; each of whom is distinctly by himself True and
Perfect God, but in the Unity of the same Divine Nature and Godhead. Now that
this was the received Faith of the Catholic Church, we may learn both from the
Valentinians* Sabellians, and Arians.

Though the Valentinians, as I observed before, had corrupted the Doctrine of
the Trinity, either with the Platonic Philosophy, as that it self had been
corrupted by the Junior Platonists; or with the Pagan Theology; yet the
Propagation of their Aeons in different Degrees and Descents from the first
Supreme Aeon, the Unbegotten One, and the Invisible and Incomprehensible
Father, as they style him, shows what they thought the Catholic Faith was,
concerning the Eternal Generation of the Son, and Procession of the Holy
Spirit, which they took to be a Substantial Generation and Procession; and
accordingly in imitation of this Faith, asserted a Substantial (...), or
Emanation of one Aeon from another; and which is more, none of the Ancient
Fathers who wrote against this Heresy, as far as I have observed, ever quarrel
with them upon this account. Nay Tertullian, though he abominates these
Heresies, owns this Probole or Emanation in a true Catholic Sense; and tells
us, that these Heretics borrowed this word from the Catholic Faith, though
they fitted it to their Heresy: And challenges any man to say whether the
Divine Word be not produced by the Father; Hoc si qui putaverit me (...)
aliquam in^ roducere, id est, prolation^m rei alterius ex altera, quod facit
Valentinus, alium atque ali^m Aeonem de Aeone producens; primo quid^m dicam
tibi, non ideo non utitur and Veritas Vocabulo isto, and re and censu ejus,
quia and haeresis potius ex veritate accepit, quod ad mendacium suum strueret.
Prolatus est Sermo Dei an non? Hic mecum gradum fige. Si prolatus est, Cognosce
probolam Veritatis, and viderit Haeresis si quid de Veritate imitata est. Iam
nunc quaeritur, quis quomodo utatur aliqua re and vocabulo ejus? Valentinus
probolas suas discernit and separat ab Auctore: Et ita long ab eo ponit, ut
Aeon Patrem nesciat. Denique desiderat nosse, nec po^est; immo and pene
devoratur, and dissolvitur in reliquam substantiam. Apud nos autem solus filius
patrem novit and sinum patris ipse exposuit, and omnia apud patrem audivit and
vidit. -- Sermo ergo and in patre semper, sicut dicit, Ego in patre. Et apud
Deum semper, sicut scriptum est, and sermo erat apud Deum, and nunquam
separatus a patre, aut alius a patre; quia, Ego and Pater unum sumus. Haec erit
probola veritatis, cuflos unitatis, qua prolatum dicimus filium a patre, s^d
non separatum. Tert. adv. Praxeam. c. 8.
and if it be, Here, says he, is the Prolation or Emanation, which the true
Catholic Faith owns. And adds, That the fault of this Heresy was not their
producing one Aeon from another, but that besides the number of their
fictitious Aeons, they did separate these Emanations and Aeons from their
Author; that the Aeons knew not the Father, nay, desired to know him, but could
not know him; and was even dissolved with Passion and Desire; whereas in the
Catholic Faith there is the most Inseparable Union of the Son with the Father,
and the most Intimate and Perfect Knowledge of him. So that Tertullian allows
of a Real and Substantial Production of the Person of the Son from the Person
of the Father; as the Valentinians pretended of their Aeons; and asserts, that
these Heretics learnt this from the Catholic Faith of the Trinity: And that
the Church must not reject this Probole, Prolation, or Emanation, in an
Orthodox, Catholic Use of those words, because Heretics abuse them, to
countenance their own Heresies.

As for the Noetians and Sabellians, (for however they explain the Doctrine of
the Trinity, whether by Three Names, or Three Powers, or Three Parts, while
they Teach, That the One God is but One Single Person, the Heresy is the same)
it is impossible the Catholic Church should reject this Heresy, without
asserting Three Distinct, Real, Substantial Persons in the Unity of the
Godhead, each of whom is as True and Perfect God, as each of Three Men, Peter,
James, and John, is a True, Perfect, Distinct Man; though these Three Men are
not uni^ed, as the Three Divine Persons are.

The occasion of this Heresy was, That they thought that Three Real Distinct
Persons in the Godhead were Three Gods; and therefore, though being professed
Christians, and consequently baptized in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, they durst not deny Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
yet neither would they own Three Divine Persons, but turned them into Three
Names, or Three Parts of One Person; which has much more sense in it than Three
Modes; though Three Modes of the same Person, let them call them Three
Personalities if they please, is the same Heresy, if there be but One
Suppositum; as One Man may be the Subject of Three, or Three and twenty Modes,
and be but One Human Person still.

Noetus and Sabellius did certainly apprehend, that by Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, the Catholic Church understood Three Distinct, Substantial, Divine
Persons, or else why should they charge them with Tritheism upon this account,
and turn Three Persons into Three Names, or Three Parts of One and the same
God, to avoid the Imputation of Three Gods? And if this had not been the belief
of the Catholic Church, what meant their Zeal against this Heresy? For all the
Wit of Man cannot find a Medium between Sabellianism, and Three Divine
Substantial Persons. A Trinity must be Three Somewhats, as it has been lately
called; and then it must either be One Suppositum or Person, under Three Names,
or Three Modes, or compounded of Three Parts; or be Three Distinct Suppositums
and Persons. Now if this had been the Catholic Faith, That the Trinity is but
One Suppositum or Person, under Three Names or Modes, etc. I cannot imagine why
the Catholic Church should have quarreled with these Heretics, or they with
the Catholic Church, unless they both mistook one another: But if the
Sabellians and Catholics understood themselves and each other, and did intend
to contradict each other, we certainly know what the Catholic Faith was: For
there is nothing contradicts a Noetian and Sabellian Trinity, but a Trinity, of
Distinct, Substantial, Divine Persons.

And Novatianus well observes, That these Heretics did acknowledge the
Divinity of Christ; That whoever Christ was, it was evident from those
Characters given of him in Scripture, That he was True and Perfect God: And
because the Father is True and Perfect God, and Christ True and Perfect God,
for fear of owning Two Gods, they make the Father and the Son to be but One and
the same Person. Firmum est genus probationis, quod etiam ab adversario
sumitur, ut veritas etiam ab ipsis inimicis veritatis probetur. Nam usque adeo
manifestum est in Scripturis esse Deum tradi, ut plerique haereticorum
divinitatis ipsius magnitudine and veritate commoti, ultra modum extendentes
honores ejus, ausissent non filium, sed ipsum Deum patrem promere vel putare.
Quod etsi contra veritatem Scripturarum est, tamen divinitatis Christi
argumentum grande atque praecipuum est: qui usque adeo Deus, sed qua filius Dei
natus ex Deo; ut plerique illum (ut diximus) haeretici, ita Deum acceperint, ut
non filium, sed patrem pronunciandum putarent, etc. Novat. de Trin. c. 18.


The Arians denied the Eternal Godhead of Christ, and made a Creature of him,
though the most excellent Creature, the Minister and Instrument of God in
making the World; and the reason of this Heresy was the same; viz. for fear of
a Plurality of Gods, should they allow Christ to be True and Perfect God. And
this still is a plain evidence what they thought the Catholic Faith to be; not
only that Christ was True and Real God, but that he was Truly and Really a
Distinct Person from God the Father; so distinct, that if they should
acknowledge him to be True God, he would be a Second God; which they thought
contradicted the Faith of One God.

Well: Though they would not own him to be True God, yet they own him to be a
distinct Person from the Father, as distinct as God and a Creature are
distinct. Do the Catholics now quarrel with the Arians, that they have made a
Substantial Person of the Son (as in reason they ought to have done, had they
not believed the Son to be a distinct Substantial Person); this Dispute we hear
nothing of; but the only Dispute was concerning the Consubstantiality of the
Son with the Father; and that proves, that they did own the Son to be a
Substantial Person; for were he not in a true proper sense a Person, and a
Substantial Person, he could not be Consubstantial with the Father.

Nay, St Austin expressly tells us, That Arius agreed with the Catholics
against the Sabellians, In eo quod credit (Arius) alium esse Patrem, alium
Filium, mecum est contra Sabellianos. Aug. de 5. Haeres. c. 5.
in making the Son a distinct Person from the Father; and if so, the Catholics
taught, That the Son was as distinct a Person as Arius did, though not a
Separate and Created Person, as he did.

Now when Arius would have reduced Christ into the number of Creatures, though
he made him the first and most excellent Creature, created before the World,
and God's Minister in making the World, as like to God as a Creature can
possibly be, but not of the same Nature with God; the Catholic Church would
not bear this, but in a most Venerable Synod collected from most parts of the
Christian World, condemn this as contrary to the Faith always received and
owned in their several Churches.

Thus far, at least, the Tradition of the Church was Sacred and Venerable, and
the concurrent Testimony of all these several Churches, was a more certain
Proof of the Apostolic Faith, than all the Wit and Subtilty of Arius: For Wit
may patronize New Errors, but cannot prove That to be the Ancient Apostolic
Faith, which the Church had never received from the Apostles, nor ever heard of
before.

This I take to be a very sensible Proof what the Faith of the Christian Church
was, from the Times of the Apostles till the Council of Nice; and consequently,
what that Faith was which the Church received from the Apostles: And this
abundantly satisfies me, That whatever loose Expressions we may meet with in
some of the Fathers, before the Arian Controversy was started, and managed with
great Art and Subtilty (though I know of none but what are capable of a very
Orthodox Sense), it is certain that they were not Arians, nor intended any such
thing in what they said. For had Arianism been the Traditionary Faith of the
Church, it must have been known to be so; and then how came the Church to be so
strangely alarmed at the first news of it? Or what shall we think of those
Venerable Fathers and Confessors in that Great Council, who either did not know
the Faith of the Church, or did so horribly prevaricate in the Condemnation of
Arius, when they had no other apparent Interest or Temptation to do so, but a
Warm and Hearty Zeal for the Truly Ancient and Apostolic Faith?

It is certain Arius never pretended Catholic Tradition for his Opinion, but
undertook to reform the Catholic Faith by the Principles of Philosophy, and to
reconcile it to Scripture by new-coin'd Interpretations; though in this he
failed, and found the Great Athanasius an over-match for him.

It is not with Faith, as it is with Arts and Sciences of Human Invention,
which may be improved in every Age by greater Wits or new Observations; but
Faith depends upon Revelation, not Invention; and we can no more make a New
Catholic Faith, by the power of Wit and Reason, than we can write a True
History of what the Apostles did and taught, out of our own Invention, without
the Authority of any Ancient Records: Men may do such things if they please,
but one will be Heresy, and the other a Romance.

And yet this is the bold and brave Attempt of Secinus and his Disciples: They
are so modest indeed, as not to pretend Antiquity to be on their side; they can
find no other Antiquity for themselves, but in Cerinthus and Ebion, who
separated from the Catholic Church, and were rejected by them; and it does not
seem very modest, to set up such men as these, against the Universal Consent of
the first and purest Ages of the Church.

The Socinians, who know very well what the Charge of Novelty signifies in
matters of Religion; That a New Faith is but another Name for New Heresies;
Though they reject the Doctrine of the Fathers, and the Catholic Tradition of
the Faith from the Apostolic Age, yet they appeal to Scripture and Natural
Sentiments, as the greatest and best Antiquity, in opposition to Apostolic
Tradition. This is our Considerer's way, which he prefers before a Traditionary
Faith; and by the same reason the Socinians may oppose it to a Traditionary
Faith: And if we must always expound Scripture by our Natural Sentiments, this
Author had best consider whether he can prove a Trinity by Natural Reason; or
fairly reconcile the Natural Notion of One God, with the Catholic Faith of the
Trinity, or of Three, each of whom is True and P^rfect God, from the mere
Principles of Natural Reason; for if he cannot, he must not in his way find a
Trinity in Scripture: But of this more hereafter.

3. Let us now, in opposition to this pretense, consider of what Authority the
Traditionary Faith of the Catholic Church ought to be, in expounding Scripture.

The Holy Scripture, at least in pretense, is allowed on all hands to be a
Complete and Authentic Rule of Faith; but the question is, since men differ so
much in expounding Scripture, What is the safest Rule to expound Scripture by;
whether the Traditionary Faith of the Church, or our Natural Sentiments, or
Natural Reason?

I do not mean, that we must learn the Critical Sense of every Text from
Catholic Tradition; for we have not in all points such a Traditionary
Exposition of Scripture; though even in this respect, we shall find that the
Catholic Fathers have unanimously agreed in the Interpretation of the most
material Texts relating to the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, and the Divinity
and Incarnation of Christ. They sometimes indeed allege such Texts, especially
out of the Old Testament, as our Modern Critics will not allow to be proper
and apposite; but even this shows what their Faith was; and yet these very
Expositions, which have been so anciently and unanimously received (though they
may appear at this distance of time too forced and mystical) have too Sacred
and Venerable an Authority to be wantonly rejected. We may learn from Christ
and his Apostles, what mysterious and hidden Senses were contained in the
Writings of the Old Testament, such as it is very probable we should never have
found in them, had not Christ and his Apostles explained their meaning: And the
nearer any Writers were to the Apostolic Age, the more they were addicted to
these Mystical Interpretations; which is a good reason to believe that they
learnt it from the Apostles themselves.

But this is not what I now intend; my present Argument reaches no farther than
this; That if we can learn what the Doctrine of the Catholic Church concerning
the Holy Trinity, and the Divinity and Incarnation of Christ has always been:
Then

1. It is very reasonable to conclude, That they received this Doctrine from
the Apostles, it being the Faith of those Churches which were planted by the
Apostles, received their Faith from them, and always lived in Communion with
them.

2. This makes it reasonable to believe, that this very Faith is contained in
the Writings of the New Testament; for, I suppose, no man questions, but that
the Apostles taught the same Faith by Writing, which they did by Preaching; and
then this is a Demonstration against all such Interpretations of Scripture as
contradict the Catholic Faith; whatever fine Colors Wit and Criticism may
give them. Nay,

3. It is a certain Proof, That these Primitive Christians, who received these
Inspired Writings from the Apostles which now make up the Canon of the New
Testament, did believe that the same Faith which the Apostles and Apostolical
men had taught them by Word of Mouth, was contained in their Writings; for they
could not possibly have believed both what the Apostles taught, and what they
writ, if their Preaching and Writings had contradicted each other. We know what
the Faith of the Primitive Church was, and we know they received these
Apostolical Writings with the profoundest Veneration, as an Inspired Rule of
Faith; and had we no other presumption of it but this, we might safely
conclude, That they found the same Faith in these Writings, which the Apostles
had before taught them by Word of Mouth.

But besides this, we find that all the Catholic Writers appeal to the
Scriptures, and prove their Faith from them; and the Authority of such men who
were so near the Fountain of Apostolic Tradition, must be very Venerable.

4. I shall only add this, That since we know what the Catholic Faith was, and
how the Catholic Fathers expounded Scripture, if the Words of Scripture will
naturally and easily admit that Sense, much more if they will not admit any
other Sense without great force and violence, let any man judge which is most
safe and reasonable, to expound Scripture as the Catholic Faith and Catholic
Fathers expound it, and as the Scripture most easily and naturally expounds it
self, or to force New Senses and Old Heresies upon Scripture, which the
Catholic Church has always rejected and condemned.

This, I hope, may satisfy our Considerer, that he did very ill in rejecting a
Traditionary Faith, and venturing to expound Scripture by his Natural
Sentiments, which is a very Unsafe Rule in Matters of Pure Revelation, of which
mere Natural Reason is no competent Judge.

SECT. III. What is sufficient to be believed concerning the Trinity.
THus far, I fear, our Considerer has been a little unfortunate; or if it do
not prove a Misfortune to him in forming his Notion of a Trinity, his Luck is
better than his Choice.

P. 9, 10.
Let us proceed to his next Enquiry, What is sufficient for Christians to
believe concerning the Trinity; or, which is all one in this case, what is
necessary to be believed? What the meaning of this Question is, I cannot well
tell; nor why he makes sufficient and necessary all one; for, at least, they
are not always so. That is sufficient which is enough for any man to believe;
that is strictly necessary which every man must believe: But let him take his
own way; he quits the Term sufficient, and enquires what is necessary to be
believed; whereas in many cases, that which is absolutely necessary for all,
may not be sufficient for some: I should much rather have enquired how much may
be known concerning this Glorious Mystery, than how little will serve the turn;
which argues no great Zeal for it.

Well: What is necessary to be believed concerning the Trinity? He answers,
Nothing but 1. What Is possible to be believed. And 2. What Is plainly revealed.

Here we begin to see what the effect is, of consulting nothing but Scripture
and Natural Sentiments. I hope he meant honestly in this; but if he did, he
expressed himself very incautiously; for these two Conditions are very ill put
together, when applied to matters of Revelation. Plainly revealed, had been
enough in all reason, unless he would insinuate, that what is plainly revealed
may be impossible to be believed; and that how plain soever the Revelation be,
men must judge of the possibility of the thing by their own Natural Sentiments,
before they are bound to believe it; which makes Natural Reason, not Scripture,
the final Judge of Controversies.

But we must follow him where he leads us; and thus he divides his whole Work.
1. To consider how far it is possible to believe a Trinity. 2. What the
Scripture requires us to believe in this matter.

As for the first, he tells us, There are two requisites to make it possible
for us to believe a thing. 1. That we know the Terms of what we are to assent
to. 2. That it imply no Contradiction to our former Knowledge: Such Knowledge I
mean, as is accompanied with Certainty and Evidence.

This in some sense may be true; but as it is thus loosely and generally
expressed, it is very like the Socinian Cant and Sophistry.

By knowing the Terms, he means having distinct Natural Ideas of what is
signified by such Terms; as he himself explains it; P. 14.
-- I can believe it no farther than the Terms of which it is made up, are
known and understood, and the Ideas signified by them consistent. So that all
Divine Mysteries must be examined by our Natural Ideas; and what we have no
Natural Ideas of, we cannot, we must not believe: And this once for all
condemns all Supernatural Faith, or the belief of Supernatural Objects, though
never so plainly revealed; for we have no Natural Ideas of Supernatural
Objects: And though Revelation may furnish us from the Resemblances and
Analogies in Nature with some Artificial Ideas, this will not serve the turn;
for though they know what such Terms signify when applied to Natural, they know
not what they signify when applied to Supernatural Objects, nor have they any
Ideas to answer them: As for Instance; We know what Father and Son signify when
applied to Men; but when we say, God is not only Eternal himself, but an
Eternal Father, who begot an Eternal Son; these Terms of Father and Son,
begetting and being begotten, must signify quite otherwise than they do among
men, something which we have no Idea of; and therefore say the Socinians, All
this is unintelligible and impossible to be believed, unless we can believe
without understanding the Terms: This Considerer asserts the Premises, he had
best consider again how he will avoid the Conclusion.

Another Socinian Topic is Contradiction, and this our Considerer makes
another requisite to the possibility of believing, That the thing do not imply
a Contradiction to our former knowledge; that is, to any Natural Ideas: And
here he learnedly disputes against believing Contradictions; and that it is not
consistent with the Wisdom, Justice, and Goodness of God to require us to
believe Contradictions. P. 13.
But if instead of all this he had only said, That God cannot reveal such plain
and evident Contradictions, as he cannot require us to believe; and
consequently, That whatever is plainly revealed, implies no Contradiction, how
much soever it may be above our comprehension, because God does require us to
believe what he plainly reveals; this had put an end to this Dispute, and left
the belief of the Trinity possible, whatever difficulties we might apprehend in
conceiving it: But this great Zeal against believing Contradictions, when
applied to the belief of the Trinity, is a very untoward Insinuation, as if the
Doctrine of the Trinity, as commonly understood, were clogged with
Contradictions, and that we must cast all such Contradictions (which in the
Socinian account is the Doctrine it self) out of our Faith; and therefore, That
whatever the Scripture says, we must put no such sense on it as implies any
Contradiction to our former knowledge. This is an admirable Foundation for
Considerations concerning the Trinity; and what an admirable Superstructure he
has raised on it, we shall soon see.

I may possibly discourse this Point of Contradictions more at large elsewhere;
at present I shall only tell this Author, That as self-evident as he thinks it,
this Proposition is false, That it is impossible to believe what implies a
Contradiction to our former knowledge; and that God cannot require us to
believe it.

I grant that all Logical Contradictions which are resolved into is, and is
not, are impossible to be believed, because they are impossible to be true; and
such is his Contradiction about the Whole and its Parts; for to say, That the
Whole is not bigger than any of its Parts, is to say, That a Whole is a Whole,
and is not a Whole; and that a Part is a Part, and is not a Part. But
contradictory Ideas may both be true, and therefore both be believed, and every
man believes great numbers of them: The Ideas of Heat and Cold, White and
Black, Body and Spirit, Extension and No Extension, Eternity and Time, to have
A Beginning and to have No Beginning, are contradictory Ideas, and yet we
believe them all; that is, we believe and know that there really are such
things, whose Natures are directly opposite and contrary to each other. Now
when there are such Contrarieties and Contradictions in Created Nature, it may
justly be thought very strange to true Considerers, that our Natural Ideas
should be made the adequate measures of Truth or Falsehood, of the Possibilities
or Impossibilities of things; that we must not believe what God reveals
concerning himself, if it contradicts any Natural Ideas. And yet I challenge
this Considerer, and all the Socinian, Sabellian, Arian Fraternities, to show
me any appearance of Contradictions in the Doctrine of the Trinity, but what
are of this kind; that is, not Logical Contradictions, but Contradictions to
our other Natural Ideas: And if our Natural Ideas of Created Nature contradict
each other, it would be wonderful indeed if the Divine Uncreated Nature should
not contradict all our Natural Ideas. Every thing we know of God is a direct
Contradiction to all the Ideas we have of Creatures; an Uncreated and a Created
Nature, an Infinite and a Finite Nature, are direct Contradictions to each
other: Eternity without Succession, Omnipresence without Extension, Parts, or
Place; a pure simple Act, which is all in one, without Composition; an
Omnipotent Thought, which thinks all things into Being, and into a Beautiful
Order; these and such like Ideas of God are direct Contradictions to all the
Ideas we have of Creatures; and can any Contradiction then to any Ideas of
Created Nature be thought a reasonable Objection against believing any thing
which God reveals to us concerning himself? But of this more hereafter.

SECT. IV. Concerning his State of the Question, That One and the Same God is
Three Different Persons.
THese are his Preliminaries, Axioms, Postulata's, all in the strict
demonstrative way; but now he comes to apply all this more closely to the
business in hand; but then he very unfortunately stumbles at the Threshold.

The Proposition he proposes to examine by these Principles, is this, That One
and the same God is Three Different Persons. ^. 14.


Where he met with this Proposition in these very Terms, I know not; I Am sure
there is no such Proposition in Scripture, nor did I ever meet with it in any
Catholic Writer: It is very far from giving us a true and adequate Notion of
the Catholic Faith concerning the Trinity; it is of a doubtful signification,
and in the most obvious sense of these words (which I fear will appear to have
been intended by this Considerer) is manifest Heresy: For if by One and the
same God, he means, That there is but One who is God; and, That this One and
same God is Three different Persons; it is the Heresy of Sabellius at least, if
he would have owned the Term different, which inclines more to the
signification of diversity, than of mere distinction, which savours of
Arianism, and more properly relates to Natures than to Persons.

We meet with different forms of speech in Catholic Writers concerning the
Unity and Trinity in the Godhead, all which must be reconciled, to form a
distinct and complete Notion of the Trinity. That Deus. est Vnus and Trinus,
God is One and Three, is very Ancient, and very Catholic. That the Father is
the One God, in a peculiar and eminent sense, is both the Language of
Scripture, and of the Church. That each Person, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is
by himself True and Perfect God, is likewise the Doctrine both of the Holy
Scriptures, and the Catholic Fathers. That the Trinity is One God; That Father
and Son are (...), Vnum, One Divinity, Christ himself teaches us: That Father,
Son, and Spirit, are also (...), One, St. John teaches us. And nothing is more
familiar both with the Greek and Latin Fathers, than to call the Trinity One
God; and in consequence of this, That One God is the Trinity; though this they
rather chose to express by (...), or (...), One Divinity in Three Persons. And
whoever would give an account of the Catholic Faith of the Trinity, must have
respect to all these Notions, and not content himself with any one of them, as,
to make the best of it, the Considerer here does, when he only proposes to
enquire, How One and the same God is Three Persons: But he ought to have
enquired also in what sense each Person is by himself True and Perfect God; and
the Person of the Father in a peculiar and eminent sense the One God; and to
have framed his Notions of Unity and Distinction with an equal regard to all
these Catholic Expositions; which would have secured him from the Sabellian
Heresy, which now his Words are very guilty of, whatever He himself be.

But let us now proceed to his Examination of these Terms, God, Unity,
Identity, Distinction, and Number, and Person.

P. 14.
As to the Notion of a Deity, he confesses he has not a ful^ and adequate Idea
of God; but yet he knows which of those distinct Ideas he has in his mind, are
applicable to God, and which are not. But the present question does not conce^n
the Idea of God, which I hope we are all agreed in, That God is a Being
infinitely perfect: But whether this Name God, in the Question of the Trinity,
signifies only One who is God, or One single Divine Person? Or, Whether this
Name, and the perfect Idea which belongs to it, be applicable distinctly to
Three, to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; That each of them is True and Perfect
God, and neither of them is each other, and all Three but One God? This had
been the true Explication of the Term God, as applied to the Doctrine of the
Trinity, To have told us what is meant by God, when this Name is peculiarly
attributed to the Person of the Father, when it is attributed to each Person
distinctly, and when it is jointly attributed to them all, That Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, are One God: ^t is certain all this must be resolved into the
same One Divinity, which is perfectly in each of them, and insepara^ly and
indivisibly in them all: And the true stating of his matter had been very
proper, and would have saved all his other Labor. And therefore to save me
some labor, I will briefly tell him how the Catholic Fathers understood it;
which is the only possible way I know, of reconciling these different
Expressions.

When they tell us, That the Person of the Father is in an eminent and peculiar
manner the One God; by this they understand, That the Father alone is
self-originated, and from himself; That the Whole Divinity and Godhead is
originally his own, which he received from no other: Which is the first and
most natural notion we have of God, and of One God.

When they say, That though the Father in this sense be the One God, yet the
Son also is True and Perfect God, and the Holy Ghost True and Perfect God, they
ascribe Divinity to the Son and Holy Ghost, upon account of the Eternal and
Perfect Communication of the Divine Nature to them: For he who has the True
Divine Nature, is True and Perfect God: And therefore the Son, who is eternally
begotten of his Father, of the Substance of his Father, and is Consubstantial
with him, is True and Perfect God, but God of God; and the like may be said of
the Holy Spirit, who eternally proceeds from Father and Son.

When they teach, That the Trinity is One God, they mean by it, That the same
One Divinity does subsist whole and entire, indivisibly and inseparably, but
yet distinctly in them all, as I have already explained it: So that the Unity
of the Godhead gives an account of all these Expressions, Why the Father is
said to be the One God, and yet that the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost God,
and Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, but One God. All this is taught in Scripture,
and is the Faith of the Catholic Church; and I would never desire a better
Proof of the Truth and Certainty of any Notion, than that it takes in the whole
Mystery, and answers to every part of it; which no other account I have ever
yet met with, can do.

SECT. V. An Examination of his Notions and Ideas of Unity, Distinction,
Person, etc.
AND now the Sabellian Scene opens apace: If the Heresy of Sabellius was, That
there is but One who is God, but One Divine Intelligent Person, as well as One
Divine Nature, this our Considerer expressly owns, and does his Endeavor to
prove it absolutely impossible that it should be otherwise; that is, That the
Catholic Faith, asserted and defended by the Catholic Church, against
Sabellius, is absolutely impossible.

P. 20.
To explain the word Person, he tells us, It signifies one of these two things;
either a particular Intelligent Being; or an Office, Character, or some such
complex Notion, applicable to such a Being: If you would know in which of these
senses we must understand the word Person, when we say there are Three Persons
in the Trinity; P. 24.
he tells us plainly, That the simple Idea (of God) can be applied but to One
single Person, in the first sense of the word Person, as it signifies a
particular Intelligent Being, Nature, or Principle. -- And that all the
Personal Distinction we can conceive in the Deity, must be founded on some
accessory Ideas, extrinsecal to the Divine Nature; a certain Combination of
which Ideas, makes up the second Notion signified by the word Person.

And for this he appeals to Natural Sentiments, mistaking Heresy for Nature.
And if we fairly and impartially examine our own Thoughts upon this Subject, we
shall find, That when we name God the Father, we conceive the Idea of God, so
far as we are capable of conceiving it, as acting so and so, under such
respects and relations; and when we name God the Son, we conceive nothing else
but the same Idea of God over again, under different relations; and so likewise
of the Holy Ghost. Noetus, Praxeas, or Sabellius, never taught their Heresy in
more express words than these.

And what is to be done now? Must we dispute this Point over again with the
Considerer, and confute a Heresy which has been so early, so often, and so
constantly condemned by the Catholic Church? For my part, I can pretend to say
nothing new, which has not long since been much better said by the Catholic
Fathers; and therefore before we part, I shall acquaint him with their Judgment
in the Case, and leave it to rest on their Authority and Reasons.

But it may not be amiss to mind this Considerer, That he has all the Schoolmen
(as far as I have heard, or had opportunity to consult them) as well as the
Catholic Fathers, against him, in his Notion of a Person; for they all receive
Boetius's Definition, That a Person is an Individual Substance of a Rational
Nature. Or it may be the Authority of Melancthon may be more considerable with
him; who tells us, That the Church in this Article of the Trinity understands
by Person, an Individual, Persona, ut Ecclesia in hoc articulo loquitur, est
substantia individua, intelligens, and incommunicabilis. Satis constat veteres
Scriptores Ecclesiae solitos haec duo vocabula discernere, (...) and (...), and
dicere unam esse (...), id est, essentiam aeterni Patris, Filii and Spiritus
Sancti, sed tres (...), id est, tres vere subsistentes, non commentitios, non
caducos, non confusos, sed distinctos, singulares intel^^gentes.
Intelligent, Incommunicable Substance: And adds, That the Ancient
Ecclesiastical Writers distinguish between (...) and (...), that there is but
One Essence or Nature, and Three Hypostases; that is, Three really subsisting,
not commentitious, vanishing, confused, but distinct, particular, Intelligent
Persons. And the Censure he passes upon Servetus upon this score, is very
remarkable.

That Fanatical Fellow Servetus played with the word Person, Lusit homo
Fanaticus Servetus de vecabulo Personae, and disputat olim Latinis significasse
habitum aut officti distinctionem, ut dicimus Roscium alias sustin^re Personam
Achillis, alias sustinere Personam Ulyssis; seu alia est Persona Consulis, alia
servi: ut Cicero inquit, Magnum est in republica tueri Personam Principis. Et
hanc veterem significationem vecabuli sycophantice detorquet ad Articulum de
tribus Personis Divinitatis. Sed has impias pras^igias fugiamus and execremur,
and sciamus in hoc Articulo aliter loqui Ecclesiam, and Personam dici
substantiam individuam, intelligentem, and incommunicabilem. Ac prodest in hac
cogitatione saepe mente intueri baptismum Christi, ubi tres Personae illustri
discrimine monstrantur. Pater sonat hanc vocem: Hic est Filius meus dilectus.
Filius stans in flumine conspicitur: and Spiritus Sanctus specie visibili
demittitur. Melanct. loci Theolog. de tribus Personis Divinitatis.
and contended, That in Latin it anciently signified a Dress or Habit, or the
distinction of an Office; as R^scius is sometimes said to act the part of
Achilles, sometimes of Ulysses: Or, the Person of a Consul is one thing, and
the Person of a Slave is another, as Cicero speaks; that it is a great thing to
maintain the Character of the Person of a Prince in the Commonwealth: And this
Ancient Signification of the Word he slily wrested and applied to the Article
concerning the Three Persons of the Godhead: But let us fly from, and abhor
such wicked Artifices; and know, That the Church speaks after another manner;
and that Person signifies an Individual, Intelligent, Incommunicable Substance.
And it will be of great use to form and fix this Notion in our minds; to
contemplate the Baptism of Christ, where all Three Persons were most evidently
represented and distinguished: The Father spoke in an audible Voice, This is my
beloved Son; the Son is seen standing in the River; and the Holy Spirit
descends on him in a visible Appearance.

But since the Considerer makes a great Flourish with his Ideas, and clear and
distinct Conceptions, and fetches his Proofs from the most intimate knowledge
of Nature, he may take it ill if no notice or regard be had of them: We see
very well where he has been trading; and I doubt the Ingenious Author of Human
Understanding, will have more Disciples of different kinds than he was well
aware of, in whom he will have no great reason to glory: For it requires more
Skill than every man is Master of, to form simple and distinct Notions and
Ideas, and to apply them dexterously to their proper Subjects. And to refer all
men to Natural Ideas and Perceptions, when so very few know how to distinguish
between Natural Notions, and the Prejudices and Prepossessions of Education,
the Delusions of Fancy, and the Bias of Inclination, is like the Quakers
appeal to the Light within, which is just what every man will have it to be.

Our Considerer reduces all the Notions he can find of Unity and Distinction,
to Three Heads: The Unity or Distinction of Ideas, of Principle, and of
Position; and undertakes to prove from them all, That it is impossible, or
absolutely unconceivable, that there should be more than One Intelligent
Person, in the proper Notion of a Person, in the Godhead.

Now in the first place I would be glad to hear a good reason why the
Considerer takes no notice of that old received definition of One, that Vnum
est Indivisum; that is One, which is Undivided: The most perfect One is that
which neither is nor can be divided; an absolute perfect Monad, which is
absolutely and perfectly Simple, without any Parts to be divided into: And this
is the Unity of the Divine Nature, as Scripture, Fathers, Schoolmen, and all
men of improved and exercised Reason teach; and it is strange he should not
find this Notion of Unity among all his Natural Ideas, which is the only
Natural Notion of the Divine Unity, and belongs to no other Being. And this
would have given him a true Catholic Notion of the Unity of God in a Trinity
of Persons; for all agree, That the Divine Nature is indivisibly and
inseparably One.

And this is another thing I would be glad to know the reason of, Why in such
an Enquiry concerning the Unity and Distinction of the Trinity, he takes no
notice of that Old Catholic distinction, That God is One in Nature, and Three
in Persons; which would have been a good direction to him, what kind of Unity,
and what distinction to have enquired after: What Unity belongs to Nature, and
what it is which distinguishes Persons: But our Considerer has no regard to the
different Notions of Nature and Person, but applies all his Notions of Unity to
a Person, which as far as they are true, belong to Nature, and from the Unity
of Nature proves against the Catholic Faith, that there can be but One proper
Divine Person.

And there is one thing I am sorry for, That having mentioned a very good
Notion, he let it slip between his fingers without making any use of it. P. 20.
He tells us, That Identity is nothing else but a repetition of Unity, as
Number is of difference. This is very Catholic, and it is great pity we hear
no more of it. Upon this Principle the Fathers justify the Unity of the Godhead
in a Trinity of Persons: For the Divine Nature is but One, a perfect Monad, and
is communicated whole and entire, without the least Division or Separation, to
the Son and Holy Spirit, and therefore is perfectly and identically one and the
same in all Three; for the perfect repetition of a Monad and Unit makes no
Number: God, and God, and God, are not Three Gods, but One God, because the
same Divine Nature, without the least difference or diversity, is distinctly in
them all; and the repetition of what is perfectly the same, makes no Number;
but Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are three, for they are really distinguished
from each other, not by any difference of Nature, but only by Personal
differences, or the different manner of having the same Nature: That the Father
has the Whole Divine Nature originally in himself, is God of himself: The Son
receives the same Divine Nature by an Eternal Generation, and is God of God:
And the Holy Ghost in like manner by an Eternal Procession from Father and Son:
This incommunicably distinguishes Persons, that one can never be another; and
this is difference enough to make a Number; not to make Three Gods of them,
because the Divine Nature is perfectly One and the same in Three, but to
distinguish them into Three Persons, each of whom is True and Perfect God, and
all but One God. Why the Considerer should wave such a Notion as this of Unity
and Distinction, which any one would have thought his own Notions of Identity
and Number must unavoidably have led him into, I cannot guess; but I hope this
may satisfy him, that there are other Notions of Unity and Distinction, than
what he insists on, and such as may be as easily understood, and which fairly
reconcile the belief of Three proper Divine Intelligent Persons, with the Unity
of the Godhead: But let us now briefly consider his Ideas of Unity and
D^stinction.

1. The first is, The Unity of Idea: This he discourses of very confusedly, P.
13*
and does not seem well pleased with it himself: The Unity of the Idea he
places in being perceivable at one view, and having one uniform appearance:
Which makes it one Idea indeed, right or wrong, but proves no other kind of
Unity: This he grew sensible of, that the reality of things may not answer our
Ideas or Appearances; and I know not how they should, unless our Ideas answer
the Reality of Things; for Things are to be the Patterns for our Ideas, not our
Ideas for Things.

But the Considerer, by forsaking his good old Rules, for new Methods of
Thinking, has quite mistaken the Question. When we enquire into the general
Notion of Unity, the meaning is not, When we conceive of any thing as One, but
what it is that makes any thing One. The Unity of Idea, whether simple or
compounded, may be Answer enough to the first Question, Tha^ a^l that is
comprised in one Idea, if our Idea be right, belongs to one thing; but, as he
owns, we cannot prove that our Idea answers the Reality of Things, and
therefore I know not what this Rule is good for at all. But our general Notion
of Unity is of a very different Consideration; and our particular Ideas of
particular Things, contribute nothing to it: For the question is not, How many
Things are united in One Being? or, How many partial Conceptions are united in
One Idea? But, What it is that makes it One; or what the formal Conception of
its Unity is?

But our Considerer takes heart at last, from the Unity of the Idea of God, to
prove that there can be but One Divine Person in a proper sense; or but One who
is True and Perfect God. P. 21.
His Argument is this; We cannot conceive that any Object should be truly and
adequately represented to any Mind or Understanding under One Idea, and truly
and adequately represented under Three Ideas. And what is the Cons^quence of
this? That he tells us plainly, That all the Perfections (of the Deity) though
considered separately under different apprehensions by our imperfect Faculties,
P. 24.
being really but One simple Idea, can be applied to but One single Person, in
the first sense of the word Person, as it signifies a particular Intelligent
Being, Nature, and Principle.

1. Now in the first place this Argument supposes an Idea which truly and
adequately represent its Object, and yet our Considerer is so modest as not to
pretend to a full and adequate Idea of God: And therefore, according to his own
way, he can never conclude from the Idea of God, That it can belong but to One
single Person, because he has not an adequate Idea of the Divine Nature; and
then there may be something in the Idea of God, which he does not comprehend,
which may make it applicable to more Persons than one. Certainly it seems very
reasonable, when we confess that we have not an adequate Idea of the Divine
Nature, to refer this whole Dispute, not to Natural Ideas, which can never
determine it, but to Revelation, which is more certain and more perfect than
our Natural Knowledge.

2. I grant, That One Object cannot be truly and adequately represented to my
mind under One Idea, and truly and adequately represented under Three different
Ideas: But it is as true, That One and the same Idea may be truly and
adequately applied to Three distinct and different Persons: The adequate Idea
of Peter can be applied to none but Peter* but the Idea of Man, or of Human
Nature, may be truly and adequately applied to Peter, James, and John, and to
every single human Person in the world.

The Idea of God, as abstracted from the Consideration of a Trinity of Persons,
is only the Idea of the Divine Nature, which is but One, and can never be Three
different Natures; for the Divine Nature always was, and always will be but One
and the same; and this is that One Object which is adequately, in his sense,
represented by One Idea. And this is the account the Catholic Fathers give of
the Unity of God, That there is but One Divinity, One Divine Nature in Three
Persons; and thus the Trinity is the (...), the One Divinity, that One Object
represented by the One Idea of God. The Divine Persons are not distinguished by
any difference of Nature, which is One and the same in all, but by Personal
differences; That the Father is unbegotten, the Son begotten, and the Holy
Ghost proceeds from Father and Son: These are Three different Ideas for the
Three Divine Persons; but the Idea of the Divinity is but One, as the Divine
Nature is One and the same in all.

Could he indeed prove, That the Idea of God is not only One simple Idea, but
the Idea of One single Person, that would be somewhat more to the purpose; it
would be such an Argument against a Trinity of Persons, from the Idea of God,
as Necessary Existence, as included in the Idea of God, is for the Being of
God: But this he can never prove; and at best, these Arguments from Ideas are
thought too fine and subtle by most men.

2. His next kind of Unity is a Unity of Principle; that is One thing, which
has but One Principle of Action: And we cannot conceive that One Principle or
Nature should be but One, P. 16, 20, 21.
and yet Three different Principles and Natures. But I suppose he can conceive,
That if One and the same undivided Principle and Nature be and act in Three,
these Three are One by the Unity of Principle and Nature. And this is the
Catholic Faith of the Trinity, not Three different Principles and Natures in
Three Persons, but One and the same Principle and Nature, inseparably and
indivisibly subsisting and acting in Three: Upon account of which Identity of
Principle and Operation, the Catholic Fathers asserted but One Life, Energy,
and Power, not confusedly, but distinctly in Three; which asserts the Unity of
Principle, together with the real distinction of true and proper Persons. If
indeed he can prove from his Unity of Principle, That One Nature and Principle
can live, subsist, and act but in One; such a Unity of Principle as this, will
admit but of One single Person, and must overthrow the Catholic Faith of a
Real Trinity. But though the Unity of Principle does prove That to be but One,
which has but One Principle; it does not prove, That this One Nature and
Principle can be but in One.

3. His Third kind of Unity is very surprising, especially as applied to the
Unity of God; it is the Unity of Position, P. 16.
of Place, or of Vbi. When we perceive any Object in a continued Position,
bounded and fenced out from other things round about it, all within such Terms
and Limits we call One. Bless me! thought I; How is this applicable to the
Unity of God? who has no Body, no Parts, no continued Position; cannot be
bounded and fenced round about, nor confined within Terms and Limits; and
therefore can never have this Unity of Position, which is a very sorry kind of
Unity at best.

His Philosophy belonging to this Head is very admirable; but to let that pass,
he would not be thought to attribute Extension to Spirits; P. 18.
but the Idea of a Point is more applicable to Spiritual Beings; but a Physical
Point is extended still, though it be the least conceivable Extension, and has
parts, and therefore cannot represent simple Unity, and is the Idea of Body, not
of Spirit. Nor does he think local presence or determination any way contained
within the Idea of a Spiritual Being, and therefore this cannot belong to the
Unity of a Spirit. Well: But he is not able to comprehend the Union or
Separation of Two Spiritual Beings, P. 19.
without considering them in the same or different Localities.

I know not how to help this, that he cannot conceive of Spirits, but only after
the manner of Bodies. Are Spirits united by Juxta-position of Parts, or
Penetration of Dimensions? If not, One Vbi cannot unite them, though Separate
Vbi's may prove them Separate.

But still what is all this to the Unity of God? Why, he tells us, It is plain
at first sight, P. 21.
that we cannot possibly conceive God under any difference of Position: I add
further, That we cannot conceive God under any Position, and therefore the
Unity of Position can never belong to the Unity of God. But the reason he gives
why we cannot conceive God under any difference of Position, is, because we
cannot exclude Omnipotence from any imaginable point of Space; nor can we
include it in it; which proves that God has no Position, but is present without
Position, as he is without Extension, and without Parts. God needs no place to
subsist in, but is Place to himself, and Place to every thing else; as the
Hebrews called God Mak^m, or Place; according to S. Paul's Notion of it, That
in him we live, move, and have our being; that as all things receive Being by
his Almighty Word, so all things subsist in Infinite Mind, as the Ideas and
Notions of things do in Finite Minds. God could not create any thing without
himself, because there is nothing extra without him; and this is the
Omnipresence of God, not his Commensuration to Infinite Space; which is a gross
Corporeal Representation of Omnipresence by Infinite Extension, or
Commensuration to Infinite Extension, and makes something else as Infinite as
God, viz. Infinite Space, which must be commensurate to God, if God be
commensurate to Space; but the Omnipresence of God is his Comprehension of all
things in himself.

And yet his way of proving the Omnipresence of God from his Omnipotence, That
we cannot exclude Omnipotence from any imaginable Point of Space, if by
Omnipresence he means an Essential Omnipresence, as he must do here, is not so
self-evident as he seems to think it: The only foundation of it is this, That
nothing can act where it is not; which holds true only where Contact is
necessary to Action, that is, only in Bodies, whose Power consists in Contact,
or touching each other; but any Being which acts without Contact, as God
certainly does, may be Omnipotent, without being Omnipresent; that is, may act
at an Infinite distance, without any Local Presence with the thing on which it
acts. It is the first time, to the best of my remembrance, that ever I met with
this Notion, That it is the limited Powers and Faculties of Created Beings,
which are the foundation of all local distinction. P. 21.
Finite Creatures indeed have finite and limited Powers; but it is not the
limitation of their Powers and Faculties, but of their Presence, which makes a
local or Vbi distinction: If this were so, Power must be proportioned to
Presence, which we know is false; for the greatest things, which fill the
largest space, are not the most powerful: Spirits, which fill no space at all,
have the greatest Power, and most enlarged Faculties.

But it is time to see the Pinch of this Argument from the Unity of Position;
and the Sum of it is this: Whatever is One, must be in some One Place or Vbi,
which distinguishes and separates it from other things: That he cannot conceive
the distinction of two or three Beings from each other, without considering
them in so many different Places or Localities: That God is Omnipresent, P. 22.
and he can no more conceive Three Omnipresent, than he can conceive Three
straight Lines drawn between the same Points. That is, in plain English, There
are not Three Distinct Infinite Spaces for Three Distinct Omnipresent Persons
to be in, and therefore there cannot be a Trinity of True and Proper Persons;
but as there is but One Omnipresent Divine Nature, so there can be but One
single Omnipresent Person; and there is an end of the Trinity, till we can find
room in the world for Three Persons, each of whom is Omnipresent.

I perceive our Considerer has not been so fair and equal as he pretended to
be. He would not consult the Fathers, for fear of Prejudices and
Prepossessions; but either good Wits jump, or he has taken care to consult the
Ancient Heretics; for this was the old Sabellian Argument, which was long
since answered and scorned by Athanasius; as he will find in the Chapter of
Sabellianism, to which I refer him and the Reader.

But in good earnest, does any sober Christian want an Answer to this Argument?
Does God then fill a Space, as Bodies do, that Three Divine Omnipresent Persons
must have Three separate Localities, and be commensurate to Three Infinite
Spaces? Has God any Place; does he subsist in any thing but himself? If the
Considerer cannot conceive any Beings to be distinct without distinct
Localities, How does he distinguish God from Creatures, when he owns that God
is in every imaginable Point of Space, that is, in the very same Vbi's and
Localities, wherever any Creatures are?

But do not all Catholic Christians own, That there is but One Infinite,
Inseparable, Undivided Nature, in Three Persons? And must this One Undivided
Monad be in Three separate Localities, because it subsists in three distinct
Persons? especially when these distinct Persons are whole and entire in each
other; as our Savior assures us, I am in the Father, and the Father in me. And
is not this a wonderful demonstration against Three Real and Proper Persons in
the Trinity, That there cannot be Three such Infinite Omnipresent Persons,
unless they subsist in Three Infinite and Separate Localities? But enough of
this in all reason.

These are the Premises, from whence with so much open Assurance and Confidence
he draws that Sabellian Conclusion, P. 24.
That the Idea of God being really but One simple Idea, can be applied but to
One single Person, in the first sense of the word Person, as it signifies a
particular Intelligent Being, Nature, or Principle. -- From whence, he says, it
follows, that according to the Notions we are capable of framing of Unity and
Distinction, -- all the Personal distinction we can conceive in the Deity, must
be founded on some accessory Ideas, extrinsecal to the Divine Nature. So that
there is not a Trinity in the Divine Nature, as the Catholic Church has always
believed; but the Divine Nature, which really is but One single Person, is a
Trinity with respect to something which does not belong to the Divine Nature,
but is extrinsecal to it. Whether these be not New Terms and New Doctrine too,
unknown to the Catholic Church, or known only as condemned Heresies, I appeal
to all men, who will consult any Catholic Historian, or any Catholic Father,
without prejudice.

And here I might reasonably enough break off; for I have followed the
Considerer till we have heard him demonstrate against a Trinity of Real, Proper
Persons in the Unity of the Godhead; which puts an end to the whole Dispute
about a Trinity in Unity, because there is no such thing. He has found out
indeed a Unity for God, but it is not a Unity in Trinity, but the Unity of One
single Person; and he has found a Trinity, but it is not a Trinity in the Unity
of the Divine Nature, but a Trinity of extrinsecal accessory Ideas. But since
he has used some Art in palliating this Heresy, it will be necessary to take
off the Disguise.

The first step he makes to it, is by seeming to own, P. 24, 25.
That there may be some greater Mystery and Obscurity in the Doctrine of the
Trinity, than that Account which he has given of it: But if this Account, says
he, of the Trinity be too easy, and falls far short of those high expressions
of distinction found in Scripture (as I think it does), and no other, grounded
upon any Notions our Souls have framed of Unity and Distinction, can be true or
consistent (as I have before particularly proved), then it necessarily follows,
That God must be One and Three in some way or manner not conceivable by human
Understanding. Here he thinks he has found a safe Retreat: He asserts, and
proves (as he would have us believe) from all the Notions of Distinction and
Unity which our minds can frame, That God is and can be One in no other Notion,
than of One single Person, in the first and proper sense of a Person, for an
Intelligent Person; and that God neither is nor can be Three in the sense of
Three Proper Distinct Persons: If you charge him with Sabellianism for this,
then he retreats to an obscure, confused knowledge; to such a way and manner of
God's being One and Three, as is not conceivable by human Understanding.

Well: But will he allow us with this obscure and confused knowledge, to
believe the Holy Trinity to be Three Divine, Proper, Distinct Persons, and One
God, in a way and manner unconceivable by Human Understanding? By no means!
This he has proved by all the Notions of Unity and Distinction cannot be true
or consistent; nor is it possible for us to believe what we do not understand
the terms of, or what contradicts our former knowledge; and we are not bound to
believe what is not possible to be believed, nor can God in Justice or Goodness
require such a Faith of us, as we have already heard: So that Sabellianism we
may believe, and must not believe any thing contrary to it; and then we may
believe that there is something more in it than we understand, if we please.

And therefore we may observe, That he is not concerned about any difficulties
in the Notion of the Divine Unity, which all Catholic Writers have been most
concerned for; how to reconcile the Unity of God with a Trinity of Divine
Persons; but that which troubles him most, is the Distinction, which the
Catholic Fathers never disputed about, but positively asserted in the most
proper and real sense, against the Sabellian Heretics: But he seems sensible,
as well he may be, that the Sabellian Notion of Persons falls very short of
those high Expressions of Distinction which are found in Scripture: And here it
is that he allows of an obscure and confused Knowledge. When he has rejected a
True Personal distinction, all other kinds of distinction he can think of, will
not answer those high expressions of distinction found in Scripture; and
therefore provided you do not believe them distinct Persons, you may believe,
if you please, that there is some other unknown and unconceivable distinction
between them.

This is plainly what he means by his obscure confused Knowledge, by his
general confused Faith, by his general confused Notion of the Trinity; and
therefore he religiously keeps to that form of words, That One and the same God
is Three; which must be understood in his Notion of One and the same God, that
is, One single Person; for all his Notions of Unity and Distinction are on
purpose designed to prove, That One God cannot be Three, in a true and proper
Notion of a Person; and therefore he never so much as names that question, How
Three Divine Persons are One God? Which can never be reconciled to a Sabellian
Unity of a Single Person.

SECT. VI. What it is the Scripture requires us to believe concerning the
Trinity.
THE Considerer having laid the Foundations of Sabellianism in his Natural
Sentiments, proceeds to examine what the Doctrine of the Scripture is
concerning this matter; and to reconcile the Scripture to his Natural
Sentiments; though the more reasonable and safer way had been first to have
learnt the Faith from Scripture, and then to have corrected the Mistakes of his
Natural Sentiments by Scripture.

I do not intend to enter into a long dispute with him here, but shall only let
the Reader see what it is he would prove, and what he asserts; for his whole
business in short is to prove, That the Sabellian Notion of the Unity of God,
or of One single Person, and of Three Names, Titles, Characters, extrinsecal
Respects and Relations, is the True Scriture Doctrine of the Trinity.

This he very freely tells us, P. 2^.
That the Sum of all that the Scriptures plainly and expressly teach concerning
a Trinity, is this, That there is but One only God (and what he means by One
only God, we have often heard), the Author and Maker of all things: But that
One God ought to be acknowledge and adored by us under those Three different
Titles or Characters of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: Which Words are very
remarkable. He does not say, That this One God is to be acknowledged and adored
in Three, who have the same One Divinity subsisting whole, and perfect, and
distinctly in each of them, which is the Catholic Faith: But this One God is
to be acknowledged and adored by us under these Three different Titles and
Characters of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: So that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
are not the One God, for neither of them is God, but they are only the
different Titles and Characters of the One God* And though God, when
represented by different Characters, is God still under each Character, yet
neither of the Characters is God, no more than the Titles and Characters of a
Man, is the Man.

Now one might have expected that the Considerer should have proved, That the
Scripture-Notion of One God is, That there is but One single Divine Person (in
the true and proper Notion of the word Person) who is God; and that these Names
of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, do not in Scripture signify Three Distinct,
Real Persons, but are only Three Different Titles and Characters of the same
One Divine Person: This indeed had effectually proved what he pretends to; but
he was too wise to attempt either. The first he says nothing at all of, but
takes it for granted, that he has demonstrated That by his Natural Notions of
Unity and Distinction; but had he not first demonstrated that nothing could be
true and consistent, and that God can require us to believe nothing which
contradicts his Natural Notions, he should have a little enquired what the
Notion of Scripture is about this matter: But taking it for granted that he had
already demonstrated this, That One God signifies One single Person, he only
proves, That the Titles and Characters of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, belong
to God; and therefore, That these Terms must all be so understood, as to
include the same God (the One single Divine Person) in their Signification. P.
30.


The first, I think, he proves well enough, That these Titles and Characters of
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, belong to God; and this vindicates him from being
a Socinian: But when he applies all these Titles and Characters to One and the
same God, that is in his sense, to One and the same single Person, this proves
him to be a Sabellian; for this was the Doctrine of Noetus and Sabellius, That
these different Titles and Characters did belong but to One single Person, who
is God.

He proves, That these Titles and Characters, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, do
signify God, from the forms of Baptism, Salutation, and Blessing. Go teach all
nations, P. 31.
baptizing them in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of
the Holy Ghost, be with you all. From whence, as he adds, I infer, That all
these terms, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, signify God; because I cannot
possibly conceive it is agreeable to the nature of the Christian Religion, that
the Ministers of it should teach, baptize, or bless the people in any other
name but God's. I like this Argument very well, but if it proves any thing, it
proves more than he would have it, That Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are each
of them by himself true and perfect God, and not all Three One single Person;
for it seems altogether as absurd to teach, baptize, or bless in Three Names
and Titles, when there is but One single Person signified by those Three Names.
And therefore his Inference is not very plain, P. 32.
That if any One of these Terms signify God, they must all Three signify God;
and if all Three signify God, they must all Three signify One and the same God;
for God is One.

This is very artificial, but not plain: The consequence is plain, That if
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are the Names of God, they must all signify One
God by the Unity and sameness of Nature, because there is but One God; but not
by the Unity of Person, because the Scripture mentions Three, each of whom is
God: Which proves, That God is One in Nature, but Three in Persons; as the
Catholic Church has always believed.

As for what he adds, That the One Supreme God, the Lord and Maker of all
things, is here meant by the word Father, is a thing not questioned; and
therefore S^n and Holy Ghost are terms expressive of the same Divine Nature;
may in some sense be allowed, if he will distinguish between Nature and Person;
but according to the sense of Scripture, and the belief of the Catholic
Church, Father, Son, and H^ly Ghost, are the names of Three Real, Distinct,
Divine Persons, not of One Divine Nature, in the sense of One Pers^n.

But though we allow this with the Catholic Church, That the Father is the One
Supreme God; we have no reason to allow this to the Considerer, who will not
allow Father, Son, or Holy Ghost, to be Names of Divine Persons, or to be Names
or Relations of the Divine Nature, considered as the Divine Nature; for he says
they are extrinsecal, that is, ^xtra-essential, Ideas, Titles, Characters,
Respects, Relations; and therefore Father, according to this Hypothesis, is not
the essential Name of the One Supreme God, but given to him for some
extrinsical and extra-essential reasons; is his Name, not by Nature, but by
Institution, and then must be proved to be his Name; which the mere form of
Baptism cannot do, for the Name God is not expressed in it; much less does it
prove, That Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are One and the same God, or One
single Person.

It is evident indeed from other Texts, That Father is the Name of God, but
then it is the Name of God the Father; and the Son is the Son of God, and the
Holy Ghost the Spirit of God, the Spirit of the Father and of the Son; and this
does prove, That Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, have the same One Divinity, the
same One Divine Nature, as the very Names and Relations of Father, and Son, and
Spirit, prove: But surely this does not prove, That God the Father, and his
Son, are the same One single Person, as well as One God; for Father and Son all
the world over signify Two distinct Persons; for no One Person can be Father
and Son to himself; nor can the Eternal subsisting Spirit of God be the same
Person with that God whose Spirit he is. Unless he allows that Father in the
form of Baptism is the Name of a Person, he can prove nothing from it; and if
Father be the Name of a Person, Son, and Holy Gh^st, must be the Names of
Persons also; and then the Names and Relations of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
necessarily prove, That they are not One single Person, but Three Persons.

Thus he proves the Son to be God, from that Religious Worship which is paid to
him; which does indeed prove him to be God, but not the same One Person with
the Father: Our Considerer is much mistaken, if he thinks it sufficient to
prove, That Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are the Titles and Characters of the
same One single Person, who is the One God, if he can prove that each of these
Names signify One who is God. And the truth is, if these Names, Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, do not signify Persons, they cannot signify God; for then they
are not Names of Nature, but something extrinsecal and accessory to the Divine
Nature; P. 37.
and therefore they may be the external Denominations of him who is God, but
not the Names of God, considered as God, and therefore cannot signify God;
because they do not signify the Divine Nature in the Persons of Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, but something extrinsical and accessory, that is, something
which is not essential, and therefore which the Divine Nature might be without.
I hope the Considerer did not think of this Consequence, That it is possible
that God might neither have been Father, Son, nor Holy Ghost; which yet must be
allowed possible, if these be mere extrinsecal and accessory Titles and
Characters: Nay, this must be allowed, unless we will grant that these Names
signify Three Real, Subsisting, Intelligent, Coeternal Persons, in the Unity of
the same Godhead.

But these Three Persons do somewhat puzzle him. That God should be called
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is as easily to be believed, as that he should be
called Adonai, Elohim, P. 36.
and Jehovah: That the same thing should be signified and expressed by several
Names, is no such incredible Mystery. Which still shows us what it is he
believes and would prove in all this, That Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are but
Three Names of that One single Person, who is God. But, as he proceeds, if we
allow that these terms, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are all applied to God in
Scripture, it is not thought sufficient to say, That these are Three several
Names, which signify God; but we are further required to believe, That God is
One and Three; the same God (not the same single Person), but Three different
Hypostases or Persons; and that one of these Three Hypostases or Persons is
both God and Man.

These are the Hard Sayings which puzzle some men's understandings. This is the
Faith of the Catholic Church, and will always be Hard Sayings to Sabellian
Understandings, which they will never be able to reconcile with their
Hypothesis of One single Person in the Godhead. But let us hear how he clears
himself of these difficulties.

P. 37.
He observes in the first place, That these Names, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
are applied to God in Scripture in a different way from what any of his other
Names are. So far he is in the right; but what is this different way? In short,
it is this; That the other Names of God signify only partial Conceptions of the
Divine Nature, such as Self-existence, Power, etc. and are all contained within
the same Idea of God, and therefore cannot be the foundation of any distinction
in the Godhead. Let this pass. But each of these Names, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, includes the whole Idea we have of God, and something more; as being
extrinsecal and accessory to the Divine Nature, and the whole Idea of God full
and complete, before the application of these terms. Let us examine this first.

He says, Each of these Names includes the whole Idea of God. I beseech you how
can that be, when they signify something extrinsecal and accessory to the
Divine Nature, and the whole Idea of God may be conceived full and complete
without them? For if these Names are not included in the Idea of God, which is
full and complete without them (which Assertion, by the way, overthrows the
whole Christian Faith of the Trinity), how can they include the Idea of God in
them, which they are not so much as any part of, much less the whole, and
something more?

I grant the Names of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, may connote the Idea of God,
as the Name of a King and a Father connote the Idea of a Man who is King and
Father, which I suppose is all he intends by it; but then the King must be a
Man, and the Father must be a Man, to connote the Idea of Man: And thus in the
Blessed Trinity; if these Names, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, connote the Idea
of God, the Father must be True and Perfect God, and the Son must be True and
Perfect God, and the Holy Ghost must be True and Perfect God; for neither
Father, Son, or Holy Ghost, connote the Idea of God upon any other account,
than as the Whole and Perfect Divine Nature subsists in each of them, and that
makes the whole Idea of God belong to each of them.

To proceed: He tells us, That though all these Names are separately and
together affirmed of God, yet each of them in so peculiar a manner, that there
are several occasions, where, when one of these terms is used with relation to
God, 'twould be improper to use either of the other. That is, when it is proper
to call God Father, it is improper to call him, Son, or Holy Ghost, and so on
the contrary: But the reason of this in his Hypothesis, is not that their
Persons are distinct and incommunicable, but that there are several occasions
which make such change of Names improper: As a Man who is a King, a Husband,
and a Father, all these Names do separately and together belong to him, but you
must have a care of speaking improperly, by applying these Names to improper
Relations.

Well: however, From hence, he says, it follows, that these Three Names of God,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, must denote a Threefold difference of distinction
belonging to God. I grant, it makes a distinction of Names and external Offices
and Relations in God, but no distinction of Hypostases and Persons, which was
the distinction to be shown; but this he absolutely rejects; for it must be no
other difference or distinction, but such as is consistent with the Unity and
Simplicity of the Divine Nature. This we would all subscribe to, did he mean
honestly; but his Unity and Simplicity of the Divine Nature, is nothing else
but the Unity and Simplicity of One single Person; and all the distinction he
will allow these different Names to make, is no more than what One single
Person is capable of.

For each of these Names includes the whole Idea we have of God, and something
more. Very right; if we allow these Names, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to be
the Names of true and proper Divine Persons; for then each of them is true and
perfect God, and the whole Idea of God is included in each of them, because the
whole Divine Nature is in each of them; otherwise neither of these Names
include the Idea of God, but only connote it, as I have already observed.

And what he adds, That as far as these Names express the Nature of God, they
all adequately and exactly signify the same; is very true also, if by the same,
he means the same Nature, not the same One single Person: And then what he
adds, It Is the additional signification which makes all the distinction between
them, is very true also; but he ought to have told us what this additional
signification, this something more than the whole Idea of God, is, which is
included in these Names, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and then we might have
known what this distinction is.

All the additional signification that I know of, is this; That Father
signifies God, includes the whole Idea of God; but besides this, Father, when
it signifies God, signifies a Self-originated, Unbegotten God, who is God of
himself, and begets a Son of his own Nature, and Coeternal with himself. Son
signifies God, but begotten God, God of God, the living and perfect Image of
his Father. Holy Ghost signifies God, but God proceeding eternally from Father
and Son, in the Unity and Perfection of the same Divine Nature. And this is all
the difference between them, not a difference of Nature, but a distinction of
True, Real, Proper Persons.

The Considerer seems to allow this. P. 38.
That Person is a proper Name for this distinction; For Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost -- have plainly a Personal significati^n; each of them, without any
figure of speech, being determined to signify some Intelligent Being acting in
such a manner as is there related.

These Words would betray an Unwary Reader, to believe the Considerer as
Orthodox as the Nicene Fathers, and that he did acknowledge Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, to be Three Persons, without a Figure, as a Person signifies an
Intelligent Being; but he has secured himself against this Imputation by an
artificial addition, some Intelligent Being acting in such, or such, a manner:
He will not allow Person to signify absolutely an Intelligent Being* but an
Intelligent Being with respect to some peculiar manner of acting; and thus One
single Person, in the proper Notion of Person, for an Intelligent Being* may
sustain Three Persons, or Personal Characters, with re^pect to extrinsecal
Relations, and the different manner of acting.

The whole Mystery and Sophistry of this, is, That God, who is One single
Person, is upon different accounts sometimes called the Father, sometimes the
S^n, and sometimes the Holy Ghost; and therefore Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
have a Personal signification, each of these Names signify Person in a proper
sense, that is, the Person of God; but all of them separately and together,
signify but One and the same single Person; for they are all of them attributed
to God, and God is but One, or One Person, though this One proper Person may
sustain Three figurative Persons, or Personal Characters. This is plain
dealing: and this is his Answer to his first Hard Saying, That God is One and
Three; the same God, but Three different Hypostases or Persons: That God is One
and the same single Person, under Three Personal Characters, which may be
called Three Persons, because each of them signifies the True and Proper Person
of God.

And here we see in what sense these Gentlemen allow, That each Person is
Substance, is Mind, and Spirit, and yet that God is but One Substance, One
Mind, and Spirit; viz. in the very same sense that this Author affirms that God
is but One single Person, and yet that the Father is a Person, the Son a
Person, and the Holy Ghost a Person; and for the same reason, that they decry
and abhor Three Substances, Three distinct Minds and Spirits in the Godhead,
though affirmed to be indivisibly and inseparably One Infinite Substance, Mind,
and Spirit; for the same reason they reject Three Intelligent Substantial
Persons; though our Modern Sabellians have been more cautious generally than
this Considerer, not to own it in express words.

Now as for these Terms of Three Substances, and Three Minds, there may be good
reason to let them alone, tho when rightly explained no reason to condemn them
of Heresy; but we must insist on Three Distinct, Infinite, Intelligent,
Substantial Persons, Each of which is Mind and Substance, and One is not the
Other: If they disown this (as the Considerer does) they are downright
Sabellians; if they own it, we have no farther Dispute about this matter.

Let us now consider his other Hard Saying, That One of these Three Hyp^stases
or Pers^ns should be both God and Man.

Now the Hardness of this Saying is not, That it is hard to prove from
Scripture, that so it is; or that it is hard to conceive how God and Man can be
united; which is all that he touches on: But it is and always will be a Hard
Saying to the Considerer upon another account; that is, To reconcile it with a
Trinity of One proper single Person, and Three Personal Characters.

The Doctrine of the Incarnation is this; That the Eternal Son of God became
True and Perfect Man, by taking the Human Nature into a Personal Union to
himself. That the Son only became Man, not the Father, nor the Holy Ghost: That
two perfect distinct Natures, the Divine and Human Nature, were without
Confusion united in the One Person of Christ; and that this One Person is the
Eternal Word and Son of God. Now if there be but One single Person in the
Godhead, and Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are but Three Names, or Personal
Characters of this One single Person, How can the Son be Incarnate, and not the
Father, nor the Holy Ghost? It is only a Person that can be Incarnate, for a
Personal Character cannot be Incarnate without the Person; and if there be but
One single Person, and this same One Person is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, it
is impossible that that Person who is the Son, should be Incarnate, but the
Person who is the Father and the Holy Ghost, must be Incarnate also; because
the same Person who is the Son, is the Father and the Holy Ghost.

The short Question is this; Whether a True, Proper, Divine Person was
Incarnate, in the Incarnation of Christ? If not, then Christ was not a Divine
Person, how Divine soever he might be upon other accounts; the Divine Nature
did not pers^nally subsist in him, he was not personally True and Perfect God;
and then the Person of Christ was no more than a Man, whatever Divine
Influences he might receive from God: But if the Divine Nature were truly and
properly Incarnate in the Person of Christ, then if there be but One single
Divine Person in the Godhead, but One Divine Nature* in the sense of One single
Person, then the whole Godhead, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which are but One
True and Proper Person, was Incarnate in Christ.

This is the true difficulty, and he is so wise as to take no notice of it. It
does not appear to me, that he believes one word concerning the Incarnation of
God, or of a True Divine Person; P. 38.
he says, He that is in Scripture called the Son of God, did appear in the
likeness of men: He certainly was a True Man, but that is not our present
dispute; Was he in his own Person True and Perfect God? Was he a Human Person;
or the Person of the Son of God appearing in Human Nature?

P. 39.
He was, he says, in the Form of God, before he took the Nature of Man upon
him. This sounds well; but why does he not speak out, and tell us what this
Form of God is? Whether the True Divine Nature subsisting in him, a True Divine
Person?

Well: But God did suffer himself to be worshipped and adored in and by the Man
Christ Jesus; the least that can be inferred from which is, That God was more
immediately and peculiarly present in Christ, than ever he was said to have
been any where else? as in the Heavens, the Jewish Temple, between the
Cherubims, in Prophets and Holy Men, who spoke as they were moved by the
Spirit. Now all this might have been spared, would he but have said, That the
Person Jesus Christ was worshipped with Divine Honors, as being in his own
Person True and Perfect God, as well as Man; and without saying this, he says
nothing to prove that Christ is the Son of God Incarnate.

To say, That God did suffer himself to be worshipped in and by the Man Christ
Jesus, as he was worshipped in the Heavens, in the Jewish Temple, between the
Cherubims (for that must be the force of the Comparison) does no more prove
Christ to be God, than it proves the Heavens, the Jewish Temple, and the
Cherubims, to be God: It may prove a more perfect symbolical Presence of God in
Christ, which he calls the Fullness of the Godhead, but not the Incarnation of
the Son of God. But this is not the Doctrine of Scripture, merely to say, That
God suffers himself to be worshipped in the Man Christ Jesus; as if God, and
the Man Christ Jesus, were not One Person; but that he commands us to worship
that Person who is called Christ Jesus, not as a Man, in whom the Power of God
dwells, and is present, as in the Heavens, or in the Jewish Temple, or in the
Prophets and Holy Men (who were never for this reason thought the Objects of
Worship) but as his own Eternal Son Incarnate. That all men should honor the
Son, as they honor the Father; which does not only signify to honor the
Father in the Son, but to pay Divine Honors to the Person of the Son, which
makes them distinct Objects of Worship, and therefore True and Proper Persons,
not Personal Characters, which may be distinct Reasons of Worship, but are not
distinct Objects.

But we shall better understand this, by the account he gives of the Union of
God and Man, In what manner Soul and Body, or God and Man, are united, is not
the question; for we know nothing how this Physical Union is made; but the
question is concerning the Nature and Kind of this Union: Whether, as the Soul
and Body are united in One Person, so as to be One Man, so God and Man are
united in One Person: That as the reasonable Soul and Flesh is One Man, so God
and Man is One Christ. Whether the Divine and Human Natures are united in One
Person; or God be united to Man only as an assisting Principle, by a perpetual
and constant Influx of Divine Powers and Virtues. These two are vastly
different: The first indeed always includes the second in the most perfect
manner, but the second does not always infer the first.

A Personal Union is always a Union of Life, Influence, and Power; as he
describes the Union of Soul and Body; That there is some Intelligent Power that
makes use of the Organs of my Body, and acts in conjunction with the motions
there produced: This is all true, and necessarily consequent upon a Personal
Union, but a very lame account of the Vital Union of Soul and Body; for thus
Angels may use the Bodies they assume, without a Personal Union: But a
conscious Life, Sensation, and Government, which makes One self, is a great
deal more than to act in conjunction with the Motions of the Body. The Union of
Influence and Power may be without Personal Union, and therefore does not
always make One Person.

It is the first we enquire after, it is the first the Scripture teaches, That
the Word was made Flesh; That God sent forth his Son, P. 40.
made of a woman: This is the Catholic Faith of the Incarnation; but this the
Considerer takes no notice of; but all he says, relates only to the Union of
Influence and Power.

And I may, says he, as well consider God united to Man, when he so acts by the
Ministry and Operation of Man, that the Actions of God seem conveyed to us the
same way as the actions of one man are to another. But does this make God True
and Perfect Man? This falls short of the conjunct Operations of Soul and Body,
which are much more close and intimate than the actions of one man are to
another; however, to be sure the actions of one man upon another, do not make
Two such Men One Person; nor therefore can the like Influence of God on Man,
make God and Man One Person. But he proceeds:

Had those who upon some occasions spoke by the Extraordinary Assistance of a
Divine Power, been constantly so directed and assisted, how could they have
distinguished the Motions of their Souls from the Impressions of God? Just as
they did when they were sometimes thus assisted; for External Impressions are
always distinguishable from Internal Motions. But suppose they could not
distinguish them, does this prove that God is Incarnate in such men; or would
it be a reason to worship such men as God?

He adds, And why then should we not think such an extraordinary Power as this,
as much united to such men, as that common ordinary Power we call the Soul, is
to those Bodies in which it acts and exerts it self. The Answer is plain,
because it would be an External, not an Internal Principle of Life, and Motion,
and Sensation, how constant soever its Influences were. He calls it an
Extraordinary Power, which shows that it is not a Natural Principle of Action;
it is an Extraordinary Power united to a Man, and therefore the Man is the
Person, this Extraordinary Power only an external assisting Principle, of the
same kind with that in Prophets, though more constant and regular in its
actings: But here is nothing of Incarnation in all this.

Is this Extraordinary Power a Divine Subsisting Person, in the true and proper
Notion of a Person? Is it the Son of God, that Eternal Word, which was in the
beginning, was with God, and was God? Is this Extraordinary Power so united to
Human Nature, as to become Man? Is it the Person of Christ Jesus, who was
conceived in the Womb of the Virgin, lived in the World as a Man, suffered, and
died, and rose again from the dead, and now sits at the Right Hand of God in
the highest Heavens? Not one word of all this, which is the true Mystery, and
the only Use of this Doctrine of the Incarnation, whereon all our Hopes of
Salvation by Christ depend. This Extraordinary Power is not a Person, but such
a constant regular Inspiration, as he says, some are of opinion the Soul of man
is: But whether that be so or not, as he thinks m^st probably it is not (which
yet argues some kind of Inclination to it), yet it seems to him plain from
Scripture, that such a Power as we ascribe to God (he will not say such a Power
as is God, or a True Divine Person) did as constantly and regularly act in and
through Christ, as the Human Soul is perceived to do in any other man. That
such a Power did constantly appear and act in Christ, is true; but whether by
Nature, or by a constant and regular Inspiration, is the Question. Our Savior
proves his Divine Nature from his Works; our Considerer thinks it proves no
more than a constant and regular Inspiration: The first is necessary to the
Catholic Faith of the Incarnation, That the Word was made Flesh; the second
proves him only to be an extraordinary and perpetual Prophet: The first makes
him True God-Man; the second makes him only a Divine Man. And this is all he
can mean by this Power regularly and constantly acting in and through Christ:
For if Christ be God-Man, he is this Divine Power in his own Person; it is his
Divine Nature, not an external adventitious Principle, how regularly and
constantly soever it acts; it is not merely an uninterrupted Presence and
Concurrence of the Deity with the Man Christ Jesus, as he represents it, but
the Personal Union of the Divine Nature of Christ to Human Nature. He was not
only as conscious of all the Divine Perfections in himself, P. 41.
as a man is conscious of his own thoughts, (which yet, by the way, is
absolutely impossible, without being True and Perfect God in his own Person),
but he knew himself to be God, the Eternal Son of God, not the same Person with
his Father, but One with him.

Were a man thus regularly and constantly Inspired, he would know that he was
thus Inspired, and he would also know, that these Divine Perfections are not in
himself, not seated in his own Human Person, nor under the Conduct of his own
Will, as his own Natural Powers are, and therefore must know himself to be a
mere Man still, not God-Man.

So that this constant and regular Inspiration, this uninterrupted Presence and
Concurrence of the Deity, which is all he allows in this matter, cannot make
any Person God-Man. This Inspiration is not a subsisting Person, is not the
Person of the Son of God, is not Incarnate by its Union to Man, no more than it
is Incarnate in other Prophets: The Man is the Person, and therefore a mere
Creature still, tho never so Divinely Inspired.

This is such an Incarnation as Socinians themselves own, in as high
expressions as the Considerer can invent. Cerinthus owned something more, That
Christ who descended on Jesus at his Baptism, was a Divine Person, not a mere
Inspiration, and rested on him, and was most intimately united to him, till his
Crucifixion. That Sect of the Noetians and Sabellians who were called
Patripassians (for they do not seem by the accounts we have of them, to have
been all of that mind) did acknowledge the Incarnation of God in a true and
proper sense, as the Catholic Church did the Incarnation of Christ: But then
their Trinity being but One proper single Divine Person, distinguished by Three
Names or Personal Characters (which is the express Doctrine of the Considerer)
their whole Trinity was Incarnate, suffered, and died, in the Incarnation and
Sufferings of Christ, the Father as well as the Son; as it must of necessity
be, if there be but One Divine Person, who is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and
if this One Person is in a true and proper sense Incarnate: But this the
Catholic Church abhorred and condemned, under the name of the Patripassian
Heresy. Others of them were Sabellians in the Doctrine of the Trinity, but
Photinians, or Samosatenians, that is, Socinians, as to the Doctrine of the
Incarnation, as Athanasius often intimates: And if I understand him, this is
the Considerer's way, who believes a Trinity in One single Person, and an
Inspired Man for a God Incarnate.

And thus we have lost the Trinity and Incarnation, and must part with every
thing which is peculiar and essential to Christianity, with them. And now one
would wonder after all this, what he has to say more about the Faith of the
Trinity and Incarnation; and yet this is his next Enquiry, P. 41.
What the Scriptures necessarily oblige us to believe in this Point, that is,
concerning the Trinity and Incarnation? Though he has been careful all along
never to use this term Incarnation, as being sensible that all he said about
God-Man, would not reach the Catholic Notion of Incarnation.

When I met with this Enquiry, I was in hope that there was something behind to
unsay all that he had hitherto said; for if what he has already said be true,
it is certain the Scripture requires us to believe nothing about them. But upon
Examination I found, that the Question was fallaciously stated; and the true
meaning of it was, What the Scriptures oblige us to believe, instead of what
has hitherto passed for the true Catholic Faith of the Trinity and
Incarnation? I shall not dispute this Point with him now; to show what he
means, will be Confutation enough.

P. 42.
We must not, he says, look upon the Doctrine of the Trinity as a nice
abstracted Speculation, designed for the exercise of our Understandings; but as
a plainer Revelation of God's Love and Good Will toward men, and a greater
Motive and Incitement to Piety than ever we had before this Doctrine was
delivered.

This we grant, That the Christian Faith is not designed merely for
Speculation, but for Practice; but yet all the Doctrines of Faith are matters
of Speculation, and the Doctrine it self must be believed in order to Practice,
or else the Revelation of it is of no use at all.

The Question then is, Whether we must not believe the Doctrines of the Trinity
and Incarnation? Or how much we must believe of them? Must we not believe, That
God has in a true and proper sense an Eternal and Only-begotten Son, begotten
from Eternity of his own Substance; his True, Perfect, Living, Subsisting
Image? Must we not believe, That this Eternal Son of God did in a true proper
Notion become Man, by uniting Human Nature to his own Person; and that in Human
Nature he suffered and died for the Redemption of Mankind? Truly, No; if I
understand him: All this is a nice abstracted Speculation, and a very
perplexing exercise of our Understandings; and we are bound to understand no
more by God's giving his own Son to dye for us, but his Love and G^od Will to
Mankind, as it is a great Motive and Excitement to Piety.

But how can we learn God's Love and Good Will to Mankind, from this Doctrine,
if it be not true? if God have no Eternal Son, and therefore did not give his
Eternal Son to become Man, and to suffer and dye for us? The Gospel proves the
great Love of God to Sinners, by the Incarnation, Death, and Sufferings of his
Son; that if we do not believe this Doctrine strictly and literally true, we
lose the Gospel Proof of God's Love to Sinners, and of the Virtue and Efficacy
of Christ's Death and Sacrifice to expiate our sins, and of the Power of his
Intercession as the Eternal, Only-begotten, and Well-beloved Son of God.

But our Considerer will not allow this: These Titles and Relations must be
chiefly c^nsidered with reference to the great Work of Man's Salvation: But
must they not be considered as Three distinct proper Persons in the Unity of
the Godhead, who have their distinct Parts and Offices in the Redemption of
Mankind? No; but distinct Relations and Offices of One and the same single
Divine Person, who is the One Supreme God, and is All in One, Father, Son, and
Holy Gh^st, Savior, Mediator, Comforter. P. 43.


But how then can these Titles and Relations signify an Eternal Distinction in
the Godhead, an Eternal F^t^^r, an Eternal Son, and an E^ernal Spirit, when
th^se Offices relating only to Man's Salvation were not Eternal?

This he resolves into the Eternal Purpose and Decree of God, to redeem Mankind
by the Death and constant Mediation of a Man chosen and enabled for this work
by the Fullness of the Godhead dwelling in him: And in consideration of his
Passion and Intercession, to impart such Gifts, Graces, and Spiritual
Assistances, as would be sufficient to render this Redemption effectual to the
saving of much people. So that God decreed from Eternity, upon his
Foreknowledge of Man's Fall, that in order to redeem Man he would take upon
himself the Distinctions and Offices of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; Savior,
Mediator, and Comforter, in time; and this is all the Eternal Distinction in
the Godhead.

Well: But it seems God did not decree from Eternity to redeem Man by his own
Son, but by a Man chosen and enabled for this Work by the Fullness of the
Godhead dwelling in him; that is, as we have already heard, by an Inspired and
Deified Man, Sin autem ideo dictum putant Deum, quod inspirationem divinitatis
habuit, sicut and multi sancti viri -- ergo non ultra homines eum praeferunt --
Ambr. de fide, l. 5. cap. 1.
not by a God Incarnate: It is the Man who is the Savior and Redeemer, though
he be enabled to this work by the Fullness of the Godhead, or a constant regular
Inspiration: This is downright Socinianism; the Catholic Faith is, That it is
the Son of God who redeems us, though he redeems us in Human Nature.

But if God redeems us by a Man, however he be enabled by a Divine Power, Why
is he said to give his Son for us? For this Divine Power is not a Person, and
therefore no Son, nor is the Man his own and only begotten Son.

Now this would be a difficulty indeed, were we to understand God's giving his
own Son for us, in a proper literal sense; but this is nothing but Figure and
Representation, if we believe the Considerer. P. 44.
His words are these; Thus when God is pleased to represent his Love to Mankind
in the highest Image of Nature, that of a Father sacrificing an onlybegotten
Son, the exact Transcript and Resemblance of himself, perfectly innocent, and
obedient to his Will in all things, we are to believe (that God did thus
sacrifice his Son, as he assures us he did? No; but) that by the Sufferings and
Death of Christ, God has given greater Proof of his Love toward us, than any
man is capable of doing to another; and that such an action of an Earthly
Parent suggests the nearest and likest Conception we can possibly frame of what
our Heavenly Father has done for us; though at the same time we must
acknowledge it comes infinitely short of expressing the Riches and Fullness of
his Mercy and Loving kindness. It does so indeed. To believe that God has
actually given his own Eternal and Only-begotten Son for us, as the Scripture
assures us he has, is a much nearer and truer Conception of what God has done
for us, and infinitely exceeds all earthly comparisons. Abraham's offering his
Son Isaac at God's Command, was an Image and Figure, but a Typical Figure of
it; but it was a Type without an Antitype, if Christ was not as truly and
properly the Son of God, as Isaac was the Son of Abraham. But if we will
believe the Considerer, the Scripture does not oblige us to believe this; if we
do but believe, That God is as good to us as if he had sacrificed his only Son
for us, we need not believe, That he did sacrifice his Son. I have no Patience
to proceed any further; if this be true, there is an end of the Faith and Hope
of Christians.

CHAP. III. A Brief Account of the Sabellian Heresy, and by what Arguments the
Catholic Fathers opposed it.
THE Considerer has given us the most Complete and Artificial Scheme of
Sabellianism that I have yet met with, and has very fairly and openly confessed
his Design, to prove, That One God must signify that there is but One who is
God, but One single Divine Person, in the proper Notion of a Person, as it
signifies an Intelligent Being. I have endeavored to show him his Mistake, and
what it is that has misled him; and how hopeless an Attempt it is to reconcile
his Hypothesis with the Catholic Faith of the Trinity and Incarnation.

This is so bold an Attempt, openly to assert and defend a Heresy which has
been constantly condemned by the Catholic Church, since its first appearance,
that I am apt to hope he does not believe his Hypothesis to be Sabellianism, or
that Heresy which now is best known by that name, though Sabellius was not the
first Author of it. And therefore I will show him what Sabellianism is, and how
the Fathers opposed it.

There were Two Points in dispute between them and the Catholic Christians.

First, Concerning the Personality of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.

Secondly, Concerning the Unity of God, Whether it were the Unity of One
Person, as they pretended.

That we may rightly understand this matter, we must distinguish between the
several kinds of Sabellianism, because the Arguments and Answers of the Fathers
are sometimes adapted to one, and sometimes to another Notion of it. That
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, were but One Person, was asserted by them all, but
explained very differently, and that altered the state of the Question, and
required different Answers.

1. As first, They made Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to be only Three Names,
Appearances, or Offices of the same Person, as I observed before: And then the
state of the Question was not, Whether the Son was a Person, and the Holy Ghost
a Person, in as true and proper a sense as the Father was a Person? For this
they owned by making Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Three Names of the same
Person; whereas it is impossible they should be the same Person, if the Son
were not a Person, nor the Holy Ghost a Person. If the Son be the same Person
with the Father, the Son must be a Person, for no Person cannot be the same
Person: Which is the same Argument to prove that these Heretics owned Christ
to be a True and Real Person, that Novatianus used (as I observed before) to
prove that they owned Christ to be true and perfect God, because they made him
the same with the Father, who is true and perfect God, and a true, and real,
and substantial Person. And if he be the very same with the Father, he must be
the same we acknowledge the Father to be; viz. a true and real Person, and
perfect God.

The Dispute then which the Catholic Fathers had with these Heretics, with
respect to this Notion, That Father, Son* and Holy Ghost, were the very same
Person, was not, Whether the Son was a Person, and the Holy Ghost a Person?
but, Whether the Son and Holy Ghost were truly and really distinct Persons from
the Father, as the Catholic Church always believed? or, Whether they were the
same Person, distinguished only by Three Names.

Now when the Fathers asserted not only the Personality of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost (which this Notion did not oppose), but the real distinction of
Persons, That the Son was a Person, but not the same Person with the Father,
they must ascribe the same kind of Personality to the Son, which they do to the
Father; That the Son is as truly and really a Person as the Father is, though
not the same Person; as truly a Person as God would be, were there but One
Person in the Godhead, as these Heretics affirmed. For according to all the
Rules of Disputation, we must take Words in the sense of those whom we oppose;
for otherwise it is a mere wrangle about Words, without opposing one another.
And therefore since the Sabellians by Person understood such a Person as every
single Person is, (for they made Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, but Three
different Names of the same single individual Person) nothing could oppose or
confute them, but to prove, That Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost, are Three
distinct Persons, in the same Notion of a Person which belongs to every single
individual Person, as far as mere Personality is concerned. For to prove them
Three in any other sense, whether Three Modes, or Three Powers, or Three Parts
of the same One single Person, is what they would have; and allow them to be
but One Person, and they will dispute no further; nay, will give you leave to
call Three Modes, or Three Names, or Three Parts of the same One Person, Three
Persons, if you please.

But for the clearer understanding of this matter, we must consider by what
Arguments the Ancient Writers opposed this Heresy.

Tertullian, in opposition to Praxeas, reduces this to a short Question,
Whether God have any Son, and who he is, and how he is his Son. Sed quia duos
unum volunt esse, ut idem Pater and Filius habeatur, oportet and totum de filio
examinari, ut sit, and qui sit, and quomodo sit. Tert. ad Prax. c. 5.

Ipsum qu^d Pater and Filius dicuntur, nonne aliud ab alio est. Utique ^nim
omnia quod vocantur, h^c crunt; and quod crunt, hoc vccaluntur -- Ita aut pater
aut filius est, and neque dies cadem and nox, neque pater idem and filius, ut
sint ambo unus, and utrumque alter. Ibid. c 9, 10.

Ipsi se, inquiunt, filium sibi faci^, atquin pater filium facit, and patrem
filius. Et qui ex alterutro fiunt, a semetipsis sibi fieri nullo modo possiunt,
ut pater se sibi filium faciat, and filius se sibi patrem praestet. Qu^e
institut Deus, ipse custodit. Ibid.

Habeat, necesse est, pater filium, (...) pater sit, and filius patrem, ut
filius sit. Aliud est autem habere, aliud ^sse. Verbi gratia, ut maritus sim,
h^b^a^ oportet uxorem, non ut ipse mihi ero ^xor; sic etiam, ut pater s^^n,
filium habco, non ipse mihi ero filius. Ibid.

Qu^e enim me faciunt, si ha^^^ero, tun`e ero pater, si filium habeam, filiu^
ero, si patrem, Parro, si ipse ero qui^ coruum, jam non habeo, quod ipse ero;
n^c patrem, quia ipse ero pat^^, (...) filium, quia ipse ero filius: in q^antum
vero alterum ex his hab^re m^ oportet; alterum esse, in tantum si ^trumque
sucro, alterum non ero, dum alterum non habeo* si enim ups^ ero filius ut, q^a
and pster, sum non habeo filium, sed ipse sun filius. Non haben^o autem filium
cum ipse sum flius, quem^do pater ero? habere enim filium d^ b^n, ut pater
sini; non sum ergo silius, quia patr^n^ non habeo, qui (...) filium; (...) si
ipse sum pater, qu^ and filius, etc. H^c ^rit titum ingenium Diab^li, alterum
ex aliero ^xelua^re, dum utrumque in (...) s^b Monar^^^ae ^avore conclu^^^ns,
^entrum hale^^ (...), etc. Ibid.


For if God have a Son, the Son must be as true and real a Person as the
Father, and Father and Son must be Two distinct Persons; for the same Person
cannot be both Father and Son to himself; the very Names of Father and Son
signify, that one is of the other, and we must understand things to be what
they are called, whether Father or Son, which can no more be the same than
Night and Day, with respect to these different Relations. The Father makes the
Son, and the Son makes the Father; and those who receive these Relations from
each other, can never be these Relations to themselves, that the Father should
make himself a Son to himself, or the Son make himself a Father to himself.
This Order God has instituted in all other Beings, and he observes it himself.
A Father must of necessity have a Son, to be a Father; and a Son must have a
Father, that he may be a Son, but to have, and to be, are two things; as for
instance, for a man to be a Husband, signifies that he has a Wife, not that he
is a Wife to himself; and thus to be a Father, signifies to have a Son, not to
be a Son to himself; in such Relations we must be one, and have another; that
to be both is to be neither, because we can have neither. If I be Father and
Son to my self, I am no Father, because I have no Son, who makes a Father, but
am Son my self; and I am no Son, because I have no Father, who makes the Son,
but am Son my self; and thus while they make Father and Son one and the same
Person, they destroy the Notion both of Father and Son.

Now would any man have argued at this rate, who did not believe Father and Son
to be real and Substantial Persons, and as distinct from each other as a human
Father and Son are; for if they be not, all this reasoning from the distinct
Relations of Father and Son, which require a real distinction of Persons, is
quite lost: And whether this Argument be good, or no, (which is not the present
Enquiry) it is certain that whoever uses it, if he understands himself, must
believe, That Father and Son signify as true and real Relations, and as real
and distinct Persons in the Godhead, as they do in human Nature.

The like may be said of that other Argument against the Father and the Son
being One and the same Person, That then the same Person must, in order of
Nature, be both before and after himself; for he who begets must always in
order of Nature (though not of Time, in an Eternal Generation) be before him
who is begotten by him: That as Father, he is before himself as Son; as Son, he
is after himself as Father; which had been Iudicrous trifling, if they had not
believed a real substantial Generation of the Person, and consequently that the
Son is a real substantial Person: For this Argument will not hold in the
Generation of Modes and Postures, or in one part of the Deity generating
another.

Thus to prove the distinction of Persons between Father and Son, Non posse
unum and eundem videri, qui loquitur, and de quo loquitur, and ad quem
loquitur: quia neque perversit as, neque fallacia Deo congruat, ut ci^n ipse
esset ad quem loquebatur, ad alium potius, and non ad semetipsum loquatur.
Ibid. c. 11.
they urge all those Texts in which the Father speaks to or of the Son, and the
Son speaks to or of the Father; which are so many, and so well known, that I
need not transcribe them. And Tertullian lays it down as a certain Rule, That
he who speaks, and he to whom he speaks, and he who is spoken of, cannot be one
and the same Person; for this is such perverseness and deceit as does not
become God; that when he himself is the Person to whom he speaks, he should
speak in such a manner as if he directed his speech to another, and did not
speak to himself. And therefore when the Father says, Thou art my Son, this day
have I begotten thee. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. When
Christ tells us, That God is his Father; That he came forth from the Father,
and came into the world, and again leaves the world, and goes to the Father:
When he says, I and my Father; and I will pray the Father, (...). Ath. cont.
Gregales Sabellii.
and he shall send you Another Comforter: I, and He, and Another, must signify
Three as Real and Distinct Persons, as these words signify in common speech.

Thus they prove the distinction of Persons between Father and Son, from those
Texts which tell us, That the Father sends the Son, and the Son is sent; That
the Father anoints, and the Son is anointed; That the Father gives Commands,
and the Son receives them, and does the Will of his Father; That the Father
knows the Son, and the Son the Father; That he sees all that the Father does,
and can do all that he sees the Father do: For there must be distinct Subjects
for such different Acts; the same Person, with respect to himself, cannot with
any propriety of speech be said to send, and to be sent; to anoint, and to be
anointed; to command, and to obey; to come forth from himself, and to come into
the world, and to leave the world, and go to himself: And therefore he who
sends, and he who is sent, etc. must be Two.

Nay, it is well observed by these Fathers, That Christ himself expressly
teaches us, that He and his Father, with respect to the distinction of Persons,
are Two; so Two, as to make a Legal Testimony of Two Witnesses; 8. John 13, --
18. When the Pharisees objected against him, (...). Ath. Ibid.
That he bore Record of himself, and therefore his Record was not true: He
answers, And yet if I judge, my judgment is true, for I am not alone, but I and
my Father which sent me. It is also written in your law, That the testimony of
two men is true; I am one that bear witness of my self and my Father that sent
me bears witness of me. This is as express as words can make it. If Father
and Son were but O^e single Person, Christ could not have said, I am not alone,
but I and my Father which sent me; for one single Person is in this sense
alone, how many Names soever he has; and if he and his Father are not Two
distinct Persons, they are not Two Legal Witnesses, as Two distinct men are.

These and such like Arguments we may find in all the Ancient Writers who have
engaged in this Controversy; and from hence we learn not only what they thought
of the distinction of Persons between Father and Son, but what kind of Person
they believed the Son to be; such a Person as has a Personal Knowledge, and
Will, and Power, who is capable of being sent, of receiving and executing
Commands, and has all this as distinctly in himself, as he is a distinct
Person. The Father knows the Son, and the Son knows the Father, but each of
them know by their own Personal Knowledge; the Father wills, and the Son wills,
and wills all the same with the Father, but each of them wills by his own
Personal Will; the Father works, and the Son works, and they inseparably do the
same things, but each of them work by their own Personal Power. Knowledge, and
Will, and Power of acting, is essential to the Notion of a Person, and
therefore every distinct Person must have a distinct Personal Knowledge, and
Will, and Power; and those must acknowledge this, who prove the distinction of
Persons from distinct Personal Acts, as all these Fathers did. This is all we
ask, when we assert a distinction of Persons in the Trinity; and this we must
insist on, or deny a Trinity; for if there are not Three who have all the same
distinct Personal Acts, there cannot be Three distinct complete Persons; for
Personal Acts show a Person, and distinct Personal Acts prove distinct Persons;
and in this sense (as all these Arguments prove) the Ancient Fathers owned a
distinction of Three Persons in the Unity of the Godhead.

Their distinction between Deus invisibilis, and Deus visibilis, the invisible
and visible God, whereby they proved the real distinction between God the
Father and God the Son, is an undeniable Proof of their Opinion in this matter;
for I urge it no farther.

It was the received Opinion (as far as I can find) of all the Ancient Fathers,
till St. Austin, That God the Father never appeared in any visible
Representation of himself; for he tells Moses, No man can see my face, and
live: And St. John assures us, No man has seen God at any time, but the
only-begotten Son, Ipse enim ad humana semper colloquia descendit ab Adam usque
ad Patriarchas and Prophetas, in visione, in somnio, in speculo, in aenigmate,
ordinem suum praestruens ab initio semper, quem erat persecuturus in finem; it
a semper ediscebat and Deus in terris cum hominibus conversari, non alius
potuit quam sermo, qui caro erat futurus. Tert. adv. Prax. c. 16.
who is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him: And yet in the Old
Testament we frequently read of God's appearing to men, which they therefore
expound of God the Son, and that his Appearance in a visible Form was a
Preludium to his Incarnation.

This we may see largely proved by Tertullian and St. Hilary, and observed by
St. Athanasius; and the plain consequence they draw from it, is, That this
invisible and visible God cannot be one and the same Person; and the
consequence is so sel^-evident, that it needs no Proof; but it evidently proves
what a real, substantial, as well as distinct Person they thought the Son, who
could visibly appear, while the Father remained invisible; for as a visible and
invisible God cannot be the same Person, so a visible God must be a real
substantial Person.

And though St. Austin was of opinion, That those Three Men which appeared to
Abraham, were the Three Persons of the Sacred Trinity, and thereby rejected the
distinction of the invisible and visible God, by attributing a visible
Appearance to God the Father, which none of the Ancients had done before him;
yet by these Three distinct Appearances he confirmed the real distinction of
the Divine Persons, who were as distinct Persons as they appeared to be, and
therefore as distinct as Three Human Persons, for they appeared as Three
distinct men. And therefore he observes, That whereas Two of these Three went
to Lot in Sodom, Lot speaks to them as to One, 19. Genesis 18. And Lot said unto
them, Quid agis Lot sancte? Angelos vides, non unum, sed duos, and dicis domine
mi. Duos video, aequales video, unum rogo, nulli injuriam facio, quia patrem
and filium non divido; Sabellianus legate duos venisse, etc. Aug. de 5. Haeres.
Oh, not so, my Lord: And justifies Lot in this, That though they were two, yet
they were equal, and he would not divide the Father and Son; and urges this
against the Sabellians, who made Father and Son One Person. I do not justify
St. Austin in this, because I doubt whether the Argument be good; but by this
we may understand St. Austin's Judgment of the real distinction of Persons.

And to the same purpose the Voice from Heaven at our Savior's Baptism, This
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; and the Descent of the Holy
Spirit like a Dove, and lighting upon him, is urged by the Ancient Fathers to
prove a real Trinity of Divine Persons: Epiph. c. Noes. Haer. 57.
The Voice from the Father in Heaven, the Son on earth, and the Holy Ghost
descending like a Dove; which being Three distinct Manifestations, Audi tu
Sabelliane, audi de coelo patrem, vide in terra filium, and noli dicere, idem
pater qui silius. Aug. de quinque Haeres. cap. 6.
and all at a time, must represent the Father who spoke from Heaven, the Son
who was on Earth, and the Holy Ghost who descended like a Dove, to be Three
distinct Persons, not One single Person, which cannot speak of himself in the
Third Person, nor descend on himself in a distinct visible Appearance.

The Sabellians being unable to maintain this Point, which is so manifestly
absurd, and so irreconcilable with all the forms of speech used in Scripture
concerning Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, found it necessary to allow some
distinction between them, but yet were so afraid of Tritheism, that they kept
religiously to their main Point, that One God was but One Person, and therefore
would admit of no other distinction but what was reconcilable with the Unity of
a Person.

2. Hence, secondly, some of them taught, That the Son is distinguished from
the Father, not as one Person is distinguished from another, but as a man's
Word or Wisdom which is in his Heart and Soul, may be distinguished from
himself; that is, That the Son is not a living, substantial, subsisting Word,
no more than the Word of a Man, which is only the motion of a living subsisting
heart, but does not live and subsist it self, but being spoke it vanishes, and
being often repeated, never continues; (...). -- (...). Ath. cont. Gregal.
Sabellij.
and therefore is not another Man, nor Man of Man, nor with Man; as the Divine
Word is true and perfect God, God of God, and God with God; and therefore they
make God and his Word but One Person, as Man and his Word is One Man.

In answer to this, St. Athanasius urges all those Texts which prove Christ and
God the Father to be Two distinct Persons; for if they be Two Persons, then the
Son is as True and Real a Person as the Father is. This I have already taken
notice of, and need not now repeat it; only I cannot but observe what
Athanasius tells us of these Heretics, That when they were convinced by the
plain Evidence of Scripture, that God the Father, and Christ who called himself
the Son of God, were Two Persons, they then took Courage, and owned Christ to
be a Person, but not a Divine Person, as the Eternal Word of God, but only a
Human Person, as he was Man. But Athanasius tells them, That this was neither
better nor worse than the Heresy of Paulus Samosatenus, or what we now call
Socinianism, to make Christ a mere Man; for he can be no more, if the Divine
Word, which St. John tells us was Incarnate, be not the Person: If the Word
Incarnate be the Person, then Christ is God-Man; if the Man be the Person, he
can be no more than a Man.

This Athanasius confutes at large, and proves, That what Christ says of
himself, cannot belong to a mere Man. But that which I would observe, is this,
That both these Heretics, who denied the Divine Word to be a Person, and
Athanasius and the other Catholic Fathers who affirmed him to be a Person,
agreed very well in the Notion of a Person, viz. That a Person is a distinct,
intelligent Being, who does really and actually subsist, and subsists
distinctly from all other intelligent Beings. That the Divine Word in the
Godhead is such a Person as a Man is in Human Nature: Such a Person these
Heretics would allow Christ to be, considered as a Man; and such a Person
Athanasius affirms Christ to be, considered as God, or the Divine Word; for
otherwise they wrangle about words, and do not oppose each other.

The Fathers proved, That Christ was a Person, and a distinct Person from the
Father, by those Texts which represent him as speaking to and of his Father,
and which attribute many Personal Acts to him: The Sabellians could not deny
but that these were Personal Acts, and did prove Christ to be a real subsisting
Person; but then would not allow the Word to be the Person, but only the Man
Christ Jesus to be the Person: The Fathers, on the other hand, allow their
Notion of a Person, which is the only true intelligible Notion, but prove, That
the Divine Word which was Incarnate, not merely the Man Christ Jesus, was this
Person; and therefore that this Divine Word is a real, substantial, subsisting
Word, not like the Word of a man, which is a transient Act, but has no
subsistence of its own.

The Sabellians would have allowed a Trinity of Persons in any other Notion of
a Person, than as a Person signifies a real, subsisting, intelligent Being; but
the Catholic Fathers would own no other Notion of Person but this; and taught
that there were Three Persons in the Trinity, in the same sense in which the
Sabellians denied there were Three Persons; Three such Persons as they affirmed
there was but One; that the Son and Holy Ghost were Divine Persons, in the same
sense that the Sabellians owned the Father to be a Person; that is, Three such
Persons as they called Three Gods.

The reason of this I Am sure is not to be answered, That if the Catholic
Fathers understood what they did, when they opposed the Sabellians, who made
the Divine Word only to be the Word of a Divine Person, but not a Divine Person
himself, they must assert the Divine Word in a strict and proper sense to be a
Divine Person, and not merely the transient Word of a Person, which has no
subsistence; which is a more sensible Argument than all the Criticisms about
Persona and (...). And yet they express themselves so fully and clearly in this
matter, that there is no need of gu^ssing at their meaning.

Tertullian reduces this Dispute to this one single Question, Ergo inquis, das
aliquam substantiam esse sermonem? plane. Non vis enim eum substantivum habere
in re per substantae proprietatem, ut res and persona quaedam videri possit,
and it a capiat secundus a Deo constitutus duos officere, patrem and filium,
Deum and sermonem. Quid est enim, dices, sermo, nisi vox and sonus oris, and
sicut Grammatici tradunt, aer offensus, intelligibilis auditu, caeterum vacuum
nescio quid, and inane and incorporale. Tert. adv. Prax. c. 7.
which is the true state of it; whether the Son and Word of God, considered as
distinct from God the Father, be a Substance, and has a Subsistence of his own:
Which he expressly affirms, and offers his reasons for the Proof of it.

This he tells us is necessary to make the Word a real Being and Person, Res
and Persona, that he have a real Substance, and a Substance of his own, proper
to himself, per Substantioe proprietatem, without which he cannot be Second to
God; nor the Father and the Son, God and his Word, be Two.

Now for the Son and the Word to be a substantial Being per proprietatem
Substantioe, by a Substance proper to himself, as distinguished from God the
Father, must signify, That the Personal Substance of the Son is not the same,
but a distinct Substance from the Personal Substance of God the Father; so
distinct, that the Father and Son are Two Persons, in the same sense and notion
that the Father is One Person.

In answer to their Objection, That the Word of God was but like the Word of a
Man, which was nothing else but a Voice and Sound, a Vibration of the Air,
which conveyed some Notions to the Mind, but was it self Emptiness and Nothing,
without any Substance of its own; he answers, That God himself is the most real
and perfect Substance, and therefore whatever proceeds from (or is begotten of)
his Substance, must be a real substantial Being; At ego nihil di^o de Deo mane
and vacuum prodire potuisse, ut non de inani and vacuo prolatum, neo carere
substantia, quod de tanta substantia processit, and tantas substantias fecit,
feciz enim and ipse, quae facta sunt per ipsum: quale est ut nihil sit ipse,
sine quo nihil factum est? ut inanis solida, and vacuus plena, and incorporalis
corporalia operatus sit? Nam etsi potest aliquando quid fieri diversum cjus per
quod fit; nihil tameu potest fieri per id, quod vacuum and iname est. Ibid.

Vacua and inanis res est sermo De^, qui filius dictus est, qui ipse Deus
cogneminatus est? and sermo erat apud Deum, and Deus erat sermo.


much less can the Son and Word, who gave Being to all other Substances, be an
insubstantial Nothing himself: For tho there may be equivocal Causes, which may
produce things of a different nature from themselves, yet nothing can produce
nothing.

He argues farther, That this Word is called the Son of God, and God; The Word
was with God, and the Word was God: And that Word which is the Son of God, and
himself God, cannot be an insubstantial Nothing, unless God himself be Nothing.
If God begets a Son, he must be a substantial Person, as all Creature-Sons are,
much more the Son of God: And such a Son who is himself God, must have all the
Reality and Perfections which belong to the Notion of God.

But he argues farther, from what St. Paul tells us, That he was in the form of
God, and thought it not robbery to be equal with God. In Effigy, in the Image
of God. Now, says he, in what Image of God, was he? Certainly in another, but
not in none: Hic certe est, qui in effigy Dei constitutus, non rapinam
exiitimavie esse se aqualem Deo. In qua ^ffigie Dei? utique in alia, non tamen
in nulla.
The meaning of which is, That every Person, as a Person, has his own Personal
Image; but thus he was not the Personal Image of the Father, because he was not
the same Person with the Father; but yet if he was the Image of God, he must be
his True, Substantial, though not his Personal Image; the true living Image of
his Father's Person, but not his Person. He seems indeed in what follows, to
have entertained too gross and corporeal imaginations of the Substance and
Image of God; but this was his own Mistake, and a Mistake only in Philosophy,
not in the Traditionary Faith of the Church; for which only we allege his
Authority. And the Conclusion of this Argument most fully acquaints us what he
understood by a Person: Whatever, says he, the Substance of the Word is,
Quaecunque ergo substantia sermonis fuit, illam dico Personam, and illi nomen
filii vindico; and dum filium agnosco, secundum a Patre defendo. Ibid.
that I call a Person; and to that I give the Name of Son; and by acknowledging
him the Son, I own him to be second to the Father. Whoever reads this, must
confess, That Tertullian did believe Father and Son to be Two distinct
substantial Persons; that though the Son be of the same Substance with the
Father, as begotten of his Father's Substance, yet the Personal Substance of
the Father was no more the Personal Substance of the Son, than Father and Son
were One Person.

Novatianus, who was Cotemporary with St. Cyprian, In substantia fuit Christus
ante mundi institutionem. Nov. de Trin. c. 24.

Sermo filius natus est, qui non in ^ono percussi aeris, aut tono coactae de
visceribus vocis accipitur, sed in substantia prolatae a Deo virtutis
cognoscitur. --

Substantia scilicet illa divina, cujus nomen est verbum. Ibid. c. 30.

Deus utique procedens ex Deo secundam personam efficiens. Ibid.


though a Schismatic, was charged with no Heresy in this Article; and he
opposes the Sabellians with the same Arguments, and almost in the same words
that Tertullian and done before him: And tells us particularly, That this
Divine Word, which is the Son of God, begotten and born of him, is not a mere
Sound or Voice, like the Word of a Man, but that substantial Virtue and Power
which proceeds from God: A Divine Substance, whose Name is the Word: Such a
Word as is both the Son of God, and God: God proceeding from God, and making a
Second Person in the Godhead.

Epiphanius, in opposition to the Heresies of Noetus and Sabellius, who made
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, but One Substantial Person, affirms over and over,
That the Father is Substance, the Son Substance, and the Holy Ghost Substance,
that is, each of them Substance by himself, and as distinct in Substance as
they are in Person: Three Substantial Persons, which are not one another, nor
all the same. These Heretics allowed the Father to be Substance, the Son
Substance, the Holy Ghost Substance, but denied them to be Three in Substance,
but taught that they were but One Substance, as they were but One and the same
Person, Three Names, or Three distinct Virtues and Powers of the same One
Substance or Person. And therefore when in opposition to these men Epiphanius
asserts, That the Father is Substance, the Son Substance, and the Holy Ghost
Substance, he can mean no less but that each of them is as distinctly Substance
as he is a Person; for to oppose One Substance, and One substantial Person, you
must assert, not Three diverse or different Substances, but Three as distinct
in Substance as they are in Person, or Three distinct substantial Persons.

Epiphanius asserts against these Heretics, That the Son is not the Father,
but truly and properly a Son, begotten of God the Father, as to Substance. Now
a Son which is substantially begotten of the Father, and is not the Father,
must in Substance be distinct from God the Father, that is, a distinct, tho not
separate Substance from God the Father.

Athanasius also is very positive in this, That this Divine Word is a Perfect
Son of a Perfect Father, Being of Being, (...). Ath. cont. Sabellii Gregal.
the Image or Character of his Father's Substance, not an insubstantial Word,
but a living Power, and the Author of Life to all things; not like the Power of
a Man, which denominates a Man powerful; for the Power of Man is not his
Offspring or Son, whereas this Power of God is his Son; that the Father is
Perfect Power, as the Father of Power, and the Son Perfect Power, as born of
him. It were endless to transcribe such Sayings as these out of the Fathers;
but I cannot miss Athanasius his Argument from those words of our Savior, I am
in the Father, and the Father in me. Now, says he, the Father is not the Word
in the Heart of the Son, (...). Ibid.
and therefore neither is the Son the Word in the Heart of the Father, but the
Living Word, begotten eternally of the Living God the Father, and being without
beginning with the Father; insomuch that we cannot conceive the Father ever to
have been alone: Which attributes as complete and distinct Personal Subsistence
to the Son as to the Father: That if the Father, who has the Son in himself, be
a real, subsisting Infinite Person; the Son, who has the whole Father in
himself, must be as real, subsisting, Infinite a Person; for there is the same
reason of both.

The Answer Athanasius gives to a Sabellian Objection against the substantial
Generation and Subsistence of the Word and Son of God, is an unanswerable Proof
what he thought of this matter.

The Objection is this, That if the Word and Son be truly and substantially
begotten, this substantial Word must go out of the Father, and subsist
separately from him: (...).
Whereas the Word which is in God must be inseparable from him, and not appear
out of him; for how should he appear out of God, when God fills all places,
even Heaven and Earth, and therefore there is no place for the Word to subsist
in, where God is not?

In answer to this, Athanasius first observes what this Objection is levelled
against, viz. (...). Ath. Ibid. p. 658.
To disprove the true and proper Generation of the Son, his Eternal Procession
from the Father, and Subsistence with the Father; that the Father does not
completely and perfectly subsist by himself, nor the Son completely and
perfectly subsist by himself. This is the Faith the Sabellians opposed, and
which Athanasius defended, as the Argument it self will assure us; which
contradicts no other Notion of Generation or Subsistence, but a substantial
Generation, and a complete Personal Subsistence of the Word; but they could not
imagine how the Word should be substantially begotten, and completely and
perfectly subsist by himself in his own Person and Substance, distinct from his
Father's Subsistence and Person, without going out of the Father, and
subsisting in a separate place from the Father, as all Created Births do, which
opposes nothing but a real substantial Birth, and a complete distinct
subsistence of the Word; and therefore this is what the Sabellians took for the
Catholic Faith, and this is what Athanasius defends: Who tells them that this
is a very ignorant mistake, (...). Ibid.

(...). -- (...). Ibid.

(...) -- (...) -- (...).


to think that God is circumscribed by place, and to conceive the Son in
another place, and to imagine that the Father and Son must be divided and
separated, one in this place, and another in that, if we acknowledge that the
Son is begotten of the Father, and does appear and subsist by himself, distinct
from the Father: This he proves from Scripture; That there is no place that can
contain God, and therefore we must have no imagination of Place, when we think
of God, the Son, and the Holy Spirit; That these are false and Atheistical
Reasonings; That the Omnipresence of God is not a co-extension with all
Creatures, which is a bodily or kind of Corporeal Omnipresence; but his Power
holds and contains all things, for Power is unbodied and invisible, which
neither encompasses other things, nor is encompassed by them; and therefore it
is impious to ask for, or to conceive what is the Place of God, of the Word, or
of the Holy Spirit. And if a man will deny that the Son is or was begotten,
because he cannot conceive nor find out the place of his Essence or Substance,
for the same reason he may deny that there is a Father, or that there is a God.

So that Athanasius acknowledges the Son to be as true and substantial a Son,
as the Father is a substantial Father; and that he does as perfectly and
completely subsist by himself, as the Father does; but denies that it hence
follows, as the Sabellians objected, That the Son, if he be a distinct
substantial Person himself, must be divided and parted from the Substance of
his Father, and that if he subsist distinctly by himself, he must subsist in a
separate place from his Father; that this distinction of Persons and
Subsistence cannot be conceived without a Local Separation.

For he tells them, All these Mistakes are owing to Corporeal Imaginations;
that they conceive of God after the manner of Bodies; that because Body cannot
generate another, without parting and dividing of Substance, nor subsist
without being in some place, nor subsist distinctly without being in distinct
and separate places, therefore if God beget a Son, and this Son subsist
distinctly by himself, this Son must go out of the Divine Substance, and be
locally separated from God the Father, as a human Son is from his Father;
whereas the Divine Nature and Substance cannot be divided, nor does God subsist
in a place; and therefore the Son may be substantially begotten of the Father,
and subsist distinctly by himself, without any division of the Divine
Substance, or separation of place.

Let us now proceed to a Third sort of these Heretics, who did allow a real
and substantial difference between Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, but made God a
compound Being, but one Person, as well as one God, and that Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, were the Three Parts of this One God. This St. Austin calls
Triformis Deus; and tells us, Est alia, quae triformem sic asserit Deum, ut
quaedam pars ejus sit pater, quaedam filius, quaedam spiritus sanctus, hoc est,
quod Dei unius parts sint, quae istam faciunt Trinitatem, velut ex his tribus
partibus compleatur Deus, nec sit perfectus in seipso, vel pater, vel filius,
vel spiritus sanctus. Aug. de Haeres. ad quod vult. Deum. Haeres. 74.
That these Heretics did not allow the Father to be Perfect in himself, nor
the Son Perfect in himself, nor the Holy Ghost Perfect in himself; that neither
of these considered by themselves were Perfect God, but that all Three together
made one Complete and Perfect God.

This all the Catholic Fathers unanimously reject, and for the same reasons;
because there can be no composition in the pure and simple Nature of God; and
it was the received Doctrine of the Catholic Church, That each Person is by
himself True and Perfect God, not an incomplete Part of the Deity.

Thus Athanasius warns us against this Heresy, (...). --

(...). Athan. con. Greg. Sab. p. 661.

(...). -- (...). Ibid. p. 662.


which conceives the Trinity like Three Bodily Parts, inseparably united to
each other; which, he says, is an ungodly reasoning, contrary to the Nature of
Perfect Unbodied Beings; and therefore attributes the Perfection of the Godhead
to each Person, who are a real Trinity, inseparably united in the same Form and
Nature. That the Father is Perfect Essence and Being, without any defect, the
Root and Fountain of the Son and Spirit: That the Son in the Fullness of the
Deity is the Living Word, and Perfect Offspring of the Father: That the Spirit
is the Fullness of the Son, not Part of another Being, but Whole and Entire in
himself: That we must conceive them inseparably united to each other, but yet
Three real subsisting Persons in the same Form and Species, which is originally
in the Father, shines in the Son, and is manifested by the Holy Spirit. And
therefore he adds, That he did not compound the Trinity, nor force it into a
Monad or Unit (that is, One single Person) to preserve the Unity of the
Godhead; nor conceive of God as of a Man, who is compounded of Three Parts,
Spirit, Soul, and Body; for such a composition cannot belong to a simple Nature.

This is the constant language of the ancient Writers, (...). Damasc. Orth.
Fidei. l. 1. c. 10.
That the Divine Nature is not compounded of Parts, nor is God a compound
Being; that each Person in the Trinity is a complete and perfect Person, and
Three complete and perfect Persons cannot be One by Composition, as Three
incomplete Parts are: that each Person by himself is perfect God and perfect
Essence, though when we unite them and number Three, we acknowledge but One
perfect God: for the Deity is not compounded but in Three, (...). Id. ib. c. 13
each of which is complete and perfect, there is One perfect Being, without
Composition, and without Parts; that is, the same One Divine Nature subsisting
distinctly, not by Parts or Composition, but Whole and Entire in Three.

Let us now then consider the true state of the Question between these
Sabellians, and the Catholic Fathers: These Heretics owned at last, Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, to be Three distinct Substances, but not Three substantial
Wholes, but Three substantial Parts, which by their Union and Composition made
up One whole entire God. The Catholic Fathers join with them so far, as to own
these Divine Persons to be Three substantial subsisting Persons, but reject
their Notion of a compounded God, or Three Parts of the Deity, with the utmost
abhorrence, and affirm, that each Person is by himself entire and perfect God,
perfect and complete Divine Essence or Substance, (...), as Damascen speaks;
and that they are not One God by Composition, or as One Person is One God, but
as Three complete and perfect Persons, each of which is perfect God, can be One
God.

Now I think after this we need not dispute, what the Metaphysical Notions of
Person and Personality are: for a Person in this Sacred Mystery, signifies One
who is true and perfect God, and therefore is whatever God is; for the true and
perfect definition of God, must belong to every Person who is true and perfect
God. If then we acknowledge God to be Infinite Substance, Mind, Life,
Knowledge, Power, every Person who is God must be all this; and if each Person
be true and perfect God, and yet no One Person is the other, nor the Motion,
Affection, or personal Power, nor part of the other, then each Person is
distinctly and by himself complete and perfect God, and therefore has
distinctly in himself all those Attributes and Perfections which belong to the
perfect Notion and Idea of God; and to make any Person less than what God is,
is to make him no God.

But Athanasius has another Argument against the Sabellian compounded Deity,
(...); Ath. contr. Gregal. Sabell. p. 662.
which must put all Compositions of the Deity for ever out of countenance. The
Scripture assures us, that God sends his Son, and that the Son sends the Holy
Ghost; whereas were the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Three inseparable Parts of
one compounded Deity, how could this One God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, send
part of himself, and one part of the same One God send another?

To send, and to be sent, necessarily supposes Persons really and substantially
distinct, such as can give and receive, and execute Commands, who have distinct
Understandings, Wills, and Powers of Action, for no other Beings are capable of
sending or being sent; and Three such distinct Persons, each of which is
complete and perfect God, is the Trinity asserted by the Catholic Fathers, in
contradiction to the Heresy of Sabellius.

But there is one very good Rule of Athanasius, (...). -- Ibid. 658.
which is worth observing in this Controversy, That we must not imagine to find
the Unity of the Godhead by denying Three, but we must find this Unity, or
Monade, in Three. The Sabellians took the first way to secure the Catholic
Faith of One God, they denied Three real, distinct, substantial Persons in the
Godhead; but the Catholic Faith owns Three real, distinct, substantial, divine
Persons, and teaches that these Three are One God; not with such an Unity as
belongs to One Person, but as Three Persons are One God: which should be a
warning to some late Writers, who think they cannot sufficiently defend the
Unity of God, without opposing a real and substantial Trinity, which is to
oppose the ancient Catholic Faith.

To conclude this Chapter, the result of the whole in short is this, That in
opposition to the Noetians, who made Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to be only
Three Names of the same One Divine Person, whom we call God, the Catholic
Fathers asserted that they were Three distinct Persons, not the same Person
under Three Names, or Three Appearances; in opposition to those Sabellians, who
denied the Substantiality of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, but made the Son
like the Word in the mind or heart of man, which had no substantial, permanent
Subsistence of its own, and the Holy Ghost in like manner to be a transient
efflux of Power from God; so that God the Father was the only subsisting
Person, and the One God, but the Son, and the Holy Ghost, the insubstantial,
transient Word and Power of God. These ancient Fathers in like manner asserted
the Substantiality of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, that they were real,
distinct, subsisting Persons, as true and perfect Persons as the Father himself
is: in opposition to those Sabellians who asserted a compound Deity, and made a
Trinity of Parts, instead of a Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the Godhead;
they unanimously rejected all composition in the Deity, and asserted each
Person distinctly by himself, not to be a part of God, but true and perfect God.

Now had these Fathers asserted nothing positively concerning the Three Divine
Persons, but only rejected these Noetian and Sabellian Heresies, it had been
evidence enough what their Faith was concerning the Ever-blessed Trinity; for
remove these Heresies, and all such as are manifestly the same, however they
may differ in words, and there is nothing left for any man to believe
concerning a Divine Trinity, but the true Catholic Faith of Three real,
distinct, substantial, Divine Persons, each of which is distinctly, and by
himself complete, entire, perfect God* For if Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are
not one and the same Person, distinguished only by Three Names, according to
their different Appearances and Operations; nor one single Person with two
personal Virtues and Powers, called the Son, and the Spirit, like the word and
emotion in a man's heart, which is no person, and has no subsistence of its
own; nor three parts of one compounded Deity, as a man is compounded of Body,
Soul, and Spirit, then of necessity Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, must be Three
complete, substantial, subsisting Persons, Thr^^ such Persons as the Sabellians
would allow but One: f^^ ^f they ^e not the same, nor affections and motions of
the ^ame, nor parts of the same, there is nothing left but to own them Three
completely and perfectly subsisting Person.

If God be One, not in the Sabellian ^otion of Singularity, as One God
signifies One single Person; but O^e in Three, without parts or composition, as
the Father asserted against Sabellius, then each Person must be by himself
complete and perfect God; for God cannot be One in Three Persons, unless each
Person be perfect God; for unless this One God be perfect God in each Person,
he cannot be perfectly One in Three. If the Unity of God be not the Unity of a
Person, it must be the Unity and Sameness of Nature, and the inseparable Union
of Persons; and this is the Unity in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, which the
Catholic Fathers taught, and which is the only thing they could reasonably
teach, when they had rejected the Sabellian Unity. There is no medium that I
know of in this Controversy concerning the Unity of God, between the Unity of
One single Person, and that Oneness which results from the Unity, and the
Consubstantiality of Nature, and inseparable Union of Persons; and therefore if
the first be Heresy, the second must be the Catholic Faith; and whatever
Notions men advance against this, is Sabellianism in its Principle, and last
result: for if the Unity of God be not the Union of Three complete Divine
Persons, each of which is distinctly by himself perfect God, it must be the
Unity of One Divine Person, which is the Sabellian Unity.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the Homoousion, or One Substance of Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost.
IN the last Chapter I have plainly shown what Sabellianism is, and by what
Arguments the Catholic Fathers opposed and confuted it, which is proof enough
what they meant by Person, when in opposition to Sabellius, they taught that
there were Three Persons in the Unity of the Godhead; not Three personal
Characters and Relations, which Sabellius owned, but Three true and proper
Persons, each of whom is by himself true and perfect God.

But yet the Nicene Faith of the Homocusion, or One Substance of Father and
Son, is so expounded by some, as to countenance the Sabellian Heresy, which all
the Nicene Fathers condemned, though one would think that should be an
unanswerable Objection against it; this has made it so absolutely necessary to
the Vindication of the Catholic Faith, and to compose some warm Disputes,
rightly to understand this matter, that I shall carefully inquire what the
Nicene Fathers meant by these terms of the Homoousion, and One Substance, which
they have put into their Creed, as the most express opposition to the Arian
Heresy.

And we cannot long doubt of this, if we consider the true state of the Arian
Controversy: There was no Dispute between the Arians and Catholics concerning
the Personality of the Son; they both condemned Sabellius, and therefore One
Substance, when opposed to the Arians, cannot signify a Sabellian Unity.

The Arians and Sabellians both agreed in this, That One God is but One Divine
Person, who is truly and properly God; and that to assert Three Persons, each
of which is true and perfect God, is to make Three Gods. The Sabellians, to
avoid this Tritheism, make Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, but One Divine Person,
and in that sense but One God. The Arians on the other hand, allow Father and
Son to be two real distinct Persons, but attribute true and perfect Divinity
only to the Father, and make the Son a Creature, though the most excellent
Creature, made before the World, and as like to God as any Creature can be, and
the Minister of God in making the World.

This Heresy was condemned by the first general Council assembled at Nice; and
if we would understand the Nicene Creed, we must expound it in opposition to
the Arian Heresy, without running into the other Extreme of Sabellianism. And
therefore when we are taught to believe in One Lord Jesus Christ, the Only
begotten Son of God, begotten of his Father before all Worlds, God of God,
Light of Light, Very God of very God, begotten, not made, being of One
Substance with the Father, by whom all things were made; Wemust understand a
Son, who is a distinct Person from his Father, as the Arians allowed him to be,
but not a made or created Son, as they taught, but a Son by Nature, begotten of
his Father's substance, and that not in Time, but from all Eternity; and
therefore not a Creature, but God by Nature, true and perfect God, as God of
God, begotten of God, and therefore of One Substance with the Father; not in
the Sabellian sense, as One Substance is One Person, but as One Substance
signifies the same Nature, in opposition to the Arians, who made him not only a
distinct Person, but of a different Nature, like his Father, but not the same;
not of the substance of his Father, but a new created Substance, made out of
nothing, as all other Creatures are. The opposition of this Creed to the Arian
Heresy is certainly the best way of expounding it, and then we find nothing in
it, but the true ancient Catholic Faith, of the real distinction of Persons in
the Unity of the Divine Essence. But the present Inquiry is, What is the true
Notion of the Homousion, or One Substance of Father and Son; and besides that
positive account the Fathers give us of it, we may learn this from those false
Glosses and Interpretations which they reject, and those Rules they give for
the expounding these words.

SECT. I. The true Sense of the Homoousion, from those Misrepresentations which
were made of it, and the Answers which were given by the Nicene Fathers to such
Objections.
1. FIrst then, Let us consider what Misrepresentations were made of this
disputed word Consubstantial, by the Enemies of the Catholic Faith, and what
Answers the Fathers gave to such Objections. St. Hilary mentions three in the
beginning of his 4th Book of the Trinity; and I shall consider them in the
Order in which he sets them down.

1. The first is, that this word Homoousion, Quin etiam id adjiciunt, cum unius
substantiae patrem and filium esse audiunt, ab anterioribus episcopis esse
praedicatum, ut id subtiliter per speciem haereticae opinionis infirment;
dicentes eos verbi hujus significationem, id est, unius substantiae, quod grace
dicitur homoousion, hoc sensu usurpare atque eloqui, tanquam ipse sit pater qui
and filius, ex infinitate videlicet sua protenlus in virginem, ex qua corpus
assumens sibi, in to corpore quod assumpsit filii nomen addiderit; and haec
quidem de Hill. de Trin. l. 4.


or Consubstantial, is no better than Sabellianism; that it makes the Father
and the Son to be but One, by One singular Substance, which being Infinite,
extended it self into the Virgin's Womb, and taking a Body of her, in that Body
took the Name of Son; and thus they say some former Bishops understood it, and
is therefore to be rejected as Heretical; which, as he adds, is the first
misrepresentation of the Homoousion.

Thus he observes in his Book de Synodis, Secundo id quodque addidistis, quod
Patres nostri, cum Paulus Samosatenus hareticus pronunciatus est, etiam
homoousion repudiaverint, quia per hanc untus essentiae nuncupationem,
solitarium atque unicum sibi esse Patrcem and Filium praedicabat, and hoc same
nunc quoque prophanissimum Ecclesia recognoscit, Patrem and Filium in his
nominum professionibus ad unionis and singularis solitudinem negat^ personarum
proprietate revocare. Hilar. de Synod. prope finem.


that the Fathers in the Council of Antioch, which condemned Paulus
Samosatenus, did also reject the Homoousion, because Paulus thereby understood
the singularity of the Divine Nature and Substance, which destroys the real
personal distinction between Father and Son; and adds, that the Church, though
it retained the word Homoousion, still rejects that sense of it as profane. The
Learned Dr. Bull, notwithstanding St. Hilary's Authority, cannot believe that
either Paulus or Sabellius did upon choice own the Homoousion, but only put a
forced and unnatural sense of it, Bull. Defens. Fidei Nicaenae. p. 52.
to favor their Heresies; and seems to have very good reason on his side; but
that is not the present question, How perversely soever Heretics understood
this word, the Nicene Fathers rejected this sense as profane and heretical. Now
if One Substance does not signify One singular Substance in the Sabellian
Notion of it, which leaves only a Trinity of Names or Modes, instead of a
Trinity of Persons, then Three consubstantial Persons must signisy Three
substantial Persons, who have the same Nature and Essence, but not the same
singular Substance. And St. Basil tells us, (...). Basil. ep. 300.
that this is the proper acceptance of the word Homoousion, which is directly
opposed to the Sabellian as well as to the Arian Heresy, as it destroys the
Identity of Hypostasis, and gives us a complete and perfect Notion of distinct
Persons; for the same thing is not consubstantial to it self, but to another;
that there must be another, and another, to make two that are consubstantial.

Another Objection against the Homoousion was this, Sequens illa est, quod
affirment id enuntiationem homoousii significare, quod rei anterioris and
alterius communio sit duobus, and tanquam prior substantia vel usia materiae
alicujus exciterit, quae participata duobus, and in utroque consumpta, utrumque
illam and nature anterioris, and rei esse testetur unius. Atque ideirco
improbare se homoousii aiunt confessionem, quod enuntiatio ejus neque Filium a
Patre distinguat, and posteriorem Patrem materia, quae sibi cum Filio sit
communis, oftendat. Hill. de Trin lib. 4. initio.


That to be consubstantial, or of One Substance, signifies the communion of Two
in some other thing, which is in order of Nature before them both; as if there
were some prior Substance or Matter, of which they both did partake so as to
have the whole Substance between them; which makes them consubstantial, or of
one Substance both partaking of the same Being, Nature, or Substance, which was
before them both; De homoousio vero, quod est unius essentiae tractantes,
primum idcirco respuendum pronuntiastis, quia per verbi hujus enunciationem
substantia prior intelligeretur, quam duo inter se partiti essent -- prophanus
hic sensus est, and communi judicio ab ecclesiae respuendus. Hill. de Synod


and therefore they rejected the Homoousion, because it did not preserve the
relation between the Son and the Father, and made the Father later than that
Substance or Matter, which is common to him with the Son. This also St. Hilary
tells us the Church rejects and abominates; Quis enim sanae mentis tertiam
substantiam, que and Patri and Filio communis sit, praedicabit.


for nothing can so much as in thought be before the Substance of the Father;
Non hic sanctissima religiosorum virorum synodus, nescio quam priorem, quae in
duos divisa sit, substantiam introducat, sed Filium natum de substantia Patris.
Ibid.


and the relation between Father and Son signifies to beget, and to be
begotten, not to be both made of the same Substance.

Tertio quoque hanc improbandi homoousti causam commimscuntur, quod secundum
verbi hujus significationem, ex divisione Paternae substantiae esse Filius
existimetur, tanquam desectus ex co fuerit, ita ut in duos sit res una divisa:
and ideo substantiae dicantur unius, quia portio desecta de toto, in natura ca
sit unde desecta est. Hill. de Trin. lib 4.


A third Reason they assigned against this word Homoousion was this, That to be
Consubstantial, or of One Substance, in the strict and proper acceptance of
these words, signifies, that the generation of the Son, is by the division of
the Father's Substance, as if he were cut out of him, and One Substance divided
into Two Persons, and so Father and Son are of One Substance, as a part cut out
of the whole, is of the same nature with that from whence it is taken.

This was objected against the Homoousion in the time of the Nicene Council,
while this word was under debate, which Socrates gives a more particular
account of. The reason those Bishops, who refused to subscribe to the Nicene
Faith, gave against the Homoousion, was this, (...) -- Socrates H. E. lib. 1.
c. 8.
That that only can be said to be Consubstantial, which is of another, either
by division, or by efflux and emanation, or by prolation or eruption: by
eruption, as the branches sprout out of the root; by efflux, according to the
manner of human generations; by division, as the same mass of Gold may be
divided into two or three golden Cups; but the Son is of the Father neither of
these ways, and therefore they rejected this Faith, and ridiculed the
Homoousion.

For this very reason Eusebius of Caesarea was for some time in suspense about
the Homoousion, Eusebii Epist. ad Caesariensis apud Socrat. Ibid
which he afterward readily received, when the Council had declared in what
sense they understood it, and rejected all corporeal passions, all division and
partition, change and diminution of the Divine Essence; which pure, simple,
unbodied, eternal, unchangeable Mind is not capable of. Now all that I shall
observe at present is, That this very Objection, which was thought so
formidable, necessarily supposes that both they who made it, and they who were
so much concerned to answer it, did acknowledge a substantial generation of the
Son; for this whole Dispute is downright Nonsense without it: If God the Father
in begetting his Son, does not so communicate his own Nature and Substance to
him, as to make him a true substantial Son, of the same Substance indeed, but
yet as distinct in Substance from the Father, as he is in Person, How
ridiculous is all this Dispute, how the Father communicates his own Nature to
his Son? for according to these men, he does not communicate or propagate his
own Nature and Substance at all, there being but one singular solitary Divine
Nature and Substance, with a Trinity of Names, Modes, or Offices, and therefore
no danger of any division or partition of the Divine Substance.

The Dispute between the Catholics and the Arians about the generation of the
Son was this: They both owned against the Sabellians, that the Son is a real,
substantial, subsisting Person; but the Question was, whence he had his Nature?
whether he was created out of Nothing, and consequently had a beginning of
Being, as the Arians affirmed; or was (...), of the Substance of his Father,
and so coeternal with his Father, as the Nicene Council affirmed, That the
Substance of the Son was of the Substance of the Father, God of God, Light of
Light. Against this the Arians objected, That the Son could not be of the
Substance of the Father, without the division of the Father's Substance, which
is impossible in an infinite uncreated Spirit, as God is; which Argument is
only against a substantial generation. The Nicene Fathers allow this Objection
to be good as to corporeal generations, but deny that it is thus as to the
Eternal Generation of the Son of God; for an Eternal, Uncreated, Immutable
Mind, if it can communicate its own Nature at all, (and we learn from
Scripture, that God has a Son) must do it without division of parts; for the
Divine Nature and Substance has no parts, and is capable of no division: And it
is very absurd to reason from corporeal Passions, to the Affections and
Operations of Spirits, much more of an infinite eternal Spirit.

Had not the Arians understood the Catholic Fathers, of the substantial
Generation of the Son, they had more wit than to urge an Argument to no
purpose; for where there is no communication of Substance, it is certain there
can be no division of it: And had not the Catholic Fathers owned this
substantial Generation, they would have rejected the Argument with scorn, as
nothing to the purpose, and not have distinguished between corporeal
generations, and the Generation of Eternal and Infinite Mind. That though
Bodies cannot communicate their own Nature and Substance without division, yet
an Eternal Mind can; so that from these perverse Interpretations of the
Homoousion, which the Catholic Fathers rejected, we may learn what they meant
by it: for if Father and Son are not Consubstantial in the sense of the
Sabellians and Modalists; that is, that Father and Son are not One Person with
Two Names, nor One singular solitary Substance common to them both, then the
Father must be a substantial Father, and the Son a substantial Son, and these
Two substantial Persons are Consubstantial, as having the same One Divine
Nature and Substance entirely, perfectly and distinctly in themselves, without
any division, diminution, or separation of Substance, by a complete and perfect
Generation, whereby the Father communicates his whole entire Nature to the Son
without any change or alteration in himself.

SECT. II. Some Rules for expounding the Homoousion; and in what Sense the
Fathers understood it.
SEcondly, Let us now examine what account the Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers
give of the Homoousion, and in what sense they understood it. But before I tell
you what they expressly say of this matter, I shall observe by the way two or
three Rules they give us for expounding the Homoousion, which are of great use
in this Enquiry.

1. The first is, To give the Homoousion the right place in our Creed, as the
Nicene Fathers have done. They do not tell us abruptly, in the first place,
That the Son is consubstantial, or of one Substance with the Father. They first
tell us, That Jesus Christ our Lord is the only-begotten Son of God, begotten
of his Father, that is, of the Substance of his Father, before all Worlds, God
of God, Light of Light, Very God of Very God, Begotten, not made; and then they
add, Of One Substance with the Father.

This St. Hilary lays great stress on, and his Reason is very considerable; In
his igitur tot tamque gravibus fidei periculis, verborum brevitas temperanda
est, ne impie dici existimetur, quod pic intelligitur: ne secura atque
innocente conscientia, per occasionem haereticorum reus sermo sit, dicturus
unam substantiam Catholicus Patris and Filii, non inde incipiat; neque hoc
quasi maximum teneat, tanquam sine hoc vera fides nulla sit. Hilar. de Synodis.


because if in the first place we say, Father and Son are consubstantial, or of
One Substance, this is capable of an Heretical as well as Orthodox Sense, as we
have already heard; for they may be One Substance in the Sabellian Notion, as
that signifies One Person; or One by the Division or Partition of the same
Substance, of which each has a part; for all these perverse Senses may be
affixed to it, when this word Consubstantial, or One Substance, stands singly
by it self, or is put in the first place, without any thing to limit or
determine its signification. And therefore a true Catholic Christian must not
begin his Creed with saying, That Father and Son are of One Substance; Unam
substantiam dicet, cum ante dixerit, pater ingenitus est, filius natus est,
subsistit ex Patre, Patri similis est, virtute, honor, natura, etc.

Et post haec unam substantiam patris and filii decendo, non errat, at unam
substantiam negando, jam peccat.

Nemo unam substantiam brevi and nudo sermon putet praedicandam: ut possit
religiose deci, una esse substantia.

Nihil solitarium ex divinis sacramentis ad suspicionem audientium, and ad
occasionem blasphemantium proferamus. Ante nativitas filii, ante subjectio,
ante similitudo naturae praedicanda est, ut non impie unius and Pater and
Filius substantiae praedicetur. Ibid.


but then he may safely say One Substance, when he has first said, The Father
is unbegotten, the Son is born, and subsists of his Father, like to his Father
in all Perfections, Honor, and Nature; not of nothing, but born; not unborn,
but coaeval; not the Father, but the Son of the Father; not a Part of the
Father, but All that the Father is; not the Author, but the Image, the Image of
God, begotten of God, and born God; not a Creature, but God; not Another God,
of a different Kind and Substance, but One God, as having the same Essence and
Nature, which differs in nothing from the Substance of the Father; that God is
One, not in Person, but Nature, Father and Son having nothing unlike, or of a
different kind in them: And after this we may safely add, That Father and Son
are One Substance, and cannot deny it without Sin.

This is as plain as words can make it, and needs no Comment, but fixes and
determines the Catholic Sense of the Homoousion. For if we must acknowledge
the Son to be consubstantial, or of one Substance with the Father, in no other
sense than as a True and Real Son is consubstantial, a Son, not created out of
Nothing, but begotten of his Fathers Substance; the Son of God, who in his own
proper Person is true and perfect God; not a part of God, but all that God is;
not One God, as One Person with the Father, but as having the true Divine
Nature distinctly in his own Person. This is a Demonstration that the Nicene
Consubstantiality, is the Consubstantiality of Two real substantial Persons,
who have the same Nature distinctly subsisting in each of them.

2 Another Rule for expounding the Homoousion is, that (...) and (...), are
equipollent terms; that to be of one Substance, and to be in all things alike
to each other, signify the same thing. I know the Fathers condemned the Arian
Homoiousion; for they asserted, That the Son was like the Father, in opposition
to his being of the same Nature with the Father, and therefore this was an
imperfect likeness and resemblance, or indeed no likeness at all; for a created
and uncreated Nature are at such an infinite distance, as to have no true and
real likeness to each other; to be sure not such a likeness as there must be
between a Son and a Father: Nay sometimes they would not allow, that likeness
can be properly applied to two individual Natures of the same species, as to
two individual human Natures, which are not like to each other, but are the
same. But yet whether it was proper or improper, (...) and (...), to be upon
all accounts, and every way perfectly alike, was allowed to be very Orthodox;
and therefore St. Hilary in his Book de Synodis, approves several Oriental
Creeds as very Orthodox, though they left out the Homoousion, because they in
the most express terms confessed the perfect likeness and similitude of Nature
between Father and Son; Si ergo naturam neque aliam, neque dissimilem ci, quem
impassibiliter generabat, dedit, uon potest aliam dedisse, nisi propriam; ita
similitudo proprietas est, proprietas aequalitas est, and aequalitas nihil
differt; qui autem nihil differunt, unum sunt; non unione personae, sed
aequalicate a^^urae. Hill. de Synod.
which they guarded with the utmost Caution, against the perverse
Interpretations both of the Sabellian and Arian Heretics. And he disputes at
large, That perfect similitude is a sameness and equality of Nature; and calls
God to witness, that before he ever heard of those words Homoousion, and
Homoiousion, Testor Dominum coeli atque terra me cum neutrum audissem, semper
tamen utrumque sensisse, quod per homaeusion homousion eperteret intelligi; id
est, nihil simile sibi secundum naturam esse posse, nisi quod esset ex cadem
natura.

Fidem Nicaenam nunquam nisi exulaturus audivi, sed mihi homousii and homaeusii
intelligentiam Evangelia and Apostoli intimaverunt. Ib. in fine.

Religiose unam substantiam praedicamus, dummodo unam substantiam proprietatis
similitudinem intelligamus, ut quod unum sunt, non singularem significet, sed
aequales. Aequalitatem dico, id est, indifferentiam similitudinis, ut
similitudo habeatur aequalitas. Aequalitas vero unum idcirco dicitur esse, quod
par sit, unum vero in quo par significatur, non ad unicum vindicetur. --

Credamus and dicamus esse unam substantiam, sed per naturae proprietatem, non
ad significationem impiae unionis. Una sit ex similitudine non ex solitudine.
Hilar. de Synod.

Ita similitudinis aequalitas nec solitudinem habet, nec diversitatem, quia
omnis aequalitas nec diversa nec sola sit. Idem l. 7. de Trin.


he always thought that what is signified by both these words, is the same:
that perfect likeness of Nature is the sameness of Nature; for nothing can be
perfectly alike, which has not the same Nature. And this he says he learnt from
the Evangelists and Apostles, before ever he heard of the Nicene Faith, which
he had not heard of till a little before he was banished for that Faith. This
observation is of great use, as St. Hilary notes, to confute Sabellianism, and
to fix the true sense of the Homoousion: for if to be Consubstantial, or of one
Nature, signifies a perfect likeness, similitude, and equality of Nature,
Consubstantiality must at least signify Two, who are thus consubstantial, as
likeness, similitude and equality does; and these Two must have One and the
same Nature, not in the sense of Singularity, and Sabellian Unity, but of
likeness and similitude: that Father and Son are One Substance, not as One
Person is One with himself, but as Two Persons are One by a perfect likeness
and similitude of Nature, which must be the true meaning of Consubstantial, if
Consubstantiality and likeness of Nature be the same.

3. I observe farther, That the Catholic Fathers did not make the Homoousion
the Rule of Faith, that whatever sense some critical Wits can put on it, must
therefore be owned for the Catholic Faith; but they chose it as the most
comprehensive word, to comprize the true Catholic Faith, and to detect the
Frauds of Heretics. They taught no new Faith by this word, but what the
Catholic Church had always taught, but secured the Faith by it against the
shifts and evasions of H^reticks. This is the defense they made to the Arian
Objection, That it was an unscriptural word; they confessed the word Homoousios
was not to be found in Scripture, but the Faith expressed by that word was:
Deus qued est genuit, ejusdem substantiae, ejusdem essentiae, sine tempore,
sibi coaeternum genuit -- Hanc Dei Trinitatis substantiam unam homusion verbo
Graeci complecti breviter maluerunt. Non enim nomen est, sed res terribilis est
in verbo hujusmodi sonaus. Quod verbum aperte ipse Fili^s declarat, cum dicit,
ego and Pater unum sumus. In isto uno consistit substantia una. -- Contra hoc
pugnetur, quod possidet, quod habet, quod docet verbum Graecum, non contra
ipsum verbum, quod auribus retinuit syllabis articulatum. Contra divitio^s,
contra aequalitatem naturae, quod possidet verbum, etc. Altercatio inter Aug.
and Pascentium. To. 2.
Thus St. Austin answers Pascentius, and tells us, That Christ himself has
taught us the Homoousion, where he says, I am in the Father, and the Father in
me; and I and my Father are One; and expounds this of the Unity, Dignity, and
Equality of Nature: And adds, That it is not the word, but the thing signified
by that word, which is so terrible to Heretics; and if they would dispute to
purpose, they must not reject the word, but the doctrine it contains. And thus
Laurentius, who presided in that Dispute, gives judgment in this Controversy,
Nec esse nomen fidei homusion, sed aequalitatem magis ipsius Trinitatis --
Laurentius vir clarissimus dixit, sic ergo and homusion quod in dubium veniebat
te proponente, and si scriptum non est, res ipsa tamen, quae latet in verbo,
vera est. Credatur honorifice Unitati, ne fiat injuria Tranitati. Ibid.
That the Homoousion was not the Name of the Christian Faith, but signified the
Equality of the Trinity; and that though this word be not in Scripture, yet the
thing signified by it is true; and we must believe honorably of the Unity,
lest we injure the Trinity.

We may find enough to this purpose in Athanasius, De Decret. Syn. Nic. and
elsewhere, of which more presently. And therefore St. Hilary, in his Book de
Synodis, which he wrote to some Catholic Bishops, who were very Orthodox in
the Faith, and yet doubted of this word Homoousion, tells them, Displicet
cuiquam in Synodo Nicaena homousion esse susceptum? Hoc si cui displicet,
necesse est placeat quod ab Arianis est negatum. Negatum enim idcirco est
homousion, ne ex substantia Dei Patris Deus Filius natus, sed secundum
Creaturas ex nihilo conditus praedicaretur -- Hilar. de Synod. prope finem.
That they are to consider what the Synod intended by that word, and not reject
the word, unless they rejected the Faith taught by it, and would profess those
Arian Doctrines, which the Council condemned in it.

This is the constant language of the Nicene and Post Nicene Fathers, when the
Dispute is concerning the use of this word, which gives us this certain Rule
for expounding the Homoousion, that we must understand it in no other sense
than what the Nicene Fathers intended by it; for if we do, we may acknowledge
the Homoousion, and yet deny the Nicene Faith. What they taught by this word,
that we must own; and what they rejected by it, we must reject. And though we
may fancy that this word signifies more than what the Nicene Fathers understood
by it, (as we have heard what perverse Senses the Heretics fixed on it) yet it
being not a Scriptural, but an Ecclesiastical word, it must be expounded to
that Sense, and no other, which placed it in the Creed.

SECT. III What the Nicene Fathers meant by the Homoousion.
AND this brings me to a more particular Account of the Homoousion, and what
the Nicene Fathers understood by it.

Eusebius Pamphili, who at first doubted about the (...) and the (...), that
Christ was of the substance of the Father, and consubstantial, or of One
Substance with him; gives an account to his Coesareans of the Reasons which
moved him afterward to subscribe to that Form of Faith; as appears by his
Letter to them, recorded in Socrates his Ecclesiastical History. He tells them,
That he did not admit these words without due examination; but when he found
there was nothing meant by them, but what was truly Catholic and Orthodox, he
complied for Peace sake. (...). Socr. H. E. l. 1. c. 8.
For by the Son's being of his Father's Substance, they meant no more than that
he was of the Father, not as a part of the Father, or of his Substance; and
when the Son is said to be consubstantial with the Father, they did not
understand this after the manner of Bodies by division, (...). Ibid.

(...). Ath. de Decr. Syn. Nicaenae. p. 267.


abscission, or any change of the Father's Substance; but the only meaning is,
That the Son has nothing like a created Nature, but is in every respect
perfectly like his Father, as not being of any other Substance or Nature, but
of the Father.

Athanasius gives us a very particular account what it was that forced the
Nicene Fathers to add those two words to their Creed, (...) and (...), that the
Son is of the Substance of the Father, and Consubstantial, or of One Substance
with the Father; which was to cut off all Evasions and Subterfuges from the
Arian Heretics, and to force them to confess the Truth, or to confess their
Heresy, which they endeavored to palliate and conceal under ambiguous words.

When the Nicene Fathers taught, That the Son is of the Father, (...). -- (...).

(...). Ibid.


the Arians were contented to allow this, but meant no more by it, but that the
Son is of the Father, as all other Creatures are of God; and therefore they
added, That the Son is of the Substance of God, to distinguish him from all
Creatures; and this is the true interpretation of that Phrase, That the Son is
of the Substance of the Father, that he is no Creature.

Thus when the Fathers taught, That the Word was the true Power and Image of
the Father in all things, and invariably like the Father, (...), the Arians
owned this also in a qualified sense, because Creatures are said to be the
Power, the Image, (...). Ibid. p. 269.
the Likeness of God, and therefore they were forced to express the sense of
Scripture, and what sense they understood the Scripture in, concerning the
Son's being the Likeness and Image of God, by adding, that the Son is
Consubstantial, or of One Substance with the Father, to declare that the Son is
not so of the Father as merely to be like him, (...). Ibid.
but to be the very same in likeness and similitude to the Father; and to be
inseparably united to his Father's Substance, and that he and the Father are
One, as he himself has said. The Word is always in the Father, and the Father
in the Word, like the light and its splendour; and this the word Homocusios
signifies, and was used by the Council to this very end, to distinguish and
separate the Word from all created Nature, as appears from the Anathema they
immediately denounce against those who said, That the Son of God was produced
out of nothing, (...). Ibid.
was a Creature, of a mutable Nature, the Workmanship of God, or of any other
Substance but the Substance of the Father: And therefore he adds, That those
that dislike these words, ought to consider the sense in which the Synod uses
them, and to anathematize what the Synod anathematizes; and then if they can,
let them quarrel with the words; though he is very confident that no man who
owns the sense of the Council, and understands the words in their sense, can
dislike the words. From whence it appears, that Athanasius would have allowed
those for Orthodox Christians (as I observed before St. Hilary did) who should
confess the Eternal Generation of the Son, that there was no time before he
was, and that he had no beginning of Being; that he is no Creature, nor of any
other Substance, but only of the Father, and that he always was inseparably
united to him, and one with him, though they should have boggled at those
words, That the Son is of the Substance of the Father, and consubstantial with
him. But the true reason why the Nicene Fathers did so earnestly contend for
these words, of the Substance of the Father, and Consubstantial, was because
they found by experience, that no other words would hold the Arian Heretics,
who concealed their Poison under any other form of words, though in appearance
very Orthodox; as the Catholic Bishops found to their cost in the Council of
Ariminum, and upon several other occasions; which Conc. T. 2. Col. 8 21.
is the account the Synod of Paris gives the Eastern Bishops of this matter:
But though they desired that all would agree in the use of this word, as most
expressive of the true Catholic Faith, yet they never rejected the Communion
of any Bishops merely upon this account, while they prosessed the true
Catholic Faith, which the Nicene Council intended to signify by this word, and
condemned those Arian Blasphemies which they intended to condemn by it.

Before this Council had taken the Homoousion into their Creed, and made it the
Test of the Catholic Faith, Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, in his Book
against the Sabellians, had let drop some Expressions, for which he was charged
with denying the Homoousion, and accused for it to his Namesake Dionysius,
then Bishop of Rome, which occasioned his Apology to the Roman Bishop, which
Athanasius gives us an account of.

He owns, That he did say that the word Homoousion was not to be found in
Scripture, -- (...). -- (...). Ath. Syn. Nic. decret. p. 274.

(...), etc. Ibid.


yet what he taught of Christ did plainly signify what is meant by the
Homoousion, that he is no Creature, but homogeneous, or of the same Nature with
his Father, which he explained by Human Births, which are manifestly of the
same kind; there being no difference of Nature between Parents and Children,
who differ only in this, That Parents are not their own Children; whereby he
signified that God the Father and God the Son had but one and the same Nature,
though the Father is not the Son, nor the Son the Father. The same, he says, he
represented by other similitudes of Homogeneous Productions; as a Root and its
Branches, the Fountain and Rivers, which are not the same with each other, but
have the same Nature. These are true Catholic Representations of the
Homoousion, and this Dionysius thought a sufficient Justification of his Faith,
and Athanasius thought so too, without using that term; especially if we add
what he discourses more at large, de Sent. Dionysii contra Arianos.

I shall only observe farther, That the Learned Dr. Bull takes this very way to
prove that the Ante Nicene Fathers did own the Faith of the Homoousion, or that
the Son is consubstantial to the Father, though we seldom meet with the word it
self in their Writings; because they teach the same things which the Nicene
Fathers intended by that word: Defens. Fidei Nicenae. p. 66.
As 1. When they affirm the Son of God is not only of the Father, but that he
proceeds from, and is begotten of the Father. 2. That the Son is the True,
Genuine, Proper, Natural Son of God. 3. When they explain the Generation of the
Son, by the Root and its Branches, the Sun and its Rays, the Fountain and
River, which are of the same Nature, and therefore represent the Father and Son
to be of the same Substance. 4. When they except the Son of God out of the
number of Creatures, and deny him to be a Creature. 5. When they ascribe such
things to the Son, as are proper and peculiar only to the True God. 6. When
they affirm the Son of God not only to be God, but expressly own him to be true
God, God by Nature, and One God with the Father.

This is the true Notion of the Homoousion; and now let any man judge, Whether
a Consubstantial Trinity be a Trinity of Personal Characters, Relations, or
Names, or of Real, Substantial, Subsisting Persons. If we will allow either the
Nicene Fathers, or the Arian Bishops to be well in their wits, can we think
that there would have been any such Disputes between them, as whether the Son
be Coeternal with the Father, or had a Beginning? whether there were any time,
the least conceivable moment before the Son was? whether he was made (...),
created out of nothing, as all other Creatures are, or begotten of the
Substance of the Father, and is the true, genuine, natural Son of God, or a Son
only by Adoption? whether he be true perfect God, in opposition to the most
perfect created Nature, or be only a made and Creature-God? whether he be
Consubstantial with the Father, or have only a Nature like the Fathers, but not
the same? and whether he be like his Father in all things, in Substance and
Essence, or only in Will and Affection. I say, Could any men in their wits
dispute such matters as these, unless both sides were agreed, that the Son is a
Real, Substantial Son, as human Sons are, who are begotten of the Substance of
their Parents; that he has a Subsistence of his own, distinct from his Father's
Subsistence; that he has a Substance of his own, eternally begotten of his
Father's Substance, and therefore the same, but proper and peculiar to his own
Person, which makes him the Son, and not the Father. For till these things are
agreed, there is no foundation for the other Disputes; for if the Son have no
real Subsistence of his own, who would dispute whether he began to subsist in
time, or did subsist from all Eternity? If he have no Substance of his own, is
it not ludicrous to dispute whether he be of the Father, that is, have his
Substance of his Father's Substance, or be a new created Substance, as like his
Father's Substance as a created Substance can be, but not the same? For if he
have no distinct Substance of his own, neither of these can be true. To what
purpose is it to dispute, whether he be a begotten or created God, if he be not
as true and perfect a Person, and as true and perfect God (upon the Catholic
Hypothesis) in his own Person, as the Father himself is?

In short, to conclude this Argument, If the Homoousion signifies, that the Son
of God, who is Consubstantial to his Father, is no Creature, was not made out
of Nothing, had no Beginning of Being, is of his Father's Substance, begotten
of his Substance from all Eternity, a true and perfect Son of a true and
perfect Father, and upon all accounts the very same that the Father is,
excepting that he is the Son and not the Father, it is impossible the Nicene
Fathers should have been either Sabellians or Modalists.

SECT. IV. A more particular Inquiry into the full Signification of the
Homoousion, with respect to the Specific Unity of the Divine Nature.
THAT the Nicene Fathers did by the Homoousion, or One Substance of the
Godhead, understand something like what we call a Specific Sameness and Unity
of Nature, might be proved by numerous Quotations, had it not been sufficiently
done already by Petavius, Curcelloeus, Dr. Cudworth, and others; whoever will
be pleased to read the Testimonies they produce in this Cause, will never be
able to make any other tolerable Sense of them.

They apply this word Homoousion to things, which are specifically One, or
which have the same Specific Nature, as a Tree and its Branches, a Fountain
and River, as they call God the Father the (...), the Root and Fountain of the
Son, and Holy Spirit; the Sun and its Rays and Splendour; Basil. Hom. 27. c.
Sabell.
as Christ is called (...), the brightness and refulgency of his Father's
Glory. They prove that Christ has the same Nature with his Father, because all
true, natural, genuine Sons have so; and therefore if he be as truly and
properly the Son of God, as Isaac was the son of Abraham, he must be
Consubstantial to God the Father, as Isaac was to Abraham, which we know is a
Specific Unity of Nature. And the Council of Chalcedon expressly affirms, That
Christ is Consubstantial to his Father, as to his Godhead, or Divine Nature;
and Consubstantial to us as to his Manhood, or Human Nature; and if the
Homoousion signifies the same, or something analogous in both, we know what
this sameness of Nature means; for it is impossible to reconcile this to one
singular Nature and Unity. Christ is not Consubstantial to us upon account of
the same singular human Nature in him, and in all Mankind; for every Man has a
particular human Nature of his own, and so had Christ; but the Nature is
specifically the same in Christ, and in us that is, it is a true human Nature,
and this makes Christ and us Consubstantial. And if there be any thing like
this, though in a more perfect degree, in the Consubstantiality of Father and
Son, it must signify not one singular Nature; which cannot be said to be
Consubstantial to it self, but the Consubstantiality of Two Persons really and
substantially distinct, but united in the same common Nature, or the same
Divinity: And therefore nothing is more common, than to render the (...) by
(...), unius generis, and by such like words, as every one knows signify a
Specific Unity. That the (...), and (...), the One Divinity, and One Divine
Essence, is a common Nature, the same in all Three Persons communicated by the
Father to the Son, and by Father and Son to the Holy Spirit, is so universally
acknowledged, that it needs no proof; the (...) and (...) and (...), frequently
occur in the writings of the Nicene Fathers, which signify the One Divinity to
be a common Nature to the Three Divine Persons. Basil. Ep. 43.
This is the very account St. Basil gives of the difference between (...),
Essence and Person; that Essence signifies a common Nature, which is in more
than One, and may be spoken of more than One, as a species is predicated of its
Individuals. Man is a common Name for all Men, because Humanity is a common
Nature, which is alike in Peter, and John, and James, and all the Men in the
World: But Hypostasis or Person, though it signifies the Nature also, yet not
in that general Notion, as common to all of the same kind, but as actually
subsisting in Particulars, which are distinguished from each other by their
distinct Subsistence, or by such other Properties and characteristical Marks as
are peculiar to each of them, and not common to the whole kind, as the persons
of Peter, and James, and John, though they have the same common Nature, are yet
distinguished from each other. Now if the One Divine Nature be in this sense a
common Nature, that it is really and actually communicated by the Father to the
Son, and Holy Spirit, and does distinctly subsist whole and entire, and
perfect, in all Three Divine Persons, it cannot be One singular solitary
Nature, which cannot subsist distinctly in Three; for in perfect singularity
there can be no distinction: nor can One singular Nature be Three Subsistences,
when there is but One which subsists.

Athanasius, or whoever was the Author of that Treatise of the common Essence
of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, proves that all Three Persons have the same
common Nature from the same Names, and Attributes, and Works, Dominion, and
Power, ascribed distinctly to them all; and gives this account, why, though the
Father be God, and the Son God, and the Holy Ghost God, yet we must not say
that there are Three Gods, but One God in Three Persons* because a common
Nature has a common Name, as he shows, that all Mankind in Scripture are called
one Man, (...). Athan. de communi Essentia. Vol. 1. p. 213.
upon account of their common Nature; and if this be allowable among men, to
unite all Mankind in one Name, and to speak of them as one Man, notwithstanding
all that diversity which is between them in external form, strength, will,
(...). Ibid. p. 214.
affections, opinions, etc. how much more reasonable is it to call the Three
Divine Persons One God, who are distinguished and separated from the whole
Creation by One undivided Dignity, One Kingdom, One Power, One Will and Energy.

And that we may not suspect that by One common Nature they meant One singular
Substance and Nature, (...) Basil adv. Eunom. T. 1. l. 1. p. 719.
common to Father and Son (which it is impossible to form any Notion of) St.
Basil tells us what he meant by a common Nature, such a Nature as has the same
Notion and Definition, that is, which is common, as a Genus or Species is
common: As for example; If the Father, (...), as to his Suppositum, or
Substance, be Light, we must acknowledge (...), the Essence and Substance of
the Son to be Light also; and whatever other Notion we form of the Being and
Essence of the Father, the same we must apply to the Son. And herein he places
the Unity of the Godhead, or the One Divinity; that though the Divine Persons
differ in Number, and in their peculiar Characters, yet that Divine Nature
which subsists distinctly in each of them, has but one and the same Notion and
Definition, and therefore is but one and the same in all. If this be not a
specific Sameness and Unity, all our Logicks deceive us: I Am sure the Unity of
an Individuum or singular Nature was never thought to consist in a common
Notion or Definition of its Nature; and yet this is the account which the
Fathers unanimously give of the One common Divinity of Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost.

No man who understands any thing of this Controversy, can be ignorant of that
famous Dispute de Ingenito and Genito, concerning the Unbegotten and the
begotten Nature. By this Sophism the Arians endeavored to prove, That the Son
could not be Homoousios, consubstantial, or of the same Nature with the Father,
because an Unbegotten Nature cannot be the same with a Begotten Nature.

Now had the Catholic Fathers believed the singularity of the Divine Nature in
the modern Notion of it, this Objection had been unanswerable; for it is
absolutely impossible that the same singular Nature should be both begotten and
unbegotten, as much as it is that the same single Person should be both
begotten and unbegotten. I desire to know, how any Sabellianist, who
acknowledges but One singular solitary Substance of the Deity, would answer
this Objection; I know no possible way they have, but to deny that the Divine
Nature of the Son is begotten; that though the Son be begotten, his Divine
Nature is not begotten, but only his Personality, or Mode of Subsistence,
without a begotten subsisting Nature: And this, indeed, would effectually
answer the Objection; for if there be not a begotten and unbegotten Nature, the
foundation of the Objection is lost. And this is so obvious an Answer upon the
Hypothesis of Singularity, that it is sufficient to satisfy any thinking man,
that the C^tholick Fathers did not believe this Singularity of the Divine
Essence, since none of them ever gave this Answer to the Objection.

But we need not guess at their meaning; for they themselves expressly reject
this Answer, which is the only proper and pertinent Answer upon this
Hypothesis; and give such other Answers as contradict the Notion of the
Singularity of the Divine Essence. As strange as some think it, the Catholic
Fathers, from the very beginning of Christianity, owned the Divine Nature and
Substance of the Son to be begotten; nothing is more familiar in all their
Writings, than (...), Natura genita, Deus genitus, unigenitus Deus. (...).
Basil adv. Eunom. T. 1. l. 1.717.
St. Gregory Nyssen agrees this matter with Eunomius, that the Divine Nature of
the Son is (...), a Begotten Substance; so does St. Basil, so do the other
Fathers. When Eunomius objected, That God being unbegotten, cannot admit of
Generation, St. Basil allows this to be true in one sense, viz. That he who is
unbegotten cannot in his own proper Nature be begotten, because it is
impossible that an unbegotten Nature should it self be begotten: But the other
sense of the words, That he who is unbegotten himself cannot beget, so as to
communicate by a substantial Generation his own Nature to the Son, he rejects
as Blasphemy both against Father and Son; which is a plain demonstration what
St. Basil's Judgment was about an unbegotten and begotten Nature.

Eunomius urged, That unbegotten, and begotten, are both Names of Nature, and
therefore must signify two Natures as different from each other, as unbegotten
and begotten are. Now to prove that begotten is not the Name of Nature and
Substance, St. Basil uses this Argument, That if (...) and (...) be the same,
if begotten and substance signify the same thing, then as he who is begotten is
the begotten of him who begets, so we may in like manner say, (...) -- (...).
-- (...). -- Ibid. lib. 2. p. 734.

(...). Basil. Ep. 78.


that he who is begotten is the Substance of him who begets, and then the Name
begotten will not signify the Substance of the only begotten Son, but the
Substance of the God of all: that as the Son is the begotten of God, so he is
the Substance of God; and thus the begotten is the Substance of the unbegotten,
which, he says, is ridiculous. And yet as ridiculous as St. Basil thought this,
those must of necessity own it, who assert but One singular Substance of the
Deity; for if there be but One Substance in the sense of Singularity, the Son
(if he have any Substance) must be the Substance of the Father; he who is
begotten, must be the Substance of him who is unbegotten. Thus much I think is
certain, That if St. Basil was in his wits, he would never have used this
Argument, had he believed that Father and Son are but One singular Substance;
and yet elsewhere he expressly tells us, That the Nicene Fathers distinguished
the Hypostates of Father and Son, when they called the Son Light of Light; for
the Light which begets, is not the Light which is begotten, though their Nature
is the same, they being Light and Light.

Once more, to prevent if it be possible all manner of Evasions, since some
Moderns distinguish between the generation of the Son, and of his Substance,
and will allow that the Son is begotten, but not his Substance. I observe that
St. Basil rejects this distinction between the Son and his Substance. Eunomius
durst not say that the Son was (...), made or created out of nothing, this
being so expressly condemned by the Nicene Council, which the generality of
Christians received as the Rule of their Faith, and therefore he endeavored to
cheat them into it before they were aware, by a new form of speech: (...).
Ibid. p. 734
He says, That the Substance of the Son was begotten, having no Being before
its own proper subsistence, and was begotten before all things by the Will of
God. This was very craftily expressed, to insinuate that there was a time when
the Substance of the Son did not exist; for it could not be before it was
begotten, and had a proper subsistence of its own. St. Basil exposes this
Sophistry at large, and shows, that by the same Argument they might prove, that
there was a time when the Father's Substance was not; for that could not be
older than its own subsistence: But if the Father be Eternal, though his
Substance could not be before its subsistence, so may the Son be also, by an
Eternal generation and subsistence. But that which I would take notice of is,
that St. Basil observes the vain Sophistry of this way of speaking, that when
he durst not say that the Son was of nothing, or that there was a time when he
was not, he insinuates the same thing concerning the Substance of the Son,
(...). Ibid.
as if the Son and the Substance of the Son were two things. Now if the Son and
the Substance of the Son be the same, then if the Son is begotten, the
Substance of the Son is begotten; if the Son be not the Father, the Substance
of the Son is not the Substance of the Father. And yet all the Philosophy of
the ancient Fathers, not excepting St. Austin himself, would not allow of any
difference between the Person of the Father, and his Being, Essence, Substance,
Subsistence, Nature, nor between the Person of the Son, and his Being,
Subsistence, Nature, etc. and therefore the Son is as distinct from the Father
in Nature, Being, Life, Substance, as in Person and Subsistence.

But to proceed: There was no dispute between the Catholics and the Arians
about the singularity of the Divine Substance, they both rejected that as
Sabellianism, and asserted Father and Son to be as distinct in Nature and
Substance, as they are in Person; and therefore this Objection de ingenito and
genito, concerning the unbegotten and the begotten Nature, was intended not to
prove a numerical distinction, (which it effectually does) but a specific
difference and diversity of Nature between Father and Son; that the Son is no
more consubstantial to the Father, than to be unbegotten and to be begotten are
the same. The whole Controversy turned upon this one Point, Whether unbegotten
and begotten, were Names of Nature; and consequently, whether to be unbegotten,
and to be begotten, made a specific difference of Natures. This the Catholic
Fathers unanimously denied; and not to take notice of all they say on this
Argument, there is one Answer which they all give, very observable to my
present purpose, and that is this: That to be unbegotten or begotten, makes no
specific difference in created Natures, and therefore there is no reason to
say that it makes any such diversity in the Divine Nature; and they all give
the Example of Adam, Seth, and Eve, who all had the same human Nature; (...).
Damasc. orth. nd. l. 1. c. 9.
and yet Adam was unbegotten, as being immediately formed by God. Seth was
begotten, as being Adam's Son; Eve was not begotten, but made of one of Adam's
Ribs: But this makes no diversity of Nature, but only distinguishes them by
their manner of Existence, or coming into Being, and there is no imaginable
reason why the same specific Nature considered in its Individuals, may not
have very different Beginnings, without any alteration of Nature. Nay, as
Damascen observes, (...). Ibid.
thus it is in all the several species of Creatures; for the first in every
kind is unbegotten: And though the Divine Nature in all Three Divine Persons is
Eternal, without any Beginning; yet if to be unbegotten, or to be begotten,
make no diversity of Nature in Creatures, there is no reason to say that it
makes any such difference in the Divine Nature. This is so plain and express,
that I need add nothing to show how this overthrows the Opinion of Singularity,
and owns a Specific Unity and Sameness of the Divine Nature: That though the
Father be unbegotten, and the Son begotten, yet they are Consubstantial, or of
the same Nature; not with the Sameness of Singularity, which is impossible, but
with such a Sameness of Nature as is between two of the same kind and species,
as the Example of Adam and Seth proves. And I need not prove, that a Specific
Sameness of Nature, supposes a real distinction of Persons, who agree in this
One same Nature.

SECT. V. That by the Homoousion, or One Substance, the Nicene Fathers did not
merely understand a Specific, but a Natural Unity and Sameness of Substance
between Father and Son.
BUT yet after all this, the Catholic Fathers did not allow the Divine Nature
in a strict and proper Notion to be a species, which is only a notional and
logical Unity and Sameness of Nature; for the Divine Nature, which is perfect
Essence, is not logically, but essentially One, though it subsists distinctly
in Three Persons, and this was the Faith of the Catholic Fathers. On this one
Point the whole Controversy turns, concerning the Singularity of the Divine
Nature, or the Plurality of Divine Natures multiplied with the Persons, and
consequently that great Controversy of all, whether a Trinity of true, real,
substantial Persons, be essentially One, or Three Gods.

To represent this as plainly as possibly I can, we must consider the
difference between a Specific and a Natural Unity, (...).
between being One in Notion, and One in Nature. The first is, when from that
agreement which we observe in the Natures of several Individuals, we form a
Notion of one common Nature which belongs to them all; as the Notion of
Humanity, or Human Nature, which belongs to all men, and affords a common Name,
and a common definition to them: But this is only the work of the mind, for
there is no such one common Human Nature actually existing in all Mankind;
(...) -- Damasc. de orth. fide. l. 1. c. 11.
but every man is a man by himself, and has a particular Human Nature, as he
has a Soul and Body of his own, which is not the Soul and Body of any other man
in the world. And thus Damascen owns, it is with all Creatures of the same
kind, who in truth and reality are distinct separate Beings, who subsist apart
by themselves, as Peter and Paul, and all other men do, and are united only in
a common Notion, not in a common subsisting Nature, which is one and the same
in all.

But then he tells us, that it is quite otherwise in the Divine Nature, which
is a common Nature, and yet but One; not (...), but (...); not merely in our
notion and conception, but in truth and reality; the same One Divine Nature,
without the least diversity or separation, actually and distinctly subsisting
in Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which being perfectly the same is but One, and
really and substantially subsisting in Three is a common Nature, which is
equally and perfectly in them all. Thus Damascen has declared his Opinion fully
against the notional and specific Unity of the Divine Nature, that the Divine
Nature is One, only as Human Nature is One, because it has one common Name and
Definition, which belongs to all of the same kind; whereas there is no one
common Human Nature in Subsistence, but only in Notion: But the same One Divine
Nature actually subsists in Three, and is the same One Divinity in Three. And
that this was the true Sense of all the Catholic Fathers will appear, from
considering some Notions which were common to them all.

1. They all agree, That there is but (...), and (...), but One Divinity, and
One God; and One God, because but One Divinity; and for this very reason
nothing is more familiar with them, than to call the Holy Trinity One God.
(...), One Divinity in Three perfect Hypostates. Now will any man say, That the
One Divinity, or One Divine Nature, and One God, is a mere Notion? Is not the
Unity of God the fundamental Article of Natural Religion? And if this One
Divinity does really, immutably, inseparably subsist in Three Divine Persons,
as it must do, if these Three Divine Persons with respect to this One Divinity,
are naturally and inseparably One God, Can this One common subsisting Divinity
be a mere Notion, which has no Hypostatical Subsistence, but only subsists in
Thought? Can the Specific Notional Unity of Human Nature, make three men one
man, as the One common Divine Nature makes Three Persons One God? If the Unity
of the Divine Nature be but a Notion, the Unity of God, the Unity of the
Trinity, which is this One God, must be a mere Notion also? And so, in truth
and reality, there is no more One God, than there is but one man.

I readily grant, That the Father may be, and often is, in a peculiar manner
called God, and the One God, (...) -- (...). -- (...). -- (...). Greg. Nyssenus
cont. Eunomium. Orat. 1. p. 78. Parisiis. 1615.
as distinguished from the Person of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit; but I
deny, that he is called the One God, as considered without them, or so much as
in thought separated from them: If we do not include the Son and the Holy Ghost
in the Unity of the Godhead, we must deny their Godhead also; unless we will
say, that there is One God, and besides him two Divine Persons, each of which
is God, but not the One God: Which must introduce a Plurality of separate Gods:
For if they be not One, they are more than One; and if One Person be the One
God without the other, Tres enim Deos dicit, qui divinitatem separat
Trinitatis, cum Dominus dicendo; Ite, baptizate Gentes in Nomine Patris, and
Filii, and Spiritus Sancti, unius esse Trinitatem potestatis ostenderit. Ambr.
de Fide. l. 1. c. 2.
they cannot be One God. This shows, what necessity there is of owning the Holy
and Ever-Blessed Trinity to be the One God, and One Divinity, naturally and
essentially One; and then the necessary Consequence is, That this One Divine
Nature, which actually and substantially subsists in Three distinct Divine
Persons, who for that reason are naturally and essentially One God, cannot be a
mere Common Specific Nature, but One Common Subsisting Nature.

But what possible Sense can we make of this? One Common Subsisting Nature,
which is really, actually, indivisibly, One, and yet is Common, that is, does
really and distinctly subsist in more than one. To be (...), to be Common, and
to be One, not in Notion, as a Species is common to all the Individuals, but in
the truth and reality of Nature sounds very like a Contradiction. When we say
the Divine Nature is common to Three Persons, and subsists distinctly in three,
we deny it to be One singular solitary Nature, which can subsist but in one,
and constitute but One Person, which was the Sabellian Notion of the Divine
Unity, which the Catholic Church condemned, as destroying a Real Trinity, as I
have shown at large: But how then can this Common Nature, which is not
singular, but subsists perfectly and distinctly in Three, be actually and
essentially One; for a Natural Unity is a Numerical Unity, is one in number,
which, one would think, should signify a singular Nature, for so it does in all
Creatures: And when we speak of the Unity of the Divine Nature, it cannot be
one by composition, which the absolute simplicity of the Divine Nature cannot
admit. This is the great difficulty, which we must not expect perfectly to
understand, because a Finite Mind can never comprehend, that is, can never have
an adequate notion of what is infinite: But I shall give some account, what the
Catholic Fathers have said of this matter, which will satisfy us, that it is a
natural, not a mere Specific Unity, which they intended; and will give us such
a notion of this Venerable Mystery, as will deliver it from all inconsistency,
and contradiction.

2. I observe therefore, That the Catholic Fathers lay the foundation of this
Sameness and Homoousiotes of Nature in the Eternal Generation of the Son, of
the Substance of the Father. (...) in the Nicene Creed is opposed to (...) That
the Son is not of nothing, as all Creatures are, but receives his whole
Substance of the Substance of his Father: St. Basil in express words makes
Generation essential to the notion of the Homoousion: For such Beings as upon
account of likeness of Nature may be called Brothers to each other, are not
therefore Homoousious; but when the Cause, and that which actually subsists
from, or out of that Cause, have the same Nature, then they are Homoousious to
each other: (...).
And in opposition to that Perverse and Heretical Sense, which some affixed to
the word Homoousion, that it signified two made of the same Substance by the
division and partition of it, as two Shillings cut out of the same piece of
Silver; (...) Basil Ep. 300.
besides all other Blasphemies, the same Father tells us, That this destroys
the Faith both of Father and Son; for in this Sense, to be of one Substance,
can make them no more than Brothers: (...). Ath. cont. Arianos. Orat. 2. p. 314.
And I need not observe, that all the Fathers prove the Son to be
Consubstantial to the Father, because he was not made, nor created, but
begotten of his Father's Substance; which does not refer merely to a specific
Sameness of Nature, but to the substantial Communication of the same Nature
from Father to Son; which is therefore not in mere Notion and Idea, but
substantially the same in both: (...). Ibid. p. 320.
for they would not allow that a mere specific Sameness of Nature made Two
Persons Consubstantial unless one of them received his Nature and Substance
from the other.

And this seems no improbable account why the Nicene Fathers in their
Anathema's, added (...) to (...): when they teach that the Son is (...) of the
Substance of his Father, in opposition to his being (...), of nothing, they
must, by the Substance of the Father, mean that Divine Nature and Substance
which is the Person of the Father; for there is no other Notion of begetting a
Son of his Father's Substance: nor is any other sense of the words directly and
immediately opposed to his being made of nothing. But then since Ousia does
often signify a specific Nature, which the Philosophers call a second
Substance, to prevent this mistake, they added Hypostasis, which signifies a
first Substance, or a subsisting Nature; and condemn those who say the Son is
(...), of another Nature, specifically different from the Nature of the Father,
as the Arians taught; or that he was (...), of any other Substance than that
which is the Substance of the Father, and consequently not begotten of the
Father: for both these are essential to the Notion of the Homoousion, to have
the same Nature for kind, or the true perfect Divine Nature, and to receive
this Nature from the Father by a substantial Generation; and the Council
condemns those who deny both or either of these. I must add one thing more to
make this Notion complete; that as the Son is begotten of the Substance of the
Father, so he receives his whole Substance from the whole Substance of the
Father. (...). Gr. Nyss. c Eun. or. 1. p. 9.

Quasi aliud sit Homoousion quam quod dicit, ego de Patre exivi, ego and Pater
unum sumus; -- Haec est autem nominis ratio, ut in Patre and Filio unitatem
substantiae credas, licet rem ipsam (quae est inenarrabilis) definire ^on
posses. Ambr. de Fide cont. Arian. c. 5.

Cum autem ego Patrem and Filium statuo, unitatem generis assigno; and si illam
in personis divido, discretiones tamen personarum rursus cadem nomina in
unitatem sui naturali legis foedere consignant, unde and tantus est Filius,
quantus videbitur Pater, totus de toto, integer de integro, perfectus de
perfecta consummataque virtute. Ibid. c. 7.

Habet utique in natura, habet in substantia, and habet non per gratiam
temporalem, sed per sempiternam Divinitatem; habet non ex dono quasi servus,
sed ex generationis proprietate, quasi Filius coaeternus. Et habet sicut Pater.
Sicut enim Pater habet vitam in semetipso, ita and Filio dedit vitam habere in
semetipso. Sic habet, inquit, sic dedit. Didicisti supra quemadmodum dederit,
ne putares esse gratiae largitatem, ubi generationis arcanum est. Ambr. de
Fide. l. 5. c. 1.


This is the constant Doctrine of the Fathers, That the Son is Totus ex Toto,
Whole of Whole; That the Divine Generation is not like Human Generations, by
corporeal Passions, by a division of the Father's Substance, by a partial
efflux or emanation; but the Father, without any division, diminution, or
alteration of his own Substance, communicates his whole Divine Nature to the
Son; That the Son is perfectly and entirely all and the same that the Father
is. Thus they expound those sayings of our Savior, All that the Father has,
is mine. All things are delivered unto me of my Father. As the Father has life
in himself, so has he given to the Son also to have life in himself. Not to
signify an external arbitrary Gift and Donation, but the Eternal Communication
of his whole Divine Nature to the Son; that he is Life of L^fe, Light of Light,
God of God, Very God of Very God. For this Reason the Arians rejected the
Homoousion, because they thought it absolutely impossible that the Father
should beget a Son of his own Substance, (...) Ath. cont. Arian. or. 2. p. 321.
without a division of his Substance; that he should communicate the whole
Divine Nature to his Son, and have the same whole Divine Nature himself. And
the Fathers allow, that this is above Human Comprehension, as the Divine Nature
it self is; but think those men little consider the true measure of Human
Understanding, who will not believe that God has a Son, because they cannot
comprehend the inessable Mystery of the Eternal Generation.

The Scripture assures us that God has a Son, that Eternal Word, which was in
the Beginning, was with God, and was God.

The very Notion of a Son, signifies that he has the same Nature with his
Father, (...). Ibid.

(...). Ibid. 314.

(...). Ibid. p. 321.


and receives his Being and Nature from his Father, is Substance of his
Father's Substance; for thus all other Sons receive their nature and substance
from their Parents.

The absolute simplicity of the Divine Nature, which has no Corporeity, no
Composition, no Parts, and therefore can be divided into none, proves that the
Divine Generation can have nothing like to Human Generations, no more than God
is like a man; and therefore must be as much above Human Comprehension, as the
Divine Nature is. We certainly know what it is not, That it is not by any
separation or division of Substance; for the Divine Nature is a pure, simple,
indivisible Monade; but how this Monade can communicate it self, we cannot
tell: But this we know, That if a Monade does generate, it must generate a
perfect whole; for when the whole is a simple, indivisible, uncompounded
Monade, it must generate its whole, or nothing.

Thus much is evident, (...). Ibid. p. 330.

Verbi enim appellatio in Dei Filio de Sacramento Nativitatis est, sicut
sapientiae and virtutis est nomen, quae cum in Dei F^lium cum substantia ver^e
Nativitatis extiterint, Deo tamen ut sua propria, quamvis ex Deo in Deum sint
nata, non desunt. -- Earum rerum unigenito Deo aptata cognomina sunt, quae cum
eum subsistentem ex Nativitate consumment, tamen Patri non desint exinde
mutabilis virtute naturae. Hilar. de Trin. l. 7.

Non enim sicut frequenter dictum a n^bis est, divisionis in Filio, sed
Nativitatis Sacramentum praedicamus; nec separatio fuit imperfecta sed
progenies perfecta, quia Nativitas non habet detrimentum generandi, cum
profectum teneat nascendi. Ibid.


That to communicate a whole, perfect, undivided Nature and Substance, is the
most perfect Generation. He is the most perfect Father, who communicates his
whole Substance to his Son, without division or separation; who without ceasing
to be what he was himself, begets a Son wholly and perfectly the same with
himself: For the more perfectly One Father and Son are, the more perfect is the
Generation; and they cannot be more One, than to be One and the same Substance,
communicated whole and entire from Father to Son. There is nothing like this in
human Births; for the imperfection of created Nature will not admit it; the
Father communicates the first Seeds and Principles of Life with part of his
Substance, but the Child is nourished, grows and increases to its just
proportion by adventitious matter, which never was the Substance of the Father,
and therefore Father and Son are not One Substance, though the Father
communicates the same specific Nature with part of his Substance to his Son.

Now though we cannot conceive how a whole begets a whole, yet we must grant
that this is the most perfect Generation; for to generate, is to communicate
Nature and Substance, to beget (...), another self, Quid est enim Filius de eo
quod Pater est? alius idem.

Et hoc est quod Graeci Homoousion appellant, cum uno aliud ipsum. Ambr. de
Fide cont. Arianos. c. 6, 7.

(...). Gr. Nyss. cont. Eunom. p. 19.


as the Ancients speak of the Divine Generation; and then the more perfectly
the Son is the Father's self, the more perfect the Generation is; and therefore
thus God must beget a Son, if he begets at all; for he must beget in the most
perfect manner. And thus the Son must be begotten, if he be begotten at all;
for if he be a Son, he must be of his Father's Substance, and that not a part,
but the whole; for the Divine Substance must be a perfect indivisible
Inseparable Monade.

This Eternal Generation of the Son is a great and unconceivable Mystery, and
has always been owned to be so by the Catholic Church; we have no Notion or
Idea of it, but no more have we of the Eternal Existence of the Divine Nature
it self, without any Cause or Beginning, or of the Creation of all things out
of nothing, or of the Natural Production and Propagation of Created Beings; our
present Inquiry is not concerning the Mystery of the Eternal Generation, but
concerning the Unity of the Divine Nature in Father and Son, in what sense they
are (...) of the same Substance, and that the Eternal Generation gives an
account of: For if the Father communicate his whole Nature and Substance to the
Son, without division and separation (which is the Catholic Faith) the Son
must of necessity have the same one Substance with the Father; for a whole same
of a whole same, cannot be another, and therefore must be the same One
Substance, whole of whole.

St. Athanasius reasons very subtly against the Arians upon this Point: They
taught that the Son was (...), made of nothing, as other Creatures are. Then,
says he, he must be the Son of God by participation; what is it then he
partakes of? Other Creatures are the Sons of God by the participation of the
Holy Spirit; but the Holy Spirit is given by the Son, not the Son, as the
Eternal Son of God, sanctified by the Spirit; for the Spirit receives all from
Father and Son, not the Son from the Spirit.

He must then partake of the Father: But what is that, and whence is it? (...).
Ath. contr. Arian. Orat. 2. p. 322.
If that he partakes of be something Extraessential to the Father, which is not
the Father's Nature and Essence, then he does not partake of the Father, but of
that Extra-essential Being, whatever it is; and then he is not second to the
Father, that whereof he partakes being before him; nor is he the Son of the
Father, but of that Extra-essential Being or Nature, by the participation of
which he obtains the Title and Character of Son, and God. But this is very
absurd, since the Father calls him his Beloved Son, and the Son calls God his
own Father; and therefore is not a Son by Extra-essential Participations, but
Son is the name of him who participates in the Nature and Substance of the
Father. But then again, If that which is participated of the Father, be not the
Nature and Essence of the Son, the same Absurdity returns, there being some
middle Term between these two, To be of the Father, and the Nature of the Son,
whatever that Nature be; which proves that the Nature of the Son is not of the
Father, and therefore he is not the Son of the Father, for Nature makes a Son.

All this being so absurd, it is necessary to own, That the true genuine Son of
God is all that He is, of the Essence and Substance of the Father: For when God
is thus wholly and perfectly participated, it is the same thing as to say, that
God begets; and to beget, signifies, that he begets a Son.

And therefore, though all things by the Grace of God partake of the Son, he
will not allow us to say, (...). Ibid.
That the Son partakes of any thing, which implies, that the Son is one thing,
and that which he partakes of, is another; But that which is the participation
of the Father, that is the Son.

This is the most Natural and Essential Unity that is possible to be conceived,
That the whole Son is nothing else, but the whole, entire, immediate
participation of the Father's Substance, and therefore must be as perfectly One
with the Father, as the Father is One; for there is but one and the same
Substance, which is the Substance of the Father, and by an Eternal and
Ineffable Generation, the Substance also of the Son. Though Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost are Three Real distinct Persons, and each of them have the whole
entire Divine Nature in himself, yet there is but One Divine Nature, One
Divinity in them all, and therefore they are but One God.

This is the Account St. Hilary gives, why we may say God is One, and One, and
One, but not Three Gods: Because the Divine Nature is not multiplied with the
Persons. Thus speaking of the Father and Son, he tells us, That the Son is One
of One, Unus ab uno -- ac sic uterque Deus unus, cum inter unum and unum. id
est, ex uno unum Divinitatis aeternae non est secunda natura. Hill. de Trin. l.
4.
and therefore they are both One: For between One and One, that is One of One;
there is no Second Nature of the Eternal Divinity.

For as he adds elsewhere, Nemo ambigat naturam Autoris in Filit nativitate
connasci. Id. l 5.

Et per id unus est Deus, quia ex natura Dei Deus sit. -- Unum autem illud non
subsistentem naturam perimat in Filio, sed in Deo and Deo naturam Dei conservet
unius.


The Nature of the Father is born in the Nativity of the Son, and for this
Reason, the Father and Son are One God, because the Son is God of the Nature of
God: But their being thus One, does not destroy the subsisting Nature of the
Son, but in God, and God preserves the Nature of One God. And therefore the
true, absolute, and perfect Profession of our Faith is, Verum and absolutum and
perfectum fidet nosirae Sacramentum est, Deum ex Deo, and Deum in Deo
confiteri: non corporalibus modis, sed divinis virtutibus, nec naturae in
naturam transfusione, sed mysterio and potestate naturae: n^n enim per
desectionem, vel protensionem, vel derivationem, ex Deo Deus est, sed ex
virtute naturae in candem naturam nativitate subsistit* Eandem autem naturam
inde ita, non ut natus sit ipse qui genuit, (nam quomodo erit ipse, cum genitus
sit) sed in his ipsis subsistat ille qui genitus est, in quibus totus est ipse,
qui genuit: quia non ex alia genitus, neque aliud quam Deus est, quia non est
aliunde quod genitus est. Hill. Ibid.
To confess God of God, and God in God, not after the manner of Bodies, but by
Divine Powers; not by transfusion of Nature into Nature, but by the Mystery and
Power of the Divine Nature: For God is of God, not by dissection, protension,
or derivation, but by the Power of the Divine Nature subsists by his Birth in
the same Nature. -- Not so the same Nature, that he who is born, is he himself
who begets; (for how is that possible, since he is begotten) but he who is
begotten subsists in the same whole entire Nature, which is his whole entire
Nature who begets.

And this Perfect Unity Sameness, Identity of Nature, he resolves into the
Mystery of the Divine Generation, Virtute Naturoe, and Mysterio and potestate
Naturoe, for since he is not begotten of any other Substance or Nature, but of
his Father's Substance, and that not after the manner of Bodies, by dissection,
protension, or derivation, but by the Mysterious Power of the Divinity, which
communicates it self whole and perfect, there must be the same One Divinity in
both. And he appeals to every man's Understanding, Unius cujusque
intelligentiam consulo, quid existimet in eo quod dictum sit, ex ipso. Utrumne
ex altero intelligendum sit, anne ex nullo, an ipse ille censendus sit. Ex
altero non est, quia ex ipso est; id est, ne aliunde praeterquam ex Deo Deus
sit. Ex nihilo non est, quia ex ipso est; demonstratur enim natura unde
nativitas est. Ipse non est, quia ubi ex ipso est, nativitas Filii resertur ex
Patre. Hilar de Trin. l. 6.
what the natural Interpretation of these words are, That the Son is of the
Father; for can of the Father signify, that he is of any other than the Father,
or that he is of nothing, or that he is the Father himself? He is not of
another, because he is of the Father; for a Son cannot be God, if he have any
other Father but God, and therefore is God of God. He cannot be of nothing,
because he is of the Father; and whoever is begotten, must be begotten of the
Nature of him who begets. He is not the Father himself, because he is of the
Father, and the Birth of the Son speaks a necessary relation to the Father.

Now a Son, who is so of the substance of the Father, Nescit enim in Deo
portionem, se^ scit Deum totum ex Deo toto; seit ex uno unum, non desectum, sed
natum: seit nativitatem Dei, nec d^minutienem esse gignentis, nec infirmitatem
esse nascentis. Ibid.
as to be nothing but what he is from the Father, and to be all that the Father
is, whole of whole, must have the same One Nature, Substance and Divinity with
the Father; for whole of whole must be the same whole. Quod Deus est, Deus
totum est -- Deus ut est Deus, quod est permanet, and permanens Deum genuit.
Ibid.
And yet if he be so of the Father, as not to be the Father, but the Son, Deus
qui ex Deo natus est, non utique natus ex nihilo est, neque de non extantibus
natus est, sed nativitatis suae viventem habuit naturam, nec idem Deus, qui
erat, sed Deus ex Dec qui erat natus est. Ibid.
he must be distinct in substance from the Father. He is true and perfect God,
but he receives his Divinity by his Birth; he is God of God, not God who
begets, but God, who is begotten, not of nothing, but of his Father's
substance, who is unbegotten.

And therefore though St. Hilary, and all the Catholic Fathers with him,
reject all Corporeal Passions in the Divine Generation, all Corporeal
Desection, Division, Efflux, or Emanation of the Divine Substance, which is
incorporeal and indivisible, yet they all assert a true and proper generation
of the Son, and an impassible production and prolation of him, whole of whole.
And St. Hilary tells us, Sed quia ex Deo Deus, neque per nativitatem suam Deo
ademit, quoa Deus est, neque ipse in nativitate non Deus est, and quod Deus est
non caepit esse, sed natus ex Deo Deus est, and quod nascitur, id ipsum
secundum humanae naturae sensum videtur esse prolatum, and ita ut prelatio ipsa
nativitas esse existimetur; idcirco tentatum est per Valentini haeresim
prolationis nomen excludi, ne nativitatis veritas permaneret, quia prolationis
intelligentia opinione terrena non multum esset a natura terrenae nativitatis
aliena. Ibid.
that for this reason the Arians, under a specious Pretense of condemning
Valentinus his Emanations and Aeons, denied the prolation of the Son from the
Father, only to deny his generation; whereas some kind of prolation is
essential to the very Notion of a Birth, which cannot be conceived without it;
and therefore we must not wholly reject all Prolation and Production of the Son
from the Father, but only reject all Corporeal Emanations, which are very
imperfect Images of Divine Mysteries, and have nothing like the eternal
generation of the Son, but only that the Son is truly begotten of his Father's
Substance.

This is that adorable and unsearchable Mystery of the Divine Generation: The
Son is truly and properly begotten, receives his whole Being and Nature from
his Father, is substance of his Father's substance, whole of whole, and
therefore one and the same substance with the Father; not that substance, which
is the Person of the Father, nor a new or another separate substance, as it is
in human generations, but the nature and substance of the Father, born and
repeated in the Nativity of the Son, as St. Hilary speaks: De qua Pater
substantia, and ipse substantia Filius, spiritusque substantia, sed ter ipsa
substantia. Marius Victorinus Afer. him. 3. Bl. Patr. Vol. 4. p. 258.

Filium non similem, sed eundem diximus, quippe ex cadem substantia. Id. adv.
Arium. l. 1. p. 183.


The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are but One Divinity, One Infinite, Eternal
nature and substance; but they are thrice this One substance, and as perfectly
and distinctly Three in this One substance, as any other Three are Three
substances.

St. Austin was certainly in the right, when he asserted, That the Divine
Nature and Essence must not be considered either as a Genus or Species, nor the
Divine Persons as Individuals, and shows particularly the impropriety of each;
though he knows not under what Notion to conceive them, Non itaque secundum
genus and speciem ista dicimus, sed quasi secundum communem eandemque materiam.
Aug. de Trin* l. 7.
but inclines most to some common matter or substance, which is the same in
all, as carrying the nearest resemblance and analogy in it: though this he does
not very well like neither, of which more presently. It will be of great use
briefly to consider this matter; for the difficulty consists more in want of
words to express this Unity and Distinction by, than in the Notion it self.

The singularity of the Divine Essence and Substance in the Sabellian Notion of
One Substance, the Nicene Fathers universally rejected, as irreconcilable with
a real distinction of Persons, which destroys the Faith of a Real Trinity. A
mere specific Unity of Nature and Substance, which is a mere Logical Notion,
falls short of the Natural and Essential Unity of the Godhead; and yet we have
no word to serve as a middle Term between the Unity of singularity, and a
Specific Unity of Nature. For there is no such Unity as this in Created
Nature, and therefore no name for it; and yet the Unity of the Divine Nature in
a Trinity of Persons, is neither of these, but bears some resemblance and
Analogy to both. As to show this briefly. The Unity of the Divine Nature is not
a mere Specific Unity. A Species is only an Idea, or Pattern of Nature,
according to which particular Creatures are formed; and such Creatures as are
made according to the same Pattern, are specifically the same; and as far as we
can observe this Correspondence and Ideal Sameness of Nature, so we rank them
under the same Species. So that there can be no Species but among created
Beings; for they must be all made, and made according to the same Original
Pattern. But an Eternal and Necessary Nature was not made, and therefore not
made according to any Pattern, nor can any other be made according to its
Pattern; for what is made cannot be Necessary and Eternal. So that the Divine
Nature can be but One, and One Numerical Nature is no Species; it can
communicate its own Substance by an Eternal Generation and Procession, but it
cannot be a Pattern and Idea for any other Beings of the same kind, which are
not its own Substance.

Nec sic ergo Trinitatem dicimus tres personas vel substantias, unam essentiam
and unum Deum, tanquam ex una materia tria quaedam subsistant, quanqam quicquid
illud est, in his tribus explicatum sit; non enim aliquid aliud ejus essentiae
est praeter istam Trinitatem; tamen tres personas ejusdem essentioe, vel tres
personas unam essentiam dicimus, tres personas ex eadem essentia non d^cimus --
Cum dicuntur tres honanes una natura, vel tres homines ejusdem naturae, possunt
ctiam dici ^res homines ex eadem natura, quia ^n cadem natura and alti tres
homines possunt existere. In illa vero essentia Trinitatis, nullo modo alia
quaelibet persona ex eadem essentia potest existere. Aug. de Trin. l. 7. c. 6.
For this reason St. Austin rejects this specific Unity; he distinguishes
between saying, That the Divine Persons are Vna Essentia, and Vnius Essentiae,
One Essence or Substance; and that they are ex Vna Essentia, of One Essence.
The first may signify a natural Unity, and must do so when applied to the
Trinity. The second signifies only a common specific Nature and Unity. When we
speak of men we may use either expression, that they are One Essence, or that
they are of One Essence, because in both Cases, when applied to Creatures, One
Essence signifies specifically as a common pattern of Nature, according to
which not only Three, but many Threes may be made: But the whole Divine Essence
is in the Trinity, and cannot subsist in any other Person, and therefore is not
a common specific Nature.

But then there is something in the Divine Nature, as substantially
communicated to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, which bears some analogy to a
Species, and to a Specific Unity; and for this reason the Catholic Fathers in
their Disputes both with the Sabellians and Arians, frequently express the
Unity of the Nature, as subsisting in Three Distinct Persons, by a Specific
Unity.

The Notion and Idea of a Common Nature, which subsists in many Individuals, is
called a Species; the same common notion and definition belonging to all the
Individuals of the same kind: Now if we believe the Doctrine of a Real Trinity,
we must acknowledge, That the same One Divine Nature, which is originally in
the Father, is communicated to the Son and Holy Spirit, and does subsist
distinctly and substantially in all Three; and therefore has this resemblance
to a Species, that it is a common Nature, which has the same Notion and
Definition, and is the same in Three, but not merely by a Notional Identity and
Sameness, but by the Real Identity of Substance; there being but One Divine
Substance, unmade, uncreated, unbegotten, but communicated whole and entire to
the Son by an eternal generation, and to the Holy Spirit by an eternal
Procession: so that the Divine Nature is so far a Species, as by its actual
communication to the Son and Holy Spirit, and its distinct subsistence in
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, it is in truth and reality a common Nature and
Substance, which a Species is only in Notion and Idea. The Notion and
Definition of human Nature in Peter, James, and John, is the very same, and
therefore there is a specific Sameness and Unity of Nature between them. The
Divine Nature in Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is the same, not merely in Notion
and Idea, but Substantially the same; and therefore all the names of a
Specific Sameness and Unity, do in a more perfect and excellent manner belong
to the Sameness and Unity of the Divine Nature, as Subsisting Perfectly,
Indivisibly, and yet Distinctly, in Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: And when we
speak of the Sameness of the Divine Nature, as subsisting distinctly in Three
Divine Persons, we have no other words to express it by, but such as signify a
Specific Unity; and we must use such words as we have, and qualify their
sense as well as we can.

As for instance: Those words, whereby we signify a common specific Nature,
which is One and the Same in all the Individuals of the same Species, are the
best we have to express the Unity of the Divine Nature, as common to Three
Persons, and thus the Catholic Fathers use them without scruple, and speak of
the Unity of the Divine Nature, and of its being common to all the Three Divine
Persons, in the same Words and Phrases, as they use conc^rning a common
specific Nature: Which leads some into a great mistake, as if they meant no
more by it but a specific Sameness, and Unity of the Divine Nature; that
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost have one Substance no otherwise, than as Peter,
James, and John, have one and the same Humane Nature: For the Divine Nature is
not One merely (...), but (...), not in mere Notion and Idea, but actually,
indivisibly, inseparably, One; nor is it a common Nature, merely as it has a
common Name and Definition, but by an actual Inexistence in Three.

For the same reason it is very difficult what Three to call Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, so as to avoid the Heresies of both Extremes; for there is no
Example of such Three in Nature: They are certainly Three, for the Father is
not the Son, nor the Holy Ghost, nor the Son the Father, or the Holy Ghost, and
each of the Three is perfect God, and therefore an Infinite Mind, an Infinite
Spirit, and the most Perfect Essence and Substance: And that Substance which is
the Person of the Son, is not that Substance which is the Person of the Father,
no more than the Person of the Son is the Person of the Father, or an
unbegotten is a begotten Nature and Substance; and therefore in opposition to
Sabellius, they asserted Three Substantial Persons, (...), Three Hypostases, or
Personal Substances, as Hypostasis signifies; tria in substantia, tres
substantias, tres res, (...) and yet at the same time did assert, That there is
but One Divine Nature and Substance, which indivisibly and inseparably, though
distinctly, subsists in all Three.

For the understanding of which we must observe, That as the Divine Nature,
which is common to Three, is not a mere Species, but is really and actually One
and the same in all; so these Three Divine Persons, which have one and the same
common Nature, are not in a strict and proper notion Individuals of the same
common Nature: Though we have no Names for these Three, but such as signify
Individuals, as Persons, Hypostases, Subsistences, etc. and there being no
Created Person, Hypostasis, or Subsistence, but what is an Individual.

To show you the difference, with respect to the notion of an Individual,
between the Three Divine Persons, and three individual Humane Persons, I
observe, That every Humane Person is such an Individual as has a particular
Humane Nature of his own, which is not the particular Nature of any other
Person; the notion and definition of Humane Nature is the same in all men; but
the same Numerical Humane Nature does not subsist in all, but every particular
individual man has one particular individual Humane Nature appropriated to
himself, that is, which is his particular Person; and as many particular
Persons as there are, so many particular Humane Natures, and particular men
there are.

But now the Divine Persons are not Three such Individuals as these; because
they have not three individual Divine Natures, but the same One Divine Nature
common to them all, originally in the Father, and communicated whole and entire
to the Son by an Eternal Generation, and from Father and Son to the Holy Spirit
by an Eternal Procession.

How impossible soever it is, for our finite Understandings, to comprehend
these Mysteries of the eternal Generation and Procession, it is not so hard to
conceive the difference between Three Persons who have One individual Nature
common to them all, but subsisting so distinctly in each of them, as to make
them Three distinct Persons; and Three Persons who have Three Individual
Natures of the same Kind and Species.

As for Instance; Three Human Persons, which have Three individual Human
Natures, are by the confession of all Mankind Three Men: But could we conceive
One individual Human Nature, which originally constitutes but One Person, to
Communicate it self Whole and Entire, without Division or Separation to Two
other Persons, we must acknowledge Three Human Persons, each of which Persons
is distinctly and by himself, True and Perfect Man, but not Three Men; for Man
is a name of Nature, and if Persons can be multiplied without multiplying the
Nature, (as we at present suppose) there must be Three Human Persons in One
individual Human Nature, that is, Three Persons and One Man; but not Three Men,
no more than Three Human Natures.

Thus it is with respect to the Divine Nature: Were there Three individual
Divine Natures Self-originated and Independent on each other, though perfectly
the same in their Notion and Definition; Three such Persons would be as
Perfectly Three Gods, as Three Human Persons, that have Three individual Human
Natures, are Three Men. But whereas the Scripture teaches, and the Catholic
Church has always believed, there is but One Infinite, Self-originated, Divine
Nature, Originally in the Father, and by Communication in the Son, and Holy
Spirit; these Three Divine Persons are each of them True and Perfect God, but
not Three Gods; because they have not Three Individual Divine Natures, but One
Divine Nature subsisting distinctly, but Whole and Perfect in them all.

This, I think, may give us some Notion of One Numerical Common Nature, which
is no Species, and of Persons, which are no Individuals. St. Austin shows
particularly, Nam si genus est essentia, species autem substantia sive persona,
ut nonnulli sentiunt; omitto illud quod iam dixi, oportere appellare tres
essentias, ut appellantur tres substantiae vel personae, sicut appellantur tres
equi, eademque animalia tria, cum sit species equus, animal genus; neque enim
species ibi pluraliter dicta est, and genus singulariter, tanquam diceretur
tres equi unum animal, sed sicut tres equi speciali nomine, ita tria animalia
generali nomine. Quod si dicunt substantiae vel personae nomine non speciem
significari, sed aliquid singular atque individuum, ut substantia and persona
non ita dicatur, sicut dicatur homo, quod commune est omnibus hominibus, sed
quomodo dicitur hic homo, velut Abraham, velut Isaac, velut Jacob, vel si quis
alius qui etiam digito praesens demonstrar: possit; sic quoque illos eadem
rati^ consequetur; sicut enim dicuntur Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, tria
ina^vidua, ita tres homines. and tres animae; cur ergo and Pater and Filius and
Spiritus Sanctus, si secundum genus and speciem and individuum etiam ista
disserimus, non ita dicuntur tres essentiae, vel tres substantiae and personae.
Sed haec, ut dixi, omitto, si essentia genus est, una essentia jam non habet
species. Non sunt ergo tres species unius essentiae pater and filius and
spiritus sanctus. Si aut^m species est essentia* sicut species est homo, tres
vero illae quaes appellamus substantias sive personas, sic candem speciem
communiter habent, quemadmodum Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, speciem quae homo
dicitur communiter habent, non autem sicut homo sub^ividitur in Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob. ita unus homo and in aliquos si^gulos homines subdi vidi potest,
om^^no enim non potest, quia unus homo jam singulus homo est: cur ergo una
essentia in tres substantias vel personas subdividiutr: Nam si essentia species
est. sicut homo, sic est una essencia sicut unus homo. Aug de Tr. l. 7. c. ^
how improper it is to call the One Divine Essence a Genus, and the Three
Divine Persons Species; or to call the Divine Essence a Species, and the Divine
Persons Individuals; for in both these cases we must multiply the name of
Essence with the Species and Individuals, as we not only say three Horses, but
three Animals; and as Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, are three Individuals, so they
are three Men; in consequence of which, we must not only say Three Divine
Persons, but Three Divine Essences, not One Essence. But besides this, One
Essence cannot be a Genus, because what is but One can have no Species: nor can
it for the same reason be a Species, because what is One cannot be subdivided
into Individuals, as though Man, considered as a Species, is divided into
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, yet One Man cannot be subdivided into Three Men; for
One Man is One single Man. Why then do we say, One Essence, and Three
Substances or Persons; (which are St. Austin's words, who always renders the
Greek Hypostases by Substances, and makes Substances and Persons equivalent)
for if Essence be a Species, as Man is, there can be but One Essence in the
Sense and Notion of One Man: which, by the way, he objects as a great
Absurdity, for it is the Sabellian Heresy.

Thus far St. Austin was certainly in the right; but here I think, with all
submission, this great Man missed the true Notion which he had so happily
started. One Essence cannot be a Species, because what is but One, can have no
proper Individuals under it, as One Man cannot be subdivided into Three Men: But
then he might have applied Individual to Essence, which One Essence naturally
led to; and have found Three Persons in One Individual Essence, which would not
indeed be Three Individuals of One Species, but Three Singulars of One
Individual Nature. And though One Man, who is but One Individual of Human
Nature, cannot be subdivided into Three proper Individuals, yet to conceive One
Individual Human Nature to be communicated whole and entire, without division
or separation to Two others, is the truest Image of Three distinct Persons in
One Individual Essence, and the only possible Explication of totus ex toto,
whole of whole, which is the true Catholic Faith. Such an One Essence is no
Species, but yet is a common Nature; and such Persons are not what we call
Individuals, as not having each of them a particular individual Nature to
himself, but yet they have a particular singular Subsistence as other
Individuals have, and are each of them by himself as true and perfect God,
though all but One God, as every individual Man is true and perfect Man.

It seems plain to me, that this is the very Notion St. Austin intended, in
what he immediately adds, the communis eademque materia, that One common Matter
which he prefers before either a generical or specific Unity. That the same
One Divine Essence is common to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; not as if Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, had their Subsistence out of the same common Essence, as
three golden Statues are made of the same Gold; this perverse Exposition of the
Homoousion was rejected with abhorrence by the Catholic Fathers, as I showed
before; and St. Austin expressly rejects it here, and therefore though these
Three Persons are One Essence, una essentia and unius essentiae, he will not
allow us to say, that they are ex una essentia, out of One Essence, as golden
Statues are of, or cut out of the same Gold; nay, nor as Three Men are of the
same Nature, that is, which is specifically, not identically the same, as I
observed a little above. Now remove these two Notions of One common Essence,
and there remains only a third, which is that very Notion I now insist on, One
and the same Essence common to Three, by a perfect communication of the same
One whole undivided Essence.

And this answers exactly to that Notion of St. Austin, which he could find no
Image of in Nature; that the Essence of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is not
more or greater all together, Non enim major essentia est pater and filius and
spiritus sanctus simul, quam solus pater out solus filius; sed tres simul illae
substantiae sive personae, si ita dicendae sunt, aequales sunt singules, quod
animalis homo non percipit. Ibid.
than the Father alone, or the Son alone: but these Three Substances or
Persons, if they may be so called, all together are equal to each single
Person, which a carnal Man cannot apprehend. But now if we believe a whole of a
whole, we must confess that it is impossible it should be otherwise; for if the
Son have the same whole Essence with the Father, if the Father be the whole
Divine Essence, if the Son be the same whole Divine Essence, and so the Holy
Ghost; the same whole, though subsisting distinctly in Three, can never be
greater nor less than it self: Three Persons are more in number than One, but
One and the same whole undivided Essence can be but one whole.

This is the true Notion (and there can be no other Catholic Sense made of it)
of what the Fathers so universally teach, That there is in the Trinity Vna
Substantia, but not unus subsistens, One Substance, but not one only who
subsists; when yet at the same time they as universally acknowledge, That the
Father is Substance, the Son Substance, the Holy Ghost Substance; and neither
of them each other: That the Person of the Father is the Essence and Substance
of the Father, the Person of the Son the Substance of the Son; that the Person
is not one thing, and the Essence and Substance another, as St. Austin upon all
occasions teaches: Now that there should be but One Substance, and Three
substantial Subsisting Persons, can never be reconciled any other way, than by
the perfect Communication of the same whole undivided Essence and Substance of
the Father to the Son and Holy Spirit.

For the same reason they tells us, That the Father is Wisdom, the Son Wisdom
of Wisdom, and yet but One Wisdom; the Father is Spirit, the Son Spirit, and
the Holy Ghost Spirit, and yet not Three Spirits, but One Spirit; and the
Father is God, the Son God, the Holy Ghost God, yet there are not Three Gods,
but One God: For (...) is (...), One God is the One Divine Essence; and One
Divine Essence, though distinctly subsisting in Three, is but One God, though
every Divine Person having the whole Divine Essence in himself, is True and
Perfect God. Three Divine Natures, though specifically the same, and perfectly
alike, would unavoidably be Three Gods, as three particular Humane Natures are
three men; but (...), a thrice subsisting Monade, as Dyonisius the Areopagite,
calls the Divine Essence, is but One in Three, and therefore but One God in
Three, because but one Divine Essence.

In this Sense we are so often told, That in the Trinity there is alius and
alius, another and another, that is, distinct Subsisting Persons, who are not
each other, but not aliud in the Neuter Gender; not another Essence or Nature,
not only not specifically another, as the Arians asserted, but not another
Nature, though of the same Species, but the same One Individual Nature
communicated whole and undivided to more than One.

Upon the same account, the Father is acknowledged by all Catholic Writers to
be the One only God, and they answer the Objection of Tritheism, by this very
Principle, That they own but One Eternal, Self-originated, Unbegotten Father,
and therefore but One God; They grant, That Three Fathers would be Three Gods;
but when there is but One Eternal Father, though he have an Eternal Son, and an
Eternal Spirit, there can be but One God.

Now what is the meaning of this? Is it because none is, or can be God, True
and Perfect God, but he, who is God of himself, Self-originated and Unbegotten?
This would destroy the Perfect Godhead of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, and
answer the Objection of Tritheism by denying the Trinity. And it is certain
this could not be their meaning, because they owned the Sameness and Equality
of Nature, of Majesty and Glory, of Wisdom and Power in Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, only allowed the Prerogative of the Father (...), in the name and
relation of Father: Teuenda est haec regula, qua non minor est filius, sed de
patre esse int^matur, quibus verbis non inaequalitas, sed nativitas ejus
ostendatur. Aug. de Trin. l. 2. c. 2.
And when the Arians would prove the diversity of Nature between Father and
Son, by this Argument, That the Father is unbegotten, and the Son begotten,
they denied that this inferred the least difference or inequality of Nature.

Now if the Divine Essence be God, and there be a perfect equality of Nature
between Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, though the Father be unbegotten, the Son
begotten, and the Holy Ghost proceeds from both; I desire to know, Why Three
Persons, each of which is True and Perfect God, though one be unbegotten,
another begotten, and a third proceeds, be not as much Three Gods, as Three
that are unbegotten, are Three Gods.

The natural Notion of God is an Eternal, Unmade, Uncreated Essence, which
gives being to all Creatures; but neither Begotten, nor Unbegotten, belongs to
the natural Notion of God, but is matter of pure Revelation; and therefore
Three that are Eternal, as to the natural Notion of God, are as much Three
Gods, as Three that are Unbegotten.

The true Account of it then is this, That One Father, who is unbegotten
himself, but begets a Son, is but One eternal Divine Essence, which he
eternally communicates whole and undivided to the Son, and therefore is but One
Divine Essence still, and therefore but One God: whereas Three Unbegottens, who
do not communicate in each other, and neither give to, nor receive from any
other, must be Three absolute independent Divine Essences, and therefore Three
Gods. And therefore they do not call the Father the One God, merely because he
is (...), unbegotten, but as he is (...), the Fountain of the Deity, who
communicates his own whole Divine Nature and Essence to the Son and Holy
Spirit: (...). Ath. contr. Gregal. Sabell. Vol. 1. p. 651.
For this reason Athanasius condemns Sabellius, for saying that there is but
One only God in the Jewish Notion of One God; not meaning thereby, that there
is but One only who is unbegotten, and who only is the Fountain of the Deity;
but that there is but One God, as having no Son, nor living Word or true Wisdom.

It were easy to enlarge here, and to improve this Observation for the
Explication of several difficult Passages in the Fathers; but this may satisfy
us, that the Catholic Fathers by One Substance did not mean a mere specific,
but a natural and essential Unity.

SECT. VI. A more particular Inquiry what the Catholic Fathers meant by the
(...), the Sameness and Identity of Substance in the Holy Trinity.
WHat I have discoursed in the last Section concerning the Homoousion, and One
Substance of the Godhead, will receive a new Light, if we consider what the
Catholic Fathers meant by the (...), and the (...), the Sameness, Identity,
and Inseparability of Essence and Substance, whereby they explain the Unity of
the Divine Substance, and the Unity of the Godhead.

The Learned Jesuit Petavius has two large Chapters, to prove that both the
Greek and Latin Fathers did assert the Singularity and Numerical Unity of the
Divine Nature and Substance. And I freely grant, That as Singularity is opposed
to a mere specific Unity, he has unanswerably proved it; but why he or the
Schools should choose a word to represent the Sense of the Catholic Fathers by,
concerning the Unity of the Divine Substance, which they themselves rejected as
Sabellianism, I cannot account for; for singularis and solitarius, (...), that
is, the Singularity of Nature and Substance, were rejected as suspected terms
at least, though they allowed the (...), the Sameness and Identity of Nature;
the Vnitas, but not Vnio; the Unity, but not Union; which St. Hilary so often
calls impia Vnio, a wicked Union, as destroying the real distinction of
Persons, and consequently the true Faith of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Quanquam in ejusmodi nominum usu, cum singularem and individuam Dei esse
naturam dicimus, proprietas est observanda significationis: ne sic singularis
credatur esse natura, ut communis esse nequeat: and sic individua, ut in una
tantum existat persona, vel hypostasi, qui fuit Sabellianorum ac similium
haereticorum error, ob quem nonnulli Patres istis repudiatis vocibus, it a
divinitatem unam esse docuerunt, quomodo natura quaelibet communis pluribus una
dicitur. Petav. de Trin. l. 4. c. 14. sect. 11. p. 443.
And to do Petavius right, he rejects such a notion of singularity, as denies
the Divinity to be a Common Nature; as if it could subsist only in One Person
or Hypostasis, which he owns to be Sabellianism; and that for this reason some
of the Fathers (he might have said, most, if not all the Ancient Fathers) did
reject the use of such words, and taught, That the Divine Nature is One, as any
other Nature is, which is common to more than one: And acknowledges, that St.
Hilary, St. Ambrose, St. Austin, and others, do expressly deny that God is a
singular Being, and reject the Notion of singularity from the Divine Essence.

Now such a singularity as this, as admits of a real and substantial
Communication of the Divine Nature, whole of whole, to the Son and Holy Spirit,
is certainly the Doctrine of the Catholic Fathers, and what they meant by the
(...) the Sameness or Identity of Nature in Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in
which they placed the Unity of the Godhead.

That there must be this Sameness and Identy of Nature in all Three Divine
Persons, is evident from the last Section; for a whole of a whole, must be
identically the same Whole; not so the same, as one singular Whole is the same
with it self, but as the same Whole, which thrice subsists, without the least
conceivable difference, is the same with it self in Three. And that this is
what the Fathers meant by that Sameness of Nature, wherein they placed the
Unity of the Godhead, it were easy to prove by numerous Authorities; but some
few may serve in so plain a Case.

One St. Hilary will furnish us with Testimonies enough of this nature: He places
the Sameness of Nature between Father and Son in this, That the Son has by his
Eternal Nativity the Nature of the Father, without the least dissimilitude or
diversity; Nec sit dissimilis in genere, quia diversitatem substantiae geniti
ex substantia Patris Filii similitudo non recipit, and omnem in se Divinitatis
Paternae, qualis and quanta est, formam invisibilis Dei Filius and imago
complectitur. Et hoc vere est esse Filium, Paternae scilicet formae veritatem,
coimaginatae in se naturae perfecta similitudine retulisse. Hilar. de Syn.
indifferens, indissimilis, indiscreta Natura; and this makes the Father and
Son One God: But then at the same time he carefully and expressly rejects the
Notion of Singularity, Solitude, and Union.

Petavius quotes several Passages out of St. Hilary, to prove this Singularity
of the Divine Essence; Retinetur it aque in Patre and Filio naturae
indifferentis similitudo per essentiae nativitatem, non tamen damnum Personae
affert, ut unus sit missus and mittens, similitudo Naturae -- quia cum gignens
and genitus unus esse non possit, non tamen diversae Naturae sint natus and
generans. Ibid.
but all that they amount to, and all that he pretends to prove by them, is,
That the Unity between Father and Son is greater than a Specific Unity, or a
Communion in the same Specific Nature; and this I readily grant; and he might,
In Natura Dei Deus unus est, it a tamen ut and Filius Deus sit, quia in so
Natura non differens sit; and cum Deus ex Deo sit, non potest non uterque Deus
esse, quorum per generis indifferentiam -- non discernatur essentia. Ibid.
if he had pleased, have transcribed half St. Hilary de Trinitate and de
Synodis, to the same purpose: And this is so universally the Doctrine of all
the Greek and Latin Fathers, that there was no difficulty in multiplying
Authorities to this purpose. And I dare appeal to any man who is competently
skilled in these Matters, and will impartially examine the Testimonies Petavius
has produced for the Singularity of the Divine Essence, Whether the most
pertinent of them all prove any more than this, That the Nature of the Father,
without the least alteration or diversity, is communicated whole and perfect,
without any division or separation of Substance, to the Son, (of which more
presently); not that the same singular Nature and Substance which is the Person
of the Father, is also the Person of the Son; which makes the Father and Son to
be but One Person, as well as One Nature and Substance; but so One, that the
One Nature, Substance, and Divinity, which is the Father, is wholly and
perfectly the same in the Son, excepting this, That one is the Father, and the
other the Son: Which is not the Unity of Singularity, which is properly the
Unity of a Person; but the Unity of Identity and Sameness, which is the Unity
of One Individual Nature, which is common to more than one. I don't intend to
transcribe all the Quotations of Petavius, which he has alleged to this
purpose; but yet I will give such a general View of them, as may satisfy any
impartial Reader as to this Point; not to confute Petavius, who, as I have
already observed, rejects the Sabellian Singularity; but to undeceive those who
mistake Petavius and the Schools too, as will appear more hereafter.

I shall only premise, That it had become the Learning and Acuteness of
Petavius to have reconciled the Fathers with themselves; for they were Wise
Men, and true Reasoners, and knew very well what a Contradiction meant; and
therefore we ought not easily to believe that they perpetually contradicted
themselves.

He acknowledges and proves, That the Catholic Fathers did teach a Specific
Unity of the Divine Nature; Petav. de Trin. l. 4. c. 13.
That Father, Son, and Holy Ghost have One Divinity, as Peter, James, and John
have one Human Nature; and he alleges the Authorities of the same Fathers, to
prove the Singularity of the Divine Nature, That it is an exact, perfect,
indivisible Monad: And this also they do plainly teach: But then he should have
considered how to have reconciled these two; for it is certain, that if the
Divine Nature be an indivisible Monad, it cannot be a Species in the common
Notion of a Species; and if it have any thing anolagous to a Species, it cannot
be a singular Monad, because it must be a common Nature, which subsists in more
than one; and Singularity is properly the Unity of a Person, not of a common
Nature. Petavius was very sensible how inconsistent these two kinds of Unity
are; and yet that the Fathers did most commonly explain the Unity of the Divine
Nature by a Specific Unity, and did more cautiously mention the Unity of
Singularity; he might have said, did absolutely reject it, as St. Hilary does
in a hundred places. And was not this a much better reason, so to qualify the
Notions of a Specific Unity and Singularity of Nature, as to reconcile them to
each other, than to make the Fathers contradict themselves; which destroys
three parts of their Reasoning about the Unity of the Godhead, and very much
weakens the Authoity of all the rest?

The Apology which Petavius makes for the Fathers will by no means salve this
matter. He tells us, That if we speak of God according to the exact Rules of
Philosophy; Si ad exact am Philosophiae regulam qui de Deo habetur Sermo
dirigatur, non sic ejusdem Substantiae, id est, (...), sunt Tres Personae, uti
Petrus, Pauleus, and Ioannes; quod tamen antiqui in omni f^re sua disputatione
ponunt, quam contra Arianos instituunt. Petav. de Trin. l. 4. s. 6. p. 425.
the Three Divine Persons are not so of One Substance or Homoousion, as Peter,
Paul, and John; and so far he is in the Right, as I have already shown: But
then what he adds is a very heavy Charge upon the Catholic Fathers; That they
taught this almost in every Dispute they had with the Arians. Now if this be
true, what Apology can be made for them? for, it seems, they confuted the
Arians upon false and dangerous Principles, and were either ignorant themselves
of the true Catholic Faith, or did prevaricate in it.

But let us hear what Excuse he makes for them: He says, They are not to be
blamed for this, nor accused of Ignorance, as if they understood nothing of the
Numerical Unity of the Divine Essence, Neque vero culpandi ob id illi erunt*
aut inscitiae daumandi, tanquam numeralem Unitatem Divinae Essentiae funditus
ignorarint ac solam ejus, quae in natura inest humana, similem agnoverint. Nam
and priorem illam intellexerunt, ut mox ostendam; and prudenter nihi lominus
hac sunt it. exemplam usi posteriore, speci^ique propria Etenim sic illi
adversus Arianos obnitendum sibi esse meminerant, ut scirent Sabellianam quoque
pesiem esse vitandam; in quam ab illa fugienti praeceps lapsus erat, ac
lubricus. Itaque modum hunc adhibendum or ationi suae putarunt; ut summam illam
conjunctionem, and, ut Gregorius Nyssenus loquitur, (...), parcius inducerent,
ne Sabellianae solitudini and singularitati locus dari videretur; alteram vero
quae speciei convenit, libentius usurparent: Quae cum ad Arianorum retundendam
insaniam satis illis erat, tum ab Sabelliani suspicione dogmatis, and calumnia
long cos abesse monstrabat. Ibid.
and owned no other Unity but what is like the Unity of Human Nature; for they
did know the first, but very prudently used the Specific Unity, as an Example
whereby to represent the Divine Unity: But if there be nothing in the Divine
Nature, which is analogous to this Specific Unity, and may be truly and
properly represented by it, as the best Image we have in Nature, I cannot
understand either the Prudence or Honesty of this. Yes, he says, they were to
take Care so to oppose Arianism as to avoid Sabellianism, which otherwise they
might easily slip into: And therefore so tempered their Style as to speak more
sparingly of that highest Unity and Conjunction, which Gregory Nyssen calls a
Perfect Monad, lest they should seem to favor a Sabellian Solitude and
Singularity, but did more freely use the Examples of a Specific Unity, which
was sufficient to confute the Arians; who asserted the Diversity and
Dissimilitude of Nature between Father and Son, which cannot be between those
of the same Kind and Species; and yet at the same time showed how far they were
from Sabellianism.

That this is a very false account of the matter appears from the former
Sections of this Chapter, and will appear more fully from what is to follow;
but if it were true, it would be a very scandalous account; for the sum of it
is this, That to oppose Sabellianism and Arianism, the ancient Fathers advanced
a false Notion of the Divine Unity, and dissembled the true one: Which is no
great commendation of the Catholic Faith, that it needs such Arts, nor of the
Catholic Fathers to use them; when both these sorts of Heretics, as I have
often observed, charged the Catholic Faith with Tritheism, and made that the
very Reason of their Heresies. Can any man think it prudent in these Fathers to
conceal or very cautiously mention the true Notion of the Divine Unity, and to
insist on a Specific Unity, which, if we believe Petavius, is no better than
Tritheism; which would rather have confirmed them in their Heresies than have
confuted them?

These two Heresies being in two extremes, the Catholic Faith must be in the
middle, and the only true Medium between them, is a real distinction of
Persons, without the least diversity of Nature; and this is what they meant
both by their Monad, and Specific Unity, the perfect Sameness and Identity of
Essence, actually, indivisibly, inseparably subsisting in Three, a thrice
subsisting Monad, or Individual Essence or Substance, but not one Singular and
Solitary Substance. And if this be all that Petavius means, as he seems to own,
we are agreed in this Point: But because some think that he means more, and
sometimes he says what seems to imply more, I shall show that he has proved no
more.

He begins with Athanasius; who tells us, Petav. de Trin. l. 4. c. 13. p. 427.
That the Father gives all to the Son; and yet that the Father has the same
All himself; for the Godhead of the Son is the Godhead of the Father. (...).
Ath. Or. 4. p. 489.
Which only proves, That the Father communicates his own Whole Nature to the
Son; that he gives the Whole to the Son, and has the whole himself; which is
the Same, but not One Singular Solitary Godhead, for it is the Whole in Two:
But yet it is the Godhead of the Son, and the Godhead of the Father. And the
Father and Son are Two, but yet the Godhead an inseparable, indivisible Monad.
Ath. or. 5
And therefore this Wonderful Divine Monad must not be divided into Three
Godheads. And having quoted some other Passages of that Father to the same
purpose, he concludes with a very remarkable one out of his Exposition of
Faith. (...)* Ath. in expos. fidei.
That we must not conceive Three Divided and Separate Hypostates in the
Godhead, after the manner of Bodies, as it is among men; which, like the
Pagans, would introduce a plurality of Gods: But as the River, which proceeds
from the Fountain, is not divided from it, though they have Two Forms and Two
Names; for the Father is not the Son, nor the Son the Father; but the Father is
the Father of the Son, and the Son the Son of the Father. For as the Fountain
is not the River, nor the River the Fountain, but both are One; and the
self-same Water ((...)) flows out of the Fountain into the River (and so is the
very same in both) so is that Divinity, which is communicated from the Father
to the Son, without any Efflux, Emanation or Division. This Petavius lays great
Stress on, and it is a most express Testimony against such a mere Specific
Unity in the Godhead, as there is between Three Individuals of the same
Species, as between Three Men. But then it is as express and positive a
Testimony against a Singular and Solitary Divinity, and confirms the Notion of
the perfect Communication of the same Individual Nature and Godhead from the
Father to the Son, which is as perfectly One and the Same in both as the Water
is, which flows out of the Fountain into the River: But with this difference,
That the manner of Communication is not the same, not by Efflux and Emanation
after the manner of Bodies ((...), which I wonder Petavius should transl^te
perenniter) not as Waters flow out of the Fountain, which the Catholic Fathers
always disowned; but by the Ineffable Mystery of the Eternal Generation, as I
have shown above.

The next Father he appeals to is Gregory Nazianzen, whom at other times he has
much ado to excuse from Tritheism. And he tells us, That there is but One God,
because there is but One Divinity, (...). Greg. Naz. Orat. 37.
and those who are of him ((...) of this One God, that is, the Son and Holy
Spirit) are reduced to One, though we believe them to be Three: viz. by that One
D^vinity, which perfectly subsists in each of them: And adds, If we may express
this in short, (...). Ibid.
it is One Undivided Divinity in Three Distinct Persons (for so (...) must here
signify, not Divided or Separate, but Distinct) like the Union of Three S^ns,
which would give but One Vndistinguished Light. One would wonder how this
should prove One Singular Divinity, which it expressly rejects, unless Three
Suns are One Single Solitary Sun, and give but One Single Solitary Light. Such
Expressions as these prove no more than One Undivided Divinity in Three, not
One Singular Divinity.

But the same Father starts an Objection; That since the wisest Philosophers
owned but One Divinity in all their Gods, as we acknowledge but One Humanity in
all Mankind, and yet they believed Many Gods, as we acknowledge, there are Many
Men, though but One Common Humanity: Why must not we confess, That Father, Son
and Holy Ghost are Three Gods also, though they have but One Common Divinity?
This Petavius says, Causoe jugulum petit; and it is indeed an unanswerable
Objection against a mere Specific Unity of Nature, which is Multiplied in
Individuals, and therefore must Multiply Gods as well as Men; but the Perfect
Communication of the Same Whole Individual Nature does not Multiply Natures or
Divinities, though it Multiplies Persons. And this is the very Answer Greg.
Naz. gives, which I had observed before from Damascen, the distinction between
(...). That there is not One Common Subsisting Human Nature in all Men, and
therefore Human Nature is One, only in Notion, not in Reality, every Particular
Man's having a Particular Human Nature of his own; and therefore there are as
many Men, as there are Subsisting Human Natures; but the Divine Nature is One
and Common, not in mere Notion and Idea, but by an Actual Communication without
Division or Separation: This proves it to be One Individual, but not a Singular
Nature; for it is (...) but (...); and One Undivided Divinity, though in a
Wonderful and Ineffable manner it Actually Subsists in Three, can be but One
God.

His other Quotations out of the Greek Fathers are all to the same purpose, and
are resolved into the force of such words as (...), and (...), and (...), and
their rejecting not only Three Gods, but Three Natures, Three Essences, Three
Divinities; and that not (...), which specifically differ from each other, but
even (...), and (...), those which are specifically the same, as Sophronius
speaks; which are unanswerable Testimonies against a mere Specific Unity of
the Divine Nature; but confirms what I have all along asserted, That the same
One Undivided Divinity subsists actually and inseparably, but distinctly in
Three, and therefore is One common Individual, but not a Singular Nature: And
the Latin Fathers, to whom he appeals in Chap. 14* speak all to the same
purpose, and one Answer serves them all.

To give an Account of the Meaning and Reason of these Expressions, which
Petavius insists on to prove the Singularity of the Divine Essence, will be
much more instructing and satisfactory, than to comment upon every particular
Quotation: And therefore I shall, 1. Enquire what the Fathers meant by this
(...), Sameness and Identity of Nature. 2. How they proved the Unity of the
Godhead from this Sameness of Nature. 3. How they distinguished the Divine
Persons in this Sameness of Nature.

1. As for the first, That the Fathers by this Sameness and Identity of Nature
did not mean One singular, solitary, Personal Nature, is abundantly evident
from what I have already discoursed: The Fathers, in opposition to Sabellius,
universally rejected One singular, solitary Nature and Substance, as destroying
a Trinity of Real Persons; for in their Philosophy, One singular Substance is
but One Person; and therefore Three Persons, each of which is by himself True
and Perfect Substance, cannot be One singular Substance; which is Proof enough,
that when they explain the Unity of the Divine Substance by its Sameness and
Identity, they could not by this Sameness and Identity mean Singularity; but
such a Sameness as is between Real, Distinct, Subsisting, Substantial Persons,
who are every way alike, without the least Change or Variation: Which the Greek
Fathers commonly call (...); the Latin Fathers, as St. Hilary especially,
Indifferens and Indissimilis Natura.

That this is the True Notion of this Sameness and Identity of Nature appears
from those Representations which the Catholic Fathers make of it, viz. That it
is such a Sameness and Identity, as there is between a Perfect, Living,
Subsisting Word, and that Perfect Mind, whose Word it is; such a Sameness as is
between Father and Son, between the Prototype and the Image, between the Seal
and the Impression; between Life of Life, Wisdom of Wisdom, Power of Power,
etc. neither of which is the other, and yet both are the same.

That God has an Eternal Word, which was in the Beginning, was with God, and
was God; that this Eternal Word was the Son of God, and this Son the Perfect
Likeness and Image of his Father, the Brightness of his Glory, and the Express
Character of his Substance, is the known Doctrine of the Scripture and Fathers.

That this Word is not like the Word of a Man, but the Substantial, Essential,
Living, Subsisting, Omnipotent Word; and this Son a True, Natural, Genuine Son,
and this Image a Substantial, Living Image, and a Living, Substantial Character
of the Father; that this Word is (...), a Distinct Person from him, whose Word
he is; that the Son is not the Father, nor the Father the Son, but that they
are alius and alius; that the Image is not the Prototype, nor the Prototype the
Image, nor the Chararacter and Impression, that whose Character it is; I have
already proved to be the Received Doctrine of the Catholic Fathers against the
Sabellians, and were there any occasion for it, I could confirm it with
innumerable Testimonies: The only Question then is, What this Sameness and
Identity of Nature is. And if we will allow for that difference there is
between God and Creatures, we may learn, as the Fathers teach us, what this
Sameness of Nature between the Divine Persons is, from the Sameness and
Identity between a Mind and its Word, between Father and Son, between the
Prototype and the Image, the Seal and its Character and Impression.

Now what this Sameness and Identity is, is so visible, that a few words will
explain it.

It is not the Sameness of Singularity; for the Mind and its Word, a Father and
Son, the Prototype and its Image, the Seal and its Impression, are visibly Two:
Nor is it the Sameness of mere Likeness and Similitude, how Exact and Perfect
soever we conceive that Likeness to be; for every one must confess, that there
is a vast difference between the Perfect Likeness of Two Minds, Two Men, Two
Originals, and Two Seals, and that Sameness, which is between a Mind and its
own Word, a Father and his own Son, a Prototype and its own Natural Image, and
the Seal and the Impression which is made by it; just as much difference as
there is between Similitude and Nature, or between a perfect Likeness of Nature
and Identity.

And therefore the complete and adequate Notion of S^meness and Identity
between Two, who are really distinct in Subsistence and Personality, and are
not each other, must be this, That an Eternal Unproduced Person produces
another in his own Nature, Whole, Perfect, Entire, without the least
Conceivable or Possible Difference or Diversity; excepting this, That One
Produces, and the Other is Produced: For Two such, who distinctly subsist, are
really Two Persons in One and the Same Individual Nature.

Thus it is with a Perfect Mind and its Perfect Living, Subsisting Word, which
is perfectly it self, as its own Perfect, Natural Image; Two in Number, but One
in Re, in Nature. Thus it is with a Father and such a Son, as is Whole of
Whole, they are Two and the Same, the Son the Natural Living Image of the
Father, in whom the Father sees Himself, and is seen in Him, as Christ tells
us, He that has seen me has seen the Father: Which is agreeable to the common
Forms of Speech, to call the King's Picture or Image, the King, as the
Catholic Writers frequently observe; which would be exactly and
philosophically true, were it a Perfect, Natural, Living, Inseparable Image:
And this is what the Catholic Fathers call (...), the Sameness or Identity of
Nature; as might easily be proved by numerous Citations: But I will content my
self with a few.

The Nicene Fathers taught, That the Father and the Son were (...), of the same
Nature and Substance: This, as I observed before, they explain by (...), and
(...), a Perfect Invariable Likeness and Similitude, without the least
Difference and Diversity; and this is what they call (...), the Sameness and
Identity of Nature, which cannot be the Sameness of Singularity, but the
Sameness of Indifference and Indiversity; such a Sameness as is between Two,
which are perfectly alike, and differ in nothing from each other.

Athanasius gives this account, why the Nicene Fathers taught, That the Son was
Homoousios, of the same Substance with the Father, that they might signify
that the Son was not only like the Father, but so of the Father, (...). Ath
Decr. Syn. N p. 269.

(...). Ibid. p. 272. (...). p. 273. (...). C^nt. Arian. Or. 1. p. 300 (...),
Or. 2. p. 338. (...). v. 346. (...) p. 365. (...) p. 352. (...). 365. (...).
367.

(...). Ath. Decr. Syn. Nic. p. 280.


as to be the same in Likeness: Now the Sameness and Identity of Likeness
cannot be the Sameness of Singularity; and yet this he calls the Sameness and
Identity with his Father; That the Son is the Natural Genuine Son of the
Father, and the Word God's own proper Word; and the invariable Likeness between
the Light and it is Splendour; the Unity of Nature and the Identity of Light:
With several Expressions, noted in the Margin, which signify the most perfect
Sameness in Nature.

Thus the Son is the Image of God, the Character of his Substance, Nature and
Essence; which is the Language of Scripture, and the constant Doctrine of the
Fathers: And from hence they conclude the (...) and (...), the perfect Sameness
and Identity of Nature between Father and Son, or a perfect Likeness and
Similitude. By which Argument they prove, That he is no Creature, but that he
is Eternal and Omnipotent, and all that his Father is; because this is the
Nature of a Perfect Living Image, to be perfectly all and the same that the
Prototype is.

Thus St. Basil tells us, (...). Bas. ad Eunom. c. 1. p. 718. Tom. 1. Par. 1638.


That the Seal is seen in the Impression, and the Prototype is known by its
Image, from that Sameness and Identity which is in both: Which he calls also
(...), and (...).

This sufficiently proves what the Catholic Fathers meant by this Sameness and
Identity of Nature; not the Sameness of singularity, which they always rejected
as Sabellianism, but such a Sameness as is between Two, who have the same
Individual Nature, subsisting so distinctly in each of them, as to make them
Two, but without the least conceivable or possible Change or Alteration; such a
Sameness as is a perfect likeness and similitude, which cannot be in
singularity. But because Petavius lays great stress upon these Expressions, it
will not be amiss to give two or three direct and positive Proofs of this
matter.

Athanasius expressly cautions us against this, (...) -- Ath. C. Ar. O. 4. p.
488.

(...). Ibid p. 489.


That when we hear that the Son has all that the Father has, this invariable
likeness and sameness of what the Son has, may not mislead us into
Sabellianism, to say, That the Son is the Father himself: And tells us, That
the Father gave all to the Son, and that the Father has all again in the Son;
and the Son having all, the Father again has the same all; for the Godhead of
the Son is the Godhead of the Father.

Gregory Nyssen, or St. Basil, for the same Treatise is ascribed to them both,
(...) -- (...) -- (...). Basil. Ep. 43. Gr. Nyss. d ediffer. Essent. and Hypost.


proves both the (...) and the (...), from the nature of an Image; That the Son
is both the same with the Father, and another; for so an Image is both the same
with its Prototype, and yet another; not the Prototype it self. And adds, that
we may see the Father in the Son, not considered as unbegotten, for then he
would be upon all accounts the same, and not another, which destroys the Nature
and Character of an Image.

The same account St. Hilary gives of an Image, Exclusa est assertio volentium
nominibus tantum Patrem and Filium praedicare, cum imago omnis ejus ad quem
coimaginetur, species indifferens sit. Neque enim ipse sibi quisquam imago est,
sed eum cujus imago est, necesse est ut imago demonstret. Imago est itaque rei
ad rem coaequandae imagiuata and indiscreta similitudo. Est ergo Pater, est and
Filius, quia imago Patris est Filius. Et qui imago est ut vere imago sit,
speciem necesse est and naturam and essentiam, secundum quod imago est, in se
habeat Autoris. Hilar. de Synod.


That it signifies a perfect likeness and similitude of Nature between Two; for
no Man is his own Image, but the Image represents the Prototype: And therefore
there is a Father, and there is a Son, if the Son be the Image of the Father;
and being an Image, the Son must necessarily have in himself the Nature and
Essence of his Father. Which he urges as a direct Confutation of the Sabellian
Singularity. But there is no need of multiplying Authorities in this Case,
since it is so very obvious to every one, who ever looked into the Fathers,
That the (...), and (...), the Sameness and Identity, and the Community of
Nature, though they differ in their formal Notions, yet both equally belong to
the same Divine Nature; and the same Identical Nature, which is also a common
Nature, cannot be One in the Notion of Singularity.

2 dly. Having thus shown what the Catholic Fathers meant by the Sameness and
Identity of Nature in Father and Son, I proceed to show, That herein they
placed the Unity of the Godhead, the (...), the One Divinity, and what account
they give of this matter.

The Defense they generally make for the Unity of God in a Trinity of Divine
Persons, is reducible to two Heads; this Sameness and Identity of Nature, and
the (...), or inseparable Unity; which Two make up the complete Notion of the
Divine Unity; but I must now consider them apart.

That the Catholic Fathers did resolve the Unity of God into this Sameness and
Identity of Nature, That the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, though they are Three
Real, Proper, Distinct Persons, yet have the same One Divine Nature, which
subsists whole, and perfect, and distinct, without any Change or Variation in
all Three; and that therefore they are not Three Gods, but One God, is so very
plain, that there is no need of multiplying words about it. The One God in the
Catholic Language is One Divine Nature in Three Persons; and this (...), or
(...), this One Essence, and One Divinity, is (...), which are often used as
equivalent terms, the Unity, Identity, Propriety, and Sameness of Nature; as
(...), one and the same. All those Passages quoted by Petavius, though they do
not prove the Singularity of the Divine Nature, yet prove the Unity of the
Godhead, Pet. de Tri. l. 4. c. 13, and 14.
by the perfect and invariable Sameness of Nature, in the sense now explained.

But the Testimony of St. Basil against the Sabellians is so full and express
to this purpose, that I shall represent this matter in his Words, wherein he
agrees with all the other Catholic Fathers.

Though (Father and Son) are Two in Number, (...). Basil cont. Sabellianos. p.
521.


yet are they not divided in Nature; nor does he who says Two Persons, alienate
them from each other. There is One God, because a Father; but the Son also is
One God, not Two Gods, because of the Sameness and Identity of the Son with the
Father; for there is not One Divinity in the Father, and Another in the Son;
nor One Nature of the Father, and another of the Son. When therefore you would
distinguish the Persons, number them distinctly, the Father by himself, and the
Son by himself; but if you would avoid Polytheism, confess but One Nature in
them both, which rejects both the Sabellian and Anomoean Heresy. But when I say
One Nature, you must not imagine that Two Persons are made of One Nature,
(...). Ibid.
as it were by a division of it into two Parts; but only conceive the Son
subsisting of the Father, as his Principle and Original: Nor must you conceive
that Father and Son are so of One Nature, as partaking of some One Same Nature
and Substance antecedent to them both; for we do not call them Brethren, but
Father and Son, which signifies the Sameness and Identity of Nature. For the
Son is of the Father, not made by his Command, but begotten of his Nature; not
by Division of the Father's Substance; but the Son shines forth whole and
perfect from a perfect Father, without any diminution of him. And therefore, as
he proceeds, do not charge us with Preaching Two Gods, or Polytheism; for we
Preach not Two Fathers, or Two Principles, and therefore not Two Gods, which
was the Impiety of Marcion: Nor do we make the Father and Son of a different
Nature, unlike to each other, as the Anomoeans do. -- But where there is but
One Principle, and One Begotten of it, One Prototype, and One Image, the Unity
is preserved: Because the Son who is begotten of the Father, and imprints his
Father's Nature and Essence on himself, as an Image, (...). Ibid. p. 522.
he has an invariable Likeness, as a Son he retains the same Nature and
Substance. Now as a man who calls the King's Image or Picture the King, does
not make Two Kings, nor deny him whose Image it is, to be the King, much less
reason is there for such an Imputation in this Case. For here, (...). Ibid.
when we hear of the Image of God, we must conceive nothing less than the
Brightness of his Glory. But what is this Brightness, and what is this Glory?
That the Apostle adds, The perfect Impression or Character of his Substance.
And therefore Substance is the same with Glory, and Character with Brightness:
So that the Divine Glory remaining perfect and undiminished, emits a perfect
Splendour and Brightness: And thus the very Nature of an Image expounded as it
becomes God, confirms the Faith of One Divinity. For the Father is in the Son,
and the Son in the Father; because such as the Father is, such is the Son, and
such as the Son is, such is the Father: And thus Two are One, because the Son
in nothing differs, as receiving no other Form or Character, but that of his
Father. And therefore I say again, One and One, but an undivided Nature, and
never-failing Perfection. And therefore there is One God, because by both the
same perfect Divine Form and Nature is seen wholly and perfectly subsisting in
both.

This I think is as plain as words can make it, both what St. Basil meant by
the Sameness and Identity of Nature, and that herein he placed the Unity of the
Godhead; and were there any occasion for it, it were easy to confirm this by
the concurrent Suffrages of Athanasius, Gregory Nyssen, and Gregory Nazianzen,
St. Cyril, and other Greek Fathers, almost in the same words.

St. Hilary and St. Ambrose, to name no more of the Latin Fathers, are so
express in placing the Unity of the Godhead in this perfect Sameness,
Indifference, Indiversity of Nature between Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, that
there is no need of any other Art, but barely to represent their Words; Haec
est verae nativitatis intelligentia, and fidei nostrae, quae ex natura divinae
unitate, unius indifferentisque divinitatis veritatem in patre and filio
confitetur, absolutissimum sacramentum. Hill. de Trin. l. 7. p. 86. Bas. 1570.

Exaequata virtus est per naturae indissimilis unitatem. P. 87.

Omnia habere sola natura possit indifferens, neque nativitas aliquid possit
habere, nisi datum sit. -- Neque aliter potuit aut debuit filius a patre
distingui, quam quod natus sit, nec tamen differens doceretur. Ibid.

Non confunditur itaque aut aboletur natura, ne filius sit, nec tamen rursum
adimitur natura, ne Deus sit, nec discernuntur diversitate, ne unum sint, neque
quod unum sunt id potest praestare, ne uterque sit. P. 88.

Ego and Pater unum sumus: Ut quod unum sunt, nec diversum nec solitarium
crederetur, non alia in utroque per nativitatis and generationis proprietatem
existente natura. -- Confessionem unius in utroque and consimilis naturae. 89.

Quia non differt, nec degenerat nativitas, -- dum Dei filius, non aliud quam
Deus est.

Vnum dixit, ne fiat discretio potestatis; sumus addidit, ut patrem filiumque
cognoscas, quo perfectus pater perfectum filium genuisse credatur. Et pater and
filius unum sint, non confusione, sed unitate naturae. Ambr. de fide, l. 1.
initio.

Non enim pater ipse qui filius, sed inter patrem and filium generationis
expressa distinctio est; ut ex Deo Deus, ex manente manens, ex pleno plenus
sit. -- Est enim plenitudo divinitatis in patre, est plenitudo divinitatis in
filio, sed non discrepans, sed una divinitas. Nec confusum quod unum est, nec
multiplex quod indifferens. -- Quanto magis pater and filius unum sunt, ubi nec
substantiae nec voluntatis ulla est differentia. -- In te igitur est Deus per
unitatem naturae, and non est Deus praeter te per proprietatem substantiae,
repulsam differentiae. Ibid.


and therefore I shall only refer my Readers to some few Quotations in the
Margin.

It cannot be denied, but that all the Fathers unanimously agree in this
Account of the Unity of the Divine Nature in Three Distinct Persons: Which
should make modest men very cautious of charging it with a direct Contradiction
to all Reason and Philosophy: But Modesty and Reverence to the Catholic
Fathers, are none of the prevailing Virtues of this Age.

But is it indeed such a Contradiction to say, That the same Nature, which is
perfectly and in every thing the same in Three, is but One Nature in Three, and
that such Three have not Three Natures, but One Nature? Is it such a direct
Contradiction to Sense and Reason, to say, That there is alius, and alius, and
alius, in the Trinity, but not aliud? That there is Another, and Another, and
Another Person in the Holy Trinity; but that there is nothing in any One of
these Persons, which can be called Another thing from what is in the other Two?
This is so far from a Contradiction, that it seems plain Sense, nay, plain
Demonstration to me, That Three Persons who have nothing in themselves but what
each of them have, without the least conceivable Variation, are in Nature but
one and the same; and though each of them be Another Person, yet not Another
Thing, or Another Nature.

There are several Examples in Nature which justify this distinction between
alius and aliud, and must make all thinking men confess that they cannot speak
properly without it. I would not be mistaken in this matter, and therefore
desire the Reader carefully to observe, That I do not allege these Instances
which follow, as Resemblances of the Trinity, but only as Examples of a perfect
Sameness and Unity in Nature; where we must confess, That the thing is but One
and the same, and yet that there is Another and Another: And if there be any
Images of this in Nature, there is no reason to call this a Contradiction in
the Faith of the Trinity.

Let me then ask this plain Question: When Five hundred Men hear the same Man
speak, do they all hear one and the same Voice, or Five hundred Voices? It
will, I think, be granted, that it is but one and the same Voice which they all
hear, and yet it is heard five hundred times, and is distinctly in five hundred
Ears: The Voice is essentially one and the same in all, and yet no man dares
deny that the Voice in Peter's Ear is another from that Voice which is in
John's Ear; and therefore is Another and Another, but not Another Thing: And
were a Voice Essence and Substance, there would be One Nature, Essence, and
Substance, in a Plurality of Hypostases.

Thus Sight furnishes us with as many Examples of this as Hearing: When five
hundred Men see the same thing, the Object is one and the same, and yet is
Another and Another, according to the number of the Persons who see it: Is one
and the same in Nature, and subsists the same, and yet distinctly in each eye.

Sight and Hearing approach nearest to an Incorporeal Nature, and therefore
give us the nearest Resemblances of a Spiritual Sameness, Unity, and
Distinction: But we have still more perfect Images of this, in what is more
perfectly Spiritual.

The same Notion and Idea, though it subsist in Ten thousand Minds, is
perfectly the same in all. A perfect true Idea of any thing, is and can be but
One; and therefore how many Minds soever it subsist in, it must be one and the
same in all; but yet the Idea in the Mind of Peter is not the same in
Subsistence with the Idea in the Mind of Paul: It is Another and Another, and
yet the same Idea in Nature and Essence: As suppose the perfect Idea of
Humanity, or Human Nature, and the perfect Idea of the Divine Nature; if they
be true and perfect, they are perfectly the same in all the Minds in the World;
and nothing but the different Notions men have of things, can multiply such
Ideas.

Now if we advance but one step higher, we shall plainly see what this Unity of
Sameness is; what the true Notion of it is, and how far it reaches: For though
this be absolutely essential to the Divine Unity, yet as I have already noted,
and will appear more hereafter, this is not the complete and adequate Notion of
it.

Let us suppose then that Human Nature, for instance, did subsist as perfectly
the same in Peter, James, and John, as the true and perfect Idea of Human
Nature is one and the same in all; that a Man were nothing else but the living
subsisting Idea of Human Nature, without the least change or variation in
Nature to distinguish one from another: I say, in such a Case as this, would
not Three such Persons be perfectly one and the same, (...) and (...), in the
Sameness and Identity of Nature, which would be as perfectly and invariably the
same, as the common Notion and Idea of Nature? Would not Human Nature be as
perfectly the same in Three Persons or Subsistences, as the Idea of Human
Nature is one and the same in Three Minds? Or could we in proper speaking, with
reference to this Sameness of Nature, any more say that there are Three Men,
than that there are Three Humanities, when a Man is nothing else but the
subsisting Idea of Humanity? Would not, as far as this Sameness and Identity
reaches, Human Nature be a (...), and a (...); not merely (...), but (...),
both One and a Common Nature, not merely by a Logical and Notional Unity and
Community, but by an actual Subsistence in all, without the least difference or
diversity? As the Idea of Human Nature is both One, and Common to the whole
Kind.

This indeed is but an imaginary Case, as to Finite Creatures, who never were,
and never can be so perfectly One and the same, as their Idea is; but yet it is
the properest and most sensible representation we can make of the Sameness and
Identity of the Divine Nature, which has really and actually all that Sameness
and Identity which we only suppose in Creatures to help our Conceptions of the
Divine Unity; how different Hypostases may be One in Nature by this Sameness
and Identy of Nature.

The Divine Nature and Essence is more perfectly simple and uncompounded than
any Notion and Idea which we can frame of it; and therefore must subsist as
simply as the simplest Idea, and consequently must be as perfectly one and the
same in all Three Persons of the Trinity, as the same Idea is one and the same
with it self: And though this be not the whole notion of the Sameness and
Identity of Nature, which requires not only two perfect Sames, but that one be
of the other without division or Separation; yet this is essential to this
Notion, and there can be no Identity of Nature without it: This is what the
Catholic Fathers intended in many Passages, which some Modern Writers have so
miserably mistaken and misrepresented, as to charge those Wise men, and Learned
Philosophers, with the most wild and absurd Conceits, and those great Advocates
of the Catholic Faith with the worst of Heresies, even Tritheism it self. I
cannot do right to my Cause, without doing right to these great Lights of the
Church, in giving a plain account of this matter.

And to explain what they meant by this Sameness and Identity of Nature, and to
show how groundless this Imputation of Tritheism is, I shall begin with their
natural Proof and Demonstration of the Unity of God against the Pagan
Polytheism, which they unanimously resolve into this Sameness and Identity of
Nature. They prove, that there can be but One God, and One Divinity, because
the Divine Nature is not capable of the least conceivable change and diversity,
which is necessary to make a Number: For what is, and always must be the same
with it self, cannot be another, or a Second Nature; and One Divinity is but
One God.

This they prove from all the Notions which we have of God, especially that
comprehensive One of an Absolute and Perfect Being; for Absolute Perfection is,
and can be but One, without any possibility of change; for all change and
diversity must be either for the better or for the worse, and Absolute
Perfection can admit of neither; and without diversity and alterity there can
be but One. An Infinite Nature, which nothing can distinguish from it self, can
be but One; and could we imagine any thing to be added to, or taken from it, to
make this distinction, it would destroy, not only its Unity, but its Infinity
too; it would indeed make a Number, but not of absolute perfect Beings.

If we consider the Divine Perfections by themselves, (...) (forta (...))
(...). Greg. Nyss. Catech. Or. Praef.
it is impossible to conceive any difference or diversity, and consequently any
number in them: Is not Eternal Truth, and Infinite Wisdom, and Omnipotent
Power, always one and the same? Can Eternal Truth, and Infinite Wisdom in any
thing vary from it self, to make two Eternal Truths, and Infinite Wisdoms? Now
remove all possible diversity, and you necessarily destroy a plurality of Gods;
for a Perfect Sameness and Identity must reduce us to the belief of One God:
For what is perfectly the same, is not many, but one. (...).

Well! But cannot there be more than one of these Eternal, infinitely Wise,
infinitely Good, and Omnipotent Natures? No: For if this Nature must of
necessity be always the same, and is unmade and self-originated, it can be but
one: For though in Created Natures several of the same kind may be made
according to the same Pattern, there being nothing in the Idea of any Created
Nature which hinders the multiplication of its Individuals, yet a Nature which
subsists of it self; and is absolutely incapable of any diversity, and
consequently of number, can be but One; for a Self-subsisting Nature must
subsist according to its own Essential Idea, that is, according to its own
Nature, and that is but One; for as far as we can judge of these Matters, what
we cannot possibly conceive should ever be Two, we must conclude to be One.

But besides this, these Fathers observed, That if there were more than one
Self-originated Divinity, or more Divine Natures than one, they must be divided
and separated from each other; for if to the Sameness and Identity of Nature
you add an inseparable and indivisible Union too, it is impossible they should
be more than One. And yet two or more such divided and separated Natures are
inconsistent with the Notion of a Divine Nature and Essence, which is (...),
Uncircumscribed, and Omnipresent; whereas two Divided and Separated Natures,
which are not where each other is, must be Circumscribed, and not Omnipresent,
and this destroys the absolute Perfection of both; for a confined and limited
Presence, as it is an imperfection it self, so confines and limits all other
Perfections, as it confines Wisdom, Power and Goodness within a certain limited
Sphere of Action.

And now it may be, some may think that these Arguments conclude as strongly
against a Trinity of Divine Persons, each of which is by himself True and
Perfect God, as against a plurality of Divided and Separate Divinities; and
upon second thoughts, I suspect this may be what our Considerer intended in
those surprising Arguments, of the Unity of Idea, and the Unity of Position and
Place, to prove, that there can be but one single Person, in the true and
proper notion of a Person, for an Intelligent Person, in the Trinity; this to
be sure is the Argument which a Socinian Writer alleges with so much triumph
out of Athenagoras to disprove the Trinity, though that very Ancient and
Learned Writer understood very well the difference between Polytheism and the
Trinity, and at the same time confutes the one, and professes the other; which
might have made that Author suspect, that he did not understand the true force
of this Argument, since not only Athenagoras, but all the other Fathers,
thought it a good Argument against Polytheism, and at the same time a
Confutation of the Charge of Polytheism against the Faith of the Trinity.

Gregory Nyssen, and Damascen, and many others, having confuted the Pagan
Polytheism, or plurality of Gods from the Sameness and Identity of the Divine
Nature, which can admit of no change or diversity, and therefore not of number;
they immediately proceed to consider the distinction of Persons and Hypostases
in the perfect Unity and Simplicity of the Divine Nature, in opposition to the
Jewish Notion of One God, for One Single and Solitary Divine Person.

And here they undertake to prove by Natural Arguments (of which possibly more
hereafter) that the (...), or Divinity, must have an Eternal Subsisting Word,
which is Life, Wisdom, Power, all the same in his own Person that God is, but
yet another Person: For the (...) is not (...), the Divinity is not without its
Coeternal Word, Gr. Nyss. cat. or. c. 1.
and Coessential Reason and Wisdom; and the same they teach and prove
concerning the Eternal Spirit; so that they make Father, Son, and Spirit, to be
essential to One Divinity, not as parts, but as perfectly whole, and the same
in Three distinct Hypostases, which they think necessarily included in the
Perfection of One Divinity, as Reason and Word is essential to a Created Mind.
This is what they mean by the (...), One Divinity in Three Perfect Hypostases;
not that Three Hypostases are united, as it were ex post facto, into One
Divinity; but that One Divinity does subsist Eternally, Essentially, and
Inseparably, in Three Hypostases, which are necessary to complete the Notion
and Definition of One Divinity. Thus it is certain Melanchton understood it,
and therefore rejects the Definition which Plato gives of God, That he is an
Eternal Mind, the Cause of all Good in the World; for though he owns it to be
True and Learned, when rightly explained, yet he says it is defective, and must
be supplied by the Gospel Revelation. That God is a Spiritual Intelligent
Essence, Deus est essentia Spiritualis, intelligens, verax, bona, pura, justa,
misericors, liberima, immensae potentiae and sapientiae, Pater aeternus, qui
Filium imaginem suam ab aterno genuit, and Filius imago Patris coaeterna, and
Spiritus Sanctus procedens a Patre and Filio, etc. Melanct. loci Theol. de Deo.
Eternal, True, Good, Just, Merciful, most free, of Infinite Power and Wisdom,
the Eternal Father, who from Eternity begat a Son, his own Image, and the Son,
the Coeternal Image of the Father, and the Holy Spirit, proceeding from Father
and Son.

So that the Holy and Ever Blessed Trinity is but One Eternal Coessential
Divinity; that were there more Divinities than One, there must of necessity be
more Trinities also, according to the Doctrine of these Fathers; which is
evidence enough, that this Argument against a plurality of Divinities from the
perfect Sameness and Identity of the Divine Nature, which cannot be multiplied,
cannot concern a Trinity of Real Subsisting Persons in the same One Eternal
Undivided Divinity: For the same One Divinity is not multiplied by a Trinity of
Persons Coeternal and Coessential; if this be the Nature and Unity of the
Deity, to subsist whole and perfectly in Three, which was the constant Doctrine
of the Fathers, and which this Argument don't oppose; nay so far from it, that
it as evidently proves the Unity of the Godhead in a Trinity of Persons, as it
confutes a Plurality of Godheads and Divinities; for if the Sameness and
Identity of Nature will not admit of a Plurality of Divinities, then if Three
are perfectly One and the same in Nature, they are but One Divinity, One God.
Thus the Incircumscriptibility or Omnipresence of the Divine Nature is a good
Argument against a Plurality of God's, or Divinities, which must be separated,
if they be more than One, and therefore circumscribed, or of a limited and
confined presence; but it is no Argument against a Trinity of Persons in the
Unity of Essence, which are all mutually in each other, and therefore equally
Unconfined and Omnipresent, and perfectly One by an Essential and Inseparable
Union. And are not these Fathers now like to prove very notable Tritheites, who
prove the impossibility, that there should be more Divinities than One, and the
perfect Unity of the Godhead in a Trinity of Divine Persons, from that perfect
Sameness and Identity of Nature which is between them?

But yet for all this Tritheites they are and must be, if they acknowledge
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to be One God, in no other sense than Peter,
James, and John, are one Man; that is, because they agree in the same common
Nature, which has the same notion and definition, and is upon that account One
and the same in all. This is what they are charged with, and I should not have
wondered at it, had only some Careless and Unskilful Readers charged them with
it, for they do say something which at first view may look like it; but then
such Sayings as manifestly contradict their avowed Doctrine, not only in other
places of their Writings, but in those very Places where these Sayings are
found, ought in all Reason and Justice to be expounded only by way of Analogy
and accommodation, as containing some imperfect Image and Resemblance of that,
which Nature has no proper and adequate Example of. This must be allowed in all
the Natural Representations which are made by the Catholic Fathers of the
Unity and Distinction of the Ever-blessed Trinity; or there is not one of them,
but what literally and Philosophically applied, would furnish out some new
Heresy: This I have already shown in the Specific Unity of the Divine Nature,
which the Nicene Fathers did teach in a qualified Sense; though it appears from
all I have said in the last, and this present Section, how far they were from
thinking the Divine Nature to be a mere Species, or Logical Notion, though it
has this resemblance to a Species, that it is One and Common, but not merely
(...) but (...), not in mere Notion and Idea, but by an actual Subsistence and
Inexistence in all Three, being as perfectly, wholly, indivisibly the same in
all, and in each of the Divine Persons, as a Specific Nature is Notionally and
Ideally one and the same in every individual of the same kind, which, as I have
made appear, is that (...), Sameness and Identity of Nature, wherein they place
the Unity of the Godhead. And yet this is the only foundation of the present
Charge, that they make Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to be One God only by a
Specific Unity, as Three Individuals of the same kind and Species, suppose
Peter, James, and John are one Man. That all this is a mistake, is evident,
because these Fathers do not resolve the Unity of the Godhead into a mere
Specific Unity of Nature; and the occasion of this mistake is great
Inadvertency, as will appear in a very few words.

Gregory Nyssen is principally charged with this Paradox, and in vindicating
him, I shall vindicate all the rest.

(...) -- (...). Greg. Nyss. ad Ablabium, Vol. 2. p. 448.
The Question which Ablabius desired him to resolve, was this, That since Peter,
James, and John, though they have but one common Humanity, are yet called three
Men; and no man denies, but that the name of Nature may be multiplied, when
there are more who are united in the same Nature, how comes it to pass that we
contradict this in the Mystery of the Trinity? that we acknowledge Three
Hypostases, who have the very same Nature, without the least difference or
diversity, and yet teach, that the Divinity of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is
but One, and forbid saying, that there are Three Gods?

Now the better to understand the Father's Answer, we mu^t observe that this
was an Arian Objection against the Homoousion, or the perfect Sameness,
Indifference, and Equality of Nature between Father and Son: For the design of
it was, as St. Gregory himself observes, to reduce them to this dangerous
Dilemma, either to assert Three Gods, (...). Ibid.
which is unlawful; or to deny the Divinity of the Son and Holy Ghost, which is
impious and absurd. If they denied the Sameness and Equality of Nature, then
the Son and Holy Ghost are not True and Perfect God, consubstantial with the
Father; or if Father, Son, and Holy Ghost have the same One Common Nature, and
are perfectly consubstantial, then they are Three Gods; as Peter, James, and
John, who have the same One Common Humanity, are Three Men; and there is the
very same reason for calling Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Three Gods, that
there is for calling Peter, James, and John, Three Men; that is, the same
Nature common to them all.

This was the Objection St. Gregory was to answer; and therefore his business
was to prove, That Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are not, and ought not to be
called Three Gods, as Peter, James, and John, are and may be called Three Men;
and therefore he must prove, That they are neither Three nor One, in the same
sense that Three Men are Three and One; for if they were, they would be as
truly and properly Three Gods, as Peter, James, and John, are Three Men; and no
more One God, than they are One Man; which had been to give up the Cause to the
Arians, instead of answering their Objection.

This may satisfy any man, that those Learned Persons are very much mistaken,
who charge such a sense upon this Father, as is directly contrary to his
design; for he understood the Laws of Reasoning better. Neither he, nor any
other Father I ever yet met with, asserted that Peter, James, and John, were
but One Man; or that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are One God no otherwise than
Peter, James, and John, are One Man; which yet is what has been charged upon
them.

But does not Greg. Nyssen say, That it is a catachrestical way of speaking,
(...) --
tho become common and familiar, to multiply the name of Nature with the
Individuals of the same Nature? As to say, That there are many Men, because
there are many who have the same Human Nature. (...). Gr. Nyss. Ibid.
-- But if we would speak accurately and properly, we should say that there is
but one Man, how many soever have the same Nature: And does not he apply this
to the Unity of God? And can this have any other sense, than that the same
Divine Nature makes Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, but One God, as the same Human
Nature makes all the Men in the World but one Man? The Interpretation of which
seems to be, That Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are as much Three Gods, as
Peter, James, and John, are Three Men; but that it is very improper to call
either the one or the other Three, for they are but One, by One Common Nature.

Now this Father does indeed say, and so many others of them say, That the name
of Nature ought not to be multiplied with the Individuals; but he was far
enough either from saying or thinking what he is charged with, That Peter,
James, and John, are not Three Men, but One Man; or that Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, are One God in no other sense, but as Three Men are One: And a due
attendance to the Series of the Argument, would have discovered the Falseness
and Absurdity of this Imputation; which therefore I shall briefly explain.

The Arian Objection which St. Gregory undertook to answer, as I observed
before, was this; That since the Catholic Church owned the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, to be consubstantial, and to have the same undiversified Nature,
they must for that reason be Three Gods; as Peter, James, and John, upon
account of the same common Humanity, are acknowledged to be Three Men: That is,
that whether in God or Man, the same Nature in Three must make Three
Individuals of the same Kind and Species; and therefore as the same Human
Nature in Three makes Three Men, so the same Divine Nature Three Gods.

In answer to this, St. Gregory first observes, That it is not the same common
Nature which distinguishes and multiplies Individuals, no, not in Men: Peter,
James, and John, are not Three Individuals in the Species of Humanity, merely
by having the same Nature (which is the force of the Arian Objection); for what
is perfectly the same in all, cannot distinguish or multiply them. And this is
plainly all that he means, when he says, That the name of Nature ought not to
be used plurally; and therefore Man being the name of Nature, and signifying
the same with Humanity, we ought no more, if we speak properly and
Philosophically, to say Three Men, than Three Humanities, or Three Human
Natures; for he proves, that the name Man does not distinguish one Man from
another, nor can we single any particular Man out of a Crowd by that
Compellation; for there is but One Man, (...).
or One Humamanity in them all; that name not belonging primarily and
immediately to the Individuals as such, but to the common Nature.

Well; but are there not Individual Men then, as well as a Common Nature? Yes,
without doubt; but they are distinguished and multiplied, not by the Common
Nature, which is the same in all, but by such peculiar Properties as diversify
and distinguish Common Nature, (...). Ibid.
as it subsists separately in particular Persons, and that makes the Number,
though Nature be one and the same, a perfect indivisible Monad.

This is not merely to criticize upon Words, or to dispute against the common
Forms of Speech, but to give a true Philosophical Reason of their different
Use, when applied to God and Creatures. We commonly call Peter, James, and
John, Three Men, and right enough; but then they are not Three Men merely upon
account of the same Common Humanity in them all, (which was the Arian
Objection); for Humanity is but One in all, and what is perfectly One cannot be
numbered. To say there are Three Humanities, all Men grant to be absurd; and yet
it is to the full as absurd, to say that Peter, James, and John, are Three Men,
merely upon account of the same Humanity, strictly and precisely taken, as to
say that there are Three Humanities: So that though Peter, James, and John,
could not be, nor be called Three Men, without the same Common Nature, yet some
peculiar, distinguishing, diversifying Properties make them Three Men. Could
Human Nature subsist as perfectly and indivisibly the same in Three, as the
perfect Idea of Humanity, their Persons might be distinguished, but their
Nature would be as perfectly One, as the Idea of Humanity is one and the same
in distinct Minds; and in this Case (as far as this perfect Sameness of Nature
can make them one, which, as I have observed, is not the complete Notion of the
Divine Unity, though it be essential to it) they might be called Three Human
Persons, but not Three Men: But such peculiar Properties as diversify and
thereby distinguish the same common Nature into Particulars, make the Number:
Which is one reason why we must not say Three Gods, as we do Three Men, though
the same Divinity be common to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; because this same
One Divinity subsists whole and perfect, without the least Change, Diversity,
or Alteration in Three: That though their Persons are distinct, the Divinity is
perfectly One and the Same in All, and therefore they are but One God.

So that these Fathers do not insist on a mere Specific Unity, but on the
Sameness and Identity of the Divine Nature in Three, as the reason why we must
not say that there are Three Gods; for the same One undiversified Divinity can
be but One God. And therefore having answered that Popular Objection, That
Peter, James, and John, are allowed to be called Three Men, upon account of the
same common Nature, by showing that it is a great Popular Mistake, that merely
the same One Common Nature makes them Three Men, or will justify their being
called so; this Father proceeds to show, That there is such an Unity between
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as is not, and cannot be between any Three
Creatures, though they partake of the same Common Nature: Such an Unity as
makes Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, essentially One God, though Peter, James,
and John, are Three Men. Nay, such an Unity, as even a perfect Sameness and
Identity of Nature cannot make between Creatures who have an absolute and
separate Subsistence.

This gives a reasonable Account of this whole Argument, and vindicates it from
those Absurdities which are charged on it. It was necessary to lay the
Foundation of the Divine Unity in the perfect and invariable Sameness and
Identity of Nature: For if the Divine Nature in Three is not perfectly the
same, it cannot be One; for Diversity and Alterity makes a Number: But if it
subsist as perfectly the same in Three, as its Idea is the same, it must be as
perfectly one as its Idea is one. No, say these Arians, the same Nature
subsisting in Three, becomes Three Individual Natures of the same Species; and
the name of Nature must be multiplied with the Individuals, as all allow it
must be as to Men, who partake of the same Common Nature: For Peter, James, and
John, are acknowledged to be Three Men, though they have but one common
Humanity; and by the same reason, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, must be Three
Gods, if they have the same common Divinity.

To which St. Gregory Nyssen answers, That it is not the common Humanity which
makes them Three Men; for that which is but one and the same in all, cannot
distinguish or multiply them; and therefore in strict and accurate speaking, as
Man signifies pure and abstracted Humanity, we cannot properly say Three Men,
because there are not Three Humanities; and accordingly, the name Man does not
and cannot distinguish one Man from another, nor is ever used to that purpose;
but that which multiplies Nature, and the name of Nature, are those peculiar
Properties which distinguish and diversify Nature, as well as Persons; and thus
the common Nature, with diversifying Properties, (...), is distinguished and
multiplied by a kind of Composition; for the same Nature with one peculiar
diversifying Property, is distinguished from the same Nature with other
Properties; and thus the same Nature divided and distinguished with these
Properties, makes a Number, and gives the name of Nature to each Individual
Person, and thus it is in all Creatures: But where the same Nature subsists in
Three, without any thing to distinguish or diversify Nature, as it is in the
Blessed Trinity, though the Persons may be distinguished, the Nature and the
name of Nature can be but One: Which is the reason why Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, are but One God, because they have but One undistinguished,
undiversified Nature, though their Persons are distinct.

This is the true Account of this Matter; which is so far from such a mere
Specific Unity of Nature as is between Three Men, that it is that very
Sameness and Identity of Nature, which the Catholic Fathers make essential to
the Unity of the Godhead.

And the better to understand this, we must consider their Philosophy about
Numbers; for according to them, nothing properly but Alterity and Diversity
makes a Number: Diversitas plures facit, unitas potestatis excludit numeri
quantitatem, quia unitas numerus non est, sed haec omnium ipsa principium est.
Ambr. de fide, c. 1.
What is perfectly the same, is but One, as Boethius tells us; not by a
Singularity, but by a perfect Sameness and Identity of Nature. In this sense it
is, that Greg. Nazianzen, St. Basil, and others, teach, That God is One, (...),
not in Number, but Nature; whereby they do not mean that there are more Gods in
Number than One; but that the Unity of the Godhead does not consist in the
Unity of Number, but of Nature; and that the Unity of Nature consists in the
invariable Sameness and Identity of it; and therefore where the Divinity is
perfectly the same, there is but One God. Thus Greg. Nyssen tells us, (...).
Greg. Nyss. Catech. Or. cap. 3.
That the same Divinity may be numbered, and yet rejects all Number; that is,
the Divinity may be numbered with the Persons, as when we say the Father is God,
the Son God, and the Holy Ghost God; but the Divine Nature being perfectly the
same in all, that cannot be numbered; that we must not say there are Three Gods,
or Three Divinities.

Boethius has given the best Account of this, according to the Philosophy of the
Ancients, by distinguishing between Numbers; for he says, Number is twofold,
that by which we number, and that which is in the things numbered: As to the
first, the repetition of Units makes a Number, for One, and One, and One, are
Three; and both the Catholic Fathers and Schools reject this kind of Number,
which is a Species of Quantity, from the Divinity; for God is under no
Predicament, and therefore the Unity of God not reducible to the Predicament of
Quantity; for God is before and above all Unity, as he is above Substance,
above Essence, above every thing which we have any Notion or Conception of; as
Dionysius the Areopagite speaks.

But as to the things numbered, the Repetition of Units does not multiply,
N^merus enim duplex est, unus quidem, quo numeramus, alter vero, qui in rebus
numerabilibus constat; ergo in numero quo numeramus, repetitio unitatum facit
pluralitatem; in rerum vero numero non facit pluralitatem unitatum repetitio.
Boet. de duabus in Christo Naturis.
or make a Number in things, where the Nature is perfectly the same; for it is
not a Repetition of Units, but Alterity and Diversity, which multiplies
Natures: To say God, and God, and God, does not make Three Gods, because there
is but one and the same Divinity in Three: And this is what they mean by the
Numerical Unity of the Divine Nature; not that Unity or Unit which is the
beginning of Number, but the Unity of Sameness and Identity; which Tho. Aquinas
calls unum non numero, sed re numerata; One, not in the numbering Number, but in
the thing mumbred; or as the Fathers speak, not in Number, but Nature.

The better to understand this matter, we must consider what St. Basil
discourses about the Unity of God, in answer to those who charged the Doctrine
of the Trinity with Tritheism; (...). Basil. Apolog. ad Caesar. Ep. 141. p.
164. T. 3.
viz. That they acknowledged One God, but not in Number (the numbering Number)
but in Nature: For that which is One in Number, is not truly One, nor perfectly
Simple in Nature; but all men acknowledge God to be the most Simple
Uncompounded Being, and therefore he is not One in the Notion of this numbering
Number.

This he proves by an induction of particulars; we say, (...). -- (...) --

(...) -- (...).

(...) Ibid.


the World is one in number, but not one in nature; for it is compounded of
great variety of Creatures; and we say, one Man, but Man is compounded of Body
and Soul; and even any Angel is not perfectly pure and simple, but is
compounded of Essence and Qualities, such as Holiness, which is not pure and
simple Nature, for it may be separated. He adds, that Number is a Species of
quantity, and answers to the Question, How many, which properly belongs to a
Corporeal Nature: -- And indeed all Number denotes such things as have a
material, or at least a circumscribed and limited Nature, but Monad and Unity
denote the Simple, Uncompounded, Uncircumscribed Infinite Essence: And when he
says, That Number must belong to things of a Circumscribed Nature, thereby he
tells us, he means, not merely such things as are circumscribed by Place, which
properly belongs to Bodies; but all such Natures as have a limited and confined
Idea, as all Created Natures, whether Body or Spirit, have, whose Natures are
limited, circumscribed, fixed and determined by that Infinite Mind, which gives
being to them.

The meaning of all which is this, That to make a Number, there must be
Alterity and Diversity in Nature, or a separate Existence: But a Perfect,
Simple, Uncompounded Nature, can admit of no possible alteration and diversity;
for the same Nature can never differ from it self, without some kind of
composition; and where there is no difference and diversity, there can be no
number, and an Infinite Uncircumscribed Nature can never be divided and
separated, or subsist apart, and therefore cannot be numbered: So that Number
can belong only to Created Natures, which are compounded and finite, and
therefore by some diversifying Qualities or Affections, and a separate
Ex^istence may be distinguished into Individuals, which may be numbered; but the
Unity of the Divine Nature, which is a Perfect Indivisible, Uncompounded,
Infinite Monad, is not the Unity of Number, but a Perfect Invariable Sameness
and Identity, and an Indivisible, inseparable Union.

Now some Men, who do not duly attend to the nature and design of these
Reasonings, apply all this to prove the Perfect Singularity of the Divine
Essence, in the most strict and proper notion of Singularity, as that signifies
One in Number; which contradicts the whole Intention of this Hypothesis, which
is to prove, that the Unity of God does not consist in the Unity of Number, but
of Nature; and that the Unity of the Divine Nature is not a Unity of Number,
but a Unity of Sameness, Identity, and Inseparability. This is a Matter of
great consequence, and therefore let us consider it over again.

This distinction between the Unity of Number, and the Unity of Nature, was
alleged by the Catholic Fathers to avoid the Charge of Tritheism: The
Sabellians and Arians asserted the Unity of God to be a Unity of Number; that
One Divinity is not One, unless it be One in Number, One Single Solitary Divine
Nature: And this, say they, is inconsistent with the Trinity of Divine Persons,
each of which is in his own Person True and Perfect God: For Three such Divine
Persons must be Three Gods, Three Divinities, if each Divine Person have the
True Perfect Divine Nature in himself; and it is impossible to understand what
a Divine Person is, without the Divine Nature: So that if the Father be God,
the Son God, the Holy Ghost God, if Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be Three, they
must be Three Gods.

This was the great Difficulty, and it is the only material Difficulty to this
day. To have asserted but One Singular Divine Nature, which is but One in
Number, had given up the Cause to the Sabellians or Arians: For then either
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are but Three Names or Offices of the same One
Divine Person, who is the One God, as the Sabellians taught: Or Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, are not a Consubstantial Trinity, but the Father alone is God,
and the Son and Holy Ghost but mere Creatures, how Excellent Creatures soever
they are.

On the other hand, should they have denied that Three Ones make Three, this
had been false counting, as the Socinians tell us now; and therefore to avoid
both these Extremes, they distinguish between the Number by which we reckon,
and the thing which is numbered; and thus they find a Real Trinity in Perfect
Unity: As Greg. Nyssen tells us, That (...), the very same thing, the same
Divinity, is both numbered, and not subject to Number. It may so far be numbered
with the Persons, as each Divine Person has the whole and perfect Divinity in
himself, but yet the Divinity cannot be numbered; not because it is One Single
Solitary Divinity, for it really subsists in Three; but by reason of that
perfect Sameness and Identity, which admits of no Number; for that which is
perfectly one and the same in Three, cannot be numbered.

Had they thought of such a Singularity of the Divine Nature, as is but One in
Number, they must have disputed at another rate against Sabellians and Arians.
Would they have taught, That the Divinity may be numbered, and yet is without
Number? Which is impossible to be true of the same singular Divinity, which is
but One in Number, and therefore can never be more than One in Number; that is,
in that Father's sense, cannot be numbered, much less can the same Singular
Nature be numbered, and incapable of Number, that is, be One, and More than One.

Would they have taken so much pains to prove, That Sameness and Identity of
Nature excludes all Number; if by this they had meant the Sameness and Identity
of Singularity, as the same thing is one and the same thing with it self, which
is no great Mystery? And is it not evident, that this whole Dispute is
concerning the Unity of the Divine Nature in Three distinct Persons, and
consequently, concerning that Sameness and Identity of Nature which is between
Three who have the same Nature, and therefore not One in the Notion of
Singularity, which is One in Number, not in the Sameness and Identity of Nature?

Would they have insisted on that distinction of Units in Number, and Units in
Nature; that the first multiplies, the second does not, had they believed that
there are no Units in the Divinity; not One, and One, and One, but only One
Singular Divinity? At least, could Boethius, who so particularly explains and
urges this distinction, intend to prove by it the Singularity of the Divine
Essence, when at the same time he defines a Person to be the Individual
Substance of a Rational Nature; and assigns this distinction as the Reason why
though we number Three in the same Divinity, yet there are not Three
Divinities, or Three Divine Natures or Essences; because the Repetition of
Units in the thing to be numbered, where there is a perfect Sameness and
Identity of Nature, makes no Number?

In this sense it was, that the Schools asserted the Singularity of the Divine
Substance; because the Divine Substance, by reason of its perfect Sameness and
Identity cannot be numbered, and what cannot be numbered, they call a Singular
Substance: But they expressly reject (as the Catholic Fathers did) Singularity
in the sense of Solitude, as it signifies one alone by himself, without any
Communion or Fellowship (consortium) with any other in the same Divine Essence.
And therefore the Master of the Sentences expressly distinguishes between
Diversity, Peter Lomb. lib. 1. did. 23.
Singularity or Solitude, and Unity and Trinity, Distinction and Identity. Now
let any man judge, what that Unity is, which is not Singularity or Solitude,
but a Unity in Trinity; and what that Distinction is, which is perfect Identity
without any Diversity: For my part I can make nothing of it, but this perfect
Sameness and Identity of Nature in Three, which numbers Persons, but not
Natures.

Estius takes notice of that Objection against the Trinity, That the Father is
God, and the Son is God, therefore the Father is the Son; which Consequence is
resolved into that Maxim, Quaecunque eadem sunt uni tertio, eadem sunt inter
se, whatever things are the same with the same Third, are the same with each
other: To which he answers, That this Rule holds true only where the Third is a
perfect Singular: Deus autem non prorsus singular nomen est, but God is not
upon all Accounts a name of Singularity, that is, does not signify One only who
is God; but signifies such a Singular Nature as is communicable to Three,
Significat enim Naturam Singularem, sed quae communicari possit tribus
suppositis: That is, It is not a Singular Nature, Estius, lib. 1. did. 2.
sect. 5.
with the Singularity of solitude, because it is communicable, and can subsist
distinctly in Three, but only with the Singularity of Identity, as he explains
it from St. Hilary, Did. 23. Sect. 4. to which he refers his Reader. So that
though the Schools did use this Phrase of a Singular Nature and Substance,
which the Catholic Fathers rejected as Sabellianism, yet they did not use it
in that Sense, which the Fathers rejected, for One Solitary Nature, which can
be but One Person; and therefore Estius observes, that Aquinas uses this name
of Singularity, when applied to the Divinity, non simpliciter, sed cum cautela,
not simply and absolutely, but with caution, and qualifies it with ut sic
liceat loqui, if I may have leave so to speak: And he imitates this Caution
himself, Did. 23. Sect. 1. when he tells us, That the Divine Essence may
quodam sensu in a certain sense be said to be individual, as it neither is a
Genus nor Species, but res una numero, and ut it a dicamus singularis,
numerically One, and if we may say so, Singular; though it be not individual,
in the sense that Boethius defines a Person to be an Individual Substance,
because it is not incommunicable.

This shows, That though the Schools have in this Question changed the Ancient
Catholic Language, by teaching, That the Divine Essence is Vna Numero, and
Singularis, One in Number, and Singular; whereas the Catholic Fathers denied
that God was One in Number, but only in Nature, and denied the Singularity of
the Divine Nature (which Confusion, and appearing Contradiction of Terms
occasions great Mistakes) yet they meant the very same thing, and their
Philosophy about Singularity and Number was the same: For they taught a
Communicable Singularity of Nature, which is opposed to a Sabellian Solitude,
and rejected the numbering Number from the Divinity. They universally deny, That
God is One in that sense of Unity, which is the beginning of Number: For Number
is a Species of Quantity, and nascitur ex divisione continui, is made by
Division; and to assert God to be One in this Sense, is to ascribe Quantity to
him; for nothing can be thus One, but what has Magnitude and Figure, that is,
nothing but Body; for Number, as it is a Species of Quantity, can belong to
nothing, but Body, which has divisible Parts, and Extensions, and Magnitude,
which may be One or more. This is certainly true, as to that kind of Number,
which is a Species of Quantity; for that can measure only such things as have
Quantity: But then they were sensible, that other Beings are numbered besides
Bodies, even Incorporeal Spirits, who have no Quantity, Parts, or Divisibility,
and yet these we number, when we say, a Hundred, or Thousands, or Millions of
Angels. This they own, and call it a Transcendental Number, that is, such a
Number as is not reduced to the Predicament of Quantity: But that is little to
the purpose; if Spirits, which have no Quantity may be numbered, what is it that
makes a Number in them? And why may not Number then belong to the Divinity,
though it be not quantum, have no Predicamental, that is, Corporeal Quantity?
To this they answer, That this Transcendental Unity adds no form to the thing,
but only signifies the thing it self, as undivided from it self: Well! But if
this be all, then God, who is thus indivisible from himself, may as properly be
called One, as One Angel is said to be One: No, say they, For to entitle any
thing even to this Transcendental Numerical Unity, ratione rei subjectoe
Naturam ejus designat ut limitatam, atque extra res alias positam, it must be
considered to have a Finite and Limited Nature, and to subsist separately from
all other Beings, and to be diversified from each other in Nature or Qualities.
Res una ab alia, Natura vel qualitatibus discreta intelligitur. But now Unity
in God, though it resemble this Transcendental Unity, as adding no Form to God;
that is, not supposing him to be Corporeal, as the Predicamental Unity does,
yet it does not signify any thing limited and finite in God; but only his
Undivided Inseparable Being: As Number in God (that is, the Trinity) does
signify the real distinction of Three, Non ita tamen, ut ea plura Natura vel
Qualitatibus discreta intelligantur, and singula suis velut limitibus
circumsepta. But not so, as if these Three were distinguished and separated by
Nature and Qualities, or as if each of them had their own Separate and
Circumscribed Bounds and Limits.

This is the Account Estius gives us of Unity and Number in God, did. 24.
sect. 1. which perfectly agrees with that Account I have already given of this
matter from St. Basil: That an Infinite, Undiversified, Indivisible Nature (as
the Eternal Divinity is) is neither One nor Three, in the same Sense, and for
the same Reasons, which give these Denominations to any Created Beings. And
therefore there are no Arguments in Nature to confute the Unity of the Godhead
from a Trinity of proper Subsisting Persons, nor a Trinity of Persons from the
Unity of the Godhead, because Three and One in God do not signify what they do
in Creatures.

This appeared a great difficulty to the Master of the Sentences, Lib. 1. did.
23.
That since we neither allow of Diversity nor Singularity, Multiplicity nor
Solitude in the Trinity, what should be the meaning of One, and Two, and Three,
of Trinity and Plurality, and Distinction, as when we say, One God, Two
Persons, Three Persons, more Persons, distinct Persons; or a distinction of
Persons, Plurality of Persons, a Trinity of Persons, which seems to ascribe a
Numerical Quantity, a Multitude and Multiplicity to God. To this the Master
answers, That these words, when applied to God, are rather intended to remove
every thing from God, which is inconsistent with the Perfect Simplicity of the
Divine Nature, than positively to affirm any thing of him: This Answer does not
please Estius, because it seems to imply, that God is not in a true and proper
Sense One and Three; but this is his own Mistake: For Peter Lombard meant no
more but this, That though God be in the most perfect sense One and Three, yet
those positive Ideas, which we have of One, or Two, or Three, of Distinction,
and Trinity, when applied to Creatures, do not belong to the Divine Nature; and
therefore we must conceive of them in God, rather by way of Negation, than by
any positive Ideas, by denying such things of God, as are inconsistent with the
Perfect Simplicity of his Nature; which is true of most other Divine
Perfections, that we have rather a negative than positive conception of them,
as attributed to God; for Wisdom, and Power, and Goodness in God, are no more
reducible under the Predicament of Quality, as they are in Creatures, than the
Unity of God is reducible to the Predicament of Quantity.

Thus he tells us, when we say One God, we thereby exclude more Gods, but do
not attribute the quantity of Number to God; that is, we do not mean that there
is One God, in that Notion of One as it is the beginning of Number, which is a
Species of Quantity, for so nothing can be One, but what has Quantity, which
God has not: Thus when we say, One Father, and One Son, the meaning is, that
there are not many Fathers, nor many Sons. When we say there are more Persons,
we exclude Singularity and Solitude, but do not introduce Diversity or
Multiplicity into the Divine Nature. Thus Three Persons does not signify the
Quantity of Number, or any Diversity (as it is in Creatures) but only
determines our Thoughts to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, that each of these
Persons is in the Godhead, and none else. Distinct Persons, or Distinction of
Persons, excludes Confusion and Mixture; signifies that they are Another and
Another, without any Diversity, or Sabellian Confusion. The meaning of which
is, That we must not form such a Notion of One God, as we have of One Man, nor
of Three Persons, as of Three Men; but must acknowledge One God, in opposition
to more Gods, or more Divinities; and Three Persons, in opposition to
Singularity and Solitude in the Divinity: All which resolves it self into the
Unity of Identity, which excludes both all manner of Diversity, and Singularity
and Solitude.

SECT. VII. Concerning the Distinction of Persons in the Unity and Identity of
the Divine Essence.
THIS fairly brings me to the Third Enquiry I proposed, concerning the Real
Distinction of the Divine Persons, in the perfect Sameness and Identity of
Nature; how we can distinguish Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, when their Nature
is perfectly One, by the Unity of Identity and Sameness. This is the Seat of
most of those nice distinctions which we meet with both in the Fathers and
Schools, and therefore it deserves to be carefully examined; for a sensible
Account of this Matter would answer many great Difficulties in the Doctrine of
the Trinity: And to this purpose I shall first give a general Account of it,
according to those Principles which I have now laid down; and then more
particularly explain what the Fathers and Schools say of it; which will appear
to be no such Mysterious Nonsense, as the Adversaries of our Holy Faith would
represent it to be.

1. The general Account of this is very short: The Catholic Fathers
universally teach, That Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are each of them by
himself in his own proper Person, True and Perfect God: That the same One Whole
Undivided Divinity subsists distinctly in each of them: That the Person of the
Father, as he is True and Perfect God, is the whole Divinity; That the Person
of the Son, as True and Perfect God, is also the same One Whole Divinity; and
so of the Holy Ghost: That this Divinity is One and the Same, not by an Unity
of Singularity and Solitude, which is irreconcilable with the Notion of a Real
Trinity; for One Singular Divinity can be but One Single Divine Person; but by
the Unity of Sameness and Identity, which admits of a Trinity of subsisting
Persons in the same undiversified Nature: That whatever the Father is, That the
Son is, and that the Holy Ghost is.

That a Divine Person is nothing but the Divine Nature and Essence; for the
perfect absolute Simplicity of God admits of no imaginable Composition, not so
much as of Nature and Suppositum, or that which is the subject of all Natural
Powers, as it is in Created Beings.

This makes it very evident that these Divine Persons are not distinguished by
Nature; for there is nothing in Nature to distinguish them, it being perfectly
and invariably the same in all; and where there is no distinction, there can be
no Number; for which reason they will not allow that the Divine Essence is
multiplied with the Persons, there being but (...), one and the same Divinity
in them all.

They agree farther, That the Divine Persons are incommunicable: That the
Person of the Father is not, and can never be the Person of the Son; nor the
Person of the Son, the Person of the Father; nor the Person of the Holy Ghost,
the Person either of Father or Son.

But then this seems to make the difficulty insuperable; That if a Divine
Person be nothing else but the Divine Nature, how there should be Three such
distinct incommunicable Persons in the same undivided, undistinguished
Divinity? Why we may not call Three Divine Persons, who have each of them the
whole Divine Nature distinctly and incommunicably, Three Divinities, as well as
Three Divine Persons, when a Divine Person is nothing else but the Divinity?
And then Three distinct Persons must be Three distinct Divinities.

This Unity and Distinction in the Godhead has always been acknowledged by the
Catholic Fathers to be a Great and Inexplicable Mystery, a wonderful Union,
and wonderful Distinction. Damascen, as I observed above, tells us, That the
Divine Nature, though subsisting in Three Persons, is (...), really and
actually One, not merely notionally One, Damascen. de Orthod. fide l. 1. c. 11.
as Human Nature is, which subsists only in Individuals, and has a particular,
distinct, separate Subsistence in every particular Man, and therefore can be
One in its Individuals in no other sense, but only as the same common Notion
and Definition of Humanity belongs to them all; that is, Human Nature is One in
all the Men in the World, not by a Real Subsisting, but by a Specific Notional
Unity: But the Divine Nature is One with a Real Subsisting Unity, being
perfectly the same in Three, without any Division or Separation: And an
indivisible, inseparable, undiversified Same, is really and actually One,
according to the most simple Notions we can form of Unity.

But what room then does this leave for a Real Trinity of Persons, in this One,
Simple, Uncompounded, Indivisible, Inseparable Nature?

To this he answers, That this Real Distinction of Persons in the perfect Unity
and Simplicity of Nature, may be known and understood by Reason, though there
be nothing in Nature to distinguish them. Father, Son, (...). Damasc. de Orth.
Fide. l. 1. c. 11.
and Holy Ghost, are upon all accounts perfectly One, excepting this, That one
is Unbegotten, the other Begotten, and the third Proceeds. We acknowledge One
God, distinguished only by these Personal Properties of Paternity, Filiation,
and Procession, as a Cause, and that which is caused; and as each of them has a
complete perfect Hypostasis, distinguished only by these different Modes of
Subsistence.

This proves a Real Distinction, without any Diversity, Division, or
Separation, and therefore a Real Distinction in perfect Unity.

The Divine Nature is Infinite and Uncircumscribed, (...) -- (...) -- Ibid.
and therefore the Divine Persons cannot be divided and separated from each
other, but are perfectly in each other, without Confusion. The Divine Nature is
perfectly One in Three, by the Unity of Sameness and Identity, and therefore
there can be no diversity or division of Will, or Counsel, or Operation, or
Power: Now a Nature which is perfectly the same, and undivided, must be
perfectly One. But then Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are certainly Three; for
He who begets, is not He who is begotten, for nothing begets it self: To beget,
and to be begotten, and to proceed, are the Characters of Persons, and can
belong only to True, Real, Substantial Persons: He who begets, must be a
Person, and so must He who is begotten, and He who proceeds; they have each of
them (...), whatever makes a complete and perfect Person; but then these Three
can never meet in the same Person, and consequently must distinguish Persons;
for the same Person cannot be unbegotten, begotten, and proceed; cannot be the
Cause, and that which is caused.

This is demonstratively certain, That a begotten and unbegotten Person, and
consequently a begotten and unbegotten Nature (a Divine Person being nothing
else but the Divine Nature) are and must be Two, and never can be each other;
and therefore this distinguishes Persons, though it makes no distinction or
diversity in the Divine Essence; as the Catholic Fathers proved against the
Arians, that to be unbegotten, and to be begotten, does not. But to be
unbegotten, to be begotten, and to proceed, whatever you will call them,
whether Personal Properties, or Modes of Subsistence, though they do not make
the Persons, that is, are not the formal Notion of a Person, yet they certainly
distinguish them, or prove them to be as distinct and incommunicable, as
Unbegotten, Begotten, and Proceeding; for if these Terms or Characters can
never signify each other, then the Persons characterized by them can never be
each other: And this is all the distinction that can be in an undistinguished,
undiversified, undivided Essence.

Well; but still the difficulty remains, how to distinguish between Essence and
Person in God; for if Person be Nature and Essence, and each Person distinctly
in himself be the whole Divine Essence, or the whole Divinity, how can we avoid
acknowledging Three Essences, and Three Divinities, as well as Three Persons in
the Trinity? Now the account of this must be taken from the nature of that
Distinction and Unity which is in God; for such a Distinction as does not
destroy the Unity, cannot multiply Natures, though it distinguishes Persons.
Each Person is the Divine Nature, but without any diversity, division, or
separation of the Divinity; and what is Identically and Indivisibly the same,
is but One. The Divine Nature, as self-originated and unbegotten, is the Person
of the Father; as communicated by Generation, is the Person of the Son; as
proceeding is the Person of the Holy Ghost, and these are Three; but the Son is
begotten of the Substance of his Father, and the Holy Ghost proceeds from
Father and Son, without any diversity, division, or separation of Substance,
and therefore the Divinity is but One. The Divine Nature subsists distinctly
and incommunicably in Three, according to their distinct Characters of
Unbegotten, Begotten, and Proceeding; and these we call Persons, because they
bear some Analogy to Individuals in created Beings, which in an Intelligent
Nature are called Persons; but they are not Three Divinities, because the
Divine Nature, though it be distinct, yet is undiversified, and undivided in
Three, and therefore is but One in Three.

This seems to me a very intelligible Account of a Trinity in Unity, and the
difference between Person and Essence, though a Divine Person is the Divine
Essence. When we distinguish between Person and Essence, and say there are
Three Persons and One Essence, by Essence we mean an undistinguished, undivided
Divinity, which is but One; by Three Persons we mean the Divine Essence,
unbegotten, and communicated by Generation, and Procession, which are really
distinct Persons, and subsist distinctly, but i^ the Unity of an
undistinguished and undivided Divinity; which makes them really and actually
Three and One; the same without diversity, and distinct without division. And
this seems to be the reason why the Catholic Fathers, tho they called the
Divine Persons Tres Res, and (...), and Tres Subsistentes, Three Things, and
Three that subsist, yet were more cautious in calling them Three Natures, or
Essences, or Substances (though there are some Examples of this kind), because
though the Divine Essence subsists distinctly in Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
which makes them Three Distinct, Real, Subsisting Persons, yet the Divine
Nature is not distinguished nor separated, but is perfectly One, Same,
Undivided Essence; and therefore Vna Substantia, though not Vnus Subsistens;
One Substance, though not One, but Three, that subsist.

What I have thus briefly represented, I hope I have proved in the First
Chapter, from the Authority of Scripture, and Reason founded on Scripture: And
from what I have already discoursed of the Doctrine of the Fathers, it may
appear to careful and intelligent Readers, who use such Application as this
Argument deserves and requires, that this is their Unanimous Sense also. But
yet as far as it is possible, to clear this Matter more fully, and vindicate
the Fathers and Schools from those Obscurities, Inconsistences, and
Contradictions which are generally charged on them in so concerning an Article,
I shall reassume this Matter, and particularly show,

1. That what they call a Divine Person, is the Divine Essence and Substance,
and nothing else.

2. That this Divine Essence and Substance, as constituting these Divine
Persons, is proper and peculiar to each, and incommunicable to one another; and
therefore that this Divine Essence and Substance, as subsisting distinctly in
Three, is no more numerically One, than their Persons are One.

3. What difference they made between Nature and Essence, and Hypostasis and
Person.

4. Whether the Catholic Faith of a Real and Substantial Trinity, can be as
reasonably and intelligibly explained by the Notion of One Singular Substance
in the Divinity, as by asserting Three Personal Substances or Suppositums: And
whether the Singularity of the Divine Essence in this Notion, deliver the
Asserters of it from any Inconveniences and Objections which the contrary
Opinion is thought liable to.

1. As for the first, That a Divine Person is the Divine Essence, it is and
must be in some sense acknowledged by all who profess the Faith of a Real
Trinity; for there cannot be a Real Trinity of Divine Persons, if each Person
be not True and Perfect God, that is, the whole Divinity, or Divine Nature and
Essence. And therefore those who assert in the strictest sense the Singularity
of the Divine Essence, yet assert, That this One Singular Essence subsists
distinctly in each Divine Person; which, whether it be to be understood or not,
yet is an acknowledgment that there is no conceiving a Divine Person without
the Divine Essence: But we need not be beholden to any man for this Concession,
for the thing is plain and evident in all Catholic Writers.

Petavius has very critically observed the different use of Words in Catholic
Writers, relating to this Venerable Mystery; such as Essence, Nature,
Substance, Hypostasis, Subsistence, Person, etc. which sometimes occasioned
great Misunderstandings between them, and is to this day made a pretense of
charging the Fathers with great Uncertainty and Obscurity, and with
contradicting each other, and themselves.

This of late has been much insisted on, in order to disparage the Authority of
^, as Zealous, Contentious Bigots, who neither understood one another, nor
themselves, nor the Catholic Faith, but so confounded Terms, that we can never
certainly know what they meant; or used such dangerous Terms, that if we rely
too much upon them, we may easily m^stake H^resy for the Catholic Faith. Were
this true, our Case would be very bad; but two or three Observations will set
this matter in a clear light.

1. That very Ambiguity which the Fathers are charged with in the use of Words,
does certainly prove, that by a Divine Person, they meant the Divine Essence,
Nature, and Substance.

The plain Case is this. The Catholic Fathers did universally own and profess
a Trinity in Unity, Three Persons, and One God; So that there was no difference
in their Faith, how different soever their words were: The most common Terms,
whereby they expressed the Unity of the Godhead, were (...), Vna Esse^^^^, Vna
Natura, Vna Substantia; One Ess^nce, One Nature, One Substance; and a Trinity
they called (...), Three Hypostates; and the Latins Three Persons; but
sometimes we meet in undoubted Catholic Writers wi^^ the direct contrary
Expressions, such a (...), Tres Substantiae, and (...), Three Essences, Three
Natures, Three Substances, and One Hypostasis: The usual way of reconciling
this seeming Contradiction is by saying, That when these Fathers use such
Expressions, as Three Essences, Three Natures, Three Substances, they do not
understand this of Three diverse, or specifically different, Essences, Natures,
Substances, which is Arianism, but of Three Persons; and when they affirm, that
there is but One Hypostasis, they do not by One Hypostasis mean One Person,
which is Sabellianism, but One Nature, Essence, or Substance: As we know this
very Controversy about One or Three Hypostases, was thus composed in the
Alexandrian Synod, where Athanasius presided: And no doubt but this is the true
Solution, since those, who were neither Arians, nor Sabellians, could not
understand such Expressions in any other sense.

But then the Question still remains, How this Ambiguity should happen, or how
it comes to pass, that such contradictory Terms, as One Essence, and Three
Essences, One Substance, and Three Substances, One Hypostasis, and Three
Hypostases, should both be Orthodox and Catholic.

Now the only Account I can give of this matter, is this; That these Terms,
Essence, Nature, Substance, Hypostasis (which originally signifies Substance,
of which more presently) may signify, as the Philosopher speaks, either the
First or Second Substance; either the common Nature, which has the same notion
and definition, common to the whole Kind, as Humanity, which is the same in all
Men; or a Singular Subsisting Nature, and Substance, which in Creatures we call
Individuals, and in reasonable Creatures, Persons: Now in analogy to this
common Specific Nature, which is one and the same in all its Individuals, the
Catholic Fathers taught but One Essence, Nature, Substance, and in this sense
but One Hypostasis in the Godhead, that is, a Consubstantial Trinity, in
analogy to the several Individuals of the same Species, in whom only this
common Nature did really and actually subsist; they ordinarily asserted Three
Hypostases, sometimes, as we see, Three Natures, and Essences, and Substances,
in the Trinity, that is, Three Real, Substantial, subsisting Persons; and in
this sense, Three Essences, Three Natures, Three Substances, was accounted
Catholic Doctrine. St. Hilary allows Tria in Substantia, or Tres Subs^antias,
Three in Substance, or Three Substances, for Tres Subsistentium Personas, Three
Subsisting Persons. And St. Greg. Nyssen, in answer to Eunomius, who asserted
(...), Three Essences, or Substances, says, Contra Eunom. l. 12.
That if he understood this distinction of Substances only in opposition to
Sabellius, who gave three Names to one Suppositum, or Substance, that not only
he, but all Catholic Christians, assented to it: His only fault being in this
Case, that he uses improper words, Three Essences, for Three Hypostases.

Now that which I observe from hence is this, That had they not believed each
Divine Person to be distinctly by himself the Divine Nature, Essence, and
Substance, there could never have been any occasion for this Dispute about One
Essence, Nature, Substance, Hypostasis, and Three Essences, Natures,
Substances, Hypostases; nor for that known Distinction, by which they
reconciled this difference between Essence and Hypostasis, that the first
signifies something analogous to a Common Specific Nature, the second to
Individuals. If the Divine Nature subsisted in Singularity, or were but One
Singular Subsisting Nature, Essence and Hypostasis must signify the same thing;
for (...), Essence is Substance, and so is Hypostasis, and in this sense, they
must both signify a first Substance, and then one singular Subsisting Nature or
Substance; and three singular Subsisting Natures and Substances, is an
irreconcilable Contradiction. Had the Singularity of the Divine Nature been the
Catholic Faith, we should never have heard of the (...), and (...), of the
Common Nature and Essence of the Divinity; for Singular and Common are express
Contradictions, and a Singular Subsisting Nature can have nothing thing
analogous in it to a Common Specific Nature: If each Divine Person be not the
Divine Nature* Essence, Substance, there can be no Pretense, that Essence and
Substance should ever signify a Person, nor can any Interpretation make Three
Essences and Substances Catholic Doctrine, if there be no sense, wherein Three
Persons may Orthodoxly be called Three Essences and Substances; as there cannot
be, if a Person, as a Person, be not Essence and Substance: And on the other
hand, if Hypostasis, which is the peculiar and appropriate Name whereby the
Greek Fathers denote a Person, do not signify Essence and Substance, it could
never be Orthodox to say, that there is but One Hypostasis, no more than it is
to say, that there is but One Person in the Trinity.

2. But to set aside this Dispute concerning Three Essences, Three Natures,
Three Substances, and One Hypostasis in the Trinity, which though allowed to be
Catholic, yet were sparingly and cautiously used, because they were liable to
Heretical Senses; I observe farther, That these words, Essence, Nature,
Substance, are distinctly applied to each Person of the Holy Trinity, which
could not be Orthodox, were not each Person distinctly in himself, Essence,
Nature, Substance.

What I have already discoursed with relation to Sabellianism, and upon several
other occasions, sufficiently proves this, and I shall not trouble my Readers
with a needless Repetition: Petavius owns it, and has given several Instances
of it, That (...), Essentia, Natura, Substantia, do not always signify the
common Essence of the Divinity, but the Divine Persons; that the (...), is the
Person of the Father, and the (...) the Person of the Son, which is undoubtedly
true; but still Essence signifies Essence, and Nature Nature, and Substance
Substance; and the only reason he has to say, That in this construction the
Words signify a Person, is because they are used singularly, and construed with
the name of a Person, as the Essence and Substance of the Father, or of the
Son: But this is no reason, if the Essence be not the Person; if the Essence of
the F^ther do not signify that Essence which is the Person of the Father; and
the Essence of the Son, that Essence which is the Person of the Son: For if a
Divine Person be not the Divine Essence, Essence can never signify Person: And
yet if they do believe that each Divine Person is by himself in his own Person
Essence and Substance, the whole undivided Divinity, I cannot imagine the
reason of this Criticism, why they should be more afraid to say the Essence and
Substance of the Father, than the Person of the Father, unless it be, that this
does not so well agree with their Notion of the singularity of the Divine
Essence, as I doubt indeed it will not, especially if we add, the (...) and
(...), the Unbegotten and begotten Substance, the one the Person of the Father,
the other of the Son; of which more hereafter; but this is not to learn our
Faith from the Fathers, but to expound them by our preconceived Opinions.

3 dly, I observe farther, That all those words, which are more peculiarly
appropriated to signify the Divine Persons, were always used by Catholic
Writers in the notion of Substance, and were never thought Catholic in any
other sense.

Hypostasis is the most received word among the Greek Fathers, to signify a
Person; and One Essence and Three Hypostases was the Catholic Language. Now it
is agreed on all hands, That Hypostasis literally signifies Substance; and as I
have already observed, the only dispute about it was, that some by Hypostasis
understood the Common Nature and Substance in the notion of Essence, and for
that reason asserted, That there is but One Hypostasis, as there is but One
Essence in the Trinity; others understood a singular Subsisting Nature and
Substance, and in this sense asserted Three Hypostases; but none of them ever
understood Hypostasis in any other notion, but that of Substance, either a
Common, or Individual Substance: And to prevent this Ambiguity, as far as they
could, which might conceal very different Heresies, Sabellianism on one hand,
and Arianism on the other, and many times occasioned the Orthodox to suspect
each other of these opposite Heresies, though Essence and Hypostasis signified
much the same thing, yet they appropriated the name Essence to signify a Common
Nature and Substance, and Hypostasis to signify Individuals: As we learn from
St. Basil, Greg. Nyssen, Damascen, and many other Catholic Writers, who assign
this difference between Essence and Hypostasis.

But yet this did not wholly silence this Dispute among the Greeks, much less
did it satisfy the Latin Fathers, who knew no difference between Essentia and
Substantia, but translated the Homoousion by Vnius Substantiae; and therefore
it was as great Heresy to them to say Three Substances (as they translated the
Greek Hypostases) as to say Three Essences in the Trinity: St. Austin
professes, That he knew not what the Greeks meant by One Essence, and Three
Substances; and for the same reason, it is well known, St. Ierom rejected Three
Substances, for both by Essence and Substance they understood a Common Nature,
which made it Heresy indeed to assert Three Substances, which in this
acceptance of the word must signify Three diverse Substances, which
specifically differ: And therefore tho they did not reject the Greek Faith, but
did believe as heartily as they, that each Person by himself was perfect
Hypostasis and Substance, and rejected the Sabellian One Hypostasis, and One
Substance; yet they did not like the Phrase of Three Hypostases, and Three
Substances; for they knew no difference between Three Substances and Three
Essences, and by both understood Three different Kinds and Species of Beings.
And for this Reason, both to secure the Catholic Faith from such a diversity
and dissimilitude of Nature, as Three Essences and Substances may signify, and
from a Sabellian Unity and Singularity, they chose such words, as signified a
Real Perfect Subsisting Being, but did not immediately and formally signify
Essence and Substance, tho they did necessarily suppose and connote it. Such
among the Greeks are (...), among the Latins, subsistentia, suppositum, res,
ens: Existence, Subsistence, Subject, Suppositum, Thing, Being, which every one
sees, must signify something as real, as Essence, and Substance, and must
necessarily include Essence and Substance in their very notion; and that thus
they were used by the Catholic Fathers, Petavius proves by numerous
Quotations, Pet. de Tr. l. 4 c. 1, 2, 3.
which the Reader may consult at his leisure. And though some of these words
are sometimes used singularly of all Three Divine Persons in the notion of a
Common Essence and Substance, as (...), res, in which sense St. Austin called
the Trinity unam summam rem, yet both Fathers and Schoolmen did without any
scruple use them in the plural number, (...), tres subsistentiae, tres res,
tria supposita, tria entia realia, that the Divine Persons were Three
Existences, Three Subsistencies, Three Suppositums, Three Things, Three Real
Beings; and why not then Three Essences, and Three Substances, since every
suppositum, every Thing, every Real Being, is Essence and Substance; the reason
of which is plainly this, That Essence and Substance, unless qualified with
some limiting Adjuncts, signify the formal Reasons of things, and cannot be
multiplied without diversity; whereas the other Terms signify nothing but Real
and Actual Existence, which does not diversify, and therefore not multiply, the
Essence; for Three Suppositums, Three Subjects, Three Things, Three Real
Beings, may have One Essence, Nature, and Substance, formally, identically, and
invariably the same.

But there is some dispute about the use of those words, Existence and
Subsistence. Petavius observes a great difference between the Ancient and
Modern use of them: Petav. de Tr. l. 4. c. 3. s. 6.
That the Ancients used them in a Concrete Sense for Person and Substance, that
which does really exist and subsist, as he proves by several Quotations; but
that the Schoolmen use them in an abstract Sense, for the modifications of
Substance, which they call Modes, which together with the Substance constitute
what we call Persons (of which more hereafter) and this may be true as to some
later Schoolmen; but the more Ancient, and many Modern Schoolmen, retained the
Old Catholic use of the words; and Suarez could trace the Doctrine of Modes no
higher than Durandus.

L. 1. did. 25.
Peter Lombard is express in it, That Three Persons are tres subsistentioe,
tres entes, Three Subsistencies, Three Beings, and tres subsistentioe vel
entes, and subsistentioe vel subsistentes, Subsistencies or Beings,
Subsistencies or those that subsist.

Part prima. q. 30. Art. 1.
Thus Tho. Aquinas tells us, That Persons are res subsistentes, subsisting
things: And in answer to that Objection against a plurality of Persons in the
Godhead, that a Person, according to Boethius, being rationalis naturoe
individua substantia, the Individual Substance of a Rational Nature; if there
be a plurality of Persons in the Godhead, there must consequently be a
plurality of Substances; he tells us, That Substance either signifies the
Essence, or the Suppositum; that in this last sense it is used in the
definition of a Person, as appears by the addition of Individual, which is what
the Greeks call Hypostasis, and therefore assert Three Hypostases (Individual
Substances) as we do Three Persons; but we don't use to say Three Substances,
by reason of the equivocal use of the word, lest we should be thought to assert
Three Essences in the Godhead. From whence it is plain, that by Three
Subsistencies, Tho. Sicut nos d^^in^us in divinis pluraliter tres personas, and
tres subsistentias, ita Graeci dicunt tres hypostases. Sed quia nomen
substantiae, quod secund^m preprietatem significationis respond^^ hypostasi,
aequ^^ ^ocatur ^pud nos, cum ^uandoque significet essentiam, quandoque
hypostasin, ne pess^ esse erroris occasio, maburunt pro hyp^stasi tran far
s^bsistentiam, quam sabscantiam. Ibid. q. 29. art. 2. ad secundum.
Aquinas understood Three that subsist; Three Individual Substances, in the
Notion of Three distinct Supp^situms, though not of Three different Essences;
for this is the true distinction he makes between Suppositum and Essence, that
they both signify Substance, but the one signifies as Matter, and the other as
Form; and therefore the Plurality of Suppositums of Subsistencies does not
multipl^ ^^e Essence or Form, for Three may be perfectly One in Nature and
Essence; but to multiply Essences, to say there are Three N^tures, or Three
Essences, is to diversify them, and to make Three Gods specifically and
essentially different.

After this, I need not add much concerning the Notion of Person. The
Ciceronian sense of this word (too much in use of late), wherein the same Man
may be said to sustain several Persons, according to his different Relations,
Offices, and Quality, has (as I have observed before) been rejected by all
Catholic Writers, as Sabellianism.

St. Austin, generally speaking, is the Text to the Master of the Sentences,
and He to the Schoolmen; and that Father is express in it, that Person is
Essence and Substance; that the Person of the Father is the Essence and
Substance of the Father: From whose Authority P. Lombard concludes, That Person
is used in the Notion of Substance; Ecce express dicitur, quod Persona
secundum substantiam decitur, ut cum decitur, Pater est Persona, hic sit
sensut, Pater est divina essentia; similiter cum dicitur, Filius est Persona.
Spiritus Sanctus est Persona, id est divina essentia. Lomb. did. 23.
That when we say the Father is a Person, the sense is* the Father is the
Divine Essence. He observes from the same Father, that the Latins used Person
in the same sense that the Greeks used Hypostasis, which in Latin literally
signifies Substance; but yet they were very cautious of saying Three
Substances, as the Greeks did Three Hypostases; because though the Greeks
distinguished between Essence and Substance, that Essence expressed the formal
Nature of things, Substance what in Creatures we call the Matter or Suppositum,
yet the Latins knew no such distinction; and therefore Three Substances to them
was the same with Three Essences, which would assert a diversity in the Divine
Nature: And this he shows was the only Objection St. Hierom had against Three
Substances, or Three Hypostases, which he allowed in the Notion of Tres
Personas subsistentes, Idem, Did. 26.
Three subsisting Persons, but not of Three Natures or Essences; and this
Solution he acquiesces in, That Tres Personoe sunt Tres Substantioe, Did. 25.
scilicet, Tres Entes, pro quo Groeci dicunt Tres Hypostases; That Three
Persons are Three Substances, that is, Three Real Beings, which the Greeks call
Three Hypostases. And though he observes that Person may sometimes signify that
Personal Property whereby one Divine Person is distinguished from another, Hoc
etiam modo sane potest accipi persona in praemissis locutionibus, cum dicitur
alia est persona Patris, alia filii, id est, alia est proprietas, qua pater est
pater, alia, qua filius est filius, alia, qua spiritus sanctus est spiritus
sanctus. Ita etiam nomine personae quidam proprietates intelligere volunt, cum
dicuntur tres personae; sed melius est ut subsistentias vel hypostases
intelligamus, cum dicimus tres personas. Ex praedictis colligitur, quod nomen
personae in Trinitate triplicem tenet intelligentiam; est enim ubi facit
intelligentiam essentiae, and est ubi facit intelligentiam hypostasis, and est
ubi facit intelligentiam proprietatis* Did. 25.
yet he will not allow us to call Three Persons Three Properties, but Three
Subsistencies, or Three Hypostases; for the Property is not the Person, but
only distinguishes Persons; of which more hereafter. And he reduces the several
acceptations of Person, as used in the Doctrine of the Trinity, to these three.
1. That it sometimes signifies the Divine Essence, as it does when we speak
singularly of any One Person; for the Person of the Father is the Divine
Essence, and so of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. 2. Subsistencies and
Hypostases, as when we speak in the Plural Number, Three Persons are Three
Subsistencies, Three Hypostases, but unius Essentioe, of one and the same
Essence. 3. A Property, as when we distinguish the Persons by their Personal
Properties.

Thomas Aquinas, and generally the Schools, receive and vindicate that
Definition which Boethius gives of a Person, That it is the Individual Substance
of a Rational Nature, as I have already observed, whereby they expressly tell
us, that they understand Aristotle's Substantia Prima, or a Subsisting
Individual.

St. Austin thought that the Greeks might as well have used Prosopon as
Hypostasis, De Tr. l. 7. c. 6.
for what the Latins called Person; and why they rather said Hypostasis, he
could not tell, unless perhaps the Propriety of their Language required it; and
this was the truth of the Case; for (...) was a very ambiguous word, taken
originally from the Stage, as Persona also was, and signified that Vizor which
was put over the Face, to represent the Person whom they intended to act, and
so was used to signify a mere Appearance and Representation, not a Real
Subsisting Person; and therefore St. Basil tells us, Basil. Ep. 349.
That the Sabellians who owned but One Essence and Hypostasis in God, yet
(...), that the Scripture represented God under different Personal Appearances,
sometimes as the Father, sometimes as the Son, or Holy Spirit; and adds, That
therefore those who affirm that Father, Son and Holy Ghost are but (...), One
in Subject, Hypostasis, or Suppositum, but (...), Three perfect Persons, or
Prosopa, or Appearances, justify the Charge of Sabellianism imputed by the
Arians to the Catholics. And in another place he tells us, That those who say
that Essence and Hypostasis are the same, Ep. 391.
are forced to acknowledge (...), only different Prosopa, o^ Appearances; and
while they are afraid to own (...), Three Hypostases, they relapse into the
Sabellian Heresy. And therefore Petavius truly observes, That though the
Catholic Fathers did not scruple the use of this term Prosopon, yet they used
it in the sense of Hypostasis; and the Notion of Hypostasis joined with
Prosopon, makes up the true Catholic Notion of a Person, as (...), Quae
liguendi rati^nes indicent, Personat illas, -- non unum and simpl^x hahere
(...), neque diversas solum c^^idem individui functiones and (...), quibus
appel ationes variae comp^^ant -- s^d diversitatem illam and mul^iplicitatem in
subjecto esse revera, ac tria emnino ex se distincta, and su^sistentibus
proprietatibus separata consistere. Petav. l. 4. c. 2. p. 324.
and (...), and (...), which, as he says, proves that these Persons have not
one simple (...), or Suppositum, nor are merely different Functions and
Energies of the same Individual Being, but that the Diversity and Multiplicity
is in the Subject it self, and that there are Three truly and really distinct,
and that subsist distinctly.

This I hope is a sufficient Proof of the first thing proposed, That a Divine
Person is the Divine Essence and Substance; but I added also, That it is
nothing else; and I must speak something briefly to this.

The absolute Simplicity of the Divine Nature, which admits of no kind of
Composition, neither of Parts, nor of Substance and Accident, nor of Nature and
Suppositum, that which has, and that which is had, is the universal Doctrine
both of the Catholic Fathers and Schools, as I need not prove; and the
necessary Consequence of this is, That a Divine Person can be nothing else but
the Divine Nature, Essence, and Substance; for were a Divine Person the Divine
Nature and something else, there must be a Composition in the Divine Nature,
something superadded to it, to make it a Person.

The Unity of the Divine Nature in a Trinity of Persons, as I have shown at
large, is resolved into the perfect invariable S^meness and Identity of Nature
(the (...)) in Three; and therefore each Divine Person must be the whole Divine
Nature and Essence, and nothing else; for otherwise the Divine Essence could
not be perfectly one and the same in Three, but would be distinguished and
multiplied by some new Accidents and Modifications, as Human Nature is in
distinct Human Persons.

A Trinity of Persons is a known Objection against the absolute Simplicity of
the Divine Nature; and the Answer to it is as well known, That those Relations
which distinguish Persons, make no Composition in the Divine Nature; and then a
Person can be nothing else but the Divine Nature, if there be no Composition to
make a Person: But of this more presently.

2 dly. The next thing I proposed was this, That according to the Doctrine both
of Fathers and Schools, the Divine Essence and Substance, as subsisting
distinctly in Three, is proper and peculiar to each, and incommunicable to one
another.

This is so universally acknowledged by all who own real and substantial
Persons, that I need say little of it. I have produced several express
Testimonies already out of the Fathers to this purpose; and indeed to say, That
the Substance of each Person is proper and incommunicable, is no more than to
say that their Persons are incommunicable; that the Father is not, and never
can be the Son, nor the Son the Father, nor the Holy Spirit either Father or
Son; which is what they meant by (...) and (...), properly and appropriately
Father and Son; that the Father never was nor can be a Son, nor the Son a
Father. Thus their different Characters prove an incommunicable distinction
between them: The Son is the Image of God, (...) and (...), a Living
Substantial Image; but the Image, tho by an Identity of Nature it is the same
with the Prototype, yet it is not and never can be the Prototype; not
imaginale, but imaginalis imago, as Victorinus Afer speaks; not the Person, nor
Personal Substance of the Father, but the express Image of his Person and
Substance.

In Boetius's Definition of a Person by individua substantia, the Schools, as
far as I have observed, universally understand incommunicabilis substantia, an
incommunicable Substance; and therefore, as I observed before, though they
assert the Divine Essence to be singularis, yet it is singularis
communicabilis, a communicable Singular; but a Person is substantia individua,
or singularis incommunicabilis, a singular incommunicable Substance.

Now this started a great Difficulty; How the Essence and Substance of the
Father, which is but One, can be both communicable and incommunicable. The
Person of the Father, which is his Divine Essence, is incommunicable, and yet
the Father communicates his own Divine Nature and Essence to the Son and Holy
Spirit, without communicating his Person.

Of the same Nature is what the Schools teach concerning the Divine Generation
and Procession. They allow that the Father does truly and properly, not
metaphorically, beget the Son, and that the Son is truly and properly begotten;
and that the Father by Divine Generation communicates the Divine Essence to the
Son; and that the Son has all that he has from the Father, and is all that the
Father is, excepting that he is not the Father, but the Son: And yet they will
not allow that the Divine Essence either begets, or is begotten, or proceeds.

They have a great Authority against them in this, as they all own; for the
Fathers made no scruple to say, That God begat God, Essence Essence, Wisdom
Wisdom, Life Life; and that the Son is begotten, and only begotten God, God of
God, Light of Light, Wisdom of Wisdom, and begotten Wisdom. Upon these
Authorities Richardus Victorinus contends earnestly, that we ought in plain
terms to own, De Trin. l. 6. c. 22, 23.
That Substance begets Substance, and that those who deny it, reject the
Doctrine of all the Catholic Fathers: But Peter Lombard, and most other
Schoolmen, especially since the Council of Lateran, justify themselves in this
matter, by saying, That the Fathers intended no more in such expressions, than
what they themselves own, though they reject that way of speaking. When the
Fathers taught, That God begat God, Essence Essence, Substance Substance,
Wisdom Wisdom, Life Life, they meant no more, than that the Father, who is God,
Essence, Substance, Wisdom, Life, begat his Son, who is also truly and really
God, Essence, Substance, Wisdom, Life; and the reason why they rather chose to
say, That the Father, who is God, and Essence, and Wisdom, begets the Son, who
is God, and Essence, and Wisdom, etc. than to say, That God begets God, Essence
Essence, Wisdom Wisdom, is this, Because God, and Essence, and Wisdom, etc.
signify absolutely, and so may multiply Gods, Essences, Wisdoms; as when we say
Man begets a Man, the begotten Man is as absolutely a Man, as he who begets;
and he who begets, and he who is begotten, notwithstanding their relation, are
two absolute Men: And therefore, to prevent all such mistakes, and to secure
the Catholic Faith of the Real Distinction of Persons and Suppositums in
perfect Unity, without the least diversity or multiplication of Essence, they
attributed Active Generation to the Person of the Father, and Passive
Generation to the Person of the Son; which proves a Real Distinction of Persons
and Suppositums (for he who begets cannot be he who is begotten), and yet
preserves the Unity and Identity of the Divine Nature.

But how can this be, if Person and Essence, Suppositum and Nature be the same,
as it is in God? For then if the Person be begotten, the Essence, which is that
Person, must be begotten also; and if the Person begets, the Essence must
beget. Now this is in some sense true; and therefore the Catholic Fathers
promiscuously used these terms; That the Father begets a Son, or God begets
God, or Essence begets Essence; and the Schools themselves own, That the
Father, who is God, begets the Son deitatem habentem, who has the Divinity, the
Divine Nature and Essence, and has it by his Generation and Birth; which in
reality is the same, though they thought the expression less liable to mistake.
For the truth of the Case is this; The Schools, that asserted the perfect
Singularity of the Divine Essence, fenced against all Expressions of an
absolute signification, which multiplied Natures; for Two absolute Natures
cannot be singularly One; and therefore would not say, that Nature and Essence
begets, or is begotten; for in these Propositions, the terms Nature and
Essence, unless qualified and restrained, signify absolutely, and so infer Two
absolute Natures and Essences, that which begets, and that which is begotten;
and therefore they rather call this a Communication than a Generation of
Nature, because this last signifies relatively: That which is communicated, may
be a Singular Nature, which subsists distinctly in more than one, but with a
necessary relation to its Original, and such a Communication does not multiply
Natures, but only Essential Relations. And this is the difference they made
between Deus and Deitatem habens, God, and one who has the Divinity; that God
signifies absolutely, an Absolute Independent Divinity, which has no relation
or communication with any other; but One who has the Divinity, may signify One,
who has it, not originally and absolutely, but by communication from another,
and in an Essential Relation to him, as the Son and the Holy Spirit have, which
is the same Divinity in Three, and but One in Three. And therefore I think the
Schools were very much in the right, for rejecting Tres Dii, Three Gods, when
at the same time they owned Tres Deitatem habentes, Three who have the
Divinity, for these do not signify the same thing: The first, unless qualified,
is Polytheism; the second, the Christian Trinity in Unity; though I confess, I
should not choose to call the Father, One who has the Divinity, but simply God,
because he is absolutely and originally so, and not by communication; and for
that reason is both in Scripture, and in the Fathers, eminently called God, and
the One God, See Dr. Payn' s Letter to the Bishop of Rochester.
whereas the other Divine Per^^^s are the Son of God, and the Spirit of God;
and as Te^^^^^ian observes, never called God, when joined with the Father,
though they are, when spoken of distinctly by themselves.

For the same Reason the Schools forbid the use of Abstract or Sub^tantive
Terms in the Plural Number, when we speak of the Divine Persons, but allow of
Plural Adjectives, because Substantives signify absolutely, and multiply
Natures, as well as Persons or Suppositums, but Adjectives may signify
relatively, and multiply Persons without multiplying Natures; as Three
Eternals, Three Omnipotents, Three Infinites, in a Substantive sense, signify
Three Eternal, Omnipotent, Infinite, Natures, as well as Persons; but Three,
who are Eternal, Omnipotent, Infinite, signify a Trinity of Eternal,
Omnipotent, Infinite, Persons, but do not necessarily signify a Trinity of
Natures, since these Three may subsist in the same Eternal, Omnipotent,
Infinite Nature, and each of them have this Eternal Infinite Nature, and all
the same. But still the difficulty remains, if Person or Suppositum and Nature
be perfectly the same, How the Father can communicate his Nature, and not his
Person? How there can be Three Incommunicable Persons, and Suppositums, and but
One Nature, and that communicable to more than One?

That thus it is, and how it may be, is better explained by an Example, than by
any words without it: See the Defense of Dr. Sherlock' s notion of a Trinity in
Unity, p. 19. etc.
And I shall instance in a living substantial Image: This is the true Character
of the Second Person of the Trinity, that he is so the Son, as to be the Living
Perfect Image of God, as has been explained at large elsewhere, as you may find
in the Margin. Now every man must confess, that the Prototype and the Image are
two distinct Incommunicable Suppositums, the Prototype is not the Image, nor
the Image the Prototype; and yet we must confess, that there is, and must be,
but one and the same Nature in both, not Specifically, but Identically the
same, for a perfect Image is, and can be nothing but the same that the
Prototype is, the same Eternity, the same Life, the same Wisdom, Power, and
Goodness, but all this not Personally the same, for their Persons are not, and
cannot be the same; but identically and invariably the same, or else it cannot
be a true and perfect Image. And this makes it evident, that though Person and
Nature be perfectly the same in God, yet when he begets a Son, he neither
begets his own Person, nor Nature, which would be to beget himself, which St.
Austin, and the Schools after him, reject as absurd; for an Image of God is
neither the Person, nor the Personal Nature of God, but of the same Nature with
him, and perfectly the same, there being no other difference between them, but
that one is the Prototype, the other the Image; one the Father, the other the
Son. So that when God of his own whole perfect Substance begets a whole,
perfect, living, substantial Image, he does not beget himself, but another; he
does not beget his own Nature, nor another Nature like his own, but his own
Image, of the same Nature with himself: He begets another Person, who is as
truly and perfectly God, as the true, perfect, living, Image of God must be
perfect God, but he does not in an absolute sense beget God, neither se Deum,
nor alium Deum, as the Schools rightly determine, neither himself God, nor
another God; for he neither begets his own Essence and Divinity, nor another
Divinity, but another, who is the perfect Image of his own Divine Essence: And
what is here said of the Generation of the Son, as the living subsisting Image
of God, must be applied to the Procession of the Holy Spirit, who is the
Eternal Spirit of God, as the Son is his Image.

This is what the Catholic Fathers call the (...), which is (...), that One
Divinity, in which they place the Unity of God: That there is but One Absolute
Divinity, or Divine Nature, which is the Person of the Father, who is therefore
eminently acknowledged to be the One God, as (...), the Fountain of the
Divinity, that is, of the Divinity of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, which
are not two other Absolute Divinities, for then they would be two more Gods,
besides the Father; but the Divinity of the Son and Holy Spirit is the same One
Divinity of the Father, as an Eternal, Perfect, Begotten, Living Image, and an
Eternal Proceeding Spirit, each of which is in himself true and perfect God,
and all Three but One God, or One Divinity, not merely because they receive
their Divinity from God by an Eternal Generation and Procession, nor as they
have a Divinity, or Divine Nature specifically the same with the Father, which
alone can no more render them One God, than Father and Son are One Man; but as
the singular individual Divinity of the Father is in the Son and Holy Spirit;
as it is manifest the singular individual Nature of the Prototype is, and must
be in its living substantial Image, without which it is not a Natural Image,
though it may have a perfect likeness of Nature, if it have an absolute Nature
of its own: This is what Tertullian tells us, That there is unus Deus cum
oeconomia, One God with his Economy; and what St. Hilary and others so often
tell us, That the Father does not cease to be the One God by having a Son,
since the Son is God by Nativity and Birth, and Authoritate Paternoe Naturoe,
by having his Father's Nature, who is the One God.

And this is all that the Schools mean by the Singularity of the Divine Nature
and Essence; and it is impossible they should mean any thing else, when they
teach, that this singular Nature is communicable.

They allow, as I have already shown, that Nature and Person is the same, that
each Person is Suppositum and Substance, a singular incommunicable Substance,
and therefore that there were Three Suppositums, and in that sense Three
Substances in the Trinity; but not Three Natures and Essences, though each
Person be distinctly by himself, the Divine Nature and Essence. Now since what
is strictly singular, is Numerically One; and what is Numerically One, and
never can be more, cannot be multiplied, as that seems to be, which is
communicated, what sense can there possibly be in a singular communicable,
which seem to be contradictory Terms?

But this is very good sense, and very Catholic Doctrine, if we understand
this Singular Communicable, as the Schools did, of One absolute Divinity, or
Divine Nature, which is so singular, that it can be but One, as is demonstrable
by Reason: But yet may beget its own essential Image, which is not another
Divinity, or another Nature, but its own singular Nature in its Image, which is
another Suppositum and Person, but not another Nature.

That this is the Sense of the Schools, and all that they meant by the
Singularity of the Divine Essence, is evident from the whole Doctrine of
Relations. A Trinity of Proper, Real Persons, each of which is Nature, Essence,
and Substance, was made an Argument against the perfect Unity, as well as
against the perfect Simplicity of the Divine Nature, for Plurality and Unity
are opposed to each other. To this the Schools answer, That a Plurality and
Unity of the same kind, are indeed opposite to each other, and cannot be
reconciled; as a Plurality of Natures cannot be reconciled with the Unity of
Nature, nor a Plurality of Persons with the Unity of a Person; but a Plurality
of Persons and Unity of Nature may be reconciled, and thus it is with the
Trinity in Unity; for though each Divine Person be the Divine Nature and
Essence, yet Three Divine Persons are not Three Absolute Natures and Essences,
Adeo propter summam unitatem and simplicitatem excluditur omnis pluralitas
absolute dictorum, non autem pluralitas relationum Quae relationes praedicantur
de aliquo ut ad alterum, and sic compositionem in ipso de quo dicuntur non
important. Aquin. 1. q. 30. art. 1, ad 3.
but Three Relations in One Singular Absolute Nature.

SECT. VIII. Concerning the Divine Relations.
BUT it will be of great use more particularly to consider this Doctrine of
Relations, without which it is impossible rightly to understand what the
Schools teach, about a Trinity in Unity: And to reduce it into as narrow a
compass as I can, I shall 1. show, What the Schools mean by Relations in the
Divine Nature. 2. Why they insist so much upon Relations.

1. What they mean by Divine Relations. Now they tells us, That they are real
Relations, not made by the Mind from some external Respects and Habitudes which
it observes between things, but antecedent to all the Acts of Reason in the
things themselves: That they are not inherent Accidents, but Substance, and
subsisting Relations; not relative Names and Appellations, but the Relatives
themselves; the Persons related being the Relations, and the Relation the
Person; which are therefore by some called Substantiae Relativae, and Entia
Realia Relativa, Relative Substances, and Real Beings, but Relative; that is,
not Absolute Substances, and Absolute Beings, with a Relation, as it is in
Creatures, where the Son is as Absolute a Man, and as Absolute a Person as the
Father is, though they are related to each other as Father and Son; but the
very Substance and Person is the Relation.

Before I show, That this is the Doctrine of the Schools, the better to
understand what they say, and the Reasons of it, it will be necessary to give
as plain and intelligible an Idea of this as I can; especially since I find
some Learned Men boggle very much at the Notion of Relative Substances, which
are not merely the Subjects of Relations, but the Relations themselves.

What their Objection is against this, I cannot tell, unless they think that a
Relative Substance is not True and Perfect Substance; which is very far from
the Notion of the Schools, who attribute complete and perfect Subsistence to
these Divine Relations or Persons, not as Accidents in their Subjects, nor as
Parts in a Whole, which is their Notion of Substance and complete Subsistence;
but a Relative Substance only signifies such a Substance as is not the
Original, but is all that it is from another, which they call the Relatio
Originis, not merely such a Relation as is between the Cause and the Effect,
which is seldom a substantial subsisting Relation, but the Relation between
Substance and Substance, when one Substance, in the notion of Suppositum, is
wholly and perfectly derived and expressed from the other.

The easiest Representation of this, is the relation between the Prototype or
Original, and its Image; which is not a mere Relation of Likeness and
Similitude, Imago enim est similitudo non quaecunique, sed ex eo, cujus imago
dicitur expressa; respondent enim sibi invicem imago and exemplar. Proinde non
quaecunque sibi mutuo sunt multum similia, ut ovum ovo, sunt ejusmodi, ut
alterum sit imago alterius; non enim in his omnibus, verbi gratia in ovis,
alterum de altero expressam gerit figuram, sed quod ex re objecta resultat in
speculo, and similitudo sigilli cerae impressa, and alia hujusmodi proprie
imagines dicuntur. Estius did 27. S. 8. and Aquin 1. q 35. in corpore.
but of Origination, that the Image is taken from the Original, which is the
foundation of the Relation. Though Two Eggs were never so perfectly alike, yet
One is not the Image of the Other, because it is not of the Other, nor its
natural Representation, though perfectly like it; but the Image is that which
results from the Object, like a Face in the Glass, or the Impression of a Seal;
and the whole Essence of such an Image, as an Image is relative. And it is the
same case as to a living substantial Image of that Life and Substance from
whence it proceeds; it is as perfect Life and Substance it self, as its
Original, or else it could not be a natural Image of Life and Substance; but
yet it is Relative Life and Substance, Life of Life, the Prototype begetting
its own Image in a perfect Identity and Sameness of Nature, Whole of Whole. And
this is the Notion of the Schools concerning Relative Substances, which is
intelligible enough.

And that this is what they mean by Relations in the Godhead or Divine Nature,
is as plain.

The Master of the Sentences tells us, That these Names, Father, Son, Has
proprietates designant nomina personarum, scilicet Pater, Filius, and Spiritus
Sanctus; quae relativa sunt, and ad se invicem dicuntur. Quia notant
relationes, quae non sunt Deo accidentales, sed in ipsis Personis ab aeterno
sunt immutabiliter, ut non modo appellationes sunt relativae, sed etiam
relationes, sive notiones in rebus ipsis, scilicet in Personis sint. Lomb. l.
1. did. 26.
and Holy Ghost, signify the Properties of Paternity, Filiation, and
Procession; for they are Relatives, which speak a mutual respect, and denote
Relations, which are not Accidents in God, but immutably in the Persons
themselves; so that they are not mere relative Appellations, but are Relations
or Notions in the things themselves, that is, in the Persons.

And by this Argument Tho. Aquinas proves, That these are real Relations, Pater
non dicitur nisi a Paternitate, and Filius a filiatione; si igitur paternitas
and filiatio non sunt in Deo realiter, sequitur, quod Deus non sit realiter
Pater aut Filius, sed secundum rationem intelligentiae tantum, quae est
haeresis Sabelliana. Aqu. 1. q. 28. art. 1.
and are really in God, because the Father is so called from the Relation of
Paternity, and the Son from Filiation; that were not Paternity and Filiation
realiter in Deo, real subsisting Relations in the Divinity, it would follow,
That God is not really Father or Son, but only according to different
Conceptions, Relationes in divinis, cum sint secundum processiones in
identitate naturae, reales quasdam in divinis esse relationes necessarium est.
Ibid.
which is the Sabellian Heresy. And proves, That these Relations in God are
real, because they are Divine Processions in the Identity of Nature; that is
the Son, who proceeds from the Father in the Identity of the same Nature; and
the Holy Spirit, who proceeds from Father and Son in the Identity of the same
Nature: For they called both the Generation of the Son, and the Spiration of
the Holy Ghost, Processions, as the Greeks did (...); the one processio
intellectus, the other amoris. Now these real Processions are Respects in the
nature of things, and such Respects are real Relations; Respectus in natura
rerum sunt relationes reales, cum aliquid procedit a principio ejusdem naturae,
necesse est quod ambo, scilicet procedens, and id a quo procedit in eodem
ordine conveniant, and sic oportet quod habeant reales respectus ad invicem. Ib.
for when any thing proceeds from a Principle of the same Nature, both that
which proceeds, and that from which it proceeds, must necessarily be of the
same Order, and therefore have a real respect to each other. Divine Processions
in the Identity of Nature must be related to each other in the Unity of the
same Nature, and must be substantial subsisting Relations; for they are no
other than the Persons themselves, who thus proceed.

It is a received Conclusion in the Schools, Relatio realiter in Deo existens,
idem est essentiae secundum rem. Aq 1. q. 28. art. 2.

Relationes personales nec a Personis, nec ab essentia reip^a distingui. Estius
did. 33. S. 2. l. 1.


That a Relation in God is the same with the Divine Essence: That Personal
Relations are not reipsa distinguished either from the Persons or the Essence.
And Gilbertus Porretanus, who taught the contrary, was forced to recant in the
Council of Rhemes. The real Distinction of these Relations in the Unity of the
Divine Nature, is another avowed Doctrine of the Schools; and by a real
Distinction they mean a Distinction in re, in the Subject and Suppositum: And
this they prove from the real Distinction of Persons, which are distinguished
only by Relations: From a real Trinity, which is One in Substance, but
multiplied by Relations, (relatio multiplicat Trinitatem;) and therefore unless
these Relations be really distinguished from each other, there cannot be a Real,
but only a Notional Trinity, which is Sabellianism. That these Relations which
constitute the Trinity, are opposite Relations, Aquinas and Estius, Ibid.
which require distinct Subjects, as Paternity and Filiation, for no man can be
Father and Son to himself: That these Divine Relations are real Relations, and
therefore must be really distinct or else they are not all real, unless they be
really opposed to each other, which makes a real distinction; and therefore
there must be a real distinction in God, not as to any thing absolute (secundum
rem absolutam), which is the Divine Essence, which has the most perfect and
simple Unity, but secundum rem relativam, with respect to a Relative Being and
Subsistence: So that these Relations are Relative Beings* Relative
Subsistences, and, as they are sometimes called. Relative Substances, which are
really distinct, though not in Nature, yet in their Suppositums; not as T^ree
Absolute Beings, which makes a distinction in Nature, but as Three Real
Subsisting Relations, in the Unity of the same Nature.

But not ^o multiply words in so plain a Case, I shall observe bu^ one thing
more to this purpose, and that concerns the Dispute conc^^ning the Number of
the Divine Persons. The Catholic Faith owns a Trinity, or only Three Divine
Persons in the Unity of the Godhead, Father, Son, and Holy (...); and it is the
known Doctrine of the Schools, That the Relation is the Person; How comes it to
pass then, that when there are Four Relations in the Godhead, Paternity,
Filiation, Active Spiration, and Procession, there should be but Three Persons?

Now the Answer, which Aquinas and others give to this Difficulty, is this.
That it is not every Relation, Aqui. 1. q. 30. Ar. 2.
but only opposite Relations, which constitute and distinguish Persons; for
more Pers^ns are more subsisting Relations really distinct from each other; but
there can be no real distinction between the Divine Relations, but upon account
of their relative opposition: And therefore two opposite Relations must belong
to two Persons, but such Relations as are not opposite to each other, must
belong to the same Person; and therefore Paternity and Filiation must belong to
two Persons, as being relatively opposed; and therefore a subsisting Paternity
is the Person of the Father, and a subsisting Filiation the Person of the Son:
Which can never be one Person, as requiring distinct Suppositums for such
opposite Relations: But now the other two Relations, Spiration and Procession
are not opposed to either of these, but only to each other: And therefore
Spiration does not constitute another Person, as not being opposed either to
Paternity or Filiation, and therefore may and does belong both to Father and
Son; but Procession must constitute a Third Person, as opposed to Spiration,
and so necessarily distinguished from Father and Son.

And therefore, though there are Four Relations, yet one of them, Spiration, is
not separated from the Person of the Father, and the Son, but belongs to them
both; nor is it a Property, as not being proper and peculiar to any one Person;
nor is it a Personal Relation, or that which constitutes a Person, and
therefore there are but Three Relations, Paternity, Filiation, and Procession,
which are Personal Properties, which constitute Persons, and therefore but
Three Persons.

Now this Answer evidently proves, That by Relations they did not mean mere
Habitudes, Respects, and External Denominations; for then every Relation must
of necessity be a Person, and there must be as many Persons, as there are
Relations; but they mean relative Beings, and Subsistencies, and therefore
allow no Relations to constitute distinct Persons, but such as necessarily
require distinct Subjects; that is, such opposite Relations, as can never meet
in the same Subject; and therefore their Suppositums must be really distinct,
as Paternity and Filiation, for no one can be Father and Son to himself. There
is no imaginable Account, why only opposite Relations constitute Persons, but
because they distinguish their Subjects; for when opposite Relations meet in
the same Subject, but not in opposition, they do not distinguish and multiply
Persons, as the same man may be Father and Son, and but One Person; but when
opposite Relations distinguish their Subjects, as the Divine Relations
necessarily do, they multiply Persons too: And no Relations, Properties,
Notions, according to the Doctrine of the Schools, constitute a Person, but
such as distinguish their Subjects, that Three Persons, and Three Relations,
are not Three Respects and Denominations of the same Singular Subject, but
Three real distinct Relative Beings, and Subsistencies.

2. Let us now consider, why they insist so much upon the notion of Relations,
that when they allow every Divine Relation to be the Divine Essence, Substance,
an incommunicable Subsistence and Substance, yet they will not allow us
absolutely to say Three Substances, but Three Relations, or Three Relative
Beings, Subsistencies, or Substances. And the plain and short account of it is
this; That this is essential to the Unity of God, and gives us the truest and
most perfect conception of a Trinity in Unity. As to show this particularly;

1. These Divine Relations (though each of them be incommunicably in his own
Person, Essence, and Substance) secure the perfect Unity of the Divine Essence.
For Three Relative Substances are essentially but One Substance, which Three
Absolute Substances can never be, though they never so perfectly agree in the
same Specific Notion and Idea.

By an absolute Substance, I mean one entire, perfect, individual, whole, which
is complete in it self, and subsists completely by it self, without any
Internal, Essential Union to, or necessary dependence on, any Being of the same
kind: By Relative Substances, I mean, such Substances as are internal
subsisting Relations in the same One whole individual Nature: Of Absolute
Substances we have as many Instances, as there are particular Creatures in the
World; of Relative Substances we have no instance in Created Nature, but some
such Images and Resemblances, as may help us to form an intelligible notion of
them. Now it is evident, without any need to prove it, that every complete
absolute Substance, how many soever they are, multiplies the Individuals of the
same kind; Three absolute Human Substances are Three Men, and Three Absolute
Divine Substances would for the same reason be Three Gods; but it is ^therwise
as to Relative Substances, which are ^ubsisting Personal Relations in the same
One individu^l Nature; and it is demonstrable, that the Relations of the same
One individual Nature and Substance, cannot multiply Natures and Substances, for
then they would not be Relations in the same individual Substance, but would be
Ab^olute, not Relative Substances.

As to explain this by a familiar Example. The Fathers, and after them the
Schoolmen, find some Images of the Trinity in Human Souls, as Memory,
Understanding. Will; or which they think a nearer resemblance, Mind, Knowledge,
Love: And a late S^cinian is very fond of such a Trinity, as Original Mind,
Reflex Wisdom, and Love.

Lomb. l 1. d. 3.
Peter Lombard explains this particularly from the Doctrine of St. Austin, and
it is evident that all these are very distinct, and never can be each other;
but all have a mutual and necessary relation to each other; are in each other,
and equal to each other, but are but One, One Mind, One Life, One Essence, and
One Substance; because they substantially exist in the same Soul and Mind, not
as Accidents in their Subjects, which may be parted, but as Essential
Properties and Powers.

This our Socinian Adversaries like well enough; for these distinct Properties
and Powers do not multiply Persons, and therefore though they grant something
like such distinct Powers in the Divine Nature, yet still there is but One
Divine Person, and therefore according to their own Notion, but One God.

But this is not the Question, Whether such distinct Faculties, Properties, and
Powers, multiply Persons, which we grant they do not, because they do not
multiply Natures, and One Individual Human Nature is but One Man, or One Human
Person; but the Q^estion is, Whether, if instead of these distinct Powers and
Faculties, there were real subsisting Persons, as essentially related to each
other in the same Individual Nature, they would any more divide or multiply
Nature, than such distinct Powers and Faculties do? And I am pretty confident,
no man can give me any good reason, why Relative Subsistencies, or Personal
Relations should any more divide or multiply the Divine Nature, than Relative
Powers and Properties divide or multiply Human Nature: For if these Divine
Persons are as essentially related to each other in the Divine Nature, as such
distinct Powers and Faculties are in Human Nature, a Trinity of Persons must be
as essentially One in the same One Individual Divinity, as a Trinity of Powers
and Faculties are in the same single Human Nature. It is certain, Three such
Divine Persons, though each of them be by himself true and perfect God, are not
Three Absolute Divinities, and therefore not Three Gods, but Three Divine
Relative Subsistencies in the same One Individual Godhead, and therefore but
One God; as Memory, Understanding and Will, are all that a Mind is, and each of
them all that the other is, and yet not Three Minds, but One Mind.

This shows the diff^rence between Absolute and Relative Substances; Three
Absolute Substances are always distinctly and separately Three, and can never
be any otherwise than specifically One; but Relative Substances may be
essentially One in the same One Individual Nature; and this is the Account both
the Fathers and Schools give of a Trinity in Unity, Three Relations, or Three
Relative Substances, or Subsistencies, essentially related to each other in the
Unity of the same One Individual Essence.

St. Gregory Nyssen has given the most particular Account of this matter in his
Catechetical Oration. (...). Nyss. Orat. Cat. cap. 1.
To convince the Heathens of the Eternal Subsistence of the Divine Word in the
Unity of the same Godhead, he lays the foundation of all in that universally
received Principle, That the Divinity is not (...), which I translate (not,
irrational, without Reason, or Understanding, but) not without its Word; which
is not the Personal Wisdom of the Father, (...). Ibid.

(...).

(...).


whereby the Father is wise, as I have already shown ( Chap. 3.) but a
Personal, Living, Subsisting, Word: Which answers to that Word which we feel in
our own Minds, and which is essential to all Minds, that no Mind can be without
its Word; but is not a vanishing Notion and Idea, or a transient sound, as
Human words, but answers to the perfection of the Divine Nature. And therefore
as our Mortal Nature has a Vanishing, Perishing Word, so the Incorruptible, and
Eternally Permanent, Immutable Nature, has an Eternal Subsisting Word. And (as
he proceeds) if this Divine Word subsists, it lives; for it does not subsist
like stupid inanimate Stones, but as Mind, and Spirit, which must live, if it
subsists; and if it lives, the absolute simplicity of the Divine Nature, which
admits of no composition, proves that he lives, not by a participation of Life,
but as Life it self. And if the Word lives, as being Life it self, (...).

(...).


it must have (...), a power to do, what it freely wills and chooses. For that
which cannot will and choose ((...)) does not live; and an Impotent Will is a
contradiction to the Nature of God; and therefore its Power must be equal to
its Will: But this Divine Word can will nothing but what is good, and wills
whatever is good; and being able to effect whatever it wills, is not unactive
((...)) without doing any thing, but does the good it wills: And since we must
acknowledge the World, and all things in it, which are wisely and artificially
made, to be good; all things are the Works of this Living Subsisting Word. This
is his Proof, (...). Ibid.
That God has a Subsisting, Living, Almighty, Creating Word, which is another
distinct Person from him, whose Word he is. For the Word is a Relative Term,
and signifies a Relative Subsistence, and necessarily supposes the Father; for
he is not the Word, but with relation to him, whose Word he is. And by this
means he tells us, we may escape both the Polytheism of the Gentiles, and the
Singularity of the Jews, by acknowledging the Living, Energetical, Operative
Word, which the Jews deny, and the Unity and Identity of Nature, between the
Word, and Him, whose Word he is. For as our Word proceeds out of our Mind, and
is neither every way the same with the Mind, nor yet upon all accounts another.
For that it is of the Mind, proves that is is another, and not the Mind it
self; but as it perfectly expresses and represents the Mind, it cannot be
another Nature, but one and the same Nature, though a kind of different
subsistence. So the Word of God, by a distinct subsistence of its own, is
distinguished from him, from whom he receives his Subsistence and Hypostasis;
but inasmuch as he is all, and the same that God is, he is perfectly one and
the same in Nature.

This is the Doctrine of all the other Catholic Fathers, as well as of Gregory
Nyssen, who resolve the Unity of the Godhead in a Trinity of Persons, into
Relative Subsistencies in the same Individual Nature, which no more multiplies
Natures and Divinities, to make Two or Three Gods, than the Mind, its Word, and
Love, make Three Minds.

This is the true and complete notion of the Homoousion, which (as I have
already shown) does not signify a mere Specific Unity, but the Unity of One
Individual, not Singular, Nature in Three; that Three Real, Distinct,
Subsisting Persons are as intimately and essentially related to each other in
the same Individual Nature, as a Human Mind and its Word are; which are not,
and never can be two Minds, but one Mind. Two complete and perfect Minds can
never in a proper notion be Consubstantial, or one Substance, though they have
the same specific Nature; for their Substance is not one and the same, but
naturally two, and naturally separable, how closely soever they may be united;
but Three Divine Persons, who are essentially related to each other in the same
Divinity, as the Mind and its Word are, are in the strictest notion
Consubstantial, or One Substance, being essentially related to each other in
the same One Individual Nature and Essence.

And here I must take notice of a great mistake, which some Learned Men run
into, concerning the (...), singular and particular Natures, Substances, and
Essences, by which they understand, what some others call Personal Substances;
and conclude, That since Philoponus, and others, who asserted (...), Three
particular Natures and Essences, or Substances in the Godhead, were charged
with Tritheism (as they deserved, if their Opinions be truly represented) those
who assert Three Substantial Persons, or Three distinct Personal Subsistencies
or Substances, are liable also to the same Charge. This is a material
Objection, and a fair Answer to it will set this whole matter in a clear light.

Now the Answer in short is this, That those who rejected the (...), and
charged it with Tritheism, did not thereby understand particular, personal,
relative, Subsistencies or Substances, but complete, absolute, particular
Natures and Substances; not Three Real, Substantial, Subsisting Relations in
One Individual Nature, as a Mind, its Internal, Essential, Word, and Spirit, as
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are Three; but Three absolute particular Natures,
as Three Men, each of whom has a complete, absolute, personal Nature of his
own, are Three. Now if this be the true Account, every one sees the difference
between Three personal, relative, Substances or Subsistencies of the same
Nature, and Three absolute particular Natures; the first is a real Substantial
Trinity, Three Subsisting Infinite Persons in the Unity of the same Godhead.
Three Persons, and One God; the other is downright Tritheism.

And that this is all they meant by particular Individual Natures, I have many
Arguments to prove.

For 1st. Had they herein condemned distinct, personal, relative Substances,
they had condemned the Faith of the Catholic Church, and relapsed into
Sabellianism, as abundantly appears from what I have already proved at large.

2 Those very Persons, who charge Philoponus with Tritheism for asserting Three
Individual Natures and Essences, do themselves own a Personal Substance.
Leontius de sectis Act. 1. B.P. Gr. L. T. 1. p. 493.
Leontius, as Nic^ph rus tells us, wrote a large Book against Philoponus, and
yet he tells us, That the Fathers by (...) and (...), Essence or Substance, and
Nature, understood the same thing, and so they did by Hypostasis and Person.
That by Essence and Substance, they meant what the Philosophers call a Species;
by Hypostasis and Person, what they call (...), an Individual Substance: And in
this sense he tells us, They acknowledged One Divinity in Three Hypostases, or
Three Personal Subsistencies. That there is One Hypostasis (that is, (...)) of
the Father, One Hypostasis of the Son, and One Hypostasis of the Holy Ghost;
that these Three ((...)) in nothing differ from each other, but only in their
Personal Properties, ((...)) that one is the Father, the other the Son, the
other the Holy Ghost: So that Leontius owns Three true proper Persons, each of
which is (...), an Individual Substance, which he asserts to be the true
Catholic Ecclesiastical Notion of a Person, and each Person as distinct from
each other, as he that begets is from him who is begotten; and therefore when
he condemned Philoponus for his Individual Natures and Essences, he could not
by that mean relative, Personal Subsistencies or Substances.

Theodorus Abucara (if he be the Author of that Tract against the Severians,
Explanatio vocum, (...). Theod. Abuc. Op. 2. B. P. Gr. L. p. 382.
quibus Philosophi utuntur, which I have sometimes suspected to belong to
Theodorus Presbyter Raithensis, who promises such an Explication of
Philosophical Terms at the end of his Treatise de Incarnatione, I say, this
Theodorus, whoever he is) expressly charges these (...), Individual Natures and
Essences with Tritheism; and yet throughout that Treatise teaches, That
Hypostasis is (...), a singular Individual Nature; and so does Anastasius
Sinaita in his Hodegos; and indeed all the Writers of that Age, who asserted
against the Severians the Union of Two Natures in One Person in Christ.

3 dly, But we shall soon be satisfied in this matter, if we consider the
occasion of this Dispute. The Severians, as they had learnt from their Master
Severus, and he from Eutyches, taught, that there was but One Nature, as well
as One Person in Christ, and that for this reason, That to assert Two Natures,
is consequently to assert Two Persons in Christ, which is Nestorianism; for
every Nature is a Person, that it is impossible there should be (...), a Nature
without a Personality of its own, for (...), Nature and Person, or Hypostasis,
are the same. In opposition to this the Catholics urged, That if Nature and
Hypostasis were so the same, that One Hypostasis is One Nature, and One Nature
but One Hypostasi^; then as we assert Three Hypostasis in the Trinity, we must
also allow (...), Three Individual Natures and Essences in the Trinity.
Philoponus saw that this was an unavoidable Consequence, and therefore rather
than own Two Natures in One Person in Christ, he chose to assert Three
Individual Natures in the Trinity: And for this, he and his Followers were very
justly charged with Tritheism.

And this shows us, what these Individual Natures were, not Three Relative
Personal Subsistencies and Substances in the same One Individual Nature, which
is but (...), One Divinity; but Three Complete Absolute Divinities, (...),
Three such Divine Natures, as there are Three Individual Human Natures in Three
Men: Each of which is by himself, and alone, without communication with any
other in the same Individual Nature, One complete entire Humane Nature, and One
Human Person: For this was the rise of the Dispute, concerning the Humanity of
Christ. The Catholics owned the Personality of the Word, but taught that
Christ's Humane Nature was so united to his Divinity, as not to be a distinct
Human Person, but to subsist in the Person of the Word, which is the true Faith
of the Word's being Incarnate, or made Flesh, which could not be true, if the
Person of the Word were not Incarnate, and that could not be true, if the Human
Nature in Christ, were a distinct Human Person, as other Men are. On the other
hand, the Severians denied the Union of Two Natures in the One Person of
Christ, because an Individual Human Nature must be a Person, and then Christ
must be two Persons, as well as two Natures: So that this (...) is a complete
absolute Individual Nature, such as an Individual Human Nature is, and three
such Individual Natures make three Men, or Three Gods, and to assert Three such
Absolute Divinities, is Tritheism; but this concerns not Personal, Relative,
Subsistencies or Substances in the same Individual Nature and Essence; and
therefore the Condemnation of Philoponus, or Valentinus Gentilis, and such kind
of Heretics (if they did really teach what they are charged with) cannot
aff^ct those, who assert Three real, distinct, substantial, Persons, each of
whom is by himself, in his own Person, the whole Divine Nature, Essence,
Substance, but are essentially and inseparably related to each other in the
Unity of the same Individual Essence. The very asserting three relative,
personal Subsistencies, or Substances, in One Individual Nature, is a direct
opposition to the Doctrine of Philoponus, and the Severians, that Nature and
Person is the same, so the same, that One Nature can be but One Person, and One
Person but One Nature, which necessarily overthrows a Trinity of Persons in the
Unity of the Divine Essence, and the Union of the Divine and Humane Nature in
the One Person of Christ; but Three Relative Persons and Subsistencies in One
Nature, and One Nature and One Person are direct Contradictions, as One
Individual Substance, and Three Individual Substances are.

Indeed those who deny Three Relative Personal Subsistencies, that is, Three
Real, Proper, Substantial Persons, in the Unity of the Divine Nature, go upon
the same Principle with Philoponus and the Severians, that One Nature is but
One True and Proper Person, or Hypostasis, and therefore there cannot be Three
Proper Subsisting Persons in the Unity of One Individual Substance; which, as
Anastatius Sinaita, and the other Catholic Writers of that Age frequently
observe, is that fundamental Error, which gave birth to Sabellianism, Arianism,
Nestorianism, and Eutychanism; for as different as these Heresies are, the
fundamental Principle is the same, that One Individual Nature is, and can be
but One Person, and One Person but One Nature: For this reason Sabellius, who
acknowledged the Unity of the Divine Nature, rejected a Trinity of proper
Subsisting Persons; Arius, who owned a Trinity of Persons, denied their
Consubstantiality, or Sameness and Identity of Nature; Nestorius, who owned Two
Natures in Christ, asserted also Two Persons; and Eutyches made Christ but One
Nature, as well as One Person; and in consequence of this Philoponus (if he was
not mistaken) taught Three Individual Natures, as well as Three Persons in the
Godhead. So that to make Nature and Person in the true and proper notion of
Person commensurate and convertible Terms; that a Nature is a Person, and a
Person an Individual Nature; that One Nature is but One Person, and One Person
but One Nature; and that Individual Natures and Persons must always be
multiplied with each other, is the fundamental Principle of all the Heresies
relating to the Trinity and Incarnation, and then one would think, that those
Doctrines which expressly contradict this Principle, and all these Heresies
which result from it, should be the true Catholic Faith: And then Three Real,
Substantial, Subsisting Persons, or Three Relative Personal Subsistencies, or
Substances, in the Unity of the same Individual Essence, or one Godhead, is the
True Catholic Faith; and to reject it upon pretense, that this must multiply
Natures with Persons, and so make Three Divinities, and Three Gods, is to
return to that condemned Heretical Principle, That One Nature can be but One
True and Proper Person; which, if Men understand the true Consequences of what
they say, must inevitably betray them to Sabellianism, Arianism, or Tritheism.
And thus much for the (...), which, I hope, we shall hear no more of. The
Doctrine of Relations demonstrates the Individual Unity of the Divine Essence;
for if Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, though each of them in his own Person be
True and Perfect God, yet are not Three Absolute Divinities, but Three Eternal
Subsisting Relations, in the same One Divinity, they must be One Individual
Essence and Substance, for else they cannot be the Relations of the same One
Essence and Substance.

2. As these Divine Relations prove the Individual Unity of Nature and Essence,
so they prove the Sameness and Identity of Nature, wherein, as I have shown at
large, the Catholic Fathers place the Unity of the Godhead. That (...). One
Divinity is One God. A few words will serve to explain this, after what I have
already discoursed on this Argument.

The (...), as I have already shown, does not signify the Singularity, but the
perfect invariable Sameness and Identity of Nature; not such a Sameness, as
every single Person is the same with himself, but such a Sameness as is between
distinct Persons of the same Nature. Now the Doctrine of Relations necessarily
infers this perfect Sameness and Identity, and this Relative Sameness and
Identy proves a perfect Unity.

As for the first, there needs no other proof, but barely to represent it, for
it is self-evident: For is it possible, that a Perfect, Living, Subsisting Word
should not be perfectly the same with that Infinite Mind, whose Word it is, and
from whom it proceeds? That a Perfect, Living, Subsisting Image, should not be
perfectly the same with its Prototype, from whom it receives its Being and
Nature? For if the Word be not perfectly the same with the Mind, nor the Image
with its Prototype, it is not a true and perfect Word, not a perfect Image: By
these Relations of Father and Son, of a Mind and its Word, a Prototype and its
Image, the Catholic Fathers, as I have already shown, prove the perfect,
invariable Sameness and Identity of Nature; for the thing proves it self. The
Relation indeed of Father and Son, considered in general, proves no more than a
specific Sameness of Nature, which may admit of great changes and variety
within the same Species; but when God is the Father, and begets a Son of his
own Substance, his Nature being absolutely and immutably perfect, he must
communicate the same perfect invariable Nature to his Son; especially when this
Son is his own perfect living Word, and his perfect Image. But this is not all:
A perfect Sameness between Two Absolute Natures, without the least conceivable
difference or variation, would not be a (...), a Sameness of Identity; for
though they could subsist as perfectly the same, as their Idea is, yet they
would be Two Absolute Natures, not One Nature: But a perfect Sameness in
Essential Relations, or Relative Subsistencies, proves a perfect Identity of
Nature, that they are perfectly the same in the same One Individual Nature: As
a living substantial Word must receive its substance and being, whole of whole,
from that Mind, whose Word it is; for if it be not the same Substance, it cannot
be the substantial Word of that Mind, whose Substance it is not; nor can a
living substantial Image be any other Substance, than that of the Prototype;
for if it were, it might be its likeness, but not its natural Image. And thus
this Sameness and Identity of Nature proves each Person by himself to be true
and perfect God, and all Three but One God; for each Person, according to this
Doctrine, has, and must have, the whole perfect Divinity in himself, and all
Three but one and the same Divinity.

3. These Subsisting Relations in the Unity of Nature, give us an intelligible
Notion of the (...), of the inseparable Union of the Divine Persons, and their
mutual (...), Inexistence, Inbeing, in each other. That all the Catholic
Fathers asserted the (...), or inseparable Union of the Divine Persons, as
essential to the Unity of the Godhead, is so well known, that I need not
multiply Quotations to prove it, after what I have already observed to that
purpose. But the Question is, What they mean by this (...), wherein the
Essential Unity of the Godhead consists.

Now it is certain this relates to the inseparable Union of the Persons; for it
is opposed to (...), divided and separate Hypostases and Persons, which the
Fathers charge with Tritheism. The Son is (...), Athan. Decr. Syn. Nic. T. I.
p. 269.
inseparable from the Essence and Substance of the Father, and (...), is
inseparably in the Father; that he is begotten of the Father without any
division of Substance, within the Father, and inseparable from him; so that
this does not relate immediately to the Unity of Nature, but the Union of
Persons, and therefore cannot signify the Singularity of the Divine Nature, but
the Inseparable Union of real distinct Persons in the Unity of Nature. That the
(...), this Inseparable Union and Inbeing of Persons, does as necessarily prove
the real Distinction of Persons as the Unity of Nature, as St. Hilary, and
Athanasius, and the other Fathers, frequently observe, and that proves that the
Unity of the Divine Nature, which is the Inseparable Union of Three proper
subsisting Persons, is not the Unity of Singularity: Which shows by the way,
how improperly the (...) is made use of to prove the Singularity of the Divine
Essence, for it proves quite the contrary; it is the Unity of Three which is a
Trinity in Unity; not the Unity of One, which is Singularity and Solitude.

In the next place I observe, That by the (...) all the Catholic Fathers
understand in this Mystery the inseparable Union of Relatives in the same
Individual Nature, not the Union of complete, absolute Natures, how close and
inseparable soever it may be. There is by Nature no Inseparable Union, but in
the same Individual Nature. Three complete Individuals, though of the same Kind
and Species, how closely and intimately soever they be united, are not by
Nature inseparable nor essentially One, for they may be parted by that Power
which united them, and when they are parted, can subsist apart; as Three
complete Minds, how intimately soever they should be united by God, yet can
never be essentially and inseparably One, for they are not essential to each
other; they might have subsisted apart, and may be parted again, and an
External Union cannot so make them One, as to be naturally inseparable. Which I
think is a Demonstration that a Natural Inseparability, which is an Essential
Unity, can be only in One Individual Nature between such Relatives as are
Essential to each other, and can neither be, nor be conceived, divided, or
separated: And therefore the Catholic Fathers represented the (...) by
Examples of Natural Unions between things Essentially related to each other in
One Individual Nature, which either cannot be conceived, or at least cannot
subsist apart. Of this last Kind are a Fountain and its Streams, a Tree and its
Branches, whereby they not only represent the Homoousion, but the Inseparable
Union of the Divine Persons, as every one knows; for there cannot be a Fountain
but its Waters must flow out, nor Streams without a Fountain from whence they
flow; and though Branches may be separated from the Tree, yet they live no
longer than they are united, and are Branches of that Tree no longer: But these
are very imperfect Images, and without great caution will corrupt our Ideas of
the Divine Unity. Of all Corporeal Unions the nearest resemblance we have of
this, and which the Fathers most insist on, is the Sun, and its natural
Splendour, for we cannot conceive the Sun without its Splendour, nor the Splendour
without the Sun; they never were, never can be parted, and therefore, though
two, are essentially one. This Representation the Scripture makes of it, which
calls the Son, (...), the Brightness of his Father's Glory, and in this Sense
they teach that he is (...), Light of Light, as it is in the Nicene Creed,
whereby they do not mean two distinct independent Lights, which either are or
may be parted, though one be lighted at the other (this was the Heresy of
Hierachas, Sed nec sicut Hierachas lucernam dixit de lucerna, vel lampadem in
duas parts. Hilar. de Tr. c. 6.
as St. Hilary tells us, who represented this Mystery by two Candles, one of
which is lighted at the other, or by one and the same Lamp, (...). Ath. Syn.
Nic. decr. p. 271.
which is divided and burns in two Sockets); but that Light and Splendour which
is essential to the same Sun, and can never be divided from it, as Athanasius
teaches. But the truest Images we have of this in Nature, is the Inseparable
Union which is between a Mind and its own Internal Word, which are so
essentially related to each other in the same Individual Nature, that they can
never be parted, nor conceived apart; the Mind can never be without its Word,
nor the Word subsist but in the Mind: It is evident, That two complete,
absolute Minds can never be thus united; for they are not Essential to each
other; not naturally one, and therefore not naturally inseparable; but a Mind
and its Word, though two, are essentially One, and therefore can never be
parted but must subsist together; and these are the Characters the Scripture
gives us of God the Father and his Son; the Father Infinite, Eternal,
Self-originated Mind; the Son his Eternal Infinite, Living, Subsisting Word.
And if Father and Son, this Eternal Mind and Eternal Word, be as essentially
One, as a man's Mind and his Word are One, this is a Demonstration of their
Inseparable Union, and gives us a sensible Notion and Idea of it.

This is the account Athanasius every where gives of the (...), that the Father
and Son are inseparably One; the Father being in the Son, and the Son in the
Father, as the Word is in the Mind, and the Light in the Sun. (...). Dionys.
Alex. ap. Athan. Syn. Nicen. decr. T. I. p. 275.
To separate the Divine Persons, so as not to be in each other, whatever other
Union we own between them, Dionysius of Alexandria charges with Tritheism; for
the Divine Word must of necessity be one with God, and the Holy Spirit be and
subsist in him. And this Athanasius resolves into such a Sameness and Unity of
Nature, as must be between two Relative Subsistencies in the same Individual
Nature. That the Son is in the Father, as the Word is in the Mind, and the
Splendour in the Sun; that he is a genuine proper natural Son in the Father's
Essence and Substance, not (...), not subsisting out of his Father's Substance,
as other Creature Sons do. (...). Ath. cont. Arian. Or. 4. p. 456.

(...). Ibid.

(...). Ibid. p. 437.


That the true Notion of the Sons being in the Father, is that the whole Being
of a Son, is (...), the Genuine Natural Birth of the Father's Substance, the
(...), as the Splendour is of the Sun: That the very Being of the Son is the
Form of Species, and Divinity of the Father. That as the Sun and its Splendour
are two, but not two Lights, but one Light from the Sun enlightening all things
with its Splendour and Brightness; so the Divinity of the Son is the Divinity of
the Father, and therefore inseparable; and thus there is but one God, and none
else besides him.

All this plainly refers to the Inseparable Union and Inbeing of Relatives of
the same Individual Substance, which are really distinct, but essentially in
each other, as the Word is in the Mind, and the Mind in the Word, that Thought
it self cannot part them; which is such an Union as can never be between
complete absolute Substances, which are not naturally Inseparable, nor
essentially One. Herein Athanasius places the adequate Notion of the
Homoousion, the Sameness, Identity, and Unity of Nature. He tells us, That for
this reason the Nicene Fathers taught the Homoousion, or that the Son is
Consubstantial, or of one Substance with the Father, to signify that the Son is
not only like the Father, (...).

(...) -- (...). Ath. Syn. Nic. decret p. 269.

(...). Ath. Or. 4. c. Ar. p. 456.


but to be so of the Father, as to be the same in likeness; not after the
manner of Bodies, which are like each other, but subsist apart by themselves,
as Human Sons subsist separately from their Parents; but the Generation of the
Son of the Substance of the Father is of a different Kind and Nature from Human
Generations, for he is not only like, but inseparable from his Father's
Substance. He and the Father are One, as he himself says: The Word is always in
the Father, and the Father in the Word, as it is with Light and its Splendour,
and this is what the Homoousion signifies; and in like manner he resolves the
Sameness, Identity, and Unity of Nature, into this Internal, Inseparable Union
and Inbeing of Three, essentially related to each other in One Individual
Divinity.

4 thly, That Mutual Inbeing of the Divine Persons, which is their Inseparable
and Essential Union, that the Father is in the Son, and the Son in the Father,
which the Greeks call (...), and the Latins Circumincessio, can be understood
only between the Relatives of the same Individual Essence and Substance. The
true complete Notion of this Inbeing or Perichoresis, is not merely a Mutual
Presence, or the same Vbi, that wherever one is, there the other is; or a kind
of Immeation and Penetration of each other, which is a Corporeal Notion, and
rejected as such by the Catholic Fathers, when they speak of this Divine
Inbeing, as St. Hilary expressly does, Hill. C 7. de Tr.
inesse autem non aliud in alio, ut corpus in corpore; that they are not in
each other, (...). Ath. Or. 4. c Ar. p. 454.
as one Body is in another Body. And when the Arians objected against our
Savior's saying, I am in the Father, and the Father in me; How can this be in
that, and that in this? Or how can the Father, who is greater, be at all in the
Son, who is less? Or what wonder is it, that the Son should be in the Father,
when it is written of us all, That in him we live, and move, and have our
being? Athanasius answers, That this is all owing to Corporeal Conceits, as if
they apprehended God to be a Body, not considering the Nature of the True
Father, and true Son, the Invisible and Eternal Light, and its Invisible
Splendour; an Invisible Substance, and its unbodied Character and Image.

But the true Notion of this Inbeing and Pericharesis is the Perfect Unity of
the same Individual Nature in Three. That the Nature and Essence of the Father
is in the Son, (...). -- (...). Ibid. p. 456.
that the Son is (...), the Character, Image, Mind, Divinity of the Father.
Here, as Athanasius observes, our Savior himself lays the Reason and
Foundation of this Mutual Inbeing: He first tells us, I and my Father are One;
and then adds, I am in the Father, and the Father in me, that he might show the
Sameness and Identity of the Godhead, and the Unity of Essence. For they are
One, not One divided into two Parts, and nothing more than One; for they are
Two* the Father is the Father, and not the Son; and the Son is the Son, and not
the Father, but there is but One Nature; for he that is begotten, is not unlike
in Nature to him that begets, but is his Image, and all that the Father has is
the Sons.

There is no need to multiply Quotations to this purpose, which may be met with
every where. The Father is in the Son, and the Son in the Father, as the Nature
of the Father is, lives and subsists in the Son* not a Nature like the Fathers,
but the (...), the Father's own proper Nature and Essence; they are in each
other, as being essentially One, not One merely as being in each other, as it
is possible Three may be, and yet not be essentially One, but Three; as Three
complete absolute Minds would be Three still, though they should perfectly
penetrate each other: Or as Three Candles in the same Room, are Three Lights
though they are perfectly united in One. But Original Mind, its Word and Spirit
are and must be in each other, as being Three in One Individual Essence; for
the same undivided Essence cannot be whole and entire in Three, but those Three
must be in each other. If the Divinity of the Father is in the Son, the Father
is in the Son, and the Son in the Father; the Mind is in its Word, and the Word
in the Mind: The Son is in the Father, as eternally begotten in the Substance
of the Father, whole of whole, and essentially one and the same, as the Word is
in the Mind, not by such an Union and Penetration as we may suppose between two
Minds, but as conceived in the Mind, and essentially one and the same with it.

Now according to this Representation, which all the Catholic Fathers make of
this Mystery, we must of necessity acknowledge Number without Multiplication,
Distinction without Division or Separation, a perfect Trinity in perfect Unity;
Three Persons, each of which is by himself True and Perfect God, but not Three
Gods, but One God: A Mind and its Word are two, and a living, subsisting Word
is true and perfect Mind, Mind of Mind, and yet not two Minds, but one Mind;
for the Mind and its Word are essentially One, as all Men must confess; the
Word is in the Mind, and the Mind in the Word, and therefore identically one
and the same: for which reason the Fathers acknowledge that the Father is
Spirit, the Son Spirit, and the Holy Ghost Spirit, and these are Three, but not
Three Spirits, as essentially related to each other in the same individual
Essence, essentially the same, and essentially in each other: And thus Will of
Will, Wisdom of Wisdom, Life of Life, Power of Power, though they multiply and
distinguish Persons, do not multiply Wills, Wisdoms, Lives, Powers, which are
essentially One, as the Mind, its Word, and Spirit, are One: They are not One
Life, One Will, One Understanding, One Power, in the Sense of but One who
Lives, who Wills, who Understands, and has Power; but as the same, identically
the same Life, and Will, etc. is in each of them, and indivisibly and
inseparably in them all.

And this gives an account of the Unity of Operation, wherein the Catholic
Fathers unanimously place the Unity of God, for One Almighty Agent is but One
God, and One Essential Will, Wisdom, and Power, can be but One Agent; and
Infinite, Original Mind, and its Eternal subsisting Word can have but One Will,
and Wisdom, and Power, for the Will and Wisdom of the Mind is in its Word; the
same, not merely specifically the same, or the same by consent, as it may be
between Two Minds, which Will perfectly the same thing, but the same One
Individual Will; the Father Wills, and the Son Wills, and they both Will
distinctly, but with one Individual Will; as it is impossible that the Word
should Will with any other Will, but the Will of that Mind, whose Word it is.
And therefore Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, though Three Eternal, Infinite,
Living, Intelligent, Willing, Persons, which Subsist and Act distinctly, yet
being that to each other in a more perfect and excellent manner, that Mind, its
Word, and Spirit, are in Men, they must be as perfectly One Almighty Agent as a
created Mind is, which Wills and Acts in its Word and Spirit.

The Distinction and Unity of Operation necessarily proves the Distinction and
Unity of Essence; it being in our way of conceiving things a necessary effect
of it; there must be some real Distinction in the same Nature and Essence, in
which there are Three who Act distinctly; and there must be an Individual Unity
of Essence, when in Three there is but One Individual Operation; and though
these things may be distinguished in Creatures, where we distinguish the
Suppositum and the Powers, and give a priority of Nature to the Suppositum, yet
Essence and Energy being the same in God, who is a pure simple Act, there can
be no priority nor posteriority between them, but the Demonstration proceeds
equally upon Nature or Operation; but that is the best, which is the most
intelligible Representation of this Distinction and Unity.

For this reason the Fathers chose to explain the Distinction and Unity of the
Godhead by the Distinction and Unity of Operation, which I need not prove at
large, as being universally owned, and therefore I shall only observe, how St.
Gregory Nyssen represents this matter.

In his Answer to Ablabius, that there are not Three Gods, (...) Nyss. ad Abl.
Vol. 2. p. 450.

(...)


he tells us, That the best way to form the clearest and most perspicuous
Notion of this, is to examine what this Name (...), or Godhead, signifies. Now
whereas some think this a proper Name to signify the Divine Nature and Essence,
he asserts with the Scriptures ((...)) that the Divine Nature and Essence is
(...) and (...), without a Name, (...).
and cannot be signified by words; and that every Name which is given to God,
signifies something essential to him, but not his Nature and Essence it self.
This he shows particularly in some Names given to God, and affirms, (...).

(...).

(...).


That thus it is in all other Divine Names, that either they remove all
Imperfections, or attribute all Divine Perfections to him, but do not declare
his Nature: And thus he adds it is in the Name (...), which is (...), that
(...), is (...), that is, God is a S^er, an Inspector, who beholds all things:
Now if God signifies him, who sees and knows all things, we must inquire,
whether this All-seeing Power belongs only to one of the Divine Persons of the
Trinity, or to all Three: For if this be the true interpretation of the Name
(...), that it is an All-seeing Power, and that He that sees all, is God, we
cannot reasonably deny this to any Person in the Holy Trinity, since the
Scripture does equally attribute this Omniscience to Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost.

Well! suppose this, as he adds, it does not remove but increase the
difficulty; for though God be not a Name of Nature, but of Energy and Power, if
the Name God signifies a Seer and Inspector, and there be Three, who thus see
all things, Three must be Three Gods, as we number Persons of the same
Profession, who all do the very same things, as well as those who have the same
Nature; as we say many Orators, Mathematicians, and the l^ke, (...); -- (...)
-- (...).
as well as many M^n. Now this he answers by the Unity of Energy and Power,
which is in each of them, but is but One indivisible inseparable Power; not as
it is in Men, who each of them acts separately by himself; and though they do
the same thing for kind, yet what each of them does, is properly his own doing,
and not another: They act separately, and produce distinct and separate
Effects, and therefore are many Agents. (...) -- (...).
But it is quite otherwise as to the Divine Nature: The Father does nothing by
himself without the Son, nor the Son without the Holy Ghost; but each Divine
Operation proceeds originally from the Father, is continued by the Son, and
perfected in the Holy Spirit; and therefore the name of Energy is not divided
into a number of Agents, because neither of them acts separately by himself.

And this he proves from the Unity of the Effect; (...). -- (...). -- (...).

(...).


that whatever good thing we receive from God, as suppose Life, is attributed
to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; but though it be given by Three, that which is
given, or done for us, is not Three; we do not receive three Lives, one from
each Person of the Trinity, but we have but one Life, which we receive from
them all. Now where there is but One Undivided Effect, there can be but One
Natural Agent; for separate Agents will produce separate Effects; and therefore
there can be but one motion of the Divine Will from the Father by the Son to
the Holy Spirit, and that without distance and Succession. Now it is plain,
that all this does not signify a mere Unity of Consent, as may be between Three
Distinct and Separate Minds, but the Unity of Principle, which acts distinctly,
but uniformly and inseparably in Three; the same Divine Will, which is
originally in the Father, acting in the same manner, and with one indivisible
motion (as they speak) in the Son, and Holy Spirit; which Unity of Operation,
though it admits of distinct Acts, and consequently a real distinction of
Persons, yet proves the individual Unity of Essence; for there can be no Unity
of Principle or Operation, but in the same Individual Essence; where Three
Persons are united in the same Individual Essence, as the Mind, its Word, and
Spirit, are in Man.

And here (had there not been enough already said about it) is a proper Place
to vindicate that late Representation which has been made of the Distinction
and Unity of the Godhead by the self-consciousness, See the Defense of Dr.
Sherlock 's Notion of a Trinity in Unity.
and mutual consciousness of the Divine Persons.

I have met with no body yet so hardy as to deny, that Self-consciousness is
essential to the natural Unity of a Person, and that Three Persons cannot be
naturally and essentially One without mutual Consciousness. But the great
Objection against this Notion (and which I am amazed to find some Learned Men
insist on) is the order of Nature, which requires, that a Person should be One
by an Unity of Nature, before it can be self-conscious; and that Three Persons
must be One by the Unity of Nature, before they can be mutually conscious: For
the Unity of Nature, and the Union of Persons in the same Nature, must be
before all Acts of Self-consciousness, and mutual Consciousness: And that which
in the order of Nature comes after such a Distinction and Union cannot be the
cause of it.

But who ever thought of causes of Distinction and Unity in an Eternal Nature,
which has no cause? Did the Fathers philosophize thus concerning Priority and
Posteriority in the Divine Nature, when they placed the Unity of the Godhead in
the Unity of Energy and Operation? For does not the same Objection lie against
the Unity of Energy and Operation, that does against mutual consciousness,
(which is essential to this Unity of Energy) that the Divine Persons must first
be One, before they can be One Energy and Power? and therefore that One Energy
does not cause their Unity, because they must be One, (...). Ibid. p. 456.
before they are One Agent. And indeed such Men Gregory Nyssen intimates he had
to deal with, who would not allow the Deity to be Energy and Power, but he
thought it not worth the while to dispute that Point with them; for the Divine
Nature being Infinite and Incomprehensible, the pure and simple Nature of God
is not the immediate Object of our Knowledge, can have no name and definition
given it; and therefore we can know nothing of it immediately and directly, but
by such Essential Attributes and Properties, as we c^n form some notion of.

The not considering this, how perfectly unknown and incomprehensible the
Divine Nature it self is, occasioned a late Author to tell us, That An
Hypothesis in this Affair, which leaves out the very Nexus, the Natural and
Eternal Union, and insists upon mutual consciousness, which at most is but the
consequence thereof, wants the principal thing requisite to the salving the
Unity of the Godhead.

But this is to philosophize about the abstracted Natures and Essences of
Things, even the Divine Substance and Essence, which I dare not presume to do.
No doubt but God is the most real substantial Being in the World, even Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost; and there is as little doubt, but there is as real and
substantial an Union between them: But I know nothing of the Substance of God,
as distinguished from his Essential Attributes and Perfections, nor of such a
Distinction and Unity of Substance in the Deity, as can help us to form any
notion of a Trinity in Unity, and defend it from the Charge of Contradiction
and Impossibility, when we have done. For we must have a care of conceiving any
Extension, or Parts, or Composition in God, without which we can have no notion
of a Distinction and Union of Substances, considered purely under the notion of
Substance. And therefore we must be contented to be ignorant of the Substance
and Substantial Unions of the Deity, as we are of all other Substantial Unions.
We know not what the Substance of a Spirit is, nor what the Substance of Matter
is, nor what their substantial Unity is: And therefore when we inquire into
their Distinction and Unity, we never meddle with the Essential Reasons and
Causes of Unity, which are concealed from us, but consider as far as Sense, or
Reason, or Observation will reach, wherein the Unity of any thing consists, and
when a thing may be said to be One: As to instance at present only in the Unity
of a Mind, and in the Union of Soul and Body.

Is there any thing else in the World which can make a Mind one with it self,
and distinguish it from all other Minds, but a self-conscious Sensation, that
it feels it self, and its whole self, and only it self? I suppose these Men
will grant, that such a Mind is One, and but One, and distinct from all other
Minds; but Self-consciousness is not the formal reason of the Unity of a Mind,
or of a Person, because in order of Nature the Unity of a Mind or Person must
go before Self-consciousness; that is, Self-consciousness is owing to the Unity
of Essence, not the Unity of Essence to Selfconsciousness. Well, but what is
this Essence of a Mind, and this Unity of Essence, which makes a Mind One?
Truly that no body can tell; and therefore to say a Mind is one by the Unity of
its Essence, is to say, it is One, because it is so; for we know no more of the
matter: But Self-consciousness is a sensible Unity, which we all feel in our
selves, and know our selves from other Men by it.

This Unity of Essence we know nothing of, but by Selfconsciousness; and I
desire to know, whatever the Unity of Essence be, whether any but a
Self-conscious Unity would make a Mind One, and distinguish it from all other
Minds? which shows, that we have nothing to do with the naked Essences and
Substances of Things, but with their immediate and essential Properties; and
when we know them, we know all that is to be known of Nature; and therefore we
can know no more of the Unity of a Mind than Self-consciousness.

The Substances of things are distinguished from each other by their Essential
Properties, and therefore from them we must learn their Unity or Distinction. A
Mind is a Substance, and Matter is Substance; and the essential difference
between them, as far as we can understand, is, that a Mind is a thinking
Substance, and Matter extended Substance; and therefore we must judge of a Mind
by the properties of Thinking, and of Matter by extension: The Unity of a
Thinking Substance must consist in the Unity of Thoughts and Sensations, that
is, in one Consciousness; and the Unity of an Extended Substance in the
continuity of its extension; and to ask farther, what is the cause or principle
of Consciousness in a Mind, or of One Consciousness in One Mind, is to ask a
reason of the natures of things; why a Mind is a Thinking Being, and why One
Thinking Being has one Center of Thoughts: Why do they not ask also, how
Extension comes to be essential to Matter, and how Matter is extended? I know
no reason to be given of such matters, but the Will of God, who formed all
things according to the Ideas of his own Infinite Wisdom.

This I hope is sufficient to be said concerning the order of Nature, and the
priority and posteriority of our Conceptions; for if we do not stop in our
Inquiries at immediate and essential Properties, but demand an antecedent
Reason for them, this is to demand a Reason of Nature, Why things are what God
has made them: Those who are not contented to contemplate Nature in its
immediate and Essential Properties, may philosophize by themselves for me; for
there is nothing more to be known without an intuitive knowledge of Nature it
self, which none can have but the Author of Nature.

Thus should you inquire of me concerning the Union of Soul and Body; all that
I know of it is, That they are united in one Conscious Life; That the Soul
feels all the Impressions of the Body, and directs and governs it. No, will
such Philosophers say, here wants the Nexus, the natural Union between Soul and
Body; for they must be One by a Natural Union before there can be this
Conscious Life and Sympathy between them, which is not the Union, but the
effect and consequent of this Union. Very true! They must be vitally united to
have One Life, and to receive impressions from each other; But can they give
any other notion of this Vital Union, than that the Body is animated by the
Soul, and lives with it? Could these Philosophers tell you, how a Soul, which
is an Immaterial Being, could be fastened to a Body, what Union of Substances
there is between them, (which is the thing they want to know) would they
understand a Vital Union ever the better for it? An Union of Substances seems
to signify some kind of Contact, which is hard to conceive between Body and
Spirit; but however an Union of Contact, and an Union of Life, are two very
different kinds of Union, and do not include or infer each other; and therefore
the true Answer to that Question, How Soul and Body are united, is not to say,
That their Substances are united or fastened together, which gives us no notion
of a Vital Union; but that the Soul lives in the Body, and gives life to it;
receives impressions srom it, and governs its motions. But to inquire farther,
is to inquire into the Reasons of Natural and Essential Unions, which are as
great Mysteries as Nature is: We may as well ask, How a Soul lives, as how it
animates a Body; and God alone knows both. So that to inquire after the Natural
Nexus, or Cement of this Union, is nothing at all to the purpose, and is not
the Object of Human Knowledge.

Now, though the Vital Union between Soul and Body, and the Union of mutual
Consciousness, be of a very different Kind and Nature, yet the Dispute about
the Nexus, or the Natural Union of Substances, is much the same.

Consciousness is the Unity of a Spirit; Self-consciousness is the Unity of a
Person, and by the same reason mutual Consciousness is a Natural Union of Three
distinct Self-conscious Persons in the Unity of the same Nature. And to reject
this for want of a Nexus, or the Natural Union of Substances, is as if we
should deny the Union of Soul and Body to be an Union of Life or Animation,
because this don't explain the Natural Nexus between Soul and Body: If a Mutual
Conscious Union be an Essential Union of Three distinct Persons in the same
Nature, as a Vital Union is the Essential Union of Soul and Body, we have
nothing to do in either Case with the Union of Substances which we can know
nothing of, and if we could, should understand these Unions never the better
for it. For whatever Union of Substance we may suppose between Soul and Body,
and the Three Divine Persons in the Holy Trinity, it is the Kind and Species of
Union which gives us the Notion and Idea of it. If you inquire, what Spirit,
and what Matter is? It would not be thought a good Answer to these Questions,
to say a Spirit is a Substance, and Matter is a Substance, without adding their
Specific Differences, that a Spirit is an intelligent thinking Substance, and
Matter is an extended Substance; nor is it a better Answer to that Question,
what Union there is between Soul and Body, or between the Three Divine Persons
in the Trinity, To say, That their Substances are united, which gives us no
distinct Notion of their Union; but a Vital Union, and a Mutual Conscious
Union, contain distinct Ideas; and if these be Natural and Essential Unions,
though we know no more of the Union of Substances than we do, what Substance
is, yet we know that the Soul and Body must be one Natural Person, and the
Three Divine Persons must be naturally and essentially One God; for a Natural
Union makes One according to the Nature of that Union.

It is visible enough what has occasioned this Mistake: Men consider Mutual
Consciousness between Three Complete, Absolute, Independent Minds, and rightly
enough conclude, that how conscious soever they were to each other, this could
not make them essentially One; for every complete Mind is One by it self, and
not naturally Conscious to any One but it self, and by whatever Power they
should be so united, as to be mutually Conscious, this could not make them
essentially One; they would be Three Mutually Conscious Minds, not essentially
One Mind; for they are not by Nature One, nor mutually Conscious, and therefore
may be parted again, and cease to be so. But then, in this way of stating it,
the Objection equally lies against the Perichoresis, the inseparable Union and
In-being of Minds, which can never make Three Complete Absolute Minds
essentially One. But if we apply this to the Union of Living, Subsisting,
Intelligent Relatives of the same Individual Essence, to Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, Eternal, Self-originated Mind, its Eternal, Living, Subsisting, Word,
and Eternal Spirit, this Mutual Consciousness gives us the most Intelligible
Notion of the Essential and Inseparable Union and In-being of Three in One. I
dare not say what other Men can do; but I have tried my self, and can form no
Notion of an Unity in Trinity, but what either necessarily includes, or
ultimately resolves it self into One Natural Essential Consciousness in Three.

The Divine Nature is indivisibly and inseparably One in Three; but we must not
understand this Inseparability after the manner of Bodies, whose Parts may be
divided and separated from each other; God is not Body, and has no Parts; but
in the Unity of the Godhead there is Eternal Original Mind, an Eternal Word,
and Eternal Spirit, which are inseparable from each other, that is, can never
be parted: What then can parting and separating signify in a Mind, which has no
Parts to be torn and divided from each other? I can understand nothing by it,
but that the Mind does no longer see, and know, and feel its Word in it self,
nor the Word the Mind; for this would make a perfect Separation between the
Mind and its Word; that Mind has no Word which does not see and feel it in it
self; and were it possible that a living subsisting Word should lose all
Conscious Sensation of the Mind, whose Word it is, it would cease to be a Word,
and commence a perfect separate Mind it self: So that as far as we can conceive
it, the Inseparable Union between Father and Son, between Original Infinite
Mind, and its Eternal Word, is an inseparable Conscious Life and Sensation,
which is such a Natural Demonstration of their Inseparable Union, as no other
Notion can give us; for all Men feel that a Mind and its Word can never be
parted; a Mind can never be without its Word, nor the Word subsist but in the
Mind.

Thus what other possible Notion can we form of the Perichoresis, or Mutual
In-being of Father and Son, as our Savior tells us, I am in the Father, and
the Father in me, which is their Natural and Essential Unity, I and my Father
are one? We all feel how the Word is in the Mind, and the Mind in the Word; the
Mind knows, and feels, and comprehends its own Word; and a perfect, living,
subsisting Word knows and feels that whole Mind, whose Word it is, in it self;
for the Word is nothing else but the whole Mind, living and subsisting in the
Word, which is another Hypostasis, but perfectly One and the same Nature; and
therefore as they know themselves, so they know and feel each other in
themselves. As the Father knows me, says Christ, so know I the Father, 10
John 15. And thus to see and know God by an Internal Sensation, and to be in
him, are ^quivalent Expressions in Scripture, 1 John 18. No man has seen G^d
at any time; the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he
has declared him: Where to see God, and to be in the Bosom of the Father, must
signify the same thing; for to be in the Bosom of the Father, is put in the
place of seeing God, that is, to see him within, to see him in his Bosom, as
the Word sees the Mind, and this is to be in his Bosom, and thus the Son is in
the Father.

The same Account we have of the Holy Spirits being in God, 1 Cor. 2.11. (...).
Theophyl. in locum.
For what man knows the things of a man, but the spirit of man, which is in
him? even so the things of G^d knows no man, but the Spirit of God; that is,
the Spirit of God is in God, as the Spirit of a Man is in Man, and therefore by
this In-being, the Spirit of God knows all the Things of God by such an
Internal Conscious Sensation, as the Spirit of Man knows what is in Man.

Thus what is the Unity of Energy and Operation, but the same Conscious Will
and Power acting distinctly, but inseparably in Three? for without this
Internal Consciousn^ss, they must be Three separate Wills and separate Powers,
and produce distinct and separate Effects; but when God, his Word and Spirit
are in each other, and see, and know, and feel each other in themselves, as a
Man's Mind, his Word, and Spirit, do, though in a more perfect and excellent
manner, there can be but One undivided Motion of the Divine Will, as there is
but One Conscious Life in Three; the Son lives, subsists, wills, understands,
and acts, in and with the Father, and therefore is but One Eternal Life, One
Almighty Will and Power.

Now as Novel as some Men think this Notion of the Unity of Mutual
Consciousness to be, we meet with it more than once in express words in S^.
Hilary, whose Authority I hope is sufficient to vindicate it from the charge of
Novelty.

Thus with reference to what our Savior says, Sed c^m na^ura Dei in natura Dei
substi^^ss^^, id est, ex patre filius natus esser, per virtutis ac naturae in
se paternae conscientiam, nihil ab se, ni^i quod patrem faci^ntem vidisset,
fi^^^m fac^re poss^ testatus est. Et cum unigenitus Deus pa^ern^e virtutis
operationibus operaretur, tantum si^i a^ fa^iendum praesumcret, quantum in
Conscientia sua esfet, inseparabil^m a se Dei Patris, quam per l^gitimam
nativitatem ob^in* bat, posse naturam; non enim corporalibus modis via^^, sed
visus ei omnis in virtute Naturae est. Hill. de Trin. c. 7.

Et demonstratio operum non ignorationis instructio, sed nostrae fidei, quae
non silio scientiam ignoratorum, sed nobis confess^onem nativitatis invexit --
ut demonstratio ipsa nativitatis esse substantia d^ceretur, cui per dile^^^^ne^
patris op^rum paterno^^^ -- esset cognata cognitio. Ibid.

Quod a^tem videt, conscia in se na^^^ae s^^nificatur aguitio, and in eo nunc.
(...) Dei cognosce naturam. Ibid. U^^genitus igitur Deus naturae in^e (...)
^^nscius, etc.

Di^eun^ (...) se per loquentem loqui, and per operantum operari, and per
judicantem judica^e, and per visum vi^^r^, and per r^con^^^^tem reconci^^^ri,
and manner se in ^o, qui in se ma^^ret, qu^ero quo alio a^ intellig^nt^^
nostrae sensum Expositionis sit^e (...) ap^rtio^i s^rmone, ut unum ^sse
intellige^entur quam isio, quo p^r ^^^ivitatis verita^em, and naturae u^^tatem,
qui^q^id filius ageret, and diceret, id in filio, pater and loqueretur and
ageret? Non est hoc itaque naturae a se alienae. -- Sed perfecta nativitate in
Deum perfectum genitae divinitatis, cujus haec naturalis conscientiae fi^ucia
est, ut dicat, ego in Patre, and Pa^er in me, and omnia, quae Patres sant, mea
sunt. Id. l. 8.

Vide ci^m tacitus recum ipse congrederis, ratione hec ipsam agi intra te,
e^cu^rente e^i tibi cum s^rmone, ad omnem cogitatus tui motum, and omnem sensus
tui pulsum. Tert. Cont. Prax. p 503. Paris.

Tert. Contr. Prax. c. 13. p. 509.


No man knows the Son but the Father; neither knows any man the Father save
the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him, 11. Matthew. 27. St.
Hilary observes, (Hilar. de Trin. c. 2) Illis scientia mutua est, illis
vicissim c^gnitio perfecta; That Father and Son have a mutual perfect Knowledge
of each other. And this he asserts to be a Conscious Knowledge, connate with
him, a Conscious Sensation of his Father's Nature in himself, which our S^viour
himself signifies by his Unity of Nature and Operation with the Father; as the
Reader may see in the Margin.

Thus Tertullian long before described this mutual Consciousness between God
and his Eternal Word and Wisdom by what we feel in our selves when we silently
muse alone, our Word does as it were talk with us, and return our Thoughts to
us, is present with us in every Turn, and Motion, and Pulse of Thought, and
internal Sensation, as conscious to all within us.

Thus he tells us, That the Son alone knows the Father, and does not his own,
but his Father's Will, which he knows, de proximo, imo de initio; that is, by
an immediate Intuitive Knowledge, not by External Communication, but by
Internal Sensation. Thus the Son does nothing of himself, but what he sees the
Father do; in sensu scilicet facientem, in his own Mind and Will; Pater enim
sensu agit, the Father does all things by disposing and ordering all things in
his own Mind and Will; Filius vero, qui in sensu Patris est, videns perficit:
The Son, who is in the Mind, and Sense, and Will of the Father, sees the
Father's Will, and does it: Now let any Man tell me what else can be meant by
the Sons being in sensu Patris, and videns in sensu Patris, but this Internal
Conscious Sensation. St. Cyril of Alexandria calls it (...) and (...), Cyr. l.
4. in Joan.
that the Son Wills together with the Father, and with the same Will. Dionysius
the Areopagite, says, Dion. de divin. nom.
This Union does not only exceed all bodily Unions, but the Unions also of
Souls and Minds, (...). And Fulgentius tells us, Fulg. 3. ad Mon. c. 7.
The Word was with God, sicut in mente verbum, sicut in c^rde consilium, as the
Word is in the Mind, and Counsel in the Heart.

Marius Victorinus Afer tells us to the same purpose, Unigenitus qui est in
gremio Patris, quod est esse Deum, in gremio enim and in (...) substantiae;
(...), uterque, and substantia and divinitate consistens, uterque in utroque,
and cognoscit uterque utrumque. Vict. Afer. Bl. Patr. Vol. 4. p. 190.
That the Son being in the Bosom of the Father, signifies, that he is God; that
he is in the Bosom and Womb of his Substance, and therefore they are
Consubstantial, each of them being in each other, and knowing each other.

But not to multiply Quotations; all those Catholic Fathers and Doctors, Id
enim quod ait, Ego and Pater Unum s^mus, tentant ad Unanimitatis refer
consensum, ut voluntatis in his unitas sit, non naturae; id est, ut non per id
quod idem sunt, sed per id quod id^^m volunt, un^m sent. Hill. de Tr. l 8.
who placed the Unity of the Godhead in Consent, (and none of them rejected
this in a Catholic Sense) could understand nothing less by it than this mutual
natural Consciousness, for any other Consent was down right Arianism, as St.
Hilary witnesses; and yet thus the famous Lucian, whom the Arians would have
challenged as theirs, but whom the Catholic Church always owned, expresses it
in his Creed; and thus per substantiam tria, per consonantiam vero unum: Et
quia dixit Unum, intel^igant haeretici quod non dixit Unus. Unum enim
neutral^ter positum, societatis concordiam, non unitat^m personae sonat. Novat.
de Trin. c. 22.

Quod autem dictum est, ut sint quidem per substantiam tria, per consonantiam
vero unum, non habet calummam, quia cognominato spiritu, id est, paracleto,
consonantiae potius quam essentiae per similitudinem substantiae praedicare
convenit unitatem. Hill. de Synod.


Three in Substance, but in Consent and Agreement One, is justified by St.
Hilary, (Hilar. de Synod.) as very Catholic; but then he refers this to the
Holy Spirit, who is the substantial Bond and Cement of this Union and Consent.
But Gregory Nyssen, who allows of this Unity of Consent, more intelligibly
represents it by the Consent and Uniformity of all the Motions between the
Prototype and its Image, (...), etc. Gr. N^ss. cont Eun. O^. 12. p 345.
or a Man's Face in a Glass, which moves and acts with it. Thus Christ is the
Image of the Invisible God* and is immediately and instantly affected together
with his Father. Does the Father Will any thing? The Son also, who is in the
Father, knows the Fathers Will, or rather is the Father's Will.

But this I think is sufficient to be said about mutual Consciousness, which is
so manifestly the Doctrine of the Fathers, of some in express Terms, and of all
according to the true Interpretation of what they taught, that I cannot imagine
the meaning of this furious Zeal against it, but a Sabellian Zeal against Three
Conscious Persons, for one single Self-conscious Nature: As St. Hilary observes
in the Dispute between the Sabellians and Arians. The Arians allowed Father and
Son to be Two Distinct Persons, but denied their Consubstantiality, or Unity
and Sameness of Nature: The Sabellians, who denied the distinction of Persons,
but asserted the Sameness, Unity and Singularity of Nature, which they thought
sufficiently proved One Person, as well as One Nature (as no doubt but it does)
confuted the Arian Dissimilitude of Nature by what our Savior says, Nou alta
natura, quam quae sui conscia est, diceret, ego and Pater Unum sumus. Hill. de
Trin. c. 7.
I and my Father are one; which they said could be the Language of none, but of
a Nature conscious to it self of its own Identity, and Sameness, which he
allows to be a good Argument against the Arians, (which he could not have done,
had he not allowed this Consciousness in the Trinity) but then observes, That
the Arians did as eff^ctually consute them, as to the distinction of Persons;
and thus between them both the Catholic Faith, Uterque hostis Ecclesiae res
Ecclesiae agit; dum Sabellius Deum ex natura in operibus praedicat; hi vero ex
sacramento fidei filium confitentur. Ibid.
of a real distinction of Persons, in the Sameness and Conscious Unity of
Nature, was vindicated. In short, If the whole Divine Nature is conscious to it
self, as every Created Mind is conscious to all that is in it self; and the
Three Divine Persons subsist in the Individual Unity of the same Nature, then
these Divine Persons must be intimately and mutually conscious to each other,
as a Mind, its Word, and Spirit, are; and however Men please to philosophize
about this, as to the prius and posterius, whether they will make the Unity of
Nature the cause of this mutual Consciousness, and therefore in order of Nature
prior to it; or make mutual Consciousness not the cause of this Unity, but the
Essential Union of Three Distinct Subsisting Persons in the Unity of the same
Individual Nature; I will not contend with any Man which of these speak most
properly. Consciousness is the Unity of an Intelligent Nature, and the mutual
Consciousness of Persons in the same Nature, and the Conscious Unity of Nature
in Three Distinct Persons is the same thing. We cannot conceive the Unity of a
Mind without Consciousness, nor any other kind of Unity of a Mind, but a
Conscious Unity; nor can we conceive an Internal Essential Consciousness
without an Essential Unity; and if the mutual Consciousness of Persons in the
same Nature, is the Consciousness of Nature, I cannot see why we may not say,
That it is at least One Notion of the Unity of Nature too.

But to return where I left off, (if this may be called a a Digression) what I
have now said, is sufficient to show, how necessary this Doctrine of Relations
is to give us a sensible notion of a Trinity in Unity.

To assert a Real Trinity, we must assert Three Real, Distinct, Subsisting,
Substantial, Intelligent Persons, neither of which is each other, and each of
which is by himself, in his own proper Person, True and Perfect God: But this,
say Sabellians, Arians, and Socinians, is to assert Three Gods; which the
Catholic Church always abhorred the thoughts of. Now how the Fathers answered
this Charge, and vindicated the Divine Unity in a Trinity of Real Subsisting
Persons, I have already particularly shown, as by the Consubstantiality, the
perfect Sameness and Identity of Nature, whole of whole, their Inseparability,
and Unity of Operation; but we can form no distinct Idea of all this, but only
among Personal Subsisting Relatives of the same Individual Nature. Whatever is
not this, is a mere Specific Consubstantiality and Identity of Nature, and an
External Union, how inseparable soever it be, which must make a number of
Individuals in the Divine, as well as Human Nature: but now it is plain to a
Demonstration, That if God has an Eternal Subsisting Word, and an Eternal
Subsisting Spirit, they can be but One Individual Essence, as a Man's Mind, and
Word, and Spirit, are One; and therefore all Three but One God, as a Man, with
his Mind, and Word, and Spirit, i^ but One Man; which is an Intelligible Notion
of the (...), One Individual Essence and Godhead: For though the Word of God be
a Person, which a M^n's Word is not, yet if his true Nature and Character is
the Word, he is the same to the Eternal Mind, which a Man's Word is to his
Created Mind, and therefore God, and his Living, Subsisting Word, must be One
Individual Essence, as a Man's Mind and his Word are One; a Word must be
conceived and begotten of the Mind, and can have no other Substance, if it be a
Living, Substantial Word, but that of the Mind; and if it be a perfect Word,
the perfect Image of the Mind, it must be whole of whole, all that the Mind is;
for the whole Mind is in its perfect Word and Image, and lives and subsists in
it, and the whole Word in the Mind. So that the C^eternity, the Coequality, the
Consubstantiality, the Identity, the Inseparability, the Unity of Operation
between God and his Word, is so far from being Jargon, Contradiction,
Unintelligible Nonsense, that i^ God have an Eternal Word, it is self-evident
that thus it must be: When we contemplate the Consubstantiality of Father and
Son, under the notion of Substance, we can form no Idea of a whole, which is of
a whole, that the Father should communicate his whole Essence, and Substance,
to the Son, and be the whole himself; and this is no great wonder, since we can
form no Idea at all of the Divine Substance; but we can very well understand,
That the Whole Mind must be in its Word, that the Eternal Mind and its Word
must be Consubstantial, Coeternal, Coequal, Two, but perfectly the same,
inseparably in each other; for all this is included in the very Relation and
Notion of a Mind, and its Word. I Am sure, a Living, Subsisting Word, which is
not Consubstantial, Coeternal, Coequal, with that Eternal Mind, whose Word it
is; that a Mind should be without its Word; that an Infinite, Eternal Mind,
which is perfect Life and Being, should have a vanishing, perishing Word, as
Man has; not a living, subsisting Word; that a Mind and its Word should ever be
parted; that the Word should not be and subsist in the Mind, and the Mind in
the Word; I say, all this contradicts all the Notions we have of a Mind and its
Word: We cannot immediately and directly contemplate the Divine Nature and
Essence, which is so infinitely above us, and therefore we must contemplate it
in such Ideas and Representations, as God himself makes of it; and if they are
such, as we can form an intelligible notion of, we have no reason to complain
of unintelligible Mysteries and Contradictions, though when we reduce it into
Terms of Art, we find our Minds confounded and perplexed, and unable to form any
distinct and easy Ideas.

The Arians, to avoid the Consubstantiality of the Son with the Father, Quod si
de nomine substantiae aut naturae Divinae voluerint dicere, facile revincuntur,
quia Usiam Grace and Latin Substantiam frequenter Scriptura memoravit -- quod
si ex alia substantia filium dicunt, ipsi se revincunt, and verbum substantiae
quod metuunt confitendo, and filium creaturis, quibus praeferre se simulant,
conferendo. Ambr. de Fide, C. 1. Tom. 2. Bas. 1555. p. 51.
would not allow the Term Substance to be used of God; the Catholic Fathers
proved, that Substance is in Scripture used concerning God, and that the Arians
could not reasonably reject it, because they used it themselves; for though
they would not own the Son to be of the same Substance with the Father; they
taught, that he was of another Substance, which still is to own Substance in
God.

But though God be in the most true and absolute sense, perfect Essence and
Being, the (...), or according to St. Ambrose his derivation of the Word (which
shows what he meant by it, whether it shows his skill in Greek or not) that
Essence and Substance is that which always is, Aut quid est Ousia, aut unde
dicta, nisi (...), quod semper maneat; cui enim esse est semper, Deus est, and
ideo maneus semper Ousia dicitur Divina. Ambr. Ibid. c. 3.
and that which always is, is God, and therefore God is Essence and Substance,
and a Consubstantial Son is a true and real Son; for which reason, as he
observes, the Arians would not allow the Son to be Consubstantial, because they
would not allow him to be a true genuine Son; Non igitur verbum, sed vim verbi
fugiunt, quia nolunt, verum esse Dei filium. -- sicut Author ipsorum Eusebius
Nicomediensis Epistola sua prodidit, dicens, siverum, inquit, Dei filium and
increatum dicimus, Homousion cum patre incipimus confiteri. Haec cum lecta
esset Epistola in Concilio Nicaeno, hoc verbum in Tractatu fidei posuerunt
Patres, quod id viderunt Adversariis esse formidini, ut tanquam evaginato ab
ipsis gladio ipsorum nefandae caput haeresis amputarent. Ibid. p. 75.
and for this very reason the Nicene Fathers inserted the Homoousion in their
Creed: But yet if we would rightly conceive of God, of Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, of the Unity and Distinction of the Ever Blessed Trinity, we must not
form our Notions by the Ideas of Substance and Consubstantiality, which we have
no distinct conceptions of; but we must learn their Unity, Distinction, and
Consubstantiality from those Characters the Scripture gives of Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost. This Rule St. Ambrose expressly gives us with reference to the Son,
and the Reason is the same, as to the other Divine Persons. If we would avoid
Error, says that Father, Certe ne quis posset errare, sequatur ea quibus
scriptura sancta ut intelligere possimus Filium significat. Verbum dicitur,
Filius dicitur, Dei virtus dicitur, dicitur Dei sapientia. Ib. c. 1. p. 40.
let us attend to those Characters the Scripture gives us, to help us to
understand what, and who the Son is: He is called the Word, the Son, the Power
of God, the Wisdom of God; all this we can understand; and not only St.
Ambrose, but all the other Catholic Fathers, as I have already shown, prove
the Consubstantiality, Coeternity, Coequality, Unity and Distinction of Father
and Son, from these Names and Characters, which they understood in a true and
proper sense, for a Living, Subsisting Son, and Word, and Power, and Wisdom;
and there is no difficulty in conceiving all this, if we contemplate it in
these Characters; nay it is impossible to conceive otherwise of it. As
impossible as it is to form any notion at all of those Philosophical Terms,
whereby this Mystery is commonly represented, when we abstract them from those
sensible Characters and Ideas which the Scripture has given us, and begin our
Inquiries with them. It will be of great use to represent this matter plainly,
that every man may see what it is that obscures and perplexes the Doctrine of
the Trinity, and confounds men's notions about it, to the great scandal of the
Christian Religion, and the disturbance of the Christian Church.

The great difficulty concerns the Unity and Distinction of the Ever Blessed
Trinity, that they are really and distinctly Three, and essentially One: And
this is represented by One Nature, Essence, and Substance, and Three
Hypostases; and yet Hypostasis signifies Substance, and every Divine Hypostasis
is the whole Divine Essence and Substance. Now if we immediately contemplate
this Mystery under the notion of Substance, it is impossible for us to conceive
One Substance and Three Hypostases, that is, in some sense Three Substances, or
which is all One as to the difficulty of conceiving it, though the form of
Expression is more Catholic; Three, each of which is the whole Essence and
Substance, and neither of them is each other; we may turn over our Minds as
long as we please, and change Words and Phrases, but we can find no Idea to
answer these, or any other words of this nature. But now if instead of Essence
and Hypostasis, we put Mind and its Word, we can form a very intelligible
notion of this Unity and Distinction, and prove that Unity of Substance, and
Distinction of Hypostases, which we cannot immediately and directly form any
notion of. For Eternal Original Mind, and its Living Subsisting Word, are
certainly Two, and neither are, nor can be each other; the Mind cannot be its
own Living Word, nor the Word the Mind, whose Word it is; and yet we must all
grant, that Eternal Mind is the most Real Being, Essence, Substance, and that a
Living Subsisting Word is Life, Being, Substance, and the very same Life and
Substance that the Mind is, and all that the Mind is; for a perfect Living Word
can have no other Life and Substance but that of the Mind, and must be all the
same that the Mind is.

The Eternal Generation of the Son (...), of the Substance of the Father, Life
of Life, Substance of Substance, Whole of Whole, is impossible to be conceived,
as immediately applied to the notion of Substance; but the Generation of the
Word, Whole of Whole, is very conceivable, for the Mind must beget its own
Word, as we feel in our selves; and a Mind which is perfect Life and Substance,
if it begets its Word, must beget a Living, Subsisting, Substantial Word, De
substantia autem, Imperator Auguste, quid loquar unius Filium cum Patre esse
substantiae, cum imaginem Paternae substantiae Filium legerimus, ut in nullo
secundum Divinitatem a Patre intelligas discrepare? Iuxta h^nc imaginem dixit,
omnia quae Pater habet, mea sunt; ergo nec substantiam in Deo possumus
denegare. Ambr. de Fide. c. 3. p. 74.

Mihi enim impossible est generationis scire secretum. Men's deficit, vox
silet, non mea tantum, sed and Angelorum. Id. c. 1. p. 45.


the perfect Image of its own Life and Substance. And as impossible as it is to
conceive, much more to express in words, this Mystery of the Eternal
Generation, yet the necessary relation between a Mind, and its Word, proves
that thus it is; we feel it in our selves, though we are as perfectly ignorant,
how our Mind begets its dying vanishing Word, as how the Eternal Mind begets an
Eternal, Living, Subsisting Word: And the Generation of the Word includes in it
all the Properties of the Divine Generation; that it is Eternal; for an Eternal
Mind can never be without its Word; that it is without any Corporeal Passions,
or Esslux, or Division, begotten in the Mind, and inseparable from it.

Now if we conceive after the same manner of the Eternal Procession of the Holy
Spirit, can any man deny this to be an Intelligible Notion of a Trinity in
Unity, though we can form no distinct Idea of One Essence and Substance, and
Three Hypostases? For if we can conceive Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; Eternal
Original Mind, its Eternal Word, and Eternal Spirit, to be Essentially One and
Three, the Catholic Faith is secured, though we do not so well understand the
distinction between those Abstract Metaphysical Terms of Nature, Essence,
Substance, Hypostasis, especially when applied to the Unity and Distinction of
the Eternal Godhead, which is above all Terms of Art. The Catholic Faith is,
That the Father is God, the Son God, and the Holy Ghost God; but yet there are
not Three Gods, but One God; and this the Doctrine of the Divine Relations
gives us a very intelligible notion of; for we cannot conceive otherwise of the
Eternal Mind, its Eternal Word, and Eternal Spirit, but that each of them are
True and Perfect God, and yet a Mind, its Word, and Spirit, can be but One, and
therefore but One God.

But One Substance, and Three Hypostases, is but a secondary notion of a
Trinity in Unity, to secure the Catholic Faith against the Sabellian and Arian
Heresies: Against the Sabellians the Catholic Fathers asserted Three
Hypostases, against the Arians One Substance; and the Essential Relations of
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, necessarily prove both the One Substance, and
Three Hypostases; but though One Substance and Three Hypostases be the
Catholic Language, yet those Men begin at the wrong end, who think to form an
intelligible notion of a Trinity in Unity from these abstract Metaphysical
Terms. This is not the Language of the Scripture, nor have we any Idea to
answer these Terms, of One Substance in Three distinct Hypostases, when we
consider them by themselves, without relation to the Divine Nature, to which
alone these Terms can belong, for there is no such thing in created Nature, and
therefore we can have no Idea of it. It is abundantly sufficient in this Case,
that we have a clear and distinct Notion of One Substance, and Three Hypostases
in the Essential Unity and Distinction of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Three
subsisting Relations in One Individual Essence and Substance, though when we
abstractedly consider these Terms of One Substance and Three Hypostases, we can
form no consistent Notion or Idea of it. And now let our Socinian Adversaries,
who talk so loud of Absurdities, Contradictions, Nonsense, false Counting and
Tritheism, try their skill to make good these Charges against the Divine
subsisting Relations in the Unity of the same Individual Essence.

SECT. IX. A more particular Inquiry into the Difference between (...) and
(...), or Nature and Person, with an Account of some Catholic Forms of Speech,
relating to the ever Blessed Trinity.
BUT since one Nature and Essence, and Three Hypostases or Persons, is the
Catholic Language, and necessary to guard the Faith from those Two Extremes of
Sabellianism and Arianism, it will be necessary to consider how to apply these
Ecclesiastical Terms to the Three and One in the ever Blessed Trinity. And
here, were I so disposed, I might enter into a very large and perplexed Dispute;
but my design, as far as possibly I can attain it, is only to explain what the
Catholic Fathers meant by these Terms, and to give a plain and sensible Notion
of them: And after what I have already so largely discoursed concerning Nature
and Hypostasis, I have little more to do, than to compare them together, and to
show in what the Catholic Fathers placed this Distinction. And as nothing is
of greater consequence, than rightly to understand this matter, so nothing
requires greater Caution, nor greater Application of Mind.

Whosoever is conversant in the Writings of the Ancient Fathers, must
acknowledge it not only reasonable but necessary, to distinguish between their
Faith, and their Philosophy. Their Faith, which they received srom the
Scriptures, and the Universal Tradition of the Catholic Church, is plain and
simple, and the same in all. That there is but One God, who has an Eternal Son,
and an Eternal Spirit; that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are each of them by
himself, True and Perfect God, and all but One God, which is a Trinity in
Unity, and Unity in Trinity; that they are in a true and proper Sense, Three
and One. This is the Catholic Faith, wherein they all agree; but then those
Philosophical Terms, which the importunities of Heretics, who corrupted either
the Faith of the Unity or Trinity, forced them to use in the Explication of
this Mystery, are of a different Consideration: These have not always been the
same, nor have all agreed in them; and the wisest Men have owned great
Improprieties in them all, when applied to this Sacred Mystery; and indeed it
is impossible to be otherwise; for that infinite Difference and Diversity there
is between the Divine and Humane Nature, nay all created Nature, can never
admit of any Common Terms proper to express both. The most perfect Creatures
bear only some imperfect Analogy and Resemblance to what we conceive of God;
and therefore when we apply such Words and Terms to the Divine Nature, as are
borrowed from Creatures, (and we have no other) we must understand them only by
way of Analogy and Accommodation; and when we expound such Terms as are used by
the Catholic Fathers in such an accommodated Sense, we must apply them no
further, than that particular Matter they intended to represent by them. I have
already sh^wn this in several particular Passages relating to the Homoousion,
but now I am more particularly to consider the difference between Essence and
Hypostasis; and I shall only show how the matter of fact stands, what has
occasioned this difficulty, what the true state of the Controversy is, and how
we may form some sensible notion of this Distinction; and if I should mistake
in so nice a Point as this, I hope it will be a pardonable Mistake, while I
make no change in the Catholic Faith, and intend it only as an Essay, if it be
possible to silence or qualify the Dispute about words.

The Greek Fathers attribute all the Heresies relating to the Doctrines of the
Trinity and Incarnation, (...). Damasc. Orth. Fid. l. 3. c. 3.


to this one Mistake, that Essence and Hypostasis are the same; for then if
there be but One Essence in the Blessed Trinity, there must consequently be but
One Hypostasis, which is Sabellianism; or if there be Three Hypostases, there
must be Three Natures and Essences, either in the Arian or Tritheistick Notion:
Thus with reference to the Incarnation, two Natures must be two Persons, or
Hypostases, as Nestorius taught, or One Person must be but One mixed and
compounded Nature too, which was the Heresy of Eutyches.

This some Fathers thought a fundamental Error in Philosophy, introduced by
Aristotle, who makes the first Substance, which is the only true and proper
Substance, (...). Arist. Categ. cap. 5. T. 1. p. 23.


to be that which is predicated of no Subject, nor is in any Subject, that is,
what we call, a Subsisting Individual, as this Man, or this Horse. And
therefore Theorianus observes, That the Catholic Fathers understood Essence
and Hypostasis in a very different sense from the Greek Philosophers; Theor.
Leg. ad Armen.
that is, by Essence, and Substance, they did not mean one singular Individuum,
or singular Nature and Substance, as Aristotle did; but a common Nature, not a
common Notion, as Genus or Species, which are Aristotle's second Substances,
but a common Subsisting Nature, which is one and the same, whole and perfect in
every Individual of the same kind. And what Aristotle called his first
Substance, a singular Subsisting Nature, that they called Hypostasis, a common
Subsisting Nature, with its individuating Characters and Properties.

It is evident some Ages past, before these words Essence and Hypostasis were
thus nicely distinguished, or at least before this Distinction was so
unanimously received; for as I have already observed, these Words were used
very promiscuously, which occasioned the Alexandrian Schism; and it does not
appear to me, that this Distinction was settled by Athanasius, and the Bishops
with him, in that Synod, as some seem to think; though soon after it generally
prevailed, as we may learn from St. Basil, Gregory Nyssen, St. Cyril of
Alexandria, Damascen, Leontius, Theorianus, Theodorus Abucara, Ignatius
Sinaita, and generally all the Catholic Writers of the Eutychian and Severian
Age, who universally agree in this, That Essence and Hypostasis differ as (...)
and (...), as that which is Universal, differs from what is Proper and Singular.

Now so far these Fathers were certainly in the right, That if they must apply
Philosophical Terms to Divine Mysteries (which the Cavilling Objections of
Heretics made necessary) there was an absolute necessity for them to change
their signification; for as there is nothing common to God and Creatures, so
there can be no words in the same sense common to them; but then this only
requires an accommodation of words to Divine Mysteries by way of analogy and
resemblance, but not to change the Language and Philosophy of Created Nature,
which after all our Attempts, and all our Art of Expression, will fall
infinitely short of the Divine Nature, and give us but a very imperfect Image
of it. And if by such Attempts we confound our Notions and Ideas of Nature too,
we shall so much the more confound and perplex our Ideas of God. It may help to
ease men's Minds of some Notions which lie cross and uneven: Briefly to state
this matter.

I confess, I am not satisfied of that absolute necessity, which some pretend,
of stating nicely and Philosophically this distinction between Nature and
Person, in order to understand the Doctrine of the Trinity. This was the
Catholic Faith long before this Distinction was universally received; and Men
who understand little of this Distinction, may believe very orthodoxly in
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, without it: Nay the best, the safest, and easiest
way, to understand these and all other Philosophical Terms applied to the
Explication of this Faith, is to fit them to those Scripture Ideas we have of
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, each of them True and Perfect God, and all Three
but One God, as I have shown at large in the First Chapter. But since there is
a very warm Dispute about Nature and ^erson, and has been for many Ages, and
this Distinction is become necessary to secure the Catholic Faith against the
Attempts of Heretics on both sides, as the Church has found by long
Experience; it will be necessary to set this matter in as clear a light as
possible we can.

And the best way I can think of to do this, is 1. To consider this distinction
of Nature and Person in Creatures: As for instance, in a Man; What the
distinction between Nature and Person is in Man; and to show, which way soever
we state this matter, how improper all these Notions are to represent this
distinction between Nature and Person in the Blessed Trinity. And 2. To show
how the Catholic Fathers accommodated these Names of Essence and Person to the
Explication of this Mystery, and what Unity, and what Distinction they intended
to represent by them.

1. As for the first, If the Infinite distance between God and Creatures will
allow us to Philosophize freely about Created Nature, without incurring the
Suspicion of Heresy; I must confess, I never could form a distinct notion of
the difference between a subsisting Nature and Hypostasis, or Person in Man;
but do what I can, I can conceive no otherwise of an Individual Subsisting
Human Nature, but as of an Individual Subsisting Human Hypostasis, or Person;
nor of an Individual Human Person, than as of an Individual Subsisting Human
Nature. And I have some reason to think, that this is not peculiarly my Case;
for besides that I find other thinking Men blundered in this matter, and could
never yet meet with a clear and sensible Explication of it; I observe, that
there is no word, which in its original institution signifies this difference;
and it is reasonable to think, as to Created Nature, that Mankind have no
notion of that, which they have no word for.

It is sufficiently known, that Hypostasis originally signifies Essence and
Substance, not Person as distinguished from Nature, which is a later, and a mere
Ecclesiastical use of it; and it is confessed, that Persona and (...) were
taken from the Stage, and when they were applied to signify a true and real
Man, they signified only the Man himself, not the Personality of a Man, as
distinguished from an Individual Subsisting Nature: And, which is much more
considerable, some of the Fathers, as I observed before, confess, that
Aristotle knew no such distinction; but in his Philosophy, Essence and
Hypostasis signified the same thing; for Nature and Essence, which is his first
Substance, is an Individuum, which subsists not as part of another, but as
whole and complete, which the Fathers call Hypostasis; and therefore
Aristotle's first Substance, and what these Fathers call Hypostasis, is in
Creatures one and the same thing; and yet all confess, That no man ever more
nicely distinguished all the distinguishable Notions in Nature, than Aristotle
did, that what escaped his observation, must be very nice indeed.

And though St. Basil, and St. Gregory Nyssen, and the other Catholic Writers
of that Age, do distinguish between Essence and Hypostasis, that they differ as
(...), and (...), what is common to all the Individuals of the same kind, which
is a common Nature, and what is proper and peculiar to each Individual, and
distinguishes one man from another; yet I do not remember, that they quarrelled
with the Greek Philosophers, or apprehended that they themselves taught any new
Philosophy in this Point, as afterward Theorianus, and others did; nor can I
see any other difference there is between them, if heartily interpreted, but
only in words.

The short account of the matter is this. Aristotle's first Substance, which
subsists by it self, these Fathers, as they themselves own, call Hypostasis,
not Nature, Essence, and Substance; that is, every subsisting Individuum is
Aristotle's Nature, Essence, and Substance, the Fathers Hypostasis; now when
they mean the same thing, and own that they do so, so far they are agreed in
the thing, and differ only in words. But then these Fathers in every Hypostasis
distinguished between the common Nature, and such Personal Properties, which
distinguished common Nature into Individuals, or were Characteristical Marks,
whereby to know one Person from another. Now Aristotle indeed never made such a
distinction as this; but yet all that is material in it, is included in his
Notion and Definition of Substance.

For when these Fathers distinguish in every Hypostasis, what is common to the
whole Kind, and what is proper and peculiar to each Individuum, they mean no
more by it, but that Peter, for instance, considered as a Man, is perfectly the
same that James and John are, considered also as Men, though there is something
so peculiar to Peter, as to make him a particular Human Person, and to
distinguish him from James and John, and all other Men in the World. Now it is
certain, neither Aristotle, nor any Man of sense, would ever have denied any
thing of all this; for it is evident, that there is something wherein all Men
agree, and something proper to every particular Man. That which is the same in
all Men, the Fathers call a common Nature, and so does Aristotle, a common
Specific Nature; but here is some appearance of difference between them, which
I think, if rightly stated, is none at all. Aristotle makes Nature as actually
subsisting by it self; as suppose Human Nature in Peter or James, to be (...),
Individuum, a particular, Singular Nature, and that it is common only in
Notion, as every particular Man has a Nature of the same kind, or a true Human
Nature.

These Fathers on the contrary affirm, That Human Nature, as considered in
Peter, or any other particular Man, is a common Nature, distinguished into
Hypostases, by something proper, peculiar, and particular to each. (...).
Damasc. Orth. Fid. l 3. c. 6.
That all Nature is common to all the Hypostases of the same kind, and that it
is impossible to find a particular and appropriated Nature.

Now as great an appearance as here is of a direct Contradiction, a little
consideration, I believe, will satisfy all thinking Men, that Aristotle would
have owned all that these Fathers say, and then the only Dispute will be, which
of them speak most properly, which is of no great moment in this Cause.

For what do these Fathers mean by a common Nature? Do they mean, that there is
but one Numerical Subsisting Nature common to all the Individuals? but one
Universal Human Nature in all the particular men in the World? By no means.
Damascen expressly teaches, That the (...), the common Nature in Creatures, is
only (...), to be known by Reason; but the (...), the distinction of
Hypostases, (...), is seeen in the things themselves, in their separate
Existence. But what is this common Nature, (...). Damas. Orth. Fid. l. 1. c. 11.
which is seen by Reason? why, every particular Man is a reasonable Mortal
Creature; each of them is Flesh animated by a reasonable Soul and Mind, and
this is the common Nature which is seen by Reason; common, because it is
perfectly and invariably the same in all, though each of these Hypostases, in
which this common Nature is, subsist distincty and separately by themselves,
and therefore the common Nature too subsists distinctly and separately in these
separate Hypostases. Now would Aristotle, or any one for him, deny that his
first Substance, though it be an Individuum, which subsists completely and
separately by it self, is in this sense a common Nature, as being perfectly the
same in all the Individuals; or in the Language of the Fathers, in all the
Hypostases of the same Nature?

There can be no such thing, as what Aristotle calls a Species, if every
Individual have not the common Nature; for Nature subsists only in Individuals;
and if that be not a common Nature, it cannot have a common Name and
Definition; if Human Nature be not perfectly the same in Peter, James, and
John, the Name and Definition of a Man cannot equally and universally belong to
them all. (...). Damasc. O^th. Fid. l. 3. c. 6.
And therefore Damascen was certainly in the right, who from an Universal
Predication infers, that common Nature is the Species; and that for this
reason, Nature is predicated of its Hypostases, or Individuals, because in
every Hypostasis of the same kind, there is the same perfect Nature. Every Man
has the perfect Nature of a Man; and for that reason, and no other, the Name
and Definition of a Man belongs to every Man.

Upon this account it is, that they reject (...), (...). Ibid.
a particular, singular Nature; because then the same Hypostases must have both
the same, and a diverse Nature, even the Persons of the Holy Trinity. If Nature
be perfectly the same in all the Hypostases, it is a common Nature; but if
Human Nature in Peter have any thing peculiar and different from Human Nature
in Paul, it is then a particular Humanity, and Peter and Paul are not perfectly
of the same kind, which is one Notion, wherein they rejected a particular
Nature; which added to what I discoursed above, that by a particular Nature,
they meant a whole, absolute Individual Nature, it includes, I think, all that
they meant, when they rejected as Heresy, (...), Three Individual Natures in
the Trinity: By Three particular Natures, they always understood Three
Absolute, Whole, Individual Natures, and this alone is Trith^ism, for Three
such Absolute Divinities must be Three Gods; but besides this, they thought
there could not be Three Individual Natures, without some essential difference
to distinguish and number Natures, and this added a mixture of Arianism to
Tritheism, and made, at least in part, Three different Divinities, that they
were partly of the same, and partly of a different Nature. For, as far as I can
understand this matter, the reason why they rejected Singular and Individual
Natures, was not, that Human Nature, for instance, does not subsist singly and
individually, (...), as Damascen speaks, in Peter and Paul, and every
individual Man in the World; but because what is common to all without the
least Alterity or Diversity, can be but one in all, for Alterity and Diversity
is necessary ^o make a Number; and therefore Nature, which is perfectly the
same in all, though it subsists singly in Individuals, is not an Individual it
self, as having no principle of Individuation in it self, that is, no
Diversity: For which reason it may be numbered with the Hypostases, with the
numbering Number; but the res numerata, that Nature which is numbered with the
Hypostases, is but one in all, as I have shown above.

In this sense also these Fathers rejected an Individual Nature, (...), in
their Disputes with the Severians, concerning the Personality of Christ's Human
Nature: These Heretics taught, That every Nature is an Individuum, Hypostasis,
or Person, and therefore the Human Nature of Christ, if it were true Human
Nature, must be a Human Hypostasis or Person too: In answer to which, these
Fathers absolutely denied that there is any such thing as an Individual Nature;
that pure Nature is no Hypostasis, not that it cannot subsist, for the Human
Nature of Christ does actually subsist; but that mere Nature has no
individuating Principle in it self to distinguish it into different Hypostases,
but is distinguished not by any Essential Diversity, but by Personal
Properties; that Nature with Personal Properties is a Person, and therefore if
there be a Subsisting Nature, which has no Personal Properties, but is
distinguished some other way from Human Nature in Human Persons, it is certain
it is Human Nature, but no Human Person: And thus it is with the Human Nature
of Christ, which is distinguished from Human Nature in all others by its
Hypostatical Union to the Eternal Word, which is no Personal Property, and
therefore does not make it a distinct Person, though it be a perfect Subsisting
Nature.

This is the best and easiest Account I can give of the Philosophy of these
Fathers, concerning a Common and Individual Nature, which if it be thought a
new way of speaking, yet it is what may be understood, and has a great deal of
old Truth in it; and will help us to understand the Fathers in these Disputes
about the Trinity and Incarnation, a little better than I find many men do.

Let us then in the next place, inquire what these Fathers mean by Hypostasis,
and how they distinguish it from Nature in Created Beings. Now they themselves
tell us, That by Hypostasis, they mean Aristotle's first Substance, or that
which subsists by it self; not as a Part in a Whole, nor as Accidents in a
Subject, but is a perfect whole it self, and has a complete Subsistence of its
own. What is it then that subsists by it self? For that is Aristotle's first
Substance, and the Fathers Hypostasis: And that is (...), Nature, Essence, and
Substance: For nothing else can subsist by it self, as is evident in
Aristotle's Definition of Essence and Substance; and though the Fathers put
something more into their Definition of Hypostasis, (...). D^m. Orth. Fid. l.
3. c. 6.
yet it comes all to one. For as Damascen tells us, Every Hypostasis is perfect
Nature and Substance; and therefore the Hypostases do not differ from each
other in Nature, but only in such peculiar and Characteristical Accidents, as
distinguish Hypostases. For the Definition of Hypostasis is Nature with its
Accidents: That every Hypostasis has the common Nature with its peculiar
distinguishing Accidents, subsisting by it self. So that an Hypostasis is
nothing else but Nature with its Accidents and distinguishing Characters,
subsisting by it self: Now we know Accidents do not subsist by themselves, but
if they be Inherent Accidents, they subsist in Nature and Substance; and
therefore though they may distinguish Hypostases and Persons, do not constitute
an Hypostasis, and therefore are owned to be only (...), the peculiar
distinguishing Marks and Characters of Hypostases or Persons, whereby they are
known from each other: But the Marks and Characters which distinguish
Hypostases, are not the Hypostases themselves; such as the Time when they were
born, the Place where they lived, their Parentage, Name, Features of Body,
Endowments of Mind, and a hundred other distingushing Marks, for these are very
different in different Persons, and as changeable in the same Persons, as Time,
Age, Place, Features of Body, Endowments of Mind, Trades, Offices, etc. and yet
all these are Persons, and the same Persons under all these Changes.

Now setting aside all these Characters and Accidents, which cannot make a
Person, but only distinguish one Person from another, there is nothing left to
be the Hypostasis or Person, but only the common Nature subsisting by it self:
Common, as it is the same in every Individual, but an Hypostasis or Individuum
by a separate Existence, or subsisting by it self. For an Individuum, (...), is
one undivided Whole, subsisting by it self, and therefore a whole, perfect,
undivided Human Nature, subsisting by it self, is an Hypostasis, or Person, one
single, individual Man, though there were no other Mark and Character to
distinguish him from other Men, but only this Separate Subsistence.

The Humanity of our Savior is a plain Demonstration of this, that it is only
a Separate Existence, or subsisting by it self (which in Created Beings is the
same thing) that makes Human Nature an Hypostasis, or Person. All Catholic
Christians own, that Christ took Human Nature on him, but not a Human
Hypostasis or Person, and therefore in him we may see the difference between
Nature and Person.

What then was Christ's Human Nature? I know no more of it, but that he had a
true Body of Flesh, animated by a Reasonable Soul, such a Body, and such a
Soul, as other Men have, and this is Human Nature: But why is not this Human
Body and Soul a Human Person too? Did he want the (...), some peculiar Marks
and Characters to distinguish him from all other Human Persons? By no means! He
had more of these Marks of Distinction, and more Authentic ones, than any
other Man ever had. The Time and Place of his Birth, his Parentage, his
Miracles, his Doctrine, the minute Circumstances of his Death, his
Resurrection, etc. were foretold by Ancient Prophets, and he distinguished
himself from all the rest of Mankind by those wonderful things he did, that if
peculiar distinguishing Characters make a Person, he was more a Person than
ever any Man was before or since. What then was wanting to make us Human Nature
a Human Person? Truly nothing, but only subsisting by it self, which it never
did, but in union to the Eternal Word. This I think looks very like a
Demonstration, that an Hypostasis is nothing but Nature subsisting by it self;
for all that the Humanity of Christ had, without being a Human Person, cannot
make a Person, for then the Human Nature of Christ must have been a Human
Person too; and that which alone was wanting to make the Human Nature of Christ
a Person, which was subsisting by it self, must be the only thing which makes
Nature a Person.

I have the rather chose this Instance, because the Humanity of Christ, which
is no Person, is often alleged to prove, that there must be some peculiar mode
of Subsistence, which must coalesce with common Nature to make a Person.

This, I confess, is Language which I do not understand, if there be any thing
more meant by i^, than that Nature subsisting by it self is a Person: For
Nature which does not subsist, is nothing but in Idea, and Subsistence is a
mere Notion without something that subsists; now we may unite these two Notions
of Nature and Subsistence, and form the Idea of a Subsisting Nature, which is
all the coalescing I know of; but actual Production makes a Subsisting Nature,
which is not Nature and Subsistence, or a mode of Subsistence coalescing, but
Nature in Act. In a Subsisting Created Nature, which does not necessarily
exist, we may distinguish between the Notions of Nature and Subsistence, but a
Subsisting Nature is nothing but Nature in being, Nature which is, that is,
Nature it self; for the mere Idea of Nature is not Nature. But Subsistence has
a Mode, and there must be a peculiar manner of Subsistence to make a Person:
Must every Person then have a peculiar manner of Subsistence? Are there then as
many peculiar Manners and Modes of Subsistence, as there are, or ever have
been, or ever shall be, distinct Persons in the World? This is beyond my
Philosophy. I have heard of a Complete and Incomplete Subsistence, to subsist
by it self, or to subsist as a Part in the Whole, or an Accident in a Subject,
etc. but I never could understand, that any other Subsistence strictly belongs
to the Notion of an Hypostasis or Person, but to subsist by it self. The Human
Nature of Christ did upon all other Accounts, as truly and properly subsist, as
any other Man in the World, but was no Person, as not subsisting by it self,
but in Union to the Eternal Word; which made it the Human Nature of the Word,
which was made Flesh, and dwelt amongst us.

All this Talk about the different Modes and manner of Subsistence, seems to be
a mistake of the Fathers Doctrine concerning the (...), which these Men
translate Modes of Subsistence, of which more anon; but at present I only
observe, That the Fathers do not place the Personality of Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, in these Modes of Subsistence, but only distinguish and characterize
their Persons by them, and from thence prove the real distinction of Persons in
the Individual Unity of the Divine Essence: But then I do not remember, that
they so much as distinguish all Created Persons by their peculiar Modes of
Subsistence.

I know very well, that both Damascen and others, give an Example of this in
Adam, Eve, and Seth; that Adam was immediately formed by God of the Dust of the
Earth, Eve formed of one of Adam's Ribs, and Seth begotten of Adam and Eve,
which they call their (...), which in this Example can signify nothing else but
their different manner of Production, not different Modes of Subsistence; but
then they do not allege this as the formal Reason of Personality, nay not as
necessary to the distinction of Persons, (though such Peculiarities, whenever
they are, will always distinguish Persons) but all they designed by it, was to
prove, that such different ways of coming into being, made no change or
alteration in Nature; for Adam, Eve, and Seth, had all the same Human Nature,
though formed after such a different manner; in answer to the Arian Objection
against the Homoousion, that an Unbegotten and Begotten Nature cannot be the
same, and therefore Father and Son not Consubstantial. Damasc. Orth. Fid. l. 1.
c. 9.
Indeed this would have been a very ill Example of the Distinction of Persons
by these different Modes of Subsistence, because it could only distinguish Adam
and Eve from all the rest of Mankind; for all Mankind ever since, excepting our
Savior, have come into the World the same way that Seth did, and therefore are
not distinguished by a peculiar manner of Subsistence, for they have all the
same; and consequently either are not distinct Persons, or else such peculiar
Modes of Subsistence, coalescing with common Nature, do not constitute the
Person. And yet I can meet with no other Account of any Modes of Subsistence
necessary to the constitution of a Created Person (excepting their Personal
Properties and Characters, which do not make, but only distinguish Persons,
which are not properly Modes of Subsistence, but Modes, Affections, and
Properties of the Subsisting Nature); but only a separate Subsistence, (...).

(...). Damasc. Ibid. l. 1. c. 11.


that every Created Hypostasis, or Person, subsists by it self, and separately
from all others. And herein both Fathers and Philosophers, notwithstanding some
difference in words, seem well enough agreed, and this is all that I need say
concerning the Distinction between Nature and Person in Created Beings.

But now every one who understands the True Catholic Faith of the Trinity,
must needs be sensible, how improper all this is to explain that Venerable
Mystery of One Nature, and Three Persons, in the Unity of the Godhead, if we
apply these Terms strictly and properly.

The Catholic Fathers would not allow Aristotle's Definition of (...), Nature,
Essence, and Substance, that it is that which subsists by it self; because this
leaves no possible distinction between Essence and Hypostasis, without which we
can never defend the Faith of One Nature in Three Persons; for what in his
Sense thus subsists by it self, is an Individual and Singular Nature, which is
the same with Hypostasis, and then it is impossible there should be Three
Hypostases in One Singular Nature, which is but One Hypostasis.

But after all, Do these Fathers deny, that the Divine Nature is One Individual
Nature? Do they not, as I have largely shown, make this the Fundamental Reason
of the Divine Unity, That there is but (...), One Divinity in Three Perfect
Hypstases; and that this One Divinity is (...), a Perfect Indivisible Unit, and
Monad; and that in a very different Sense from what they own in Creatures? So
that in some Sense these Fathers own, That the Divine Nature is as True an
Individuum, and infinitely a more Perfect Unit and Monad, than Aristotle's
First Substance, though his First Substance is, and can be but One Hypostasis,
and the Divine Nature subsists perfectly in Three.

And therefore to qualify this, they tell us, That Nature signifies the (...),
that which is common to all the Hypostases of the same Nature; but the
Hypostasis is the common Nature with some peculiar and distinguishing
Properties, subsisting separately by it self; and this seems to give us a
better image and resemblance of One Nature in Three Hypostases; for here is one
common Nature, not only in Three, but in all the distinct Hypostases of that
Nature, that ever were, or ever shall be: But I Am sure this needs greater
qualification, when applied to the Mystery of the Trinity, than Aristotle's
first Substance, or it will unavoidably introduce, not merely Tritheism, but
Polytheism without end; for God can limit the Numbers of Created Hypostases,
but the number of Hypostases in an Infinite necessary Nature can never be
limited, if the Divine Nature be common to the Divine Hypostases, only as
Humane Nature is common to Human Hypostases.

They teach, as I have already observed, That Human Nature, for instance, is a
common Nature, and that every Hypostasis, or every particular Man has this same
common Nature; but then it is a common Nature, not as it is numerically One in
all, for it subsists separately in every Hypostasis, and therefore in this
sense is not One common Numerical, Individual Nature; but it is common only, as
it is perfectly the same in all. Which they will not allow to be a mere common
Notion, but a common Specific Nature; for the Nature is the Species, which is
the foundation of the common Predication: For therefore all Men have the common
Name and Definition of a Man, because they have the same common Human Nature.

And thus, though every Hypostasis has not (...), a particular Nature, as that
signifies a distinction in the Nature it self, yet it has the common Specific
Individual Nature; that is, that Nature which makes the Species, and is common,
as it is the same in all, but yet subsists individually (...), and separately
in each Hypostasis. But now will any Catholic Christian say, that thus it is
in the Ever Blessed Trinity? That the One Common Divinity is One and Common,
only as One Common Humanity is, that is, that it is perfectly the same in all?
not One Individual, but One Specific Nature: Or will he say, That each Divine
Person has one whole entire Specific Divinity, as every Human Person has a
whole Specific Humanity? As far as I can see, this would as unavoidably make
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Three Gods, as Peter, James, and John, are three
Men; and a common Nature, and personal Properties, and different Modes of
Subsistence, would no more prevent a Trinity of Gods. than a Trinity of Men.

This, I think, plainly shows, how vain an Attempt it is to find out any
Notions of Unity and Distinction, of Nature and Person, or any words to express
those Notions by, common to God and Creatures. These Creature-Ideas, and
Creature Terms, can be applied to God only by way of Analogy and Accommodation,
and that a very imperfect one too.

2. Let us then consider, how the Catholic Fathers accommodated these Names of
Essence and Person to the explication of this Mystery, and what they intended
to represent by them. I shall do this in as few words as possibly I can, that
what I have to say may be the more easily understood.

They tell us, That all Nature is common, that Human Nature is common to all
Mankind, and the Divine Nature common to all the Three Divine Persons, Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost; not that they thought the Divinity or Godhead a common
Nature, merely as Human Nature is common, but there is this Analogy between
them; that the Divine Nature is not singular, or does not subsist in
Singularity, but in Three Hypostases, as Human Nature is common, because it is
not confined to one, but is in all Human Hypostases; and that the Divine Nature
is perfectly and invariably the same in each Hypostasis, as the Human Nature
is, which for this Reason is called a common, not a particular Nature; which is
the (...), the Sameness, Identity, not Singularity, of Nature in the Blessed
Trinity. Thus far the Analogy holds, (which is a direct opposition both to
Sabellianism and Arianism) but it reaches no farther; for the Divine Nature is
not a common Specific Nature, as all Created Nature is common, for the Godhead
is no Species; that is, there is, and can be but One God: Which I have already
at large shown to be the Sense of the Fathers. They expressly teach, That the
Divine Nature is an Individual Nature, but not Singular; it is common, as being
whole and perfect in more Hypostases than One, which excludes Singularity, but
it is one whole Entire, Individual Nature; so one Individual, as Human Nature
is one in one Man. For though Individual and Singular is the same in Creatures,
it is not so in the Divine Nature; nor can it be, if the Catholic Faith be One
Nature, One Divinity in Three Perfect Hypostases: And if we can form any
sensible Notion of this, it will silence all the pretenses of Jargon, Nonsense,
Contradiction, Tritheism, which are so constantly objected against this
Venerable Mystery. And therefore I shall briefly inquire, 1. What that One
Divinity is, which is common to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and how it is
common: 2. How this common Nature is in a strict and proper Sense, One
Individual Nature. And I think this is easily accounted for from the Doctrine
of the Fathers.

1. As for the first; This (...), One Divinity, is the Divinity of the Father,
the Natura Patris, the (...), the Nature of the Father, and the Divinity of the
Father, who is the Eternal Self-originated Mind, which has no Second, and
therefore there can be no other, no Second, or Third Divinity. Now this One
Divine Nature, One Divinity of the Father, is common to the Son, and to the
Holy Spirit: Common, I say, not merely as Human Nature is common to all Men,
because it is the same in all, perfectly the same (...), though it be not the
same Individual Nature in all, which is singular and incommunicable in
Creatures; but it is common by a perfect communication, whole of whole; that it
is no New Divinity, but the Divinity of the Father, which is in the Son, who is
therefore so often, as I observed above, called the Nature, and Divinity, and
Mind of the Father, his Image and Character, and that which is signified by all
this, his Eternal, Living, Omnipotent Word. I do not intend to prove all this
over again, which I have abundantly proved already, but only to put every thing
into its proper place, that we may view the Whole in a true light.

This Divine Nature then of the Father which is but One, is that One Divinity,
which is by an Eternal Ineffable Generation communicated whole and perfect to
the Son, and by a like Eternal and Ineffable Procession to the Holy Spirit: But
still the difficulty is, How this is One Nature, which is not Singular, nor
subsists in Singularity, but in Three Proper, Distinct, Complete Hypostases, or
Persons.

2. And therefore rightly to apprehend this, we must inquire into the Notion of
One Individual Nature. Now that which is most obvious, and which the Fathers
perpetually allege in justification of the Divine Unity, is, That an
Individual is an undivided Nature, and therefore the One Divinity of the
Father, though actually communicated to the Son, and Holy Spirit, is One
Individual Divinity, because it is communicated whole and perfect, without
Division or Separation; and that which is undivided is One.

But though to be undivided be essential to the Notion of an Individual Nature,
yet there must be something else to complete this Notion, or at least to give
us a more distinct conception of it.

Could Human Nature propagate it self whole and complete to Two or Three,
without any division or separation of Substance, this could not make it One
Individual Nature, though they were undivided; for One Individual Nature, is
One whole Complete Nature, without division; which is all that is essential to
such a Being, and is this all but once, and that without division.

But how will this agree with the Notion of One Divinity, or One Individual
Divine Nature? For does not the One Divine Nature, which is the Divinity of the
Father, subsist completely and distinctly, though without division and
separation, in the Son and Holy Ghost; and will you call this One Individual
Nature, which is not singularly in One, but subsists distinctly in Three? Yes,
I will, because all these Three, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are essential to
the Notion of One Divinity, and therefore are One Individual Divinity in Three;
for an Individual Nature is that, which without division has all that is
essential to such a Nature.

Well, But is not the Father then, in his own Person, True and Perfect God, and
the Son True and Perfect God, and the Holy Ghost True and Perfect God? that is,
Have not each of these Divine Persons all the Divine Perfections included in
the Notion and Idea of God? And are they not Three who have all the Perfections
of the Divine Nature? and how then is this One Individual Nature?

I answer: When I say, That One Individual Nature is that which has all that is
essential to such a Nature; by Essential I mean, not only Essential Properties,
Qualities, Powers, and Perfections, (which are commonly called Nature, there
being no other notion of Nature in Created Beings) but Essential Productions
too, which (when there is any such thing) are as essential to Nature, as any
other Properties or Perfections. In the first Sense of Essential, the Divine
Nature is not singular, but communicated by the Eternal Father to the Eternal
Son, and by Father and Son to the Eternal Spirit, and all Three are Infinite in
Wisdom, Power, and Goodness, and all other Divine Perfections. This is but One
Divinity, One Godhead; for there is not a Second and Third Divinity in the Son,
and in the Holy Spirit, but the One Divinity of the Father.

But yet we must confess, that here is Number; Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are
Three, and how can that Divinity, which is perfectly and distinctly in Three,
be One Individual Nature, One Numerically; One as Human Nature in every
particular Man is One?

Now this must be resolved into the second Notion of Essential, for Essential
Productions; for all Essential Productions in the Unity of Nature, though they
may be distinguished and numbered among themselves, are but One Individual
Nature. It will be in vain to seek for an Example of this in Created Nature,
and I believe the reason of it will be evident without it.

An Eternal Self-originated Mind is True and Perfect God, the First Supreme
Cause of all things, and has all the Perfections of the Divinity wholly in it
self, is the One and only True God: But if it be essential to an Eternal Mind
to have an Eternal, Living, Subsisting Word and Spirit, by an Eternal
Generation and Procession, then this Eternal Word and Spirit are essential to
an Eternal Mind, not as Essential Perfections, or Essential Parts, but as
Essential Productions or Processions in the Unity and Identity of Nature. Thus
the Scripture represents this Mystery, That there is One God, who has an
Eternal Word, and an Eternal Spirit; and the Catholic Fathers, as I have
already observed, insist on this as a natural Demonstration of a Trinity, That
the Eternal Mind must have its Eternal Word and Eternal Spirit. Now if the
Eternal Word and Eternal Spirit are essential to the Eternal Mind, it is
certain, that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the Eternal Mind, its Word, and
Spirit, are but One Individual Divinity; every thing that is essential, is
included in the Notion of an Individual Nature; for that is not a Complete and
Perfect Nature, nor an adequate notion of Nature, that wants any thing that is
essential. Now though we may have a general Notion and Idea of a God, That he
is an Absolutely Perfect Being, which Includes all the Divine Attributes and
Perfections, without knowing any thing of the Son, or Holy Ghost; yet if we
consider this Absolutely Perfect Being as Eternal Self-originated Mind, with
its Eternal Word and Spirit, as essential Productions or Processions, we can
consider them no otherwise, but as One Individual Divinity; this Eternal Word
and Spirit being essential Processions of the Eternal Mind, which can never be
separated from it: For such essential Processions are not only coeval and
consubstantial with the Nature from whence they proceed; as the Sun, its Light
and Heat, (by which Argument the Catholic Fathers proved the Coeternity and
Consubstantiality of the Son and Holy Spirit with the Eternal Father) but
whatever distinction there is between them, they are One Individual Nature, if
all that be One Individual Nature, which is essential to such a Being; and such
all essential Processions are, as well as essential Perfections. These are two
very different Questions, and of a very different consideration, What God is?
and Who this God is? In an answer to the first, we form the Idea and Notion of
all Divine Perfections, or of an absolutely Perfect Being, which is the true
notion of the Divinity, and whoever has all these Divine Perfections, is True
and Perfect God; and this is our natural notion of God, as that signifies the
Divinity, which gives no notice of any distinction in the Divinity; for there
can be no diversity in Absolute Perfections and therefore no distinction or
number, according to the Philosophy of the Fathers.

But when we consider who God is, or what is the Subject of all these Divine
Perfections, we can form no other Idea of it, but an Eternal, Infinite, Self
originated Mind; this the Wisest Philosophers, as well as Christians, are
agreed in, That God is an Infinite Mind; and this rightly explained, may teach
us some distinction in the Divinity; for all Men must grant, what they feel in
themselves, that every Mind has its Word and Spirit, and cannot be conceived
without them; and therefore the Eternal Mind must have its Eternal word and
Spirit too; and the reason why this did not lead all Mankind into the natural
belief of a Trinity of Persons, Mind, Word, and Spirit, in the Unity of the
Godhead, was plainly this, Because they found that their own Word and Spirit
were not permanent, subsisting Persons, but were the perishing Creatures of the
Mind, which were no sooner produced, but died and vanished as our Thoughts do,
and thus they conceived it was with the Divine Mind; which is one kind of
Sabellianism, as I observed above: But yet the Catholic Fathers thought this
natural belief, That the (...) is not (...), that the Divinity, or Divine Mind,
is not without its Word, a very proper Medium to prove a real subsisting Word
in the Divinity; for an Infinite Perfect Mind, which is all Life, Being,
Substance, if it begets its own Word, as every Mind does, must beget a Living,
Substantial, Subsisting Word, the perfect Image and Character of its own Life
and Infinite Being.

However, thus much I think we must own, That since every Mind must have its
Word and Spirit in the Individual Unity of its own Nature; and the Holy
Scripture assures us, that God, who is the most perfect Mind, has his Word and
Spirit, and that this Divine Word and Spirit is an Eternal, Living, Subsisting
Word and Spirit, this is a very good foundation for the belief of a Real
Trinity both from Reason and Scripture. The natural Notion and Idea of a Mind,
teaches us this distinction in the Divinity; and Natural Reason strongly
infers, from the perfect Productions of an infinitely perfect Mind; that the
Divine Word and Spirit must be an Eternal, Living, Infinite Word and Spirit;
and the Holy Scripture confirms all this: And therefore Scripture and Reason
are so far from contradicting each other in this Article, that the Belief of
the Trinity, though it be ultimately resolved into the Authority of Revelation,
yet has Reason on its side, as far as it can judge of such matters: Which
proves a considerable Authority, when the obscure and imperfect Conjectures of
Reason, are explained and confirmed by Revelation. For though the Notion of an
absolutely perfect Being, which is the Natural Idea of the Divinity, teaches no
such distinction, yet the Idea of an Infinitely Perfect and Self-originated
Mind, which is as natural a Notion of God, does. (...), etc. Damasc. Fid. Orth.
l. 1. c. 11.
Thus Damascen teaches us to distinguish between the Divinity, and in what the
Divinity is, or to speak more accurately, what is the Divinity, and that which
proceeds eternally from this First Cause, that is, the Hypostases of the Son
and Holy Spirit; the first teaches us that there is but One Divinity; the
second shows the distinction of Persons in the Unity of the Divine Nature. But
then (which is what I intended in all this) this very distinction proves one
individual Divinity, because it is in the individual Unity of the same
Numerical, not Specific Nature; for all essential Processions, as the Eternal
Word and Spirit are, which cannot so much as in Thought be separated from
Original Mind, must continue in the Unity of the same individual Nature.

This is what the Fathers meant by the (...), the One common Divinity, which is
individually One in Three perfect Hypostases, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: The
Divinity of the Father, of Eternal, Self-originated Mind, is the common
Divinity, communicated to the Eternal Word and Spirit, in the individual Unity
of Nature.

2. Now this will give us some Notion of the distinction of Nature and Persons
in the Eternal Godhead. I say, Persons, not Person; which I take to be the
fundamental Mistake which has obscured and perplexed this Mystery. Men have
racked their Inventions, to find out some distinction between Nature and Person
in every single Person in the Godhead; which it is certain these Fathers never
thought of; though their Attempt to distinguish between Nature and Person in
every Man, gave some occasion to this Mistake: But I have already proved both
from Fathers and Schoolmen, That when they spoke distinctly of each particular
Person, they made Person and Nature the same: That the Person of the Father is
the Nature of the Father, and the Person of the Son the Nature of the Son. Nor
indeed had they any occasion to distinguish between Nature and Person in each
single Person, which could do no service in this Mystery: For the true reason
and occasion for this distinction, was to reconcile the Individual Unity of the
Divine Nature, with a Trinity of real Hypostases or Persons; how One Nature can
subsist in Three distinct Hypostases, and continue One Individual Nature: Which
had been no difficulty at all, were not each Divine Person by himself the
Divine Nature. But how the Divine Nature should subsist whole and perfect in
Three distinct Persons, and not be Three distinct Natures, but One Nature, and
One Divinity; not specifically, but individually and numerically One; This was
the difficulty they were concerned to answer; which the distinction between
Nature and Person in each single Person could not answer: For let us suppose
such a distinction as this, whatever it be; if the Divine Nature subsist whole
and perfect in each distinct Person, the difficulty still remains how the
Persons are distinct, and the Nature individually One: As, to put the Case in
Human Nature; whatever distinction we allow between Nature and Person in every
particular Man; if we allow that every Man has Human Nature as distinctly in
himself, as he is a distinct Person, the distinction between Nature and Person
can never prove the Individual Numerical Unity of Human Nature in Three Men.

The Question then is, Not how Nature and Person is distinguished in each
single Person, (much less, how Three Persons in One singular Nature are
distinguished from that singular Nature, which unavoidably reduces a Trinity of
Persons to an unintelligible Trinity of Modes); but, How the Three Persons in
the Ever-blessed Trinity, which are Three in number, and each of them the
Divine Nature, are distinguished from that One Individual Divinity which is in
them all, or rather, which they all are. Now what I have already said, seems to
me to give a very intelligible Notion of this, viz. That the Divine Nature,
which is but One, is the Eternal, Self-originated Divinity, with its Eternal,
Essential Processions or Productions; which, as I have already shown, are but
One, not Singular, but Individual Nature, and Individual Divinity: But then
this One Self-originated Divinity is most certainly an Infinite, Eternal,
Self-originated Person, if Infinite, Eternal, Self-originated Mind be a Person;
and these Eternal Essential Processions are Persons also, if an Eternal,
Living, Subsisting Word be a Person, and an Eternal, Living, Subsisting Spirit
be a Person; and then it is evident, that there are Three Eternal, Subsisting
Persons in the Individual Unity of Nature. These Divine Processions do not
multiply nor divide the Divine Nature, because they are essential to an
Infinite Mind, and are Processions ad intra in the perfect Identity ((...)) and
Individual Unity of Nature; but they are distinct Persons, as being Eternal,
Subsisting, Living, Intelligent Processions, which is all that we mean by
Persons in this Mystery, with reference to the Eternal Word and Spirit.

For these Three Divine Persons have their different Characters and Order,
whereby they are distinguished from each other, which the Fathers call the
(...), by which they meant their different manner of subsisting in the
Individual Unity of the Divine Nature, that though they have all the same
Divinity, as that signifies all Divine Perfections, yet they have it after a
different manner that is, as they constantly explain it, Unbegotten, Begotten,
and Proceeding, as the Athanasian Creed teaches us to believe; The Father is
made of none, (...). Damasc. Orth. Fid. l. 1. c. 10.
neither created, nor begotten. The Son is of the Father alone, not made, nor
created, but begotten. The Holy Ghost is of the Father, and of the Son, neither
made, nor created, nor begotten, but proceeding. This is the only distinction
which the Catholic Fathers allow between the Three Divine Persons, and let us
consider the nature of it.

Now (...) signifies actual Existence, and that which does actually exist; and
therefore the (...), signify that there are Three that do actually exist, but
after a different manner: That is, That the Father is Unbegotten,
Self-originated Divinity, is God of himself, without any other cause of his
Being, and this Self-originated Unbegotten Divinity is the Person of the
Father, and in the highest and most absolute sense the One God. The Son is
Eternally begotten of his Father's Substance, and lives and subsists in him;
and so the Holy Ghost Eternally proceeds from Father and Son: That is, There is
One Eternal Self-originated Divinity with its two Eternal Processions in the
perfect Unity and Identity of the same Nature. The Father's manner of
subsistence is easily understood, and secures to him the Prerogative of the One
True God; but we must show this a little more plainly with reference to the Son
and Holy Spirit, each of which is by himself True and Perfect God, but not a
Second and Third God: The right understanding of which depends upon the true
stating of their different manners of subsistence.

And here I need only refer to what I have already discoursed concerning the
difference between an Absolute Nature, and Relative Subsistencies in the same
Nature. An Absolute Nature is a whole Complete Nature, with all that
essentially belongs to such a Nature, as every perfect Man has all that belongs
essentially to the Nature of Man, and thus a Man begets a Man in his own Nature
and Likeness; and the Son, which is begotten, is upon all accounts as much a
Man, as he who begets, and Father and Son are two Men: And to beget, and to be
begotten, tho they prove their Persons to be distinct, yet are but External
Relations not different manners of subsistence in the same Nature. And thus God
does not beget a Son, which would be to beget a Second God: For to beget, and
to be begotten, when he who begets, begets in an absolute sense all the same
that he is himself, makes two of the same kind. And therefore we must observe,
That (...), which is the Personal Character and Property of the Father, does
not only signify, that he has no cause of his Being and Nature, but that what
he is, he is absolutely in himself, has an Absolute, not a Relative Nature and
Subsistence; and so consequently the (...), which is the Personal Property of
the Son, signifies that his Being and Nature is Relative; not only, that he
receives his Being and Nature from his Father, but that he so receives it, as
to be a Relative Subsistence in his Father's Nature; and the like may be said
of the Procession of the Holy Ghost. As to show this more particularly.

God begets a Son, his own perfect Image and Likeness, but he does not beget
his own Absolute Nature in his Son, as Man does, though he begets his Son of
his own Nature and Substance; as for instance. God is Perfect, Absolute,
Original Mind, not only as Original is opposed to what has a Cause, and a
Beginning, but as opposed to an Image; but God does not beget an Absolute
Original Mind in his Son, but only his own Eternal, Essential Word, which is
the Perfect, Living Image of Eternal, Self-originated Mind, and is it self
Eternal, Infinite Mind, in the Eternal Word; but is in its own proper
Character, the Eternal Word of the Eternal Mind, not originally an Eternal Mind
it self. It has all the Perfections of an Eternal Mind, as a Perfect Word must
of necessity have, which is the perfect Sameness and Identity of Nature; but it
has all these Perfections, not as Original Mind, but as a Begotten Word, which
is a different Mode of Subsistence, and a sensible distinction between the
Eternal Mind and its Word in the perfect Identity of Nature.

This I take to be a True and Intelligible Account of these different manners
of Subsistence, which distinguish the Divine Persons in the perfect Unity of
Nature, that they have all the same Nature, and same Perfections, but after a
different manner; which can never be understood in Absolute Natures and
Persons, for three Men, though Father, Son, and Grandson, have all of them
Human Nature after the very same manner; but in an Absolute Nature, and
Relative Essential Processions, this is to be understood, and proves a real
distinction, and perfect Unity. It is evident to all Men, that the Mind and its
Word are Two; and it is as evident, that Life, Wisdom, Knowledge, are in
Absolute, Original Mind, after another manner than they are in its Word; and
yet the very Notion of a Mind, and its Word, and that Essential Relation that
is between them, makes it a contradiction to say, that any other Life, Wisdom,
Knowledge, can be in the Word, than what is in the Mind; which would be to say,
That the Word is not the Word of the Mind, if it have any thing that is not in
the Mind: For a Natural Word can have nothing but what is in the Mind, and is
no farther a Word, than it is the Natural Image of the Mind: And the like may
be said concerning the Holy Spirit, which has all the same Divine Perfections,
but in a different manner, from Original Mind, and its Word, as eternally
proceeding from both.

This is the Account which the Catholic Fathers give of the Unity of Nature,
and Distinction of Persons, in the Ever Blessed Trinity, which answers the
Objections of our Sabellian, Arian and Socinian Adversaries, and vindicates
those Catholic Forms of Speech, which they charge with Tritheism,
Contradiction, and Nonsense: As to show this briefly in one view, for each part
of it has been sufficiently confirmed already.

The Catholic Faith teaches us, That there is but One God; and this is
demonstrable from the Doctrine of these Fathers. For in this Account I have now
given, there is but (...), One Absolute Divinity, One Divine Nature, and
therefore but One God.

But, say our Adversaries, One God in Natural Religion, and according to the
general Sense of Mankind, signifies One Person, who is God: And this also in
some sense has always been owned by the Catholic Church; That as there is but
One Absolute Divinity, so the Person of the Father, who is this One Absolute
Divinity, is this One God; (...), there is but One Person, who is God, in this
Absolute Sense, because there is but One Father, who, as they often speak, is
the Fountain of the Deity, that is, of the Divine Processions, of the Son and
Holy Spirit: He is the Whole Absolute Divinity himself, and whatever is Divine,
Eternally and Essentially proceeds from him, in the Unity of his own Nature.

But at this rate, what Divinity do we leave for the Son, and the Holy Spirit?
Truly, the very same by Eternal Generation and Procession, which is originally
and absolutely in the Father: For it is the Nature of the Father, and the
Divinity of the Father, which is in the Son and Holy Spirit; as the Fathers
constantly own, and as of necessity it must be, because there is no other.

This Eternal Generation and Procession has always been owned as an ineffable
Mystery; which we must believe upon the Authority of the Scriptures, without
pretending to know how God begets an Eternal Son, or how the Eternal Spirit
proceeds from Father and Son, which we confess we have no Notion of; but we
know likewise, That this is no reason to reject this Faith, no more than it is
a reason to reject the belief of an Eternal, Self-originated Being; because
though it be demonstrable, That there must be an Eternal First Cause of all
things, which has no Cause of its own Being, but an Eternal necessary Nature,
yet we can no more conceive this, than we can an Eternal Generation and
Procession.

Supposing therefore (without disputing that matter at present) that God has an
Eternal Son; that Eternal, Self-originated Mind has an Eternal, Subsisting
Word, and an Eternal Spirit, it is evident that this Eternal Word and Eternal
Spirit, must have all the same Perfections of the Eternal Mind, must be all
that the Eternal Mind is, (...), excepting its being an Absolute,
Self-originated Mind. Now if he be God, who has the whole Divine Nature and
Perfections, then the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God, who by Eternal
Generation and Procession have that same Divinity which is absolutely and
originally in the Father.

Well then: Here is One Divine Person, viz. the Eternal Father, who is
absolutely and originally God; and Two more, the Son, and Holy Ghost, who are
each of them in his own Person, true and perfect God, by having all the Divine
Perfections: But are not these Three then Three Gods? the Unbegotten God, who
is originally and absolutely God, the Begotten God, and the Proceeding God. No,
it is the constant Doctrine of the Catholic Fathers, that the Trinity is but
One Divinity, and One God, una Summa res, One Supreme Being, as St. Austin
taught, and from him Peter Lombard, and was confirmed by the Council of
Lateran, in the Condemnation of Abbot Ioachim. For Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
though they are Three true and proper Persons, are but One Individual Nature;
for it is Essential to the Eternal Mind to have its Eternal Word and Eternal
Spirit, and the Eternal Word and Spirit live and subsist in the Mind; and
though living, subsisting Persons, yet are as individually One with the Mind,
as a Created Mind, its Word and Spirit are One.

Whatever is Essential to Nature, is in the Individual Unity of it; and that is
but One Individual Nature which has nothing but what is Essential to it; and
therefore if, as I have already observed, and as the Catholic Faith teaches,
the Son and Spirit, the Eternal Word and Eternal Spirit, are Essential
Processions of Eternal Original Mind, and essentially, indivisibly, and
inseparably in it; Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are as essentially and
inseparably One Individual Divinity, as any One Nature is One with it self.

But is not this a kind of Sabellian Composition of a God? A whole Divinity
made up of Three partial and incomplete Divinities? Which St. Austin calls a
Triformis Deus: (...).

(...) Damas^. Orth. Fid. l. 1. c. 10. and cap. 11.


By no means! What is compounded, is made up of Parts, which make a compound
Nature; but perfect Hypostases, however united, can make no Composition:
However you unite James and John, you can never make a compound Man of them,
because each of them have a perfect Human Nature; and as Damascen observes, we
do not say, That the Nature or Species is made up of the Hypostases, but is in
the Hypostases: So that each Divine Person, being a complete and perfect
Hypostasis, having the whole Divine Nature in himself, as being True and
Perfect God; their Union in the same Individual Nature, though it makes them
One Essential Divinity, yet it cannot make a Compound God; for however their
Persons are united, the Divinity or Divine Nature is not compounded, each of
them being True and Perfect God, and not One God by Composition, but by an
Individual Unity of Nature in Three. For every Divine Person is not God, in the
same sense, that every Human Person is a Man, as having an Absolute Individual
Nature of his own; for in this sense the Father only is God, as being Absolute
Original Divinity, an Eternal, Self-originated Mind; and Three such Persons
must be acknowledged to be Three Gods; but as I have been forced often to
repeat it, the Son and Holy Spirit are Divine Persons, as they are Eternal,
Living, Subsisting Processions in the Divine Nature, which proves them to have
the very same Divinity, and to be but One Individual Divinity, but not One
Compound God. For One Individual Nature in Three, though distinguished into
Distinct Subsisting Persons, makes such a natural, inseparable Unity of Will,
Energy, and Power, that they are as perfectly One Almighty Agent, as every
single Person is One Agent, as I have shown above.

It is thought by some a manifest Contradiction to say, as the Athanasian Creed
teaches us, The Father is God, the Son God, and the Holy Ghost God, and yet
there are not Three Gods, but One God. But whoever carefully considers what I
have now said, must own, that this is the only true and proper way of speaking
in this Mystery. If there be but One Absolute Divinity, there can be but One
God; for the Divine Processions in the Unity and Identity of the same
Individual Nature, cannot multiply the Divinity, nor multiply the Name and
Title of God; for the Name God does not originally, absolutely, and immediately
belong to them, but only relatively: The proper immediate Character of the
Second Person in the Trinity is, not God, but the Son of God, and the Word of
God; and so the Third, is the Spirit of God. And though we must necessarily
own, that the Son of God, and the Spirit of God, are each of them True and
Perfect God, equal in all Divine Perfections to the Father, as being all the
same that the Father is, excepting his being a Father; yet they are not Three
Gods, for this is not their immediate, Original Character, but there is One God
the Father, his Eternal Son, and Eternal Spirit. This is what I have above
observed from Tertullian, That there is One God with his Economy, that is, his
Son and Spirit, and that Christ is called God, when he is spoken of by himself;
but when he is named together with the Father, he must have his own proper
Title, which is the Son of God; and the Reason is the same, as to the Holy
Spirit; by which Rule, we can never say, That Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
though each of them be God, are Three Gods; but there are Three, God the
Father, his Son, and Holy Spirit: The Father God of himself, the Son and Spirit
Eternal Processions, and Divine Subsisting Relations in the Unity and Identity
of the Father's Godhead. They have all the same Divinity, their Glory equal,
their Majesty coeternal, but their different manner of having it, the (...),
distinguishes their Names and Characters: The Father is God, absolutely God, an
Unbegotten, Self-originated Being; so God, that there is no other God besides
him. The Son is not absolutely God, but the Son of God; and when he is called
God in Scripture, it is in no other sense,-but as the Son of God; for the Son
of God, must be God the Son: Nor is the Holy Spirit absolutely God, but the
Spirit of God, which is all we mean, when we call him God; for the Spirit of
God must be God the Holy Ghost: This is the Catholic Faith, and let any Man
try if he can find Three Gods in it: For when we number Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, we must not number them by the common Name of Nature, which is One
Undivided Divinity in them all; but by their Relative Names and Characters,
which do not only distinguish their Persons, but signify their Unity, Order,
and Relations in the same Nature. We must not call them Three Gods, because God
is not the original Name of the Son, or Spirit, and therefore they are not
Three Gods; but there are Three in the Unity of the Godhead. The One God the
Father, the Son of God, and the Spirit of God; so that there is but One God in
the Christian Faith, if the Son of God be the Son of this One God the Father;
and the Spirit of God, be the Spirit of this same One God: And though the Son
of God be God, and the Spirit of God be God, that is the Name of their Nature,
not of their Persons, and therefore can no more be multiplied with the Persons,
than the Divine Nature is. The Son of God is God, but it is Authoritate
Paternae Naturae, as St. Hilary speaks, not by any Absolute Godhead of his own,
but in right of his Father's Nature and Divinity, which he received by an
Eternal Generation. Thus it must be, where there is but One Absolute Nature,
with its Internal Processions.

Let us put the Case in a Human Mind, and suppose, That its Word and Spirit
were Distinct, Living, Intelligent Hypostases in the Mind, Essential
Processions in the Unity and Identity of Nature, perfectly the same with the
Mind, but distinct Hypostases; but would any one for this Reason, call these
Three, Three Men, or Three Minds? And yet such a Living, Subsisting Word, and a
Living Subsisting Spirit, would as perfectly have the Nature of the Mind as the
Mind it self, but neither of them would be an absolute Mind, but one the Word
of the Mind, and the other the Spirit of the Mind; not Three Minds, but One
Mind, with its Essential Word, and Spirit.

This, though an Imaginary Case, gives us a sensible representation of the
difference between the Eternal Mind, and its Eternal Word and Spirit; which I
freely acknowledge cannot properly be called Three Infinite Minds and Spirits;
for though the Eternal, Subsisting Word is an Infinite Mind, and so the
Eternal, Subsisting Spirit, yet Mind, as well as God, is the Name of their
Nature, not of their Persons, which is Identically one and the same in all.

This, as I take it, is what some Learned and truly Catholic Writers mean, in
distinguishing the several Acceptations of this Name God. That sometimes it
signifies the Divine Nature and Essence in general; as when we say, The Trinity
is One God, that is, One Divinity; that there is but One Divine Nature and
Essence in all the Three Persons of the Holy Trinity: Sometimes it signifies
Personally, as when we say, The Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy
Ghost is God; that is, the Person of the Father, the Person of the Son, and the
Person of the Holy Ghost is God: But then they are still forced to acknowledge,
that the Name God is not predicated Vnivocally of all Three Persons; See Doctor
Pain 's Letter to the B of R.
but that the Father is God in a more excellent and eminent Sense, than the Son
is God, or the Holy Ghost God, as being God of himself, an Unbegotten,
Self-originated God, the Fountain of the Deity to the Son and Holy Spirit: Upon
which account he is so often by the Catholic Fathers called the One God, and
the only True God. Now all this is very True, and very Catholic, but with all
submission, it seems to me to be an inconvenient way of speaking, which
perplexes the Article with different Senses, and is liable to great Cavils and
Misconstructions, as the Examples of Dr. Pain, and the Author of the 28
Propositions, witness; and when most dexterously managed, will sooner silence
than convince an Adversary.

The Divine Essence must be considered only as in the Divine Persons; when we
say, That the Trinity is One God, the true meaning is, That Three Persons are
One God; and the general abstract Notion of the Unity of Essence does not
account for this, but the Unity of the Divine Essence in Three.

Thus to say, That the Father is God in the highest sense of that Name God; and
that He alone (strictly speaking) is a Being absolutely perfect, because he
alone is Self-existent, and all other Beings, even the Son and Holy Ghost are
from him; may be expounded to a very Catholic Sense, and was certainly so
meant; but is liable to great Cavils, when Men take more pains to pick Quarrels
with Words, than to understand an Author. An Absolutely Perfect God; and a God
that wants any Perfection, sounds not only like Two Gods, but like Gods of
different Kinds; for every diversity of Nature alters the Species.

All that is meant by this is certainly True and Catholic, and taught in
express words by the Primitive Fathers; That the Father is not the Son, nor the
Son the Father; that the Son is all that the Father is, excepting his being the
Father, and unbegotten, that is, excepting Paternity, and Self-existence, or
Self-origination; and that upon this Account the Father is eminently called the
One God, the Son, God of God; that is, God as the Son of God.

What I have now discoursed seems to me to give the fairest Account of this
Matter. I take the Name God always to signify a Person, in whom the Divine
Nature is, not the Divinity in the Abstract; and then the Name God must belong
to any Person after the same manner, as the Divine Nature is his; that is, he
must be called God in no other sense than as he is God. Now, as I have already
shown, there is but One Absolute Divinity, with Two Internal Processions in the
Unity and Identity of Nature: And if we make this our Rule of Speaking, (as we
must do, if this be the Catholic Faith of the Trinity, and we will fit our
words to the nature of things) then it is very plain, That the Name God
absolutely belongs only to him, who is this Absolute Divinity, that is, the
Person of the Father, that no other Person is God in recto, absolutely and
simply God, but only he; that he is the One God, the only True God, as both the
Scripture and Fathers own.

But what becomes then of the Son, and Holy Ghost? Is not the Son God? and the
Spirit God? Yes! the Name and Title of God belongs to them, as the Divine
Nature does; that is, not absolutely, as to the Absolute Divinity, but as to
Divine Processions, to Divine Subsisting Relations in the Unity of the Godhead;
that is, the Second Person in the Trinity is God, but not in recto, as God
signifies that Person, who is the Divinity; but as the Son of God, as habens
Deitatem, having the Divinity, not absolutely and originally, but by
Communication, by Eternal Generation: And so the Holy Spirit is not absolutely
God, but the Spirit of God; and God only as the Spirit of God, as an Internal
Procession in the Divine Nature.

But in what sense then can we say, That the Trinity is One God, or that Three
Persons are One God? Must we not necessarily own, that God in these
Propositions is taken Essentially for the Deity in the abstract, and not as
considered in any One Person? For will we say, That the Trinity, or Three
Persons, are but One Person? No! and yet in this Proposition, The Trinity is
One God; by One God, I understand, One, who is absolutely God, One Absolute
Divinity, which is the Father, who has indeed a Son and Spirit, in the Unity of
his own Nature and Godhead, each of which is True and Perfect God, but not a
Second, and Third God, but the Son of God, and the Spirit of God; Divine
Subsisting Relations in the One Absolute Godhead of the Father, which does not
multiply the Name nor Nature of God.

This is the Account the Catholic Fathers give of the Unity of God in a
Trinity of Persons, and therefore this must be the Catholic Sense of this
Proposition: And here it will be proper to observe, That in the Account they
give of the Unity of God, that is, the Unity in Trinity, they indifferently
assign One Divinity, and One Father, as the Reason of it: (...), and (...).
There is One God, because there is One Divinity; and there is One God, because
there is One Father, which are not two different Reasons, but one and the same;
from whence it necessarily follows, That this One Divinity is the Divinity of
the Father, and that this One God in Trinity, is the Father; for One God must
necessarily signify One Person, when the Father is the One God.

So that the Father, who is the One Absolute Divinity, is the One God, who
ceases not to be the One God, (as St. Hilary and others constantly teach) by
having a Son, and Holy Spirit, who receive all from him, live and subsist in
him, and are eternally and inseparably One with him: Thus we are taught in the
Athanasian Creed, to worship One God in Trinity, that is, the Eternal Father,
who is the One God, with his Son, and Holy Spirit; and the Trinity in Unity,
that is, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, not Three Gods, but One in the Unity of
the Father's Godhead. For the Godhead of the Father, of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, is all one, the Glory equal, the Majesty Coeternal: There is but
One Godhead, One Glory, One Majesty, and that is the Godhead, Glory, and
Majesty of the Father; and the Son and Spirit are in the Godhead, Glory,
Majesty of the Father, as Internal Processions, Living, Subsisting Relations in
the Father's Godhead.

This Account, which I confess is the only Account of this Matter that I can
understand, whatever other Faults it may have, which I do not yet see, I Am sure
is perfectly Orthodox; is neither Tritheism, Sabellianism, Arianism, nor
Socinianism, but the True Catholic Faith, of a Trinity in Unity.

Here is but One Absolute Divinity, but One Father with his Eternal Son and
Spirit, in the Unity of his own Nature and Godhead, and therefore but One God:
For Three Gods must be Three Absolute Divinities, without any Internal
Relation, or dependence on each other. Internal Relations, though Real,
Subsisting Relations, cannot multiply Nature, and therefore cannot multiply Gods.

Here are Three Real, Proper, Living, Intelligent, Substantial, Divine Persons,
and therefore no Sabellianism, not One Personal God, with three Names, Offices,
Manifestations, Modes, Powers, Parts.

Here are Three truly Divine Persons, each of which is by himself, or in his
own Person, True and Perfect God. The Father God of himself, Unbegottan,
Self-originated God, the Fountain of the Deity to the Son and Holy Spirit. The
Son, the Son of God, and True and Perfect God, as the Son of God. The Spirit,
the Spirit of the Father, and the Son, and True and Perfect God, as the Spirit
of God: So that here is neither Arianism, Macedonianism, nor Socinianism; no
Made or Created Nature, no Creature in the Ever Blessed Trinity.

No, say our Arian and Socinian Adversaries, neither the Son, nor the Holy
Ghost, according to this Hypothesis, are True and Perfect God, as the Father
is: Neither of them have Self-existence, or a Fecundity of Nature, which are
thought great Perfections in the Father; but the Son is not of himself, but
begotten of his Father; nor is the Spirit of himself, but proceeds from Father
and Son; and neither of them have a Son, or Spirit of their own, as the Father
has.

All this I readily grant; for it is the Catholic Faith, that the Father is
(...), so a Father, that he never was a Son, and the Son (...), so a Son, that
he never was, nor can be a Father, and so of the Holy Spirit; That there is but
One Father, not Three Fathers; One Son, not Three Sons; One Holy Ghost, not
Three Holy Ghosts, as the Athanasian Creed teaches.

This proves indeed, as we all own, that neither the Son, nor Spirit, are
absolutely God, an Absolute Divinity, as the Father is, but only Divine
Processions; an Absolute Divinity has a Fecundity of Nature; Absolute, Original
Mind, according to this Hypothesis must have its Word and Spirit, in the Unity
of its Nature; but the Word being no Absolute Nature, cannot beget another Word,
nor the Spirit another Spirit. So that this Objection only delivers us from the
Charge of Tritheism, by proving Father, Son, and Holy Ghost to be but One
Divinity, One God: For if the Son were as absolutely God, as the Father is,
there is no account to be given, why he should not beget a Son, as his Father
did him, as we see it is among Men, where the Son begets a Son, and becomes a
Father, and thus there could be no possible end of Divine Generations; but
these are Generations ad extra, which give as complete and absolute a Nature,
and absolute Subsistence to the Son, as the Father has; but Internal, Essential
Relations are in the Individual Unity of Nature, and therefore cannot multiply,
when Nature has all that is essential to it. So that Self-existence and
Generation do not belong to the Character of a Son; and with the Catholic
Church, we teach, That the Son of God is God, only as the Son; and it would be
Heresy to ascribe the peculiar Prerogatives of the Father to him: And then it
can be no Objection against the Divinity of the Son, that he has not what is
peculiar and proper only to the Person of the Father, as Self-existence and
Generation is.

Self-existence, Self-origination, to have no cause of his Being, I grant, is
essential to the Idea of a God: And Eternal and Necessary Existence to the
Notion of any Person, who is in any sense God; for he, who ever began to be,
and subsists precariously, can in no sense be God. But then though
Self-existence be essential to the Notion of an Absolute Divinity, yet a
Person, who is a Son, and therefore not Self-originated, but eternally begotten
of a Self-originated Father, and subsists eternally and necessarily as an
Essential Procession and Relation in a Self-originated Nature, must be the Son
of God, and God the Son, True and Perfect God, as the Eternal, Necessary,
Essential Procession of a Self-originated Divinity. For what is internally and
essentially related to a Self-existent Nature, can be no Creature, and
therefore must be True and Perfect God.

Thus to proceed: The same Rule of speaking (if Men be peaceably and charitably
disposed to understand one another) will easily reconcile that late warm
Dispute, about One Substance, and Three Substances, in the Unity of the
Godhead; for the Dispute is the very same, in other words, with One Nature and
Three Persons.

The Nicene Fathers, who asserted the Homoousion, the One Nature and Substance
of Father, and Son, did not by this mean One Singular Substance, as I have
abundantly shown; and those who assert Three Substances in opposition to
Sabellianism, do not mean Three Absolute, nor Three divided and separated
Substances, but One Individual Substance, as there is One Individual Nature in
Three Substantial, Subsisting Persons. That is, There is but One Absolute
Substance, with Two Relative, Substantial Procefsions in the Individual Unity
of the same One Substance: Which the Schools make no scruple to call Three
Relative Substances. All Catholic Writers, both Ancient and Modern, own, that
the Father is Substance, the Son Substance, and the Holy Ghost Substance; but
yet are cautious of saying Three Substances; nor will they say, ter Vna, thrice
One Substance, because Number does not belong to the Nature, but to the
Persons; though at the same time they own, Aqu. p. 1. Quaest. 31. Art. 1.
that Deus trinus signifies tria supposita Deitatis.

These seem to be great Niceties, and Arbitrary Distinctions, without any
reason and foundation in Nature; for what difference is there between Three
Substances, and Three Relative Substances? For Relative Substances are
Substances. What difference between Three Substances, and tria supposita? when
suppositum is only another name for Substance; and so St. Hilary, as I have
observed, called them, tres substantias, and tria in substantia, Three
Substances, and Three in Substance. When there are Three, each of which is in
his own Person Substance, and neither of them each other, what difference is
there between saying, Tres in una substantia, and ter una substantia? Three in
One Substance, and thrice Once Substance? Marius Victorinus, as I observed
before, ventures to say, The Distinction between Real and Nominal Trinitarians
Exam. p. 24.
ter ipsa Substantia, (not ter una, as it is mistaken in a late Treatise, by
trusting too much to memory) thrice the very same Substance; now thrice the
same One Substance, is thrice One Substance; where the Number belongs to the
Essence and Substance, which is Aquinas's Objection against it.

But the whole Account of this must be resolved into the Distinction between
Absolute and Relative. Substance, when it stands by it self, signifies
Absolutely, and so Three Substances are Three Absolute Substances; Three Human
Substances, Three Humanities; and Three Divine Substances, Three Divinities;
and therefore we must not without great caution, say Three Substances in the
Trinity, for fear of asserting Three Gods; but yet we must own, that each
Person is True and Perfect Substance; and both the Fathers and Schools own
this; and Three in Substance are Three Substances, but not Three Absolute but
Relative Substances, Three Subsisting Relations in the Unity of the Divine
Essence and Substance: Though, as I have more than once observed, in proper
speaking, we cannot say Three Relative Substances; for though the Father speaks
a Relation to the Son, and Holy Spirit, it is as he is the Fountain of the
Deity, Original, Absolute, Divinity, Essence, Substance, in his own Person, not
a Relative Subsistence; and therefore in the Blessed Trinity, there is One
Absolute Substance, Absolute Divinity, and Two Relative Substances, as there
are Two Internal Substantial Relations in the Unity of the same Substance. And
to prevent Mistakes, I must here observe, That by Absolute we do not mean
Complete and Perfect, for so the Son is Absolute Substance, and the Holy Spirit
Absolute Substance, Complete and Perfect Substance, as each of them in his own
Person is True and Perfect God; in which Sense St. Austin tells us, that
persona ad se dicitur, that Person is predicated absolutely; that every Person,
as considered in himself, is a Person, and not merely as related to another;
but when we say, that there is but One Absolute Substance in the Godhead, by
Absolute we mean Original, as I have already explained it, as distinguished
from Relative Processions, as the Original is distinguished from the Image;
though the Image, if a Living, Subsisting Image, is as Complete and Perfect
Nature and Substance, as the Original is. And this is the only difference I
know, between Substance, Nature, Essence, and Suppositum, Subject, (...), Res,
(...), Thing, Being, (...), Subsistence, and the like: That the first signify
Absolutely, or as the Schools speak, the Form; that is, an Original Substance,
Nature, and Essence; and therefore these must not be multiplied in the
Divinity, by saying Three Substances, Natures, or Essences, for fear of a
Diversity or Number of Divinities, and Gods. The other Terms, though they do
not in common use signify Relatively, as Subject, Suppositum, Thing, Being,
Subsistence, do not, yet they signify any thing that really is, that has a
Complete, Actual Subsistence of its own, and therefore are applicable, to all
substantial relative Processions, which are complete Subsistencies, Things,
Beings, as well as to original Nature and Substance: And both the Fathers and
Schools for this reason owned the Three Divine Persons to be Three Things,
Three Beings, Tres Entes, Tria Entia, Tres Res, (...); and scruple not the use
of any such transcendental Terms, as do not necessarily multiply the absolute
and original Form.

Thus the One Substance of the Godhead either signifies the absolute Divinity
of the Father, and this is but One, and can never be Ter Vna, Thrice One; or it
signifies the One individual undivided Divinity of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
that is, the absolute Divinity of the Father, with his internal essential
Processions in the perfect Unity and Identity of Nature, and this it is but One
Substance, for there is but One Individual Nature; not Ter Vna, but Tres in
Vna; not Thrice One Substance, but Three in One Undivided Nature and Substance;
(...), which I have sometimes, not so properly, translated a Thrice subsisting
Monad, but it is a Monad with Three Hypostases; which, in other words, is One
Nature and Three Persons; not One singular Nature Thrice subsisting (which I
cannot understand), but One individual Nature, and Three subsisting Hypostases;
Vna Substantia, non Vnus Subsistens; One Substance, not One that subsists: This
Individual Nature subsists but once; but in the Individual Unity of the
Father's Essence and Godhead, are those Eternal, Substantial, Subsisting
Processions, the Hypostases of the Son, and Holy Spirit. And in this sense the
One Individual Substance of the Divinity may properly enough be styled Ter
ipsa, or Ter Vna Substantia; Thrice the same One Substance, not Thrice One
Absolute Substance, in which sense Aquinas rejected it; but Tria Supposita
Vnius Substantiae, or Deitatis; which is One Substance, by the individual
Unity, and invariable Sameness and Identity of Nature; as I have shown above.

Thus that warm Dispute among the Schoolmen, about one Absolute Subsistence and
Existence in the Trinity, and Three Relative Subsistencies and Existences,
which is managed with so much perplexing Subtilty, as far as I can understand
any thing by it, may easily be composed after the same manner. For there is but
One Absolute Being and Nature in the Divinity, and therefore there can be but
One Absolute Subsistence and Existence, as Absolute signifies, not Complete and
Perfect, but, to subsist and exist as an Original, which in the Godhead
signifies a self-originated Subsistence and Existence: But then to deny all
relative Subsistencies and Existencies, is to deny the complete Subsistence and
Existence of the Son and Spirit, who are essential Relations in the Unity of
the Father's Godhead, and therefore subsist not as Originals, but as Relatives,
which is the meaning of a Relative Subsistence. There is but One Absolute
Divinity, and Two Relative Processions, and therefore in this sense, but One
Absolute, and Two, not Three, Relative Subsistencies; which seems fairly to
divide the Question between them.

Thus, once more: It is a known Rule of speaking in this Mystery, That
Substantives must be predicated in the Singular Number, Adjectives will admit a
Plural Predication; and the same difference is made between Abstract and
Concrete Terms. There are not Three Gods, but Tres Deit atem habentes, there
are Three who have the Divinity; not Three Omnipotencies, or Three
Omnisciencies, but Three who are Omnipotent and Omniscient. And the approved
reason for this is, That Substantives and Abstract Terms, signify the Nature,
Essence, and Form, and to multiply them, is to multiply Natures; but Adjectives
immediately signify the Subjects, Suppositums, and Persons, and only connote
the Nature and Form, which multiplies the Persons, but not the Nature. Now
though I understand what is meant by this, when applied to the Divinity, yet I
never could understand this Reason for it; for there is no such difference
between Substantive and Adjective Predications in any other Case; Three men,
and Three, who have Human Nature, signify the very same thing, and multiply the
Form, as well as the Persons; Three, who have Human Nature, are truly and
properly Three men; and then the mere difference between Substantives and
Adjectives cannot be a good Reason, why Three, who have the Divine Nature, are
not Three Gods. But the difference between an Absolute and Relative Predication
does give an account of this. Substantives and Abstract Terms always signify
the Form, as the Schools speak, that is, an Absolute and Original Nature, and
in this Sense Number multiplies Nature, as well as Persons, and Three Gods are
Three Absolute Original Divinities, as wellas Three Divine Persons; and thus it
is as to Adjective Predications in all Creatures, as I observed before, because
there is no such distinction in Creatures between an Absolute Nature, and
Internal Subsisting Processions in the Unity and Identity of Nature; and when
Nature always signifies the Original Form, a Substantive or Adjective
Predication can make no difference: but where there is such a distinction, as
there is in the Divinity, Substantives and Adjectives do most aptly represent
it, because Adjectives admit of a Relative Predication, and may signify a
Person, who has the Divine Nature, as an Internal, Subsisting Procession in the
Divinity, but is not the Absolute Divinity, nor in an Absolute Sense God, but
the Son of God, and the Spirit of God.

Indeed in such Forms of Speech we must have more regard to the Absolute or
Relative Signification, than to the Substantive or Adjective Form of the Words.
Adjectives in an Absolute Sense must no more be multiplied than Substantives,
which I take to be an easier Account of the tres aeterni, and unus aeternus in
the Athanasian Creed, than to turn it with Aquinas into tria aeterna, and unum
aeternum. For Three Eternals, whether Substantives or Adjectives, in an
Absolute Sense are Three Gods; Three Eternal, Three Intelligent, Three
Omniscient Persons, in an Absolute Sense, are Three Eternities, Three
Omnisciences, and in this Sense there is but unus aeternus, One Eternal Self
Originated Person, as there is but One God: and on the other hand, Deus or God,
though a Substantive, may signify Relatively, as it does in the Nicene Creed,
God of God; and in this Sense some of the Schoolmen, thought it very Orthodox
to say Three Gods, if we explained in what Sense we meant it, as I observed
above, Tertullian did, Ecce duos deos, though at the same time he rejects the
use of such Forms, for their ambiguous Signification which might betray men
into Polytheism. And if God may have a Relative Signification, so may Mind and
Spirit too, and then Three Minds and Spirits is as Orthodox, as Three that have
an Intelligent and Spiritual Nature.

In short; as far as I can hitherto observe, all the Catholic Rules of
Speaking relating to this Mystery must be resolved into this distinction of
Absolute and Relative: This is the only distinction we know of in the Godhead,
and this we as certainly know there is, as we know, that there is an Eternal
Father, who has an Eternal Son, and an Eternal Spirit; One Absolute,
Self-Originated Divinity, with its Internal, Essential Processions in the
Individual Unity and Identity of Nature: and if this be the Unity and
Distinction of the Divinity, this must be our Rule of Speaking also, to have a
due regard to the One Absolute Nature, and the Relative Processions of the
Godhead; which will secure us both from a Sabellian Singularity, and a
Tritheistick Trinity of Absolute Divinities.

The CONCLUSION. With a short Application to the Socinians.
I Proposed one thing more to be considered in relation to this Subject; viz.
Whether the Catholic Faith of a Real and Substantial Trinity, can be as
reasonably and intelligibly explained by the Notion of One Singular Substance
in the Divinity, as by asserting Three Personal Substances or Suppositums: And
whether the Singularity of the Divine Essence in this Notion, delivers the
Asserters of it from any Inconveniences and Objections, which the contrary
Opinion is thought liable to. But, I hope, after what I have already said,
there is no occasion for this, and I will not needlessly revive old Quarrels.
Let but Men sincerely and heartily believe in Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
Three Eternal, Infinite, Substantial, Living, Intelligent, Omnipotent, All-wise
Persons, each of which is in his own Person True and Perfect God, and all Three
but One Divinity, and One God; and I will dispute with no such Orthodox
Christians concerning the Philosophy of the Divine Nature, which is so
infinitely above our comprehension. There may be a necessity for such Disputes,
when we have to do with Heretics, who ridicule the Catholic Faith as
contradictions and absurd; but when Men agree in the Faith, such Disputes are
of no use to them, and may prove of dangerous consequence; for there are too
many, who will be sooner disputed out of their Faith, than out of their
Philosophy; which should teach all Catholic Christians, as much as it is
possible, to silence all Disputes amongst themselves, which their common
Adversaries are so apt to improve into Skepticism, Infidelity, or Heresy.

And therefore for a Conclusion, I shall only take a brief Review of the
Doctrine of the Fathers concerning this Article of a Trinity in Unity, and
apply it in a few words to our Socinian Adversaries.

The Faith of the Catholic Church taught by Christ and his Apostles is, that
there is but One God; but this One God is a Father, who has an Eternal Son, and
an Eternal Spirit, in the Essential Unity of the same Undivided and
Undiversified Godhead: And this is the Faith which all the Catholic Fathers
have owned and taught in their several Ages. The whole Christian Church
Baptizes, as our Savior commanded, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost; and this is the Rule of their Faith, to believe in
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: A plain, simple Faith, could Men have been
contented to believe God concerning himself.

Let our Socinian Adversaries tell us, what there is absurd, impossible, or
contradictious in this Faith? Will they venture to say, That it is absurd or
contradictious, that God should have a Son? No! in some sense they will allow
this true; they themselves believe in Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; they
acknowledge Jesus Christ to be the Son of God, as he is frequently called in
Scripture, and that in a higher sense, than any other Man is the Son of God;
but that he is but a Man after all, though advanced by God to Divine Honors,
above all Principalities and Powers, and made the Judge both of the Quick and
of the Dead; and this they affirm to be all that the Scripture means, in
calling Christ the Son of God.

But this is not the present Dispute: They know that the Catholic Church
believed otherwise, that Christ is the Eternal Son of God, begotten of his
Father before all worlds, God of God, very God of very God; and they know also,
that thus the Catholic Fathers expounded those Texts which concern the Sonship
and Divinity of our Savior; and they cannot but confess, That they are very
capable of such an Exposition; nay, that it is very difficult to put any other
sense upon many Texts; and the only reason why they reject these Catholic
Expositions, is the pretended Absurdity and Contradiction of the Catholic
Faith. Here then we join issue with them, and desire them to show us, what is
impossible or contradictious in this Faith?

That there is something incomprehensible in this Mystery, that is, something
which we have no Natural adequate Ideas of, we readily acknowledge with the
whole Catholic Church; and some of our Adversaries grant, That it is possible
for a thing to be, Reply to theSecond Defense of the Twenty eight Propositions,
p. 16.
whereof we have no Idea; and then it seems to me very unreasonable to add, but
we are no ways concerned, nor can we Reason or Discourse about those things
whereof we have no Ideas: For the direct contrary seems to be the more natural
consequence, that if God thinks fit to reveal such things to us, of which we
have no Ideas, we are concerned and obliged to believe them; for if they may be
true, they are the proper Objects of Faith, though they want the Evidence of
Natural Ideas But I do not intend to dispute this now, but refer them to the
Bishop of Worcester' s Answer to Mr. Lock' s Second Letter; and to a late
Sermon, and its Vindication, Concerning the Danger of Corrupting the Faith by
Philosophy. What I have now to say, is of another Nature, viz. That we have an
Idea of a Trinity in Unity, and such an Idea, as contains nothing absurd,
impossible, or contradictious in it: That very Idea, which I have so largely
explained, One Absolute Divinity, with Two Eternal, Essential Processions, in
the Unity and Identity of Nature. The Eternal Father, Eternal Self-originated
Mind, with his Eternal Word, his Eternal Son, and the Eternal Spirit of Father
and Son.

This is that Idea which the Scripture gives us of it, and which the Catholic
Church has always taught: Every Man may understand what is meant by it, and
therefore it is not Jargon and Nonsense; and I think I have sufficiently
vindicated it from Tritheism and Contradiction, and have no more to say of that
nature, till I hear what they have to object against what is already said; and
when they come to consider this Matter again, as Men that shall certainly be
called to an Account for it in this World, as well as in the next, I hope they
will see reason to grow out of conceit with their own Philosophy, about
Emanations and Processions, a Priority of Time, and Priority of Nature,
Self-Existence and Necessary Existence, and such like Arian Objections, which
were made and answered many Ages since, and which they may find sufficiently
answered in this Treatise.

This brings back the Dispute to Scripture, where the last Appeal must lie in
all such Matters, without appealing for the Sense of Scripture to Natural Ideas
and Philosophy: And if the Interpretations of the Catholic Fathers were of any
Authority with these Men, I have already shown how they expounded Scripture,
which will always be a venerable Authority to modest Men and sober Christians,
how much soever it be despised by Heretics. But it is time to put an end to
this Treatise; we may consider their Expositions of Scripture some other time.

THE END.
DR. Sherloc^, Dean of St. Paul's Vindication of the Doctrine of the Trinity.
Third Edition. Quarto

-- Apology for Writing against Socinians. Quarto.

-- The Danger of Corrupting the Faith by Philosophy. A Sermon. Quarto.

-- A Vindication of the Sermon, in Answer to some Socinian Remarks.

An Answer to the Animad versions on the Dean of St. Paul's Vindication of the
Trinity. By I. B. A. M. Quarto.

A Defense of the Dean of St. Paul's Apology for Writing against Socinians.
Quarto.

A Defense of Dr. Sherlock's Notion of a Trinity in Unity. Quarto.

The Distinction between Real and Nominal Trinitarians examined; in Answer to a
Socinian Pamphlet. Quarto. All Printed for William Rogers.


