THE CASE OF THE ALLEGIANCE DUE TO Sovereign Powers, Further Considered, and
DEFENDED: WITH A more particular Respect to the Doctrine of NON-RESISTANCE and
PASSIVE-OBEDIENCE.

TOGETHER, With a Seasonable Persuasive to our New Dissenters.

By WILL. SHERLOCK, D. D. Master of the Temple.

LONDON, Printed for W. Rogers, 1691.

DR. Sherlock's DEFENSE OF HIS CASE of ALLEGIANCE, etc.

THE CASE OF THE ALLEGIANCE DUE TO Sovereign Powers, DEFENDED, etc.
THere is nothing more evident, than that GOD set up a Supreme and Sovereign
Power in the Jewish Nation, as could not, and ought not to be resisted by the
Fundamental Laws of their Government; not that the Supreme and Sovereign Power
is always to be in a single Person, but that wherever it is, it is
irresistible; and that whenever this Supreme Power by the Laws of the Nation is
invested in a single person, such a Prince must not, upon any Pretense
whatsoever, be resisted.

To prove this, I shall begin with Examples out of the Old Testament.

The first Governor God set over the Children of Israel, when he brought them
out of the Land of Egypt, was Moses; and I think I need not prove how sacred
and irresistible his Authority was. This is sufficiently evident in the
Rebellion of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, against Moses and Aaron, when God
caused the Earth to open her Mouth and swallow them up, Numb. 16. And least
this should be thought an extraordinary cafe, Moses and Aaron being
^xtraordinary persons, immediately appointed by God, and governed by his
immediate Direction, the Apostle St. Jude alleges this Example against those
in his days, who were turbulent and factious, who despised Dominions, and
spoke evil of Dignities, Jud. v. 11. which he could not have done, had not this
Example extended to all ordinary as well as extraordinary Cases; had it not
been a lasting Testimony of God's Displeasure against all those who oppose
themselves against the Sovereign Powers. But Moses was not always to rule over
them, and therefore God expressly provides for a Succ^ssion of Sovereign Powers,
to which they must all submit. The ordinary Sovereign Power of the Jewish
Nation aft^r Moses's death, was devolved either on the High Priest, or those
extraordinary persons, whom God was pleased to raise up, such as Joshua, and
the several Judges, till in Samuel's days it settled in their Kings. For, as
for the Jewish Sanhedrim, whose Power is so much extolled by the Jewish
Writers, who are all of a late date, many years since the destruction of
Jerusalem, and therefore no competent Witnesses of what was done so many Ages
before; it does not appear from any Testimony of Scripture, that there was any
such Court of Judicature, till after their return from the Babylonish Captivity.

But yet God took care to secure the Peace and good Government of the Nation,
by appointing such a Power as should receive the last Appeals, and whose
Sentence in all Controversies should be final and uncontrollable; as you may
see in the 17th. of Deuteronomy 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. ver. There were inferior
Magistrates and Judges appointed in their several Tribes and Cities, which
Moses did by the advice of Jeth^o his Father-in-law, and by the approbation of
God, Exodus 18. But as the Supreme Power was still reserved in the hands of
Moses, while he lived, so it is here secured to the High Priest or Judges after
his death; for, it is expressly appointed, That if those inferior Judges could
not determine the Controversy, they should come unto the Priests and Levites;
that is, the Priests of the Tribe of Levi, (who by the 12. ver. appears only to
be the High Priests) and to the Judge that shall be in those days; that is, if
it shall be at such a time, when there is an extraordinary Judge raised by God
(for there were not always such Judges in Israel; as is evide^t to any one who
reads the Book of Judges) and of them they should enquire, and they shall show
the sentence of judgment, and thou shall do according to the sentence which
they of that place (which the Lord shall chu^^) shall show thee; and thou shall
observe to do according to all they shall inform thee.

Where the Place which God shall choose, signifies the Place which he should
appoint for the Ark of the Covenant, and for the L^vitic^l Worship; which was
the place where the High Priest, and the chief Judge or Ruler of Israel, when
there was any such person, had their ordinary residence; which was first at
Shilo, and afterward at Jerusalem.

The Authority of the chief Priests, or of the Judge, when there was one, in
those days, was as absolute Authority as the most absolute Monarch in the World
can challenge, v. 12. That Disobedience to their last and final Determination,
whatever the cause be, shall be punished with Death: And what place can there be
for Resistance in such a Constitution of Government as this? It is said indeed,
in v. 11. according to the sentence of the Law, which they shall teach thee,
and according to the judgment that they shall tell thee, thou shall do. And
hence some conclude, that they were not bound to abide by their Sentence, nor
were punishable if they did not, but only in such cases, when they gave
Sentence according to the Law of God. But these Men do not consider, that the
matter in controversy is supposed to be doubtful, and such as could not be
determined by the inferior Courts, and therefore is submitted to the decision
of the Supreme Judge, and as he determined, so they must do, and no man, under
the penalty of Death, must presume to do otherwise: Which takes away all
liberty of judging from private persons, though this Supreme Judge might
possibly mistake in his Judgment, as all human Judicatures are liable to
mistakes; but it seems God Almighty thought it necessary, that there should be
some final Judgment, from whence there should be no Appeal, notwithstanding the
possibility of a ^istake in it.

So that there was a Supreme and Sovereign, that is, unaccountable and
irresistible Power in the Jewish Nation appointed by God himself; for indeed it
is not possible that the public Peace and Security of any Nation should be
preserved without it. And I think it is as plain, That when the Jews would have
a King, their Kings were invested with this supreme and irresistible Power; for
when they desired a King, they did not desire a mere nominal and titular King,
but a King to judge them, and to go out before them, and fight their Battles;
that is, a King who had the Supreme and Sovereign Authority, 1 Samuel 8.6, 19,
20. a King who should have all that Power of Government, excepting the peculiar
Acts of the Priestly Office, which either their High Priest or their Judges had
before.

And therefore, when Samuel tells them what shall be the manner of their King,
v. 11. though what he says does necessarily suppose the translation of the
sovereign and irresistible Power to the Person of their King, yet it does not
suppose that the King had any New Power given him, more than what was exercised
formerly by their Priests and Judges. He does not deterr them from choosing a
King, because a King should have greater Power, and be more unaccountable and
irresistible than their other Rulers were; for Samuel himself had had as
sovereign and irresistible a Power as any King, being the Supreme Judge in
Israel, whose Sentence no man could disobey or contradict, but he incurred the
Penalty of Death, according to the Mosaical Law. But the reason why he
dissuades them from choosing a King, was because the external Pomp and
Magnificence of Kings was like to be very chargeable and oppressive to them. He
will take your Sons, and appoint them for himself, for his Chariots, and to be
his Horsemen, and some shall run before his Chariots. And he will appoint him
Captains over thousands, and Captains ov^r fif^ies, and will set them to ear
his Ground, and to reap his Harvest. And thus in several particulars he
acquaints them what Burdens and Exactions they will bring upon themselves by
setting up a King, which they were then free from: And if any Prince should be
excessive in such Exactions, yet they had no way to help themselves: They must
not resist, nor rebel against him, nor expect, that what Inconvenience they
might find in Kingly Government, God would relieve and deliver them from it,
when once they had chose a King: Ye shall cry out in that day, because of your
King which ye have chosen you, and the Lord will not hear you in that day, v.
18. That is, God will not alter the Government for you again, how much soever
you may complain of it.

This, I say, is a plain Proof that there Kings were invested with that
Sovereign Power which must not be resisted, though they oppress their Subjects
to maintain their own State, and the Grandeur and Magnificence of their
Kingdom. But I cannot think that these words contain the Original Grant and
Charter of Regal Power, but only the translation of that Power which was
formerly in their High Priests or Judges, to Kings. Kings had no more Power
than their other Governors had; for there can be no Power greater than that
which is irresistible; but th^s Power in the hands of Kings was likely to be
more burdensome and oppressive to them, than it was in the hands of their
Priests and Judges, by reason of their different way of living; which is the
only Argument Samuel uses to dissuade them from transferring the Supreme and
Sovereign Power to Princes. And therefore I rather choose to translate Mishpat,
as our Translators do, by the manner of the King, than as other learn^d men do,
by the right of the King, thereby understanding the Original Charter of Kingly
Power: for it is not a Regal Power which Samuel here blames, which is no other
but the very same which he himself had, while he was Supreme Judge of Israel;
but their pompous way of living, which would prove very oppressive and
burdensome to them, and b^ apt to make them complain, who had not been used to
such Exactions.

Let us now proceed to consider, how sacred and irresistible the Persons and
Authority of Kings were under the Jewish Government; and there cannot be a
plainer Example of this, than in the Case of David. He was himself anointed to
be King after Readiness death, but in the mean time was grievously persecuted by
Saul, pursued from one place to another, with a design to take away his Life.
How now does David behave himself in this extremity? What course does he take
to secure himself from Saul? Why, he takes the only course that is left a
Subject; he flies for it, and hides himself from Saul in the Mountains and
Caves of the Wilderness; and when he found he was discovered in one place, he
removes to another: He kept Spies upon Saul, to observe his motions, not that
he might meet him to give him Battle, or to take him at an advantage, but that
he might keep out of his way, and not fall unawares into his hands.

Well, but this wa^ no thanks to David, because he could do no otherwise. He
was too weak for Saul, and not able to stand against him; and therefore he had
no other Remedy but Flight. But yet we must consider, that David was a Man of
War, he slew Goliath, and fought the Battles of Israel with great success; he
was an admired and beloved Captain, which made Saul so jealous of him; the Eyes
of Israel were upon him for their next King, and how easily might he have
raised a potent and formidable Rebellion against Saul! But he was so far from
this, that he invites no man to his assistance; and when some came uninvited,
he made no use of them in an offensive or defensive War against Saul. Nay, when
God delivered Saul two several times into David's hands, that he could as
easily have killed him, as have cut off the skirts of his garment at Engedi, 1 Samuel 24. or as have taken that spear away which stuck in the ground at his
bolster, as he did in the hill of Hachilah, 1 Samuel 26. Yet he would neither
touch Saul himself, nor suffer any of the People that were with him to do it,
though they were very importunate with him for liberty to kill Saul; nay,
though they urged him with an Argument from Providence, that it was a plain
Evidence that it was the will of God that he should kill Saul, because God had
now delivered his Enemy into his hands, according to the promise He had made to
David* 1 Samuel 24.4.26. chapter ver. 8. We know what use some men have made of this
Argument of Providence, to justify all the Villainies they had a mind to act:
but David, it seems, did not think that an opportunity of doing evil, gave him
license and authority to do it. Opportunity, we say, makes a Thief, and it
makes a Rebel, and it makes a Murderer. No man can do any Wickedness, which he
has no opportunity of doing; and if the Providence of God, which puts such
opportunities into Men's hands, justifies the wick^dness they commit, no man can
be chargeable with any Guilt whatever he does; and certainly opportunity will
as soon justify any other Sin as Rebellion, and the Murder of Princes. We are
to learn our Duty from the Law of God, not from his Providence; at least, this
must be a settled Principle, that the Providence of God will never justify any
action which this Law forbids.

And therefore, notwithstanding this opportunity which God had put into his
hands to destroy his Enemy, and to take the Crown for his Reward, David
considers his Duty, remembers, that though Saul were his Enemy, and that very
unjustly, yet he was the Lord's Anointed. The Lord forbid, says he, that I
should do this unto my Master, the Lord's Anointed, to stretch forth my hand
against him, seeing he is the Lord's Anointed. Nay, he was so far from taking
away his Life, that his Heart smote him for cutting off the Skirt of his
Garment. And we ought to observe the Reason David gives, why he durst not hurt
Saul, Because he was the Lord's Anointed; which is the very Reason the Apostle
gives in the 13. Romans 12. Because the Powers are ordained of God, and he that
resists the Power, resists the ordinance of God. For to be anointed of God,
signifies no more, than that he was made King by God. Thus Josephus expounds
beinganointed by God, (...), one who had the Kingdom bestowed on him by God;
and in another place, One who was ordained by God: For it seems by this Phrase,
he looked upon the external Ceremony of Anointing, to be like Imposition of
Hands, which in other cases consecrated Persons to peculiar Offices: For this
external Unction was only a visible sign of God's designation of them to such
an Office; and when that was plain, they were as much God's Anointed without
this visible Unction as with it. Cyrus is called God's Anointed, though he
never was anointed by any Prophet, but only designed for his Kingdom by
Prophecy, 45. Isa. 1. And we never read in Scripture, that any Kings had this
external Unction, who succeeded in the Kingdom by right of Inheritance, unless
the Title and Succession were doubtful; and yet they were the Lord's Anointed
too, that is, were placed in the Throne by him. So that this is an eternal
Reason against resisting* Sovereign Princes, that they are set up by God, and
invested with his Authority, and therefore their Persons and Authority are
sacred.

But yet there are some men, who from the example of David, think they can
prove the lawfulness of a defensive, though not an offensive War. For David,
when he fled from Saul, made himself Captain of four hundred men, 1 Samuel 22.2.
which number soon increased to six hundred, 1 Samuel 23.13. and still every day
increased by new additions, 1 Chronicles. 12.1. Now, why should he entertain these
men, but to defend himself against the Forces of Saul? that is, to make a
defensive War whenever he was assaulted by him.

1. In answer to this, I obs^rve, That David invited none of these men after
him, but they came Volunteers after a beloved Captain and General; which shows
how formidable he could have made himself* when such numbers resorted to him of
their own accord.

2. When he had them, he never used them for any Hostile Acts against Saul, or
any of his Forces; he never stood his ground, when he heard Saul was coming,
but always fled, and his Men with him; Men who were never used to flee, and
were very ready to have served him against Saul himself, would he have
permitted them. And, I suppose they will not call this a Defensive War, to fly
before an Enemy, and to hide themselves in Caves and Mountains; and yet this
was the only Defensive War which David made with all his Men about him: Nay,
all that he would make, according to his professed Principles, That it was not
lawful to stretch out his hand against the Lord's Anointed. And when these men
are pursued, as David was, by an enraged and jealous Prince, we will not charge
them with Rebellion, though they fly before him by thousands in company.

3. Yet there was sufficient reason why David should entertain these men, who
voluntarily resorted to him, though he never intended to use them against Saul:
for some of them served for Spies, to observe Readiness motions, that he might not
be surprised by him, but have timely notice to make his escape. And the very
presence of such a number of men about him, without any hostile act, preserved
him from being seized on by some officious persons, who otherwise might have
delivered him into Readiness hands. And he being anointed by Samuel to be King
after Readiness death, this was the first Step to his Kingdom, to have such a
Retinue of valiant Men about him; which made his advancement to the Throne more
easy, and discouraged any opposition which might otherwise been made against
him; as we see it proved in the event, and have reason to believe that it was
thus ordered by God, for that very end. It is certain, that Gad the Prophet,
and Abiathar the Priest, who was the only man who escaped the fury of Saul,
when he destroyed the Priests of the Lord, were in David's Retinue; and that
David enterprized nothing, without first asking Counsel of God: But he who had
anointed him to be King, now draws Forces after him, which after Readiness death
should facilitate his advancement to the Kingdom.

2 dly, It is objected further, That David intended to have stayed in Keilah,
and to have fortified it against Saul, had not he been informed, That the Men
of the City would have saved themselves, by delivering him up to Saul, 1 Samuel
23. Now, to maintain any strong Hold against a Prince, is an act of War; though
it be but a defensive War. And I grant it is so, but deny that there is any
Appearance, that David ever intended any such thing. David and his Men, by
God's appointment and direction, had fought with the Phil^^tins, and smote them
with a great slaughter, and saved Keilah from them; and as it is probable, did
intend to have stayed some time in Keilah: But David had heard that Saul
intended to come against Keilah, to destroy the City, and take him, and
enquires of the Lord about it, and receives an answer, That Saul would come
against the City. He enquires again, whethe^ the Men of Keilah would deliver
him up to Saul, and was an^wered, That they would. And upon this, he and his
Men leave Keilah, and betake themselves to the strong Holds in the Wilderness.

But now, it is likely, That if David had had any design to have fortified
Keilah against Saul, he would have been afraid of the Men of the City: He had
six hundred Men with him in Keilah, a victorious Army, which had lately
destroyed the Philistines, who oppressed them; and therefore could easily have
kept the Men of Keilah too in awe, if he had pleased, and have put it out of
their power to deliver him to Saul. But all that David designed was, to have
stayed there as long as he could, and, when Saul had drawn nigh, to have
removed to some other place: But when he understood the Treacherous
Inclinations of the Men of Keilah, and being resolved against all acts of
Hostility, he hastened his remove, before Saul drew near.

So that these men must find some other Example than that of David, to
countenance their Rebellion against their Prince: for David never rebelled,
never fought against Saul; but when he had a very potent Army with him, he and
his Men always fled, and ^^d themselves in the Wilderness and places of
difficult access.

The Sum is this: God, from the very beginning, set up such a Supreme and
Sovereign Power in the Jewish Nation, as could not, as ought not to be
resisted. This Power was at ^^rst in the hands of Moses, and when Korah and his
company rebelled against him, God vindicated his Authority by a miraculous
Destruction of those Rebels; for the Earth opened her mouth and swallowed them
up. Afterward, when they came into Canaan, the ordinary Exercise of his Power
was in the High Priests and Judges, whom God raised up, whose Sentence and
Judgment was final, and must not be resisted, under penalty of death, when the
Children of Israel desired a King, this sovereign and irresistible Power was
transferred to him, and settled in his Person. Saul was the first King who was
chosen by God, and anointed by Samuel; but for his Disobedience, was afterward
rejected by God, and David the Son of Jess^, was anointed King to succeed after
Readiness death: But in the mean time David was persecuted by Saul, who sought
after his Life. And though he himself was anointed by God, and Saul rejected by
him, yet he durst not p^rsist nor oppose him, nor defend himself by force
against the most unjust violence, but fled for his life, and hid himself in
Caves and Mountains. Nay, when Saul was delivered into his hands by God, he
durst not stretch out his hand against the Lord's Anointed.

Let us now consider what Christ and his Apostles taught and practiced about
Obedience to Sovereign Princes; whereby we may learn how far Christians are
obliged by these Laws of Subjection and Non-Resistance.

1. I shall consider the Doctrine of Christ, while he lived on Earth: And here
are several things very fit to be obser^^d.

First, We have no reason to suspect, that Christ would alter the Rights of
Sovereign Power, and the measures of Obedience and Subjection, which were fixed
and determined by God himself. This was no part of his Commission, to change
the external Forms and Polities of Civil Governments, which is an act of
Secular Power and Authority, and does not belong to a Spiritual Prince. He who
would not undertake to decide a petty Controversy, or to divide an Inheritance
between two contending Brethren, 12. Luke 13, 14. can we think that he would
attempt any thing of that vast consequence, as the Changes and Alterations of
Civil power, which would have unsettled the Fundamental Constitutions of all
the Governments of the World at that time?

Our Savior tells us, That he came not to destroy the Law and the Prophets,
but to fulfill it; to fill it up, to complete and perfect it; Mat. 5.17. that
is, to fulfill the anci^nt Types and Prophesies in his own person, to perfect
an external and ceremonial by a real and Evangelical Righ^^ousness; to perfect
the Moral Laws with new instances and degrees of Virtue; but He abrogated no
Moral Law, and therefore not the Laws of Obedience and Subjection to Princes,
which has always been reduced to the Fifth Commandment. Nay, he abrogated no
Laws, but by perfecting and fulfilling them; and therefore he could make no
alteration in the Doctrine of Non-R^sistance, which is as perfect Subjection as
can or ought to be paid to Sovereign Princes. His Kingdom was not of this
World, as he told Pilate: Though he was a King, he neither was an Enemy nor
Rival to Caesar; but had he absolved his Disciples from their Obedience to
Princes, had he made it in any case lawful to Resist (which was so expressly
forbid the Jews by God himself, and which is such a contradiction to the very
Nation of Sovereign Power) he had been somewhat worse than a Rival to all the
Princes of the Earth; for though he had set up no Kingdom of his own, yet he
had pulled down theirs. Whereas he took great care that his Religion should
give no disturbance to the World, nor create any reasonable Jealousies and
Suspicions to Princes, who had been very excusable for their aversion to
Christianity, had he invaded the Rights and Royalties of their Crowns.

This makes it very improbable, that our Savior should make any Alterations in
Civil Powers, or abridge the Rights of Sovereignty; which is so foreign to his
design of coming into the World, and so incongruous to the Person which he
sustained; and yet he could not alter the Duties of Subjects, but he must alter
the Rights of Princes too; he must take away the Sovereign Power of Princes, at
the same time that he makes it lawful for Subjects in any case whatsoever to
resist. We may safely then conclude, That our Savior has left the Government
of the World as he found it: He has indeed given such admirable Laws, as will
teach Princes to govern, and Subjects to obey better; which is the most
effectual way to secure the public Peace and Happiness, to prevent the
Oppression of Subjects, and Rebellions against Princes: but he has not
interposed in new modelling the Governments of the World, which is not of such
consequence as some men imagine* It is not the external form of Government, but
the Fatherly Care, and Prudence, an^ Justice of Governors, and the dutiful
Obedience of Subjects, which can make any People happy. If Princes and Subjects
be good Christians, they may be happy under most forms of Government; if they
be not, they can be happy under none. Had our Savior given Subjects Liberty to
Resist, to Depose, to Murder Tyrannical Princes, he had done them no kindness
at all; for, to give liberty to Subjects to Resist, is only to proclaim an
Universal License to Factions and Seditions, and Civil Wars; and if any Man can
think this such a mighty Blessing to the World, yet methinks it is not a
Blessing proper for the Prince of Peace to give: But he who instructs Princ^s
to Rule as God's Ministers and Vicegerents, and to express a Fatherly Care and
Concernment for the Happiness of their Subjects, and that teaches Subjects to
reverence* and obey their Princes, as the Image of God, and quietly submit and
yield to his Authority, and that enforces these Laws, both on Princes and
Subjects, in the Name and Authority of God, and from the consideration of the
future Judgment, when Princes who abuse their Power, shall give an account of
it to their great Master, when Subjects who resist, shall receive to themselves
Damnation; and those who patiently and quietly suffer for God's sake, shall
have their Injuries redrest, and their Obedience rewarded; I say, such a person
as this takes a more effectual course to reform the Abuses of the Civil Power,
and to preserve good Government in the World* than all our wise Politicians and
State-menders, who think to reform the Government of the World by some
State-Spells and Charms, without reforming those who govern, and those who are
governed. This our Savior has done, and this is the best thing that could be
done, nay, this was all that he could do in this matter. He never usurpt any
Civil Power and Authority, and therefore could not new model the Government of
the World: He never offers any external Force and Compulsion to make Men obey
his Laws, and therefore neither forces Princes* to Rule well, nor Subjects to
Obey; but he has taken the same care of the Government of the World, as he has
done of all the other Duties of Piety and Virtue; that is, he has given very
good Laws, and has threatened those that break them with eternal punishments;
and as the Laws and Religion of our Savior prevail, so will the Governments of
the World mend, without altering the Model and Constitution of them.

2. But yet we have some positive Evidence what our Savior taught about
Obedience to the Higher Powers; I shall give you two Instances of it, which are
as plain and express as can be desired.

First, The first is that Answer our Savior gave to the Pharisees and
Herodians, when they consulted together to entangle him in his Talk, Mat.
22.15, etc. they come to him with great Ceremony and Address, as to an
infallible Oracle, to consult him in a very weighty Case of Conscience. They
express a great esteem and assurance of his Sincerity, and Faithfulness, and
Courage, as well as of his unerring Judgment, in declaring the Will of God to
them. Master, we know that thou art true* and teach the way of God in truth,
neither carest thou for any Man, for thou regardest not the person of Man: that
is, thou will not conceal nor pervert the Truth for fear nor favor: and then
they propose an insnaring Question to him; Tell us therefore, what think
thou? is it lawful to give Tribute to Caesar, or not? They thought it
impossible that he should give any Answer to this, which would not make him
obnoxious, either to the Roman Governors, if he denied that the Jews might
lawfully pay Tribute to Caes^r, or ^o the Pharisees and people if he affirmed
that they might: for there was a very potent Faction among them, who thought it
unlawful for the Jews to own the Authority or Usurpations of any Foreign
Prince, or to pay Tribute to him, as to their King* They being expressly forbid
by their Law, to set a stranger over them for their King, who is not their
Brother, (i. e.) who is not a natural Jew, Deuteronomy. 17.15. and it seems they could
not distinguish between their own voluntary Act in choosing a Stranger for their
King, (which was indeed forbid by their Law) and their submitting to a Foreign
Prince, when they were conquered by him. Our Savior, who knew their wicked
intention in all this, that they did not come with an honest design to b^
instructed in their Duty, but to seek an Advantage against him, expresses some
indignation at it; Why tempt ye me, ye Hypocrites? But yet, to return them an
Answer to that their Question, he bids them show him the Tribute-Money, that
is, the Money in which they used to pay Tribute, and enquires whose Image and
Superscription it had; for coining of Money was as certain a Mark of
Sovereignty, as making Laws, or the power of the Sword. Well, they acknowledge
that the Image and Superscription on the Tribute-Money was Caesar's; upon which
he replies, Render therefore unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto
God the things that are God's. The plain meaning of which Answer is this, That
since by the very Impres^ion on their Money, it is evident, that Caesar is
their Sovereign Lord, they must render to him all the Rights of Sovereignty,
among which, Tribute is one, as St. Paul tells us, Render therefore unto all
their dues, tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom
fear, honor to whom honor, Romans 13.7. Whatever is due to Sovereign Princes,
and does not interfere with their Duty to God, that they must give to Caesar,
who at this time was their Sovereign. In which Answer there are several things
observable.

1. That our Savior does not examine into Caesar's Right, nor ^ow he came by
this Sovereign Power; b^t as (...) found him in possession of it, so he leaves
him, and requires them to render to him all the Rights of Sovereignty.

2. That he does not particularly determine what the things of Caesar are, that
is, what his Right is* as a Sovereign Prince. Hence some men conclude, that
this Text can prove nothing; that we cannot learn from it, what our Savior's
Judgment was in this Point; that it is only a subtle Answer, which those who
ask the Question could make nothing of; which was a proper return to their
ensnaring Question. This I think is as great a Reproach to our Savior, as they
can well cast upon him, that He, who was the Wisdom of God, the great Pro^het
and Teacher of Mankind, should return as Sophistical and doubtful Answers as
the Heathen Oracles and that in a Case, which required, and would admit a very
plain Answer. It is true, many times our Savior, when He discourst of what
concerned His own Person, or the Mysteries of His Kingdom* which were not fit
at that time to be published in plain terms, used a Mistical Language; as when
he called his Body the Temple, or he taught them by Parables, which were not
obvious at the first hearing, but still what he said, had a certain and
determined sense, and what was obscure and difficult, he explained privately to
his Apost^es, that in due time they might explain it to others; but to assert,
as these men must do, that Christ gave them such an answer as signified
nothing, and which he intended they should understand nothing by, shows that
they are not so civil to our Savior as these Pharis^es and Herodians were, who
at least owned in compliment, Master we know that thou ar^ true. and teach
the way of God in Truth, neither carest thou for any Man, for thou regard^st
not the Person of Men.

But certainly the Pharisees did believe, that there was something in our
Saviors answer, for they marvelled, and left him, and went their way: And yet
those who had wit enough to ask such ensnaring Questions, could not be so dull
as to be put off wi^h a Sophistical Answer, (an Art below the gravity of our
Savior's Pers^n and Office) but would have urged it a little f^r^her, had they
not been sensible, that they were sufficiently answered, and had nothing to
reply.

For indeed can any thing be plainer than our Savior's Answer? They ask him
whether it were lawful to pay Tribute to Caesar? he does not indeed in express
words say, that they should pay Tribute to Caesar, but he gives them such an
Answer, as withal convinced them of the Reason and Necessity of it. He asks
whose Image and superscription was on the Tribute-Money; they tell him Caesar's;
from whence he infers, Render therefore unto Caesar the things that are
Caesar's. Therefore? Wherefore? because the Tribute-Money had Caesar's Image on
it; therefore they must render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's; which
certainly signifies that Tribute was one of those things which belonged to
Caesar, and must be rendered to him, as appeared by having Caesar's Image: Not
as if every thing that had Caesar's Mark and Stamp on it, did belong unto
Caesar, and must be given to him, (as some Men profanely enough, how wittily
soever they imagine, burlesque and Ridicule our Savior's Answer) for at this
Rate all the Money of the Empire, which bore his Image, was Caesar's; but the
Money which was stamped with Caesar's Image, and was the current Money of the
Nation, was a plain sign, as I observed before, that he was their Sovereign,
and paying Tribute was a known Right due to Sovereign Princes; and therefore
the very Money which they used, with Caesar's Image on it, resolved that
Question, not only of the lawfulness, but the necessity of paying Tribute: and
this was so plain an Answer, that the Pharisees were ashamed of their Question,
and went away without making any Reply; for they no more dared to deny that
Caesar was their King, than they thought he dared either to own or deny the
lawfulness of paying Tribute to Caesar. And this was all the subtilty of our
Savior's Answer

But then, our Savior not confining his Answer merely to the Case of paying
Tribute, but answering in general, That we must render to Caesar the things
that are Caesar's, extends this to all the Rights of Sovereign Princes, and so
becomes a standing Rule in all Cases, to give to Caesar what is Caesar's due.
And when our Savior commands us to render to Caesar the things which are
Caesar's, without telling us what Caesar's things are, this is so f^r from
making his Answer doubtful and ambiguous, and of no use in this present
Controversy, that it suggests to us three plain and natural Consequences,
which are sufficient to end this whole Dispute.

1. That our Savior did not intend to mak^ any alteration in the Rights of
Sove^aignty, but what Rights he found Sovereign Princes possessed of, he leaves
them in the quiet possession of; for had he intended to make any change in this
matter, he would not have given such a general Rule, to render to Caesar the
things which are Caesar 's, without specifying what these things are.

2. And therefore he leaves them to the known Laws of the Empire, to determine
what is Caesar's Right. Whatever is essential to the Nation of Sovereign Power,
whatever the Laws an^ Customs of Nations determine to be Caesar's Right, that
they must render to him; for he would make no alteration in this matter. So
that subjection to Princes, and Non-Resistance, is as plainly determined by our
Savior in this Law, as paying of Tribute; for Subjection and Non-Resistance is
as essential a Right of Sovereign Power, and as inseparable from the notion of
it, as any thing can be. So it is acknowledged by the Laws and Customs of
Nations; and so it is determined by the Apostle St. Paul; as I shall show
hereafter.

3. I observe farther, That when our Savior enjoins our Duty to our Prince,
with our Duty to our God, render to Caesar the things which are Caesar 's, and
to God, the things which are God's. He excepts nothing from Caesar's Rights,
which by the Laws of Nations is due to Sovereign Princes, but what is a
violation of, and an encroachment on God's Right and Sovereignty; that is, we
must pay all that Obedience and Subjection to Princes, which is consistent with
our Duty to God. This is the only limit our Savior sets to our Duty to
Princes. If they should command us to renounce our Religion, and worship false
gods; if they should challenge Divine Honors to themselves, as some of the
Roman Emperors did; this we must not do, because it is to renounce Obedience
and Subjection to God, who has a more Sovereign power, and a greater Right in
us than our Prince: But all Active and Passive Obedience, which is consistent
with a good Conscience toward God, and required of us by the Laws of our
Country, and the essential Rights of Sovereignty, is what we owe to our Prince,
and what by our Savior's Command we must render to him.

This, I hope, is sufficient for the explication of our Savior's Answer to the
Pharisees and Herodians; which evidently contains the Doctrine of Obedience and
Subjection to Princes, enforced on us by the Authority of our Savior himself.

Having seen what the Doctrine of our Savior was, let us now consider his
Practice: And we need not doubt, but our Savior lived as he preached. He taught
his Disciples by his Example, as well as by his Laws. His Life was the best
Comment upon his Sermons; was a visible Lecture of Universal Righteousness and
Goodness; and it is impossible to conceive a more perfect and absolute example
of Subjection and Non-Resistance, than our Savior has set us.

When our Savior appeared in the World, the Jews were very weary of the Roman
Yoke, and in earnest expectat^on of their Messiah, who, as they thought, would
restore the Kingdom again unto Ifrael; and this expectation of their Messiah,
whom they mistook for a Temporal Prince, made them very apt to join with any
one, who pretended to be the Messiah, and to rebel against the Roman
Government. Such most likely were Th^^d^s and Judas of Galilee, of whom we have
mention, Ast. 5.36, 37. an^ it is not impossible, but the Egyptian, who led
4000 men into the Wilde^n^ss, Act. 38. either pretended to be the Messiah, or
some forerunner of him: to be sure, such were those false Christ's, and false
P^ophets, of whom our Savior warns his Disciples, Mat. 24.23. Then if any man
shall s^y unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there; be^ieve him not.

This being the temper of the Jewish Nation at that time, so extremely inclined
to S^ditions and Rebellion against the Roman Powers, how easy had it been for
our Savior, had he pleased; to have made himself very potent and formidable?
How easy could he have gained even the Scribes and Pharisees to his party,
(whose great quarrel was at his meanness and poverty) would he once have
declared himself a Temporal Prince, and invaded the Throne? But he was so far
from this, that when he perceived the people had an intention to take him by
force; and make him a King, he withdrew himself privately from them, and
departed into a Mountain himself alone, John* 6.15. and yet I presume there
might have been as many plau^^ble preten^es to have justi^ied a Rebellion then,
as ever there were in any Nation since. He had at that time fed five thousand
men besides women and children, with five barley loaves, and two small fishes:
and what a formidable Enemy would he have been, who could Victual an Army by
Miracles, and could, when he pleased, conquer by the same miraculous Power
also? This the people, whom he had miraculously fed, were very sensible of, and
did hence conclude, That he was the Prophet that should come into the World,
and that it was time to take him, and set him upon the Throne: But though our
Savior was indeed the Messiah, yet he was not such a Messiah, as they
expected; he was not a Temporal Prince, and therefore would not countenance
their Rebellion against Caesar, though it were to make himself a King.

It is sufficiently known, That Christ submitted to the most unjust Sentence,
to the most ignominious and painful death, rather than resist the Higher
Powers, though he could so easily have called for Legions of Angels to his
rescue; but he went as a lamb to the slaughter, and as the sheep before the
shearer is dumb, so he opened not his mouth: when he was reviled, he reviled
not again: when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed himself to him who
judges righteously. He rebuked Peter when he drew his Sword in his defense,
and tells Pilate the reason why he was so easily apprehended, and used at their
pleasure, without any resistance and opposition, though he had been formerly
attended with such crowds of his Disciples; because he was no Temporal Prince,
and therefore did not require his Disciples to fight for him, as other Temporal
Princes used to do. Jesus answered, my Kingdom is not of this World: if my
Kingdom were of this world, then would my servants fight, that I should not be
delivered to the Jews; but now is my Kingdom not from hence, Joh. 18.36. Which
plainly shows, That our Savior's subjection was not matter of force and
constraint, because he wanted power to resist; but it was matter of choice,
that which was most agreeable to the nature of his Kingdom, which was not to be
propagated by carnal Weapons, but by Suffering and Death.

And when our Savior has set us such an Example as this, it is wonderful to
me, that any, who call themselves his Disciples, can think it lawful to rebel
against their Prince, and defend themselves from the most unjust Violence, by a
more unjust Resistance. But there are few men, who are contented to follow
Christ to the Cross; they do not like that part of his Example, and are willing
to persuade themselves, that they are not bound to imitate it. And there are
two things which I find urged by some men to this purpose, which must be
briefly considered.

1. That it is no wonder, that Christ suffered patiently and quietly, without
resisting the most unjust Violence, because he came into the World to die, and
to make his Soul an Offering for Sin. And how could so innocent a person die,
but by the Hands of Unjust and Tyrannical Powers? And it was inconsistent with
his Design of dying for Sin, to resist and oppose. This is the account our
Savior himself gives of his patient suffering. When St. Peter drew his Sword
in his defense, he tells him, Think thou that I cannot now pray to my
Father, and he shall pres^ntly give me more than twelve Legions of Angels? But
how then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be? Mat. 26.43,
54. And the Cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it? John 18.11.

Having thus concluded what the Doctrine and Example of o^r Savior was, about
subjection to the higher Powers, let us now consider the Doctrine and Example of
h^s Apostle St. Paul; not as if the Authority and Example of our Savior were
not sufficient, of it self, to make a Law, but stood in need of the
Confirmation and additional Authority of his own Apostles; but we might justly
suspect our selves mistaken in the Meaning of our Savior's words, or in the
Intention and Design of his Sufferings, had none of his Apostles, who were
immediately instructed by himself, and acquainted with the most secret
Mysteries of this Kingdom, ever preached any such Doctrine as this, of
Subjection to Princes. And therefore to give you the more abundant assurance of
this, I shall plainly show you, That the Apostles taught the same Doctrine, and
imitated the Example of their Master. St. Paul has as fully declared himself in
this matter, as it is possible any Man can do by words, Romans 13.1, 2. Let every
Soul be subject unto the higher powers, for there is no power but of God: the
powers that be, are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the Power,
resists the Ordinance of God; and they that resist, shall receive to
themselves Damnation.

This is a very express Testimony against Resistance, and therefore I shall
consider it at large; for there have been various Arts used to pervert every
word of it and to make this Text speak quite contrary to the Design and
Intention of the Apostle in it: and therefore I shall divide the words into
three ge^eral parts. 1. The Doctrine the Apostle instructs them in: Le^ every
soul be subject to the higher powers. 2. The reason why he proves and forces
this Doctrine: For there is no power but of God; the powers that be, are
ordained of God. Whoso^v^r therefore resists the Power, resists the
Ordinance of God. 3. The Punishment of such Resistance: And they that resist,
shall receive to themselves Damnation.

1. I shall begin with the Doctrine, That every Soul must be subject to the
higher powers. And here are three things to be explained: 1. Who are contained
under this general expression of every soul. 2. Who are meant by the higher
Powers. 3. What is meant by being subject.

1. Who are contained under this general expression of ^v^ry soul, which by an
ordinary Hebraism, signifies every man; for M^n is a compounded Creature of
Body and Soul, and either part of him is very often in Scripture put for the
whole. Some^imes Flesh, and sometimes Soul signifies the Man; and when every
soul is opposed to the higher powers, it must sig^ifie all Men, of what Rank or
Condition soever they be, who are not invested with this higher Power. Popes
and Bishops, and Bishops and Priests, as well spiritual as secular persons; the
whole Body of the people, as well as every single Individual: for, when every
Soul is commanded to be subject, without any exception or limitation, this must
reach them in all capacities and conditions.

The design of the Apostle, as you shall hear more presently, was to forbid all
Resistance of Sovereign Princes; and had he known of any men, who might
lawfully r^sist, he ought not to have expressed it in such general terms, as to
forbid all without exception. Had St. Paul known the Prerogative of St. Peter,
and his Successors the Bishops of Rome, would he have written to the C^ristians
of Rome, to be subje^t to their Emperors, without making any provision for the
greater Authority of their Bishops?

The reason he assigns why every soul must be subject to the higher Powers, is,
Because all powers are of God; so that whosoever is bound to be subject to God,
must be subject to their Prince, who is in God's stead. And this, I think, will
reach the Pope of Rome, as well as any private Christian; unless he will
pretend to have more Authority on Earth than God himself has; for the Prince
has God's Authority, and therefore cannot be resisted, but by a greater
Authority than God's. And, by the same reason, if the whole Body of the people
be subject to God, they must be subject to their Prince too, because he acts by
God's Au^hority and Commission. Were a Sovereign Prince the Peoples Creature,
that might be a good Maxim: Rex major singulis, sed minor universis; that the
King is greater than any particular Subject, but less than All together: but if
he be God's Minister, he is upon that account as much greater than All, as God
is.

And that the whole Body of the People, all together, as well as one by one,
are equally concerned in this Command, of being subject to the Higher Powers,
is evident, from this consideration: That nothing less than this will secure
the Peace and Tranquillity of Human Societies: The Resistance of single persons
is more dangerous to themselves than to the Prince, but a powerful Combination
of Rebels is formidable to the most puissant Monarchs. The greater number of
Subjects rebel against their Prince, the more too they distress his Government,
and threaten his Crown and Dignity, and his Person and Authority be sacred, the
greater the Violence is which is offered to him, the greater is his Crime.

Had the Apostle exhorted the Romans after this manner: Let no private and
single man be so foolish, as to rebel against his Prince, who will be too
strong for him; but if you can raise sufficient Forces to oppose against him;
if you can all consent to depose or murder him, this is very innocent* and
justifiable, nay, an Heroical Achievement, which becomes a free born people:
How would this secure the Peace and Quiet of the World? How would this have
agreed with what follows, That Princes are advanced by God, and that to resist
our Prince, is to resist the Ordinance of God, and that such men shall be
severely punished for it, in this World or the next? For, can the Apostle be
thought absolutely to condemn Resistance, if he makes it only unlawful to
resist, when we want power to conquer? Which yet is all that can be made of it,
if by every soul, the Apostle means only particular men, not the united force
and power of the Subjects.

Nor can there be any Reason assigned, why the Apostle should lay so strict a
Command on particul^r Christians, to be subject to the higher Powers, which
does not equally concern whole Na^ions; for if it can ever be lawful for a
whole Nation to resist a Prince, it may, in the same circumstances, be equally
lawful f^r a particular man to do it. If a Nation may conspire against a
Prin^e, who invades their Rights, their Liberties; or their Religion, why may
not any Man, by the same Reason, resist a Prince, when his Rights and Liberties
are invaded? It is not so safe and prudent indeed, for a private man to resist*
as for great and powerful numbers; but this makes Resistance only a Matter of
Discretion, not of Conscience: If it be lawful for the whole Body of a Nation
to resist in such Cases, it must be equally lawful for a particular man to do
it; but he does it at his own peril, when he has only his one single force to
oppose against his Prince. So that our Apostle must forbid Resistance in all or
none; for, single persons do not use to resist or rebel, or there is no great
danger to the Public if they do; but the Authority of Princes, and the
Security of public Government, is only endangered by a Combination of Reb^ls,
when the whole Nation, or any considerable part for numbers, power, and
in^erest, take Arms against their Prince.

If Resistance of our Prince be a sin, it is not the less, but the grea^er sin,
the greater, and the more formidable, the Resistance is; and it would very much
unbecome the Gravity and Sacredness of an Apostolical Precept, to enjoin
sub^ection to private Christians, who dare not, who cannot resist alone, but to
leave a powerful Combination of Rebels at liberty to resist: so that every
Soul, must signify all Subjests, whether single or united: for, whatever is
unlawful for every single person, considered as a Subject, is unlawful for them
all together; for the whole Nation is as much a Subject to the higher Powers,
as any single man.

Thus I am sure it is in our Government, where Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament own themselves the Subjects of the King, and have by public Laws
disclaimed all Power of raising any War, either offensive or defensive against
the King.

Having heard what St. Paul's Doctrine was, let us now consider what St. Peter
taught about this matter: he had as much reason to learn this Lesson as any of
the Apostles, our Savior having severally rebuked him for drawing his Sword
against the lawful Powers, as you have already heard. And indeed his rash and
intemperate zeal in this Action cost him very dear; for we have reason to
believe, that this was the chief thing, that tempted him to deny his Master. He
was afraid to own himself to be his Disciple, or that he had been in the Garden
with him; because he was conscious to himself, that by drawing his Sword, and
smiting the Servant of the High Priest, he had incurred the penalty of the Law,
and had he been discovered, could expect nothing less, but to be severely
punished for it, it may be to have lost his Life for his resistance. And
indeed, this has very often been the fate of those men, who have been
transported with a boistrous and intemperate Zeal to draw their Swords for
their Master and his Religion, against the lawful Powers, that they commonly
deny their Master, and despise his Religion, before they put their swords up
again.

But St. Peter having, by our Savior's Reproof, and his own dear-bought
Experience, learnt the Evil of Resistance, never drew his Sword more, and took
great care to instruct Christians, not to do so; 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 15, 16.
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man, for the Lord's sake, whether it
be to the King, as supreme; or unto Governors, as to them that are sent by
him, for the punishment of evildoers, and for the praise of them that do well.
For so is the will of God, that with well-doing ye may put to sil^nce the
ignorance of foolish men. As free, and not using your liberty as a cloak of
maliciousness, but as the s^rvants of God.

This is the very same Doctrine which St. Paul taught the Romans: Let every soul
be subject to the higher powers; for the same word is used in the Original, and
therefore to submit, and to be subject, is the same thing, which, as St. Paul
tells us, signifies Non-Resistance; only St. Paul speaks of not resisting the
Higher Powers; that is, Emperors and Sovereign Princes, herein including all
those who act by their Authority; S. Peter, to prevent all Cavils and
Exceptions, distinctly mentions both, That we must submit to all humane Power
and Authority, not only to the King as Supreme, that is, in St. Paul's phrase,
to the Higher Powers, to all Sovereign Princes, who are invested with the
supreme Authority; but also to those who are sent by him, who receive their
Authority and Commission from the Sovereign Prince.

St. Paul tells us at large, That all Power is of God, and that the power is
the Minister of God; and he that resists the power, resists the ordin^nce
of God; and therefore we must needs be subjest, not only for Wrath, (that is,
for fear of being punished by Men) but also for Conscience sake, out of
reverence to God, and fear of his Judgment. This St. Peter comprises in one
word, which includes it all* Submit your self to every Ordinance of Man, for
the Lord's sake: for, How is God concerned in our Obedience to Princes, if they
be not his Ministers, who are appointed and advanced by him, and act by his
Authority, and if it be not his Will and Command that we should obey them? and
therefore he adds, For this is the will of God, that with well-doing, (that is
by obedience and subjection to Princes) ye may put to silence the ignorance of
foolish men; that is, that you may put to silence those foolish men, who
ignorantly accuse you, as fond of Changes, and troublesome and dangerous to
Government. But then, St. Peter observing, that Christian Liberty was made a
pretense for Seditions and Treasons, he cautions them against that also; As
free, but not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness; that is, to
cover and excuse such wickedness as Rebellion against Princes, but as the
servants of God: You must remember whatever Freedom Christ has purchased for
you, he has not delivered you from Obedience and Subjection to God; you are His
servants still, and therefore must be subject to those, who receive their Power
and Authority from God, as all Sovereign Princes do.

This is as plain, one would think, as words can make it; but nothing can be so
plain, but that Men, who are unwilling to understand, and who set their wits on
work to avoid the force and evidence of it, may be able to find something to
say, to deceive themselves, and those who are willing to be deceived: and
therefore it will be necessary to consider what false Colors some men have put
upon these words, to elude and baffle the plain scope and design of the Apostle
in them.

As, first, they observe, that St. Peter calls Kings and subordinate Governors
an Ordinance of Man, or a human Creature, and from hence they conclude, that
Kings are only the Peoples Creatures; they are made by the people, and receive
their Power from them, and therefore are accountable to them if they ^^use
their Power. In answer to this, we may consider,

1. That this Interpretation of St. Peter's words, is a direct contradiction to
St. Paul, who expressly asserts, That there is no power but of God, the powers
that be, are ord^ined of God; but, according to this Exposition of Hu^an
Creature, or the Ordin^nce of Man, there is no power of God, but all power is
derived from the people. Kings and Princes may be chosen by Men, as it is in
Elective Kingdoms, and as it was at that time in the Roman Empire, but they
receive their power from God: and thus St. Paul* and St. Peter may be
reconciled. But to affirm, That St. Peter calls Kings an Ordinance of Man,
because they receive their ower and Authority from Men, is an irreconcilable
contradiction to St. Paul, who affirms, That they ^eceive their power from God;
That they are God's, and not the peoples Ministers. Now, though St. Peter and
St. Paul did once differ upon a matter of Prudence, it would be of ill
consequence to Religion, to make them differ in so material a Doctrine as this
is; and yet there is no way to reconcile them, but by expounding St. Peter's
words, so as to agree with St. Paul's; for St. Paul's words can never be
reconciled with that sense which these men give of St. Peter's; and that is a
good Argument to me, that is not the true interpretation of St. Pe^er; for I
verily believe, that these two great Apostles did not differ in this point.

2. St. Peter exhorts them to submit to every Ordinance of Man; for the Lord's
sake; which plainly signifies, that whatever hand Men may have in modelling
Civil Governments, yet it is the Ordinance of God, and Princes receive their
power from him. For it is no act of Disobedience to God, to resist our Prince,
nor of Obedience to God to submit to him, if he does not derive his power from
God, and act by his Authority and Commission; especially in such cases, when he
opposes the Government of God, and the Interest of Religion, and oppresses not
only God's Creatures, but his most faithful and obedient People, who are his
peculiar care and charge: In such cases as these, if Princes do not receive
their power from God, they are oppo^^te and rival-powers, and we can no more
submit to them for God's sake, than we can submit to a Reb^l, for the sake of
-- that is, out of Duty and Loyalty to our Natural Prince. And therefore, when
the Apostle exhorts them, for God's sake, to submit to their King, he plainly
supposes what St. Paul did particularly express, That Kings receive their power
from God, and therefore are God's Ministers, even when they abuse their power;
and he that resists, resists the Ordinance and Authority of God.

3. But suppose we should grant, That when St. Peter calls Kings the Ordinance
of Man, he means, That they receive their Power and Authority from Men; yet I
cannot see what good this will do them; for he plainly disowns their
consequence, That therefore Princes are accountable to the people, as to their
Superiors, and may be resisted, deposed, and brought to condign punishment, if
they abuse this power; as will appear from these two Observations.

1. Tha^ He gives the King the Title of Supreme, who is above them all, and is
invested with the supreme and sovereign power. Now, the supreme power, in the
very notion of it, is i^resistible and unaccountable; for otherwise it is not
supreme* but subject to some superior Jurisdiction; which, it is ev^dently
known, the Roman Emperors, of whom the Apostle here speaks, were not. And,

2. That he requires Subjection to this Human Ord^nance; which, as appears from
St. Paul, signifies Non-Resistance: so that though we should grant, that the King
derives his Power from the people, yet, it seems, God confirms and establishes
the Crown on his Head, and will not suffer people to take it off again, when
the^ please.

A Seasonable Admonition to our new Dissenters.
LET us have a care of our Zeal, that we may not mistake an earthly Fire, which
burns and consumes, for that Divine and harmless flame, which is kindled at
God's Altar. A true Zeal for Religion is nothing more, nor less, than such a
hearty Love for it, as makes us very diligent in the practice of it our selves,
and very industrious to promote the knowledge and practice of Religion in the
World, by all lawful and prudent means. A true Christian Zeal will not suffer
us to transgress the strict bounds of our Duty to God, or of our Duty to Men,
especially to Kings and Princes, whatever flattering prospect of Advantage it
may give. To lie, to forswear our selves, to hate and revile each other; to
reproach and libel Governors in Church and State; to stir up or countenance,
with the least thought, any seditious practices against the King or Government,
is not a Zeal for God, nor for Religion; for, this Wisdom is not from above,
but is earthly, sensual, and devilish; for where Strife and Contention is,
there is C^nfusion, and every evil work. Let us be wary how we begin to
entertain, or to whisper our Discontents; how we begin to listen to Suspicions
of our Prince, or of his Government, and to hear with pleasure any scandalous
stories or reflections on either.

GOD, of His infinite Mercy, preserve our King and Queen, and these Kingdoms,
our Liberties, Laws, and Religion, from the wicked Conspiracies of all our
Enemies. Which is the last thing I shall recommend to you, to praise God for
his Preservation of our King hitherto, and earnestly beg, that the same
Providence would still watch over him for the time to come. Let us bless God,
and let us honor our King, and receive him with Joy and Thanksgiving, as a new
Gift and Present from the hands of God. When we are heartily thankful for the
Mercies we have already received, this will ma^e our Prayers more effectual for
the continuance of them.

O Lord* save the King and Queen, who puts their Trust in thee; send them
help from thy Holy Place, and evermore mightily defend them: let their Enemies
have no advantage against them, nor the Wicked approach to hurt them. Which God
of His infinite Mercy grant, through our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom, with the
Father, etc.

FINIS.

