A RESOLUTION Of some CASES OF CONSCIENCE Which respect Church Communion. VIZ.
I. Whether to Communicate with some Church, especially in such a divided State
of the Church, be a necessary Duty, Incumbent on all Christians. II. Whether
constant Communion be a necessary Duty, where occasional Communion is Lawful.
III. Whether it be Lawful to Communicate with two Churches, which are in a
State of Separation from each other.


LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Jun. for Fincham Gardener at the White Horse
in Ludgate Street. 1682/3.

A RESOLUTION Of some CASES of CONSCIENCE, Which respect Church Communion.
IN order to state such cases as particularly relate to Church Communion with
all possible clearness, it will be necessary to premise a brief explication of
some words, which must be used in questions of this nature, but are not so
commonly understood.

As, 1. What is meant by a Church, and a Christian Church. 2. What Church
Communion is. 3. What is meant by Fixed Communion and by Occasional Communion.


First, What is meant by a Church. Now the plainest description I can give of a
Church is this, That the Church is a Body or Society of Men separated from the
rest of the World, and United to God, and to themselves by a Divine Covenant. I
shall briefly explain this description to fit it to the meanest understanding.

1. Then a Church is a Body or Society of Men, for I speak only of the Church
in this World, and therefore shall not enter into that dispute, in what sense
Angels belong to the Church.

And when I call the Church a Body or Society of Men, I oppose a Body to single
Individuals, or particular Men, and to a confused Multitude, without any order
or Union among themselves. For tho the Church consists of particular Men, and
when their Numbers are increased, of great Multitudes, yet the Church consists
of such particular Men, not considered in a private and separate capacity, but
as United into a regular Society, which is called a Body, in allusion to the
natural Body, in which all the parts and members are United in an exact Order,
Ephesians. 4. 16. 1 Cor. 12. 15, 16, etc. For God is not the Author of Confusion, but
of Peace, as in all the Churches of the Saints. And if the meanest Societies
cannot subsist without Order, wherein their strength and beauty and usefulness
consist, much less the Church of God, which is a Society Instituted for the
most Spiritual and Supernatural Ends.

And therefore we find, that God ordained a most exact Order and Government in
the Jewish Church, which for the greater strength and Unity he formed into a
religious Commonwealth: And our Blessed Savior ordained the Apostles, and
committed the Government of his Church to them, and their Successors, with a
promise to be with them to the end of the World. And the Christian Church with
respect to the firm and close Union and orderly Disposition of all its Parts,
Ephesians. 2. 21, 22.
is not only called a Body, but a Spiritual Building, 1 Timothy 3. 15.
and Holy Temple, and the House of God.

But then the Church is a Body, or one Body, in opposition to many bodies, for
Christ has but one Body, and one Church, and he is the Savior of this Body.
The Jewish Church was but one, and therefore the Christian Church is but one,
which is not a new distinct Church, but is grafted into the Jewish stock or
Root. Believing Jews, and Christians being United into one Church, Romans 11. 17,
18.
built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself
being the chief corner stone: Who unites Jews and Gentiles into one Church, as
the corner stone unites both sides of the House, and holds them together.

Upon the same account the Church is called the Building, the House, the Temple
of God, and we know the Temple was but one, and was to be but one, by the
express command and Institution of God. And for the same reason Christ tells
us, John 10. 16.
that there should be but one Fold under one Shepherd.

And indeed it is extreemly absurd and unreasonable to say, that the Christian
Church, which is built upon the same foundation, which worships the same God
and Savior, which professes the same Faith, are Heirs to the same promises,
and enjoy all privileges in common, should be divided into as distinct and
separate bodies, tho of the same kind and nature, as Peter, James, and John,
are distinct Persons, tho they partake of the same common nature. That is, it
is very absurd to say, that where every thing is common, there is not one
Community. Peter, and James, and John, tho they partake of the same common
nature, yet each of them have a distinct essence and subsistence of their own
(as it must be in natural Beings, otherwise there could be but one Man in the
World) and this makes them distinct Persons: But where the very nature and
essence of a Body or Society consists in having all things common, there can be
but one Body; and therefore if one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and
Father of all, be common to the whole Christian Church, if there be no peculiar
Privileges, which belong to some Christians and not to all, to one part of the
Church, and not to another, then by the Institution of Christ, there is but one
Church, one Body, one Communion, one Household and Family: For where there is
nothing to Distinguish and Separate, no Enclosures or Partitions of Divine
Appointment, there can be, by Divine Institution, but one Body.

2. I add, that the Church is a Body or Society of Men separated from the rest
of the World, or called out of the World, as (...), from whence Ecclesia is
derived, may signify, and is so expounded by many Divines, upon which account
the Christians are so often called, the (...), and (...), the Called and Chosen
or Elect People of God, which signifies, that the Church is distinguished from
the rest of the World by a peculiar and appropriate Faith, by peculiar Laws, by
peculiar rites of Worship, and peculiar Promises and Privileges, which are not
common to the whole World, but only to those, who are received into the
Communion of the Church. But there is no controversy about this matter, and
therefore I need add no more about it.

3. The Church is a Body of Men united to God and to themselves by a Divine
Covenant: The Church is united to God, for it is a Religious Society,
instituted for the Worship of God; and they are united among themselves, and to
each other, because it is but one Body, which requires a union of all its
parts; as I have already showed, and shall discourse more presently. But the
chief thing to be observed here is this, that this union with God, and to each
other, which constitutes a Church, is made by a Divine Covenant. Thus it was in
the Jewish Church. God entered into Covenant with Abraham, and chose him and
his Posterity for his Church and Peculiar People, and gave him Circumcision for
a Sign and Seal of this Covenant. And under the Gospel God has made a new
Covenant with Mankind, in and by his Son Jesus Christ, who is the Mediator of a
Better Covenant, founded upon better Promises; and this Gospel Covenant is the
foundation of the Christian Church. For the Christian Church is nothing else,
but such a Society of Men, as is in Covenant with God through Christ.

I suppose all Men will grant, that God only can make or constitute a Church.
For such persons, if there were any so absurd, are not worth disputing with,
who dare affirm the Church to be a human Creature, or the Invention of Men.

And I think it is as plain, that the only visible way God has of forming a
Church (for I do not now speak of the invisible operations of the Divine
Spirit) is by granting a Church Covenant, which is the Divine Charter, whereon
the Church is founded, and investing some persons with Power and Authority, to
receive others into this Covenant, according to the terms and conditions of the
Covenant, and by such Covenant Rites and Forms of Admission, as he is pleased
to institute, which under the Gospel is Baptism, as under the Law it was
Circumcision.

To be taken into Covenant with God, and to be received into the Church, is the
very same thing. For the Church is a Society of Men, who are in Covenant with
God. That can be no Church, which is not in Covenant with God, he is no member
of the Church, who is not at least visibly admitted into Gods Covenant, and
whoever is in Covenant with God, is made a member of the Church, by being
admitted into Covenant.

Now before I proceed, I shall briefly observe some few things, which are so
plain and evident, if these Principles be true, that I need only name them, and
yet are of great use for the resolution of some following cases.

As 1. That a Covenant-state and Church State is the same thing. 2. That every
professed Christian, who is received into Covenant, as such, is a Church member.
3. That nothing else is necessary to make us members of the Christan Church but
only Baptism, which is the Sacrament of our admission into the Christian
Covenant. For if Baptism, which gives us right to all the Privileges of the
Covenant, does not make us Church members, then a Church State is no part of
the Covenant; then a man may be in Covenant with God through Christ, and yet be
no member of Christ; or he may be a member of Christ and no member of his Body,
which is the Church. 4. That no Church State can depend upon human Contracts
and Covenants, for then a Church would be a human Creature, and a human
Constitution; whereas a Church can be founded only upon a Divine Covenant. It
is true, no man, who is at age, can be admitted to Baptism till he profess his
Faith in Christ, and voluntarily undertake the Baptismal Vow; but the
Independent Church Covenant betwixt Pastor and People, is of a very different
Nature from this, unless any man will say, that the voluntary contract and
Covenant, which the Independents exact from their members, and wherein they
place a Church State be part of the Baptismal Vow. If it be not, then they
found the Church upon a human Covenant, for Christ has made but one Covenant
with Mankind, which is contained in the Vow of Baptism. If it be, then no Man
is a Christian, but an Independent, and then they would do well to show, how
the Baptismal Vow, which is but one and the same for all Mankind, determines
one Man to be a fixed member of Dr. Owens Church, another of Mr. Griffiths, or
any other Independent Pastors; and if they could get over this difficulty,
there is another still, why they exact this Church Covenant of Baptized
Christians, before they will admit them to their Communion, if Baptism makes
them members of their Church.


This I think makes it plain, that the Independent Church Covenant is no part
of the Baptismal Vow, and then it is no part of the Christian Covenant; and if
there be no true Church State, but what depends on such human Contracts, then
the Church owes its being to the will of Men, not to the Covenant of God.

5. I observe farther, how absurd it is to gather Churches out of Churches,
which already consist of Baptized Christians. Christianity indeed separates us
from the rest of the World, but surely it does not separate Christians from
each other. The Apostles only undertook to Convert Jews and Heathens to the
Christian Faith, and to make them members of the Christian Church, which is a
state of separation from the World; but these Men Convert Christians from
Common Christianity, and the Communion of the universal Church, to
Independency. If the Church be founded on a divine Covenant, we know no Church
but what all Christians are made members of by Baptism, which is the universal
Church, the one Body and Spouse of Christ. And to argue from the Apostles
gathering Churches from among Jews and Heathens, to prove the gathering
Churches out of a Christian and National Church, must either conclude, that a
Church, and Church State is a very indifferent and Arbitrary thing, and that
Men may be very good Christians, and in a safe condition without it; or that
Baptized Christians, who are not members of a particular Independent Church,
are no better than Jews and Heathens, that is, that Baptism it self, though a
Divine Sacrament and Seal of the Covenant, is of no value, till it be confirmed
and ratified by a human Independent Covenant.

6. I observe, that if the Christian Church be founded on a Divine Covenant, on
that new Covenant, which God has made with Mankind in Christ, then there is
but one Church of which all Christians are members, as there is but one
Covenant into which we are all admitted by Baptism. For the Church and the
Covenant must be of an equal extent. There can be but one Church founded upon
one Covenant, and all who have an interest in the same Covenant, are members of
the same Church.

And therefore, tho the distance of place, and the necessities and conveniences
of Worship and Discipline, may, and has divided the Church into several parts
and members, and particular Churches, yet the Church cannot be divided into two
or more distinct and separate Churches, for that destroys the unity of the
Church: and unless they could divide the Covenant also, two Churches, which are
not members of each other, cannot partake in the same Covenant, but the guilty
Divider forfeits his interest in the Covenant without a new grant.

A Prince indeed may grant the same Charter to several distinct Cities and
Corporations, but then tho the matter of the Charter be the same, their right
to it depends upon distinct Grants. But if he grant a Charter for the Erecting
of such a Corporation, and confine his Charter to the members of that
Corporation, those who wilfully separate themselves from this Corporation to
which this Charter was granted, forfeit their interest in the Charter, and must
not think to Erect a new distinct Corporation by the same Charter.

Thus it is here, God has made a Covenant of grace with Mankind in Christ, and
declares that by this one Covenant, he unites all the Disciples of Christ into
one Body and Christian Church, who shall all partake of the Blessings of this
Covenant. By Baptism we are all received into this Covenant, and admitted
members of this one Church; now while we continue in the Unity of this Body, it
is evident, that we have a right to all the Blessings of the Covenant, which
are promised to this Body, and to every member of it. But if we divide our
selves from this Body, and set up distinct and separate Societies, which we
call Churches, but which are not members, nor live in Communion with the one
Catholic Church, we cannot carry our Right and Title to the Covenant out of
the Church with us.

The Gospel Covenant is the common Charter of the Christian-Church, and if we
are not contented to enjoy these Blessings in common with other Christians we
must be contented to go without them. For it is not a particular Covenant,
which God makes with particular Separate Churches, but a general Covenant made
with the whole Body of Christians, as United in one Communion, and therefore
that, which no particular Church has any interest in, but as it is a member of
the universal Church.

God has not made any Covenant in particular with the Church of Geneva, of
France or England, but with the one Body and Church of Christ, all the World
over; and therefore the only thing, that can give us in particular a right to
the Blessings of the Covenant, is, that we observe the conditions of this
Covenant, and live in Unity and Communion with all true Christian Churches in
the World, which makes us members of the Catholic Church, to whom the Promises
are made.

Secondly, The next thing to be explained is, what is meant by
Church Communion. Now Church Communion signifies no more then Church Fellowship
and Society, and to be in Communion with the Church is to be a member of the
Church; and this is called Communion, because all Church members have a common
right to Church Privileges, and a common Obligation to all those Duties and
Offices, which a Church relation Exacts from them.

I know this word Communion is commonly used to signify a Personal and
presential Communion in Religious Offices: as when Men pray, and hear, and
receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper together, they are said to be in
Communion with one another and to live in Communion with that Church, with
which they join in all Acts of Worship.

Now we must acknowledge, that Public Acts of Worship performed in the
Communion of the Church, are an Exercise of Christian Communion, but
Church Communion is something antecedent to all the Acts and Offices of
Communion. For no Man has a right to any Act of Christian Communion, but he,
who is in a State of Communion with the Christian Church.

What natural Union is in natural Bodies, that Communion is in Bodies Politic,
whether Civil or Religious Societies; a member must be vitally united to the
Body, before it can perform any natural Action or Office of a member; before
the Eye can see, or the Feet can walk, or the Ears can hear; and the union of
the Eye, or Foot, to the Body, does not consist in seeing or walking, but
seeing and walking are the effects of this Union.

Thus in a Body Politic, when Men by any common Charter are United into one
Society, they become one common Body, or one Communion; and this gives them
right to all the privileges of that Body, and obliges them to all the Duties
and Offices, which their Charter requires of them; but should any Man, who is
not regularly admitted into this Society, pretend to the same Privileges, or
do such things, as are required of those, who are members of this Body, this
would be so far from being thought an Act of Communion with them, that it would
be censured as an unjust Usurpation. Should a Man, who is no Citizen of London,
open his Shop, and drive a trade as other Citizens do, or give his Vote at a
Common Hall, and in all other cases Act like a Citizen, this would not make him
a Citizen, but an Intruder. He is a Foreigner still, and his presuming to Act
like a Citizen, when he is none, is no Act of Communion with that Body, of
which he is no member, but justly exposes him to censure and punishment.

Thus it is in the Christian Church, which is one Body and Society united by a
Divine Covenant. Our Communion with the Church consists in being members of the
Church, which we are made by Baptism: The exercise of this Communion consists
in all those Offices and Duties, which all the members of the Church are
obliged to, and which none have any right to perform, but they; such as praying
and receiving the Lords Supper together, etc.

Now should any Man who is no member of the Church, nor owns himself to be so,
intrude into the Church, and Communicate in all holy Offices, this can be no
more called an Act of Communion, then it can be said to make him a member of
the Church, of which he is no member, and resolved not to be: Prayers, and
receiving the Sacraments, etc. are Acts of Communion, when performed by
Church Members in the Communion of the Church; but they are no Acts of
Communion, when performed by those, who are no Church Members, tho to serve a
turn, they thrust themselves into the Society of the Church.

As for Instance, suppose a member of a Presbyterian, or Independent
Conventicle, should, for reasons best known to himself, at some critical time,
come to his Parish Church, and there hear the Common Prayer, and Sermon, and
receive the Lords Supper, according to the order of the Church of England, does
this make this Man a member of the Church of England, with which he never
Communicated before, and it is likely, will never do again? If it does not, all
this is no Act of Communion, which can be only between the members of the same
Body.

So that to be in Church Communion, does not signify, merely to perform some
such Acts, which are Acts of Communion in the members of the Church, but since
the decay of Church Discipline, may sometimes be performed by those, who are
not members, which is such an abuse, as would not have been allowed in the
Primitive Church, who denied their Communion to Schismatics, as well as to the
Excommunicate upon other accounts: but to be in Church Communion signifies to
be a member of the Church, to be Embodyed and Incorporated with it, and I
suppose* what that means, every one knows, who understands what it is to be a
member of any Society, of a City, or any Inferior Corporation; which consists
of Privilege and Duty, and requires all those, who will enjoy the benefits of
such a Society, to discharge their respective trusts and obligations.

To be in Communion with, or to be a member of the Church, includes a Right and
Title to all those Blessings, which God has promised to his Church, and an
obligation to all the Duties and Offices of Church Society; as Subjection to
the Authority, Instructions, Censures of the Church; a Communion in Prayers,
and Sacraments, and other Religious Offices, and he who despises the Authority,
or destroys the Unity of the Church, renounces his membership and Communion
with it. These things are extemely plain, and though Men may cavil for disputes
sake, yet must needs convince them, that no Man is in Communion with a Church,
which he is not a member of, tho through the defect of Discipline, he should
sometimes be admitted to some Act of Communion with it, and I shall observe
some few things from hence of great use.

1. That Church Communion primarily and principally respects the universal
Church, not any particular Church or Society of Christians. For to be in
Church Communion signifies to be a member of the Church, or Body of Christ,
which is but one all the World over. Church Communion does not consist in
particular Acts of Communion, which can be performed only among those, who are
present, and Neighbors to each other, but in membership: now a member is a
member of the whole Body (not merely of any part of it,) how large soever the
Body be. All the Subjects of England, those, who live at St. David's, and those
at Yarmouth, who never saw, nor converst with each other, are all members of
the same Kingdom, and by the same reason, this membership may extend to the
remotest part of the World, if the Body, whereof we are members, reach so far.

And therefore we may observe, that Baptism, which is the Sacrament of our
Admission into the Covenant of God, and the Communion of the Church, does not
make us members of any particular Church, as such, but of the Universal Church;
and I observed before, that a Church State, which is the same thing, with
Church Communion, is founded only on a Divine Covenant; and therefore since
there is no other Divine Covenant to make us members of particular Churches, as
distinguished from the Universal Church, such particular Church Membership is at
best but a human Invention, and indeed nothing else but a Schism from the
Universal Church: which alone, if well considered, is a sufficient confutation
of Independency which is a particular Church State, as distinguished from all
other Churches and Societies of Christians.

2. I observe further, that tho the exercise of Church Communion, as to most of
the particular Duties and Offices of it, must be confined to a particular
Church and Congregation (for we cannot Actually join in the Communion of
Prayers and Sacraments, etc. but with some particular Church) yet every Act of
Christian Communion, though performed in some particular Church, is and must be
an Act of Communion with the whole Catholic Church, Praying, and Hearing, and
receiving the Lords Supper together, does not make us more in Communion with
the Church of England, then with any other true and Orthodox part of the
Church, tho in the Remotest parts of the World. The exercise of true Christian
Communion in a particular Church, is nothing else but the exercise of Catholic
Communion in a particular Church, which the necessity of affairs requires,
since all the Christians in the World cannot meet together for Acts of worship;
But there is nothing in all these Acts of Communion, which does more peculiarly
Unite us to such a particular Church, than to the whole Christian Church.

When we Pray together to God* we Pray to him as the Common Father of all
Christians, and do not challenge any peculiar interest in him, as members of
such a particular Church, but as members of the whole Body of Christ: when we
Pray in the Name of Christ, we consider him as the great High Priest, and
Savior of the Body, who powerfully interceeds for the whole Church, and for us
as members of the Universal Church. And we Offer up our Prayers and
Thanksgivings, not only for our selves and those, who are present, but for all
Christians all the World over, as our Fellow Members; and Praying for one
another is the truest notion of Communion of Prayers; for Praying with one
another, is only in order to Praying for one another. And thus our Prayers are
an exercise of Christian Communion, when we Pray to the same common Father,
through the Merits and Mediation of the same common Savior and Redeemer, for
the same common Blessings, for our selves, and the whole Christian Church.

Thus when we meet together to Celebrate the Supper of our Lord, we do not meet
as at a private Supper, but as at the common Feast of Christians; and therefore
it is not an Act of particular Church Fellowship, but of Catholic Communion.
The Supper of our Lord does not signify any other kind of Union and
confederation between those Neighbor Christians, who receive together in the
same Church, than with the whole Body of Christ. The Sacramental Bread
signifies and represents all those, for whom Christ died, that one Mystical
Body, for which he Offered his Natural Body, which is the Universal Church; and
our eating of this Bread signifies our Union to this Body of Christ, and
therefore is considered, as an Act of true Catholic, not of a particular
Church Communion. And the Sacramental Cup is the Blood of the New Testament,
and therefore represents our Communion in all the Blessings of the Covenant,
and with all those, who are thus in Covenant with God. So that there is nothing
particular in this Feast, to make it a private Feast, or an Act of Communion
with a particular Church, considered as particular, but it is the common Feast
of Christians, and an Act of Catholic Communion.

Which by the way plainly shows, how groundless that scruple is against mixed
Communions, that Men think themselves defiled by receiving the Lords Supper
with Men, who are vicious. For tho it is a great defect in Discipline, and a
great reproach to the Christian Profession, when wicked Men are not censured,
and removed from Christian Communion, yet they may as well pretend, that their
Communion is defiled by bad Men, who Communicate in any other part of the
Church, or any other Congregation, as in that, in which they live and
Communicate: For this holy Feast signifies no other Communion between them, who
receive at the same time, and in the same Company, then it does with all
sincere parts of the Christian Church. It is not a Communion with any Persons
considered as present, but it is a Communion with the Body of Christ and all
true members of it, whether present or absent.

Those who separate from a National Church for the sake of corrupt professors,
though they could form a Society as pure and holy, as they seem to desire, yet
are Schismatics in it, because they confine their Communion to their own
select Company, and Exclude the whole Body of Christians all the World over,
out of it; their Communion is no larger than their gathered Church, for if it
be, then they must still Communicate with those Churches, which have corrupt
members, as all visible Churches on Earth have, (unless we will except
Independents, because they have the confidence to except themselves) and then
their Separation does not Answer its end, which is to avoid such corrupt
Communions; and yet if they do confine their Communion to their own gathered
Churches, they are Schismatics in dividing themselves from the Body of
Christians; and all their Prayers and Sacraments are not Acts of Christian
Communion, but a Schismatical Combination.

This does not prove indeed, that particular Churches are not bound to reform
themselves, and to preserve their own Communion pure from corrupt members,
unless all the Churches in the World, will do so too; because every particular
Church, whether Diocesan, or National, has power to reform its own members, and
is accountable to God for such neglects of Discipline: but it does prove, that
no Church without the guilt of Schism, can renounce Communion with other
Christian Churches, or set up a distinct and separate Communion of its own, for
the sake of such corrupt members; which was the pretense of the Novatian and
Danatist Schism of Old, and is so of the Independent Schism, at this day.

3. I observe further, that our obligation to maintain Communion with a
particular Church, wholly results from our obligation to Catholic Communion.
The only reason, why I am bound to live in Communion with any particular
Church, is because I am a member of the whole Christian Church, which is the
Body of Christ, and therefore must live in Communion with the Christian Church;
and yet it is Impossible to live in Communion with the whole Christian Church,
without Actual Communion with some part of it; when I am in such a place, where
there is a visible Christian Church; as no member can be United to the Natural
Body, without its being United to some part of the Body; for the Union and
Communion of the whole Body, consists in the Union of all its parts to each
other.

Every Act of Christian Communion, though performed in a particular Church, or
Congregation, is not properly an Act of particular Church Communion, but is the
exercise of Communion with the whole Church and Body of Christ, as I have
already proved; but it can be no Act of Communion at all, if it be not
performed in the Communion of the Church, which it cannot be, unless it be
performed in the Communion of some particular Church. And this is the only
obligation, I know of, to Communion with any particular Church, that as I am a
Christian, I am a member of the Body and Church of Christ, and in a State of
Communion, and therefore am bound to maintain Actual Communion with the
Christian Church, wherever I find it, and by Communicating with the Church,
wherein I live, if it be a found and Orthodox member of the Christian Church, I
maintain Communion with the whole Catholic Church, which is but one Body.

So that here is no choice, what Church we will Communicate with, for there is
but one Church all the World over, with which we must Communicate; and
therefore we have nothing else to do, but to judge, whether that part of the
Church, wherein we live, be so sound and Orthodox, that we may Communicate with
it according to the Principles of Catholic Communion; and if it be, we are
bound to Communicate with it, under Peril of Schism from the Catholic Church,
if we do not.

4. From hence we may plainly learn the true notion of a Separate Communion,
and Separate Church. For some Men seem to be greatly sensible of the sin and
mischief of Schism and Separation, but then they use great art, so to confound
the notion of Separation, as that neither they themselves, nor any one else,
shall ever be able to understand what it is, whereas if they will allow, that
there is, or ever can be, any such thing as Separation from the Church, it is
as easy to understand, what Separation is, as what it is for a member to be
divided from the Body.

For if there be but one Church, and one Communion, of which all true
Christians, and Christian Churches, are, or ought to be members, then those
Churches, which are not members of each other, are Separate Churches. It is not
enough indeed to prove a Separation, that two Congregations meet in several
places for Worship, for this is done by all the Parish-Churches of England, who
are in the same Communion, but yet hold distinct and Separate Assemblies, as to
Local separation. Nor is it sufficient to prove, that there is no Separation,
because these differing Churches agree in all the Articles of Faith, and
essentials of worship; For thus the Novatians and Donatists did, who yet were
Schismatics from the Catholic Church. But where there are two Churches, which
are not members of each other, there is a Schism, tho they agree in every thing
else, but in one Communion; and where Churches own each others Communion, as
members of the same Body, there is no Schism, though they are as distant from
each other in place, as East and West.

And it is as easy to understand, what it is for two Churches to be members of
each other; but to make this as plain, as I can, and as far, as it is possible,
to prevent all Evasions, and Subterfuges, I shall lay down some few rules
according to the Principles of Catholic Communion, whereby we may certainly
know, what Churches are in Communion with each other, and which are Separate
and Schismatical Conventicles.

1. There must be but one Church, in one place, according to that Ancient Rule
of the Catholic Church, that there must be but one Bishop in a City; and this
was observed in the Apostolical times, that in the greatest and most Populous
Cities, and where there were the greatest number of Converts, yet there was but
one Church, such as Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus, etc. this is acknowledged by
the Independents themselves, who endeavor hence to prove, that there were no
more Christians in any of those Cities, than could meet together in one place
for Acts of Worship, which is a mighty groundless Surmise, and not much for the
credit of the Christian Church, as has been often shown by learned Men, both
Episcopal and Presbyterian Divines.

And there is an evident reason, why this should be so, because there is no
other Rule of Catholic Communion for private Christians, but to Communicate in
all Religious Offices, and all Acts of Government and Discipline, with those
Christians, with whom they live; for to renounce the ordinary Communion of any
Christians, or true Christian Church, is to divide the Unity and Communion of
the Church, and to withdraw our selves from ordinary Communion with the Church,
in which we live, into distinct and Separate Societies for Worship, is to
renounce their Communion; and when there is not a necessary cause for it, is a
Schismatical Separation.

So that distinct and particular Churches, which are in Communion with each
other, must have their distinct bounds and limits, as every member has its
Natural and Proper place and situation in the Body. But when there is one
Church within the Bowels of another, a new Church gathered out of a Church
already constituted; and formed into a distinct and Separate Society, this
divides Christian Communion, and is a notorious Schism. These Churches cannot
be members of each other, because they ought to be but one Church, and
therefore to form and gather a new Church, is to divide and Separate the
members of the same Church from each other.

This is the plain case of the Presbyterian and Independent Churches, and those
other Conventicles of Sectaries, which are among us; they are Churches in a
Church, Churches formed out of the National Church, by which means Ohristians,
who live together, refuse to Worship God in the same Assemblies, and have
bitter Envyings and Contentions, for the Honor and Purity of their several
Churches.

If all Christians are members of the one Body of Christ, nothing can justify
the distinction of Christians into several Churches, but only such a distance
of place, as makes it necessary and expedient to put them under the Conduct and
Government of several Bishops, for the greater Edification of the Church, in
the more easy and regular Administration of Discipline, and all holy Offices;
and therefore nothing can justify the gathering of a Church out of a Christian
Church, and dividing Neighbor Christians into distinct Communions.

Churches at a distance may be distinct Churches under their distinct Bishops,
but yet in the same Communion; but distinct Churches in the same place can
never be of the same Communion, for then they would Naturally Unite and Cement
into one. There must either be Antibishops, or Schismatical Presbyters, set up
in opposition to their Bishops, under different and opposite Rules of Worship
and Discipline, which makes them Rival and opposite Churches, not members of
each other. From hence I think, it plainly appears, that all Separation from a
Church, wherein we live, unless there be necessary reasons for it, is Schism;
and we cannot justify such distinct Churches within one another, from the
examples of other distinct Churches, whose bounds, and limits, and jurisdiction
also, are distinct and separate.

2. It is plain, those are Separate Churches, which divide from the Communion
of any Church, from any dislike of its Doctrine, Government, or Worship, for in
this case, it is plain, they leave the Church, and form themselves into a new
Church, out of the Communion of the Church, from whence they went, because they
did not think it safe to continue one Body with it.

This has often made me wonder, what those Men mean, who take all occasions to
quarrel at our constitution, and assign a great many reasons, why they cannot
Communicate with us, and yet at the same time will not own, that they have made
any Separation from us. What middle state now shall we find for these Men, who
will neither continue in the Church, nor allow themselves to be out of it?

It is possible for two particular Churches to be in Communion with each other,
and yet not Actually to Communicate together, because distance of place will
not permit it; but for two Churches to renounce each others Communion, or at
least to withdraw ordinary Communion from each other, from a professed dislike,
and yet still to continue in a state of Communion with one another, is a down
right contradiction. To be in Communion is to be members of the same Body and
Society, and he that can prove, and he that can believe, two opposite
Societies, founded upon contrary principles, and Acting by contrary Rules, and
pursuing contrary ends, to the Ruin and Subversion of each other, to be the
same Body, and the same Society, are very wonderful Men to me.

3. Those are Separate Churches, who do not own each others members, as their
own. Actual Communion during our residence in any certain place, must be
confined to that particular Church, in which we live, if it be a sound part of
the Christian Church; but Church Membership is not confined to any particular
Church. I am no otherwise a member of any particular Church, then I am of the
Universal Church, which gives me a right of Membership and Communion in all the
particular Churches of the World. Now I would ask whether every Baptized
Christian, who by Baptism is made a member of the Catholic Church, and has not
forfeited this right by a Scandalous life, be ipso facto a member of an
Independent Church; if he be not, (as it is plain, by the constitution of
Independency, he is not, for Independent Church Membership is not founded on
Baptism, but on a particular Church Covenant;) then Independency is a Separate
Communion from the Catholic Church; for the members of the Catholic Church
are not by being so, made the members of an Independent Church, and therefore
an Independent Church is a distinct and separate Body from the Catholick-Church.

Nay I would know whether a member of one Independent Church by being so,
becomes a member of another Independent Church; if he does not, as it is plain,
he do'nt, (for every Independent Church is founded upon a particular
Church Covenant between such a particular Pastor and particular members) then
every Independent Church is a distinct and separate Body from all other
Independent Churches, and so they are all Schismatics to each other, as not
preserving the Unity of the Body.

And tho Independent Churches should be so civil to each other, as to admit
each others members to some Acts of Communion, yet this is matter of courtesy,
not of right, and therefore their constitution is Schismatical. It is like two
Neighbor Families, which hold good correspondence with each other, and often
visit one another, and Eat, and Drink together, but yet remain very distinct
Families, and have all their concerns apart and separate. But the Christian
Church is but one Household and Family, and whoever makes two Families of it, is
a Schismatic.

Thus let me ask, whether the Episcopal, and Presbyterian Churches in the same
Christian Kingdom, be one Church, and members of each other, and own each
others members, as such, to be members of their own Body and Church; If they do
not, as it is evident they don't, from their holding distinct and separate
Assemblies, under a distinct kind and species of Government, which both of them
assert to be instituted by Christ, and to be essential to the constitution of
the Church, from their forming themselves into distinct Bodies, under different
Governors, which have no Communion, as such, with each other, (which yet is
essential to the Communion of particular Churches, that their Governors should
be in Communion with each other) from their Condemning each others
constitution, and particular modes of Worship, and their great endeavors to
draw away members from each other; which necessarily supposes, that they do not
look upon each others members, as their own. I say, if from these
considerations it appears, that they are not, and do not think themselves to
be, one Body, nor members of each other, then they are two separate Churches,
and the Church, which makes the separation is the Schismatic.

And indeed we may as well say, that a Monarchy, and Aristocracy, and Democracy
in the same Nation, with their distinct Governors, and distinct Subjects, and
distinct Laws, that are always at Enmity and War with each other, are but one
Kingdom, as to assert, that the Episcopal and Presbyterian Churches in England,
are but one Church.

3. The last thing to be explained, is, what is meant by fixed or constant, and
by occasional Communion. Now this is a question, which would grievously have
puzl'd St. Cyprian and St. Austin and other Ancient Fathers, who never heard
but of one sort of Communion. For indeed there is no place for this distinction
of constant and occasional Communion, according to the Principles of Catholic
Communion. To be in Communion with the Church, is to be a member of the Church,
and I take it for granted, that a member signifies a fixed and constant, not an
occasional member; not a member, which is one day a member, and the next day
upon his own voluntary choice is no member, which is a member or no member,
just as occasion serves. And if Church Membership be a fixed and constant
relation in it self considered, then the Duties of this relation are fixed and
constant also. And therefore for the understanding of these Terms, which were
unknown to Antiquity, we must consult the meaning of our Modern Authors, who
were the first Inventors of them.

Now by fixed Communion they mean an Actual and constant Communicating with some
one particular Church, as fixed members of it; occasional Communion is to Pray,
and Hear, and receive the Sacrament, at some other Church, (of which they do
not own themselves to be members) as occasion serves; that is, either to
gratify their own Curiosity, or to serve some secular end, or to avoid the
Imputation of Schism.

Now this distinction is owing to such Principles, as I have evidently proved
to be very great mistakes.

For if to be in Communion with the Church signify to be a member of it, and
that not of any particular Church, as distinguished from the whole Catholic
Church, but to be a member of the one Body of Christ, and of every sound part
of it; then our Communion with the Church is as fixed, as our relation and
membership is, and I think no Man, who understands himself, will talk of an
occasional member.

If no Man can perform any Act of Communion with a Church, of which he is no
member (since all Acts of Communion have a necessary relation to a state of
Communion, and that, which is an Act of Communion in a member, is no Act of
Communion, when performed by him, who is no member, as I have already proved)
then it is as plain a contradiction to talk of an occasional Act of Communion,
as of occasional Membership; and there can be no place for occasional Communion
with a Church, of which we are no members, unless we will say, that a Man, who
is not in Communion, may exercise Acts of Communion with the Church.

If all the Acts of Christian Communion, which respect Christian Worship, such
as Prayer, receiving the Lords Supper, etc. tho performed in a particular
Church, be not Acts merely of a particular Church Communion, but of Catholic
Communion, with the whole Christian Church, and every sound part of it, then
every true Catholic Christian, is not only in a fixed state of Communion with
the Catholic Church, but lives in as constant an exercise of Christian
Communion with all Sound and Orthodox Churches, as he does with that Church, in
which he lives; for every Act of Worship, which is an Act of Communion with
that particular Church, in which it is performed (if that Church be in
Catholic Communion) is an Act of Communion with the whole Catholic Church,
and therefore the very exercise of Christian Communion, is equally fixed and
constant, or equally occasional with the whole Catholic Church.

There is a sense indeed, wherein we may be said to be members of one
particular Church considered as distinct from all other particular Churches,
but that principally consists in Government and Discipline: every Christian is
a member of the whole Christian Church, and in Communion with it, but he is
under the immediate Instruction and Government of his own Bishop, and
Presbyters, and is bound to Personal Communion with them; and this constitutes
a particular Church, in which all Acts of Worship, and all Acts of Discipline
and Government are under the direction and conduct of a particular Bishop. And
when Neighbor Bishops unite into one Body, and agree upon some common Rules of
Government, and the Administration of Religious Offices, this makes them a
Patriarchal or National Church, and thus by submitting to the Government and
Discipline of such particular or united Bishops, we become members of a
Diocesan or National Church, considered as distinct from other Diocesan or
National Churches; But this does not confine our Church Membership and
Communion to such a particular Church, tho it strictly oblige us to conform to
the Worship, and Discipline, and Government of that Church, wherein we live,
while it imposes nothing on us inconsistent with the Principles of Catholic
Communion.

But tho particular Christians are more peculiarly obliged to observe the Rites
and Usages, and to submit to the Government and Discipline of the Church,
wherein they live, and to maintain Personal Communion with it, (and upon this
account may in a peculiar manner be called the members of that Church) yet
every Act of Communion performed in this particular Church is an Act of
Catholic Communion; and an exercise of Christian Communion with the whole
Church, and every sound part of it. Baptism makes us members of the whole
Church, and gives us a right to Communion with every sound part of it; every
Act of Christian Communion in a particular Church is a vertual Communion with
the whole Church, with all particular Churches, which live in Communion with
each other; and notwithstanding my relation to a particular Church, by my
constant Abode and Habitation in it, when ever I travel into any other Church,
I Communicate with them as a member; so that wherever I Communicate, whether in
that Church, in which I usually live, or in any other particular Church, where
I am accidentally present, my Communion is of the same Nature, that is, I
Communicate as a member of the Church, and it is Impossible, I should
Communicate otherwise; for I have no right to Communion, but as a member, and
nothing I can do, can be an Act of Communion, if I be not, and do not own my
self to be a member.

And yet this is the occasion of this mistake about Fixed and Occasional
Communion; that according to the Laws of our Church, which are founded on great
and wise reasons, and indeed according to the Laws of Catholic Communion,
every Christian is bound to Communicate with that part of the Church, wherein
he lives; now Men may have Houses in different Parishes, or distinct Diocesses,
or may Travel into other parts of the Country, and Communicate with the
Churches, which they find in those places, where they are, or they may
sometimes go to Prayers, or hear a Sermon, or receive the Lords Supper at
another Parish Church; now our ordinary Communion with those Churches, where
our constant Abode is, may be called constant Communion, and our Communion with
those Churches, which we accidentally visit, and Communicate with, may be
called occasional Communion; and all this without Schism, because we still
Communicate, either with the same National Church, or (which is often the case
of Travelers) with some other sound part of the Catholic Church, of which we
are also members, and so still keep in the same Communion, and communicate with
no Churches, but those, of which we own our selves members; as being all in the
same Communion; as being either sincere members of the National or Catholic
Church.

From hence our Dissenters conclude, that their Communion with an Independent,
or Presbyterian, Church, of which they profess themselves fixed members, is as
consistent with their occasional Communion with the Church of England, when to
serve some present turn, they hear the Prayers, and receive the Sacraments with
us; as our fixed Communion with our Parish-Churches is, with our occasional
Communion, with other Parish-Churches; which no Body accounts Schism, tho when
it is too frequent and causeless, it is a great disorder.

But the difference between these two is vastly great, for in the First case,
we only Communicate with such Churches, which are all in Communion with each
other, and therefore he, who is a member of one, is a member of them all, and
Communicates with them, wherever he is, as a member. But he, who is a fixed
member of a Presbyterian, or Independent Church, cannot Communicate so much as
occasionally, with the Church of England, as a member, because he is a member
not only of another particular, but of a separate Church; and it is impossible
for any Man, who is one with himself, to be a member of two separate Churches,
and whatever Acts of Worship we join in with other Churches, of which we are no
members, they are not properly Acts of Communion.

Having thus premised the explication of these terms, what is meant by Church,
and what is meant by Church Communion, and what is meant by Fixed or Constant,
and occasional Communion, the right understanding of these things, will make it
very easy to resolve those cases, which Immediately respect Church Communion,
and I shall Instance in these three.

1. Whether Communion with some Church or other, especially when the Church is
divided into so many Sects and Parties, be a necessary Duty, incumbent on all
Christians.

2. Whether constant Communion with that Church, with which occasional
Communion is Lawful, be a necessary Duty.

3. Whether it be Lawful for the same person, to Communicate with two separate
Churches.

Case 1. Whether Communion with some Church or other, Case 1.
especially when the Church is divided into so many Sects and Parties, be a
necessary Duty incumbent on all Christians.

Now methinks the resolution of this is as plain, as whether it be necessary
for every Man to be a Christian. For every Christian is Baptized into the
Communion of the Church, and must continue a Member of the Church, till he
renounce his Membership by Schism, or Infidelity, or be cast out of the Church
by Ecclesiastical censures.

Baptism incorporates us into the Christian Church, that is, makes us Members
of the Body of Christ, which is his Church and is frequently so called in
Scripture. For there is but one Body and one Spirit. Ephesians. 4. 4. one Christian
Church, Ephesians. 5. 23. 4. 12.
which is animated and governed by the one Spirit of Christ. And we are all
Baptized into this one Body. Col. 1. 18.
For as the Body is one, and has many Members, and all the members of that one
Body, being many, are one Body, so also is Christ, that is, the Christian
Church, which is the Body of Christ, of which he is the Head; 1 Cor 12. 12, 13.
for by one Spirit we are all Baptized into one Body, whether we be Jews or
Gentiles, whether we be Bond or Free, and are all made to drink into one
Spirit; for the body is not one member, but many.

Now I have already proved, that Church Communion is nothing else, but
Church Membership, to be in Communion with the Church, and to be a member of
the Church, signifying the same thing. And I think, I need not prove, that to
be in a state of Communion contains both a right; and an Obligation to Actual
Communion. He, who is a member of the Church, may Challenge all the Privileges
of a member, among which Actual Communion is none of the least; to be admitted
to all the Acts and Offices of Christian-Communion, to the Communion of Prayers
and Sacraments, and all other Christian Duties, which no Man who is not a
member of the Church, has any right to. And he who is a member, is bound to
perform all those Duties and Offices, which are Essential to Church Communion,
and therefore is bound to Communicate with the Church in Religious Assemblies,
to join in Prayers and Sacraments, to attend public Instructions, and to live
like a member of the Church.

But to put this past all boudt, that external and actual Communion is an
essential Duty of a Churchmember, I shall offer these plain proofs of it.

1. That Baptism makes us Members of the visible Church of Christ, but there
can be no visible Church without visible Communion, and therefore every visible
Member, by virtue of his Membership, is bound to external and visible
Communion, when it may be had.

2. This is essential to the notion of a Church, as it is a Body and Society of
Christians. For all Bodies and Societies of Men are Instituted for the sake of
some common Duties and Offices to be performed by the Members of it. A Body of
Men is a Community, and it is a strange kind of Community, in which every
Member may act by it self, without any Communication with other Members of the
same Body. And yet such a kind of Body as this, the Christian Church is, if it
be not an essential Duty of every Member, to live in the exercise of visible
Communion with the Church, when he can. For there is the same Law for all
Members, and either all or none, are bound to actual Communion.

But this is more absurd still, when we consider, that the Church is such a
Body, as consists of variety of Members, of different Offices and Officers,
which are of no use without actual and visible Communion of all its Members.

To what purpose did Christ appoint such variety of Ministers in his Church,
Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers, for the perfecting of
the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of
Christ; to what purpose has he instituted a standing Ministry in his Church, to
offer up the Prayers of the Faithful to God, to instruct, exhort, reprove, and
administer the Christian Sacraments, if private Christians are not bound to
maintain Communion with them, in all Religious Offices?

3. Nay the Nature of Christian Worship obliges us to Church Communion. I
suppose, no Man will deny, but that every Christian is bound to Worship God
according to our Saviors Institution: and what that is, we cannot learn
better, than from the Example of the Primitive Christians, of whom St. Luke
gives us this account, Acts 2. 41.
that they continued Steadfast in the Apostles Doctrine, and Worship, and in
breaking of Bread, and in Prayers.

That which makes any thing in a Strict sense, an Act of Church Communion is,
that it is performed in the Fellowship of the Apostles, or in Communion with
the Bishops and Ministers of the Church; They are appointed to Offer up the
Prayers of Christians to God in his Name; and therefore tho the private
devotions of Christians are acceptable to God, as the Prayers of
Church Members, yet none but public Prayers, which are Offered up by Men who
have their Authority from Christ, to Offer these Spiritual Sacrifices to God,
are properly the Prayers of the Church, and Acts of Church Communion. If then
we must Offer up our Prayers to God according to Christ's Institution, that is,
by the hands of persons Authorized and set apart for that purpose; we must of
necessity join in the Actual and Visible Communion of the Church.

The Sacrament of the Lords Supper is the principal part of Christian Worship,
and we cannot Celebrate this Feast; but in Church Communion; for this is a
(...) a common Supper, or Communion-Feast, which in all Ages of the Church, has
been administered by Consecrated Persons, and in Church Communion; for it loses
its Nature and Signification, when it is turned into a private Mass, so that if
every Christian is bound to the Actual performance of true Christian Worship,
he is bound to an Actual Communion with the Christian Church.

4. We may observe further; that Church Authority is exercised only about
Church Communion, which necessarily supposes, that all Christians, who are
Church Members and in a State of Communion, are bound to all the Acts of
external and visible Communion with the Church. The exercise of Church
Authority consists in Receiving in, or Shutting out of the Church. To receive
into the Church, is to admit them to all external Acts of Communion, to Shut,
or Cast, out of the Church, is to deny them the external and visible Communion
of the Church; not to allow them to Pray, or receive the Lords Supper, or
perform any Religious Offices in the public Assemblies of the Church. Now all
this Church Authority would signify nothing, were not External and Actual
Communion, both the Privilege and Duty of every Christian; and yet this is all
the Authority Christ has given to His Church.

5. And to confirm all this, nothing is more plain in Scripture, than that
Separation from a Church, is to withdraw from the visible Communion of it, and
there can be no Notion of Separation without this; now if Separation from
Religious Assemblies be to break Communion, then to live in Communion with the
Church requires our Actual Communicating with the Church in all Religious
Duties.

And that this is the true Notion of Separation is easily proved from the most
express testimonies; 2 Cor. 6. 17. Wherefore come out from among them, and be
ye separate, says the Lord, and touch no unclean thing, and I will receive
you: Where, come out from among them, and be ye separate, plainly signifies, to
forsake the Assemblies of Idolaters, not to Communicate with them in their
Idolatrous Worship; So that not to join with any Men or Church in their
Idolatrous Worship, is to Separate from their Communion, which is a very Godly
Separation, when the Worship is Idolatrous and Sinful, but a Schismatical
Separation, when it is not. Thus St. John tells us of the Ancient Heretics,
They went out from us because they were not of us, for if they had been of us,
1 John 2. 19
they would, no doubt, have continued with us, but they went out, that they
might be made manifest, that they were not all of us. Where their going out
from them, plainly signifies, their forsaking Christian Assemblies, upon which
account the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews admonishes the Christians, not
to forsake the Assembling of themselves together, Heb. 10. 25.
as the manner of some is, in which he refers to the Separation of those
Ancient Heretics.

And thus accordingly to have Fellowship or Communion with any, is to partake
with them in their Religious Mysteries. By this Argument St. Paul disswades the
Corinthians from Eating of the Idols Feast; because they were Sacrifices to
Evil Spirits, and by partaking of those Sacrifices they had Communion with
them. 1 Cor. 10. 20, 21.
But I say, that the things, which the Gentiles Sacrifice, they Sacrifice to
Devils, and not to God, and I would not that you should have Fellowship with
Devils. Ye cannot Drink the Cup of the Lord, and the Cup of Devils, ye cannot
be partakers of the Lords Table, and of the Table of Devils. So that, tho we
must first be in a state of Communion with Christ, and his Church, must first
be received into Covenant, and by Baptism be incorporated into the Christian
Church, before we have any right to Communicate with this Church; yet no Man
can preserve his Church State without Actual Communion, no Man has Communion
with Christ, or his Church, but he, who Actually Communicates in all Religious
Offices, and Christian Institutions; a state of Communion confers a right to
Communicate, but Actual Communion consists in the exercise of Communion, and a
right to Communicate without Actual Communion is worth nothing, as no right or
privilege is without the Exercise of it; for enjoyment consists in Acts, and
all the Blessings of the Gospel, all the Blessings of Christian Communion, are
conveyed to us by Actual Communion. So that if we would partake in the
Blessings of Christ, if we would Reap the advantages of Church Communion, we
must live in Actual Communion, and not content our selves with a dormant and
useless right, which we never bring into Act.

This is sufficient to prove, the necessity of Actual Communion with the
Christian Church, when it may be had, for where it cannot be had, Non-Communion
is no Sin, for we are not obliged to Impossibilities; he who lives in a
Country, or travels through any Country, where there is no true Christian
Church to Communicate with, cannot enjoy Actual Communion; the right and Duty
of Communion continues, tho necessity may suspend the Act. But the greater
difficulty is, whether it be not Lawful, to suspend our Communion with any
particular Churches, when we see the Church divided into a great many Parties
and Factions, which refuse Communion with each other, which is the deplorable
state of the Church at this day among us, Presbyterians, Independents,
Anabaptists, Quakers, all Separate from the Church of England, and from each
other, and from hence some conclude it Lawful to suspend Communion with all
these divided Parties, which is just such a reason for a Total suspension of
Church Communion, as the different and contrary opinions in Religion are for
Skepticism and infidelity. Because there are a great many kinds of Religions in
the World, and a great many divided Sects of the Christian Religion, therefore
some Men will be of no Religion; and because the Christian Church is divided
into a great many opposite and Separate Communions, therefore others will be of
no Church; and the reason is as strong in one case, as it is in the other, that
is, indeed it holds in neither: For it is possible to discover, which is the
true Religion, notwithstanding all these different and contrary persuasions
about it, and it is equally possible to find out, which of these divided
Communions is a true and sound Member of the Catholic Church, and when we know
that, we are bound to maintain Communion with it.

Indeed if such Divisions and Separations, excuse us from Actual Communion with
the Church, Actual Communion never was, and is never likely to be a Duty long
together; For there never was any state of the Church so happy long together,
as to be without divisions: even in the Apostles times, there were those, who
Separated from the Communion of the Apostles, and set up private Conventicles
of their own, and so it has been in all succeeding Ages of the Church, and so
it is likely to continue, and if we are not bound to Communicate with the
Church, while there are any Heretics, or Schismatics, who divide from the
Church, farewell to all Church Communion in this World.

Should any Man indeed Travel into a Strange Country, and there find a Schism
in the Christian Church, it were very fitting for him to Suspend Communion with
either Party, till he had opportunity to acquaint himself with the state of the
Controversy, so as to judge, which party is the Schismatic; and then he is
bound (if he understand their Language) to Communicate with the sound and
Orthodox part of the Catholic Church, which he finds in that place. But this
does not reach the case of those, who are constant Inhabitants of the place,
where the Schism is; for they must not live in a Skeptical suspension of
Communion all their days.

And there is one plain Rule to direct all Men in this Inquiry; That wherever
there is a Church Established by public Authority, if there be nothing Sinful
in its Constitution and Worship, we are bound to Communicate with that Church,
and to reject the Communion of all other Parties and Sects of Christians. For
the advantage always lies on the side of Authority, no public establishment
can justify a Sinful Communion, but if there be nothing Sinful in the
Communion of the National Church, which is Established by public Authority, to
Separate from such a Church is both disobedience to the Supreme Authority in
the State, and a Schism from the Church.

But it will be convenient to consider, what these Men mean by suspending
Communion. For is it Lawful for an English Man during these Church divisions
among us, never to Worship God in any Public and Religious Assemblies? Never
to Pray, nor Hear, nor receive the Lords Supper together? If this were so, it
were the most Effectual way in the World to thrust out all Religion.

But this they will not, they dare not say, and therefore by Suspending
Communion they mean, that in case of such divisions they may refuse to enter
themselves fixed and settled Members of any Church, but Communicate occasionally
with them all.

But I have already observed how absurd this distinction of fixed and occasional
Communion is. For no Act of Religion is an Act of Communion (not so much as of
occasional Communion) which is not performed in the Communion of the Church;
and no Man is in Communion with the Church, who is not a Member of it, and
whoever is a Member of the Church is a fixed and not an occasional Member; and
whatever Church he Communicates with, tho it may be, it is but once in a Year,
or once in his Life, as he occasionally Travels that way, yet he Communicates
as a fixed Member of the Catholic Church, and of every sound part of the
Catholic Church; for a fixed Member does not signify our fixed abode, or
constant Acts of Communion in any particular Church, but our state of
Communion, and fixed and permanent relation to the whole Christian Church, and
every part of it, and therefore tho a particular Act of Communion may be
performed upon some particular occasion with such a particular Church, yet it
is not an Act of occasional, but of fixed Communion, because tho I Communicate
but once and that occasionally, yet I Communicate as a Member of the Church,
which is not an occasional but a fixed Relation.

So that when Men Communicate occasionally, as they speak, with all the
different Parties of Christians in a divided Church, they either Communicate
with none, or Communicate with all of them. If they perform these Acts of
Communion, without owning their relation to them, as Members, then they are in
Communion with none of them, notwithstanding all these pretended Acts of
occasional Commmunion, and so they live in Communion with no Church, which yet
I hope, I have made it appear to be the Duty of every Christin to do; if they
Communicate with all these divided Parties, as Members, then they are in
Communion with many Separate Churches, are Members of Separate and Opposite
Bodies, that is, they are contrary to themselves, and on one side or other, are
certain to be Schismatics, but this will appear further from considering the
two following Cases.

Case 2. Case 2.
The Second Case is this; Whether constant Communion be a Duty, where
occasional Communion is Lawful. I have already made it appear, that the very
notion of constant and occasional Communion is absurd, and a contradiction to
all the principles of Catholic Communion, and therefore there is no place for
this distinction, nor for this question, every Christian, as a Christian, is a
fixed Member of the whole Christian Church, and of every sound part of it, and
for Men to talk of being Members of any one particular Church, in distinction
from all other particular Churches, of which they will not own themselves
Members, is a Schismatical notion of Church Membership, because it divides the
Christian Church into distinct Memberships, and therefore into distinct Bodies,
which makes the one Church and one Body of Christ, not one, but many Bodies:
for if every particular Church has such a number of Members, which are Members
only of that particular Church, wherein they are fixed, and are not Members of
any other particular Church, then every particular Church is a distinct and
entire Body by it self, which has particular Members of its own, which belong
to no other Body; just as every particular Man has his own Body, which consists
of such a number of Members, united to each other, and distinct from all other
Bodies.

The plain state of the Case in short is this: Every true Christian is in
Communion with the whole Christian Church, that is, is a Member of the whole
Church; but he must perform the Acts of Communion in some particular Church,
and the only allowable difference between constant and occasional Communion is
this; that we must perform the constant Acts of Communion in that part of the
Catholic Church, in which we constantly live, and Communicate occasionally
with that part of the Church, in which we are occasionally present; and
therefore there never can be any Competition between constant and occasional
Communion in the same place. I cannot Communicate constantly with that Church
in which I Communicate occasionally, unless I remove my Habitation, and turn an
occasional presence into a constant and settled abode; nor can I without sin
Communicate only occasionally with that Church, with which I may and ought to
Communicate constantly, as being constantly present there, for this is only to
do that sometimes, which I ought to do always. This is like a Man's living
occasionally in his own House, which signifies, that for the most part he is a
stranger at home.

There cannot be two distinct Churches in the same place, one for occasional,
and another for constant Communion, without Schism, For it is evident, these
are two distinct Communions, and that our relation to them is as different, as
it is to a House we live in, and to an Inn, where we lodge for a Night.

So that there is no foundation for this Inquiry among Men, who understand the
true Principles of Catholick-Communion; It never can be a Case of Conscience,
whether I should Communicate constantly or occasionally with such a Church,
unless it be a Case of Conscience, whether I should live constantly or
occasionally within the bounds and jurisdiction of such a Church; for where my
constant abode is, there my constant Communion must be, if there be a true and
sincere part of the Catholick-Church in that place, and where I am only
occasionally, there I can only Communicate occasionally also.

But to meet with the distempers of this Age, and to remove those Apologies
some Men make for their Schism, it is necessary to make this a question. For in
this divided state of the Church, there are a great many among us, who think,
they cannot maintain constant Communion with the Church of England, as constant
and fixed Members, who yet upon some occasions think, they may Communicate with
us in all parts of Worship, and Actually do so.

Now when these Men, who are fixed Members, as they call it, of Separate
Churches, think fit sometimes to Communicate in all parts of Worship with the
Church of England, we charitably suppose, that Men, who pretend to so much
tenderness of Conscience, and care of their Souls, will do nothing, not so much
as once, which they believe, or suspect, to be sinful, at the time, when they
do it; and therefore we conclude, that those, who Communicate occasionally with
the Church of England, do thereby declare, that they believe, there is nothing
sinful in our Communion; and we thank them for this good opinion they express
of our Church, and earnestly desire to know, how they can justify their
ordinary Separation from such a Church, as requires no sinful terms of
Communion.

If any thing less than sinful terms of Communion can justify a Separation,
then there can be no end of Separations, and Catholick-Communion is an
Impossible and Impracticable notion, that is, the Church of Christ neither is
one Body, nor ever can be. For if Men are not bound to Communicate with a
Church, which observes our Saviors Institutions, without any such corrupt
mixtures, as make its Communion sinful, then there is no bounds to be set to
the Fancies of Men, but they may new model Churches, and divide and subdivide
without any end.

Is that a sound and Orthodox part of the Catholick-Church, which has nothing
sinful in its Communion? If it be not, Pray what is it, that makes any Church
Sound and Orthodox? If it be, upon what account is it Lawful, to separate from
a Sound and Orthodox Church? and may we not by the same reason separate from
the whole Catholic Church, as from any Sound part of it? Nay does not that Man
Separate from the whole Catholic Church, who Separates from any Sound part of
it? For the Communion of the Church is but one, and he, that divides and Breaks
this union, Separates himself from the whole Body.

Excepting the Independency of Churches (which I have proved above to be Schism
in the very notion of it) the great Pleas for Separation from a Church, which
has nothing sinful in its Communion, are the pretense of greater Edification,
and purer Ordinances. But these are such Pleas, as must expose the Church to
Eternal Schisms, because there are no certain Rules to judge of these matters,
but the various and uncertain fancies of Men. What they like best, that shall
be most for their Edification, and these shall be purer Ordinances, and till
Men can agree these matters among themselves, which they are never likely to
do, till they can all agree in the same Diet; or in their judgment and opinion
about beauty, decency, fitness, convenience, they may and will divide without
end; and if the Peace and Unity of the Church be so necessary a duty, it is
certain, these Principles, which are so destructive to Peace and Unity, must be
false, as to consider these things particularly, but very briefly.

What purer Administrations and Ordinances would Men have, than those of our
Saviors own Institution, without any Corrupt and sinful mixtures, to spoil
their virtue and efficacy? (as we suppose is acknowledged by those, who
occasionally Communicate in all parts of our Worship, that there is nothing
sinful in it) the purity of divine Adminstrations must consist in their
agreement with the Institution, that there is neither any such defect or
addition, as alters their Nature and destroys their Virtue. For the Efficacy of
Gospel Ordinances depends upon their Institution, not upon particular modes of
Administration, which are not expressly Commanded in the Gospel; and he, who
desires greater purity of Ordinances than their conformity to their
Institution, who thinks, that Baptism and the Lords Supper lose their Efficacy,
unless they be administered in that way, which they themselves best like, are
guilty of gross Superstition, and attribute the virtue of Sacraments to the
manner of their administration, not to their divine Institution.

And what Men talk of greater Edification is generally as little understood as
the other; for Edification is building up, and is applied to the Church,
considered as Gods House and Temple, and it is an odd way of building up the
Temple of God, by dividing and Separating the parts of it from each other.

This one thing well considered, viz. That (...) Edification or Building,
according to the Scripture notion of it, does always primarily refer to, or at
least include, Church-unity and Communion, is sufficient to convince any Man,
what an ill way it is, to seek for greater Edification in breaking the
Communion of the Church by Schism and Separation; and therefore I shall make it
plainly appear, that this is the true Scripture notion of Edification; and to
that end shall consider the most material places, where this word is used.

Now the most proper signification of (...), which our Translators render by
Edification, is a House or Building, and this is the proper Sense, wherein it
belongs to the Christian Church, 1 Cor. 3. 9. 10.
Ye are Gods Husbandry, ye are Gods Building, that is, the Church is Gods House
or Building, (...). Thus the same Apostle tells us, that in Christ, Ephesians. 2. ^1.
the whole Building (i. e. the whole Christian Church) fitly framed together,
Matthew. 21, 42.
grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord. Hence the Governors of the Church
are called Builders, (...), Acts 4 11.
and the Apostles are called Laborers together with God, 1 Cor 3. 9.
in erecting this Spiritual Building, and St. Paul calls himself a Master
Builder. Hence the increase, growth and advances toward perfection in the
Church, is called the Building, or Edification of it. For this reason St. Paul
commends Prophecy, or Expounding the Scriptures, before speaking in unknown
Tongues without an Interpreter, 1 Cor. 14. 9.
because by this the Church receives Building or Edification. v. 12.
All these Spiritual gifts, which were bestowed on the Christians, were for the
Building and Edifying of the Church. The Apostolical power in Church censures
was for Edification, not for Destruction, (...) to Build, 2 Cor. 10. 8. 12. 19.
13. 10.
and not to pull down, that is, to preserve the Unity of the Church entire, and
its Communion pure.

And we may observe that this Edification is primarily applied to the Church, 1
Cor. 14. 5. 12.
That the Church may receive Edifying: Ephesians. 4. 12.
That ye may excel to the Edifying of the Church: For the Edifying of the Body
of Christ, And it is very observable: wherein the Apostle places the
Edification of the Body of Christ, viz. in Unity and Love. 13.
Till we all come in the unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of
God, to a perfect Man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ. Till we are united by one Faith into one Body, and perfect Man. And
speaking the truth in love, may grow up in him into all things, 15, 16.
which is the head, Even Christ from whom the whole Body fitly joined together,
and compacted by that, which every joint supplieth, according to the Effectual
working in the measure of every part, makes increase of the Body, unto the
Edifying it self in love. This is an admirable description of the Unity of the
Church, in which all the parts are closely united and compacted together, as
Stones and Timber are to make one House; and thus they grow into one Body, and
increase in mutual Love, and Charity, which is the very Building and
Edification of the Church, 1 Cor. 8. 1.
which is Edifyed and Built up in love, as the Apostle adds, that knowledge
puffs up, but Charity Edifieth, this Builds up the Church of Christ; and that
not such a common Charity as we have for all Mankind; but such a love and
Sympathy, as is peculiar to the Members of the same Body, and which none but
Members can have for each other, and now methinks I need not prove, that Schism
and Separation is the not for Edification of the Church; to Separate for
Edification is to pull down instead of Building up.

But these Men do not seem to have any great regard to the Edification of the
Church, but only to their own particular Edification, and we must grant, that
Edification is sometimes applied to particular Christians in Scripture,
according to St. Paul's Exhortation, Comfort your selves together, and Edify
one another, 1 These. 5. 11.
even as also ye do. And this Edifying one another without question signifies
our promoting each others growth and progress in all Christian Graces and
Virtues: and so the Building and Edification of the Church, signifies the
growth and Improvement of the Church in all Spiritual Wisdom and knowledge, and
Christian graces, the Edification of the Church consists in the Edification of
particular Christians, but then this is called Edification or Building, because
this growth and Improvement is in the Unity and Communion of the Church, and
makes them one Spiritual House and Temple. Thus the Church is called the Temple
of God, and every particular Christian is Gods Temple, wherein the Holy Spirit
dwells, and yet God has but one Temple, and the Holy Spirit dwells only in the
Church of Christ; but particular Christians are Gods Temple, and the Holy
Spirit dwells in them, as living Members of the Christian Church; and thus by
the same reason, the Church is Edified and Built up, as it grows into a
Spiritual House and Holy Temple by a firm and close Union and Communion of all
its parts; and every Christian is Edified, as he grows up in all Christian
Graces and Virtues in the Unity of the Church.

And therefore whatever extraordinary means of Edification Men may fancy to
themselves in a Separation, the Apostle knew no Edification, but in the
Communion of the Church; and indeed if our growth and increase in all Grace and
Virtue, be more owing to the internal assistances of the Divine Spirit, than to
the external Administrations, as St. Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 3. 6, 7.
I have planted, and Apollos watered, but God gave the increase: So then,
neither is he, that planteth any thing, nor he that waters; but God that gave
the increase: And the Divine Spirit confine his influences and operations to
the unity of the Church (as the same Apostle tells us, that there is but one
Body and one Spirit, Ephesians. 4. 4.
(which plainly signifies, that the operations of this one Spirit, are
appropriated to this one Body, as the Soul is to the Body it Animates) then it
does not seem a very likely way for Edification to cut our selves off from the
Unity of Christ's Body.

3. Case 3.
The Third and Last Case still remains, which will be resolved in a few words,
according to the Principles now laid down, which is this: Whether it be Lawful
to Communicate with two distinct and Separate Churches. For this is thought of
late days, not only a very Innocent and Lawful thing, but the true
Catholick-Spirit, and Catholick-Communion, to Communicate with Churches of all
Communions, unless perhaps they may except the Papists, and Quakers. It is
thought a Schismatical Principle, to refuse to Communicate with those Churches,
which withdraw Communion from us. And thus some, who Communicate ordinarily
with the Church of England, make no Scruple to Communicate in Prayers and
Sacraments with Presbyterian and Independent Churches, and Presbyterians can
Communicate with the Church of England, and with Independents, whom formerly
they charged with downright Schism; and some think it very indifferent, whom
they Communicate with, and therefore take their turns in all. But this is as
contrary to all the Principles of Church Communion, as any thing can possibly
be.

To be in Communion with the Church is to be a Member of it, and to be a Member
of two Separate and opposite Churches, is to be as contrary to our selves, as
those Separate Churches, are to each other.

Christ has but one Church, and one Body, and therefore where there are two
Churches divided from each other by Separate Communions, there is a Schism and
Rent in the Body, and whoever Communicates with both these Churches, on one
side or other, Communicates in a Schism.

That the Presbyterian and Independent Churches, have made an Actual Separation
from the Church of England, I have evidently proved already; and therefore if
the Communion of the Church of England be Lawful (as those, who can, and
ordinarily do Communicate with the Church of England, must be presumed to
acknowledge) then they are Schismatics, and to Communicate with them is to
partake in their Schism.

Now if Schism be an Innocent thing, and the true Catholic Spirit, I have no
more to say, but that the whole Christian Church, ever since the Apostles
times, has been in a very great mistake; but if Schism be a very great Sin, and
that which will Damn us, as soon as Adultery and Murder, then it must needs be
a dangerous thing to Communicate with Schismatics.

The Sum of all in short is this. Besides these Men, who justify their
Separation from the Church of England, by charging Her with requiring Sinful
terms of Communion, (which is the only thing, that can justify their
Separation, if it could be proved) there are others, who Separate lightly and
wantonly, for want of a due sense of the Nature of Church Communion, and our
obligations to preserve the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace. They have
no notion at all of a Church, or no notion of one Church, or know not, wherein
the Unity and Communion of this Church consists; and these Men think, it is
indifferent, whether they Communicate with any Church at all, or that they
secure themselves from Schism by Communicating sometimes with one Church, and
sometimes with another; that they may choose their Church according to their
own fancies, and change again, when ever their humor alters. But I hope, who
ever considers carefully, what I have now writ, and attends to those passionate
Exhortations of the Gospel to Peace, and Unity, and Brotherly Love, which
cannot be preserved but in one Communion, which is the Unity of the Body of
Christ, and the Peace and Love of fellow Members, will not only heartily Pray
to the God of Peace, to restore Peace and Unity to his Church, but will be
careful, how he divides the Church himself, and will use his utmost endeavors
to heal the present Schisms and Divisions of the Church of Christ.

THE END.

