A SERMON Preached at St. PAUL's Cathedral, NOVEMBER 22. 1699. BEING The
ANNIVERSARY Meeting OF THE Lovers of MUSIC.

By W. SHERLOCK, D.D. Dean of St. Paul's, Master of the Temple, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

Published at the Request of the Stewards.

LONDON: Printed for W. Rogers, at the Sun against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetstreet. MDCXCIX.

PSALM LXXXI. 1, 2. Sing aloud unto God our strength, make a joyful noise unto
the God of Jacob. Take a Psalm, and bring hither the Timbrel, the pleasant
Harp, with the Psaltery.
TO Praise God is acknowledged by all men to be the most Excellent part of
Divine Worship; it is the Religion of happy Creatures, and the Natural Homage
due to Infinite Goodness, which is the most Glorious Perfection of the Deity.
It exercises the best Passions of our Souls in the most perfect manner, Love,
Joy, Reverence, Admiration, which are the proper Passions of Devotion, made for
God, who is their last Object; and made for the Praise of God, which is their
most perfect Exercise. We cannot well conceive, What other Acts of Religion can
be proper for Heaven; when we shall be advanced to the utmost perfection of our
Natures; when we shall have put off Mortality and Corruption, and all other
Wants with them; When a Complete and Consummate Happiness shall leave no more
place for Desire; When we shall have nothing more to ask of God, nothing more
to expect, but the secure Possession and Enjoyment of those Pleasures which
fill, but never satiate; which are Eternally repeated, and are Eternally New
and Fresh: I say, in such a State as this, as Faith will be turned into Sight,
and Hope into Enjoyment; so Prayer also, which is so great a part of the
Worship of Sinners, and indigent Creatures, will be all turned into
Thanksgiving and Praise. Now as for this reason St. Paul prefers Charity before
Faith and Hope; because, though they are admirable Graces for the State of
Christians in this World, and absolutely necessary to carry us to Heaven; yet
they cannot enter into Heaven themselves, where Charity attains its greatest
Glory and Perfection; so by the same reason it appears, That Praise and
Thanksgiving is the most excellent part of Worship, because this is the
Religion of Heaven, and therefore ought to be the chief Delight and
Entertainment of those who hope to go to Heaven.

But what is it to praise God? Is it only to sing aloud, and to make a joyful
noise to God? Does it consist merely in the Harmonious Melody of Voices, and
Musical Instruments? Does he praise God best, who composes the best Anthems, or
Sings them best? Or do we think, that we then praise God best, when we feel our
selves the most Transported and Ravished with Excellent Music, performed by
the best Voices, the choicest Instruments, and the greatest Masters? This is a
very easy and a pleasant way of praising God, if this would carry us to Heaven;
but this is only to praise the Music, the Composition, or the Performance,
when we think of nothing else, come for no other End, and mean no more by it. I
would not have you mistake me; I do not appear in this place at this time to
decry or disparage the use of Music in the Worship of God, which would neither
become this Presence, nor my own Character; but to persuade and direct you to
turn the Delights and Charms of Music, into the Raptures of Devotion, which
would the most effectually silence all the Enemies of Church-Musick, and
Cathedral-Worship, while as a Divine Poet of our own Sings, This would visibly
turn Delight into a Sacrifice.

Now since Music, whatever it be, and how well soever performed, is of no Use
or Value in Religion, but as it serves the true Ends of Devotion; we must
Enquire, What that Harmony and Melody is, which is so acceptable to God; How
fit External and Sensible Melody is to promote this; And how it may and ought
to be improved to that purpose.

1. As for the first, I need not tell any Man, who understands the Nature of
Christian Worship, That it is only the Melody of the Heart, as St. Paul speaks,
that pleases God; All True Christian Worship, whatever the Externals of it are,
is the Worship of the Mind and Spirit. This alone is that Worship which it
becomes a reasonable Creature to pay to his Maker, his Sovereign Lord and
Savior, as the Blessed Virgin Sang, My Soul does magnify the Lord, and my
Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior. For it is the Mind only that can praise
God, though the Tongue must Sing his Praises. The Best Composed Hymns, the Most
Musical Instruments, the most Charming Voices, are but Lifeless Mechanical
Sounds, till they are Animated and Inspired by the Devotion of the Heart; And
God takes no more pleasure in the Best Voices, than in Bodily Strength or
Beauty. Now the Melody of the Heart, is the Consent and Harmony of all the
Powers and Passions of our Souls in the Praises of God. When Love, and Joy, and
Admiration, and the profoundest Reverence bear their several Parts, and offer
up our whole Souls as a Living Vocal Hymn of Praise: Then we Sing aloud in our
Hearts to God, when we feel the greatest Transports and Ecstasies of these
Divine Passions, which Swallow us up in God, and Unite us to the Heavenly
Quire: Then we Sing with True Melody in our Hearts to God, when these Divine
Passions, which are Essential to Praise and Thanksgiving, Charm all our Earthly
Passions into a Calm; Quiet all their Storms and Tumults; Leave no jarring
Discords, no Discontents, no Solicitous Cares, no Jealousies, no Envyings, to
discompose the Harmony of our Souls, which must be all Peace, all Love, all
Joy, to Sing with a True Divine Melody the Praises of God. This, and nothing
else, is the true Praise of God, when our Minds are filled with such bright
Ideas of his Glory and Perfections, with such a lively Sense of His Majesty,
Wisdom, Goodness, Power, discovered in his Great and Wonderful Works of
Creation, Providence, and the Redemption of the World by our Lord Jesus Christ,
as Transport us with Love, Admiration, and Joy. A Heart thus full of God, will
break forth into Songs of Praise; When the Fire is kindled within, as the
Psalmist observes from his own Experience, we shall then speak with our
Tongues; Here our Praises ought to Begin, to be sure here they must always End,
in the Heat and Fervor of our Affections, and an inward feeling of the Divine
Praises, if we would have them an acceptable Worship of God. As far as the
Harmony of Voices or Musical Instruments serve this End, they are Excellent
Helps to Devotion; but it is only their Subserviency to the Devotion of the
Mind, which gives them any Value, or allows them any Place in Religious Worship.

2 dly. Let us then consider of what Use Music is to Excite and Quicken our
Affections, and to give a New Life and Spirit to Devotion. Man is not all Soul
and Spirit, but a Compound Creature, consisting of Soul and Body; And while our
Souls are Vitally united to Bodies, they receive most of their Passions from
them; at least feel the most Strong and Vigorous Motions from those Impressions
which our Senses make; And Sight it self does not more variously affect our
Minds than Hearing does; Words and Sounds have very powerful Charms, and give
as quick a turn to our Thoughts and Passions, as Sight it self; and not only
Words, but even a Diversity of Sounds, are fitted by Nature to Express, and to
Excite very different Passions. Love, Joy, Admiration, Desire, Fear, Sorrow,
Indignation, Revenge, give some distinguishing Notes and Accents to the very
Voice, which no Art, but Nature Teaches, and which betrays the Passion without
speaking a Word; And such different Notes will also as forcibly imprint such
Passions on our Minds, as they naturally represent, and that many times whether
we will or no; which is a great secret in Nature, and shows an unaccountable
Sympathy between Sounds and Passions, which are by turns the Natural Effects
and Causes of each other: and there needs no other Proof what the Natural Power
of Music must be, to Raise and to Calm our Passions; And the Experience of all
Mankind tells us, that thus it is; When the Composer knows how to fit Notes to
Passions, which the Knowledge of Human Nature, not the mere proportion of
Sounds must teach him. Without this, a Fine Piece of Music is like a Company
of Fine Words put together, without any great Sense or Meaning; they make a
Fine Sound, and that is all.

Now if there be a Natural Sympathy, and Mutual Causality between Sounds and
Passions, there is no doubt, but True Devotional Music will Excite or Heighten
our Devotional Passions, as we daily see and complain, that Wanton and Amorous
Aires are apt to kindle Wanton Fires; For Nature will act like it self, whether
you apply it to Good or to Bad Purposes. If there be no force in Music to give
a Good or Bad Tincture to the Mind, Why do any men complain of Wanton Songs?
They may then blame the Poet, but neither the Composer nor Singer; For the
Music, it seems, does no hurt: if there be, Why do they Condemn Church-Musick,
which will have as good an influence upon a Devout Mind, as the other has a Bad
One?

Why then should any Man think Music improper for the Worship of God? It is a
Natural Power, though improved by Art, as most other Natural Powers are; and
all Natural Powers are made for the Worship and Service of God, as far as they
are capable of serving him; which Music is in a very high Degree, if it have
such a Natural Power over our Passions, as to Increase and Actuate, though it
cannot Create Devotion.

Both Poetry and Music were Originally used to Celebrate the Praises of God;
lost their Glory, when they descended to meaner Subjects, but were Profaned by
a Prostitution to men's Lusts and Vices. The first Account we have of Singing,
is the Song of Moses, Exodus 15. when God had made the Children of Israel to
pass through the Red Sea on dry Ground, and had Drowned the Egyptians; and we
cannot have a more Ancient Account than this, which is the most Ancient History
in the World. And throughout the Old Testament, both Vocal and Instrumental
Music, was not only used in the Worship of God; but this was the Chief, if not
the only Use of it. This is acknowledged by all; but some will not allow it to
be a Pattern for Christian Worship. They reckon Music among the Ceremonies of
the Jewish Law, sitted to the Carnal State of that People, and Abrogated with
the other Legal Ceremonies, by the more perfect Dispensation of the Gospel,
which requires a more Spiritual Worship. But a few Words will show, how
unreasonable this Pretense is.

The Song of Moses and Miriam was before the giving of the Law, and therefore
no part of it; and though this is the first time we Read of Singing, there is
no Reason to think, That this was the first beginning of it. We Read of no
Institution of Singing, though we do of Singers; that Singing seems as Ancient
and Natural, as Public Worship.

But suppose Singing had been part of the Mosaical Law; the Gospel of our
Savior Abrogates nothing of that Law, but such Types as receive their
Accomplishment in Christ, or such Appendant Ceremonies as were mere Signs and
Figures of an Evangelical Righteousness: But what is Singing a Type of, any
more than Speaking? For it is only a more Harmonious and Emphatical way of
Speaking; and I see no Reason, Why men may not reject Vocal Prayer, as well as
Vocal Music, because they were both used by the Jews. Whatever Objections are
now made against Church-Musick, which I have not now Time particularly to
Examine, were as good Objections in David's Time, as they are now; and yet then
Prophets Composed Hymns, and Prophets set the Tunes; for so the Chief Musicians
to whom David directs his Psalms, as the Titles of some of them Express, were
Prophets as well as Musicians; and methinks Men should speak more favorably of
such Practices as were under the Direction and Government of Inspired men.

In the Vision of the Prophet Isaiah, 6 Chapter 1, 2, 3, v. The Scraphims are
represented crying one to another, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts,
Heaven and Earth are full of his Glory. This is acknowledged to be a great
Example of Antiphonal Singing, in which One Answers another. But then they say,
this plainly refers to the Ancient Temple-Worship, and must not be admitted a
Precedent for Christian Practice. But if the Temple-Worship be a fit Precedent
for the Worship of Angels, Why may it not be a Precedent for the Worship of
Christians? Whose Worship, as Pure and Spiritual as it is, falls vastly short
of Angelical Worship. But do not the Angels then thus Worship God in Heaven?
This would be a New Objection against our Liturgy, never thought of before,
which in the Te Deum teaches us to Sing, To Thee all Angels cry aloud, the
heavens and all the powers therein.

To Thee Cherubin and Seraphin continually do cry,

Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabbath.

Heaven and Earth are full of the Majesty of thy Glory.

And if the Angels thus Sing in Heaven, surely the Precedent is not unworthy of
the Christian Church on Earth.

The like Representation we meet with of the Four Beasts, and Twenty four
Elders, Rev. 4. And the same Answer is given to it, That the Images in the
Apocalyptick Visions are fetched from the Law, and not from the Gospel. But
whence soever these Images were Originally taken, this Book was Directed to the
Christian Churches, and therefore was a Rule and Precedent for them. It all
along describes the State of the Christian, not of the Jewish Church, and
therefore their Worship too: And if we look into the Fifth Chapter, we shall
find these Four Beasts, and Twenty Four Elders were Christians, who were
Redeemed by the Blood of the Lamb, and Sung the Song of the Lamb; Thou art
worthy to take the Book, and to open the Seals thereof; for thou wast Slain,
and have Redeemed us to God, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and
Nation, and have made us unto our God Kings and Priests, and we shall Reign
upon the Earth, Ver. 9, 10. This I take to be a Christian Hymn, and therefore a
Pattern for Christian Worship.

And as much as some Smile at the Conceit, I cannot but think, That the General
Exhortations in the New Testament, to Sing to God, To admonish one another in
Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, Singing and Making Melody in our Hearts
to the Lord; Though they are not an Apostolical Institution of a Quire, nor do
prescribe the particular Forms of Cathedral Worship; yet they justify it all,
as far as it is fitted to the True Ends of Devotion; for the Apostles knew
after what manner they Sung in the Jewish Church; and had this been so unfit,
as is pretended for Christian Worship, they would not have Exhorted Christians
to Sing, without giving them a Caution against Jewish Singing.

And now it does not seem to me much to the purpose, to Enquire whether this
Practice was for any time intermitted in the Christian Church; and When, and
upon What Occasion it was Restored; For if what I have now Discoursed hold
good, it justifies the Use of Music in Religious Worship, whenever it can be
had; though there may be some Times and Circumstances, which will not allow it.
Though it could be certainly proved, That this was disused for the First Three
Centuries in the Christian Church, while they were under a State of
Persecution: This would be no greater Argument to me against Cathedral-Worship,
than it is against Cathedral-Churches: The Poverty and Afflicted State of the
Church at that Time would allow neither; but Prosperity by Degrees restored
them to both. We may as well Argue against the Use of Music in the Jewish
Church, because under the Babylonish Captivity they hung their Harps upon the
Willows, and refused to Sing the Songs of Sion in a Strange Land, to those who
carried them away Captives. The Primitive Christians in those Days never
declared their dislike of this way of Worship, but their Condition would not
bear it. No Christian will deny, That Singing the Praises of God and their
Savior, was always a Principal part of Christian Worship, and therefore was
the Worship of the Primitive Christians, unless they were Defective in a
Principal Part of Worship; so that the only Dispute can be about the manner of
Singing; and the Chief thing Objected, is the Antiphonal way of Singing; which
is acknowledged to have been used in the Jewish Church, and therefore has the
same Authority that Singing has: But yet I will yield the Cause, if any Man can
give me a good reason, Why it should be very Lawful, and an Excellent Part of
Religion, for a hundred Men, suppose, to Sing a whole Psalm together; but very
Unlawful and a Corruption of Religion, to Sing it Alternately; Fifty to Sing
One Verse, and Fifty the Next; when by their Answering each other, they
mutually Excite each other's Devotion, and signify the Consent and Union of
their Prayers and Praises in the Whole.

But setting aside the Afflicted State of the Christian Church, the Professed
Enemies of Cathedral-Worship allow us as Great and Early Authorities as we
desire. St. Basil, St. Ambrose, and St. Chrysostom, always will be Venerable
Names. The Church was restored to Peace but in the Fourth Century, and then
this Worship revived, and that by the Authority and Example of as Great and
Good Men as any the Church had.

That Erasmus himself, and many Reformers, were great Enemies to this way of
Worship, as it was then Practiced in the Church of Rome, is no great Wonder,
when their Hymns, as well as their Prayers, being performed in an unknown
Tongue, all their Singing was mere Noise, which could contribute nothing to
Devotion. But this is no greater Argument against our English Hymns and
Anthems, than against our English Prayers. If they meant any thing more, we
must demand their Reasons; For as for Authority, our own Reformers, and
Reformation have, and that deservedly, a much greater Authority in the World.

But I must hasten to a Conclusion, Which brings me to the Third Thing I
proposed, How Music may and ought to be improved to the Purposes of Devotion:
And here I must beg leave to speak something briefly to Three Sorts of Men;
Composers, Singers, and Hearers; which will serve for the Application of the
Whole.

First, As for Composers, Those who set our Hymns and Anthems to Musical Notes.
I do not pretend to Skill in Music, much less to be able to Teach such great
Masters as this Age has Bred; but I hope in some Measure I do, and may be
allowed to Understand and Teach Devotion, which is all I intend in This; for
that which according to all the Rules of Art must be allowed for Excellent
Music, may not always be proper for Devotion.

It is a great Mistake in Composing Hymns, and Anthems, to consider only what
Notes are Musical, and will Delight and Entertain the Hearers; The true Rule
is, What Notes are most proper to Excite or Quicken such Passions of Devotion,
as the Words of the Hymn or Anthem Express. This indeed cannot be done without
Skill in Music, but true Devotion is the best Directer of that Skill; for a
Devout Mind will judge of the Devotion, as a Skilful Ear does of the Music of
Sounds: That the most certain way for the greatest Masters to Compose such
Hymns and Anthems as are fit for the Worship of God, and may best serve the
Devotions of Christians, is to work their own Minds first into all those
Heights and Flames of Devotion, which they are to Express in Sounds: which they
will find a double Advantage in; it will make them Good Christians, and
Admirable Composers of Church-Musick.

A Devout Ear without any great Skill in Music, soon finds the want of this.

A Grave, Serious Mind, which is the true Temper of Devotion, is disturbed by
Light and Airy Compositions, which disperse the Thoughts, and give a Gay and
Frisking Motion to the Spirits, and call the Mind off from the Praises of God,
to attend merely to the agreeable Variety of Sounds, which is all that can be
expected from such Sounds as have nothing of Devotion in them: Which is so much
the worse still, when, (as is now grown very common in such Compositions) they
are clogged with Needless and Endless Repetitions. A Repetition serves only to
give an Emphasis, and it requires a great Judgment to place it Right; and is
very Absurd, when it is placed Wrong; but we often see, that there is too
little Regard had to this; The Skill of Altering Notes is the whole Design,
which, when there is not very great occasion for it, is like Schoolboys,
Varying Phrases, or like Ringing the Changes; which how Entertaining soever it
be, when we have nothing to do but to attend to Sounds, is yet very Nauseous
and Offensive to Devout Minds in Religious Worship. I thank God, the Ordinary
Service of our Church is very Grave and Solemn, and well fitted to Devotion:
And as for more Modern Compositions, the Governors of Churches ought to take
care to receive nothing into the Worship of God, but what is fitted to serve
Devotion; and this would Effectually Answer the greatest Objections against
Church-Musick.

Secondly, As for those who are Employed in Singing the Church Service and
Anthems, to assist the Devotions of the Congregation, it certainly becomes them
to behave themselves very Devoutly in it. Musical Instruments, which have no
Life and Sense, may Minister to our Devotions, though they are capable of none
themselves; but it gives great Offense and Scandal, to see those who are daily
Employed in the Singing Praises to God, to show no Signs of Devotion in
themselves, much more by an irreverent Behavior to betray great Symptoms of
want of Devotion. I thank God we have no great reason to make this Complaint in
this Church, and, I hope, shall every day have less; but this is a good
occasion to mind all such Persons, how Devout they ought to be, (if Music be a
help to Devotion); who have this Advantage from Art and Nature, first to Excite
their own Devotions, and then to Assist the Devotions of others; which last
must be a very tasteless uneasy Employment, if they have no Devotion of their
own. And a great Reproach also to their Art, when they themselves are
Witnesses, how little Devotion it Teaches.

But there is one thing, which I believe is not so well considered, which yet
is just matter of Scandal; for those who Sing Divine Hymns and Anthems at
Church, and whose Profession it is to do so, to Sing Wanton and Amorous, Lewd,
Atheistical Songs out of it. Men, who have entered themselves into the Service
of the Church, have Consecrated their Voices to God; not so, as never to Sing
any thing else but Hymns and Anthems, but yet so as never to Sing any thing to
the Reproach of God, Religion, or Virtue. This unbecomes any Man, who calls
himself a Christian, much more those whose peculiar Employment it is to Sing
the Praises of God.

Thirdly, As for Hearers, they ought also to consider, That their business at
Church is, not merely to be Entertained with Music, but to Exercise their
Devotions, which is the true End of Church-Musick; to Praise God with the more
fervent Passions. It is a Contempt of Religion, and of the House of God, to
come only to please our Ears, to hear Better Voices, and more Curious
Compositions, and more Artful Singing than we can meet with in other places.

This I have reason to fear is the Case of very many who Resort hither; who,
especially on the Lord's Day, Crowd into the Church to hear the Anthem, and
when that is over, to the great Disturbance of the Worship of God, and the
Scandal of all good Christians, Crowd as fast out again. Though there is this
good in it, that they make Room for Devouter People, who immediately fill up
their Places, to attend the Instructions of God's Word. But I hope this will
not be charged upon the Service of our Church, that Men who have no Devotion,
come only for Music: For Church-Musick cannot Create Devotion, though it may
improve it where it is.

But indeed we ought all to be aware that the Music does not Emply our
Thoughts more than our Devotions; which it can never do, if as Common Sense
Teaches us it ought to be, our Minds be in the first place fixed and intent upon
the Praises of God, which are Expressed in the Hymn or Anthem; which when
conveyed unto us in Musical Sounds, will give Life and Quickness to our
Devotions; not first fixed on the Music, which most probably will leave the
Devotion of the Anthem behind it. Those who find that Music does not Assist,
but Stifle their Devotion, and many such there may be, had much better keep to
their Parish-Churches, and prefer Devotion before Music. For to come to Church
without any intention to Worship God in his own House, or to pretend to Worship
him without Devotion, are great Affronts to the Divine Majesty.

In a word; Those who profess themselves Lovers of Music, ought to consider,
What the true End of Music is; and to improve it to the Noblest purposes. The
mere Harmony of Sounds is a very pleasant and innocent Entertainment: Of all
the Delights of Sense, this is in it self the least sensual, when it is not
abused to recommend Vice, and to convey impure Images to our Minds: But yet
merely to be delighted with Charming and Musical Aires, does not Answer the
true Character of a Lover of Music: For it is the least thing in Music to
please the Ear; its proper, natural Use, and the great Advantage and Pleasure
of it, relates to our Passions: To Compose, Soften, to Inflame them; and the
Diviner Passions it inspires us with, the more it is to be admired and valued;
and then Music must attain its greatest Glory and Perfection in true Devotion;
That the Lovers of Music ought to be very Devout Men, if they love Music for
that which is most valuable in it, and its last and noblest End.

To Conclude;

It concerns the Lovers of Music to vindicate it from all Profane Abuses; not
to suffer so Divine a thing to be prostituted to Men's Lusts: To discountenance
all Lewd, Profane, Atheistical Songs, how admirable soever the Composition be:
To preserve Music in its Virgin Modesty, and without confining her always to
the Temple, make the Praises of God her Chief Employment, as it is her greatest
Glory.

Thus I have spoke my mind very freely; showed you the Use, and the Abuses of
Music, which was one great Inducement to me to comply with the desires of
those Honorable and Worthy Persons, who imposed this Office on me; that I
might have an Opportunity of saying that which I thought fit should be said at
one time or other, and for saying of which, there could not be a more proper
Occasion than this.

And I hope this may plead my Excuse with all good Christians, if it have drawn
my Sermon out to too great a Length, and given too long an Interruption to the
Entertainment of those, the least part of whose business it was to hear a
Sermon.

To God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, be Honor, Glory, and
Power, Now and Ever. Amen. FINIS.
Books Published by the Reverend Dr. Sherlock, Dean of St. Paul' s, Master of
the Temple, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty. Printed for W. Rogers.
AN Answer to a Discourse, entitled, Papists protesting against Protestant
Popery. 2d Edit. Quarto.

An Answer to the Amic^ble Accommodation of the Differences between the
Representer and the Answerer. Quarto.

Thirteen Sermons preached on several Occasions. Quarto.

A Vindication of some Protestant Principles of Church Unity and Catholic
Communion, from the Charge of Agreement with the Church of Rome. Quarto.

A Preservative against Popery, in Two Parts; with the Vindication, in Answer
to the Cavils of Lewis Sabran, Jesuit. Quarto.

A Discourse of the Nature, Unity, and Communion of the Catholic Church. First
Part. Quarto.

Case of Allegi^nce due to Sovereign Powers, Stated and Resolved, according to
Scripture and Reason, and the Principles of the Church of England. Quarto.

A Vindication of the Case of Allegiance due to Sovereign Powers. 4 to.

A Discourse concerning the Divine Providence. Quarto. Second Edition. Price 5
s.

A Vindication of the Doctrine of the Trinity. 3d Edit. 4 to.

A Modest Examination of the Authority and Reasons of the late Decree of the
Vice Chancellor of Oxford, and some Heads of Colleges and Halls, concerning the
Heresy of Three Distinct Infinite Minds in the Holy and Ever Blessed Trinity.

Apology for Writing against Socinians. Quarto.

A Vindication of the Sermon of the Danger of corrupting the Faith by
Philosophy; in Answer to some Socinian Remarks. Quarto.

A Defense of Dr. Sherlock's Notion of the Trinity. Quarto.

The Distinction between the Real and Nominal Trinitarians examined, in Answer
to a Socinian Pamphlet. Quarto.

A Practical Discourse concerning Death. In Octavo. Tenth Edition. Price 3 s.

A Practical Discourse concerning a Future Judgment. The Fifth Edition. Octavo.
Price 3 s. 6 d.

The Present State of the Socinian Controversy, and the Doctrine of the
Catholic Fathers concerning a Trinity in Unity. 4 to. Price 5 s.

An Answer to the Animadversions on the Dean of St. Paul's Vindication of the
Trinity. By I. B. A. M. Quarto.

A Defense of the Dean of St. Paul's Apology for Writing against Socinians.
Quarto.


