The Dean of St. Pauls's SERMON Before the Honorable House of Commons, On the
30 th of January, 1691/2.

Lunae 1mo. die Februarii, 1691.
ORdered, That the Thanks of this House be given to the Dean of St. Paul's, for
the Sermon Preached before this House at St. Margaret's Westminster, the 30 th
day of January last: And that he be desired to Print the same: And that Sir
Tho. Darcy, and Mr. Biddolph do acquaint him therewith.

Paul Jodrell, Cl' Dom. Com.


A SERMON Preached before the HONORABLE House of Commons, AT St. MARGARET's
WESTMINSTER, January the XXXth, 1691/2.

By WILLIAM SHERLOCK, D. D. Dean of St. Paul's, Master of the Temple, and
Chaplain in Ordinary to Their MAJESTY'S.

LONDON: Printed for William Rogers at the Sun, overagainst St. Dunstan's
Church, in Flee^street. 1692.

A SERMON Preached before the HOUSE of COMMONS, On the XXXth of January, 1691/2.
XC. PSALM 15. Make us glad according to the days wherein thou have afflicted
us, and the years wherein we have seen evil.


THIS Psalm, as the Title tells us, and as Learned Men generally agree, is a
Prayer of Moses; penned by him, as is supposed, after God had pronounced that
final Sentence against the Israelites, That none of that great Army, which came
out of Egypt, from twenty years old and upwards, should enter into Canaan, but
should all die in the Wilderness, excepting Caleb and Joshua. And therefore he
complains, We are consumed in thy anger, and by thy wrath are we troubled; Thou
have set our iniquities before Thee, our secret sins in the light of thy
countenance: For all our days are passed away in thy wrath, we spend our years
as a tale that is told. Which is literally true of no other period of the
Jewish Church, but this, when God in great anger had condemned them all to die
in the Wilderness: They lived then to little other purpose, but to pass away
the time, as men tell Stories, till forty years should put an end to them all.

But in my Text, and some Verses before, he prays for, and foretells a more
happy state of the Jewish Church; when all the Troubles they had suffered for
so many years in Egypt, and the Wilderness, should come to an end, and they
should be settled in a quiet possession of the promised Land. Return, O Lord,
how long? and let it repent thee concerning thy servants. O satisfy us early
with thy mercy, that we may rejoice, and be glad all our days. Make us glad
according to the days wherein thou have afflicted us, and the years wherein we
have seen evil.

So that in my Text there are three things considerable; 1. The first is
implied, That sin for which God thus punished them: For that it was for their
sins, not only the Justice of the Divine Providence supposes, when the Calamity
is National; but the Psalmist expressly affirms, v. 8. Thou have set our
iniquities before thee, our secret sins in the light of thy countenance. Which
intimates, that there were more sins than one, and some of them very secret
ones too, for which God punished them: For so commonly it is, that a great many
sins, such as we have forgot, or took little notice of, are brought to account,
when some one great Provocation tempts God to public Acts of Vengeance.

If we apply this to the Case I before mentioned, then it is very evident what
this provoking Sin was; viz. Their murmuring against that good Land, their
rebelling against God and Moses, their attempt to make them a Captain to return
into Egypt, and to stone Caleb and Joshua, who encouraged them to go up, and
take possession of the Land, which God had promised to their Fathers, Number. 14.

2. Their Punishment, The continuance and severity of it; They were to wander
in the Wilderness Forty Years, and to die there, without entering into that good
Land.

3. Moses's Prophetic Prayer, That God would return to them in Mercy, and
recompense these Sufferings, by giving them a quiet possession of the Land of
Promise; Make us glad according to the days wherein thou have afflicted us, and
the years wherein we have seen evil.

Our case, which is the occasion of this present Solemnity, differs somewhat
from this in every particular, but yet bears such an Analogy, and proportion to
it, that I shall take occasion from hence to discourse to you on these Three
Heads:

1. The Sin which we this day Lament.

2. The Evils and Calamities, which we have now for more than Forty Years, in
some degrees or other, and sometimes very severely suffered under, as the
natural effects, or just Punishments of that Sin.

3. What a happy Prospect we have of an end of all these Evils, if we can be
contented to be Happy.

1. As for the First, The Sin we this Day lament; I shall make no scruple to
call it what you have this Day in your Public Prayers to Almighty God
confessed it to be; The Barbarous Murder of an Excellent Prince: And those are
guilty of base Hypocrisy, and put a great Contempt upon God, who join in the
Devotions of this Day, and don't think it so.

Besides our imploring the Divine Mercy and Forgiveness, I have sometimes
thought that such an Annual Solemnity as this, is due to the Memory of our
murdered Prince; the least Recompense we can make to him, and yet the greatest
thing we can now do for him; To celebrate his Funeral with a Religious Pomp,
and to shed Penitential Tears upon his Grave; And indeed such an Honorable
Presence as this, gives an illustrious Testimony to him, and vindicates his
Memory from those scurrilous Reflections which are made on it by envenomed Pens.

I shall not dispute the Lawfulness of Resisting the King's Authority; whether
it were Lawful for the Parliament to take Arms against the King, to Defend the
Laws and Liberties of their Country; for whether it were or were not, all Wise
and Good Men must abominate the Villainy of this Day; as we know many of those
did, who began the War, without being aware what the end of it would be.

For suppose (which is all that can be asked in this case), That in a Limited
Monarchy the Estates of the Realm have Authority to maintain the Laws and
Liberties of their Country, against the Illegal Encroachments and Usurpations
of their King; How does this justify the Murder of King Charles?

For 1. They could pretend to no farther Right, than to keep the King within
the Boundaries of Law; and when they were secured of this, they had nothing
else to do, but to lay down their Arms, and return to their Duty; for he was
their King still, and they his Subjects; and if it were no Rebellion to resist
his illegal Usurpations, yet it must be Rebellion to oppose him, when he was
contented to Govern by the Measures of Law; if there be any such Sin, as what
men use to call Rebellion.

Especially when the Subversion of the Laws and Government, and Established
Religion of the Nation is made the Condition of Peace: For tho it were Lawful
for Subjects to Resist their Prince for subverting Laws, surely this don't make
it Lawful for them to Murder him for observing the Laws which he is sworn to
observe: And therefore whether it were Rebellion or not before, one would think
it should commence Rebellion, when the Scotch Covenant, the Abolishing of
Episcopacy and Liturgies, that is, of the Worship and Government of the Church
Established by Law, were made the necessary Articles of Peace, without which, a
Prince who sued for Peace, must be denied it by his own Subjects.

And yet it is much worse still, when a Prince for the sake of Peace shall make
such Concessions, (tho it may be to the diminution of his just Authority) as
the Estates of the Realm shall Vote Satisfactory, and yet be Persecuted by a
Prevailing Faction, who had got the Power in their hands, and did equally
oppress both King and Subjects. I need not comment upon these things, you know
the Truth, and the Application of them.

2 dly, And yet it is a monstrous Aggravation of this, when they had a yiedling
and complying Prince in their hands, as far as with a safe Conscience he could
comply, to arraign, judge, condemn, and execute him: For what Authority had
they to judge and condemn their King? How came they to be his Sovereign, and He
their Subject? What Law or Rule made such an Example or President as this? And
if they had no Authority for it, it was Murder, and that the most execrable
Murder, the Murder of their King. It was a Sarcastical Question of Pilate to
the Jews, Will ye crucify your King? This they were ashamed of, and therefore
Disowned him, We have no King but Caesar: If the murder of a private man be so
great a crime, because in the Image of God made he man; what is the Murder of a
King, who is doubly Sacred, doubly the Image of God, both as a Man, and as a
King, who is God's Minister and Vicegerent?

And yet a secret Stab or Poison had been a civil way of Murdering Princes, in
comparison with this Mock-Scene and Pageantry of Justice: For what a Tragical
Sight was this! How could Humane Nature bear such an Indignity! To see a
Crowned Head, which not long since received the humblest Submissions of his
Subjects, and had Life and Death at his disposal; who was the Fountain of all
Authority and Justice, now Arraigned before his own Subjects, treated with
Ignominy and Scorn, brought in Triumph through his own Palace, where he used to
Shine with an Awful Majesty, and in the fight of the Sun, in the fight of his
own Subjects, who scarce durst bestow a secret Sigh on him; bow his Royal Head
to the Murdering Axe: I cannot bear telling the Story, and were it upon any
other occasion, I should think it very unmannerly to put you to so much pain as
to hear it.

And if to this we add the Character of his Person, and those Princely Virtues
which adorned his life; such Virtues as are rarely found in meaner Persons;
nay, which would have adorned even a Hermits Cell; it still aggravates the
Iniquity of it: But I shall not insist on this, for he has drawn the Picture of
himself in his admirable Book, better than any one else can draw it. It is an
amazing Providence, That God should expose the greatest Example of Piet yand
Virtue, that had sat upon the English Throne, to such Indignities and
Sufferings, as in all the Circumstances of them had no Example: What Wise
Reasons God had for it, we know not; but I am sure thus much we learn, That
there is a Spirit of Zeal and Faction, the Principles of which, if not
restrained, will ruin the best Princes, and over-turn the best Governments in
the world; for they make little difference between Princes, where they can find
Pretense and Power.

This was a very great Wickedness, for which it becomes us, as we do this day,
to humble our selves before God, and to implore his Mercy to Pity and Spare us.
It is not enough to say, That we had no hand in it; that it was done before
many of us were born, or before we could know and judge any thing about it, or
that we did abhor and detest it when it was done: This will excuse us from all
Personal Guilt; we shall not answer for it in another world, but we may suffer
for it in this. National Sins bring down National Judgments, which all men will
more or less feel, till they are removed by a National Repentance and
Humiliation: And therefore tho we cannot confess this Sin, as our own Personal
Guilt, we ought to express our Public Abhorrence of it; to beg God to remove
those Judgments which this Sin has both deserved, and has brought upon us;
especially after so many days, wherein we have been afflicted, after so many
years, wherein we have seen evil.

2. Which brings me to the second part of my Text, Those many Evils we have
seen and felt; Those Judgments with which God has afflicted us for this Sin:
For so we have reason to believe, when the Punishment bears the Character of
the Sin upon it, and is the natural effect and consequent of it.

I shall not give you a History of those late Tragical Times, which most of you
know as well or better than I do: How much this unhappy Divided Kingdom
suffered by a Bloody Unnatural War, which ruined so many Noble and Flourishing
Families, made so many miserable Widows and Orphans, spent so much Christian
Blood and Treasure, ruined the best Reformed Church, together with the best
Prince; put the Sword into those men's hands, who knew better than to part with
it, when they had it, till they had carved out their own Fortune and Greatness.
I need not tell you, That the fundamental Constitution of the English
Government was overturned, and exchanged for new Models, which did not last
long enough to be licked into any shape, and at last dwindled and glimmer'd
away in some short and faint Apparitions of Power. How the Subject was all this
while oppressed by the worst sort of Oppressors, their Fellow Subjects; and
found a vast deal of difference between the Government of their King with all
his Faults, and their new Masters. These things, I say, I shall pass over, for
thanks be to God, there is an end of them; and they remain only in Story, as
Sea-marks to warn us, where the Rocks and Sands lie: but such violent Storms as
these seldom end without leaving a rolling and troubled Sea. These terrible
Convulsions of State, like a sharp fit of the Gout, when the pain is gone,
leave a great weakness upon the Government, and make it very unquiet, and
liable to frequent Relapses. As for Example:

This destroys all confidence between Prince and Subjects, leaves ill
Resentments, Jealousies, Distrusts, which make Government uneasy and weak,
when a Prince cannot trust his Subjects, nor Subjects their Prince; but they
guard and fence against each other, the one to secure his Crown, the other
their Liberties: An unhappy state, which must needs make all Public Affairs
move slowly, and lamely, and create many Inconveniences to a Kingdom, both at
home and abroad.

This temps Princes to affect Arbitrary Power, when they feel their Crowns sit
tottering upon their Heads, and see themselves checked at every turn, and it
may be finally stopped in the most generous Designs, to advance the Glory,
Safety, Riches, and Power of their Nation; nay find themselves too weak to
secure their Government from Foreign Powers, or from Homebred Factions without
it.

I believe, no considering man doubts, but that the late Attempts to introduce
Arbitrary Power in form of Law, were principally owing to the Tragedy of this
Day: And if it were possible any thing could excuse such Attempts, this would
have done it. However we ought to acknowledge, that those Difficulties we so
lately strugled under, and from which the good Providence of God has delivered
us, were the just punishment, because the just desert, and the unavoidable
effect of our Sin.

While this is the state of things, without setting up the Royal Standard, or
levying Forces, Prince and Subjects (however the matter may be dissembled) are
at War with each other; and how uneasy a state this is, and how much the
Public suffers by it, our late Experience will tell us, or nothing will.

Arbitrary Power and Popery were the two great Pretenses to justify the War
against King Charles I. Now whatever appearances there might be of the first
through mistake and ill Council, and the necessity of Affairs, which might
misguide an Excellent Prince; there was little pretense for the second, besides
a Fanatical Imputation of Popery to the Church of England, of which that Prince
was so zealous a Patron; The Church of England, I say, the great Bulwark
against Popery; whose first Reformers sealed their Testimony against Popery
with their Blood; and whose many Learned Pens have defended the Protestant
Cause, to the great satisfaction of all the Protestant Churches, and to the
Confusion of their Popish Adversaries, and that even in the late Reign, when
few other Pens durst engage in the Quarrel. But observe now, as Adonibezeck
does, how God has required us.

To prevent the vain Fears of Popery, Protestants take Arms against their King,
barbarously murder him, and drive their Princes to seek their Bread, and to
secure their Lives in Foreign Countries. There one of them learns the Religion
of those Countries, which is a very convenient Religion for a Prince, who
affects to be Absolute. And this brought our Fears upon us; we saw a Zealous
Popish Prince, and Popish Bishops, and such bold steps made to set up Popery,
as made us all tremble. Righteous are thou, O Lord, and just are thy judgments!

On the other hand, this makes Subjects very jealous of the Power of their
Prince, and ready to take all Advantages to lessen it; which in time may prove
very dangerous to Government, at least will insensibly alter the Constitution:
For too little Power is as fatal to Government as too much; nay, in some
junctures it is the most dangerous Extreme of the two for what we call too much
Power may be well used, when in the Hand of a wise and good Prince; And then
the more the Power is, the stronger and more flourishing must the Government
and Nation be; but too little Power can never Govern well when the Government
is so weak, that it can neither defend it self nor its Subjects; and therefore
the just Rights and Prerogatives of the Crown, and the necessary Powers and
Authority for Government, ought to be as dear to Subjects, as their own Rights
and Liberties are. It is certain Power will be somewhere, if the Prince loose
it, the People will get it, and when once the People gain such a Power as to
top their Prince, there is an end of Monarchy. As absolute Power changes the
Constitution of a Legal and Limited Monarchy into an Arbitrary Government, so a
precarious depending Power, changes the Monarchy it self into a Venetian State.
Both which Extremes wise Men, who love the English Government, would by all
means avoid; and it is a very great mischief, when Princes or Subjects are
violently Tempted to either of the Extremes: and this we owe also to the Sin of
this Day.

Another very lasting and fatal Evil of such Examples, as that of this day is,
that it infects Men's minds with loose Notions of Government and Obedience,
which are at first invented to justify such Actions, and which People are
sooner taught then untaught: As, that all Power is radically in the People, and
therefore but a trust, which a Prince must give an account of; which he may be
deprived of; for the Abuse of which he may be Punished, even with Death, by his
own Subjects. Nay there are some among us who charge all Men who deny this,
with being Enemies to the Constitution, and with reproaching the Wisdom and
Justice of the Nation in the late happy Revolution, which they think can be
defended upon no other Principles. But as wise Men, and as hearty Friends to
the present Government think otherwise; and I am sure it would be no Service to
the Government to persuade all, who cannot own these Principles, to disown and
renounce all that has been done.

But how does it appear, that the late Revolution turned upon these Principles.

The Undertaking of the Prince of Orange, now our Gracious King, needed none of
these Principles to justify it: He was no Subject of England, but an
Independent Prince, and so nearly related to the Crown, that he was concerned
to see the Succession secured, and the Government kept upon its ancient Bottom;
which was thought so just and honorable and necessary an Undertaking, that Men
of all Principles seemed very well satisfied with it; even those who think the
Matter carried so far that they cannot now comply with the present Government;
in so much, that some, who are the greatest Sufferers at present by their
Noncompliance, could not be persuaded at that time to declare their abhorrence
of it.

The great Body of the Nation stood still and looked on; wished well to the
Prince without wishing ill to the King's Person, or to the just Exercise of his
Authority. And I am verily persuaded, there were very few even among those who
were more active, who at that time while the King continued with us ever
thought of more, then to obtain a free parliament, by whose mature Counsels,
the Law might be restored to its due Course, and the Religion and Liberties of
England secured.

But the King would not stand this Trial, but disbands his Army, withdraws his
Person, without leaving any Authority behind him to administer the Government.
No body ever thought that this was a perfectly free and voluntary Act, but
however gone he was, and had left no body behind him to govern by his
Authority; and then the Government was either dissolved, or the Power must
reside in the Estates of the Realm: for if at any time there be no Power in the
Nation the Government is dissolved.

The Estates upon this great Exigency of Affairs assembled, but did not pretend
the Superior Authority of the People over Kings, and their Power to judge,
depose, and punish them, but they only undertook to judge, what properly falls
under their Cognizance in such cases, and what now lay before them, whether the
Throne were vacant, and if it were, how it must be filled: And when those, who
were the sole and proper Judges of this Case had once determined it, private
Subjects (according to the fundamental Reasons of all Governments) were bound
to acquiesce, whatever their private Opinions were, or else such State-disputes
can never be determined, but we must necessarily dissolve into Anarchy and
Confusion. Where there is no determination of the Law of Nature, or of the Law
of God against it (as there is none about mere legal Rights) the Resolutions of
Government must determine the Consciences of private Subjects; for the Power of
Judging must extend as far as the just Power of governing does.

So that (whatever dispute there may be about other Matters) the late
Revolution has made no alteration at all in the Principles of Government and
Obedience. It does not oblige us to own the Superior Power of the People over
the King, which would be a very tottering Foundation for Monarchy, and could
never support it long. Those who believed the Doctrine of Nonresistance and
Passive Obedience to be a good Doctrine before may think so still, and be never
the less Friends to the present Government; and I have often thought it a
wonderful Providence of God, that in an Age, wherein the strictest Loyalty and
Obedience had been so earnestly pressed on Men, so great a Revolution should be
brought about, while the generality of Subjects were merely passive, and
surprised into a Deliverance. But it is quite otherwise in the present Case,
the horrid Fact committed on this Day has poisoned the very Springs and
Fountains of Government, and so deeply tinctured Men's Minds, that I pray God,
we may not still live to see and feel the miserable Effects of it. For when Men
sit loose in their Obedience, without the Restraint and Ties of Conscience,
nothing but Power can keep the disjoynted and incoherent Parts of such a
Government together; they are a fluid Body like the Sea, which every breath of
Wind puts into a new Disturbance and Commotion.

Especially when a Nation is already divided into Parties and Factions both in
Church and State, which are acted with a furious and restless Zeal, and will be
satisfied with nothing less than to be uppermost; which is another Mischief our
late unnatural War has left behind it. Those bitter Animosities are not yet
forgot, nay they daily revive again, and our old Quarrels are acted over with a
new Zeal. This is not only an uneasy, but a very dangerous State for any
movernment; when there are two or three or more Parties in any Nation, which
contend to be uppermost, and to oppress the others, and are resolved to
dislike, and to misrepresent what the others do. When a Name shall make common
Friends and common Enemies, and few Men have any regard to the Public good, if
it be against the Interest of their Party. Nay, when good Success is grievous
to them, if they have not been the chief Actors in it, and they are well
pleased with the greatest and most irreparable Miscarriages, if they give them
any advantage over their Rivals, though the Nation is in danger to be undone by
them. What difficulties does this impose upon a Prince, when it is dangerous to
choose any side, and yet impossible to be thought of none.

These are some of those Evils, which our own Sins, and the just Judgments of
God have brought upon us. And when shall we see an end of these things! When
shall Peace, and Righteousness, and Truth, take up their Habitation among us!
When will God return in Mercy, Heal the Breaches of our Sion, and Build up her
Walls! Now is the time if ever, heartily to endeavor, heartily to Pray for
this, That God would make us glad according to the days, wherein he has
afflicted us, and the years wherein we have seen Evil.

3. Which is the third part of my Text; which I can but name. Now in order to
this, God has done a great deal for us already, if we will do any thing for our
selves. God has advanced such Princes to the Throne (whom we beseech him long
to continue, preserve and prosper there) as seem on purpose fitted by Nature,
by Education, by Religion, by Interest, to accomplish this glorious Work. We
have a King, who was always in the Interest of his Country, whose great Mind
knows no greater Glory then to be a public Benefactor, to be a Patron to the
Injured and Oppressed, and to break the Chains and Fetters prepared for Europe.
A King, who knows how to Govern a free People, who knows the price of Liberty,
and what a value Mankind have for it. A King, who was never Personally
concerned in any of our Quarrels, and therefore has no Personal Resentments;
brings no Spirit of Revenge, no Spirit of a Party to the Throne with him. A
King and Queen, who by Education, Principle and Interest, are professed Enemies
to Popery, and the great Defense and Support of the Protestant Cause at home
and abroad; who teach and encourage Piety and Virtue by Their Examples as well
as Laws, and maintain and defend the Worship and Government of the Church of
England, and at the same time endeavor to soften and temper Men's passions with
Ease and Liberty; and God grant we may see the good effects of it; for Liberty
unless wisely used, seldom proves a kindness, even to those who have it.

So that all the old Complaints are redressed, all the plausible Pretenses for
Faction are silenced, by the Advancement of Their Majesty's to the Throne. Here
is no appearing Danger of an over-growing Power, and illegal Usurpations, no
oppression of the Subjects in their Just Rights, no divided Interest between
Prince and People; unless People will divide from a Prince who makes their
Safety, Happiness and Interest his own; nay, who purchases their Ease and
Security with the endless Fatigues and Hazard of his own Sacred Person. Here
are no fears of Popish designs, no pretense for former Clamours of Persecution
for Conscience sake; and what have the most dissatisfied Men to complain of,
but only the pressing Necessities of Affairs and such unavoidable Miscarriages,
as such Necessities will always occasion under the best Government in the World.

And why then should we not all unite in such Princes, and forget all former
Quarrels? why should we still divide into Parties, when the Throne is of no
Party, and will admit of none? what are those grievances still to make party
quarrels, unless Monarchy and the Church of England be thought the only
remaining Grievances; and I pray God I may never live to see these Grievances
removed; may the Throne always support the Church, and the Church the Throne,
for neither of them can long subsist apart: A fondness for Parity will soon
affect the State as well as the Church, for Parity is parity still, whether in
Church or State, and most of the Arguments for it will do equal Execution both
ways.

To conclude: If ever we desire to see a flourishing Church and Kingdom again,
let us learn Wisdom from the Example of this day; for he being dead, yet
speaks, and warns us all to have a care of a blind Zeal and Faction, not to
lissen to designing and discontented Spirits, who to gratify their own private
Passions and Resentments, will Revenge themselves upon the public Peace; not
to be imposed on again by the glorious Names of Religion and the Cause of
Christ, not to help such Men to begin a Quarrel who will end it without us, and
which we shall then in vain repent that ever we began; but these Cautions are
needless in such a Wise and Honorable Assembly. God grant we may all mind the
things that make for Peace, and those things whereby we may edify one another.

To God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, be Honor, Glory, and
Power, now and for ever Amen. FINIS.
BOOKS Published by the Reverend Dr. Sherlock, Dean of St. Paul' s, Master of
the Temple, and Chaplain in Ordinany to Their Majesty's.
AN Answer to a Discourse, Entitled, Papists Protesting against Protestant
Popery. Second Edition. 4o

An Answer to the Amicable Accommodation of the Differences between the
Representer and the Answerer 4o

A Sermon at the Funeral of the Reverend Benjamin Calamy, D. D. 4o

A Vindication of some Protestant Principles of Church-Unity and
Catholick-Communion, from the Charge of Agreement with the Church of Rome. 4o

A Preservative against Popery: Being some plain Directions to unlearned
Protestants, how to Dispute with Romish Priests. First Part. Fifth Edition. 4o

A Second Part of the Preservative against Popery. Second Edition. 4o

A Vindication of both Parts of the Preservative against Popery, in Answer to
the Cavils of Lew^s Sabran, Jesuit. 4o

A Discourse concerning the Nature, Unity, and Communion of the Catholic
Church. First Part. 4o

A Sermon Preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of
the City of London, on Sunday, November. 4. 1688. 4o

A Vindication of the Doctrine of the Holy and Ever-Blessed Trinity, and the
Incarnation of the Son of God: Occasioned by the Brief Notes of the Creed of
St. Athanasius, and the Brief History of the Unitarians, or Socinians, and
containing an Answer to both. The Second Edition. 4o

The Case of the Allegiance due to Sovereign Powers stated and resolved,
according to Scripture and Reason, and the Principles of the Church of England;
with a more particular Respect to the Oath lately enjoined, of Allegiance to
their present Majesty's, King William and Queen Mary, Sixth Edition. 4o

A Vindication of the Case of Allegiance due to Sovereign Powers: In Reply to
an Answer to a late Pamphlet, Entitled, Obedience and Submission to the
present Government demonstrated from Bishop Overal' s Convocation-Book; with a
Postscript in Answer to Dr. Sherlock' s Case of Allegiance. 4o

A Sermon Preached at White Hall before the Queen, on the 17th of June, 1691.
being the Fast Day. 4o

A Practical Discourse concerning Death. The Fifth Edition. 8o

A Practical Discourse concerning a Future Judgment. Second Edition. 8o.

Printed for W. Rogers.

BOOKS lately Printed for W. Rogers.
A Sermon Preached at White Hall, before the Queen, on the Monthly-Fast-Day,
September 16th, 1691. 4o

A Persuasive to Freq^^nt Communion in the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.
The Eighth Edition. 12o

Both by the most Reverend Father in God, John Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

A Sermon Preached on the 28th of June, at St. Andrew's Holbourn. By the Right
Reverend Father in God John Lord Bishop of Norwich.

A Sermon Preached on the 28th of June, at St. Mary le Bow, on Sunday the Fifth
of July, 1691. at the Consecration of the most Reverend Father in God John Lord
Archbishop of York; and the Right Reverend Fathers in God, John Lord Bishop of
Norwich, Richard Lord Bishop of Peterborough, and Edward Lord Bishop of
Gloucester. By Joshua Clark, Chaplain to the Right Reverend Father in God, the
Bishop of Norwich. 4o

The Necessity of Serious Consideration, and speedy Repentance, as the only way
to be safe both living and dying. 8o

The Lambs of Christ fed with the sincere Milk of the Word of God, in a short
Scripture Catechism. 12o

The Folly of Atheism demonstrated to the Capacity of the most unlearned
Reader. 8o

These Three by the Reverend Mr. Clement E^^s, Rector of Kirby in
Nothinghamshire.

Reflections upon two Books, one Entitled, The Case of Allegiance to a King in
Possession. The other, An Answer to Dr. Sherlock' s Case of Allegiance to
Sovereign Powers in Possession: on those parts especially, wherein the Author
endeavors to show his Opinion to be agreeable to the Laws of this Land. In a
Letter to a Friend. 4o


