A Defense and Continuation OF THE DISCOURSE Concerning the KNOWLEDGE OF Jesus
Christ, And OUR Union and Communion with Him.

With a particular respect to the Doctrine of the Church of England, And the
Charge of Socinianism and Pelagianism.

By the same AUTHOR.

LONDON: Printed by A. C. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, M. DC. LXXV.

TO The most Reverend Father in GOD, GILBERT, By Divine Providence, LORD
ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan, AND One of
His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
May it please your Grace,
IT is not unknown to your Grace, that in a late Discourse, according to my
mean Abilities, I endeavored to vindicate Christian Religion from those
uncouth and absurd Representations, which some modern Divines, who are the
great Fomenters of our present Factions, have made of it: And herein I thought,
I should do good service, not only to the common Cause of Christianity (which
is exposed to the scorn of Atheistical Wits, for the sake of such Doctrins, as
are so far from belonging to Christianity, that they seem to be invented on
purpose to affront the general sense and understanding of Mankind,) but also to
the best constituted Church in the World, which is rent and torn into a
thousand Factions for the sake of these new Discoveries, which are admired for
no other reason, but because they are not understood.

And I have met with such a Reward, as those men use to do, who oppose any
popular and inveterate mistakes, hard Words and hard Censures; though as soft
and gentle Arguments, as I could wish: But my Adversaries have used one
extraordinary piece of Art, which alone, I hope, will be sufficient to make my
Apology for this Address.

It is well known, my Lord, what Friends they are to the Church of England, and
yet now they take Sanctuary in our Church, and pretend a mighty Zeal for the
ancient Catholic Doctrine of it: Their great quarrel with me is, that I have
contradicted the Doctrine of our Church, and they are very jealous lest the
Church should by this means be disadvantageously represented to the world; and
think it the concernment of the Reverend Bishops either to confute or censure
such Doctrins: And indeed would those grave and wise Persons hearken either to
Papists or Fanatics, they should never want work; for whenever they find
themselves gravelled, they call upon the Church of England, to defend them
against her most zealous Advocates and hearty Friends.

My Lord, were I in the least conscious to my self of having deserted the
Doctrine of our Church, there is no Person, whom I should so justly dread as
your Grace, whose quick and piercing Judgment would easily detect such a
Prevarication, and whose great Authority could as easily crush so weak an
Adversary, and whose sincere and hearty Zeal and Fatherly Care and Affection
for this Church would not suffer such Tares to grow up in the midst of the
Wheat. But these excellent Accomplishments, wherewith God has in great goodness
endowed your Grace for the Preservation and wise Government of this Church in
such dangerous and critical times, render you as sure a Refuge and Sanctuary to
the Friends of our Church, as they make you formidable to her Enemies.

In this Assurance it is, that I humbly lay this my Defense at your Graces
Feet, and entirely submit it and its Author to your Judgment and Censure. If I
have said any thing blameworthy, it has been hitherto out of invincible
Ignorance and Mistake, which I hope will plead my excuse: And if I have (as I
am verily persuaded I have) made a true and faithful Representation of the
Doctrine of our Church, and vindicated it from such Fanatical Innovations, as
give the greatest and the justest cause of Scandal to all wise and considering
men, I humbly beg your Graces Patronage, which is the only Security and
Protection I desire from the rude Clamors and vehement Reproaches of my
Adversaries.

I beseech Almighty God to preserve your Grace long among us in Health and
Vigor, to protect his Church by your wise Counsels and Conduct, and to adorn
your See with your exemplary Virtues, which is the hearty Prayer of

Your GRACES Most Humble and Dutiful Servant, William Sherlock.

Imprimatur,

Ex Aed. Lambethanis April. 2. 1675. Tho. Tomkyns.

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE DEFENSE and CONTINUATION OF THE DISCOURSE CONCERNING
THE KNOWLEDGE OF JESUS CHRIST, etc. CONTAINING The Reasons which moved me to
write that DISCOURSE.
THere is not a more lamentable sight in the World, than the present state of
Religion, which is assaulted by so many subtle and malicious Adversaries,
crumbled into so many Sects and Factions, pestered with such infinite Disputes,
that it is time to cry out, as the Disciples did in the Storm, Help Lord, or we
perish. And that, which makes the case so desperate, is, that the Disease is
too strong for the Remedy, and the wisest Prescriptions do only stir and
provoke, not expel the Humors; or as it is in some complicated Distempers, that
which is proper for one disease, is very hurtful for another; which makes the
state both of the Patient and Physician very dangerous; the one being likely to
lose his Life, and the other his Reputation. I was not wholly ignorant of these
difficulties, when I ventured my late Discourse into the world, but have now a
more sensible experience, what it is to oppose inveterate prejudices; and what
little hope there is of doing much good, when a man must contend, not against
Reason and Argument, (in which way any ingenuous persons will be glad to be
overcome) but against Passion, and Interest, and popular Clamors, and the rude
assaults of a spightful and unchristian Zeal.

And yet I cannot say, that my labor is lost; for I am sensible, that my
Discourse has already served to rectify the mistakes of some honest and
unprejudiced men, and I hope may do so still; for those little and unmanly Arts
which have been used to disparage it and its Author, cannot long abuse any
ingenuous minds; and when the cheat is discovered, it will but give the greater
reputation to abused truth and honesty.

For this Reason I am resolved not to betray a good Cause, but to venture once
more, and to leave the success to the Divine Grace and Providence, which is
more peculiarly concerned for the interest of Religion, and true goodness; and
if I should see no other good effect of it, yet I can abundantly satisfy my
self in honest intentions, and worthy and generous designs.

For if I know my own thoughts (and I think no man knows them better) it was
not a disputing humor, nor an affectation of Fame and Glory, which gave birth
to that Discourse: Popular errors are a more likely way to procure a popular
esteem, than despised and persecuted truths; and though the judgment of the
wise is more valuable, yet the opinion of the people gives a name; as Dr. Owen
very Vind. p. 5.
well observes from his own experience, that his reputation is secured by the
cry and vogue of a Faction, when his Arguments are baffled, and practices
exposed.

And there is nothing I am more averse to, than a disputing humor; there are
very few opinions, which I think worth contention; while the general
concernments of Religion and a good Life are secured, I can be contented, that
men should differ in some nicer speculations, and it is a folly to be
discontented at it, for they always will, and there is no hurt in it: There are
five hundred curious questions started by some wanton wits, which can never be
determined, and it is no matter, whether they be or not; but whatever opinions
have a bad influence upon men's lives, are destructive to their souls too; and
it becomes every man, who has any concern for the eternal welfare of mankind,
to oppose such dangerous mistakes.

And this was the true occasion of my writing that Discourse; for the principal
Doctrines, which I there oppose, are such, as according to the best judgment I
can make of them, do either expressly, or in their immediate consequences,
encourage men to be bad; and if I am not mistaken in it (as I see no reason yet
to think I am) it was the most charitable design I could undertake; and if I
be, though my Adversaries may reasonably condemn me for imprudence or
ignorance, yet they ought in justice to commend my Charity: And indeed, let it
prove how it will, I cannot but foresee some good effect of it; for those who
have any care of their souls; must either reject such Doctrines, as are
destructive of a good Life, or more expressly declare for the necessity of a
good Life, notwithstanding such Doctrines; and either way I have my end, so
this Conclusion be universally received, whatever the Premises be: though this
last I think is much the worst way, it being dangerous to entrust men with bad
principles, for then they will draw Conclusions for themselves; and most men
are very sagacious to discover such consequences as will serve their interest,
and patronize their lusts.

This I have often observed in conversing with several sorts of men, that they
were very well skild in all those principles which tended to looseness and
debauchery, and that they understood the consequences of them too well, and did
at all turns make use of them to apologize for their own and other men's vices,
who were accounted gracious persons; the impossibility of keeping Gods Laws was
their excuse, and the righteousness of Christ their refuge; the one lessened
their guilt, and the other covered it; and I found, that let St. John say what
he would, they had found out a way to be righteous without doing righteousness.

Nay I observed farther, that too many were grown so fond of these Notions,
that they were impatient to hear any Preacher, who instructed them in their
Duty, and pressed the necessity of a holy Life, unless he concluded comfortably
with a Caution not to trust in their Duties, nor to expect that God would be
ever the better pleased with them upon that score, but that they must hope to
be saved only by the Righteousness of Christ, which (however it was intended by
the Preacher) I found was too often expounded by the Hearers, as a Gospel-Use,
which relaxt the Rigor and Severity of that Legal Doctrine of the necessity of
Good Works.

And it was too evident, that their Preachers did very much contribute to, and
encourage this humor, as the last refuge of their sinking Cause: all their
pretenses for Separation had been notoriously baffled and shamed, and they were
reduced to that case, that they could dispute no longer; and therefore the most
effectual way they could take, was to persuade the People, that Christ and the
Gospel were confined to a Conventicle, and to declaim against those Moral
Preachers, who made it their constant business to persuade men to live well,
and urged this, as the most material and necessary part of Religion, and the
great end of Christ's coming into the World: A strange and unpardonable crime,
that a Minister of the Gospel should preach up good Works! and yet this is the
great reproach that is cast upon the City-Clergy, (and I thank God, that there
is so much reason for it) this makes these men jealous of the Honor of Christ,
and the Grace of God, as if there would not be sins enough for Christ to
expiate, and for the grace of God to pardon, unless men continued wicked: This
occasioned that great outcry against a late excellent Book to prove that
Holiness is the Design of Christianity, that the great end of what Christ has
done and suffered for us, is, to transform us into the nature of God, and
thereby to qualify us for the eternal fruition of him; as if this were too
mean a design for the Son of God to effect, or there could be any thing more
great and honorable, or the Salvation of Mankind could be obtained without it.

So that indeed I was not the first Assailant, but writ in the defense of a
holy life, which was cried down by these men either under the name of Morality,
or of a Legal Righteousness, and in justification of those pious and truly
Gospel-Preachers, who were scandalized and reproached as great Enemies to
Christ, and the Grace of God, without any other pretense than their great Zeal
and vigorous Endeavors to convince men of the necessity and advantages of a
good Life.

It has bin the artifice of such men in all times to reproach the Loyal and
Conformable Clergy; formerly they were a company of dumb Dogs and Idol
Shepherds, because they were not every day in the Pulpit; but since their
industrious and conscientious Labors have confuted that calumny, now they
quarrel with them for preaching so well, for directing all their discourses to
the advancement of true Piety and a practical Religion; without which Preaching
can serve no end but to wheedle and cajole the People, and to maintain and
promote a Faction.

Their pretenses indeed for this are glorious and popular, that Christ is not
preached, nor the grace of God sufficiently advanced in the Work of our
Redemption; this were really a very great fault, if it were true, and such as
does unchristian those men who are guilty of it; and therefore the great design
of my Book was to wipe off this reproach, to show what it is to know Christ,
and to preach him, to explain those Metaphors whereby Christ is described, and
to reconcile the necessity of Holiness with the Doctrine of Christ's Merits and
Satisfaction, and Imputation of his Righteousness; and withal to make it
appear, that some, who glory so much in preaching Christ, have made a very
false representation of him, and out of a pretended veneration to the Person of
our Savior, have thrust his Gospel out of the World, or made such a Nose of
Wax of it, as to serve any purpose but that, for which it was first designed.

And since my Adversaries have endeavored to misrepresent the Doctrine and
Design of my Book, and by affixing ill names to it, deter their followers from
looking on the inside, or once considering what it is they are afraid of; I
shall here give a short Abstract of the whole Doctrine, and do earnestly beg
that favor of every man, if he will not be at the trouble to read and consider
the Discourse it self, at least to peruse this short Account of it, before he
allow himself the liberty of reviling.

Only I must observe by the way, how the state of things is already altered
since the appearing of my Discourse; before, the great noise and clamor was
against Moral and Legal Preachers, who preached up Holiness, but left out
Christ and the Grace of God; now when they are charged on the other hand with
as much undervaluing a holy Life, and with advancing the Person of Christ to
the prejudice of his Laws and Religion, they change their note, and would
persuade the world, that there is no real difference between us, but that I
force their Expressions to a sense which they never intended; they are now
grown great Patrons of Holiness, and whatever they talk of the Excellency of
Christ's Person, or of his boundless and bottomless compassion, and of such an
infinite mercy, which all the sins in the world cannot equal, and of such a
Patience as will save us notwithstanding our sins, they mean no more, than what
we believe, as heartily as they, that Christ is able and willing to save all
those who repent, and believe, and reform their lives, and that he will save
none but upon these terms: I am glad with all my heart to hear this, for I
designed no more than to establish this Doctrine; but what account can they
give after this of their general outcry against Legal and Moral Preachers?
Were there any men who taught the People that Holiness would save them without
the Merits of Christ? I know no such, they were none of my Companions and
Accomplices, at whom the Doctor so often flurts.

And if there be no real difference between us, but only a different phrase and
manner of expression, I wonder why they should be so angry with those men, who
speak that so plainly, that the People cannot mistake them, which they affect
to obscure in uncouth and mystical phrases: There can be no account given of
this, but that they are willing, at least, that the People should believe there
is a difference; and are not so faithful to Men's Souls as to prevent such
dangerous mistakes.

Were these phrases of coming to Christ, and closing with Christ, and leaning
and resting and rolling our Souls on Christ for Salvation, and such like,
generally understood, (not only by some cunning Sophisters, when they are
forced by reason and argument to put a sober sense on them, but by the common
people) to signify no more than expecting to be saved by Christ according to
Gospelterms, that is, upon the conditions of Faith and Repentance, and a new
Life, I should think him very ill employed, who should disturb the peace of the
Church for the sake of any modes of speaking; but when it is so evident, that
the Preachers themselves, when they have no adversary, expound these phrases to
a very different, if not contrary purpose; and that the generality of Hearers
never suspect that coming to Christ, and closing with Christ, include Obedience
and a holy Life; but that this is rather a hinderance to their closing with
Christ, as their Preachers tell them: This makes it necessary to oppose those
forms of speech which are generally abused to evil purposes, and it is an
argument of no great honesty, to be fond of words and phrases to the prejudice
of men's souls.

And yet after all this, the Doctor cannot forget his old grudge against these
Preachers of holiness: He tells us, I know there are not a few, who in the
course of a vain worldly conversation, whilst there is scarce a back or belly
of a Disciple of Christ that blesses God upon account of their bounty or
charity (the footsteps of levity, vanity, scurrility, and profaneness, being
moreover left upon all the paths of their haunt) are wont to declaim about
holiness, Vin. p. 119
good works, and justification by them, which is a ready way to instruct men to
Atheism, or the scorn of every thing that is professed in Religion. No doubt
but there is a great mixture of truth and modesty in this censure; I thank God
I know no such persons, and if I did, I should abhor them as much, as he can:
but the Doctors quarrel seems to be not so much at the vanity and profaneness,
etc. of their Conversation, (for it is a known Maxim among them, The worse the
better) as at their preaching Holiness, etc. Good Sir, if such men are
permitted to preach, what would you have them preach? Should they cry down
holiness, and preach up debauchery? Is this the way to cure the world of
Atheism? Or should they teach men to trust wholly in the righteousness of
Christ, without any righteousness of their own? I confess, this would much more
become them; and I wonder all bad men are not of this persuasion, though I hope
the Doctor and his Friends have some better reason for their Zeal.

For the same cause these men persecute my Discourse, the whole design of which
is no more than to convince men of the absolute necessity of a universal
Righteousness in order to please God, and to save their souls; that no man must
expect to be saved by Christ without obeying the Gospel, and imitating the
example of his Lord; and that this is the meaning of all those phrases of
Scripture, of believing in Christ, and coming to him, and receiving him, and
being united to him, and ingrafted in him, and the like, which are expounded by
some men to the prejudice of obedience, and to encourage sinners to expect
justification by Christ (and those who are justified, are actually in a state
of salvation) while they are in their filth and impurities.

I cannot but think it very glorious to suffer in such a cause; this was the
very reason, why the Pharisees persecuted our Savior himself, because he
rejected all their external and ceremonial righteousness, and exacted from them
a sincere and internal obedience to the divine Laws; and plainly told them,
That nothing would carry them to Heaven, but such a renovation of their minds
and spirits as transformed them into the likeness and image of God: This is the
great fault of my Book, and the true reason of all this noise and clamor, as
will appear by taking a summary account of the whole Design, and Doctrine of it.

CHAP. I.
Containing a short Account of the Design and Doctrine of the Discourse
concerning the Knowledge of Christ, etc.

THe Design I proposed to my self in that Discourse, was to reconcile that Love
and Honor and Adoration, Trust and Affiance, which all Christians owe to their
Lord and Savior, with the necessity of obeying his Laws, and being conformed
to his Example; that esteem and reverence we owe to the Person of Christ, with
a reverence for his Laws; that no man might expect to be saved by Christ,
though he be infinitely gracious and compassionate, and inherit all the
boundless Perfections of the Deity, without the practice of an universal
Righteousness. And therefore I showed that all those Considerations Chap. 2
which did naturally result from the contemplation of the Person of Christ, as
he is the Eternal Son of God, who was made Man, and sent into the World to
accomplish the work of our Redemption, did necessarily engage us to obey his
Laws, but gave us no encouragement to expect any thing more from him upon his
Personal account, than what he has promised in his Gospel.

This (I observed) was a plain demonstration of Gods love to Mankind, that he
sent so great and so dear a Person as his only begotten Son, to save Sinners:
-- No man can doubt of Gods good will to Sinners, who sees the Son of God
clothed with our flesh, and dying as a Sacrifice for our sins; and this gives
relief to our guilty fears, and encourages us to retrieve our past follies by
new Obedience. No man will return to his Duty without some hope of Pardon and
Forgiveness for his past sins; and the proper use of Gods love in sending
Christ into the World, is to conquer our Obstinacy, and to encourage our Hopes.

Thus the greatness of Christ's Person gives great Reverence and Authority to
his Gospel, and an inviolable Sanction to his Laws, as the Apostle argues; If
the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every transgression and
disobedience received a just recompense of Reward, how shall we escape if we
neglect so great salvation, which at first began to be spoken by the Lord, Heb.
1. 2, 3.

And this gives great Authority to his Example, and lays forcible obligations
on us to imitate him, who was not only our Savior, but God incarnate.

And this assures us of the infinite value of his Sacrifice, and of the power
of his Intercession: God cannot but be pleased, when his own Son undertakes to
be a Ransom, and to make Atonement for sinners, which is so great a vindication
of Gods Dominion and Sovereignty, of the authority of his Laws, and the wisdom
and justice of his Providence, that he may securely pardon humble and penitent
sinners without reproaching any of his Attributes; and we can desire no greater
security for the performance of this Gospel Covenant, than that it was sealed
with the blood of the Son of God.

And this is a great encouragement to return to God, when we have such a
powerful Advocate and Mediator to intercede for us.

But then we must expect no more from Christ, upon account of his personal
Excellencies and Perfections, than what he has promised in his Gospel. Christ
is the object of our Faith and Hope, only as he is our Savior; and he is our
Savior in no other sense, than as he is our Mediator; and he mediates for us
as our Priest, that is, in virtue of that Covenant, which he has sealed with
his blood; and therefore we have no reason to expect any thing from the Person
of Christ which is not contained in his Covenant, much less, which contradicts
it; for that would be, in effect, to renounce his Mediation, and to trust to
the goodness of his Nature.

Christ will in his own Person accomplish all those, Promises he has made,
whether they concern the present assistances of his Grace, or his Providence
and Protection in this world, or the future rewards of the next: but we must
learn what Christ will do for us, and upon what terms, not from the boundless
Perfections and Excellencies of his Person, but from the Declarations of the
Gospel, though the consideration of his Person, who he is, and how he lived,
and what he taught, may convince any man, that he will be a Savior to none but
those who live in the practice of that Righteousness, of which he was a
Preacher and Example.

Now to silence the clamors of some men, who upbraided those Preachers who
spent their greatest zeal in expounding the Laws of Christ, and in pressing men
by all the Motives and Arguments of the Gospel (the Sacrifice and Mediation of
Christ, the necessity of a good Life to make men happy hereafter, and the many
great advantages of Holiness here, etc.) to the practice of an universal
Righteousness; I say, to silence the clamors of those, who upbraided such
Preachers with not preaching Christ, I considered in the next Discourse of the
Knowledge of Christ, Chap. 3.
place, what it is to know Christ, and so consequently, what it is to preach
Him; and the sum of it was this, That to know Christ, is to be acquainted with
that Revelation which Christ has made of Gods will to the world: For as in
former ages God made himself known by the light of Nature, and the works of
Creation and Providence, and those partial and occasional Revelations of his
Will, which he made to good men; now in these last days he has sent his Son
into the world, to declare his Will to us: And therefore the only useful
knowledge is to understand those Revelations, which Christ has made of Gods
Will, the necessary consequence of which is, that he, who expounds the Laws and
Doctrine of the Gospel, does in the most proper sense preach Christ, as Philip
is said to preach Christ to the Samaritans, Act. 8. 5. which in ver. 12. is
called, Preaching the things concerning the Kingdom of God, and the Name of
Jesus Christ; that is, the whole Doctrine of the Gospel.

The whole Christian Religion is the Knowledge of Christ, and the Laws of
Righteousness, and the Motives to Obedience as principal a part as any, because
this was the ultimate design of Christ's coming into the world to reform men's
lives, and to prepare them for the happiness of the next world, by transforming
them into a Divine Nature: All that Christ did and suffered, was only in order
to this end, and then we understand all those mysteries of the Incarnation, and
Death, and Intercession of Christ, as much as is necessary to the purposes of
Religion; when we understand what obligations, they lay on us to a holy Life,
and feel their power and virtue in renewing and sanctifying our minds.

In the next place I observed, that the foundation of the greatest and most
dangerous mistakes, was laid in a wrong notion of our Union to Christ, of which
some men discourse in such uncouth and Cabbalistical terms, as no Body can
understand, and therefore I endeavored to state Chap. 4.
the true notion of our Union to Christ, and Communion with him.

And the sum of it is this, that those Metaphors which describe our union to
Christ, do primarily refer to the Christian Church, not to every individual
Christian; as Christ is the Head, and the Church or whole Society of Christians
his Body; a Husband, and the Church his Spouse; a Shepherd, and the Church his
Flock; a Rock, whereon his Church is built; the chief corner Stone, and the
Church a holy Temple.

But as for particular Christians, their Union to Christ is by means of their
Union to the Christian Church: that is, no man can be united to Christ, till he
be a Christian; and no man is in the Scripture account a Christian, till he
make a public profession of his Faith, and be solemnly admitted into the
Christian Church, which is the Body of Christ, for which he died, and to which
all the Promises of the Gospel are made.

A secret and private Faith in Christ is not ordinarily enough to make any man
a Christian; but Faith in the Heart, and the Confession of the Mouth are both
necessary: Romans x. 9, 10. Christ himself has appointed the public Sacrament
of our Initiation, and our Church teaches her Children, that in their Baptism
(which is their solemn admission into the Christian Church) They are made
Members of Christ, the Children of God, and Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven.

But I have abundantly confirmed this Notion in my former Discourse, and those
who would be more fully satisfied in it, may have recourse thither. The next
thing to be considered is, what is the true nature of this Union betwixt Christ
and his Church, and the most general and comprehensive notion is, that it is a
Political, not a natural Union: the Union between Christ and his Church
consists in their mutual Relations to each other; now those Relations whereby
the Scripture represents this Union, signify Power and Authority on Christ's
part, and Inferiority and Subjection in the Church: Christ is the Head and
Husband, which signifies Rule and Government; and the Church is his Spouse and
Body; and therefore as the Wife is subject to the Husband, and the Body to the
Head, so the Church must be subject to Christ; and the like may be said of all
those other Relations, whereby this Union is described.

Only when I call it a Political Union, you must not imagine that it is only
such an external Relation, as is between a Prince and his Subjects; because
Christ is a spiritual King, and his Authority reaches to the Heart and Spirit,
which no Humane Power can: no man is in a proper sense a Subject of Christ's
Kingdom, but he, who governs his Heart and Spirit, as well as his external
Actions, by the Laws of the Gospel; and though an external and visible
profession of the Gospel entitles men to an external Communion with the
Christian Church, because the external Government of the Church is committed to
men, who cannot discern hearts and thoughts; yet whoever does not heartily obey
Christ, is not really united to him; for the subjection of the Mind and Spirit
is the principal thing which denominates us the Subjects of a spiritual King:
and therefore this may be called a Spiritual-Political Union, which principally
respects the Subjection of our Minds and Spirits to Christ, and does
necessarily include a participation of the same nature with him, and a mutual
and reciprocal love: It is a Political Union because it consists in the
Authority and Government of Christ as a Head and Husband, and in the Subjection
and Obedience of the Church, as his Body and Spouse: and it is Spiritual,
because the Authority of Christ does not only reach our Outward Actions, as the
Government of Earthly Princes does, but extends it self to our Minds and
Spirits: and if you will put it into other words, our Union to Christ consists
in a hearty belief of his Revelations, in obedience to his Laws, and subjection
to his Authority, this makes us the Church the Temple of God, wherein he
dwells, as he formerly did in the Temple at Jerusalem; this is that which the
Scripture calls having Fellowship and Communion with God and Christ, which
signifies being of that Society, which puts us into a peculiar relation to God,
that God is our Father, and we his Children; that Christ is our Head and
Husband, our Lord and Master, we his Disciples and Followers, his Spouse and
his Body: this entitles us to his Merits and Righteousness, to his peculiar
Care and Providence, to the Influences of his Grace, to the Power of his
Intercession, to all those blessings, which he has purchased for, and promised
to his Church.

Now besides that this Notion is plain and intelligible, and very aptly agrees
with all those Metaphors and Forms of Speech, whereby the Scripture represents
our Union to Christ, there are these two great advantages we gain by it: first
that this is a plain demonstration of the evil and danger of Schism, a sin
which very few men have any sense of in these days; for if our Union to Christ
as our Head, necessarily requires our Union to the Christian Church, which is
his Body, then to divide from the Christian Church, or any true and sound part
of it, does not only make a Rent in the Body of Christ, which is a very great
evil, but divides us from Christ; as a Member, which is separated from the
Body, is separated from the Head too: this makes the Sentence of
Excommunication so dreadful, because it cuts us off from the Body of Christ;
and this Sentence every Schismatic executes upon himself, and that more
infallibly too than Church Governors can; for they may be mistaken in the
Justice of the Cause, and may separate those from the external Communion of the
Church, who are spiritually united to Christ, and then their Sentence is
reverst by a superior Tribunal: But whoever causlesly separates from the
Christian Church, or any part of it, does infallibly divide himself from
Christ, unless it be through such invincible mistakes, as may mitigate the
crime, and plead his excuse; for Schism is a work of the flesh, the effect of
Pride, and Passion, or Interest, or some other carnal Lust; and it concerns
those men, who make so light of Schism, to consider, how they expect to be
saved by Christ, who is only the Savior of the Body, when they have divided
themselves from his Body, and are no longer any part or member of it.

A second advantage, which we gain by this notion, is this, that it gives a
plain account of the necessity of Holiness and Obedience to entitle us to the
Merits of Christ, and Justification by him, and to all those Promises, which
Christ has made to his Body and Members; whoever is in Christ, and united to
him, shall certainly be saved by him; for he is the Savior of the Body; and
our Justification is not owing to our own Merits and Deserts, but to the Merits
of Christ, for whose sake alone, God has promised to justify and reward
those, who are united to him; but since our Union to Christ consists in the
subjection of our Souls and Bodies to him, Holiness and Obedience is as
necessary a condition of our Justification by Christ, as it is essential to our
Union to him: We cannot be justified by Christ, till we are united to him, and
we are not united to him, till we obey him: this gives the glory of all to
Christ, because we are justified for his sake, by virtue of our Union to him,
and yet vindicates the necessity of a holy Life, because this is essential to
our Union to Christ.

And this is the sum of whatever I asserted concerning the Necessity of Good
Works to our Justification; not that they can merit any thing of God, but that
they are the necessary conditions of the Covenant of Grace, which was purchased
and sealed by the Blood of Christ; or in other words, that they are necessary
to our Union with Christ, and thereby to give us an interest in all those
Promises of Pardon, and Grace, and Eternal Life, which Christ has made to his
Church. The Righteousness of Christ is our Righteousness, when we speak of the
Foundation of the Covenant, by which we are accepted; but if we speak of the
terms of the Covenant, then we must have a Righteousness of our own, not to
merit Justification or Eternal Life, but to entitle us to the Grace and Mercy
of the New Covenant, or which is all one, to unite us to Christ, by whom and
for whose sake we are justified: to say, that Obedience to the Laws of the
Gospel, a new Nature, and Holiness of Life, are the necessary conditions of our
Justification by Christ, and to say, that they are essential to our Union to
Christ, by whom we are justified, are different forms of Speech, but signify
the same thing; because Christ justifies none but those, who are united to him,
and none are united to him but by Faith and Obedience; and so e converso, those
who believe and obey the Gospel are in so doing united to Christ, and they, and
none else, shall be justified by him: which gives a plain account, how the
Virtue and Merit of all is due to Christ, because we are justified by our
relation to him; and explains the meaning of those phrases of receiving Christ,
and coming to him for Life and Salvation, and believing in him; which signifies
our being united to him by a sincere Faith and Obedience, which is necessarily
required of all those, who would be justified by him.

In the last Chapter I give a short account of the nature of Christ's love to
us, and of our love to Christ, that no man might mistake the love of Christ for
a fond and easy passion, nor think to please him with some heats and raptures
of Fancy, instead of the substantial Returns of Duty and Obedience: the sum of
which in short is this; that Christ expressed a wonderful and stupendous Love
in dying for us, especially in dying for us, while we were his Enemies; upon
which account the Scripture every where magnifies the love of Christ: but
though this were the greatest, yet it is not the only expression of his love,
but he manifests the same good will in all the methods of his Grace and
Providence: he is an easy and gentle Governor, who rules with the natural
tenderness and compassion of a Shepherd, a Husband, a Head, a Friend: He pities
our weaknesses and infirmities, and is ready to help and succor us; he is now
ascended up to Heaven, where he personally intercedes for us, and with his own
hand dispences all those Blessings to us, which we want, and pray for in his
Name. And he who loved Sinners so as to die for them, must needs take pleasure
in good men, and dwell with them as one Friend dwells with another, John xiv.
21, 23. Christ will in a more especial manner be present with such good men,
who are careful in all things to obey him, and will give very sensible
demonstrations of his presence with them, will manifest himself unto them, and
make his abode with them.

And now in return to this, we must consider that Christ is our Superior, our
Lord, and Master, and therefore our love to Christ must not express it self in
a fond and familiar passion, such as we have for our Friends and Equals, but in
a great Reverence and Devotion. Superiors must be treated with Honor and
Respect, and therefore our love to our Parents and Superiors in the Fifth
Commandment is called Honor; and the same religious Affection to God, which is
sometimes called Love, is at other times called Fear, which signifies a
Reverential Love, or a Love of Honor, Reverence, and Devotion: and therefore
the external Expressions of our love to our Savior are as various, as the
Expressions of Honor, and must bear some respect to the nature and condition
of the Person, and that relation we stand in to him: Christ being the only
begotten Son of God, we must have regard to the Greatness and Excellency of his
Person: Since he became Man, and died for us, we must admire and praise his
Goodness: He being our Mediator and Advocate, we must trust and confide in him,
and expect the returns of our Prayers, and all other Blessings, from the
prevalency of his Intercession: He being our Prophet and Lawgiver, we must
express our Love to him in a belief of his Gospel, and a sincere Obedience to
his Laws; as Christ requires of his Disciples, If you love me, keep my
Commandments: And when we consider our Savior, as our Guide and Example, the
truest expression of our Love and Honor is to imitate him, to live as he lived
in the World: And that, which perfects our Love, is an undaunted Courage and
Resolution in professing the Faith of Christ, whatever Dangers and Miseries, it
may expose us to in this world: For there is no fear in love, but perfect love
casts out fear. These are the proper expressions of our love to Christ, which
are summarily comprehended in believing his Gospel, and obeying it; for to be a
true Lover of Christ, signifies neither more, nor less, than to be a good
Christian.

This is a faithful account of the Design and Doctrine of my Book, which has
raised so much Noise and Clamor, and has sharpened the Pens and Tongues of so
many against me; but it is a vain attempt to think to outface the Sun; these
are such bright and glorious Truths as will outshine all the New Lights of
present or former Ages, and command belief from all honest and inquisitive
Minds, by their own natural Evidence.

The Doctrines, which I designedly opposed in that Discourse, are such as
contradict these great Truths, or at least such, as I apprehended to do so,
either expressly, or in their immediate consequences; and because this is the
principal thing, which has angered so many men, whose Cause and Reputation are
concerned in the quarrel, I shall give some brief account, what those Doctrines
are, and in what sense I reject them, which I hope may silence those scandalous
reports, as if I had struck at the very foundations of Christianity.

And first whereas I observed, that to know Christ, signifies the belief and
knowledge of those Revelations which Christ has made to the World, which
includes whatever he has revealed to us concerning his own Person, Natures,
Mediation, and the whole Will of God concerning our Salvation, which must be
learnt from the express Declarations of the Gospel, not from some fanciful and
imaginary consequences, which is a very unsafe way in matters of pure
Revelation; Doctor Owen has advanced an Acquaintance with the Person of
Christ, as the only Medium of saving knowledge; that is, when we have from the
Gospel learnt, who Christ is, what he has done and suffered for us; when we
have learnt those things, which concern his Person, Offices, and Work, we may
then give free scope to our fancies, and draw such conclusions, as are no where
expressly contained in Scripture, or could not possibly have been learnt from
Scripture, at least not clearly and savingly; without such an Acquaintance with
the Person of Christ, that is, without reasoning and drawing conclusions from
what Christ has done, and suffered. These conclusions must be formed into
artificial Theories, and Schemes of Religion, and then these are the great
Gospel-Mysteries, and the only saving knowledge of Christ: and those men only
preach Christ, who fill peoples heads with such choice Speculations, as they
have learnt from this Acquaintance with Christ.

I thought there was very great reason to oppose this Principle, which gave
such boundless scope to men's fancies, and allowed every man to frame and mold a
Religion according to his own humor; and was the more confirmed in this, when
I observed what strange Mysteries the Doctor himself had learned from this
Acquaintance with Christ, which I am sure without this, he could never have
learnt either from Scripture or Reason; I gave several instances of this nature
out of his own Writings, which shall be made good in due time; at present I
must observe what Doctrines I there reject, and in what sense.

I rejected such a notion of Gods Justice, as represents him as fierce and
savage as the worst of beings; such a notion of Justice as disparages the
Satisfaction of Christ, as if the whole design of it were to gratify Revenge,
and to appease a furious and merciless Deity; which notion at first frighted
Socinus out of his Wits, and made him rather choose to deny the satisfaction of
Christ, than to believe any thing so unworthy of God; though thanks be to God,
that we need do neither.

I reject such a notion of Justice, as disparages the Wisdom of God in the
contrivance of our Redemption by Jesus Christ: for if it were absolutely
necessary for God to punish sin, and there were no other Person in the World
fit or able to bear the punishment of sin, and to make expiation for it, but
only Christ, there was required no great Wisdom to make the choice.

I reject such a notion of the Mercy and Patience of God, as represents it to
be the effect only of the satisfaction of Revenge, which is like the tameness
of an angry man, when his passion is over, which is an unworthy conceit of the
infinite Love and Goodness of the Divine Nature.

I reject such a notion of Mercy, as represents God to be fond and easy to
Sinners, while they continue so; and I think such a notion of Justice and Mercy
very unworthy of God, which represents him more concerned to punish Sin, than
to reform it: And is it not hard, that a man must be scandalized with denying
the satisfaction of Christ, and blaspheming God, merely for rejecting such
Doctrines, as are injurious to the Satisfaction of Christ, and when they are
pursued to their just and natural consequences, are down right blasphemy
against God: this is a certain way to prevent the confutation of such
Doctrines, for you cannot confute them without discovering their blasphemy, and
whoever does so, shall himself be charged as a Blasphemer.

But to proceed, I reject such a notion of Chap. 4. Sect. ^.
our Union to the Person of Christ, as is unintelligible, such as the Great
Patrons of it cannot explain, nor any one else understand; for since all our
hopes of Salvation depends upon our Union to Christ, I can by no means think,
that this is such a Mystery, as surpasses humane knowledge; for that on which
the happiness of all men depends, ought in reason to be so plain, that it may
be understood by all.

I reject such a notion of our Union to the Person of Christ, as intitles us to
all the Personal Excellencies, Fullness, Beauty, and to the Personal
Righteousness of Christ, as much as Marriage intitles a Woman to her Husbands
Estate: that whatever Christ has done and suffered is as much reckoned ours,
when we are united to him, as if we had done and suffered the same things our
selves; and that upon this account we are justified only by the Righteousness
of Christ, without respect to any inherent Righteousness in our selves.

Now I reject this, because no Union can thus entitle us to Christ's personal
Excellencies and Righteousness, but such a natural Union as makes Christ and
Believers One Person, that they are Christed with Christ, which is an absurd
and dangerous Heresy; but neither our Marriage to Christ, nor his being our
Surety, or Mediator, can effect this; for whatever Union there may be between
the Person of Christ and the Persons of Believers, while their Persons remain
distinct, their Properties and Qualifications and Righteousness must be
considered as distinct too; and though we may receive great advantage by what
Christ has done and suffered, yet it cannot be reckoned ours, in that strict
notion, as if it had been done by us: and there is a vast difference between
these two notions; for the first only makes the Righteousness of Christ the
meritorious cause of our Pardon and Reward, which makes it necessary to have a
Righteousness of our own to entitle us to these Blessings; but the second makes
the Righteousness of Christ our Personal Righteousness, which destroys the
necessity of any inherent Righteousness in our selves; but of this more
hereafter.

I reject such a notion of our Union to Christ, whereby bad men may be, nay
must be united to Christ, while they continue in their sins: for if it once be
granted (as it must be granted, if we believe the Gospel) that our Union to
Christ gives us an actual interest in all his Promises, such as Pardon of Sin,
and Eternal Life; it is easy to observe how this overthrows the whole Design
of the Gospel, if a bad man, while he continues so, may be united to Christ;
for then he is a Son of God, and an Heir of Everlasting Life; and what becomes
then of all those Gospel-Threatnings, which denounce the wrath of God against
all unrighteousness and ungodliness of men? When Christ tells us, That he who
breaks the least of his Commandments, shall be called least in the Kingdom of
Heaven; that except our righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees, we shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: and when
St. Paul tells us, The works of the flesh are manifest, which are these,
Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft,
Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies, Envyings,
Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings, and suchlike, of the which I tell you before,
as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such things shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God, Gal. v. 19, 20, 21. I say, must these and suchlike
places, which so expressly denounce the wrath of God against all wickedness and
impieties, be expounded with this limitation, that this shall be the portion of
such men, unless they be united to Christ, and thereby sheltered from the wrath
of God, as a Wife under covert is secured from all Arrests at Law? But as soon
as any man has got into Christ, let him be what he will, he is redeemed from
the curse of the Law, and made an Heir of Eternal Life: And does not this
effectually evacuate all the Threatenings of the Gospel, and set up the Person
of Christ, as a Refuge and Sanctuary for the Ungodly, and make the Grace of
Christ's Person a Dispensation from his own Laws and Threatenings? I am sure the
Apostle understood not this limitation, as is plain from what he adds verse. 24.
And they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the affections and
lusts. And in Romans viii. 1. There is no condemnation to them which are in
Christ Jesus; and that we might not mistake him, he expressly tells us, whom he
means, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit: This is essential to
our Union to Christ, and to entitle us to the Grace of the Gospel.

And it is not enough to say, that Christ will save none, but those who do live
very holy lives, because there is no reason for this saying: for if men are
united to Christ before they are holy, their very Union to Christ gives them a
title to eternal Life, and this can never be reconciled with the antecedent
necessity of Holiness, which the Gospel inculcates, not only to qualify us for
actual Salvation, but to give us a right to it: and therefore I had good reason
to reject this notion of Union, unless I would renounce the whole Gospel.

I reject such a notion of Union, as makes it impossible for any man to ^^ow,
either how to get into Christ, or whether he be in Christ or not; and I think
every man, who values the salvation of his soul, or the peace and comfort of
his own mind, has reason to reject this too.

I reject such a notion of Sanctification, as makes it impossible to
distinguish a sanctified from an unsanctified state.

I reject such a notion of Christ's love to us as represents it too like a fond
and foolish passion, as respects the very Person, without regard to any
Qualifications in him, whether he be a fit object of love or not, which is so
great an imperfection in humane love, that I cannot imagine it to be the
perfection of a Divine Love.

And I reject such a notion of the immutability of Christ's love, as sin it self
cannot alter, which is contrary to all the Declarations of his Gospel, and
inconsistent with the Holiness and Purity of his Nature.

I reject such a notion of our love to Christ, as excludes all respect to the
infinite love of Christ, and those numerous Benefits, we receive by him; which
the Scripture assigns as the true reason of our love to Christ.

I reject such a notion of love to Christ, as excludes all regard to our own
Happiness and Salvation by him, and must make us contented to be damned, and
eternally separated from him; which is not only impossible to humane Nature,
but contrary to the Principles of Christianity.

I reject such a notion of our love to Christ, as opposes our Love to Christ to
our Duty and Obedience to him, which is the most proper and natural expression
of our love of him; such a love as consists only in some flights of fancy and
imagination, in admiring and valuing the Person of Jesus Christ, and in
preferring him above all Legal Righteousness, and blamelesness of Conversation,
and Duties upon Conviction; and in using all Duties and Ordinances only to have
us over to Christ, for Righteousness and Salvation, and whatever we need; for
this is no better than to set up the Person of Christ in opposition to his Laws
and Religion.

This is a short and plain account of the whole Doctrine and Design of my late
Discourse, and the more I consider it, the less reason I see to repent of my
Undertaking: The Doctrines I have professedly taught, are the most necessary
and useful Doctrines of Christianity, and so plain and evident, that a younger
man than my self may defend them against the oldest Sophister: And the
Doctrines that I have opposed, are as certainly false, as the other are true.
That such Doctrines have been taught, I have made it sufficiently evident
already, by the express Testimonies of some late Writers, and because Doctor
Owen is unwilling to own the Charge, as far as he is concerned in it, I must be
forced to make it good, in vindication of my own Honesty, and that is all the
trouble, which he has given me: Only I would desire the Reader to observe, that
since the Doctor disowns the Charge, he renounces such Doctrines too, and that
was all I designed; I have no personal quarrel with any man, and should be glad
to find them more Orthodox, than their express words would ever suffer me yet
to believe, they are; though I fear much that upon Examination it will appear,
that I understood them too well, and that the Doctor is not willing to recant
those Doctrines, which he would seem to disown: There is some reason to suspect
this, because he is not willing to declare his sense in plain words, but
endeavors to avoid the blow by juggling and sophistical Arts; as will appear in
what follows.

CHAP. II.
Containing an ANSWER to some Popular Exceptions.

NExt to no Adversary, the most desirable thing is, to have a fair and
ingenuous one; but this must never be expected, where men serve a Faction,
which makes them try all ways, not to discover what is true, but how they may
palliate their mistakes, and maintain, their Authority and Reputation.

It is my unhappiness to fall into such men's hands, who wanting better Weapons
to defend their Cause, return to their old childish tricks of flinging stones
and dirt: I am not so well skilled at this sport, as to venture to engage with
them, nor shall I envy them such a Victory, which will cost them some time and
trouble to make themselves clean again.

There are several familiar Topics of Reproach, which such men use, when they
dare not directly engage in the Dispute.

They have a peculiar Gift of discerning thoughts and intentions, and there
never was any Book writ, which they could not answer, but it was writ with a
very ill design. Thus the Doctor would persuade the world, that it has been the
great design of late days, to cavil at his Vind. p. 5.
Writings, and to load his Person with reproaches, and accordingly, that I
principally intended my Book against himself, and his Book, because he was the
Author of it, which (as he says) will at last prove to be its only guilt and
crime: P. 7.
What a mighty conceit has the Doctor of himself, to think that he is so
considerable that so many men should make it their business to oppose him! He
might have been quiet for ought I know, had he not been troublesome to others,
and set up for the Great Champion of the Cause; and his former miscarriages
might have been buried in silence, had he not forced men to publish them: But I
assure him, as for my own part, that I did not principally design that
Discourse against him, nor any other man, much less against any party; but
against those foolish and absurd Doctrines (whoever were the first Inventers,
or Patrons of them) which debauch the practice of Christianity, and turn the
plain Revelations of the Gospel into unintelligible Mysteries. I envy no man's
Reputation, when it is consistent with the interest of Religion, nor do I
think, that any man's Reputation ought to be so dear to us, as to forego the
most useful and necessary Truths, rather than let the World know, that such Men
of Name and Renown have been in a mistake.

But it may be the Looking-Glass-Maker Speculum, p. 55.
may see more than other men, though there is some danger, lest such persons
should draw other men's faces by the reflection of their own: however let us
hear, what he has to say. And he very gravely proves, that my design could not
be good, by several arguments.

For first, if it had, then before I had charged any Opinion, I ought fairly to
have stated, and heartily represented that Opinion, but may not the want of
this sometimes be a defect in Skill, not a failure in Honesty? Or else what
will become of many of his good Friends, who are not much versed in Logic, and
never were acquainted with this knack of stating things fairly: But he adds,
This I seldom find him to do, and if I had said, I never found him so to have
done, I should not lie, though perhaps I might be mistaken: Now I know not how
to help him, only would advise him the next time to use his Spectacles instead
of a Looking-glass, and then I hope he may see better, and discover a great
many things fairly stated.

Secondly, He says, That I ought never to charge any man with those
consequences of an Opinion, which I know to be disowned, and disavowed by him:
Now how this comes in, I cannot tell, for he has not the confidence to charge
me with doing so, though he would willingly insinuate that I do.

But the third is a heavy charge, That I draw a bad sense out of words which
are capable of a good sense, which is a great Sin against God and my Neighbor:
Now this I confess, is a great crime, if by capable he means, when according to
the common acceptance of the words, and use of phrases, and circumstances of
the place, and the avowed Doctrines and Principles of the Author, it appears to
be intended otherwise; but when the phrase is doubtful and ambiguous, and on
purpose contrived so to conceal those Doctrines, which cannot endure the clear
and open light; or when those expressions, which may be capable of a good
sense, are by a traditionary exposition generally understood in a bad sense,
especially if the bad sense be most agreeable to the professed Principles of
the Writer, and such phrases be delivered without an express caution against
the bad sense; in these cases it is no fault to expound such expressions to the
worst sense; but a great charity to men's Souls to warn them against such easy
and obvious mistakes.

But this is a great charge, and therefore let us hear how he proves it: He
gives too instances of it, one with respect to Doctor Owen's Doctrine
concerning an Acquaintance with Christ's Person: this I shall let pass at
present, because I shall meet with it again in the Doctor; but his other
instance, on which he insists, is with reference to Mr. Shephard: I show how
impossible it is, according to some men's Principles, to discover our Union to
Christ, and Justification by him by the marks of Sanctification, and among
other things I observe, That when they have a mind to take down the confidence
of men, who are apt to presume too soon, that their condition is good, they do
so magnify the seize of Hypocrites, who shall never go to Heaven, that
it is impossible for any sanctified man to do more than a Hypocrite may do.
This I make good by a large citation out of Mr. Shephard's Sincere Convert: And
here he first quarrels, that I say some men do so, and prove it only from Mr.
Shephard. These men, I see, will never be pleased; sometimes they quarrel, that
I name any body, and sometimes that I name no more: but I can assure this
Gentleman, that this was not Mr. Shephard's private Opinion, and shall make it
good, when I find more of his Mind to require a proof of it.

The wrong which he supposes I have done Mr. Shephard, is this, That I bring
him in answering the Pleas of several Hypocrites for themselves, and then
suppose the same man to make all these Pleas for himself, which is not fair or
just: As for instance, the man accused of Hypocrisy, or at least suspected,
pleads for himself, that he has reformed those Vices he once lived in, that he
prays often, that he fasts sometimes, as well as prays, that he hears the Word
of God, and likes the best Preachers, that he reads the Scriptures often, that
he is grieved and sorrowful for his past sins, that he loves good men and their
company, that he has more knowledge than others, and keeps the Lords day
strictly, and has many very good desires and endeavors to get to heaven, and
performs all these Duties with Life and Zeal, and is constant and perseveres in
godly courses, and is conscious to himself of his own Sincerity in all this,
that he does all this with a good heart for God: That Mr. Shephard objects all
this in the person of one man, whom he designs after all to prove a Hypocrite,
is so evident, that nothing could excuse our Author for supposing, that he
spoke this in the persons of several men, that one pleaded one thing for
himself, and another another, but only his confession, that he had not read the
Book; and how far that will excuse him, let others consider. Mr. Shephard
begins thus, In what have thou gone beyond them that think they are rich, and
want nothing, who yet are poor, and miserable, and naked? Thou will say happily
first, I have left my sins I once lived in, etc. So that this is but the first
thing such a man objects or pleads, which argues that the other pleas are made
in the same person; and so he goes on in the same person, But I pray; But I
fast; But I read the Scriptures, etc. where I can refer to none but the Person,
who first made this Plea; and but connects it with the former Pleas, and is
designed to take off the force of the preceding Answers, that though a
Hypocrite might do some one good thing, yet he did not another, or if he did a
second or a third, yet at least he did not do all those good things which this
poor man pleaded for himself.

And indeed the way Mr. Shephard takes with this man, to prove that he either
is, or may be a Hypocrite, is so common and familiar a practice, that I wonder
very much at the ignorance, or at the honesty of our Author in requiring a
proof of it: It is an ordinary question, How far a Hypocrite may go, and yet
miss of Heaven; and the common way of answering it, is the same, which Mr.
Shephard takes, by considering what particular good thing has been done by bad
men, and since some bad men may do one good thing, and some another, and there
is no single grace or virtue, but may be counterfeited by a Hypocrite; they put
all the good things together, which were ever done by bad men, and this is the
attainment of Hypocrites: as if because a Hypocrite may do some one good thing,
and continue a Hypocrite, therefore a man may do all the good things, which
were ever done by any Hypocrites, and yet be a Hypocrite; and after this, it is
impossible for any man to know, whether he be a Hypocrite or not, since there
is no one good thing, that can be named, but some Hypocrite or other has either
done it, or done something like it.

And now after this, every man must needs see how absurd and impertinent that
difference is between a regenerate and unregenerate man, which Mr. Shephard
assigns, and which our Author defends; That an unregenerate man, let him go
never so far, do never so much, yet he lives in one sin or other: I readily
grant, that this is a good mark, in it self considered, of an unregenerate man,
that whoever lives in any one sin, is certainly an unregenerate man: but that
he should live in some one sin, who goes never so far, and does never so much,
is a wonderful thing to me; especially when we consider, what is meant by going
never so far, and doing never so much, which has respect to what he had
discoursed before of the seize of Hypocrites; such as the reformation of
his former vices, an honest, smooth, innocent, blameless life, joined with all
the acts of Worship and Homage to God, prayer, fasting, reading, hearing,
observing the Lords day, and perseverance and sincerity in all this; what those
sins are, in which such a man lives, is strange to me, and all the Philosophy
in the world will not cure my admiration: and therefore Mr. Shephard did not
think this an infallible sign, but lays greater weight upon some more spiritual
marks, of being carried out of all Duties to Christ, and taking up his Eternal
Rest and Lodging in Christ only, which are surer evidences of Grace than all
that Legal Righteousness of good Works, which Hypocrites may counterfeit: but
this our Author fairly passes over in silence.

Now though I know not how to excuse my self to the Reader already, for taking
so much notice of such an Objector, who writes without* reading the Books,
which he defends, or scarce those which he answers, yet I cannot but divert my
self a while with some few Remarks upon his Answers to the several Pleas:

Plea: I have left my sins I once lived in, and am now no Drunkard, no Swearer,
no Liar, Speculum p. 53.
etc. Mark (says our Author) it is not supposed that he has left all the sins
he once lived in. Nor is the contrary supposed, though etc. you know is of a
very large signification; and an indefinite proposition, when the subject
matter requires it, is equivalent to an universal; and so it must be here; for
he, who pleads for his sincerity from the reformation of his former sins, must
be supposed by his sins, to understand all his sins, unless he be a greater
fool than a Hypocrite; for if forsaking sin be necessary, then forsaking all
sin is as necessary, as to forsake any. It is well our Author did not fall into
Mr. Hickman's hands, for Epistle to Historia quinque Articularis exarticulata.
he has declared against teaching his Adversaries Logic.

Upon the second Plea he observes, That though a man live a blameless,
innocent, honest, smooth life, yet if it be not so with relation to God and
Men, and in every thing, his prayers may avail nothing. Our Author is as fit a
man to defend Mr. Shephard, as ever I met with, for their Understandings and
Logic seem to be much of a size: What difference is there between being
blameless etc. with reference to God and Men, and in every thing; and between
being blameless in their lives, honest and innocent in their conversation with
men, and devout Worshippers of God, as those are, who sincerely and heartily
pray to him. However if the prayers of such men may avail nothing, he must
prove it from some other Text than Isa. i. 11. for those Jews, whose Sacrifices
God rejected, were not such honest and innocent men.

Upon the next Plea, he observes, That Hypocrites may fast sometimes; yes no
doubt, though I am but young, I am old enough to remember this; but what he
adds, that this is enough to justify Mr. Shephard, I doubt is not so true as
the other; for though this has been too common an Art of Hypocrisy, yet I am
not willing to believe, that every one, who fasts, is an Hypocrite; much less,
if he be an honest and innocent man. But whether they were the Scribes, or
Pharisees, who fasted twice a week to devour Widows Houses, I was not much
concerned to enquire, we have seen Examples enough of both sorts.

Upon the next Plea I assert, That to hear the Word with joy, and to believe
it, which is the description of the Stony Ground, had been a good sign of
Grace, if it had continued: And this is the fault our Savior found in this
Ground, that this sudden Faith and Joy did not continue. What has he to object
against this? Why then -- Ultima semper
Expectanda dies homini est, sanctusque vocari
Ante obitum nemo, supremaque funera debet.


That is, every man must expect his last hour, and cannot be called holy, till
he dies. But why so pray? We cannot say indeed, that any man will persevere,
till we see him die well; but we may call any man holy before, who lives
holily: While he lives well, it is the best sign of Grace in the World, and if
he continue to do so, his sign of Grace continues, but Perseverance must crown
all. Why does not our Author correct our Savior, for telling those new
Converts, If ye continue in my words, then shall ye be my Disciples indeed?
John viii. 31. Why does he not correct the whole Gospel, the language of which
is, He that continues to the end shall be saved?

Upon the next Plea, he has a learned Dispute about the Pharisees Memories,
which were better than any Concordance for the Hebrew Text; I know the Story,
as well as he, and do not much matter, what the credit of it is; but is not
this a wise reason why our Savior did not name the Text in preaching to a
promiscuous Auditory, because it may be some few great Rabbis knew where to
find it, whereas the generality of the people are said not to know the Law.

In the next place, he disputes as learnedly whether Judas hanged himself, and
I perceive this great Critic thinks every one must be as impertinent as
himself, who cannot meet with the word Judas, or hanged, or the like, but
whether it be to the purpose or not, must dispute the case whether Judas were
hanged: for if he broke his Neck, or had drowned, or burnt himself, it had been
all one to my purpose, and I was not disposed to go out of my way, to pursue
Feathers, and Butterflies.

Upon the next, he gravely observes, That there are no good men but sleep
sometimes, unless they be wiser than the five wise Virgins. We will allow him
this, so they do not sleep to let their Lamps go out, as the five foolish
Virgins did.

On the next, he observes, That it is a huge commendation of good Knowledge,
that I say, If a good man have the keeping of it, it is never the worse for
him; though if he think this any disparagement to good Knowledge, I perceive he
understands Rhetoric as little as Logic; or thinks his Readers understand
neither.

On the next, when I say, That keeping the Lords day strictly, is one good
thing, which does well in the company of more; he is afraid I forgot my self
and stumbled upon a Puritanical saying before I was aware; and adds, that
notwithstanding I thus commend a strict observation of the Lords day, I could
like well enough of a Book of Sports; the uncharitableness of which Censure,
contrary to the express sense of my words, I leave to be corrected by his own
Conscience, if he have any left.

And here our Author thinks fit to break off, for it was not safe to go any
farther; those other Pleas, which this poor man makes to defend himself against
the imputation of Hypocrisy, are such on which he dares not venture; as, That
he performs all these Duties with life and zeal; That he is constant, and
perseveres in godly courses; and that he is conscious to himself of his Honesty
and Sincerity in all this, that he does all with a good heart for God; that is,
out of a hearty Devotion to God, and Reverence for his Laws; and if such a man
may be a Hypocrite, no man can be sure of his Sincerity.

Only upon this last, he observes, That Mr. Shephard only says, That a man may
think he has a good heart to God, and yet deceive himself: whereas I wish he
had said, that a man, who thinks he has a good heart to God must needs be
mistaken; and then I would say, the whole Doctrine concerning Marks and
Evidences were at an end. Now to make it appear, what a fair Adversary I have
of this Author, I shall transcribe this whole passage.

Object. But some men are conscious to themselves of their own hypocrisy, but
I do all with a good heart for God. Answ. So thou may think of thy self, and
be deceived: Upon this, I observe, If this be an Objection, let a man have what
marks he will, the Objection will still be good; for after all it may be
objected, that a man may be deceived in it, and think he has these marks, when
he has them not: And as a proof of this, Mr. Shephard adds, There is a way
that seems right to a man, but the end thereof is death; thou may live so,
as to deceive thy self and others, and yet prove an Hypocrite: On which I
observe, that the sense of this argument is this, As if because some men may
think themselves good, who are in a bad way, no man could ever be sure that he
were in the right; and thus farewell all Evidences. So that there is no need Mr.
Shephard should say, that he who thinks he has a good heart toward God, must
needs be mistaken, in order to overthrow the Doctrine of Marks and Evidences;
for if a man, who is conscious to himself of his own sincerity, that he has a
great reverence and regard for God in all his actions, may be deceived in it,
it is sufficient to destroy all Marks and Evidences. For if we cannot be sure
what the workings and motions, purposes and resolutions, and habitual
inclinations of our own Minds are, we can be sure of nothing: and if a man, who
is as sure of this, as inward sense and feeling can make him, may be deceived,
then there is no way to be sure of it: this makes men as downright Scepticks
in the Doctrine of Marks and Evidences, as to deny the truth of our Senses, or
of our Faculties, does in Philosophy.

That refined Hypocrisy, wherewith men deceive themselves, does not consist in
such an hypocrisy and deceitfulness of the heart, as conceals it self from it
self, which is absolutely impossible; but in a false and hypocritical Religion,
when they think to please God by some exterior homage, or flattering Devotions,
or costly or pompous Ceremonies, or by an Orthodox Faith, or counterfeit
Reliances, or any other mode or form of Religion, without a sincere Obedience
to his Laws; the men know that they are Villains all this while, that they are
guilty of notorious wickedness, as the Scribes and Pharisees were; but they
flatter themselves, that they may be very dear to God notwithstanding this,
either for the sake of the Righteousness of Christ, or some hypocritical
performances of their own: These are the ways, which seem right to a man, when
the end thereof is death.

This is the sum of our Authors charge against me, for perverting men's words,
and how he has acquitted himself in it, let the Reader judge; and all the
amends I shall require of him is, to turn his Looking-Glass upon himself, and
to view his own face in it.

But there is one Argument still behind, to prove, that I could have no good
design in writing that Discourse, and when I have answered that, I hope I may
pass at least for a well-meaning man. And that is, That I thrust out my sting
against those, who have Speculum, p. 65.
written nothing (taken notice of by me) that can be supposed to hurt or hinder
Godliness: And though he mentions those, he instances only in one, a fault,
which at all turns he corrects in me; now suppose this were true, is there
nothing fit to be corrected, but what has an immediate tendency to make men
bad? Must men be suffered to play and toy with sacred things; and prostitute
the most venerable Religion to mean and low conceits; and confound men's notions
with mystical and allegorical descriptions, and turn the vital parts of
Religion, into a work of imagination and fancy?

This is the present case, for in this charge he refers to that short
reflection I make upon Mr. Tho. Vincents invitation of young Women to Christ;
and our Author tells us, That the Exhortation is directed to his Hearers to
choose Christ for their Husband; It is so, but it is to his She-Hearers in
particular, which is a very spiritual conceit; because he knew that Women, not
Men, wanted Husbands: He has in the same Pamphlet a distinct Exhortation to
young Men, but does he invite them to choose Christ for their Husband? by no
means; the conceit would not do there; for young Men are more for Wives than
Husbands, and therefore his Exhortation to them is only to give God their
Hearts; which is a plain confession of guilt, that he had so debased and
carnalized the notion of that spiritual Marriage between Christ and his Church,
that it was not so properly applicable to men, as to Women, as if there were
any regard to the difference of Sex in this Spiritual Marriage: Nay, which is
still more fulsome, the Exhortation is not only to Women, but to young Women,
because they generally have most mind to Husbands; and indeed it appears by his
Exhortation, that this Sermon was designed to gratify his young She-Hearers; I
shall direct my speech unto you, and that to all, both Men and Women, but
particularly to you that are young Women, whom especially I am now called to
preach unto. What the Call was, is not said, some extraordinary one, no doubt:
But whether this Exhortation had been directed to Men or Women, to Young or
Old, yet I wonder what Mr. Vincent thought of his Hearers, whether they were
Turks, or Jews, or Pagans, for it is plain he did not look upon them as
Christians, because he persuaded them to be married to Christ, to choose Christ
for their Husband: If they are the Members of the visible Church of Christ,
they are already married to Christ, in the Scripture notion of it, and the
proper Exhortation to them is, not to choose Christ for their Husband, but to
live worthy of that Relation: Neither Christ nor his Apostles ever made such an
Exhortation as this; The proper Exhortation to those who are not Christians, is
to embrace the Faith of Christ; and to those who are, to walk worthy of that
Profession and Relation; but such Discourses, as these, persuade People, that
to be married to Christ signifies something more than to be Christians, or else
they would never with so much patience hear their Preachers exhorting them to
be married to Christ, that is, to turn Christians; nor reproving them for
slighting the offers of Christ, that is, for rejecting Christianity.

And whether this notion, as it is managed by those who best understand the
consequences of it, be not prejudicial to a good Life, I shall refer my Readers
to my late Discourse to consider; for the whole of Religion at this rate
consists only in a fanciful application of Christ to themselves, to consummate
the Marriage with him, and then whatever they were before, they are rich, and
lovely, and beautiful, by virtue of their Marriage with a rich and lovely and
beautiful Husband: When once they are married to Christ, they are secured from
all the Arrests of Gods Justice, as a Woman under Covert; the Bond is
indissoluble, and Christ must now bear with all the faults of his Spouse, and
answer for all too: His Righteousness must conceal their Deformities, and make
them righteous before God; which I think does not much encourage a personal and
inherent Righteousness.

Though to give Mr. Vincent his due, he does not understand the depths of this
Mystery, and therefore must not be charged with such consequences as he does
not understand. He thinks honestly, that in order to our Marriage with Christ,
we must put off our filthy Garments, all filthiness and superfluity of
naughtiness, etc. and that we must put on the white Raiment, and clean
Garments, and rich Robes, which Christ has provided for us, I mean the Attire
of Grace, the Robes of his perfect Righteousness.

I cannot but think, how severely Mr. Shephard would have corrected this
mistake, and have told him, how unfit he was to be a Suitor for Christ. What?
Must we make our selves beautiful before we are married to Christ, or receive
all our beauty from him? Have you a mind to teach People such Antichristian
Pride, as to go about to make themselves fit for Christ, before they will close
with him? Which is a ready way to make them despise Christ, when they find
themselves beautiful without him. And how is it possible, they should get the
Robes of Christ's Righteousness, till they are married to him? For it is only
Marriage that gives us a title to the Righteousness and Fullness and All of
Christ, as it gives a Woman right to her Husbands Estate.

And now if any man be agrieved at this, he must thank our Author for it, who
has forced me in my own vindication to say more of Mr. Vincent, than ever I
intended; whose greatest fault, for ought I see, is, that he affects to speak
in such phrases, as he does not understand; and might instruct people to good
purpose, would he content himself with the plainness and unaffected simplicity
of the Gospel.

Having thus vindicated the Honesty of my Intentions, the next objection is,
That I have writ with great Scorn and Contempt; which is a very proper
Objection to be made by so candid a man as Doctor Owen, whose Writings savor
of such a humble and mortified Spirit: Indeed had this Objection any truth in
it, I could not have wished for a better justification, than the Doctors
Answer, which has so much outdone all that ever I saw in Satyr and Fury, that
I must needs hereafter be esteemed a very cold and tame Writer; I am sure his
Answer has pride and insolence enough, and if it be not sufficiently Scoptical,
it is plain, that it was not for want of good will, but for want of wit.

But pray whom or what do I scorn? Do I make any spiteful Reflections upon men's
Persons? Do I tell merry Tales of them? Do I transprose them, or dress them up
in a fools Coat to be laughed at? I shall leave these Arts to my Adversaries,
who are more versed, and better skilled in them; the cause I undertook, did not
need such a Defense: My business indeed was to confute and to shame such
Doctrines as have a very bad influence upon men's lives, and yet are cried up
for great Gospel-Mysteries, and Soul-saving Truths; and this is that, the
Doctor calls writing scornfully, that I have so plainly discovered the
absurdities of such Doctrines, as to expose them to scorn and contempt; which
as he observes very well, was my design in Writing, as well as I could to give
them a shameful baffle: for I never thought my self concerned to be tender of
the reputation of dangerous, though popular, Errors. And that I do not attempt
a grave and solemn confutation of Nonsense, or absurd forms of speech, is no
fault, Mr. Ferguson himself being Judge, The Interest of Rea son in Religion,
p. 457.
who tells us, That Nonsense is not to be refuted, but exposed. For he betrays
the Weakness of his own Reason, who undertakes to encounter an absurd phrase
with Arguments.

And that the Reputation of Persons is concerned in the Reputation of
Doctrines, and that the scorn, which I bestow on one, reflects upon the other,
I cannot help, though they may: My only design was to confute their Doctrines,
and there is not any expression which they call scornful, which was levelled
against the personal weaknesses and infirmities of Men, but against the fulsome
and palpable absurdities of Opinions; and when such absurd notions are cried up
for great and venerable Mysteries, there is the greater reason to speak very
plain, that they may appear absurd to the meanest apprehension. This is the
only Reason why my Book is accused of Scorn and Contempt; and I do not deny,
but they have some reason to be angry at this, though I shall never be
persuaded to like my Book ever the worse for it.

But the Doctor observes farther, That the Discourse, which I thus rave
against, Vind. p. 143.
is Didactical, and accommodated unto a popular way of Instruction, and it has
hitherto been the common ingenuity of all learned men, to give an allowance
unto such Discourses, so as not to exact from them an accuracy and propriety in
expressions, such as are required in those, which are Scholastical and
Polemical, etc. I cannot understand the reason of this Exception, when the
Doctor, page 7. had so expressly affirmed, That he could not find any Thing, any
Doctrine, any Expressions, any Words refl^cted on, which the Exceptions of this
man do give him the least occasion to alter, or desire that they had been
otherwise either expressed or delivered. Now if his Discourse be writ with such
accuracy, what matter whether it be Didactical or Polemical: But as for the
thing it self, it must be acknowledged, that it is very disingenuous to expect
a Polemical Accuracy in Popular Discourses, for it is not fit to instruct
people in terms of Art, borrowed from the Schools of Plato or Aristotle, which,
we may be sure, the people understand not, nor it may be these Polemical men
neither. But there is another kind of accuracy very necessary for Popular
Discourses, which I should be very glad to find in Dr. O. and some late
Writers, that is, strict Truth, and plainness of expression, and when Popular
Discourses are defective in these, it is no disingenuity to take notice of it;
for there is nothing does more mischief to Religion, than to teach the people a
Set of unintelligible and ambiguous Phrases; which how-ever they may be forced
to some tolerable sense by men of Art and Skill, yet to the generality of
Readers, either signify nothing, or that which is very bad.

But by this the Doctor would fain insinuate, that my Book consists only of
some cavilling Exceptions about Words and Phrases, and improper forms of
Speech, which, if it could be proved, would be a more effectual confutation of
it, than any I have yet seen; and yet the Looking-Glass-Maker proceeds upon
this supposition, and therefore to requite me, picks quarrels with my Words,
and discovers great improprieties, contradictions, nonsense; and writes just
such a Confutation of my Book as I should have expected from a Court-Jester, or
a Prevaricator. I shall give some few instances of this nature, which may be
sufficient to divert the Reader, and that is the only reason I know, why I
should take any notice of them: Except for fear the Author should think himself
slighted, and judge me of the same morose humor with Mr. Hickman, who uses to
punish Preface to Historia quinque Articularis exarticulata. Speculum, p. 2.
such Scriblers, with not buying nor reading their Books.

Thus sometimes I use some popular forms of Speech, the sense of which is
generally very well understood, but they will not down with our Author, because
they cannot be reconciled to strict Rules of Logic, or terms of Art; thus he
observes that I say in one place, some men, wherever they meet with the word
Christ in Scripture, always understand by it the Person of Christ; and this I
doubt not is true of a great many private Christians, and some ignorant
Preachers; but then in another place I affirm, that it is acknowledged by all,
that Christ sometimes signifies the Church of Christ; now this is a
contradiction, that all sometimes understand by the name Christ, the Church of
Christ, and some always understand the person of Christ: But pray what need is
there that all should include those some? Why could not he by all, understand
all men of any knowledge and skill in the use of words, which some, and a great
many, have not? How comes it to pass, that he has so soon forgot their beloved
distinction of singuli generum, and genera singulorum, whereby they prove, that
Christ died for all, without dying for all?

Thus I observe, that Christ has told us in the Gospel, whatever he intends to
do Ibid. p. ^
for us, and has charged us to expect no more from him; which the
circumstances of the place determine to the terms and conditions of our
Salvation by Christ; but nothing will serve our Author, unless whatever be
supposed to signify all the particularities of Christ's Providence toward the
Church; as the very particular time when Kingly and Episcopal Government should
be restored here in England: Though I doubt not, but our Author had much rather
know, when they shall be pulled down again.

Thus when I say, That now the only true Medium of knowing God, is the
knowledge of Christ, who came into the World to declare God to us: that is, as
I soon add, That the only certain way of attaining to the knowledge of the
nature and will of God, is by knowing Christ, whom God sent into the World to
publish the everlasting Gospel, who has made more perfect Revelations of Gods
will, than ever the World had before, etc. Because I say, that Christ is the
only true Medium of knowing God, he concludes, that I am a Fanatic, who reject
the Light of Nature, and the Works of Creation and Providence, as false Mediums
Ibid. p. 14
of knowing God, which must be thrown away, or not made use of: But does he
know what a true Medium is? It is that which gives us a clear and certain, and
perfect knowledge; as a true Medium of sight is that which conveys the perfect
images of things with clearness and certainty: now will he say that the Light
of Nature, etc. can give us such a clear and perfect and certain knowledge of
the nature of God, and his will concerning our Salvation, as the Revelations of
the Gospel? Or must they be false, or wholly rejected, because they are not a
true Medium of knowledge in that sense, wherein the Gospel of Christ is? But
pray, who taught him to oppose the Light of Nature to the Gospel of Christ?
That he, who owns the Gospel of Christ as the only true Medium of knowledge,
must be supposed to reject the Light of Nature? I am sure this is a Fanatical
notion of the Gospel of Christ; for Christ did not only reveal those things to
us, which could not be known by the Light of Nature, but gave us a more perfect
and certain knowledge of those things, which the Light of Nature did more
imperfectly and uncertainly discover: And therefore the Gospel of Christ is the
surest Medium of natural knowledge, so far as it concerns matters of Religion,
as well as of revealed knowledge; I say, as far as it concerns matters of
Religion, for fear this happy man at senseless mistakes, should imagine, that I
mean that Christ taught Natural Philosophy in the Gospel.

At other times he quarrels with single words and expressions, as very
improper: As I say, That Christ is originally the name of an Office, which the
Jews call the Messiah, or one anointed by God: The plain meaning of which can
be no more than this, that this Name Christ does primarily respect an Office;
that is, when this Name is given to any Person, it is wholly with respect to
the Office with which he is invested; and though there can be no such thing, as
an Office without a Person, yet the Name does more immediately respect the
Office than the Person; as is plain from this, that when we hear such a name,
it does not convey the Idea of any particular person, but the notion of an
Office to our minds; when we hear the Name King, Priest, or Prophet, it
naturally excites in us the notion of those Offices, without regard to any
particular persons invested with them; upon the hearing such names, our minds
naturally prescind the consideration of the Office from the Person; and since
words are but artificial images of things, we may safely affirm that to be the
original signification of a name, which answers to that notion and idea, which
it first imprints upon our minds. The reason our Author assigns, why Christ is
not originally the name of an Office, is because it is a Concrete, or
Connotative term: but did he Spec. p. 3.
never hear of some Adjectives that are used Substantively, and so I take (...)
and (...) to be, and when a word respects two things, may it not more
immediately refer to oue of them? And is not that then the original
signification of the Name?

This I perceive is a very material Exception, and therefore is repeated by Mr.
Ferguson, P. 457.
together with a censure of another absurd form of speech, The Duties and
Actions of an Office, at which Doctor Owen also had before quarreled: now the
Duties and Actions of an Office is a very plain and ordinary form of speech to
signify those Duties and Actions, which are proper and peculiar to any person
with respect to such an Office; and no man who is in his wits, can by such an
expression be led into such a blundering mistake, as to think that the Office
is the Agent: Methinks Mr. Ferguson might have learnt from the Title of his own
Book to have been more favorable to such forms of speech, for The Interest of
Reason in Religion, is to the full as absurd, as the Actions of an Office;
Interest is a term as proper and peculiar to a Person, as Actions, and pray
what kind of Person is Reason? Just such a Person as In-dwelling-Sin, or some
men's Consciences, which are often described, as if they were distinct Beings,
which have Properties, Actions, Powers, and a kind of Personality and
Subsistence of their own, distinct from the man, in whom they are. And indeed I
have no reason to quarrel with these men, who deal much more favorably with
me, than they do with St. Paul in the like cases: they only reprove me for an
improper expression, but do not affix an improper sense to my words; whereas
they usually make St. Paul's meaning to be as absurd, as they fancy my words
improper.

But to return to our Author: I add farther, that this name Christ is used to
signify the Person who is invested with that Office: Which our Author says, Is
a rare and odd notion; for as the name Christ never Ibid. p. 7.
signifies the Office abstracted from the Person, so it never signifies the
Person, but as invested with the Office: But what then? Christ may be used as a
proper name, to signify such a determinate Person, which very much differs
from the more general acceptance of the word without affixing it to any
particular person, as every Schoolboy knows. A Poet, or Orator, or
Philosopher, are names which may be indifferently given to any Poet, Orator, or
Philosopher, and therefore do not in their own nature signify any determinate
Person; but if these names be given by eminency, or for any other reason, to
any particular Persons, as to Aristotle, or Tully, or Virgil, this does as much
alter the property of them, as when the name of the Species is appropriated to
any one Individual: Thus it is here, Christ may signify any one, who is
anointed by God to any Office, or it may respect the particular Office of the
Messiah, without knowing who shall bear this Office; but besides this, it may
denote some determinate Person, as Jesus of Nazareth, who is invested in this
Office. And he who knows not how to distinguish a common Name, from the same
Name, when it is appropriated to a particular Person, has not much reason to
talk either of Grammar or Logic.

But this, it seems, is too hard for our Ibid. p. 8*
Authors understanding; who can by no means conceive the difference between
acknowledging Jesus to be the Christ, as his Disciples and some other Jews
sometimes did in his lifetime, and using Christ as a proper Name, to signify
the same Person who was called Jesus. As if to say Aristotle is a Philosopher,
and to say that Philosopher is the proper name of Aristotle, were the same
thing.

He adds, The reason, why the Evangelists use the name Jesus more frequently
than the name Christ, could not be, because in the lifetime of Christ it was
disputed whether Jesus were the Christ, for the Gospels were all written after
the Resurrection of Christ, and one of them was written after all Paul's
Epistles were written, at which time there were many Churches founded on this
persuasion and belief, that Jesus was the Christ.

But our Author mistakes the state of the question, which is not why the name
Christ is used more frequently in the Epistles than in the Gospels, but why it
is not used at all in the Gospels, as a proper name: and his reason shows, that
he would make no very good Historian, but would relate things not according to
the Customs and Usages of the Times, wherein they were acted, but according to
the practice of the Times, wherein he writ; for otherwise it is nothing to the
purpose, at what time the Gospels were writ, nor what was the belief and
practice of that Age, if we suppose the Gospels to be a true History, not of
those present times, but of the Life of Christ, and of that Age wherein he
lived.

He argues much at the same rate in another place, where he would prove, that
the Speculum, p. 40.
Sermons and Parables of our Savior ought not to be of greater Authority in
the Christian Church, than the Writings of the Apostles (which is contrary to
the Judgment and practice of the Ancient Church) and his Argument is
extraordinary subtle; Because our Savior did no more write the four Gospels,
than he did the Epistles; the same Spirit that inspired Matthew, Mark, Luke,
John, to write the Gospels, inspired Paul, Peter, James, John, Jude, to write
the Epistles. As if the Authority of our Saviors Sermons did depend upon the
Writer, not on the Speaker: There is a vast difference between the Truth of a
Relation, and the Authority of those Sermons and Parables contained in it; the
first depends upon the honesty of the Historian, the second upon the Authority
of the Speaker: So that though Matthew, or Mark, etc. wrote the History of the
Gospel, yet the Sermons and Parables of the Gospel derive their authority and
veneration from Christ himself: and therefore the comparison between the
Gospels and Epistles does not lie between St. Matthew and Mark, etc. and St.
Peter and St. Paul, but between Christ and his Apostles: and though the
Evangelists were inspired men, yet the only inspiration, which was necessary
for this Work, was only to help their Memories to make a true and faithful
Relation of what our Savior did and taught; and though the Apostles were
inspired men too, yet their very Inspirations were to be examined by the
Doctrine of the Gospel, which was to be the Rule of their Preaching and
Writings.

But to return: In page 4. I find our Author in a great amazement, and I always
suspected something was the matter with him, that he wrote so much like a man
out of his wits; the occasion of it is, that I say, That all these Offices of
Prophet, Priest, and King, are not properly distinct Offices in Christ, but the
several parts and administrations of his Mediatory Kingdom. Here he first
observes, That it is a strange Presumption for a Young Divine, to say that these
Offices are not distinct Offices in Christ, and never in the least suggest,
wherein the impropriety of so calling them does lie: But I did not say that
they are not distinct Offices, but not so properly distinct Offices; and had he
not been in a great amazement, he might have seen the reasons, why I said so,
because Christ did exercise a Regal Power and Authority in each of these
Offices: and the reason why I chose to state it in this manner, was the better
to show, how all these Offices did conspire to the same end: Christ is a
Mediatory King, whose Office is to reconcile God and Man, and in order to
attain this end, he gives us his Laws to be the Rule of our Lives, makes
Atonement for our Sins, and powerfully bestows all those Blessings on us, which
he has purchased by his death: All this is necessary to the Recovery of lost
man, and therefore we must not expect to receive any benefit by his Expiation
and Sacrifice, without Obedience to his Laws, nor think that his Kingly Power
will save those, who submit not to his Rule and Government; which those are
very apt to do, who do not consider how all these Offices belong to him as a
Mediatory King, but look upon them as such distinct things, which have distinct
effects, without any relation to, or dependence on each other.

For this very reason a late Reverend Author quarrels at Mr. Baxter's
definition of Justifying Faith, that it is to receive Christ in all his
Offices, as Prophet, Priest, and King. He dares not deny that justifying Faith
must receive a whole Christ, but then Iustificatio Paul^na, p. 112.
he affirms, that Christ is the formal Object of justifying Faith, not
considered as Prophet or King, but as Priest. Etsi Idem Christus sit Dominus
and Sacerdos, totusque in justificatione recipiatur, totus tamen omni sensu, i.
e. omnium promiscue munerum intuitu ad justificationem formaliter minime
requiritur, sed tantum qua Sacerdos, and legi satisfaciens: i. e. Though the
same Christ be both Lord and Priest, and whole Christ is received in
justification, yet not under that formal consideration, as a whole Christ, in
all his Offices, but only as a Priest, who makes satisfaction to the Law. And
the reason which he assigns for it, is this, That Justification consists in
being delivered from the Curse of the Law; that the only way whereby we are
delivered from this Curse, is the Satisfaction of Christ; and Christ made this
Satisfaction for us, only as our Priest and Sacrifice: And this were a good
reason indeed for justifying Faith to eye Christ only as our Priest and
Sacrifice, if his Satisfaction alone could give us a title to Justification; if
expiation of sin were the only thing required to the pardon of it: The
Sacrifice of Christ has made a general expiation for the sins of the world,
but this Satisfaction it self intitles no particular man to the benefit of it;
that more properly belongs to the Prophetical and Kingly Office, to confer a
Right and Title to the Benefits of Christ's Priesthood; and therefore we must
first receive Christ, as our Prophet, and our King, that is, must believe his
Revelations, obey his Laws, and submit to his Government, before we have any
reason to look on him as our Priest, to expiate our sins. His Priestly and
Prophetical Offices are but subservient to his Regal Power, (as the Priests and
Prophets under the Law, were to their Kings) and therefore can have no effect
without our subjection to Christ, as our Lord and King, which unites us to him,
and makes us Members of his Body, which he redeemed and purchased with his
Blood.

But then he wonders, why they may not be distinct Offices, and yet parts of
Christ's Mediatory Spec ibid.
Kingdom: but then I wonder too, what he means by distinct Offices, and parts:
When I say they are not properly to be considered as distinct Offices, by
distinct Offices I mean, such Offices, as have no dependence upon each other,
but can attain their ends single and apart; and when I say, they are several
parts of the Mediatory Kingdom, I mean, as any one might easily guess, that
though there are several Acts distinct from each other, and proper to each of
these Offices, yet they all center in one common end; they are all but the
different administrations of the Mediatory Kingdom, and necessary to produce
the same effect, the Salvation of Mankind. But this troubles him too, that I
say, they are the different administrations of this Mediatory Kingdom; for says
our Author, Is an Office an Administration? No, by no means, therefore I say
they ought not to be looked on as different Offices, but as different
Administrations of the same Supreme Office, which comprehends them all.

But then he would fain know, what kind of Totum a Mediatory Kingdom is, to the
Offices of Prophet, Priest, and King: Why Sir, just such a Totum as consists of
three parts: His mistake, which occasions this wondering humor, is, that he
thought a Mediatory Kingdom and the Office of a King, to be of equal extent,
and therefore that the Office of a King could not be contained under a
Mediatory Kingdom, as a part is contained in the whole; Whereas every Puny in
Divinity knows, that a Mediatory Kingdom is of a larger extent than the mere
Office of a King, and contains the Prophetical and Priestly Offices under it:
Which is like another of his mistakes, that because (as he observes from Doctor
Iackson and Doctor Hammond) Christ was consecrated to his Priestly Office by
his Sufferings and Death, therefore he was not consecrated to his Mediatory
Office (as I assert) by being anointed with the Holy Ghost and with Power; as
if Christ might not have a general Consecration to his Mediatory Office, and a
particular Consecration to the particular parts of it: though Doctor Hammond
only says, That the Death of Christ was his Consecration to his Melchisedechi
an Priesthood, but was it self an act of his Aaronical Priesthood.

But I see the most innocent expressions shall not escape the severest
Censures, The Interest of Reason in Religion, p. 388.
when we have to deal with men, who can understand nothing, which is out of
their common road of phrases: Mr. Ferguson draws up a very severe Charge
against me upon this score, as if I confounded the Offices of Christ, and
denied his Priesthood, and his Expiation and Sacrifice: and yet would have the
World believe, that if he had not been in a very good humor, he could have
handled me after another rate: Truly what his humor is I cannot tell, but I am
sure that either his Understanding, or his Conscience, is not very good. He
takes a great deal of laudable pains to prove, that the Offices of Prophet,
Priest, and King, though they be not separated in their Subject, the Person of
Christ, yet they are in their Natures, Objects, Acts, and Effects distinguished
one from the other: But do I any where deny this? Because I say, that they are
several Parts, and different Administrations of his Mediatory Kingdom, does it
hence follow, that they are not several Parts and different Administrations?
That they do not differ in their Natures, Acts, and Effects? As for instance,
the Paternal Government consists of very different parts, as the Education of
Children, providing Food and Raiment for them, correcting them when they do
amiss, and encouraging their Virtues, placing them with prudent Masters and
Governors, and providing for their future subsistence, and the like: Now will
any man say, that there is no difference between feeding Children, and
correcting them, and sending them to School, and putting them out to serve an
apprentiship to a Trade, whereby they may get their Livings, because all these
do equally belong to a Fathers care, and are contained under the general notion
of Paternal Government? Thus when we say, that Christ is a Savior, or which is
the same thing, a Mediatory King, and that the Offices of Prophet, Priest, and
King, are but the several Parts, and different Administrations of his Mediatory
Kingdom, that is, they are all essential to the Office of a Savior, and
included in the notion of it, and necessary to the same end, the Salvation of
Mankind; can any man hence reasonably infer, that they do not differ in their
particular Natures, Acts, P. 392.
Objects, and Effects?

But Mr. Ferguson proves, that I make no difference between Christ's Priestly
and Kingly Office, because I say, that Christ's offering himself a Sacrifice for
Sin, was an Act of Kingship. But I say no such thing: My words are these; When
he offered himself a Sacrifice for Sin, he acted like a King. Now can our
Author perceive no difference between these two expressions, that Christ's
offering himself a Sacrifice for Sin, was an Act of Kingship; and, When he
offered himself a Sacrifice for Sin, he acted like a King? The first signifies,
that the nature of his Sacrifice and Oblation consists in the exercise of a
Regal Power, which indeed confounds his Priestly and Kingly Offices; the other
only signifies, that at the very same time, and in that very Act, when he
offered himself a Sacrifice for Sin, he exercised the Power of a King too; that
is, as I explained it, that his Life was not taken from him by external force
and power, but his laying down his Life was an Act of Authority; He had power
to lay it down, and he had power to take it again: And I wonder Mr. Ferguson
should think it any derogation from our Saviors Power and Authority, that he
adds, This Command have I received from my Father; for I would fain know of
him, what Authority and Power that is, which Christ, as Mediator, has not
received from his Father, and does not exercise by his Command, and in
subordination to him: A Mediatory Kingdom is a received and subordinate Power;
it is Obedience with respect to God, and Authority and Power with respect to
Men. And had this Author been so honest, as to have considered, what I
immediately subjoyn, he could not have suspected me of Socinianizing, or of
confounding the Priestly and Kingly Office, viz. Herein Christ differs from
other Kings, that he laid the Foundation of his Kingdom in his own Blood, that
he purchased and redeemed his Subjects with the Sacrifice of himself.

Such another mistake one may observe in our Author, when he makes me to say,
P. 395.
That the Sacerdotal Office is only a part and different Administration of the
Regal: Whereas I never thought, that the Sacerdotal Office was part of the
Regal Office, but that the Priestly and Kingly and Prophetical Offices were
several Parts and different Administrations of the Mediatory Kingdom: And when
I affirm, that they were several parts of the Mediatory Kingdom, I had not so
little wit in the same breath to affirm, that they were parts of each other,
which is a downright contradiction: but I see, our Author, with all his
Learning, cannot distinguish between a Kingly Office, and a Mediatory Kingdom.

In the like manner he arraigns me for a P. 393.
Socinian, for asserting that Intercession signifies the Administration of
Christ's Mediatory Kingdom, the Power of a Regal Priest to expiate and forgive
sins: Though either our Author is very ignorant, or cannot but know, that what
I there assert, has no affinity with the Socinian Notion; for I expressly
attribute the Virtue and Efficacy of his Intercession, to the Expiation and
Sacrifice of his Death, and cite Heb. ix. 12. to that purpose, which I am sure
no Socinian can own.

The proper notion of an Advocate or Intercessor is one, who offers up our
Prayers and Petitions, and procures an Answer, which was represented by the
High Priests offering Incense in the Holy of Holies, which signified the
Prayers of the Congregation; and therefore we find that while the Priest
offered Incense in the Holy Place, the People used to pray without, that their
Prayers might ascend together with the Incense, Luke i. 10. So that Christ's
Intercession is founded on the virtue of his Sacrifice, but it is not the
representation of his Meritorius Sacrifice, as Mr. Ferguson imagines, but the
Recommendation of our Prayers and Persons to God by virtue of his meritorious
Sacrifice: and therefore the Intercession of Christ is described by his being
able to save all those to the uttermost, who come unto God by him, Heb. vii.
25. And since we have such an High Priest, who intercedes for us, and is
sensible of our Infirmities, we are exhorted to come boldly to the Throne of
Grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find Grace to help in time of need, Heb.
iv. 16.

The death of Christ upon the Cross was a Sacrifice for Sin, was an Act of his
Aaronical Priesthood, to make Atonement for Sin by the Sacrifice of himself;
but when he ascended into Heaven, and had presented his Blood in the holy
Place, he was no longer then a Priest after the Order of Aaron, but after the
Order of Melchisedeck, as the Apostle proves at large in the Epistle to the
Hebrews; his work is not to offer himself any more in Sacrifice, for he has by
one offering for ever perfected them who are sanctified; but his Office is to
bless the People in Gods Name, as Melchisedeck blessed Abraham: God has sent
his Son to bless us, in turning of us from our iniquities: He has exalted him
to be a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance unto Israel, and remission of
sins.

So that now in virtue of his Death and Sacrifice, Christ does not intercede,
like some meaner Advocates, by Prayers and Entreaties, having all power both in
Heaven and Earth committed to him, but does by his Power and Authority, which
he received from God, as the Purchase and Reward of his Death and Sufferings,
bestow all those Blessings on us which we want, and pray for in his Name.

For this Reason, I asserted, That Christ's Intercession is the Power of a Regal
Priest, to expiate and forgive sins; not to make atonement for them, which he
did by his Death and Sacrifice, (as Mr. Ferguson would pervert my words) but to
apply this Expiation and Atonement to us, in the actual forgiveness of our sins.

And this is so plain and evident a Truth, that Mr. Ferguson himself cannot
deny it, though he quarrels with me for asserting it, being willing, it seems,
to find fault, if he knew how: His Words are these: Indeed his Intercession, as
upon the one P. 391.
hand it is founded on his Oblation and Sacrifice, being nothing but the
representation of his meritorious Passion, and a continuation of his sacerdotal
Function (which, as I observed before, is a mistaken notion of Christ's
Intercession, as confounding his Sacrifice with his Intercession, which is
indeed founded on his Sacrifice, and receives all its virtue and efficacy from
it, but yet is of a distinct nature and consideration) so on the other hand, it
has its effects toward us by virtue of the interposition of some Acts of his
Kingly Office: For these Offices being all vested in the same Person, and
having all the same general End, and belonging all to the Work of Mediation, it
cannot otherwise be, but that their Acts must have a mutual respect to each
other; but yet the Priestly Office, to which Intercession appertains, is
formally distinct from his Kingly. In which words he acknowledges, that Christ's
Intercession, as it respects us, and consists in bestowing those Blessings on
us, which we want, and which he has purchased, is an Act of Kingly Power and
Authority; which is as much, as I asserted, or ever intended to assert: And as
for what he adds, that still his Priestly Office is formally distinguished from
his Kingly, I readily grant it, so far as it respects his Sacrifice and
Expiation, which is an Act of his Aaronical Priesthood; but as it respects his
Intercession, which is an Act of his Melchisedechian Priesthood, his Kingly and
Priestly Offices are so closely united, that he is rather to be considered as a
Regal Priest, than as either Priest or King, because it is the exercise of that
Power and Authority which is founded on his Sacrifice.

And by this time, I hope, every ordinary Reader will see what a vain and
malicious attempt it was, for this Author to endeavor to represent me as a
Socinian; of which Candor and Ingenuity, I shall give several other Instances
hereafter; and that he might have spared his pains in proving, that the Kingly
and Priestly Offices in Christ are distinct, and that Christ is not a
Metaphorical, but a proper Priest.

But to return to our Looking-Glass-Maker, he quarrels still, that I say, That
Christ's preaching the Gospel was the exercise of his Regal Power in publishing
his Laws: Our Author can understand, that to enact Laws is an exercise of a
Regal Power, but not to publish them, which would make every inferior Herald a
King: This is a very wise Objection, which shows his Skill in Laws and
Government: It is not indeed necessary for a King to publish his Laws in his
own Person; this was a peculiar condescension of our Savior, to come in Person
to us to publish his Laws; but yet the publication of Laws must be made by the
same Authority, which Enacts them; for publication is of the very essence of a
Law, and by wiser men than our Author, put into the definition of it, and
therefore is the proper exercise of Regal Power.

I doubt my Readers will be quite tired with my taking notice of such
impertinent Cavils, and therefore I shall add but one or two more, which are
very remarkable, and dismiss our Author for the present: I commend the Wisdom
and Honesty of our Church, for teaching her Children a Religion without Art or
Subtilty: Our Author disproves this, by showing that no Child can Speculum, P.
31.
understand the Church-Catechism without great art and subtilty: he cannot
understand what it is to be a Member of Christ, without understanding the
various significations of the Name Christ, and whether he must be made a Member
of the Church, or of the Person of Christ; and then he must know what this
Church is, which requires great subtilty, etc. Now by the same argument I can
prove, that a Child cannot understand the easiest thing in Nature, without
unridling all the Mysteries of Philosophy; as for instance, at this rate a
Child cannot understand what Bread is, unless he first understand what Matter
is, and then he must understand all the difficulties of Quantity, and whether
it consist of Divisibles or Indivisibles, and must understand the differences
of Matter, and the reason, why he can bite one sort of Matter with his Teeth,
but can make no impression upon another: and how the parts of matter hang
together, and the like. There is a more general indistinct apprehension of
things, which is sufficient to govern our Actions, though we do not understand
all the Niceties and Philosophy of them. But if our Author can find such
subtilties in those plain matters, which are taught Children in the
Church-Catechism, (which are objections that will indifferently lie against the
plainest Instructions) what does he think of those sublime matters of the
Eternal Decrees and Counsels of God, Election and Reprobation, and suchlike
Mysteries, which are so familiarly thrust into Catechisms? What subtilty is
required in Children to understand these deep Points, and to comprehend the
subtle and artificial Schemes of Orthodoxy?

This is much like another Cavil against the intelligibleness of our Union with
P. 36.
Christ: I am sure (says our Author) that our Union with Christ is an Union: No
doubt Sir; and if it be so, it cannot be very easy to be understood, because
the Metaphysical notion of Union is as difficult as any other transcendental
term: Why then let the Metaphysicians dispute it out; but for all that, I can
easily understand, and I believe any one else can, what it is to be related to
Christ, as Subjects are to their Prince, and Disciples to their Master, and
Wives to their Husbands, etc.

This is enough to give the Reader a taste of our Authors Skill; and should I
add any more, it might bring my own discretion into question: for next to
making foolish and cavilling Objections, it is an argument of a very little Wit
to answer them.

And therefore to proceed, Dr. Owen observes, that I have writ against his
Book, Vind. P. 1.
which was writ and published near twenty years since: I confess I do not well
understand the force of this Objection, unless he imagine that his Book is now
grown venerable for its antiquity; but wherever the force of it lies, I am
sure it answers another grand Objection against me (which is so often repeated)
that I am a Young Man, a defect which time will mend, and which Industry will
supply: However I suppose the Doctor was not very old twenty years ago, and it
argued some Modesty in the young Man, rather to attack a Book writ by the
Doctor, when he was a young Man too, than rudely to assault his Writings of a
later date, which may be presumed to be the effects of a more mature Judgment,
and riper years; and I hope this consideration will plead my excuse with him,
for not undertaking that task, which he has so kindly allotted me, right or
wrong, to answer all his late voluminous Treatises, which I think I may as soon
be persuaded to do, as to read them; that magnificent Title of Exercitations,
which used to be prefixed before some learned Discourses, invited me to take a
little taste of them, till I found my self mistaken, and deceived with some
jejune or trite Observations; which has so put me out of conceit with
flattering Titles, that I shall never again believe the Titles of Books or
Chapters, for his sake.

But this Book has had the approbation of as Learned and Holy Persons, it may
be, as any the Doctor knows living in England, or out of it, who owning the
Truth contained in it, have highly avowed its Usefulness, and are ready yet so
to do. I fear that either the Doctor's Acquaintance with Learned and Holy Men,
is not very great, or that this is not true; for I cannot conceive, how very
holy men should so approve a Book which is so little a Friend to Holiness, or
that learned men should be pleased with such loose and inconsequent Reasonings;
but let that be as it will, I am sure there are as learned and as holy men, who
do as little approve it; unless the Doctor thinks, that Learning and Holiness
are confined to his own Party, or that the approbation of his Writings is the
only sure test of Men's Learning and Holiness.

But the great charge of all, which runs through his whole Book, is, that I have
misrepresented his words, and perverted his sense, which sometimes he
attributes to ignorance, sometimes to malice, sometimes he calls it an impudent
falsehood, sometimes flagitiously false, and shows very great Skill at varying
phrases, which he is much better at, than at writing Controversies.

Whether this Charge be true or not, shall be examined particularly, as far as
I can reduce the several particulars of this Charge into any order: But to
abate the wonder a little, I must inform my Reader, that this is Dr. Owen's way
of answering Books, to deny those Doctrines which he dares not own, or cannot
vindicate; I am not the first who have been charged with such falsifications;
Mr. Baxter was taxed with it long since, in a whole Book written for that very
purpose, entitled, Of the Death of Christ, and of Justification, the Doctrine
concerning them formerly deliverd, vindicated from the Animadversions of Mr. R.
B. where this grave man is corrected as magisterially, as if he had been such
another Stripling as my self. Toward the conclusion of that Discourse, I meet
with a very excellent Prayer: If I must engage again in the like kind, I shall
pray, That He, from whom are all my supplies, would give me a real humble frame
of heart, that I may have no need with many pretenses, and a multitude of good
words, to make a cloak for a Spirit breaking frequently through all with sad
discoveries of Pride and Passion, and to keep me from all magisterial
insolence, pharisaical supercilious self-conceitedness, contempt of others, and
every thing that is contrary to the Rule, whereby I ought to walk. It is great
pity that Forms of Prayer are not lawful, for this is too good a Prayer to be
used but once in a man's life; which I doubt, is one reason, why we see no
better effects of it in the Doctors Writings.

But there is a heavier Charge than all this behind, which is frequently hinted
by Doctor Owen, and more expressly managed by Mr. Ferguson, who in his Preface
tells his Readers, That I treat the sacred Writers with as much contempt as I
do T. W. and Burlesque the Scripture no less than others have done Virgil's
Poems. This would be a terrible Adversary, were he as good at his proofs, as he
is bold and daring in his Charge. This is a crime of a very high nature to
burlesque Scripture, and the foulness of the imputation might justly have
provoked a tamer man than my self, did not his weak and ridiculous proofs more
deserve contempt, than any serious resentment.

He waves the proof of this in his Preface; but in his second Chapter, where he
entertains his Readers with a tedious impertinent Discourse about Metaphors and
Allegories, and very gravely states the difference between a Metaphor and
Allegory, and Parable, etc. as if he were reading a Rhetoric Lecture to his
Schoolboys; and very strongly proves, that it is lawful to use Metaphors, and
that the Spirit of God in Scripture does so, (it being his peculiar Talent to
prove that which no body denies) at length he comes to the business, to show
that some of the expressions P. 376.
reflected on in the Writings of the Nonconformists, are such as the Holy Ghost
himself has preceded them in the use of, and that to the very same ends and
purposes for which they produce them. And that he may not be thought to design
the disparagement of any party of men, by quoting Testimonies from diverse of
their Authors, who rather than not strain up the dregs of their choler against
the Fanatics, for their Phraseologies, have even written in derogation of
Scripture-phrases; and made the Spirit of God the subject of their derision, as
well as the Nonconformists; to avoid this, he confines himself to me alone.
This is true Fanatic Charity: He will by no means, good man! disparage any
party of men, only he informs his Readers that there are a sort of men, who
write against the Fanatics (and it is pretty well known who they are) that
make the Spirit of God the subject of their derision: And why so I pray?
because they laugh at the Fanatics for their ridiculous abuse of
Scripture-Phrases and Metaphors: Though they prate Nonsense in
Scripture Phrase, yet because it is the phrase of Scripture which they thus
abuse, every one, who laughs at them for it, if we will believe Mr. Ferguson,
makes the Spirit of God the subject of his derision.

And yet our Author, when he is in a better mood, tells us, But let them and
all The Interest of Rea son in Religion, P. 311.
such Persons, of what communion and persuasion soever they are, who turn the
Gospel thus into a Romance, and subvert the Mysteries of Faith, by transforming
them into Fantastic Allegories, be treated with the derision and contempt of
all, who pretend to Wisdom and Modesty. So that it seems, some men may turn the
very Gospel it self into a Romance, and abuse the Phrases and Expressions of
Scripture to very evil purposes; and then it is not a deriding the Spirit of
God, but that which is consistent with Wisdom and Modesty, to expose them to
derision and contempt. Thus contrary is our Author to himself, when he opposes
the Quakers, and vindicates his own dear Brethren, who have abused
Scripture-expressions as grossly, though in many cases with less wit, and to
worse purposes, than the Quakers themselves; as he is forced to acknowledge of
T. W. that maybe, in some things he Ibid. P. 384.
has prevaricated, which is in plain English to say, that it may be, he has
either played the Fool or the Knave, for which character T. W. is very much
beholden to Mr. Ferguson.

But he has taken care, that no other Person shall be able to answer this
Charge; for though he very charitably accuses all men, who write against the
Fanatics, yet he names no man, nor gives any particular instances of this
profane derision of the Holy Spirit; only I am singled out to bear the fury of
his assault; and I am very well contented with it, provided that if I acquit my
self, his bare Testimony may not be taken against any man, till the Cause be
first heard and tried.

The plain state of the Controversy is this: I charge them with drawing a New
Scheme of Religion, such as is no where to be found in express terms in
Scripture, from a pretended Acquaintance with Christ's Person; I foresaw an
easy and obvious objection against this, that there are no men, who stuff
their Books and Discourses with more frequent quotations of Scripture, than
they do; right or wrong they have a Scripture - proof for every thing they say;
and does it not look like a calumny then to charge them with fetching their
Religion from any other Fountain than the holy Scriptures? In Knowledge of
Christ, Chap. 3. Sect. 4. P. 100.
answer to this, I made it appear, that they expound Scriptures according to
their own fancies, and in compliance with their pre-conceived opinions; that
they do not fetch their notions from the Scriptures, but wrest the Scriptures
from their proper and genuine sense, to make them countenance their own
fancies. Now because I produce those Scripture expressions which these men
pervert and burlesque (to use his own word) by their wild and fanciful
applications, Mr. Ferguson had no way to be even with me, but to charge me with
burlesquing the Scripture it self.

As for instance: They tell us, That all we have to do in order to our
salvation, is to get into Christ, and to be united to him, for then his
Fullness, and Beauty, and Riches, and Righteousness, and Merits, and All, is
ours; and in order to this Union (which what it is, they could never yet
explain) we must first come to Christ, and then receive him, and apply his
Merits and Righteousness to our selves, and then lean, and rest, and roll our
Souls upon him, and trust to be saved wholly by his Merits, without any
Righteousness of our own: and all this they learnedly prove from those
Scripture-expressions of coming to Christ, and receiving him, etc. which
signify no more than believing in Christ, or undertaking the public
Profession of Christianity; but because I show how far these Scripture-phrases
are from countenancing their Gibberish, Mr. Ferguson challenges me with
burlesquing the Scripture. Coming to Christ, signifies, according to the
Eastern Dialect, to believe in Christ, or to become his Disciple; but because
it is called coming, hence these men of fancy dream of I know not what
spiritual progress of the Soul to Christ; and explain believing, by coming to
Christ, which in their Divinity is one of the first Acts of Faith.

Now because I say, That it falls out luckily, that Faith is called coming, I
am charged with deriding the Scripture; whereas it is plain, that if I deride
any thing, it is only their foolish Explications of Scripture-phrases: for all
their Mystical Divinity had been spoiled, and they must have been forced to
have spoke plain sense, like other men, or to have spoke Nonsense without the
least pretense of the authority of Scripture, had it not been for such Eastern
Phrases, which were intended by the Holy Ghost to another purpose, but are
capable of being perverted by such English Divines, to the countenancing of a
New-fashion'd English Divinity; and I think still, that this fell out very
luckily for them. Thus with an equal skill and ingenuity, he accounts it
deriding the Scripture, to say, That coming and going are very intelligible
explications of believing; whereas coming must be explained by believing, not
believing by coming, unless we will in a proper sense burlesque the Scripture.

Thus because I reject their fanciful and presumptuous trust and confidence in
Christ, viz. to be saved by him for no other reason, but because they trust to
be saved by him; I am charged with deriding all trust and dependence on Christ,
for the performance of his Promises, or the influences of his Grace; and
because I reject their proof of this from St. Paul's trusting in God in the
faithful discharge of his Apostolical Office, notwithstanding all the
Persecutions he suffered from Jews and Heathens, 2 Timothy 1. 12. I am accused Ib.
p. 381.
of involving the Scripture in the same condemnation, and bringing St. Paul
himself under the same imputation: Certainly these men think themselves all
Apostles, and that they expound the Scriptures with as infallible a Spirit as
first indicted them; for otherwise they would not be so impudent, as to charge
every man, who laughs at their ridiculous applications of Scripture-phrases,
with deriding the Scriptures, and the holy Spirit.

And yet this is the true Reason of all this noise and outcry about
burlesquing the Scripture; for he directs his Readers to page 62, 63, etc. of
my Book, for an example of my sacrilegious abuse of the words of Scripture, to
make my Readers sport, and to render my Adversaries ridiculous: and whoever
consults the place, will only find a Scheme of their Divinity, expressed in
their own canting phrases, without any Art to make it look ridiculously, but
only a true and naked representation of it; and though I cannot deny, that it
is a famous Example of burlesquing the Scripture, yet Mr. Ferguson ought to
have laid the Saddle upon the right Horses back, and then I doubt his own dear
Friends must suffer under this Imputation.

There is nothing I more heartily designed, than to rescue the Scripture from
such Abuses, as appears from what I immediately added, That the whole Mystery
of this, Knowledge of Christ, p. 108.
and a great deal more stuff of this nature (not of Interest of Reason etc. p.
278.
Fanaticism, as he cites my words, purposely to create the greater odium, which
is very familiar with him, and agreeable enough to the purity of his Christian
Morals) consists in wresting metaphorical and allusive expressions to a proper
sense: When the Scripture describes the Profession of Christianity, a sincere
Belief and Obedience to the Gospel, by having Christ, and being in Christ, and
coming to him, and receiving him; these men expound these phrases to a proper
and natural sense, to signify I know not what unintelligible Union and
spiritual Progress and Closure of the Soul with him; an Union of Persons,
instead of an Agreement in Faith and Manners. If this be to burlesque
Scripture, to deliver it from the Freaks of an Enthusiastic Fancy, and to
expound it to a plain and easy sense, such as is agreeable to the
Understandings of men, and worthy of the Spirit of God, I acknowledge the
Charge, and am afraid my Adversaries will never be guilty of that Crime.

Thus when I show how convincingly these men prove their darling Opinions from
a fanciful Exposition of Scripture-Metaphors, and Types and Figures, and among
the rest observe, how many pretty Resemblances of Christ, Mr. Watson has
discovered in the brazen Serpent, (wherein Mr. Ferguson himself acknowledges he
has prevaricated) I am charged with deriding Ib p. 383.
the Type it self, and making scornful Reflections upon the main scope and
design of the comparison: T. W. among other things tells us, that as the
Serpent was lifted up to be looked upon by the stung Israelites, which looking
implied a secret hope they had of cure; so if we do but look on Christ
fiducially, we shall be cured of our sins: by which comparison he would prove,
that because the Israelites were miraculously cured only by looking upon the
brazen Serpent, that therefore there is nothing more required of us to be cured
of our Sins, but only looking fiducially on Christ, that is, confidently hoping
to be saved by him; this, Mr. Ferguson says, is parallel to the words of our
Savior, and the true intendment and meaning of them, John iii. 15, 16. And as
Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, even so must the Son of man be
lifted up, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life: And now I will acknowledge that I have done very ill in
ranking this comparison of T. W's, among the rest of his Prevarications, if Mr.
Ferguson can prove, that this believing signifies no more than this fiducial
looking on Christ, which I am sure he can never prove, except it be in Mr.
Watson's way.

What he adds about Mr. Tho. Vincent is sufficiently answered already, and
shall be considered in another place. This is the sum of his Charge against me,
for burlesquing Scripture; in which I cannot think he was serious, but only
said this, because he must say something, and had nothing wiser to say: Or as
it is with some scolding people, who wanting wit to make proper and sudden
Repartees, choose rather than to say nothing, to say the same things, which were
said to them; though the impropriety of the application, and the dullness of
it, serve only to make mirth for the bystanders.

This, I perceive, is Mr. Ferguson's peculiar Talent; and to give him his due,
he is very dexterous at it, as will appear in two or three instances more of a
like narure.

I charge some of the Nonconformists (for I never thought them all guilty of
it) with perverting the Scripture by expounding allusive and metaphorical
expressions to a proper sense; Mr. Ferguson dares not deny this Charge, for the
matter of fact is too evident; but he shows great Skill in retorting Ib. p. 285.
it, and gives several instances, how I pervert Scripture in the same manner.

Thus he tells his Readers, That whereas other Expositors of Scripture have
expounded Christ's being called The Brightness of his Fathers Glory, and the
express Image of his Person, Heb. i. 3. in a plain and proper sense, and have
accordingly argued from it for the Deity of Christ against the Socinians, Mr.
Sherlock by Christ's being styled the Brightness of his Fathers Glory, etc.
understands no more but those Discoveries which Christ has made of God, being
as true a Representation of the Divine Nature and Will, as any Picture is of
the Person it represents. When he says I understand no more by it, he expressly
contradicts my own words, which are these: Upon which account too (as well as
with respect to his Divine Nature) he is called the brightness Knowledge of
Christ, p. 32.
of his Fathers glory, etc. So that I acknowledge, that Christ is called the
brightness of his Fathers glory, as well with respect to his Divine Nature, as
to the glorious Revelations of his Will; and for Mr. Ferguson to say I do not,
and upon that account to insinuate so foul a Charge as Socinianism, others
would have called a wilful and malicious lie.

But suppose the worst, that I had expounded Christ's being called the
brightness of his Fathers Glory, etc. only with respect to those glorious
Discoveries he has made of God, he might have said, it had been a false and
dangerous, and Socinian Exposition, or what he pleased; but it is a very
unhappy instance of abusing the Scripture to a metaphorical sense, where the
words, according to all Rules of Exposition, will admit a proper one: for I
would desire Mr. Ferguson to tell me, what is the proper sense of the
Brightness of Gods glory, and the express Image of his Person: What is the
proper brightness of a Spirit? Nay, the brightness of the Glory of God, and the
Image of an infinite Spirit, which has no shape? I never met with any
Expositor till now, who thought these proper Expressions, but every one has
reckoned them metaphorical: But besides this, why does he imagine, that Wisdom,
and Goodness, and Power, and Justice, and suchlike Perfections of the Divine
Nature, are but the metaphorical Glory of God? And that those glorious
Discoveries, which God has made of these Perfections in Christ, are but a
metaphorical Brightness of this Glory? When we never read of any other Glory of
God in Scripture, except it were some glorious visible Appearance, which is
much more likely to be a metaphorical glory, than the eternal and infinite
Perfections of the Divine Nature. And the same answer will serve for what he
alleges about Christ's being the Image of God.

But he tells us, That Grotius and Hammond, Persons to whom (as he well
guesses) I pay a respect, vouchsafe us a much better Paraphrase, on Heb. i. 3.
I shall be very glad to learn from these men, and first let us consult Dr.
Hammond, and his Paraphrase upon those words, The brightness of his glory, and
the express Image of his Person, is this, Who being the means of reflecting to
us the sight of him, who is otherwise invisible: for the explication of which,
he refers us to John i. 18. No man has seen God at any time, the only begotten
Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him: and his
Paraphrase on these words, whereby we may know what the Doctor means by
reflecting the sight of God to us, is this: God is invisible, and not
approachable by us, and so his will, and the knowledge of his Attributes cannot
be conveyed to us but by some Intercessor, and of this sort none can be
comparable to Christ Jesus, who is next unto the Father, and most dearly
beloved by him, and knows most of his mind; and his end of coming into the
World was to declare this unto us. So that Dr. Hammond gives no better
Paraphrase, but in part the very same, which I do, and must pass for a
metaphorical Interpreter, and Mr. Ferguson for a proper Slanderer. And Grotius
gives the very same account of the words: He expounds the (...), the brightness
of his glory, by repercussus Divinae Majestatis, qualis est Solis in Nube, qui
dicitur (...), A reflection of the Divine Majesty, such as we may sometimes
observe of the Sun in a Cloud: and adds, That this Divine Glory and Majesty,
cum per se conspici nequeat, cernitur in Christo, sicut Sol, quem direct oculi
nostri tueri nequeant, cernitur in Aqua, Speculo, Nube: Since we cannot
immediately see it, as it is in it self, is discovered in Christ; as the Sun,
which we cannot directly view, is seen in Water, in a Glass, or in a Cloud: and
for the understanding of this, refers us to 2 Cor. iv. 4. Who is the Image of
the invisible God; which he thus paraphraseth: Nimirum sicut ex imagine hominis
species cognoscitur, ita ex iis, quae egit and locutus est Christus, Dei
Potentia, Sapientia, Sanctitas, Bonitas. As a Man is known by his Image and
Picture, so is the Power, Wisdom, Holiness, Goodness of God, known and
discerned by those things which Christ did and spoke, while he was on Earth.
And the very same account he gives of Col. i. 15. What excuse Mr. Ferguson can
make for this, I know not; though I presume, that he, who so often needs
Excuses, is never without one.

But to requite him for his civility to Grotius and Hammond, I will direct him
to two other Persons, to whom, I suppose, he will pay some respect, who are as
metaphorical men in this point, as my self, and they are no less men than
Calvin and Beza. Vide Calvin in locum.
Mr. Calvin, though he acknowledges, as I do, that those Expressions, The
brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his Person, refer to the
Divine Nature in Christ, yet he tells us, that we must consider this Phrase,
according to the scope and design of the Apostle: Neque enim hic tradere
voluit, quid simile intus habeat Pater cum Filio, sed quemadmodum dixi, fidem
nostram adificare cum fructu voluit, ut discamus non aliter Deum nobis
patefieri, quam in Christo. i. e. That the Apostle did not intend in this place
to acquaint us, what internal similitude or likeness there is, between the
Father and the Son; but to teach us that which is for the edification of our
faith, that God cannot be known any other way, but only in Christ. With more to
the same purpose.

Beza exactly follows his Master, and Beza in locum.
gives this interpretation of the brightness of his glory; Is in quo resplendet
gloria illa ac Majestas patris alioqui infiniti and inconspicui, five is, in
quo uno splendorem suum conspiciendum praebet Pater, qui propterea Col. i. 15.
dicitur imago Dei inconspicui, and 1 Cor. iv. 4. idque in Evangelio. That is,
He in whom the Glory and the Majesty of the Father, who otherwise is infinite
and invisible, shines forth, or he in whom alone God makes his own brightness
and glory visible to us, upon which account, Col. i. 15. Christ is called The
Image of the invisible God, and 1 Cor. iv. 4. with respect to those Discoveries
he has made of God in the Gospel:,, And as he proceeds, We cannot truly
contemplate the Father, but in the Son, in the Son, I say, incarnate, by whom
the Father speaks to us. And he alleges the Authority of Tertullian, adversus
Praxeam, for this Exposition: Vicarium se Patris Christus ostendit, per quem
Pater and videretur in factis, and audiretur in verbis, et cognosceretur in
filio facta et verba patris administrante: Christ showed himself the true Vicar
of his Father; for the Father was seen in his Actions, heard in his Words, and
made known by that whole Economy, which was administered by the Son. By this we
may see what credit Mr. Ferguson deserves, when he talks so confidently of the
sense of Ancient and Modern Expositors, who either is acquainted with none of
them, or thinks his Readers are not; who either knows not, or cares not, what
he says.

In the next place he observes, that I expound the Fullness of Christ, John i.
16. to signify a perfect Declaration of the Divine Will concerning the
Salvation of Mankind, and he gives this as another instance of my turning plain
Scripture Testimonies The Interest of Reason in Religion, p.^^7
into Tropes and Figures. Now whatever becomes of this Exposition, (of which
more hereafter) did ever any man before Mr. Ferguson, imagine, that the Fullness
of Christ, of which we receive Grace for Grace, was a proper Expression,
without the least Trope or Figure? Fullness properly belongs only to space, as
filled with matter, and is a metaphorical Expression, when applied to Spirits,
or spiritual things: and therefore I thought that instead of turning a proper
Expression into Tropes and Figures, I had expounded a figurative Expression to
the most proper sense, when by the Fullness which is in Christ, I understood the
most perfect Knowledge of the Divine Will; and by this Fullness communicated to
us, the most perfect Declarations of the Divine Will in the Gospel, which is a
Dispensation of Grace and Truth.

But let us consider what proper work Mr. Ferguson makes of it: By that Fullness
in Christ, of which we all receive Grace for Grace, he understands a
participation of renewing sanctifying Grace, according to the plain and proper
import of the words: So that Christ is in a proper sense full of renewing and
sanctifying Grace, that is, according to Mr. Ferguson's notion of it, of
infused habits of Grace; and we receive this renewing Grace out of Christ's
Fullness, as Water flows out of a Fountain: And thus either Grace passes from
one Subject to another, which the Philosopher would have told him, no Habit or
Quality can do; or the very Substance of Christ is communicated to Christians,
together with these infused Habits of Grace, which is a more ridiculous conceit
than the Popish Transubstantiation, or the Lutheran Consubstantiation: The
inherent Grace of Christ, according to this notion, is of the same identical
nature with the infused Habits of Grace in Christians, and the Essential
Holiness of Christ is separable from his Person, and may be transmitted into
another Subject, and may there be capable of increase and diminution: Mr.
Ferguson must necessarily allow all this, if he take these words in a proper
sense; for it is not sufficient to say that Christ is endowed with power to
renew and sanctify us, to deliver this Expression from Tropes and Figures, but
the very same Grace which is in Christ, must be infused into Believers; which
is an excellent way of expounding Scriptures to a proper sense, by turning them
into Nonsense.

But these are but some slight Skirmishes; in page 387. he draws forth his
whole strength and force to make good this Charge against me, That I pervert
the Scripture, by turning Plain and Proper Expressions into a Metaphorical
Sense. Of this he gives two instances, the first is concerning the Priestly
Office of Christ, which he says, I confound with his Regal Office, and
consequently make Christ only a metaphorical Priest; and then he tells us, That
there is not one Text in the Bible, where Christ is called a Priest, which can
be understood Ib. p. 399.
in a proper sense, but they must all of necessity be interpreted in a
metaphorick, as the Socinians expound them: Now though I doubt it would puzzle
Mr. Ferguson to give an intelligible account what he means by a proper and a a
metaphorical Priest, yet at least one might reasonably expect from him, that in
order to make good this Charge, he should produce some express place where I
make Christ a metaphorical Priest, or some express Texts, which I expound to
such a metaphorical sense; but he can do neither of these, and therefore he
first perverts my words, as well as sense, and then argues by consequence, that
I make Christ only a metaphorical Priest, and then by as good consequence, I
must expound those Texts, which concern the Priesthood of Christ, in a
metaphorick sense; and thus by consequence our Author loses his labor: For I
have already made it sufficiently appear, how childishly he has mistaken, or
maliciously perverted my words, and sense, whereon this Charge is grounded:
only I am very glad to find upon this occasion, that he has so much altered his
Judgment of Dr. Stillingfleet, and his Discourse concerning the Reason of the
Sufferings of Christ: for time was, when he charged that Learned Person with
betraying the Cause, for the same Reasons, for which I am now charged with
Socinianism: But our Author never commends any one, unless it be to insinuate
some commendation of himself, or to reflect some disparagement and odium upon
his Adversary.

His next instance concerns that account which I give of the nature of
Justification. Ib. p. 403.
And here he first lays down my sense of it, and then makes some few cavilling
exceptions against it; and then admirably proves, that I pervert plain and
proper expressions of Scripture to a metaphorical sense. As for the first, I
own my words, but dislike that blundering method, into which he has cast them;
and therefore I shall beg leave to represent my own Conceptions in such order
and method, as may more easily and naturally express my sense.

I assert, That our Justification and Acceptance with God, depends wholly upon
the Gospel Covenant, which does not exact from us a perfect and sinless
Obedience, but promises Pardon of Sin and Eternal Life, upon the Conditions of
Faith, and Repentance, and new Obedience; that this Gospel Covenant is wholly
owing to the Merits of Christ, who by the Sacrifice of his Death has expiated
our Sins, and both in his Life and Death has given a Noble Demonstration of
his entire Obedience and Submission to the Divine Will: for God being well
pleased with the Obedience of Christ's Life, and with the Sacrifice and
Expiation of his Death, entered into a New Covenant of Grace and Mercy with
Mankind: that the only way to partake of the blessings of this New Covenant, is
by believing and obeying the Gospel of Christ; that is in other words, by
acknowledging the Divine Authority of our Savior, believing his Revelations,
obeying his Laws, trusting to the Merits of his Sacrifice, and the Power of his
Intercession, and depending on the supplies and influences of his Grace: So
that the Righteousness of Christ is not the formal cause of our Righteousness
or Justification, but the Righteousness of his Life and Death is the
meritorious cause of that Covenant, whereby we are declared righteous, and
rewarded as righteous Persons: our Righteousness is wholly owing to the
Righteousness of Christ, which in this sense may be said to be imputed to us,
because without this Covenant of Grace, which is founded on the Righteousness
of Christ, the best man living could lay no claim to Righteousness, or future
Glory. The Righteousness of Christ is our Righteousness, when we speak of the
Foundation of the Covenant, by which we are accepted; but if we speak of the
Terms of the Covenant, i. e. What it is that will entitle us to all the
Blessings of the Covenant, then we must have a Righteousness of our own, for
the Righteousness of Christ will not serve the turn.

This is a plain and easy Account of my sense concerning the Doctrine of
Justification by Faith in Christ, and to this I will stand. Let us hear then
what Mr. Ferguson has to object against it. And first he can by no means
understand how the Righteousness of Christ's Life and Death can be the
meritorious Ib. p. 406.
cause of Gods forgiving our sins and follies, (he should have said, of that
Covenant, wherein God promises to forgive our sins upon certain Conditions) for
as much as (according to what I express elsewhere) his Essential Goodness
obliged him to it. The words which he cites to this purpose, are these: That
the natural notions, which men have of God, assure them, that he is very good,
and that it is not possible to understand what Goodness is, without pardoning
Grace. Now I would know of Mr. Ferguson which of these three he will reject;
whether he will deny, that the natural notion of a Deity includes infinite
Goodness; or that the notion of infinite Goodness includes Pardoning Grace,
when there is a just and honorable occasion for it; or that the Merits of
Christ's Life and Death have purchased the Grace and Mercy of the Gospel: If he
believe all these, he is as much concerned to answer this Objection, as I am;
if he deny them, he must either turn Atheist or Socinian: But pray, who told
him, that the Goodness of God did immediately oblige him to pardon Sinners? or
that the Goodness of God confers an antecedent title on Sinners to Grace and
Pardon? May not a good God consult the Reputation of his Holiness, and of his
Authority and Government, and dispense his Pardons in such prudent Methods as
his own Infinite Wisdom shall direct? And may he not then require the
intervention of a Sacrifice, and of a very meritorious one too, to purchase and
seal his Pardon to Sincers? The Essential Goodness of God only proves, That he
may pardon Sin without a Sacrifice, but it does not prove, that either he will
or must.

The next Exception is very surprising, That because I elsewhere assert, That
the whole Mystery of the Recovery of Mankind consists only in repairing the
Divine Image, which was defaced by Sin, that is, in making all men truly good
and virtuous, etc. He cannot imagine, how the Covenant of Grace can be so much
as necessary to the promising of Remession of Sins, much less that the Death of
Christ was needful to procure it to that end. But pray why so? Is not the
Promise of Pardon purchased and sealed with the Blood of Christ, absolutely
necessary to encourage men to be good? Does not the Gospel represent this to be
the last and ultimate end of what Christ has done and suffered to rescue
Mankind from the Power of the Devil, and Dominion of their Lusts, and to renew
them after the Image of God? If Mr. Ferguson be ignorant in these matters, I
can direct him to a The Design of Christianity.
very good Book, which will better instruct him. But suppose he know no other
end of Christ's Death, but to satisfy a natural vindictive, inexorable Justice,
yet if this must be done, before any thing else can be done, is it not
absolutely necessary to the last and ultimate end, which is to transform men
into the Image of God, and to bring them to the fruition of him? For the
satisfaction of Justice, in what sense soever he pleases to understand it, can
only be a means in order to the Recovery of lost Man, not the Recovery it self.

In the next place, he tells us, That it P. 409.
seems inconsistent with the Wisdom and Sapience of God, to introduce a perfect
Righteousness, such as that of his Son was, merely to make way for his
justifying us upon an imperfect Righteousness, such as that of our Obedience
is. What force there may be in that phrase of introducing a perfect
Righteousness, I cannot tell, but I can discover no inconsistency with the
Wisdom of God to accept and reward those, who are sincerely but not perfectly
righteous, for the sake of one, who is. If God bestowed so many Blessings on
the Posterity of Abraham, for the sake of their Father, who was not perfectly
righteous, I wonder our Author should think it any derogation to the Divine
Wisdom, to accept and reward our imperfect Obedience for the sake of the
perfect Righteousness and Obedience of Christ. Nay, though we should suppose,
that God had sent Christ into the world upon no other design, but to set a most
perfect Example of Holiness and Obedience to the Divine Will; and to give a
plain Demonstration, how highly he is pleased with Obedience to his Laws,
should not only greatly reward him in his own Person, but should promise for
his sake to pardon and reward all those, who imitate (though imperfectly) his
Example, (which in our Authors Phrase, is to introduce a perfect Righteousness,
merely that he may justify us upon an imperfect one) this would be no greater
blemish to the Wisdom of God, than it is to choose fit and proper ways of
expressing his love to Holiness, and encouraging the Obedience of his Creatures.

But our Author proceeds very Rhetorically: Nor shall I ^^gue how that the
Righteousness of Christ's Life, and Sacrifice of his Death, must be imputed to
us for Justification, in proportion to our Sins having been imputed to him, in
order to his Expiatory Sufferings. He may argue thus, if he pleases, and I
shall perfectly agree with him in it. Let us then consider how he manages this
Argument. Christ's Sufferings must not be attributed merely to Gods Dominion,
without any respect to Sin: This I grant; therefore our sins were imputed to
him, not only in the effects of them, but in the guilt: This I so far grant,
that the Sufferings of Christ had respect to the guilt of our Sins, otherwise
he could not have been a Sacrifice for Sin; but whereas he adds, That it is a
thing utterly unintelligible (I hope Mr. Ferguson thinks it never the less true
for that) how Christ could be made sin for us, and have our punishment
transferred to him, without a previous imputation of sin, and the derivation of
its guilt upon him. I am so far of another mind, that I think it unintelligible
how it should be so: for (besides that guilt cannot be transferred upon an
innocent Person, though punishment may) I cannot understand how Christ should
suffer for our sins, if the guilt of our sins were transferred upon himself: if
he died for our sins, it is plain that the guilt is accounted ours still,
though the punishment be transferred on him: And this is essential to the
nature of a Sacrifice, that it dies not for it self, but for another, and
therefore not for its own, but for another guilt, continuing another: Christ
was no Sinner in any sense, but a Sacrifice for Sin, which differ just as much
as bearing the guilt, and bearing the punishment of sin.

Were our sins transferred on Christ in Mr. Ferguson's way, so that our sins
become his, and that he may be called a Sinner; nay the greatest of Sinners,
the necessary consequence of this Doctrine would be, that we are not delivered
from the guilt and punishment of our sins by the Death of Christ, which the
Scripture every where asserts, but by the translation of our sins on him: When
our sins are transferred on Christ, we are ipso facto innocent, and his Death
cannot deliver us, who are freed already, but must be only to deliver himself
from this assumed guilt; we are freed by the transferring of our guilt on
Christ, and Christ is freed by undergoing the punishment of sin: As if any man
should be so kind as to take my Debt absolutely upon himself, if the Creditor
accept of this exchange, I am finally discharged, and am not liable to any
farther Arrest or Action at Law; and whenever he pays the Debt, he does not
free me, but himself from the Obligation.

So that now his Argument from Proportion falls to the ground, That if our sins
were imputed to Christ, otherwise than merely in the Effects of them, so must
likewise the Righteousness of his Life, and the Sacrifice of his Death be
otherwise imputed to us, than merely in the Benefits of them: For as Christ was
not accounted a Sinner, by the imputation of our sins to him, so neither shall
we be accounted formally righteous, by the imputation of his Personal
Righteousness to us.

His next Argument is, That seeluding not only the Righteousness of Christ's
Life, but the Satisfaction of his Death, as the matter, and the imputation of
it, as the formal cause of Justification, it seems repugnant to the
Immutability and Essential Holiness of God, to justify us upon an imperfect
Obedience, the Law which requires a perfect, remaining still in force, and
denouncing wrath in case of every failure: The sum of which Argument is this,
That it is unjust for God to forgive us our sins, though Christ has died to
make Atonement for them, unless we be made formally righteous by the imputation
of his Righteousness to us; which in plain terms overthrows the Gospel of
Christ, and makes the Sacrifice of his Death of no value: for if Christ have
expiated our sins by his Death, why may not God accept and reward our imperfect
Services, without being unjust in doing so?

But that Law which requires perfect Obedience remains still in force, and
denounces wrath against every failure: But is there any Law which forbids God
to pardon sin, though his own Son make atonement for it by his Death? Where is
this Law? And where is the Sanction of it? And who gave it this Sanction? Will
nothing satisfy the Law but perfect and unsinning Obedience? Then there can be
no Gospel, then God never can forgive sin, and it is a vain thing to talk of
it: We may be Righteous by an imputed Righteousness, (were it possible for God
to judge otherwise of things, than they are) but our sins can never be
forgiven; which is a direct contradiction to the whole Gospel. A Law in force,
which will not admit of Pardon and Forgiveness upon any terms, is inconsistent
with Gospel Grace; and therefore had not Mr. Ferguson told us, that the
Socinians assert the abrogation of the Sanction of the Law upon the
confirmation of the Gospel Covenant, I should have been inclined to have
thought so too: for I cannot understand how it is possible to reconcile a Law,
which requires unsinning Obedience under the pain of Damnation, with the
Gospel, which promises Pardon of sin and eternal Life, upon the condition of
sincere Obedience, which are at as great a distance as a necessity of Pardon,
and a necessity of Innocence. And now I think of it, there is no danger of
Socinianism, if we do but attribute such an abrogation of the Law (if it may be
so called) as well as the Sanction of the Gospel, to the Merits of Christ's
Death and Sufferings; and therefore I boldly assert, That there is no such Law
now in force, as requires unsinning Obedience under the penalty of Damnation.
Not that Christ has in a proper sense abrogated the Law by his Death, if by
the Law we mean those Eternal Rules of Righteousness, which necessarily result
from the nature of things, and their mutual relations and respects, that is,
that he has not made that to be no sin, which according to the Eternal Rules of
Righteousness was a sin; as Mr. Ferguson childishly argues, That then Ib. p.
41^.
it would follow, that by being Believers, we wholly cease to be Sinners; and
that the Gospel instead of only making provision for the remission of sins
against the Law, has prevented the breaches of it from being so. But the only
abrogation of the Law is, That we shall not be judged or condemned according to
the Rules of a perfect and unsinning Obedience; that Christ having made
Atonement and Expiation for our sins, God will now for the sake of Christ
pardon the sins of true Penitents, and reward their sincere, though imperfect
Obedience. This is the Gospel Covenant, which was purchased and sealed with the
blood of Christ, which does not make that to be no sin, which before was a sin,
but only absolves us from the condemnation due to sin, and entitles us to those
Rewards which an imperfect Obedience cannot merit.

Perfect Obedience is the Attainment at which we must aim, but not the Rule by
which we shall be judged: There is no other Law now in force to Christians, but
the Gospel of our Savior, which is the Christian Law, and is the Perfection
and Advancement both of the Law of Nature and the Law of Moses; and this Law
requires a perfect, but accepts and rewards a sincere Obedience: it does not
come short of any Law in the perfection of its Rules, and it excells all other
Laws as it is a Dispensation of Grace: For though the Gospel requires both a
perfect and sincere Obedience, yet it requires them under very different
Sanctions, at least if Promises may be called the Sanction of a Law: The
Sanction of Sincerity is the Promise of Eternal Life; nothing less than this,
will deliver us from the wrath of God, or procure our admission into Heaven; by
this Rule we shall be judged, as to our final state of Happiness or Misery. But
the Sanction of Perfection consists in the greater degrees of Glory: He who is
sincere, though imperfect, shall be saved according to the terms of the Gospel,
but our Reward shall be proportioned to our different Seize, and the
greatest Glory is reserved for the most perfect Saint. And now I hope Mr.
Ferguson will be satisfied, that it is not repugnant to the Immutability and
Essential Holiness of God, to accept and reward a sincere though imperfect
Obedience; since he does not absolve his Creatures from any essential part of
their Duty, but is so merciful, as for the sake of Christ to pardon and accept
sincere Penitents; and so holy, as to encourage the most perfect Virtue with
the promise of proportionable Rewards.

As for what Mr. Ferguson adds concerning Ib. p. 411.
Christ's Surrogation in our room and stead, which makes all his Acts and
Sufferings in a Law-sense accounted ours; before he had laid too much weight
and stress on this Argument, he ought first to have proved, that Christ acted
as our Substitute, in all that he did, as well as suffered, and he might have
tried his Skill in answering Knowledge of Christ, p. ^88. Edit. 2. p. 201.
those Arguments wherewith I have already assaulted that Notion; but this is
not his way, it is more agreeable to his Genious and Capacity to dictate
Magisterially, than to prove.

Christ indeed died as a Sacrifice for our Sins, and in this sense suffered in
our stead, but his suffering in our stead is a plain demonstration, that his
sufferings are not accounted ours, any otherwise than as we receive the benefit
of them, in the expiation and forgiveness of our sins, which is the proper
effect of Sacrifices, and redounds to them for whom the Sacrifice is offered;
which is all I can understand by any sufferings, which are not ours, being
accounted ours in a Law-sense; for any other sense implies a contradiction,
that any sufferings, which are not under-gone by us, but by another in our
stead, should be accounted ours, any otherwise than as we receive the benefit
and advantage of them: And this is what the Learned Bishop Davenant understood
by Imputation: De facto imputantur (extrinseca) quando illorum Davenant de
gratia habituali. Cap. 27.
intuitus and respectus valent nobis ad aliquem effectum, aeque ac si a nobis
vel in nobis essent: Then those things, which are without us, and do not
properly belong to us, are said to be imputed to us, when with respect to them,
we are equally entitled to their effects, as if they had been done by us, or
were inherent in us. But such a Surrogationand Imputation, will not satisfy
Mr. Ferguson, who must have the Righteousness of Christ's Life, and the
Sacrifice of his Death, otherwise imputed to us, than merely in the benefits of
them: Though any other imputation is impossible, as implying a Thwacking
Contradiction, to use his own phrase.

Having thus got rid of these Objections in a fair Logical Way, according to
Mr. Ferguson's P. 413.
desire, and not called, but proved them all to be mere cavil, and sophistry,
and vulgar talk; I come now to the main Charge which he draws up against me, of
perverting the plainest Scriptures into Metaphors. And in order to make good
this Charge, he premises two things: First, That to Justify, is in its proper
acceptance a forensick term, signifying to acquit and absolve one that is
acoused: This I readily grant.

The second is, That Justification not only supposes us to be indicted, but
withal imports an absolution from the Charge of that Law, of the breach whereof
we are accused: I don't much care, if I grant this too; but then observe the
consequence, the Law, which accuses us, is the Law of perfect and unsinning
Obedience, and therefore if we would be acquitted and absolved from the
Accusation of the Law, we must produce a perfect and unsinning Obedience for
our Justification: for to be pardoned is not a proper, but a metaphorical
Justification; for in propriety of speech, neither can an accused Innocent, by
being acquitted be said to be pardoned, nor a condemned Criminal, by having the
execution of his sentence remitted, be said to be justified: So that to our
proper Justification from the Sentence of the Law, is necessarily required an
Imputation of the perfect Righteousness of Christ to us, to make us perfectly
righteous; but to place Justification in the Pardon of Sin, (as I do) is to
pervert plain Scripture into Metaphors, for then Justification, as it is
opposed to the accusation of the Law, its charging us with guilt, and its
passing Sentence of Condemnation against us thereupon, does not admit a proper
sense in the whole Scripture, but must every where be construed metaphorically;
and that the import of it is, that we are not properly and in a Lawsense
justified, but that such Benefits accrue to us by remission of sin, as if we
were so. And now I pity our Author with all my heart, for he has run himself
into a labyrinth, out of which all his Art and Sophistry can never deliver him.

The only Foundation he has to bear up the weight of this Charge, is, That the
Law of perfect and unsinning Obedience is still in force; but I have already
showed the weakness and vanity of this pretense, and how inconsistent it is
with the Gospel Covenant; and therefore I need add no more in vindication of my
self: for take away this Law of perfect Obedience, and Mr. Ferguson himself
acknowledges that according to my notion, in reference to the demands of the
Gospel, we may in a proper P. 416.
sense be said to be justified. So that I am whole again all on a sudden, and
the only difference between Mr. Ferguson and my self is, that he contends for
the necessity of a legal Righteousness and Justification, and I contend for an
Evangelical Righteousness; he is for being justified by the Personal
Righteousness of Christ, I am for being justified according to the gracious
terms and conditions of the Gospel, which are founded on the Merits and
Righteousness of Christ.

But let us suppose for once, that this Law of perfect and unsinning Obedience,
is still in force, and does accuse us, and that our Justification must respect
the Sentence of the Law; what then? Why then, to place Justification in pardon
of sin, is to make it not a proper but metaphorical Justification; and what
then? If this be the Scripture-notion of it, I matter not, whether it be proper
or metaphorical: the abuse of Scripture-expressions does not consist in
expounding Scripture either to a proper or to a metaphorical sense, but in
wresting metaphorical and allusive expressions to a proper sense, when they
ought to be taken metaphorically, and proper expressions to a metaphorical
sense, when they ought to be expounded to a proper sense. And this Mr. Ferguson
himself acknowledges, when he gives some Rules for the Exposition of Scripture,
which are generally good, when he transcribes them out of other men: I call
that (says he) the literal sense of Scripture, Chap. ^. P. 135.
which God does intend in the words, whether the words be taken properly or
tropically. That which arises from a figurative acceptance of the words, is
as truly a literal sense, as that which flows from their proper acceptance.
And therefore he ought to have proved, not only that I take Justification in a
metaphorical sense, but that the Scripture, when it speaks of the Justification
of a Sinner before God, uses that word in a proper sense, for Acquitting the
Innocent, which is a pretty odd way of Justifying a Sinner. But here our Author
is very silent, and cannot give one instance of it, only he tells us, That in
this sense it must be taken, when declarative of the Act of God toward us, as
our Judge, or when set in opposition to condemnation, or the curse of the Law
to which we are obnoxious: But what need of that? Does it not as much belong to
a supreme and unaccountable Judge to pardon, as to absolve? And is not Pardon
as properly opposed to Condemnation, as Absolution is?

But to let all this pass, it is worth considering, how our Author in his way
can explain Justification in a proper sense: He tells us, that the proper
notion of Justification, is to acquit and absolve the Innocent; suppose this to
be true, (though it may admit of some dispute, whether this forensick use of
the word be its proper sense) I would willingly learn of our Author, how a
Sinner can be justified in this proper sense; that is, how he, who has broken
the Laws of God, can be acquitted and absolved as innocent; how God, who cannot
lie, can declare, that that man has never broken his Laws, nor done any thing
amiss, who is a Sinner: Yes, says our Author, this may be done very well by the
imputation of the perfect Righteousness of Christ to Sinners, which makes them
perfectly innocent; suppose this to be true, yet is this the proper notion of
Justification, that a Sinner is innocent and righteous by Imputation? Is there
no difference then between an imputed, and an inherent and personal
Righteousness? Justification in a proper sense requires a Personal
Righteousness and Innocence, and I doubt it will require some good lusty tropes
to make an imputed Righteousness the matter of our Justification in this
Lawnotion. So that for ought I can see, the imputation of Righteousness in his
gross notion, is as metaphorical a Justification as the Pardon of sin, though
not half so good sense.

But I have not thus done with our Author; There are three things more, which I
would desire him to consider at his leisure, and to answer when he is able.

The first is this, That Pardon of Sin, whether it be a proper or metaphorical
Justification, is the true Scripture-notion of the Justification of a Sinner:
Justification indeed in its full extent and latitude, signifies the acceptance
of our Persons, and the restoring us to a state of Grace and Favor with God,
which is somewhat more than bare Remission; but the first Act of Justification
on Gods part, and that which draws all the rest after it, is the Pardon of our
Sins; this is a Sinners Righteousness, wherewith he must appear before God:
This is the Commission which Christ gave to his Disciples, To preach Remission
of Sins in his Name; this is the great Privilege of the Gospel, that now by
Christ all that believe, are justified from all things, from which they could
not be justified by the Law of Moses, Act. xiii. 39. That is, that now Christ
has made a tonement and expiation for those sins, for which the Law of Moses
did appoint no Sacrifice: Where to be justified, signifies to be delivered from
the guilt and condemnation of Sin, that is, to be pardoned.

But not to heap up many Testimonies, I shall principally insist on the Fourth
Chapter to the Romans, as being the proper Seat of this Controversy. There St.
Paul enquires by what means our Father Abraham was justified before God? And in
answer to it he tells us, that Abraham was not justified by Works, but by
Faith: Where by Works, the Apostle does not mean only the Works of the Mosaical
Law, an External and Ceremonial Righteousness, for he proceeds to that in the
tenth verse, but he seems principally to intend a perfect and unsinning
Righteousness: Let us then examine what the Apostle means by Justification by
Faith, what this Righteousness of Faith is, as it is opposed to a Righteousness
of Works; and there are four expressions whereby this Righteousness is
described, which signify one and the same thing. That it is an imputed
Righteousness, verse. 3, 6. that it is a Righteousness without Works; that it is
a Justification of the ungodly, verse. 5. that it consists in the Pardon of Sin,
verse. 7, 8.

I shall begin with the last, because this is Mr. Ferguson's grand Charge
against me, That I place Justification in the forgiveness of Sin; but so does
our Apostle, and alleges the Authority of the Prophet David for it: Even as
David also deseribeth the blessedness of that man unto whom God imputes
Righteousness without Works, saying, Blessed are they, whose iniquities are
forgiven, and whose sins are covered; Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will
not impute sin, verse. 6, 7, 8.

This is the Justification of Faith, in opposition to Justification by Works,
that those who heartily believe in God as Abraham did, though they have been
formerly guilty of many sins, and are still subject to many infirmities and
defects, yet God for Christ's sake will forgive their past sins, and their
present imperfections, and will reward them above the Deserts and Merits of
their Works. A Righteousness of Works consists in Innocence and Perfection, but
a Righteousness of Faith in Sincerity and Pardon.

Upon this account it is called an imputed Righteousness, Faith was accounted
and reckoned to Abraham for Righteousness, and blessed is the man to whom the
Lord imputes Righteousness: Which signifies, that this is matter of Grace, not
of Debt; for to him that works, is the reward reckoned not of Grace, but of
Debt. When a man is justified by Works, he is absolved because he is innocent,
and rewarded because he has merited a Reward, (which is the Justification for
which Mr. Ferguson pleads, in a direct opposition to St. Paul) but
Justification by Faith requires the favor and acceptance of God, because
though it includes an honest and sincere mind, and a readiness to do our best
to please God, yet it is consistent with a great many infirmities, and
miscarriages, and defects, which cannot pass the trial of strict Justice: and
this is imputed Righteousness, when God accepts of that for our Righteousness
and Justification, which in a strict sense is not Righteousness: Whatever is
imputed to us for Righteousness, must be good, but imperfect: If it be not
good, it is no part of Righteousness, and therefore cannot be imputed instead
of the whole; and if it be perfect, there is no need of this gracious
acceptance; it is then a strict and proper, not an imputed Righteousness.

Upon the same account it is called a Righteousness without Works, verse. 6.
Which must not be understood in such a loose sense, as if God would justify a
man, who does nothing which is good, as if he would account that man righteous,
who does no Righteousness, which is expressly contrary to the Doctrine of St.
John, 1 Epist. iii. 7. But the meaning is, either that God sometimes accepts of
great and generous Acts of Faith, instead of Works, when there is no occasion
or opportunity of Action; which was the case of Abraham, when he believed in
hope against hope, that he should have a Son in his old Age; to which the
Apostle principally refers in the 5th verse, when he tells us, That to him that
works not, but believes, his Faith is counted for Righteousness: Or else a
Righteousness without Works, signifies a Righteousness without the Perfection
of Works; and therefore the Apostle makes a Righteousness without Works, the
same with an imputed Righteousness, and both of them to consist in forgiveness
of sins; even as David also describes the blessedness of that man, to whom the
Lord imputes Righteousness without Works, saying, Blessed are they whose
iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. So that forgiveness of
sins, which supposes an imperfect and defective Righteousness, if we will
believe our Apostle, is a description of Righteousness without Works.

Upon the same account it is called Justifying the Ungodly, verse. 5. which can
by no means signify, that God will justify a wicked man, while he continues
wicked; for this is a plain contradiction to the whole Gospel; but it
signifies, that God will justify those, who though they have been wicked
(which was the case of Abraham and the Gentile-World) yet return to him by a
hearty Repentance, and a true lively Faith. Justification by Works requires a
perpetual Innocence and Blamelesness of Life; for a man, who ever was a Sinner,
can never be justified by Works in this sense, because he can never be innocent
again; it being impossible that that should never have been, which has been:
But now the Righteousness of Faith, which consists in the forgiveness of sins,
makes him Righteous, who has been a Sinner, and is still an imperfect Saint;
not that such a man never was a Sinner, but that God does not impute his sins
to him.

This is the Apostles account of Evangelical Righteousness and Justification,
that it is an imputed Righteousness, a Righteousness without Works, a
Justifying the Ungodly, or which is the sum of all, that it consists in the
Pardon of Sin: And now let our Author tell the Apostle, That this is to turn
plain Scripture into Metaphors, and that it is inconsistent with the
Immutability and Essential Holiness of God.

But secondly, I have something more to say to Mr. Ferguson, which I suppose
will be of some weight with him, viz. That all the Reformed Churches are for
that Metaphorical Justification which he rejects; that is, they place our
Justification in the forgiveness of sin. Thus the French Church declares in her
Confession, which ^
Beza presented to Charles IX. in the Name of that Church: Credimus totam
nostram justitiam positam esse in peccatorum nostrorum remissione, quae sit
etiam, ut testatur David, unica nos^^a a selicitas: i. e. We believe that our
WHOLE RIGHTEOUSNESS consists in the pardon of our sins, which also, as David
witnesses, is our ONLY Blessedness: -- In sola Jesus Christi obedientia prorsus
acquiescimus, quae quidem nobis imputatur, tum ut tegantur omnia nostra
peccata, tum etiam ut gratiam coram Deo naniscamur. And we rest wholly in the
Obedience of Jesus Christ, which is imputed to us, both that all our sins may
be covered, and that we may obtain grace and favor with God. By which last
words we learn, what they and other Protestant Churches mean by the Imputation
of Christ's Righteousness, and resting on the Obedience and Righteousness of
Christ; not that his Righteousness is so imputed to us, as to make us formally
righteous, and to answer the demands of the Law, which exacts an unsinning
Obedience; but it is so imputed to us, that for the sake of Christ, God
forgives our sins, and receives us into favor.

Thus the Helvetian Confession tells us, Confess. Helvet.
Iustificare significat Apostolo in disputatione de Iustificatione, peccata
remittere, a culpa and poena absolvere, in gratiam recipere, and justum
pronunciare. To justify, according to the Apostles sense of it in his dispute
of Justification, signifies to forgive sins, to absolve from guilt and
punishment, to receive into a state of favor, and to pronounce such a person
just and righteous: that is, not just as an innocent, but as a pardoned man.

Nor is the Scotch-Confession more Orthodox Scoticana Confess.
in this point: For giving an account of those benefits we receive by the
Satisfaction and Righteousness of Christ, it sums them up in this: Deus Pater
nos in corpore Jesus Christi Filii sui intuetur, imperfectam nostram obedientiam
quasi perfectam acceptat, omniaque opera nostra, quae in se multis maculis
foedantur, perfecta justitia filii sui tegit. i. e. God the Father beholds us
as Members of Christ's Body, accepts our imperfect Obedience, as if it were
perfect, and covers all our works, which in themselves are defiled with many
spots and blemishes, with the perfect Righteousness of his Son. So that
according to the sense of this Church, to which our Author ought to pay some
Reverence, we are not acquitted and absolved as innocent Persons, by the
Imputation of Christ's perfect Righteousness, but for Christ's sake God accepts
our imperfect Obedience, as if it were perfect: and covers all the
imperfections and defects of our Works with the perfect Righteousness of his
Son; that is, pardons all our sins, for the sake of Christ's perfect
Righteousness.

The Augustan Confession is very express in this matter, and so is their
Apology: Apol. pro Confess. August.
Consequi remissionem peccatorum est justificari, juxta illud, beati quorum
remissae sunt iniquitates: To obtain the pardon of sin, is to be justified;
according to that saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven.

Thus the Churches of Bohemia declare Bohaemica Confell.
their sense: Per Christum homines gratis fide in Christum, per misericordiam
justificari, salutem and remissionem peccatorum consequi: That to be justified,
is to obtain the pardon of sin, and salvation freely by Christ.

Thus we read in the Dutch Confession: Credimus omnem felicitatem nostram sitam
esse Belgica Confess.
in peccatorum nostrorum remissione, quae est in Christo Jesus; eaque unica
totam nostram justitiam coram Deo contineri: We believe, that our whole
Happiness consists in the forgiveness of sins, which is by Jesus Christ, and
that in this alone consists our WHOLE Righteousness before God.

And to conclude with our own Church, in the Homily of Salvation, we are
taught, that our Justification consists in the forgiveness of sin; and that
this Justification and Righteousness, which we so receive of Gods Mercy and
Homily of Salvation, Part 1.
Christ's Merits, is taken, accepted, and allowed of God for our perfect and
full Justification.

I do not urge the Consent of Reformed Churches, as if I thought their
Authority sufficient to determine us in this matter: they had no Authority but
Reason and Scripture, nor did they pretend to any other; which is the true
Principle of the Protestant Reformation.

There are but three sorts of Authority of any moment in Religion, viz. The
Authority of Divine Inspiration, the Authority of Testimony, and the Authority
of Discipline and Order.

The Authority of Divine Inspiration is peculiar to Christ and his Apostles,
who spoke by an Infallible Spirit, and is now confined to the holy Scriptures,
which are the only Infallible Rule of Faith and Manners: The Authority of
Testimony is proper only to those Ages which immediately succeeded the
Apostles; for it may reasonably be presumed, that those Persons who conversed
with the Apostles themselves, or conversed with those who conversed with the
Apostles, who understood the Phrase and Dialect of that Age, and those
particular Controversies and Disputes which were then on foot, may be able to
give us a better account of the traditionary sense of Scripture, and of the
practice of the Apostles, than those who lived in after-Ages; and upon this
account the Writings of those who lived in the first Centuries, have always had
a just Esteem and Authority in the Christian Church; but still the more Ancient
they are, the greater is their Authority; and the farther they are removed from
the Fountain of Tradition, so their Authority lessens.

The Authority of Discipline and Order, is that Authority which every
particular Church has over her own Members; or which the Universal Church,
represented in General Councils, has over particular Churches: For while we
live in Communion with any Church, we oblige our selves to submit to its
Government, and at least so far to receive those Doctrines which she owns, as
not to disturb Public Peace and Order by our Private Disputes.

But in all other cases, he has the greatest Authority, who has the best
Reason, and it is a childish thing to urge the bare Authority of any Man or
Church, when it has neither Scripture nor Reason to support it.

So that I do not urge the consent of these Reformed Churches upon account of
any inherent Authority, but to make it appear how vainly Mr. Ferguson brags,
when he charges me with opposing the received Doctrines of Protestant Churches.
For indeed those Doctrines, which I oppose, are mere Novelties, and were never
publicly owned by any Reformed Church, and never had any greater Authority,
than what an Assembly of Divines, and an Ordinance of Parliament could give
them.

He who understands, what notion the first Reformers had of justifying Faith,
that it is fiducia misericordia propter Christum, a firm and steadfast belief
and hope, that they should find mercy with God for Christ's sake, can never
imagine that they once dreamt of such an Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to
them, as should make them stand in no need of Mercy; or of such a Justification
as is the Offspring of Justice, and imports one transacting with us in a
Iuridical way, without the infringement of Law or Equity, in opposition to
Pardon and Remission, which is the result of Mercy, and the act of one
exercising favor; which is Mr. P. 417.
Ferguson's Account of it, in his own words.

But thirdly. As this Notion of Imputation has no Foundation in Scripture (as I
abundantly proved in my former Discourse, Knowledge of Christ, p. 235, etc. and
p. 279. Edit. 2. p. 164. and 195.
of which our Author takes no notice, and it was very wisely done of him, for I
am sure he cannot answer it) so it overthrows the principal Doctrines of the
Gospel, and contradicts its main design. I shall briefly name some few.

First, Justification by a perfect Righteousness is inconsistent with pardon
and forgiveness: Mr. Ferguson acknowledges, That to justify and to pardon, are
wholly distinct Interest of Reason etc p. 416.
in their Natures and Ideas, and always separated in the cases of such as are
arraigned at humane Tribunals, -- and that thus it is in the actings of God
too: Now I wonder he did not consider, that by the same reason, the same
subject is not capable of both: He who is universally justified in our Authors
notion, that is, who is acquitted and absolved in a Juridical way, i. e. as
perfectly innocent and righteous, needs no pardon, nor is he capable of it,
because he has no sins to be pardoned: and he who is pardoned, cannot be
justified in this sense, because Pardon supposes him a Sinner, and
Justification supposes him innocent, which has some little appearance of a
Contradiction. So that the Gospel-way of Justification, which is by Pardon and
Forgiveness, is quite discarded, and we are justified by a legal Righteousness,
or by the Works of the Law; that is, by a perfect and unsinning Obedience,
though the Apostle tells us, That by the Works of the Law no flesh shall be
justified: for though this perfect Righteousness whereby we are justified, be
not our own, but the Righteousness of Christ imputed to us, yet it is the Works
of the Law still, which is an express Contradiction to the Apostles Doctrine:
And I wonder, what our Author thinks of all those Promises of Pardon, which are
contained in the Gospel, and which are the greatest support and comfort of
Sinners, when it is impossible to find any place for them in his New-Gospel.

Secondly, This notion of Justification overthrows the Necessity and Merit of
Christ's Death and Sacrifice: the virtue of a Sacrifice consists in the
expiation and forgiveness of sin; but now if Justification excludes Pardon,
there is no need of a Sacrifice; if nothing will satisfy the demands of the
Law, but a perfect and unsinning Obedience, then there can be no Sacrifice for
sin, or at best it is to no purpose, for it cannot satisfy the Law, and
therefore not expiate our sin; and if Christ have satisfied the Law by his
perfect Obedience, there is no reason why he should suffer the penalty; for no
Law can oblige us both to obey it perfectly, and to endure the Penalties for
the breach of it, though we do perfectly obey it: So that if Christ died for
our sins, and if remission of sins must be preached in his name, then we are
not perfectly righteous by the imputation of his Righteousness, but must obtain
the pardon of our sins through Faith in his Blood.

Thirdly, This notion of Justification destroys the Grace and Mercy of God in
the Justification of a Sinner: This Mr. Ferguson expressly owns, That Pardon
indeed (if there could be any such thing) is the result of Mercy, but
Justification is the Offspring of Justice, and imports Gods transacting with
us in a Iuridical way, without the infringement of Law or Equity: And I know
not any assertion, which more expressly destroys the Grace of the Gospel:
Whereas St. Paul attributes our Justification as well as Pardon, to the Grace
of God: We are justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in
Christ Jesus. Nor will it relieve him to say, that our Justification is an Act
of Grace, because though we are justified in a proper Law-notion by a perfect
Righteousness, yet this Righteousness is not inherent, but imputed, which is an
act of Grace: for besides that this implies a contradiction, to be justified in
a proper Law-sense, by an imputed, that is an improper Righteousness, and that
God proceeds in a Iuridical way, without the infringement of Law, and yet
admits of such a Righteousness as not the Law, but only Grace can accept; I
say, besides this, we may for the very same Reason say, that Pardon is an act
of Justice, because it is purchased by the Death of Christ. And therefore if
our Author would make good his notion, he must show how Pardon is more an act
of Grace, than Justification; and how Justification is more the Offspring of
Justice, than Pardon; and if he dare stand to this notion, there needs not many
words to prove, that he overthrows the whole Grace of the Gospel.

Fourthly, There is another very ill consequence of this notion, that it
destroys the necessity of an inherent Righteousness, or of a good Life: For
what necessity can there be, that we should have a Righteousness of our own,
when we are perfectly righteous with the imputed Righteousness of Christ? The
Law demands a perfect and unsinning Righteousness, and it is impossible it
should demand any more; we answer this Charge by the perfect Righteousness of
Christ; and when this is done, we are innocent and righteous, and have a title
to the Rewards of a perfect Obedience, and what can be desired more from us?
Mr. Ferguson indeed supposes that the Law requires a perfect Obedience, and
that the Gospel over and above this requires Faith and a sincere Obedience: and
that Christ was our Substitute Ibid.
to make Satisfaction to the Demands of the Law, and not of the Gospel And that
by his Death he has only freed us from what we were obnoxious to, upon failure
of perfect Obedience; but not at all from what we are liable to, in case of
Unbelief, and want of sincere Obedience: Now though this be true in some sense,
that is, that Christ by his Death has expiated our sins, and thereby delivered
us from the condemnation of the Law, upon the failure of perfect Obedience, and
has sealed the Covenant of Grace in his Blood, which accepts and rewards a
sincere though imperfect Obedience; yet as it is applied by him, it is
downright nonsense: for if we perfectly answer the Demands of the Law, by the
imputation of Christ's perfect Righteousness, there is no need of the Gospel,
nor any place for it: Perfection includes Sincerity, as the greater includes
the less, and therefore if the Righteousness of Christ answers the Demands of
the Law, as to a perfect Obedience, it shuts out any farther Demands of the
Gospel. He who is perfectly righteous, is sincere too, and he who can answer
the Demands of Justice, needs not the allowances of Grace and Mercy: So that
the Imputation of Christ's perfect Righteousness does supercede our own
Endeavors, and makes our own Righteousness needless: for this Reason I charged
them before, and do so still, with setting up the Person of Christ in
opposition to his Laws and Religion; with magnifying his Personal
Righteousness, so as to evacuate all the Obligations of Duty. And now methinks
I can deal with any thing in Mr. Ferguson, but his Brow and Confidence, who is
of the true breed, and can stare the Sun in the face without blinking: for
after all this he declares, That let me but once justify my Charge of their
making the Personal Righteousness of Christ our Personal P. 55^.
Righteousness; or that they maintain, Christ to have fulfilled all
Righteousness in our stead, and he does assure me, that he will not only be
ready to allow my severest Reproofs, but to commend and second them. Now unless
by Personal, he means inherent, nothing in the World can be more plain, then
that he himself makes Christ's Personal Righteousness our Personal
Righteousness: for we are Personally Righteous with the Righteousness of
Christ, and answer all the Demands of the Law with it, and then I conceive it
must be a Personal Righteousness, not by inhesion indeed, with which I never
charged them, but by imputation. And as for Christ's fulfilling Righteousness in
our stead, unless he has some secret quirk in that phrase our stead, Doctor
Owen does not only profess this, but endeavors to prove it by several
Arguments, that Christ did not keep the Law for himself, but for us, and that
not for our good only, but that we might be righteous with his Righteousness,
and fulfill the Law in him. He keeps the Law as our Mediator, and Surety, and
Representative; and I think that is so for us, as to be in our stead: this I
have discoursed at large in my former Knowledge of Christ, p. 296. Edit. 2. p.
2^7.
Book, and thither I shall refer my Reader.

Having thus justified my self in a proper Law-notion from the Accusations of
this Author, I shall farther consider, how he justifies his dear Friends the
Nonconformists, from that Charge of toying with Scripture-Metaphors and
Phrases, and turning them into Burlesque: And truly he is the most wretched
Apologist that ever I saw; sometimes he acknowledges the Charge with respect to
particular Persons, who through ignorance, inadvertency, or wantonness,
prevaricate in this matter; but would not have the whole Party (which was never
done by me) traduced for the folly of a few; but if we should enquire, how few
those are who thus prevaricate in this matter, and judge of it by their late
Writings, I doubt it would appear by computation, that they never had so many
Prevaricators at Cambridge, since the first Institution of that Order; and then
let any one judge, how well this agrees with what he asserts in the same
breath, that he knows none more observant of these Rules (which he had before
laid down) in the sensing and applying of Metaphors, than those who are styled
Nonconformists; which proves nothing, but that he has very little good
Acquaintance.

But indeed Mr. Ferguson has taken the best course he could: I had showed in
particular instances, how they had abused Scripture-Phrases and Metaphors, but
he did not think fit to descend to particulars, but instead of that, collects a
great many good Rules out of Glassius and Vossius, and tells us how they ought
to expound and use Metaphors, and then without any farther proof concludes,
that they do so: Whereas should we suppose that all the Nonconformists
understood the Rules of Rhetoric as well as our Author (though I fear many of
them never read so much Rhetoric in their Lives before, and I wish reading
this may do them some good) yet it is a very different Art to understand the
Rules of Rhetoric, and to practice them; whether they have any Skill in the
first, or no, I know not; but I am sure, if they have, they are as saving of it
as ever men were, as if they were afraid it would waste by too common a use.

Just after the same manner he vindicates P. 62.
the Nonconformists from those Aspersions lately cast upon them, as if they
were Defamers of Reason, disclaiming it from all Concern in Religion, etc. To
wipe off this Reproach, which was not cast upon them, but which they brought
upon themselves by their perpetual Declamations against Reason; our Author
writes a large Chapter to show the Use of Reason in Matters of Religion, and
this must pass for a Justification of the Nonconformists; and now they will be
thought the only Rational Divines: Whereas in truth had he managed this
Argument with as much accuracy as he pretends to, he had been so far from
justifying the Nonconformists, that he had given a fatal blow to those
ridiculous People, who declaim against the Use of Reason: But for ought I see
they may talk at their old rate still, for all Mr. Ferguson. Desinit in piscem
mulier formosa superne.


But to wave this, only wishing that some young Sophister (and there are many
of them that are equal Matches for this Fanatic Professor) would undertake to
correct his insolent humor, and teach him to treat Descartes with greater
Reverence: I shall only inform him at present against he writes next, what he
should write about; for I find he has abundance to say, when it is nothing to
the purpose, but either does not, or will not understand, what he should
oppose, nor what he should vindicate.

I was not so silly, as to oppose a sober use of Metaphors, no not in matters
of Religion, as Mr. Ferguson would fain insinuate; nor did I concern my self
about their slovenly and Kitchin-Metaphors, though it is a great profanation
of sacred things, to make such gross and fulsom representations of them, as
must needs disgust more refined and spiritual minds, and expose Religion to the
Scoffs and Drollery of Atheistical Wits: But my Quarrel with them is, that they
confound and darken the most plain and material notions in Religion by
metaphorical Descriptions, and turn the Scriptures themselves into an Allegory
or Romance: and of this they are guilty several ways.

First, By thrusting Metaphors into Definitions; this Mr. Ferguson himself does
in express words condemn, and therefore I would desire him in behalf of himself
and his Friends, to give me a Definition of Justifying Faith, agreeable to
their Principles, without a Metaphor in it: Could I once see this, I doubt not
but all our Disputes about Faith and Justification would be at an end; and yet
this he is bound to do, if he will be true to his own Rules: for he
acknowledges, that every P. 320.
thing spoken metaphorically is spoken obscurely, with respect to expressing
the nature of things. And accordingly in assigning the definitions of things,
metaphorical terms are to be avoided, because as Aristotle says, (as Mr.
Ferguson might learn from many Modern Authors, without ever seeing Aristotle,
though he should be so ingenuous as to own his Masters) they do not declare,
(...), what a thing is, but only what it is like to; when any thing is
manifested by a Metaphor, the thing it self is not fully expressed, but only
some similitude betwixt it and another. And what he adds, is so great and
useful a Truth, that it is sufficient to expiate all the Fooleries of his Book,
because it will confute them all; That there is not any thing relating to
Doctrine or Manners delivered in the Scripture metaphorically, which is not
somewhere or other either explicitly or implicitly expressed in terms that are
proper, (one place being a Key to the unlocking another.) And yet after all
this, I never could yet hear any thing but Metaphors from these men in their
Definitions or Descriptions of Justifying Faith.

Justifying Faith is either a coming to Christ, or receiving Christ, or
embracing Christ, or a looking fiducially on Christ, or leaning, and resting,
and rolling on Christ and his Righteousness for Salvation: Now what are all
these, but Metaphors taken from material and sensible things? Which can never
give us any intelligible notion of Faith, though they may serve for
illustration, when we first understand its nature.

And yet, as if this were not sufficiently obscure already, most of them make
each of these distinct acts of Faith, which in order of nature precede each
other: We must first come to Christ, and then we must receive him, and then we
must look fiducially on him, and then we must lean, and rest, and roll our
Souls on him, and then we must lay him in our Bosoms, and embrace him in our
Arms: and when we have done all this, we shall be very understanding Believers,
if we have but a good Fancy to distinguish between the Legs, and Hands, and
Arms, and Eyes, and Bosom of Faith. I do not speak this in Mirth and Drollery,
but with a just Indignation to see the Religion of our Savior transformed into
a Work of Fancy, and with a hearty pity for those deluded People who are fed
with such thin and airy Notions.

The plain notion of Justifying Faith, stripped of all Metaphors and Figures, can
be no other than this; Such a firm and sted fast Assent to all the Revelations
of the Gospel, as governs our Hearts and Lives by the Laws of it: Or to give a
larger Explication of it, It is such an Assent to whatever Christ has revealed
concerning the Nature and Will of God, or his own Nature, Offices, and
Mediation, the Rules of Life and Practice, and the Rewards and Punishments of
the next Life, as does effectually determine our Wills to the Obedience of his
Holy Laws.

To receive Christ in all his Offices, when it is explained, comes to the very
same sense; To believe all the Revelations of Christ, as he is our Prophet, to
acknowledge the Virtue and Merit of his Sacrifice and Intercession, as he is
our Priest; and to expect our acceptance with God for his sake, upon condition
of our obeying his Laws, and submitting to his Government, as he is our King.

But these men could never be persuaded to talk without Metaphors, which would
spoil all the Shiboleths of their Party, and make them look like dull
Moralists; and yet I shall once more challenge Mr. Ferguson, in compliance with
his own Rules, to give me a Definition of Justifying Faith, agreeable to his
notions of Justification, without a Metaphor; and if he cannot do this, (as he
will be a wonderful man, if he can) I would desire him to consider how
dangerous it is to transcribe good Rules out of good Books, without
understanding the Consequences of them.

Secondly, Another fault which they are guilty of in the use of Metaphors, is,
that they expound one Metaphor by another; this Mr. Ferguson very justly
condemns: For Metaphors properly signifying one thing, and being applied to
signify another, P. 344.
only because of some resemblance, we are therefore in our sensing of Metaphors
to remove the metaphorical term, and to substitute in its room that word which
properly signifies the thing, whereof we conceive the former to have been only
a figure. To paraphrase Metaphors in metaphorick terms, is instead of making
them intelligible, to continue them dark and mysterious. Now if this be a
fault, as I perfectly agree with Mr. Ferguson that it is, he would do well to
correct those men (which might be taken more kindly from him) who do not only
explain one Metaphor by another, but pursue a single Metaphor, till they have
forced it into an Allegory: I gave one short Knowledge of Christ, Chap. 4 Sect.
3. p. 279. Edit. 2. p. 195.
instance of this in my former Discourse, with respect to the Marriage between
Christ and Believers. And whereas our Author justifies such Discourses from the
Book of Canticles, which describes the love of Christ to his Church in such an
allegorical manner; in return to this I would offer several things to his
consideration.

As first, I suppose he understands, that there is a vast difference between
Poetical Descriptions, such as the Book of Canticles is, and Practical
Discourses for the Government of our Lives: the first requires more Garnish and
Ornament, and justifies the most mysterious flights of Fancy; the second
requires a plain and simple dress, which may convey the Notions with ease and
perspicuity to the Mind. And therefore that which is not only justifiable, but
commendable in a Divine Song, which ought to have something Great and
Mysterious, and to describe every thing with Pomp and Ceremony, is not only a
ridiculous affectation, but a very hurtful vanity in a Preacher, whose business
is to instruct the Rude and Ignorant, not to amaze and astonish his Hearers
with Poetic Raptures.

And secondly, Though I do no more quarrel with Allegories, than I do with
Metaphors, which may be of good use in their fit and proper places, yet I would
desire our Author to consider, that there is some little difference between an
Allegorical Description of things, and an Allegorical Exposition: It is
justifiable enough in some cases to describe plain things in Allegories and
Parables; but it is a mad way of expounding Religion by turning it into
Allegories, which must of necessity make it obscure and mysterious. Allegories
are of no use till they are expounded, and are of a very doubtful
signification, when we want the true Key of Exposition; because they being a
work of fancy and imagination, may by men of different fancies be expounded to
very different and contrary purposes; which makes the Song of Solomon it self,
though the most divine and spiritual thing that ever was penned under the
Jewish Church, of much less use to us, than otherwise it might be, as appears
from the variety of interpretations, which are given of it: And this is a plain
Argument, how injurious these men are to Religion, who instead of expounding
the Mysteries of it, turn them into Allegories, which must either be expounded
again, or continue obscure, and expose Religion to all the Freaks of an
Enthusiastic and Allegorical Fancy.

And thirdly, Our Author may consider farther, that Allegories are much more
improper now under the Gospel, than they were under the Law; Under the Law God
instructed the Jews by dark and obscure Types and Figures, but did not think
fit to unveil his Glory, and give them a distinct and clear knowledge of his
Will, and therefore an Allegorical Song was very allowable under the Typical
and Ceremonial State of the Church: But since Christ has appeared, who is the
Brightness of his Fathers Glory, and the express Image of his Person, who has
given us a plain and perfect Revelation of the Will and Nature of God, an
Allegorical Religion is as improper as Jewish Types and Ceremonies. It
disappoints one great end of Christ's coming in the Flesh, to make his Religion
obscure and mysterious, and to wrap it up in Types and Allegories: And I wonder
very much, that these men, who are so afraid of a significant Ceremony, for
fear of returning to a Jewish Bondage and Pedagogy, should be so fond of an
Allegorical and Metaphorical Religion, which is as obscure and unintelligible,
as the Jewish Types were. We are not now under a Canticle-Dispensation, but
live under the bright and clear Light of the Gospel, which is equally clouded
by Jewish Types and mysterious Allegories.

But to return: It is very easy to give many other instances of their
expounding Metaphors by Metaphors, and I have given several in my former
Discourse: thus Faith is called Coming, Receiving, Embracing, etc. If you
enquire, How all this must be done? They tell you, That you must come to Christ
on the Legs of Faith, or be carried to him in the Chariots of Faith, or swim to
him on the Stream of the Promise, and receive him by the Hand of Faith, and
embrace him in the Arms of Faith, as good old Simeon did: and thus Faith
becomes an Instrument of Justification, and receives Christ, who is the Gift of
God, as a poor man receives an Alms: Whereas Legs, and Hands, and Arms, and
Instruments, are as obscure Metaphors, and need as much explication as Coming
and Receiving, etc. and yet you must never expect any better explication from
them; if you press them hard, they will tell you, that coming and receiving,
etc. signifies believing; but then if you ask them what believing signifies,
they are forced to ring the Changes backward, and tell you, that believing is
coming and receiving.

Thirdly, Another abuse of Metaphors is, to argue and reason from them, and to
erect such Doctrines on them, as are no where to be found in express words in
Scripture: Thus I showed in my former Discourse, how they prove the imputation
of Christ's Personal Righteousness to us, from the Laws of Marriage, of
Suretiship, and the Mediatory Function. The Church is Christ's Spouse, and as
the Chap. 4. Sect. 3.
Wife by virtue of her Marriage. Union is entitled to her Husbands Estate, thus
are Saints by their marriage to Christ entitled to all his Personal Fullness,
Beauty, Righteousness: And as a Wife under covert is not liable to an Arrest,
or Action at Law, but all must fall upon her Husband; so you being married to
Christ, this supersedes the Process of the Law against you, if it be not
satisfied, it must seek its reparation at the hands of your spiritual Husband,
Christ himself, etc.

Thus Mr. Shephard argues very comfortably: That the Husband is bound to bear
with the Wife, as the weaker Vessel, and shall we think that God will exempt
himself from his own Rules, and not bear with his weak Spouse? Ibid. p. 68.
Edit. 2. P. 48.
That is, one who has no strength, no grace, no nor so much as sense of
Poverty.

And Mr. Watson argues at the same rate, That Sin it self cannot dissolve our
Union to Christ, because we are the Members of his Body, and Christ will never
lose a Member.

And thus they argue from Christ's being our Surety, that as in the Law, the
Debtor and the Surety are but one Person, so it is with Christ and us; for he
took our Debt upon himself, and upon this Christ and we are but one Person
before God, and accordingly he deals with us; for he makes over our sins to
Christ, and Christ's Righteousness and Satisfaction to us.

At the same rate they argue from Christ's being our Mediator, That Christ
fulfilled all Righteousness as he was Mediator; and that whatever he did as
Mediator, he did it for them whose Mediator he was, or in whose stead, and for
whose good he executed the Office of a Mediator before God, and hence it is,
that his complete and perfect Obedience to the Law, is reckoned to us.

Now when I had plainly shown them how weak and fallacious this way of
Reasoning is, from the Laws of earthly Marriages and Suretiship, etc. the only
answer I can get from Dr. Owen and his Friends, is, That Christ is not such a
Husband, and Surety, and Mediator, as men are, but is all this in an eminent
manner; that there is something peculiar in him, which cannot be affirmed of
any other. Now this is the answer I desired, but could not hope that they had
so little wit as to give it: for this is plainly to acknowledge that all their
Arguments are fallacious; for if there be such a vast difference between the
Notion of a Husband, and Surety, and Mediator, and the several Duties and
Offices of these Relations, as applied to men, and as applied to Christ, then
we cannot argue from one to the other: this is plainly to give away the best
Arguments they have for the Imputation of Christ's Personal Righteousness in
their sense, and with them to yield up the Cause. For now before they argue
from Christ's being our Husband, that therefore we have a title to his Personal
Righteousness, as a Wife has to her Husbands Estate, they must prove from
express Texts of Scripture, that this is the Law of our spiritual Marriage;
before they argue from Christ's being our Surety, that therefore we are but one
Person with him, and that whatever he did as our Surety, is accounted as much
ours, as if we had done it our selves, they must prove that this is the
Scripture-notion of Christ's Suretiship: and had they taken this course, I dare
say I might have looked long enough for an Answer, before it had come.

And here, as not finding a fitter place for it, I shall briefly take notice of
that Defense which Dr. Owen has made for his way of Reasoning, from Christ's
being our Mediator, to prove the Imputation of his Personal Righteousness to
us: Though I must recall that word Defense, for indeed he has made none, but
appeals to the ingenuity of his Readers, and leaves his Book to defend it self;
which it may be supposed to be very well able to do at the age of twenty years,
especially against a young Adversary.

And first he would willingly insinuate, that I had not truly or fairly related
his words, but then on a sudden he takes courage, and roundly asserts, whatever
I had charged him with, That the Lord Christ fulfilled all Righteousness as
Mediator, and that Vindicat, p. 208.
what he did as Mediator, he did it for them whose Mediator he was, or in whose
stead, and for whose good he executed the Office of a Mediator before God. And
here he first very nicely distinguishes between these two Propositions, Christ
as Mediator fulfilled all Righteousness P. 209.
in our stead; and, Christ being Mediator in our stead, fulfilled all
Righteousness for us; and very truly observes, that I do not understand the
difference between them; and it would have been charitably done of him to have
shown the difference, for I am still so dull as not to perceive it: If Christ
as Mediator in our stead fulfilled all Righteousness for us, then he must
fulfill it in our stead; for he is therefore supposed to fulfill Righteousness
for us, because he acted in our stead; which can be no reason, unless he acted
in our stead in fulfilling Righteousness, which I think is much the same with
fulfilling Righteousness in our stead. And indeed the Doctor himself does
expressly assert this in so many words, That this Obedience was performed by
Christ, Commun. P. 184.
not for himself, but for us, and in our stead: So that it seems He himself did
not understand the difference of these expressions then, and I am sure can show
no difference now.

Though I cannot blame the Doctor for being willing to shift off this
expression, That Christ fulfilled all Righteousness in our stead, as
foreseeing the consequence of it, that this must needs discharge us from the
Obligations of a Personal Righteousness: For if Christ have fulfilled the
Righteousness of the Law in our stead, the Law can no more exact Obedience from
us, than it can inflict Punishment on us; a perfect Righteousness is all the
Law can require of us; and since we have perfectly obeyed the Law in Christ our
Mediator, it can make no farther Demands of us. Which is to set up the personal
Righteousness of Christ, in opposition to his Laws and Religion.

Now as bad a consequence as this is, if Dr. Owen would speak consistently with
his own Principles, he can never avoid it; for the foundation of all his
Arguments, to prove, that Christ's Righteousness is made ours in a Law-sense,
is, that Christ as our Surety and Mediator fulfilled all Righteousness in our
stead; for take away this, and there is no more reason why the Righteousness of
Christ should in his sense be reckoned ours, than why the Righteousness of
Abraham, or Moses, or St. Paul, should be imputed to us.

And yet supposing this true, That Christ fulfilled all Righteousness in our
stead, it necessarily overthrows their fundamental Notion of our Justification
by the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to us; for if he did it in our
stead, it becomes ours without an Imputation: It would be necessary indeed,
that God should accept of Christ as our Surety and Mediator, to act in our
stead, which may be reckoned an act of favor, and accordingly that Christ
should fulfill all Righteousness in our stead, but when this is done, there
needs no imputation to make it ours. Whatever is done in our stead by a Proxy
or Substitute appointed and allowed to act for us, becomes ours according to
strict Law and Justice, and needs not the acceptance of Grace and Mercy (which
is the Scripture-notion of Imputation) to make it so: Christ's Righteousness
would become ours by his acting in our stead, without any consequent Imputation.

And yet (to see how Absurdities multiply!) suppose we take it in Dr. Owen's
sense, that Christ is only a Mediator in our stead; this is a manifest
contradiction, for it supposes that the Middle may stand in the place of either
of the Extremes: for a Mediator is a middle Person between two contending
Parties, and therefore his Office is to act between them both, and not in the
stead of either. And to say that Christ is a Mediator in our stead, supposes
that we ought to have been Mediators, that is, middle Persons between God and
our selves; nay indeed that we are so in the Person of Christ: for otherwise,
though he may be a Mediator on our behalf, and for our good, yet he cannot
mediate in our stead.

In the next place I made it appear, that we cannot argue from the general
notion of a Mediator, that his Personal Righteousness shall be imputed to those
for whom he is Mediator; for a Mediator is one who Knowledge of Christ, P. 297.
Edit. 2. P. 207.
interposes between two differing Parties, to accommodate the difference, but
it was never heard of yet, that it was the Office of a Mediator to perform the
terms and conditions himself, which I showed particularly in the example of
Moses. And here the Doctor observes first, that I give an instance in Moses,
who is called a Mediator in receiving the Law, but did Vindicat* P. 211.
therein no way interpose himself between differing Parties, to reconcile them:
But was this the only Office of Moses, to receive the Law? Did he not
frequently interpose between God and the People, and by his intercessions
divert his anger from them? Secondly, he observes, that I would describe the
nature of the Mediation of Christ, from the nature of the Mediation of Moses,
which he calls a Socinian Fiction; but pray who told him so? I only argue from
the general notion of a Mediator, which must equally agree to all Mediators,
whatever other differences there may be in the nature of their Mediation: and
therefore if Moses as a Mediator were not bound to fulfill the Righteousness of
the Law for the whole Congregation, neither could Christ as a Mediator be bound
to this; at least we cannot prove, that he was from the general nature of
Mediation; and therefore now the Doctor quits this way of reasoning, and
pretends only to argue from the special nature of the Mediatory Office and Work
of Christ, and so I have obtained all I designed by that Argument, viz. That
the general consideration of Christ's being our Mediator, cannot prove that his
Righteousness is imputed to us.

In the next place I fairly state what that Righteousness is, which the Doctor
says, Christ fulfilled for us: this he calls wonderfully perplexing my self in
gathering up sayings Vindicat* P. ^12.
backward and forward in his Discourse, to make some advantage to my purpose:
and I confess any man, who reads the Doctors Books with a design to understand
them, and to make sense of them, will find it a very perplexing work: But
however I first showed, that the Doctor rejects the Knowledge of Christ, P. 298.
Edit. Edit. 2. P. 2^9.
habitual Righteousness of Christ as Mediator, in his humane nature, from being
imputed to us. Secondly, he rejects the Obedience which he yielded to the
peculiar Law of the Mediator, which respected himself merely, and contains all
those Acts and Duties of his, which were not for our IMITATION, and instances
in his Obedience, which he showed in dying: though I observed, that St. John
the Divine tells us, that we must imitate him in this too, must lay down our
lives for the Brethren, as Christ died for us, 1 John iii. 16. To which the
Doctor answers, That we are not so to die for any one, as Christ died for us:
But what of that? May we not imitate that which we cannot equal? But then
thirdly, the Righteousness which is imputed to us, is his Righteousness, as a
man subject to the Law, and now whatever was required of us by virtue of any
Law, that he did and fulfilled, and this is that actual Obedience of Christ,
which he performed for us.

Now before I came particularly to examine the Doctors Proof of this, I
observed by the way, That this is very strange, that what he did as Mediator
(in Obedience to the peculiar Laws of his Mediation) is not imputed to us, but
what he did not as Mediator, but as a man subject to the Law, that is imputed
to us, and reckoned as if we had done it, by reason of his being our Mediator.
Here the Doctor charges me, either with a wilful or ignorant mistake, for
making him to say, that what Christ did not as Mediator, but as a man subject
to the Law, is imputed to us; whereas he asserts, that what Christ did as a man
subject to the Law, he did as Mediator; for Christ was made a private man, as
Mediator. But the Doctor might have observed, that I did not report that as his
words, but as their natural interpretation, that what Christ did not as
Mediator, but in a private capacity, as a man subject to the Law, is imputed to
us: for soon after I take notice of the reason, whereby the Doctor proves, that
Christ did that as Mediator, which did not belong to the peculiar Laws of his
Mediation, but was required from him in a private capacity, as a man subject to
the Law; the sum of which came to this, that he did it as Mediator, because he
was a Mediator who did it; which as the Author of the Speculum observes, may
pass for a qua reduplicative; but yet I think the subtilest Schoolmen never
argued from one to the other, that whatever a Mediator does, he does as a
Mediator, because he is a Mediator who does it.

But Christ was made a private man as Mediator: Vind. P. 217.
This I deny; as Mediator he was a public Person, and nothing belongs to his
Mediation, but what he did as a public Person: But he was made a man then, as
Mediator; yes, he was a Mediator in Human Nature, but his taking Human Nature
on him, was no part of his Mediatory Office, but a necessary preparation for
it: And now what follows? That whatever he did as a man, he did as a Mediator?
By no means: He was a Mediator in our Nature, but it does not therefore follow,
that whatever he does in our Nature, belongs to his Mediatory Office; there is
no way to prove this, that I know of, but to return to the old Sophism, that he
obeyed the Law as Mediator, because he was a Mediator who did it.

So that the whole proof, that Christ fulfilled Righteousness for us, as our
Mediator, depends upon this, whether he acted as our Mediator in his private
capacity, as a Man subject to the Law: The Doctor acknowledges, that the
general notion of a Mediator includes no such thing, and that this does not
belong to the peculiar Laws of his Mediation; for his Obedience to the peculiar
Law which required the Public Acts of his Mediation, cannot be imputed to us:
And therefore it all resolves it self into his Obedience to the Law, as a
private man; that is, that he is our Mediator as a private man, acting in a
private capacity; i. e. as obeying those Laws of Righteousness, which concern
private men. Which is so strange at the first hearing, that we may well require
good proof of it.

But then I observed farther, That it is as strange to the full, that Christ
should do whatever was required of us, by virtue of any Law, when he was
neither Husband, nor Wife, nor Father, Merchant, nor Tradesman, etc. that he
should discharge the Duties of these several Relations for us, when he never
was in most of these Relations, and could not possibly be in all.

To this, the Doctor answers, That he has frequently smiled at this Argument,
when Ibid.
he has met with it in the Socinians, who are perking with it at every turn;
but here it ought to be admired. I wish the Doctor be Orthodox at his heart,
for he seems to have read none but Socinians; and I fear has a design to
promote Socinianism, by giving away all good Arguments to them: but to antidote
my Readers against this, I can assure them, that this Argument is used by very
Orthodox Writers, and derided by Antinomians: Though it is some question,
whether the Doctor smiled at the Argument, or at his own Answer; however I had
rather he would smile still, than admire, which would be the more effectual
Confutation of the two.

But his Answer is worth considering: That the Grace of Duty and Obedience in
all Relations is the same, the Relations only administering an external occasion
unto its peculiar exercise. And what our Lord Jesus Christ did in the
fulfilling of all Righteousness in the Circumstances and Relations wherein he
stood, may be imputed to us for our Righteousness in all our Relations, every
act of Duty and Sin in them respecting the same Law and Principle. The meaning
of which Answer is this, That Christ is said to fulfill all Righteousness for
us, not because he did fulfill all Righteousness, but because he would have done
it, had he been in such Circumstances and Relations as had required it: and
thus he has found out a way how Christ may fulfill all Righteousness, without
doing any thing at all: for by the same Reason that he may be said to fulfill
the Righteousness of any particular Duties and Relations, without doing it, he
may be said to fulfill the Righteousness of all Duties and Relations, without
doing any thing: for the Grace of Duty and Obedience is the same in all: and
that does not consist in external Actions, (for then it will equally oblige to
every particular act of Righteousness, as to any) but in an inward Principle:
and thus the Doctor must return to what he had before expressly rejected, That
the habitual Righteousness of Christ as Mediator in his Human Nature, is the
only Righteousness which can be imputed to us: Christ did not fulfill all the
particular Duties of Righteousness in his actions, because he was not in such
circumstances and relations as required it: and therefore those at least, who
are in any condition or relation, in which Christ never was, (as the generality
of Mankind upon one account or other are) must of necessity be justified not by
the imputation of Christ's actual, but habitual Righteousness.

And now let me reason a little with the Doctor in his own way: Why should
Christ live here in the World so long as he did, in perfect Obedience to all
the Laws of God? Had he died before (as soon as he had been born) there had
been perfect Innocence and perfect Holiness by his habitual Grace: and thismade
him fit to be a Sacrifice to expiate our sins, and would as well serve for a
perfect Righteousness to cover them: and should he have lived to the end of the
World, unless he could have run through all the several Relations and
Conditions of Life, he could never actually fulfill all that Righteousness which
is required of all Mankind, and therefore the perfect habitual Righteousness of
his Nature may as well serve for the whole as for a part.

The Doctor in the place, to which I now alluded, can find no other reason why
Commun. p. 18^.
Christ should live so long in the World, in a perfect Obedience to the Laws of
God, but only a necessity of an actual fulfilling all Righteousness for us,
which supposes that an habitual Grace is not enough; and yet when he is told
that Christ could not and did not fulfill all Righteousness for us, because he
could not discharge the Duties of our several Relations for us, when he never
was in most of these Relations, and could not possibly be in all; he answers,
that there is no need of it, because the Grace of Duty and Obedience is the
same in all: and now how the Doctor can reconcile these two. that it is
necessary actually to fulfill all Righteousness, and that it is not necessary
actually to fulfill all Righteousness, let him consider; for I am sure there
must be the same necessity of fulfilling all Righteousness, that there is of
fulfilling any; and he himself describes that Righteousness which Christ was to
fulfill for us, as our Mediator, to be, whatever was required of us by virtue of
any Law: though I suppose, when he thus stated it, he had not met with this
Socinian Objection, which he will never be able to answer otherwise than by
smiling or admiring.

In the next place I considered those Arguments, whereby the Doctor proves that
Christ fulfilled all Righteousness for us, as our Mediator. And the first is,
That Christ was under no Obligation to obey those Laws himself, and he
instances both in the Law of Creation, and in the Ceremonial Law given to the
Jews.

First to begin with the Law of Creation, that is, all those Duties which
necessarily result from the frame and constitution of Human Nature; and because
the Doctor in his Vindication has represented P. 220.
the force of his Argument in fewer and plainer words, I shall quit the
advantages which his perplexed and intricate arguings in his Book of P. 18^.
Communion give an Adversary (which I dare venture any man to make sense of,
without a comment) and deal with him at the fairest Weapon.

He proves then, that Christ's Obedience to the Law of Creation was designedly
for us, by two Arguments: First, because the way whereby the Lord Christ in his
own Person became obnoxious and obedient to the Law of Creation, was by his own
voluntary antecedent choice, otherwise than it is with those who are inevitably
subject unto it, by natural generation under it: The meaning of which is, that
he considers Christ antecedently to his Incarnation, when it was in his choice
whether he would become Man, or no, and so consequently whether he would be
subject to the Laws of Human Nature; and I say still, the force of this
Argument is no more but this, That Christ had not been bound to live like a
man, had he not voluntarily chose to become man; and the reason of that is
this, that he could not have lived like a man, had he not been a man.

It was in his choice whether he would become Man, but when he had chose this,
it was not at his liberty to choose whether he would submit to the Laws of
Human Nature; and it is a new way of reasoning to argue, that Christ was not
bound to obey those Laws for himself, because he voluntarily chose such a
state, which necessarily and without any further choice brought him under those
Obligations: Which is just as if I should prove, that no man is bound upon his
own account to discharge the Duties of a Husband, because it was at his own
choice, whether he would have entered into that Relation, which, when he is in
it, necessarily exacts such Duties from him.

The discharge of his Mediatory Office, necessarily required, that he should
become man, that he might be our Prophet, and Example, and Guide, our Priest,
and our Sacrifice, our King and Governor; and when he was Man, his Nature
required that he should obey the Laws of Creation, and live like a reasonable
Creature.

But the Doctor adds, That the Hypostatical Union in the first instant whereof
the Human Nature was fitted for Glory, might have exempted him from the
Obligation of any outward Law whatever.

What he means by outward Laws, I cannot tell, for the Laws of Creation are
intrinsic and essential to human Nature; and if the Hypostatical Union do not
destroy the Human Nature, it cannot exempt it from those natural and necessary
Obligations: He might as well say, that the Hypostatical Union exempts the
Human Nature of Christ from the Laws of Reasoning, as from the Rules of Life,
both which are equally the Glory and Perfection of a Reasonable Nature.

And though we should suppose the Human Nature in Christ, in the very first
instant of its Union to the Divine Nature to be fitted for Glory, yet I cannot
see, how this exempts the Human Nature from the Obligation of those Laws which
are essential to Human Nature, unless he thinks that Human Nature in Glory is
under no Obligations. Had Christ been immediately translated to Heaven, he had
not been obliged to those particular instances of Obedience, which are proper
to an earthly state, for glorified Saints themselves are not; but while Christ
is a perfect Man, as well as God, it will always become him in whatever state
he be, to live agreeably to Human Nature: For though he be advanced to the
Right Hand of God, he is still as man inferior to his Father, and therefore
can never, as man, be exempted from the necessary Laws of Human Nature.

But to proceed to the Ceremonial Law: The Doctor proves, that Christ as an
innocent man, under the Covenant of Works, could not be obliged by this Law,
which came upon us by reason of Sin, especially not to such institutions as
signified the washing away of sin, and repentance from sin, as the Baptism of
John did, and therefore he fulfilled this Righteousness for us.

To this I answered in my former P. ^10. Edit. 2. p. 217.
Discourse, That though it were granted, that these Laws at first were
commanded upon occasion of sin, yet an innocent man may observe them to good
and wise purposes, as public and solemn acts of Worship, or external and
visible expressions of Devotion, as a public Profession of Righteousness and a
virtuous Life; to which purposes among others, the Sacrifices and Ceremonies of
the Law, and the Baptism of John served, etc.

To which the Doctor returns no answer, but makes me say what I never thought,
and abuses his credulous Readers with an apprehension that I had talked like
himself, at such a rate of Nonsense as any one in his Wits must needs despise,
to borrow some of his own Elegancies. For thus he reports my sense, or words,
or both, as he would persuade his Readers, that I say, that an Vindicat. p. 223.
Innocent Person, such as Christ was absolutely, may be obliged for his own
sake, to the observation of such Laws and Institutions, as were introduced by
the occasion of sin, and respected all of them the personal sins of them that
were obliged by them. And now he desires to be left to his liberty, nay to the
necessity of his mind, not to believe Contradictions: I wish he had been under
this necessity a little sooner, or were yet under a necessity of not making
contradictions: for what he believes, no man can tell.

I plainly acknowledged, that Christ being an Innocent Person, could not
observe any of these Judaical Ceremonies, with respect to personal sins; but I
say, as they had other significations, so he might observe them to other
purposes. Circumcision in its first Institution was a seal of that Covenant
which God made with Abraham, and therefore did very well become him, who was
not only of the Seed and Posterity of Abraham, but that very Seed, which was
promised in the Covenant, whereof Circumcision was the Seal. The Baptism of
John was a public Profession of a virtuous Life, which becomes the most
innocent man; but it was a profession of Repentance, and signified the washing
away of sin, only when the baptized Person had been a Sinner; and yet the
Baptism of our Savior was designed for a nobler purpose, as a Public
Inauguration of him to his Prophetical Office. The Passover was an
Eucharistical Sacrifice, in commemoration of the Deliverance of their
Forefathers out of Egypt, and therefore might be observed by the most
innocent man* but I challenge the Doctor or any of his Friends to prove, that
Christ offered any Sin or Trepass Offering, which respect only personal
Offenses, or that he observed any Ceremony, which could signify nothing else
but personal guilt; and till he can prove this, his Argument is worth nothing.

His second Argument to prove that what Christ did as Mediator, (that is, the
actual Obedience of his Life) he did for us, and in our stead, I represented
thus: Knowledge of Christ, p. 311. Edit. 2. p. 218.
That there can be no other reason assigned of Christ's Obedience to the Law,
but only this, that he did it in our stead: Here the Doctor, according to his
usual way, charges me with mis-representing his Argument; for his words are.
That the end of the active Obedience of Christ cannot be assigned to be, that
he might be fit for his Death and Oblation. These I acknowledge to be his
words, but not his Argument, for the force of his Argument consists in the
dis-junction, as I expressly observed, that either Christ fulfilled all
Righteousness to fit him for his Death and Oblation; or he did it for us, and
in our stead; because otherwise, as he himself expresses it, if the Obedience
Christ performed be not reckoned to us, and done upon our account, there is no
just cause to be assigned, why he should live here in the World so long as he
did in perfect Commun. p. 182.
Obedience to all the Laws of God: and therefore in answer to this, I made it
appear, that though the Righteousness of Christ were supposed not necessary to
qualify him for his Death, (which he can never prove) yet there were other
great and necessary Reasons, why he should live so long in the World in a
perfect Obedience to the Divine Will.

His third Argument to prove that Christ performed all Righteousness for us,
is, the absolute necessity of it: for this is the term of the Covenant, Do this
and live; so that we being unable to yield that complete and perfect Obedience,
which the Law requires, as the condition of Life and Happiness, it is necessary
that Christ our Mediator and Surety should fulfill the Law for us. The sum of
which Argument Knowledge of Christ, p. 315. Edit. 2. p. 220.
(as I told him before) is this, That there never was, nor ever can be a
Covenant of Grace; that God still exacts the rigorous perfection of the Law
from us, and that we must not appear before him without a complete and perfect
Righteousness of our own, or of another: Now this is the thing in question,
whether we must be made righteous with the perfect Righteousness of Christ
imputed to us, or whether God will for the sake of Christ dispense with the
rigor of the Law, and accept a sincere and Evangelical Obedience, instead of a
perfect and unsinning Righteousness; so that he only confidently affirms what
was in dispute, and this goes for an Argument: This Argument he silently passes
over, only he transcribes the last clause, without taking any notice of the
reason of it, and huffs it off with an Appeal to his Reader.

Any man may easily guess by the management of this whole Discourse, that the
Doctor had no mind his Readers should know what was in dispute, or what
Arguments were alleged on either side; and I do readily believe what he says,
That he is weary of every word he is forced to add, for it is enough to tire
any man's heart out, to be forced to say something, and not to have one wise
word to say.

But to return from this long Digression, it were very easy to give several
other instances of this way of arguing from Metaphors; as when they prove, that
we are wholly passive in our first Conversion, because we are said to be dead
in trespasses and sins, from whence they infer, that we can contribute no more
to our own Conversion, than a dead man can to the quickening of himself; and
that we are born again, and are made new Creatures, and created to good Works,
and the like: but to discourse this fully, would take up too much time, and
possibly may fall under consideration in a proper place. What I have already
discoursed, is sufficient to acquaint Mr. Ferguson that I am no Enemy to a
sober use of Metaphors; and that he and his Friends do very much corrupt
Religion, and perplex and entangle the plainest notions of it by the abuse of
Scripture-Metaphors.

CHAP. III.
Concerning the DOCTRINE of the CHURCH of ENGLAND.

THose Objections (if they may be so called) of which I have taken notice in
the former Chapter, are but some slight Skirmishes, but the main Battle is
still behind: the great outcry is, That I have contradicted the Doctrine of
the Church of England, contained in her Articles and Homilies: This (I confess)
were a very great fault, if it were true, and if it be not, it is a very great
calumny: And yet whether it be true or false, every one may believe as he
pleases; for the Doctor is not at leisure to make good the Charge; this he
leaves to the Bishops and Governors of our Church to consider, which is very
wisely done of him. But all that he takes leave to Vind, p. 9, p. ^
say, is, That the Doctrine here published, and licensed so to be, either is
the Doctrine of the present Church of England, or it is not: If it be so, what
then? Why then the Doctor shall be forced to declare, That he neither has, nor
will have any Communion therein. But I thought there had been no need of
declaring this now: If this be all the hurt my Book has done, to force the
Doctor to renounce the Communion of our Church, after so many years actual
separation from it, the matter is not great. But why so much haste of
declaring? Why as for other Reasons (at which you may guess) so in particular
because he will not renounce or depart from that which he knows to be the true
ancient Catholic Doctrine of this Church: What a mighty Reverence has the
Doctor for the Church of England! That he will rather separate from the present
Church of England, than renounce the Ancient Catholic Doctrine of the former
Church of England! That he will not renounce any thing, which he knows to have
been the True Ancient Catholic Doctrine of this Church! But does he indeed
speak as he means? Does he account the Authority of the Church of England so
sacred, as to make it the Foundation of his Faith, and a sufficient Reason to
renounce any Doctrines which she condemns, and to own what she owns? If he does
not, I would desire him to explain the force of this reason, and if he does, I
would beg of him for the sake of his Reason to renounce his Schism; though upon
second thoughts I fear, this is no good Argument with the Doctor.

Well, but if it be not so, that is, if the doctrine here published, be not the
Doctrine of the present Church of England, as he is assured with respect unto
many Bishops, and other learned men, that it is not; What then? What account
will he now give of Renouncing the Communion of this Church? Nay, not a word of
that, but he has a little Advice to the Bishops and Governors of it: It is
certainly the Concernment of them who preside therein, to take care, that such
Discourses be not countenanced with the Stamp of their Public Authority, lest
they and the Church be represented unto a great disadvantage with many. What a
blessed change has my Book wrought in the Doctor! He is now mightily concerned
for the Honor and Reputation of the Bishops and Church, and fears lest they
should be disadvantagiously represented to the World. Who could ever have hoped
for this, who had known the Doctor in the blessed times of Reformation! And yet
I vehemently suspect, that after all his Courtship to the Church and Bishops,
the Doctor designs a little kindness to himself and his Friends in it, to
persuade the Reverend Bishops not to suffer any Books to be Printed against
them, which they cannot answer, which may represent them to a great
disadvantage with many.

The Looking-Glass-Maker transcribes several passages out of the Homilies, to
what end he himself knows best; for I should not readily have guessed my self
concerned in them, had it not been for that ingenious Reflection, How ill Mr.
Sherlock Spec. p. 30.
has fitted his Cloth to this Pattern, he that is not very blind, may see: So
that now every one must acknowledge for the credit of his eyesight, that I
have contradicted the Homilies: by which artifice, as I have heard, some
waggish Fellows have persuaded silly People to confess, that they have seen
some strange Prodigies, which they did not see, and which indeed were not to be
seen.

But to gratify the ill nature of these men, let us for once suppose, that
which they cannot prove, that I have contradicted the Doctrine of the Church of
England: what then? Why then I have contradicted the Doctrine to which I have
subscribed; if I have done so, it is very ill done of me, but what then? Why
then this is a sufficient Answer to my Book: But I pray why so? Do they believe
the Church of England to be infallible? Do they think it a sufficient proof of
the Truth of any Doctrine, that it is the Doctrine of the Church of England?
Why then do they reject any of the Articles of our Church? Why do they renounce
Communion with us? If they attribute so much to the Judgment and Authority of
our Church, is it not as good in one case, as it is in another? Every one, I
suppose, knows, what Obedient Sons they are of the Church of England, how they
reverence the Authority of their Mother; and is it not a plain Argument, how
hard they are put to it, when they are forced to take Sanctuary in the
Authority of that Church, which they so much reproach and vilify; when they
dare not trust to any other Weapon to defend their Cause, but the despised name
of the Church of England? Those I am sure must be very blind, who cannot see
through so transparent a Cheat.

The meaning then of all this noise about the Church of England, is no more but
this: They are conscious to themselves of a bad Cause, which they can no longer
defend by plain Scripture and Reason, and therefore shelter themselves in the
Authority of the Church, and would fain persuade the Bishops and the Church of
England to defend them, since they cannot defend themselves; and having little
else to say, they make long Harangues about Articles and Homilies, and pretend
a mighty Zeal for the True Ancient and Catholic Doctrine of the Church of
England: And now methinks the Church of England and the Reverend Bishops are
very much beholden to me, for they have not had so many good words from these
men in many years before, and must never expect the like again, but upon such
another occasion; and I hope the People will begin to consider, what a Church
they have forsaken, whose Authority is much greater than all other Arguments
with their own Teachers.

But I see it is very dangerous to be too much in love with any thing; for this
great zeal and passion for the Doctrine of the Church of England, has betrayed
the Doctor, and his good Friend the Author of the Speculum, to some hasty
Sayings, of which, it may be, they may see cause to repent, when they are
better advised. They are great Friends, you must know, to Liberty and
Indulgence, and take it very ill, if they may not only think and act as they
please in matters of Religion, but make Parties and Factions too, and control
the Commands of Secular Powers; and yet these very men, who so much extol and
magnify an Indulgence, and so much need it, give plain intimations how far
they would be from granting that Liberty to others, which they challenge to
themselves.

The Doctor tells me, There is great reason Vindicat. p. 82.
to pity the People committed to my Charge, what regard soever ought to be had
unto my self: i. e. though I should starve for want of my Rectorship, as he
expresses himself elsewhere, -- Had this man in their days treated this
Doctrine with his present scoffing petulancy, he had P. 117.
scarce been Rector of St. George Buttolph-Lane, etc. Nor should I be so now,
could he hinder it: But what becomes of Liberty and Indulgence then, in matters
of Religion? Must the Conscience be set free in matters of External Order and
Government, but tied up in Doctrines and Opinions? This indeed is the Doctors
avowed Principle, as great a Friend as he is to Liberty: He would be excused
himself from subscribing Three of the XXXIX Articles, but as for the other
XXXVI, he would have no man suffered to live in England who will not subscribe
them; and the Doctor can remember when he proposed this very unseasonably.

The Author of the Speculum desires his Spec. p. 68.
Friend to bid me consider, whether if the Parliament should meet, they might
not find leisure enough to censure my Discourse, as they did Mr. Mountague' s,
who in vain pleaded for himself that he had writ against the Puritans; and was
left alone to suffer, though others had instigated him to write: The Commons of
England will scarce endure to find the Doctrine of the Church of England struck
at, though it be through the sides of Dr. Owen and Dr. Jacomb. But now suppose
the Commons of England should think it as reasonable to secure the Government
and Discipline, as the Doctrine of the Church, what would become then of
Indulgence? Would not our Author then change his Note, and repent of such
Intimations as these? Or if the Commons of England should happen to have other
thoughts of that Discourse, than our Author has, and should think it necessary
to prevent the Debauching of Men's Minds by such corrupt Doctrines as are there
opposed, what would become of most of the Conventicles in England? Could he
with any Confidence then cry out of Persecution, when he himself has sounded
the Alarm to it? This it is to fence with a two-edged Sword, which cuts both
ways, and may wound a Friend as soon as an Enemy.

This is sufficient in answer to my Adversaries, who are well skilled at
drawing up a Charge, but have no faculty at proving it. But I think my self
upon this occasion concerned to vindicate the Doctrine of the Church of England
from the mis-representations of these men, as if it favored such uncouth and
absurd notions, as besides the ill consequences of them, have no foundation in
Scripture or Reason, which I doubt may represent the best Church in the World
to great disadvantage with many, I mean with all wife and considering men.

The principal thing which these Men object against me, is the Doctrine of
Justification, as it is explained in the Articles and Homilies of our Church.
And I am contented the Controversy should be put upon this issue, whether they
or I speak most consonantly to the Doctrine of the Church of England, in this
matter.

The Doctrine of Justification is contained in Article XI. which is this:

We are accounted Righteous before God, only for the Merit of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ by Faith, and not for our own Merits and Deservings.
Wherefore that we are Justified by Faith only, is a most wholesome Doctrine and
very full of comfort, as more largely is expressed in the Homily of
Justification.

The Article is plain, and expressed in a few words, without any Scholastical
Subtilties; we are not clogged here with the several Modes of Causality, with
the Efficient, Formal, Material, Instrumental Causes of Justification, which
fill up every Page in the Books of Modern Divines. All that our Church requires
us to profess, is only this, that we are accounted Righteous before God, only
by Faith, and for the Merits of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; that neither
Faith nor Works are the Meritorious Cause of our Justification, but that all
the Merit of it is to be attributed to Christ, who died for our sins, and
fulfilled the Law; so that whoever acknowledges the Merits of Christ, and
denies the Merits of Good Works, answers the end and design of this Article:
For this was the great Controversy of those days, between the Papists and
Protestants, whether we were Justified freely by the Grace of God, and the
Merits of Christ, or by the Merits of our own Works; and the principal design
of this Article was to oppose the Popish Doctrine of the Merit of Good Works.

But we are referred to the Homily of Justification for a larger Account of
this Doctrine, and thither I willingly appeal: And to proceed with all possible
ingenuity, I readily acknowledge, that there are several Expressions in that
Homily, which seem to favor that notion of our Justification by the Imputation
of Christ's Personal Righteousness, (though that phrase of the Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, is nowhere used throughout the whole Homily) but if we
will take that Explication, which the Homily it self gives of them, it will
evidently appear, that there was no such thing intended by them: I shall
produce these expressions in their proper places, and in the management of this
Argument, shall

First explain the sense of our Church concerning the Doctrine of
Justification, out of the Homilies of Salvation, Faith, Good Works, and
Repentance. And

Secondly, Show you how the state of the Controversy is altered at this day,
and what a just reason this is for a more particular explication of those
Expressions, which occasioned the corruption of the wholesome Doctrine of our
Church.

First I shall enquire what is the true sense of the Church of England
concerning the Doctrine of Justification.

And first, I observe, that our Church places the nature and essence of
Justification in the forgiveness of sins. This is evident from the very first
words of the Homily: Because all men be Sinners, and Offenders against God, and
Breakers of his Law and Commandments, therefore can no man by his own Acts,
Words, and Deeds, (seem they never so good) be justified, and made righteous
before God: but every man of necessity is constrained to seek for another
Righteousness or Justification, to be received at Gods own hands, that is to
say, the forgiveness of his sins and trespasses, in such things as he has
offended: And this Justification or Righteousness (the forgiveness of sins)
which we so receive of Gods Mercy, and Christ's Merits, embraced by Faith, is
taken, accepted, and allowed of God, for our perfect and full Justification. So
that our full and perfect Justification consists in the forgiveness of our
sins, whereby God over-looking what we have done amiss, deals with us, as with
Righteous Persons, that is bestows Eternal Life on us.

The Homily takes notice of two ways of Justification:

The first is by our own Works; when we live so innocently and virtuously as to
be acquitted and absolved by God, according to the strict Rules of Law and
Justice: But in this way no Sinner can be justified; for the Law justifies no
man, who is a Transgressor of the Law: and therefore since we are all Sinners,
and can neither expiate our past sins, nor perfectly keep the Law for the
future, it is impossible that we should be justified by our own Acts and Deeds.

It remains therefore, that no Sinner can be justified, or accounted Just and
Righteous before God, without the pardon and forgiveness of his Sins: this is
the Justification and Righteousness of a Sinner, that God forgives his wilful
sins, and covers all the defects of his good Actions; for when the sin is
pardoned and covered, the man is innocent and righteous.

Now this Account, I am sure, cannot please Dr. Owen and his Friends, who look
upon the forgiveness of sin but as one part of our Justification, and that the
most inconsiderable too, which only makes us innocent, Commun. P. 193.
and delivers us from the condemnation of the Law, but cannot entitle us to
future Happiness; besides Innocence (as they tell us) there is required a
perfect Righteousness, the first is owing to the Death of Christ, which
expiates our sins, the second to the Imputation of Christ's perfect
Righteousness to us, which makes us perfectly just and righteous: this is a
downright contradiction to the Doctrine of our Church, which teaches us, that
God accepts and allows of this forgiveness of sin for our full and perfect
Justification.

And indeed, forgiveness of sins is a true Evangelical way of Justification, in
opposition to a Legal Justification, which consists in perfect and unsinning
Obedience: the first our Church requires, but the Doctor and his Friends exact
the latter, a perfect Righteousness of Works: for as the Doctor observes, Life
is not to be obtained, Knowledge of Christ, p. 314. Edit. 2. p. 220.
unless all be done that the Law requires; that is still true, If thou will
enter into life, keep the Commandments: they must be kept by us, or by our
Surety: All the difference the Doctor knows between the Law and the Gospel, is
only this, that the Law required a perfect Righteousness from every man in his
own Person, the Gospel accepts of a perfect Righteousness in the Person of our
Mediator; but still we are justified by a Legal, not Evangelical Righteousness;
that is, by a Righteousness of Works, not by pardon and forgiveness.

And it has been before observed by some learned men, that to place our
Justification in the forgiveness of our sins, as our Church does, and in the
Imputation of Christ's Personal Righteousness to us, as others do, are not very
consistent. For by the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to us, we are
Legally Righteous, or have a perfect Righteousness of Works; and Forgiveness of
sins, and a perfect Righteousness, destroy each other: for if we are perfectly
Righteous, whether in our own Persons, or by Imputation, we need no
Forgiveness; and if we need Forgiveness, it is plain that God does not so much
as impute a perfect Righteousness to us. So that when our Church places the
whole nature of our Justification in the Forgiveness of sins, it is a good
Argument that she never thought of a Legal Righteousness of Works, of the
Imputation of Christ's perfect Righteousness and Obedience, to make us righteous
before God.

But for a fuller Explication of this Doctrine of Justification, we are taught
in that Homily, that there are especially three things which must go together
in our Justification: upon Gods part, his great Mercy and Grace; upon Christ's
part, Justice, that is, the Satisfaction of Gods Justice, or the price of our
Redemption by the offering of his Body, and sheddidg his Blood, with fulfilling
of the Law perfectly and thoroughly; and upon our part, true and lively Faith in
the Merits of Jesus Christ, which yet is not ours, but by Gods working in us.
This is a much more intelligible way of explaining the Doctrine of
Justification, than by the Material, Formal, Efficient, Instrumental Causes,
and suchlike terms of Art, which need more explication than the Doctrine it
self; and therefore I shall follow this method, and reduce the Doctrine of the
Homilies under these three Heads: What is Gods part, what is Christ's part, and
what is required on Man's part in the business of Justification.

First, Let us consider what is Gods part in the Justification of a Sinner; and
that is, the Mercy and Grace of God, which expresses it self first in providing
a Ransom for us, as it is expressed in the Homily, That our Justification does
come freely by the mere Mercy of God, and of so great and free mercy, that
whereas all the World was not able of themselves to pay any part toward their
Ransom, it pleased our heavenly Father of his infinite mercy, without any our
Desert or Deserving, to prepare for us the most precious Jewels of Christ's Body
and Blood, whereby our Ransom might be fully paid, the Law fulfilled, and his
Justice satisfied. There is no Controversy between us about this matter, that
it was an expression of the undeserved Goodness of God, to send Christ into the
World to save Sinners.

And secondly, The Mercy of God is seen in the very Act of Justifying us, in
accepting this Atonement, and in forgiving our sins. Thus we are informed in
the second part of that Sermon of Salvation. Justification is not the Office of
Man, but of God: for Man cannot make himself righteous by his own Works,
neither in part, nor in the whole, for that were the greatest arrogance and
presumption of Man, that Antichrist could set up against God, to affirm, that a
man might by his own Works take away and purge his own Sins, and so Justify
himself. But Justification is the Office of God only, and is not a thing which
we render to him, but which we receive of him; not which we give to him, but
which we take of him, by his free Mercy, and by the only Merits of his most
dearly beloved Son, our only Redeemer, Savior, and Justifier, Jesus Christ.
Bywhich words, it is very plain, what is understood by Justification being Gods
Act, and not Man's; that is, that it is an Act of Favor and Grace, not of Merit
and Desert.

Though God may be said to Justify an Innocent Man, when he pronounces him
Just and Righteous according to Law, which is the proper office of a Judge, i.
e. to acquit an Innocent Man, when he is arraigned; yet in this case an
Innocent Man may be said to Justify himself, because he is Justified by his
own Actions, and God only like a Just and Righteous Judge, pronounces the
Sentence of Justification, that is, acquits and absolves him, as his actions
deserve, which strict Justice requires: But in the Justification of a Sinner,
who dares not stand the trial of strict Justice, but appeals to the Grace and
Mercy of God, Justification is properly Gods Act, and not Man's, is owing to the
Divine Grace and Mercy, not to Man's Merit and Desert.

Upon the same account, we are told in the same place, that not our own Act to
believe in Christ, or that this our Faith in Christ which is within us, does
not justify us, (for that were to count our selves to be justified by some Act
or Virtue that is within our selves.) Which I confess sounds very like what
some men say, That Faith does not justify us, as our own Act, but as it
apprehends the Righteousness of Christ, and applies it to us, by which
Righteousness thus apprehended by Faith we are justified; but there is nothing
less meant in this place, as will appear from considering the whole Sentence,
which is this: So that the true understanding of this Doctrine, We be justified
freely by Faith without Works, or that we be justified by Faith in Christ only,
is not, that this our own Act to believe in Christ, or this our Faith in
Christ, which is within us, does justify us, and deserve our Justification
unto us, (for that were to count our selves to be justified by some Act or
Virtue that is within our selves) but the true understanding and meaning
thereof is, that although we hear Gods Word, and believe it, and do never so
many Works thereunto, yet we must renounce the Merit of all our said Virtues,
of Faith, Hope, Charity, and all other Virtues and good Deeds, which we have
done, shall do, or can do, as things that be far too weak, and insufficient,
and imperfect, to deserve Remission of our Sins, and our Justification, and
therefore we must trust only in Gods Mercy, and that Sacrifice which our High
Priest and Savior Christ Jesus the Son of God, once offered for us upon the
Cross, to obtain thereby Gods Grace and Remission, as well of Original Sin in
Baptism, as of all Actual Sin committed by us after Baptism, if we truly
repent, and turn unfeignedly to him again. The meaning of which is plain, that
we are not justified by Faith as our own act, as we are not justified by Hope
and Charity, as our own acts, that is, that they cannot merit our
Justification, or the Forgiveness of our sins: When we have done the best we
can, we must still fly to the Mercy of God, through the Merits of our Lord
Jesus Christ: that distinction of Faiths justifying, not as our own Act, but as
it apprehends the Righteousness of Christ, and clothes us with the perfect
Robes of his Righteousness, for which God accounts us perfectly Righteous, is
of a later date than these Homilies, and very inconsistent with the Doctrine
contained in them. Thus you see what Gods part is in the Justification of a
Sinner, viz. To provide a Ransom, and to forgive sins in virtue of that Ransom;
that is to justify those who according to the strictness and rigor of the Law,
are not Just and Righteous Persons. Thus to conclude this in the words of the
Homily, You have heard the Office of God in our Justification, Sermon of
Salvation, part 3.
and how we receive it of him freely by his Mercy, without our Deserts.

Let us now consider what is Christ's part in our Justification, and that is
expressed by Justice, that is, the satisfaction of Justice, or the Price of our
Redemption, by the offering of his Body, and shedding of his Blood, with
fulfilling of the Law perfectly and thoroughly: The plain meaning of which is,
that we are justified for the sake of Christ's Merits, that his Obedience in
doing and suffering the Will of God, in dying for our sins, and in fulfilling
the Law, is the meritorious cause of our Justification: that is, did deserve at
Gods hands, that for Christ's sake he should pardon all humble, penitent and
believing Sinners. This is all the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness which
our Church acknowledges, that the Righteousness of Christ is the meritorious
Cause of our Justification.

Thus we are told, That Infants being baptized, and dying in their Infancy,
Sermon of Salvation, part 1.
are by this Sacrifice washed from their sins, brought to Gods favor, and made
his Children, and Inheritors of his Kingdom of Heaven: And they which in act or
deed do sin after their Baptism, when they turn again to God unfeignedly, they
are likewise washed by this Sacrifice from their sins, in such sort that there
remains not any spot of sin, that shall be imputed to their damnation: Which
is to the same sense with that of St. John, that if we walk in the light, as he
is in the light, (if we are holy as God is) we have fellowship one with
another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin, 1
John i. 7. And to this sense our Church expounds those Texts, Romans iii. All
have offended, and have need of the Glory of God, but are justified freely by
his Grace, by Redemption which is in Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to
us for a Reconciler and Peacemaker, through faith in his Blood, to show his
Righteousness: And in the Tenth Chapter, Christ is the end of the Law unto
Righteousness, to every man that believes: And in the Eighth Chapter, That
which was impossible by the Law, in as much as it was weak by the flesh, God
sending his own Son in the similitude of sinful flesh, by sin damned sin in the
flesh, that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, which walk
not after the flesh, but after the Spirit: Which Texts are alleged by our
Modern Divines, to prove the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to us, as the
formal cause of our Justification; but our Church expressly tells us, that she
understands these Texts to signify no more on Christ's part, but Justice, or
the Satisfaction of Gods Justice. And whereas these new Divines make such a
difference between the Active and Passive Righteousness of Christ, that by his
Death and Sufferings he expiated our Sins, and by his Active Obedience makes us
righteous: Our Church knows no difference in this matter, but assures us, that
they both concur to the same effect, to make satisfaction for our sins; He made
satisfaction to Gods Justice, by the offering of his Body, and shedding his
Blood, with fulfilling the Law perfectly and thoroughly. Which account I
expressly gave of it in my former Discourse, p. 330. and Edit. 2. p. 231. In
this sense we are taught, that Christ is now the Righteousness of all them that
truly believe in him; he for them paid their Ransom by his Death, he for them
fulfilled the Law in his Life: So that now in him and by him every true
Christian Man may be called a fulfiller of the Law: for as much as that which
their infirmity lacked, Christ's Justice has supplied. Which last clause the
Looking-Glass-Maker thought fit to leave out, for he had so much wit in his
anger, as to see, that it did not make to his purpose: for the meaning of it is
this, that Christ's active and passive Righteousness is imputed to us, to
procure the pardon of our sins, and thereby to supply the defects of our
Righteousness, not to make us formally righteous: though our Righteousness be
imperfect and defective, yet Christ by his Righteousness having obtained the
pardon of our sins, we may be said in him to fulfill the Law, in as much, as
that which our Infirmity lacked, Christ's Justice (his Merit and Satisfaction,
as it is before explained) has supplied. And once for all, our Church tells
us, what she means by being justified by Christ only: Sermon* of Salvation part 3.
We put our Faith in Christ, that we be justified by him only, that we be
justified by Gods Mercy, and the Merits of our Savior Christ only, and by no
virtue and good works of our own, that is in us, or that we can be able to have
or to do, to deserve the same: Christ himself being the only cause meritorious
thereof. So that the plain sense of our Church is, that Christ's part in our
Justification is only to be the meritorious cause of it, to merit Pardon and
Justification for all those, who heartily believe in him. And who-ever of our
Communion have affirmed any more, they have in so doing plainly deserted the
Doctrine of our Church: And therefore Doctor Prideaux himself does expressly
disown the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ in any other sense than
that of Merit: Iustificamur per justitiam Christi (non personae, qua ipse Lect.
5. de Justificatione.
vestitus est, sed meriti, qua suos vestit) nobis imputatam: that is, We are
justified by the Righteousness of Christ imputed to us, not by his Personal
Righteousness (as Dr. Owen affirms) with which he is clothed himself, but with
the Righteousness of Merit, with which he clothes those who belong to him: And
in answer to a passage out of Bellarmine, he adds, Quis unquam e nostris, nos
per justitiam Christi imputatam, formaliter justificari asseruit: that is, Who
among us ever affirmed, that we were formally justified by the imputed
Righteousness of Christ. And as the learned Forbs observes, it sounds very
Considerationes modestae, p. 52.
like a contradiction to assert, that the Righteousness of Christ is both the
meritorious and the formal cause of our Justification. Nequit enim fieri, ut
eadem res simul fit causa efficiens, ad quam meritum reducitur, and formalis
ejusdem effecti, quia sic simul and de essentia effecti foret, and non foret,
cum causa formalis interna sit, and (...), efficiens autem externa tantum, ut
constat: that is, It cannot be, that the same thing should be both the
efficient (as Merit is) and the formal cause of the same effect; for so it must
both be of the essence and not of the essence of the effect; for a formal cause
is internal, and belongs to the nature and essence of the thing, but an
efficient is an external cause, as every one knows: And therefore when the
Learned Bishop Davenant, asserts the Righteousness of Christ imputed to us, to
be the De Justitia habituali and actuali.
formal cause of our Justification, and explains it by our being justified ex
intuitu meritorum Christi, and propter Christum, with respect to the Merits of
Christ, and for Christ's sake, though he uses a different phrase, which too many
since have abused to bad purposes; yet he seems to mean no more by it, than we
do, who say, that the Righteousness of Christ is the meritorious cause of our
Justification, for that must be explained by the same phrases of being
justified for Christ's sake, and with respect to the Merits of Christ: and
indeed the only difference the Bishop makes between the Righteousness of Christ
being the meritorious and the formal cause of our Justification is no more but
this, that in the first case he considers the Merits of Christ P. 16.
absolutely, as the price of our Redemption; in the second he considers those
same Merits of Christ applied to particular persons for the pardon of their
particular sins, which still makes it no more than a meritorious cause. His
words are these: Eadem and unica justitia Christi in se and suo valor
considerata est meritoria causa humanae justificationis, considerata autem
quatenus imputatur, donatur, applicatur, tanquam sua singulis credentibus, and
in Christum insitis, subit vicem causae formalis. And that he intends no more
by a formal cause, than what others express by a meritorious cause, is plain in
this, that he acknowledges the imputation even of Christ's active Righteousness
only in the sense of Merit. He expresses his agreement with Vasques in this
matter, who acknowledges the imputation of the Merit of Christ's active
Obedience: Cum dicimus Merita Christi nobis imputari, idem de justitia and
sanctitate illius existimamus; nam cum Merita Christi ex sanctitate ejus
dignitatem accipiant, eodem sensu quo Merita nobis dicuntur imputari, ipsa
etiam Iustitia Christi imputari dicitur: that is, When we say, that the Merits
of Christ are imputed to us, we understand the same thing of his Holiness and
active Righteousness: for since his Purity and Holiness gave worth and dignity
to his Merits, in the same sense, wherein his Merits are said to be imputed to
us, his active Righteousness and Obedience is imputed also. So that the Bishop
never thought that the Obedience and Righteousness of Christ is so made ours,
that we are accounted by God to have done the same things, to have performed
all that Righteousness which Christ performed, which is the modern notion of
Imputation; but it is so imputed to us, that upon account of the Merits of
Christ's Life and Death, God forgives the Sins, and accepts the Persons of those
who heartily believe in him, as the same Learned and Reverend Person
excellently explains it soon after: Where he tells us, that we are delivered
from the Law by Faith in Christ; Whosoever believes in him shall not perish,
and shall not come into condemnation, or into Judgment, as he reads it, John v.
24. and adds, What Judgment is this, from which Believers are delivered by
Christ? Proculdubio strictum illud, ubi juxta normam legis aliquis examinatur,
and prout deprehenditur huic norme respondere justus aut injustus pronunciatur,
etc. No doubt that strict Judgment, where men are examined according to the
Rule of the Law, and are pronounced just or unjust, as they are found to agree
with that Rule: Iustificatio igitur and salus credentium non ex eo dependet,
quod habent in se qualitatem nova justitiae, quam audent legali examini and
stricto Dei judicio subjicere, sed quod per and propter Merita Redemptoris, non
subituri sunt tale judicium, sed perinde cum illis agetur, ac si haberent in
seipsis exactam justitiam legalem: Therefore the Justification and Salvation of
Believers does not depend on this, that they have such an internal
Righteousness as they dare submit to a legal Trial, and to the strict and
rigorous Judgment of God; but that by and for the Merits of their Redeemer, hey
shall never undergo such a Judgment, but shall be dealt with as if they had an
exact legal Righteousness of their own. And this he tells us hemeans by the
Merits of Christ being the formal cause of our Justification; and in this sense
I heartily own it, though the abuse of that Phrase is a sufficient Reason to
alter it.

Let us now consider in the third place, what is required on our part, in order
to our Justification by Gods Mercy, and by Christ's Merits, and that is plainly
expressed in the Homily: And upon our part, true and lively Faith in the Merits
of Jesus Christ, which yet is not ours, but by Gods working in us.

That we may the better understand this, we must enquire, What is meant by this
Faith in the Merits of Christ: And what is meant by a true and lively Faith in
Christ's Merits? And what our Church attributes to this Faith in the Work of
Justification?

First, What is meant by Faith in the Merits of Christ?

Now the general Notion of Faith is, that it is a persuasion and belief in man's
heart, Homily of Faith, part 1.
whereby he knows that there is a God, and agrees unto all Truth of Gods
most holy Word, contained in the holy Scripture: This is such a Faith as Devils
and wicked Men may have: But then a Faith in Christ's Merits, or a true
justifying Faith such as no wicked men can have, is not only the common belief
of the Articles of Faith, but it is also a true trust and confidence of the
Mercy of God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, and a sted fast hope of all good
things to be received at Gods hand: and that although we through infirmity or
temptation of our ghostly Enemy, do fall from him by sin, yet if we return
again to him by true Repentance, that he will forgive and forget our offenses
for his Sons sake, our Savior Jesus Christ, and will make us Inheritors with
him of his everlasting Kingdom; and that in the mean time, till that Kingdom
come, he will be our Protector and Defender in all perils and dangers,
whatsoever do chance: and that though sometimes he does send us sharp adversity
yet that evermore he will be a loving Father unto us, if we trust in him, and
commit our selves wholly unto him, hang only upon him, and call upon him, ready
to obey and serve him. That is, a Faith in the Merits of Christ, is a sure Hope
and Confidence in God, a certain Expectation of all temporal and spiritual good
things from God, for the Merits of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, upon the
condition of Repentance, and a new Life: or as it is excellently expressed a
little after in the same Homily: For the very sure and lively Christian Faith
is, not only to believe all things of God, contained in holy Scripture, but
also is an earnest trust and confidence in God, that he does regard us, and
that he is careful over us, as the Father is over the Child whom he does love,
and that he will be merciful to us for his only Sons sake, and that we have our
Savior Christ our perpetual Advocate and Priest, in whose only Merits,
Oblation, and Suffering, we do trust that our Offenses be continually washed
and purged, whenever we (repenting truly) do return to him with our whole
heart, sted fastly determining with our selves, through his Grace, to obey and
serve him in keeping his Commandments, and never to turn back again to sin.

So that Justifying Faith (according to the sense of our Church) is not a
persuasion that our sins are actually pardoned, or that God for Christ's sake
will forgive our sins, without requiring any more of us, than to believe, that
he will forgive them. But it is a firm persuasion that God will forgive our
sins for Christ's sake, if we repent of our sins, and forsake them, and
determine through his gracious assistance never to return to them again.

But we shall understand this the better, if we consider, secondly, what is
meant by a true lively Faith in Christ's Merits: for our Church distinguishes
between a dead and a lively Faith: A dead Faith is by the holy Apostle St.
James compared to the faith of Homily of Faith, part 1.
Devils, which believe God to be true and just, and tremble for fear, yet they
do nothing well, but all evil. And such a manner of Faith have the wicked and
naughty Christian People, which confess God (as St. Paul says) in their mouth,
but deny him in their deeds, being abominable, and without the right faith, and
to all good works reprovable. -- And, Forasmuch as Faith without Works is dead,
it is not now Faith, as a dead Man is not a Man: This dead Faith therefore is
not the sure and substantial Faith, which saves Sinners.

Let us now consider what a lively Faith is, and the description of that
follows in these words: Another Faith there is in Scripture, which is not (as
the foresaid Faith) idle, unfruitful, and dead, but works by Charity (as St.
Paul declares, Gal. v.) which as the other vain Faith is called a dead Faith,
so this may be called a quick or lively Faith. -- This is the true, lively, and
unfeigned Christian Faith, and is not in the mouth and outward Profession only,
but it lives and stirs inwardly in the heart. And this Faith is not without
hope and trust in God, nor without the love of God and of our Neighbors, nor
without the fear of God, nor without the desire to hear Gods Word, and to
follow the same in eschewing evil, and doing gladly all good works. This Faith
(as St. Paul describes Heb. 12.
it) is the sure ground and foundation of the benefits which we ought to look
for, and trust ^o receive of God, a certificate and sure looking for them,
although they yet sensibly appear not unto us, etc. This I think is as plain,
as words can make it, that the only Foundation of our Hope and Trust in God,
and of our expectation of all temporal and spiritual good things from him, is a
lively and working Faith; and upon these terms I will dispute with no man; I
never asserted more my self, nor desire any other man should.

But to make it more evident what the sense of our Church is, concerning the
necessity of Good Works, we are taught in these Homilies three things
concerning Faith:

First, That it is essential to true Faith to be fruitful in good Works, when
it has the Opportunities of Action: This Faith does not lie dead in the heart,
but is lively and Ibid.
fruitful in bringing forth good Works: That as the Light cannot be hid, but
will show forth it self at one place or other; so a true Faith cannot be kept
secret, but when occasion is offered it will break out, and show it self by
Good Works. And as the living Body of a Man ever exercises such things as
belong to a natural and living Body, for nourishment and preservation of the
same, as it has need, opportunity, and occasion: even so the Soul that has a
lively Faith in it, will be doing always some good Work, which shall declare
that it is living, and will not be unoccupied. Therefore when men hear in the
Scriptures so high commendation of Faith, that it makes us to please God, to
live with God, and to be the Children of God. If then they fantasy that they
be set at liberty from doing all good Works, and may live as they lust, they
trifle with God, and deceive themselves; and it is a manifest token that they
be far from having the true lively Faith, and also far from knowledge what true
Faith means. And then follows that excellent Description of Faith, which I
have transcribed above. P. 76.


From this it is very plain, that our Church accounts a holy Life as essential
to a true Faith, as Action is to Life: and that true Faith is discovered by a
holy Life, just as an inward Principle of Life is discovered by external and
visible Actions.

This is farther proved in the Homily, from the examples of all good men in
former Ages, whose Faith was fruitful in good Works, such as Abel, Noah,
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, etc. and from the Testimony of the holy Scripture,
especially of the 1 Epist. Sermon of Faith, part 2.
of S. John, where there are so many express testimonies to this Truth: and by
refuting the several pretenses of those men, who fancy that they believe in
God, and love him, though they either live in sin, or neglect to obey his Laws:
and the conclusion of all is in these words, So they that be Christians, Part 3.
and have received the knowledge of God, and of Christ's Merits, and yet of a
set purpose do live idly, without good works, thinking the name of a naked
faith to be either sufficient for them, or else setting their minds upon vain
pleasures of this World, do live in sin, without repentance, not uttering the
Fruits that do belong to such an high Profession, upon such presumptuous
Persons, and wilful Sinners, must needs remain the great vengeance of God, and
eternal punishment in Hell, prepared for the unjust and wicked Livers.

The second thing which we are taught of Faith, is, That Faith is the only
Principle of Good Works, acceptable and pleasing to God; that without it can no
good Work be done, accepted and pleasant unto God: Sermon of Good Works, part 1.
for as a Branch cannot bear Fruit of it self (says our Savior Christ) except
it abide in the Vine, so cannot you, except you abide in me. -- And without
Faith it is impossible to please God. -- And whatever work is done without
Faith is sin. Faith gives life to the Soul, and they be as much dead to God,
who lack Faith, as they be to the World, whose Bodies lack Souls. This is a
true account why no Works, though they may appear never so good, can be
acceptable to God without Faith, because Faith is the only Principle of a new
and spiritual Life, which makes us alive to God, which gives us such a sense of
God, and reverence for his Authority, as makes us careful in all things to
please him, which is the very life and soul of Religion, and all Virtue; and as
it is observed in that Homily from St. Chrysostom: As men that be very men
indeed, first have life, and after be nourished, so must our Faith in Christ go
before, and after be nourished with good Works: A Life may be without
Nourishment, (that is, for some short time) but Nourishment cannot be without
Life: A man must needs be nourished by good Works, but first he must have
Faith: He that does good Deeds, yet without Faith, he has no Life.

Much to the same purpose it is observed from St. Augustine, That the intent
makes the Works good, but Faith must guide and order the intent of Man. -- So
that he which does not his good Works with a godly intent, and a true Faith,
that works by Love, the whole Body besides, (that is to say) all the whole
number of his Works is dark, and has no light in them: for good Deeds be not
measured by the facts themselves, and so discerned from Vices, but by the ends
and intents for which they were done.

The meaning then of our Church is no more, but this, That whereas without
Faith no man can love and reverence God, or design to please him in all things,
whatever materially Good Works such men may do, yet they are not properly Acts
of Religion, as not being referred to God, and therefore cannot be acceptable
to God, as such, nor avail any man to eternal Life.

Upon this account it is, that God so much prizes Faith, because it is the Seed
and Principle of Universal Obedience: that when there is such a sincere
Principle in us, and wants an opportunity of exerting it self, it is accepted
by God without Works; as is observed in the same place from St. Chrysostom: I
can show a man that by Faith without Works lived and came to Heaven, but
without Faith never any man had Life: the Thief that was hanged when Christ
suffered, did believe only, and the most merciful God justified him: (though,
as Bishop Davenant observes, his Faith produced a great many good Works in a
very short time) but then it follows; If he had lived, and not regarded Faith,
and the Works thereof, he should have lost his Salvation again; but this is the
effect, that I say, that Faith by it self saved him, but Works by themselves
never justified any man: Where he prefers Faith above Works, because Faith
being a Universal Principle of Obedience, is accepted by God without Works,
when there wants time or opportunity to act them, though in no other case; but
no Works can be pleasing and acceptable to God, unless they proceed from a true
and hearty Faith: Neither Faith is without Works, having opportunity thereto,
nor Works can avail to everlasting Life without Faith.

The third thing noted of Faith, is, What manner of Good Works Faith produces;
and the Good Works of Faith are not some external Acts of Hypocrisy, or some
worthless and flattering Devotions, not some Arbitrary Superstitions, etc. but
are the substantial Duties of Religion, which consist in the love of God, and
of Men, which make us like to God, and useful to the World, as is excellently
discoursed in the Second and Third parts of the Homily of Good Works.

So that according to the sense of our Church, Justifying Faith is not an idle
and unactive Principle, but is fruitful in Good Works, and no other Faith can
justify us, but such a lively Faith as abounds in all the Fruits of
Righteousness, according as it has occasion and opportunity of doing good.

But to make this still more evident, I observe farther, that whereas our
Church seems to lay the greatest stress upon one particular Act of Faith in the
matter of Justification, viz. our trust in the Mercy of God, and our
apprehending the Promise of Forgiveness through the Merits of our Lord Jesus
Christ, she also makes a good Life, or at least a firm and steadfast Resolution
of a good Life, antecedently necessary to this Justifying Act of Faith, or to
our Trust and Affiance in the Mercy of God, through the Merits of our Lord and
Savior: This is evident from that Reason, which is assigned, why no wicked men
can have a sure Trust and Confidence in Gods Mercy: For how can any man have
this true Faith, this sure confidence in God, Sermon. of Salvation part 3.
that by the Merits of Christ his sins be forgiven, and be reconciled to the
favor of God, and to be partaker of the Kingdom of Heaven by Christ, when he
lives ungodly, and denies Christ in his Deeds? Surely no such ungodly man can
have this Faith and trust in God. For as they know Christ to be the only
Savior of the World, so they know also that wicked men shall not enjoy the
Kingdom of God: They know that God hates Unrighteousness, that he will destroy
all those that speak untruly, that those who have done good Works (which cannot
be done without a lively Faith in Christ) shall come forth into the
Resurrection of Life, and those that have done evil; shall come unto the
Resurrection of Judgment: Very well they know also, that to them that be
contentious, and to them that will not be obedient unto the Truth, but will
obey Unrighteousness, shall come indignation, wrath, and affliction, etc.

The plain meaning of which words is this, that no wicked man can have a true
Faith in Gods Mercy, because the Promise of forgiveness is made upon the
Conditions of Repentance and a New Life; whereas God has threatened eternal
damnation against all wicked Livers; and therefore for any man, while he lives
in wickedness, to hope to be pardoned by God for Christ's sake, is an express
contradiction to the Promises and Threatenings of the Gospel, and surely no man
shall be justified for believing a lie.

Thus in the first part of the Sermon of Faith, the design of which is to
prove, that a true, lively, justifying Faith is fruitful in Good Works, we are
expressly taught, That he that believes that all that is spoken of God in the
Bible is true, and yet lives so ungodly, that he cannot look to enjoy the
Promises and Benefits of God; although it may be said, that such a man has a
Faith and Belief to the Words of God, yet it is not properly said, that he
believes in God, or has such a Faith and Trust in God, whereby he may surely
look for Grace, Mercy, and everlasting Life, at Gods hands, but rather for
indignation and punishment, according to the merits of his wicked Life.

This contains the very same Doctrine which was expressed in the former
Paragraph, and farther gives us an account, what distinction our Church makes
between Credere Deo, and Credere in Deum; to believe God and to believe in God:
the first signifies to believe whatever is contained in the Word of God to be
true, the second is to yield such Obedience to the Revelations of the Divine
Will, as may encourage us to trust in God for the Accomplishment of all those
gracious Promises of Pardon and Eternal Life: This is all the fiducial Reliance
which our Church teaches, to trust to the Mercy of God through the Merits of
Christ, for Pardon and Eternal Life, upon our faithful discharge of all
Gospel-Obedience.

The same Doctrine is more expressly taught, if it be possible, in the Second
Part of the Sermon of Faith: Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believes
in me has everlasting Life: Now forasmuch as he that believes in Christ has
everlasting Life, it must needs consequently follow, that he that has this
Faith must have also Good Works, and be studious to observe Gods Commandments
obediently: For to them that have evil Works, and lead their Life in
Disobedience and Transgression, or breaking Gods Commandments, without
Repentance, pertains not everlasting Life, but everlasting Death, as Christ
himself says, They that do well shall go into Life eternal, but they that do
evil, shall go into everlasting fire, etc. What can be more expressly said, to
prove the inseparable Union of Good Works with Faith, in the Act of
Justification?

In the Homily of Repentance this Doctrine is so plainly taught, that there can
be no possible evasion: We are there told, That the true Preachers of the
Gospel of the Kingdom of Heaven, and of the glad and joyful tidings of
Salvation, have always in their godly Sermons and Preachings unto the People,
joined these two together, Repentance and Forgiveness of sins, even as our
Savior Jesus Christ did appoint himself, saying, So it behoved Christ to
suffer, and to rise again the third day, and that Repentance and Forgiveness of
Sins should be preached in his Name among all Nations.

Forgiveness of sins (as I observed before) is Evangelical Justification, and
the necessary condition of Forgiveness is Repentance: This is proved in that
Homily by many Scripture-Promises and Examples, and therefore we must consider
what our Church means by Repentance, and the explication of this is reduced to
four principal Points: From what we must return, to whom we must return, by
whom we may be able to convert, and the manner how to turn to God.

First, From whence, or from what things we must return: and that is, From all
our sins, not only grosser vices, but the filthy lusts and inward
concupiscences of the Flesh. -- All these things must they forsake, that will
truly turn unto the Lord, and repent aright. For since for such things the wrath
of God comes upon the Children of Disobedience, no end of punishment ought to
be looked for, as long as we continue in such things. But this must be done by
Faith: for since that God is a Spirit, he can by no other means be apprehended
and taken hold upon. That is, God being a Spirit, we cannot see him with bodily
Eyes, nor go to him on our Legs, nor take hold of him with an Arm of Flesh, and
therefore this Metaphor of returning to God, and going to him, and taking hold
of him, must be expounded to a spiritual sense, is the work of Faith, which
discovers him who is invisible, and unites our Souls and Spirits to him.

And, We have need of a Mediator for to bring and reconcile us unto him, who
for our sins is angry with us; the same is Jesus Christ, who being true and
natural God, etc. took our nature upon him, that so he might be a Mediator
between God and us, and pacify his wrath.

In the second part of the Homily, we have this general Description of
Repentance, That it is a true Returning unto God, whereby men forsaking utterly
their Idolatry and Wickedness, do with a lively Faith embrace, love, and
worship the true living GOD only, and give themselves to all manner of good
Works, which by Gods Word they know to be acceptable unto him. And we are there
informed, That there are four Parts of Repentance, the first is Contrition of
the Heart: For we must be earnestly sorry for our sins, and unfeignedly lament
and bewail, that we have by them so grievously offended our most bounteous and
merciful God, etc.

The second is an unfeigned Confession and acknowledging of our sins to God.

The third is Faith, whereby we do apprehend and take hold upon the Promises of
God, touching the free pardon and forgiveness of our sins, which Promises are
sealed up unto us, with the death and bloodshedding of the Lord Jesus Christ.
And the Reason of this, is, because Contrition and Confession will avail us
nothing, unless we steadfastly believe, and be fully persuaded, that God for his
Son Jesus Christ's sake, will forgive us all our sins; for though we be never so
earnestly sorry for our sins, and acknowledge and confess them, yet all these
things shall be but means to bring us to utter desparation, except we do
steadfastly believe that God our heavenly Father will for his Son Jesus Christ's
sake pardon and forgive us our Offenses and Trespasses, and utterly put them
out of remembrance in his sight: therefore they that teach Repentance without
Christ, and a lively Faith in the Mercy of God, do only teach Cains, or Judas
Repentance: That is, they teach men to be sorry for their sins, without any
hopes of Pardon and Forgiveness, which is only to be obtained through our Lord
Jesus Christ.

The fourth part of Repentance is an amendment of Life, in bringing forth
fruits worthy of Repentance: for they that do truly repent, must be clean
altered and changed, they must become New Creatures, they must be no more the
same that they were before: As appears from John the Baptists Exhortation to
the Scribes and Pharisees, whereby we do learn, that if we will have the wrath
of God to be pacified, we must in no wise dissemble, but turn unto him again
with a true and sound Repentance, which may be known and declared by good
Fruits, as by most sure and infallible signs thereof.

This I think is as plain as words can make it, that Repentance, which consists
in a hearty sorrow for all our sins, and in a humble Confession of them to
Almighty God, and in a sincere Faith and Trust in the Mercies of God through
our Lord Jesus Christ, together with an actual amendment of our lives, is
according to the sense of our Church absolutely necessary to obtain the pardon
of our sins, that is, Justification by the free Grace of God.

This has often made me wonder, that any one should affix such a Doctrine as
this to the Church of England, That Repentance it self is not antecedently
necessary to our Justification; I am sure the Learned Bishop Davenant was of
another mind in this point, for he expressly asserts, that there are some Works,
sine quibus Iustificatio nunquam fuit ab ullo mortalium obtenta, nunquam
obtinebitur, De Justit. Habit. and act. cap. 29.
without which Justification never was, and never shall be obtained by any
mortal man;,, among which he reckons true Repentance and Faith, and the love of
God and of our Neighbor: Haec and hujusmodi opera cordis interna sunt omnibus
justificatis necessaria, non quod contineant in se efficaciam seu meritum
Iustificationis, sed quod juxta ordinationem divinam vel requiruntur, ut
conditiones praeviae seu concurrentes, sicuti poenitere and credere, vel ut
effecta a fide justificante necessario manantia, ut amare Deum, etc. i. e.
These and suchlike internal Works of the Heart are necessary to all that are
justified, not that they are meritorious Causes of Justification, but because
according to the Divine Appointment, they are required either as previous or
concurring conditions, such as Repentance and Faith; or as effects, which
necessarily flow from a justifying Faith, such as to love God, etc. Where this
Learned Prelate does expressly assert, that Repentance, as well as Faith, is a
previous Condition of our Justification; and I fear will hereafter be accounted
one of our Innovators.

And that distinction, which the Bishop makes between those Works which are
required as previous Conditions of Justification, as to repent and believe; and
those Works which are necessary Effects of justifying Faith, which must always
be present in the justified Person, as to love God, etc. gives a plain and
easy answer to the grand Exception against the antecedent necessity of
Repentance to our Justification: viz. Because then it must precede Faith it
self, (I suppose because every true Believer is actually justified in the first
instant of his being a true Believer) whereas all good Works, (and therefore
Repentance and Contrition, which are certainly good Works) are the Effects and
Fruits of Faith, and so consequently must follow our Justification by Faith,
unless we will place the Effects before their Cause: But this is absolutely
false, that all good Works are the effects and fruits of justifying Faith: for
there are some good Works which are essential to justifying Faith, and it is
not justifying Faith without them, such as Repentance and Contrition, without
which no Faith is a true justifying Faith; and therefore we may observe in our
Homilies, that sometimes Faith is made an essential part of Repentance,
sometimes Repentance is made essential to a justifying Faith, as appears from
what I have discoursed above.

The reason of the mistake is this, That these men do not distinguish between
the general notion of Faith, and Justifying Faith; Faith in general, as it
signifies a belief of the Being and Providence of God, and the Truth of the
Scriptures, etc. is necessary to produce any good Actions, for without Faith it
is impossible to please God; but this bare Assent of the Understanding is not
justifying Faith, till it excite in us a hearty sorrow for our sins, and
sincere purposes of a New Life, and a great Trust and Affiance in the Mercy of
God, through our Lord Jesus Christ: So that Repentance, and the Purpose of a
New Life, are at least essential to justifying Faith, and not the fruits and
effects of it; but the actual performance of these Vows and Promises, and the
faithful discharge of our Duty to God and Men in a holy and blameless Life, may
be called the effects of justifying Faith, not that they are not as necessary
to a justifying Faith as Repentance is, but because our Justification is begun
without them, (God in infinite Grace and Mercy receiving us into favor upon
our first return to him) though these good Works must necessarily follow, to
complete and perfect our Justification, as it is expressly observed from St.
Chrysostom in the Homily of Good Works, concerning the Thief upon the Cross,
that if he had lived and not regarded Faith, and the Works thereof, he should
have lost his Salvation again. And in this sense we are told in the Homily of
Salvation, That Faith does not shut out the justice of our Good Works,
necessarily to be done afterward, (that is after our Justification) of Duty
toward God. And upon the same account our Church in her XII Article teaches
us. That Good Works are the Fruits of Faith, and follow those who are Justified.

And this gives an easy and plain account of the XIII Article of our Church,
which rejects those Works which are done before Justification, that is, before
a Justifying Faith, as is plain from the Article: Works done before the Grace
of Christ, and the Inspiration of his Spirit, are not pleasant to God,
forasmuch as they spring not of Faith in Jesus Christ; neither do they make men
meet to receive Grace or (as the School-Authors say) deserve Grace of
Congruity, yea rather, for that they are not done as God has willed and
commanded them to be done, we doubt not but that they have the nature of Sin.
The plain meaning of which is this, That Works done before Justifying Faith are
not pleasing to God; that is, whatever Works we do before we repent of our
sins, and purpose to live a New Life, and trust in the Mercy of God, and Merits
of our Savior for Pardon and Acceptance, cannot please God, because such are
not Good Works: for when we reject Works done before Justification, we must not
reject Justifying Faith it self, nor any thing which is necessary and essential
to it, for then we run our selves into such a Labyrinth, out of which we shall
never find a way.

And indeed I find that some men are very sensible what weight our Church lays
upon the necessity of Repentance in order to our Justification, and use some
little Arts to avoid it: for that Description of Faith which is given us in the
first part of the Sermon of Faith, concluding thus: We do trust that our
offenses be continually washed and purged, whenever we repenting truly do
return to him with our whole heart, steadfastly determining with our selves
through his Grace, to obey and serve him in keeping his Commandments, and never
to turn back again to sin: Which maks Repentance of our sins, and a sincere and
steadfast purpose of a new life, antecedently necessary to the justfying Act of
Faith: they use this evasion, that the Homily adds, [Whensoever we repenting
return to him] either with respect to future sins, to the forgiveness of which
we all acknowledge Repentance to be necessary, or else to distinguish a saving
from a counterfeit and sudden Faith, not as if true Evangelical Repentance had
any influence upon the very Act of Justification, as Faith has.

The first account is the strangest, that ever I met with; for there can be no
imaginable reason assigned, why Repentance should be necessary to obtain the
Pardon of those sins, which we commit after Justification, and not necessary to
our first Justification: I am sure neither the Scripture, nor the Articles and
Homilies of our Church, nor the Confessions of any Reformed Churches, which I
ever yet saw, ever made such a distinction. The Commission which our Savior
gave to his Apostles, was to preach Repentance and Forgiveness of sins in his
Name, to the unconverted and unjustified Jews and Heathens; and both the
Homilies of our Church, and the Augustan-Confession, do in express
August-Confess. Art. XX.
words found the Doctrine of Repentance upon that first Commission given to the
Homily of Repentance.
Apostles, and do thence conclude the necessity of Repentance in order to
Forgiveness: for since Justification consists in the forgiveness of our sins, a
repeated Forgiveness is but a repeated Justification of a Sinner, and why that
should be necessary to the after-acts of Justification, which was not necessary
to the first, is beyond my Understanding.

The second account is much better, that it is to distinguish between a saving
and a counterfeit Faith: but then this very distinction confirms the antecedent
necessity of Repentance to Justification: for the difference between a saving
and counterfeit Faith, according to this Account, is, that a saving Faith
supposes Repentance, or includes it in its very nature, but a counterfeit Faith
does not: as for what they add, that Evangelical Repentance has not such an
influence upon our Justification, as Faith has, is none of our present dispute;
if it be but acknowledged to be antecedently necessary, we will consider the
rest hereafter.

And now it is time to proceed to the last thing I proposed, to consider what
our Church attributes to Faith in the matter of our Justification: And to state
this matter plainly, I shall first enquire, in what sense our Church rejects
Works from the Office of Justifying, and attributes it to Faith alone. And
secondly what the Office of Faith is in the Justification of a Sinner.

First, In what sense our Church rejects Works from the Office of Justifying,
and attributes it to Faith alone. And it is easily observed, that our Church
acknowledges the antecedent necessity of some Works to our Justification, as we
are expressly taught in the first part of the Sermon of Salvation: And yet that
Faith does not shut out Repentance, Hope, Love, Dread, and the Fear of God, to
be joined with Faith in every man that is justified, but it shuts them out
from the Office of Justifying: So that although they be all present together in
him that is justified, yet they justify not all together. So that no man must
expect this great Blessing of Justification, unless together with Faith, he
have Repentance, Hope, Love, Dread, and the Fear of God: which supposes, that a
man must be a true Penitent, and a true Lover of God, before he is justified.
Though Repentance and Hope, etc. have no actual influence upon our
Justification, yet they are causae sine quibus non, such causes without which
the effect will never follow, which necessarily intitles them to the nature of
Conditions: for a Condition which has no natural or meritorious Efficiency, is
only a causa sine qua non: and though it is true, that the accidental presence
of one thing with another, which produces any Effect, will not entitle it to
any degree of Efficiency, yet where there is such a natural Union between two
things, that neither of them can act alone, though the effect may more
immediately belong to one than to the other, yet they both concur to it: though
the hand does immediately apprehend any thing, or lay hold on it, yet the
Shoulder and the Arm is naturally necessary to produce this action, because the
Hand cannot move of it self: And if they will allow us this similitude, (which
they themselves sometimes use) that Good Works be the Shoulder and Arm that
upholds Faith, we will allow Faith to be the Hand. And thus it is in Moral
Causes, where the presence of two things, of Faith suppose, and Works, is
necessarily required in order to the same Effect, there must be a concurrence
of both, though it may be in different manners: When our Church asserts the
necessary presence of some internal Graces and Virtues together with Faith, in
him who is to be justified, she plainly acknowledges that we shall never be
justified without them, though not for them, which is all that any one desires,
who denies and rejects the Merits of Good Works.

And as these internal Acts of Repentance, Hope, etc. are antecedently
necessary to Justification, so Good Works must necessarily follow, as we are
taught in the same place: Nor the Faith also does not shut out the Justice of
our Good Works, necessarily to be done afterward of Duty toward God (for we
are most bounden to serve God in doing Good Deeds, commanded by him in his holy
Scripture all the days of our Life) but it excludes them, so that we may not
do them to this intent, to be made good by doing of them: that is, to be
justified by them. And this we are taught is so necessary, that unless these
Good Works follow, as the necessary Fruits of Faith, we shall loose our
Justification again, as you heard above.

In what sense then does our Church reject good Works, and attribute our
Justification to Faith alone? And that we are told over and over in the most
plain and express words; that it is only to take away the Merit of Good Works,
and to attribute our Justification to the free Mercy of God, and Merits of
Christ, not to our own Works and Deservings. Hence it is that Justification by
Works is so often opposed to our Justification by the Mercy of God, and the
Merits of Christ, which are inconsistent in no other sense, but that of Merit:
for though Good Works be supposed the necessary Conditions of Justification,
yet if they be acknowledged so imperfect as not to merit, we shall still need
the Merits of Christ to expiate our sins, and the Mercy of God to pardon them,
and to accept of our imperfect Services.

But the words of the Homily are very Sermon of Salvation, part 2.
express, where after alleging the concurrent Testimonies of the ancient
Fathers, for Justification without Works, by Faith alone, we have this
Explication given of them: Nevertheless this Sentence, that we be justified by
Faith only, is not so meant of them, that the said Justifying Faith is alone in
man, without true Repentance, Hope, Charity, Dread and Fear of God, at any time
and season; nor when they say we be justified freely, they mean not that we
should or might afterward be idle, and that nothing should be required on our
parts afterward: neither they mean not so to be justified without Good Works,
that we should do no Good Works at all: But this saying, that we be justified
by Faith only, freely, and without Works, is spoken for to take away clearly
all Merit of our Works, as being unable to deserve our Justification at Gods
hands, and thereby most plainly to express the weakness of Man, and the
goodness of God, the great infirmity of our selves, and the might and power of
God, the imperfectness of our own Works, and the most abundant Grace of our
Savior Christ, and therefore wholly to ascribe the Merit and Deserving of our
Justification to Christ only, and his most precious bloodshedding.

Hence for a man to be justified by his own Works, is expounded as if we should
affirm, That a man might by his own Works take away and purge his own sins, and
so justify himself: That is, when they reject Justification by Works, they
understand by it a meritorious Justification.

Thus in the third part of the Sermon of Salvation, we are expressly taught,
That the true meaning of this Proposition or Saying, We be justified by Faith
in Christ only (according to the meaning of the old ancient Authors) is this:
We put our Faith in Christ, that we be justified by him only, that we be
justified by Gods free Mercy, and the Merits of our Savior Christ only, and by
no virtue or Good Works of our own, that is in us, or that we can be able to
have, or to do, for to deserve the same, Christ himself only being the Cause
meritorious thereof.

This is so expressly the Doctrine of the Homilies, that I need not multiply
Testimonies for the proof of it; from whence it is evident, that our Church
owns the necessity of Good Works to all intents and purposes, excepting Merit,
and in this sense they reject Faith too, as it is our own Work.

But now because our Church, and all the Reformed Churches, expressly reject
Works in the matter of Justification under the notion of Merit and Deserving,
in which sense alone they are injurious to the Grace of God, and the Merits of
Christ; from whence we argue, that they own the necessity of Works upon all
other Accounts, and reject only the Merit of them: Some tell us, that we should
rather argue, that they put no difference between Works and the Merit of Works,
in the matter of Justification, but equally reject them both: But pray why so?
Truly for no Reason that I know, but that it best serves their Hypothesis.

They acknowledge, that there is a difference between Works and the Merit of
Works, but will by no means own, that St. Paul, or any of the Reformed Churches
made any: which is not very honorably said of them, that they should make no
difference, where there is one: which argues either a great deal of ignorance,
or mere Sophistry. But pray why do they think so? Why because St. Paul always
opposes our Justification by Works, whatever they are, to Justification by
Grace; and therefore by Works he must understand the Merit of Works, because
only Merit is opposed to Grace: So we say too, but what follows from hence?
That the Apostle rejects all Works, though they are separated from the notion
of Merit? This is to make the Apostle argue very absurdly, that because he
rejects Works, when they are inconsistent with Grace, therefore he should
reject Works, when they are not inconsistent with Grace, as by this Argument
they are not, when they are separated from the notion and opinion of Merit. And
what they add, That it is plain, that the Apostle excludes all sorts of Works,
of what kind soever, from our Justification, is very true, but then they are
all sorts of Meritorious Works; that is, such a perfect, legal, unsinning
Righteousness, as needs not the Grace and Mercy of God, not such an Evangelical
Righteousness, as ows its acceptance to the Grace of God, and the Merits of
Christ.

The only Argument they have to prove that the Church of England, and all the
Reformed Churches, make no difference between Works, and the Merit of Works, is
because wherever they reject Justification by Works, they expressly mention
their Merit and Deserving; which is the best Argument that can be, that they do
make a difference, otherwise there had been no need of that Explication,
especially when they assert the necessity of Good Works upon all other
accounts, as our Church expressly does.

In the third part of the Sermon of Salvation, we find these words: Truth it
is, that our own Works do not justify us, to speak properly of our
Justification, (that is to say) our Works do not merit or deserve Remission of
our sins, and make us of unjust, just before God: What need had there been of
this Explication, to speak properly of Justification, that is to say, to merit
and deserve, if our Church had apprehended no difference between Works and
Merit, between a proper and improper Justification by Works?

I am sure the Learned Bishop Davenant makes a great difference between the
necessity of Works, and the Merit of Works, in the Justification of a Sinner:
De Justit. Habit. and act. cap. 31.
for in answer to that Question, Utrum bona Opera dici possint ad
Iustificationem vel Salutem necessaria? Whether Good Works may be said to be
necessary to Justification or Salvation? In his first Conclusion he tells us,
that in dispute with the Papists it is not safe to say so, because they always
by necessary, understand necessary as Causes, vera and propria sua dignitate
meritorias humanae salutis, which by their own proper worth and dignity merit
Salvation: What need had there been of this Caution, if the necessity of Good
Works to Justification, and the Merit of Works, had been the same?

In the fourth Conclusion he tells us, That no Good Works are necessary to
Justification, if by necessary we understand sub ratione causae meritoriae
necessariae, as necessary meritorious Causes.

And in the fifth Conclusion he expressly tells us, Bona quaedam Opera sunt
necessaria ad Iustificationem, ut conditiones concurrentes, vel praecursoriae,
licet non sint necessaria, ut causae efficientes, aut meritoriae; That some
Good Works are necessary to Justification, as previous or concurring Causes,
though not as efficient or meritorious. So that it seems, that this distinction
between the Necessity and Merit of Works, was known and defended by the great
Patrons of our Church; and we have no reason to think, that when our Church
does so expressly reject Works only under the notion of Merit, she understood no
difference between Necessity and Merit.

And I find in an ancient Book, entitled, Reformatio legum, Ecclesiasticarum,
which was composed by Archbishop Cranmer and Peter Martyr, and some other
Bishops and Learned Men of this Church, by the Authority of King Edward the
Sixth, that where they give an account of those Heresies, which ought to be
suppressed, all they say about Justification, is no more but this, Deinde nec
illi sunt audiendi, quorum impietas salutarem and in sacris Scripturis fundatam
Iustificationis nostrae doctrinam oppugnant, in qua tenendum est, non operum
momentis Iustitiam hominum collocari: i. e. Neither must we hearken to them,
who impiously oppose that saving Doctrine of Justification, which is founded on
the Scriptures, concerning which we must believe, that the Righteousness or
Justification of Men does not depend on the Merits of their Works. So that they
only reject the Merit of Works in the matter of Justification.

The Confessions of Foreign Reformed Churches are as plain and express in this
matter, as the Homilies of our Church. In the Apology for the
Augustan-Confession we are told, That good Works are not pretium, nec
propitiatio propter quam detur De dilectione and impletione legis.
remissio peccatorum: They are not the price nor the propitiation for our sins.
And the reason they assign, why they oppose Justification by Works, is, because
it detracts from the Glory of Christ, and sets up our Works in competition with
Christ, utrum fiducia collocanda sit in Christum, an in opera nostra, Whether
we should put our trust in Christ, or in our own Works: which can be understood
only in that sense of the Merit of Works, and is no Argument against Works,
when they are subordinate to the Merit and Grace of Christ.

But not to trouble my Readers with many Responsio ad argum, adversar.
quotations, I shall add but one more, which is their Answer to that Objection
from St. James, who expressly says, That we are justified by Works, and not by
Faith only: Si non assuant adversarii suas opiniones de meritis operum, Iacobi
verba nihil habent incommodi, etc. If our Adversaries would not annex their own
opinions concerning Merit of Works, there is no inconvenience in St. James his
words. So that they were not shy of this expression, of being justified by
Works, so men would not imagine, that their Justification were owing to the
Merit of Works; which is no less than a demonstration, that they made a
distinction between Works and Merit, in the matter of Justification.

But there is one very surprising Argument to prove that there can be no
difference between Works and Merit, in the matter of Justification; and it is
this: That if we be justified by Works, without respect to their Merit, then we
may as well be justified by Works of an indifferent nature, which have no
intrinsic worth and goodness in them, as by the most real and substantial
Righteousness; for take away Merit, and it is all one what the nature of the
Work be: Now the only difficulty of framing an Answer to this Argument, is to
find what there is to be answered: To be justified by Works without Merit, if
any men phrase it so, can signify no more but this, that God for Christ's sake
forgives the sins, and accepts the Persons of those, who though they be guilty
of many Infirmites, yet do heartily and sincerely endeavor to please him, and
by the practice of a real Righteousness do every day aspire after a greater
likeness to him; now the question is, Why (since these men do not merit such
favors) should God prefer them before those, who busy themselves in some
external Rites and Ceremonies, or Judaical Observances, which have no real
Goodness in them* And I can give no other account of it, but that it is for the
same reason, for which God prefers an Evangelical before a Ceremonial
Righteousness; and if there be no reason for this (excepting Merit) I confess
the Argument is unanswerable.

Is there no reason why God should prefer the internal Habits of Grace and
Virtue, which are a participation of his own Nature, and the beginnings (though
but weak and imperfect) of a new and spiritual Life, and the best
qualifications for future Glory and Happiness, before some external Rites and
Usages, which have no real worth? Is there no reason, why God should prefer the
substantial Acts of Piety and Charity, which are useful to Men, and an
imitation of the bounty and goodness of God, before picking up straws, and such
useless and ludicrous Employments? Is there no difference between Works which
are imperfectly good, and Works which have no goodness in them? But I think it
is a Work of Supererogation, though not very meritorious, to answer such an
Argument.

But now in requital of this Argument against the distinction between Works and
Merit, I shall give another for it, and that is, That our Church makes nothing
more necessary on our part to our Salvation, than to our Justification: and
therefore when she rejects Good Works from the Office of Justifying, if she
intends to deny the Necessity, as well as the Merit of Good Works, she must be
understood to deny the necessity of Good Works to our Salvation also, which is
an express Contradiction to her declared Doctrine.

There is no such distinction as this between Justification and Salvation, to
be found in any of the Articles or Homilies of our Church, which is a good
Argument that our Church knew no such distinction, for if she had, we cannot
but think, that she would have made use of it in express terms at one time or
other; there being the same occasion for it then, that there is now. The Sermon
or Homily of Justification is called the Sermon of Salvation: and these words
Justification and Salvation are promiscuously used in the Homily it self: Thus
in the third part of the Sermon of Salvation, we have these words at the
beginning: It has been manifestly declared unto you, that no man can fulfill
the Law of God, and therefore by the Law all men are condemned: whereupon it
follows necessarily, that some other thing should be required for our
SALVATION than the Law; and that is a true and lively Faith in Christ, bringing
forth good, Works, and a Life according to Gods Commandments: Where Salvation
must of necessity signify, what at other times is called Justification; for
our Church tells us, that we cannot be saved by the Works of the Law, because
we cannot fulfill the Law, which is the reason at other times assigned, why we
cannot be Justified by the Law. Because all men be Sinners, and Offenders
against God, and Breakers of his Law, therefore can no man by his own Acts,
Words and Deeds (seem they never so good) be justified and made righteous
before God: Which are the very first words of the Sermon of Salvation: And what
is here required for our Salvation, is the very same, which in other places our
Church requires to our Justification, viz. A true and lively Faith in Christ,
bringing forth Good Works, and a Life according to Gods Commandments.

Thus in the first part of the Sermon of Good Works, our Church cites those
words of S. Chrysostom: I can show a man, that by Faith without Works lived and
came to heaven, but without Faith never any man had Life: the Thief that was
hanged when Christ suffered, did believe only, and the most merciful God
justified him: this is an Example of living and going to Heaven by Faith
without Works, that the Thief was justified by Faith only; so that to be
justified by Faith, and to live and go to Heaven by Faith, it seems are
equivalent expressions, as appears also from what follows: And because no man
shall say again, that he lacked time to do good Works, for else he would have
done them: Truth it is, and I will not contend therein, but this I will surely
affirm, that Faith only SAVED him: So that to be justified, and to be saved by
Faith, still signifies the same thing; and in the same sense wherein our Church
affirms, that we may be justified by Faith only, she affirms, that we may be
saved by Faith only, which therefore must not exclude the Necessity, but the
Merit of Good Works; and whenever Faith only will not justify, it will not
save neither, as it follows; If he had lived, and not regarded Faith, and the
Works thereof, he should have lost his Salvation again: That is, his
Justification, as appears from the whole Discourse.

The Learned Bishop Davenant certainly was not acquainted with this
distinction, when he proposed that Question, Utrum bona Opera sint necessaria
ad Iustificationem vel Salutem, Whether Good Works be necessary to
Justification or Salvation, and answers it without making any difference
between their necessity to Justification and to Salvation, which is not very
reconcilable with our Modern Divinity, in which good Works are so far from
being owned necessary, that they are judged dangerous and hurtful in reference
to Justification, though they may be necessary to our Salvation.

And indeed this distinction between Justification and Salvation was on purpose
invented to mollify some harsh expressions of later Divines, who rejected good
Works and a holy Life, from having any thing to do in the Justification of a
Sinner: This gave birth to the Antinomian Heresy, which wholly rejects the Law
and good Works, and under a pretense of advancing the freeness of Gods Grace,
delivers Believers from all the necessary Obligations of Duty and Obedience; to
prevent the infection of this Doctrine, they invented this distinction between
Justification and Salvation; and asserted, that though Good Works are not
necessary to our Justification, yet they are to our Salvation; which is as much
as to say, that though our sins shall be pardoned, and our persons accepted,
and accounted perfectly righteous, and have an actual Right and Title to future
Glory without Holiness and Obedience, yet we shall never have an actual
Possession of Glory, but upon the condition of an holy Life; which were it
true, would be a greater blemish to the Wisdom and Justice of God, than the
necessity of Holiness to our Justification, can be to the freeness of his Grace.

Having explained in what sense our Church rejects Good Works from the Office
of Justifying, viz. That nothing which we can do is so perfect as to merit and
deserve Justification, it is time to consider what our Church attributes to
Faith in the Justification of a Sinner, and upon what account she affirms, That
Faith only justifies: And I cannot better explain this, than in the words of
the Homily it self, which are these: Truth it is, that our Sermon of Salvation,
part 3.
own Works do not justify us, to speak properly of Justification, (that is to
say) our Works do not merit or deserve remission of our sins, and make us of
unjust just before God: But God of his own Mercy through the only Merits and
Deservings of his Son Jesus Christ does justify us. Nevertheless because Faith
does directly send us to Christ for remission of our sins, and that by Faith
given us of God we embrace the Promise of Gods Mercy, and of the remission of
our sins, (which thing none other of our Virtues or Works properly does)
therefore Scripture uses to say, That Faith without Works does justify; and
forasmuch that it is all one Sentence in effect, to say Faith without Works,
and only Faith does justify us: therefore the old ancient Fathers of the
Church from time to time, have uttered our Justification with this speech, Only
Faith justifies us; meaning none other thing than St. Paul meant, when he
said, Faith without works justifies us. And because all this is brought to
pass through the only Merits and Deservings of our Savior Christ, and not
through our Merits, or through the merit of any Virtue that we have within us,
or of any Work that comes from us, therefore in that respect of Merit and
Deserving, we forsake (as it were) altogether again, Faith, Works, and all
other Virtues. For our own imperfection is so great, through the corruption of
original sin, that all is unperfect that is within (...), Faith, Charity, Hope,
Dread, Thoughts, Words, and Works; and therefore not apt to merit or deserve
any part of our Justification for us. And this form of speaking use we, in
humbling of our selves to God, and to give all the Glory to our Savior Christ,
which is best worthy to have it.

These words are so plain, that they need no comment; and there are three
things contained in them, which do evidently declare the sense of our Church in
this matter.

First, That our Church does not attribute our Justification to Faith, upon
account of any Merit or Desert in Faith above other Virtues and Graces: for in
respect of Merit and Deserving, we are taught to forsake again Faith it self,
as well as Works, and all other Virtues: As our Works do not merit or deserve
remission of our sins, no more does Faith.

Secondly, That the reason why our Church attributes our Justification to Faith
only, is to declare that we owe our Justification wholly to the Mercy of God,
and the Merits of Christ: That God of his own Mercy, through the only Merits
and Deservings of his Son Jesus Christ does justify us. And thus immediately
before we are told, That the meaning of this Proposition or saying, We be
justified by Faith in Christ only, (according to the meaning of the old ancient
Authors) is this, we put our Faith in Christ, that we be justified by him only,
that we be justified by Gods free Mercy, and the Merits of our Savior Christ
only, and by no virtue or good Works of our own, that is in us, or that we can
be able to have or to do, for to deserve the same; Christ himself only being
the Cause meritorious thereof. So that whoever attributes the Justification of
a Sinner wholly to the Mercy of God, and the Merits of Christ, without any
other intervening Merit or Desert, though he may differ in the phrase and
manner of expression, yet does acknowledge all that our Church means, by being
justified by Faith only, and cannot justly be charged with deserting or
opposing the Doctrine of our Church.

And therefore, Thirdly, the true Reason why our Church attributes our
Justification to Faith only, and not to Justice, or Charity, or the Love of
God, or any other Grace or Virtue, is this, because Faith only connects the
necessity of Obedience and a Holy Life with the Mercy of God, and the Merits of
Christ; and thereby both secures and enforces our Duty, and attributes the
glory of all to Free Grace, which is the great design of our Church. For
Justifying Faith, according to the sense of our Church, (as abundantly appears
from what I have discoursed above) includes in its own nature Repentance and
the Love of God, and the sincere purposes of a new Life, which as opportunity
serves, must actually produce all the Fruits of Righteousness; for without this
we cannot embrace the Promise of Pardon and Forgiveness, which is made upon the
condition of Repentance and a new Life: But then it is the proper office of
Faith, when we have done our best, to depend upon the Mercy of God through our
Lord Jesus Christ, to pardon our many sins and defects, and to accept and
reward our imperfect services; which attributes the glory of all not to our
Merits and Deserts, but to the Grace and Mercy of God. Thus our Church tells
us, that the reason why Faith only is said to justify, is because Faith does
directly send us to Christ for Remission of our Sins, and that by Faith given
us of God, we embrace the Promise of Gods Mercy, and of the Remission of our
Sins, which thing none other of our Virtues or Works properly does: That is,
Justice or Charity, or any other Virtue does not in its own nature include a
dependence on the Grace and Mercy of God for its Acceptance and Reward; and
therefore should we be justified by these Virtues, considered as distinct from
Faith, which alone embraces the Promise of Mercy, we must be justified by their
proper Merit and Desert, not by the Mercy of God, and the Merits of Christ. But
now Faith is not only an active and vigorous Principle of a new Life, but in
its own nature includes a necessary dependence on the Promise of Pardon: it
sends to Christ for the Remission of our sins, not immediately, for this is not
the first act of Faith; but when we have done our best, it teaches us to
renounce the Merit of our own Works, and to trust in the Mercy of God through
our Lord Jesus Christ for our Pardon and Reward, which ascribes the Praise of
all to the Mercy of God.

Upon the same account our Church tells us, that Faith does not shut out
Repentance, Sermon of Salvation, part 1.
Love, Dread, and the Fear of God to be joined with Faith in every man that is
justified; but yet it shuts them out from the office of Justifying; so that
though they be all present in him that is justified, yet they justify not all
together. Where by these good Works being joined with Faith, and being present
in him that is justified, is meant, that they are essential to a Justifying
Faith, and must be present, as antecedent qualifications or conditions, without
which God will not justify us; as appears from what I have discourst above
concerning the nature of Justifying Faith, which includes Repentance and the
Love of God, etc. as antecedently necessary to our embracing the Promise of
Pardon and Forgiveness, which is not the first, but the last and completing act
of Faith: For if these good Works be not one way or other necessary to our
Justification, no reason can be assigned why they should be present in him that
is justified; for Faith might then justify alone without the Presence, as well
as without the Merit and Efficacy of our good Works.

And therefore when Faith is said to shut out these good Works from the office
of Justifying, that though they be all present, yet they do not justify all
together; the design is not to deny the Necessity, but the Merit of good Works.
This is plain from the Reason, which is immediately assigned, why these good
Works cannot justify, because all the good Works we can do be imperfect, and
therefore not able to deserve our Justification; which is the constant Doctrine
of the Homilies: For our Church by Justification perpetually understands a
meritorious, and not a conditional Justification, and therefore whatever
justifies in this sense must by its own Virtue or Merit expiate our sins, which
is the reason alleged, why no man can make himself righteous (that is,
justify himself) by his own Works, neither in part nor in the whole, for that
were the greatest Presumption in Man, that Antichrist could set up against God,
to affirm that a man might by his own Works take away and purge his own sins,
and so justify himself. SO, that is, by the Merit and Virtue of his own Works.

And Faith it self considered as our own Act, has no greater privilege upon
this account, than any other Grace or Virtue; for in respect of Merit and
Deserving we forsake altogether again Faith, Works and all other Virtues. Faith
does not justify as our own Act, that is, it does not merit our Justification,
as it must do, if it justify as our own Act; which in the sense of our Church
signifies, that we do something so meritorious, as to deserve Justification at
Gods hands: But now Justification Sermon of Salvation, part 2.
is the office of God only, and is not a thing which we render to him, (that
is, we can offer him nothing of our own to merit our Justification) but which
we receive from him, not which we give to him, but which we take of him, by his
free Mercy, and by the only Merits of his dearly beloved Son our only Redeemer,
Iustifier and Savior Jesus Christ.

But for this reason Faith only is said to justify, and to shut out our own
Works, and itself also considered as our own Act, from the office of
justifying; because though it strongly enforce the Necessity of good Works, yet
in its own nature it excludes all opinion of Merit and Desert. For Faith has a
necessary respect to the Promise of Mercy and Forgiveness, and whoever
acknowledges that he ows his Justification to the Mercy of God, who for the
sake of Christ pardons his Sins, and rewards his Imperfect Services (as all
those must do, who hope to be saved by Faith in the notion of our Church) does
plainly confess, that his Works are imperfect, and cannot deserve his
Justification, which takes away all opinion of Merit from our selves, and
attributes the glory of all to the Mercy of God, and the Merits of Christ.

I shall only observe three things from this Discourse, which are very material
to our present purpose.

First, that our Church was not acquainted with that Distinction in the modern
sense of it, that we are justified fide sola, but not solitaria; by Faith
alone, but not by that Faith which is alone: the meaning of which according to
some Modern Divines is this, That we are justified only by that particular Act
of Faith, which apprehends the Righteousness of Christ, and relies and rolls
itself on Christ for Salvation, and applies his Merits and Righteousness to the
Soul; without any regard to Repentance and the Love of God, or any other Grace
or Virtue: That though at the same time God infuse the habits of all Graces and
Virtues into a justified person, yet in the Act of justifying, he has no
regard at all to Repentance or any other Grace; but we are justified in order
of nature before these are infused into us, and without any respect to them:
And some men would willingly affix this Notion, as absurd as it is, to our
Church, because she only requires the presence of these Graces and Virtues in
the justified person, but shuts them out from the office of Justifying. But I
have made it appear, that these words admit a better sense, and that
Justification by Faith only in the modern Notion of it, so as to exclude the
antecedent Necessity of Repentance, or any other internal Grace or Virtue, is
contrary to the constant doctrine of our Church which requires the presence of
these Graces, as antecedent conditions or qualifications, though it shut them
out from being the meritorious Causes of Justification.

And to confirm this, I observe secondly, that our Church does not attribute
our Justification to any particular Act of Faith: She frequently indeed
inculcates the embracing of the Promise of Pardon and Forgiveness, as essential
to a justifying Faith; but the reason of that is not because that particular
Act justifies us, but to attribute our Justification not to the Merit of our
own works, but to the Mercy of God: But she expressly affirms, that Faith does
not justify as our own Act; that Justification is not the office of Man, but
of God; and if we be not justified by Faith, as our own Act, much less can any
particular Act of Faith (which if it be considered as an Act, must be
considered as our own Act) justify; which overthrows that Instrumentality of
Faith in Justification, which these men talk of: but the plain meaning of our
being justified by Faith only is this, that God will pardon our sins, and
reward us with eternal life, if we repent of our sins, and believe and obey the
Gospel of his Son, trusting wholly in the Mercies of God, and in the Merits and
Mediation of our Lord Jesus Christ, as it is expressed at large in the Homily:
That the true understanding Sermon. of Salvation part 2.
and meaning of our being justified by Faith without Works, or by Faith in
Christ only, is this, that although we hear Gods Word, and believe it, although
we have Faith, Hope, Charity, and do never so many good Works thereunto; yet we
must renounce the Merit of all the said Virtues, of Faith, Hope, Charity, and
all other Virtues and good deeds, which we either have done, shall do, or can
do, as things that be far too weak and insufficient and imperfect to deserve
Remission of our Sins, and our Justification; and therefore we must trust only
in Gods Mercy, and that Sacrifice which our High Priest and Savior Jesus
Christ the Son of God once offered for us upon the Cross, to obtain thereby
Gods Grace and Remission, as well of our Original Sin in Baptism, as of all
actual Sins committed by us after Baptism, if we truly repent and unfeignedly
turn to him. All this is called being justified by Faith only, which includes a
renouncing the Merits and Deserts of our own Works, but first requires that we
should do good Works, before we renounce the Merit of them; and an affiance in
the Mercy of God for Pardon and Forgiveness, upon the conditions of Repentance
and a new Life. This is all I contend for, which is the Ancient Catholic
Doctrine of our Church, against those modern notions of Reliance and Recumbency,
or the virtue of any particular Act of Faith in the Justification of a Sinner.

Thirdly, I observe, that should any man affirm in express words, that we are
justified by Works as well as by Faith, meaning no more by it, than that good
Works are the necessary Conditions, not the meritorious Causes of our
Justification, though he would differ in the manner of expression, yet he would
agree with our Church in the true notion of Justification; whereas those who
use the same phrase of being justified by Faith only, and by Faith without
Works, thereby excluding the antecedent necessity of Repentance and Holiness to
our Justification, though they retain the same form of words, yet renounce the
constant Doctrine of our Church, and are the only Apostates and Innovators.
Which may satisfy any man, how unjustly I am charged with corrupting the
Doctrine of our Church, when I have only expressed the true sense and meaning of
it in such words, as are less liable to be mistaken; and how vainly my
Adversaries pretend to be such Obedient Sons of the Church of England, when
under an Orthodox Form of Words, they have introduced such Doctrins as are
diametrically opposite to the declared sense of this Church.

After this large and particular Account of the Doctrine of the Church of
England concerning the Justification of a Sinner, it is time in the second
place to consider, how the state of the Controversy is altered at this day;
and how those men, whom I oppose, have corrupted the Doctrine, as well as
rejected the Authority of our Church: And though I have already given
sufficient Intimations of this, yet it may be of great use more particularly to
show how directly opposite these new and fantastic Notions are to the
established Doctrine contained in our Articles and Homilies, which though it
would admit of a very large Discourse, I shall comprize in as few words as may
be.

And first whereas our Church expressly asserts, that in the Justification of a
Sinner, on Gods part is required Mercy and Grace; Justification consisting in
the free Pardon of all our sins: Mr. Ferguson (very agreeably indeed to his own
Principles) expressly asserts, that Justification does not consist in the Pardon
of sin, nor is it the result of Mercy, but the offspring of Justice. Remission
(as he acknowledges) Vide supra p. 152. etc.
is the result of Mercy, and the act of one exercising Favor; but
Justification is the off spring of Justice, and imports one transacting with us
in a juridical way without the infringement of Law or Equity. This Notion I
have examined already, and shall add nothing further for the Confutation of it:
It is directly contrary to the Doctrine of our Homilies, and I hope that is
Argument enough with these men, who pretend such a mighty veneration for the
Ancient and Catholic Doctrine of our Church. But then if any man should wonder
(as well he may) how a Sinner should be justified in this Law-notion according
to the strict Rules of Justice, that is, that a Sinner is justified, not by
being pardoned, but by being acquitted and absolved, as an innocent man, who
has never offended; the account of this will farther discover what Friends they
are to the Doctrine of our Church.

For secondly, whereas the Church of England requires no more on Christ's part,
but Justice, or the Satisfaction of Gods Justice, or the Price of our
Redemption, which makes him the meritorious Cause of our Justification, that
God for Christ's sake forgives the sins of true Penitents; these men place our
Justification in the Imputation of Christ's personal Righteousness to us. They
tell us, that Christ as our Surety and Mediator has fulfilled all
Righteousness for us, and in our stead; and that by being clothed with his
perfect Righteousness, we are accounted perfectly righteous; and so are
justified, not as Malefactors, when they are pardoned, but as righteous and
innocent men, who are acquitted and absolved. And I have already informed Mr.
Ferguson, how effectually this Notion undermines Sup. p. 156
the necessity of an inherent Righteousness.

To be justified by the Merits of Christ, signifies no more than to be
justified by the gracious Terms and Conditions of the Gospel, which is founded
on the Merits of Christ, which was purchased and sealed with his meritorious
Blood: For the Merits of Christ do not immediately justify any man, but
whereas strict Justice will not admit of Repentance, nor accept of an
imperfect, though sincere Obedience, God has for the sake of Christ who has
expiated our sins by his Death, entered into a Covenant of Grace and Mercy,
wherein he promises Pardon to true Penitents; and this necessarily requires an
inherent Holiness not to merit, but to qualify us for the Grace of God: But if
we be made righteous by a perfect Righteousness imputed to us, if this will
answer all the demands of Law and Justice, what need is there of an imperfect
Righteousness of our own?

The Righteousness of Christ imputed to us makes us righteous as Christ is, and
what need is there then of any Righteousness of our own? which would be
according to the Proverb to burn day, and to light up Candles in the Sun.

Dr. Owen takes notice of this Objection, and pretends to give an Answer to it,
which must be a little considered, for a little will serve the turn. And first
he observes, that here is a great difference, if it were no more than that this
Righteousness Commun. p. 187.
was inherent in Christ and properly his own, it is only reckoned and imputed
to us, or freely bestowed on us. But does not this Imputation make it ours? How
then can we answer the demands of the Law with it? Is any thing the less ours,
because it is not originally ours, but so by Gift? And the Doctor was sensible
that this Answer would not do, and therefore secondly he tells us, the Truth
is, that Christ was not righteous with that Righteousness for himself, but for
us. How plain are things when men will speak out! So that now it seems this
Righteousness is not so properly Christ's Righteousness as ours: he had no need
to fulfill all Righteousness for himself, but for us, as our Mediator and
Surety: So that here can be no comparison between the Righteousness of Christ
inherent in him, and imputed to us; because it is not so much his
Righteousness, as ours. But was not Christ personally righteous with this
Righteousness? Did he so fulfill Righteousness for us, that he himself had no
interest in it? Can it be inherent in him, and he not righteous by it? And if
Christ in his private capacity, as a man subject to the Law, were righteous
with that very Righteousness, which makes us righteous, then we are righteous
as Christ is, and not only righteous with his Righteousness, which he wrought
for us, and that completely, but righteous with the very same Righteousness,
that makes him righteous; which excludes indeed all comparison, as the Doctor
well observes, because we cannot so properly compare a thing with it self, but
it demonstrates the Identity or Sameness of this Righteousness.

And here unless I will prove my self an arrant Coward, I must accept that
Challenge the Doctor has sent me to stand to that Resolution I gave in my
former Discourse to that Question, What Influence the Vindicat. p. 232.
Sacrifice of Christ's Death, and the Righteousness of his Life have upon our
Acceptance with God? Which signifies no more than what is meant by our being
saved by the Merits and Righteousness of Christ; and the Answer I gave to it is
this, That all I can find in Scripture about it is, that to this we ow the
Covenant of Grace: that God being well pleased with the Obedience of Christ's
Life, and with the Sacrifice of his Death, for his sake entered into a new
Covenant with Mankind, wherein he promises Pardon of Sin and Eternal Life to
those who believe and obey the Gospel. Now I would desire the Doctor to take
notice, that I stand to this, and accept his Challenge, let him choose what
seconds or thirds or fourths he pleases. This Assertion (the Doctor says)
cannot be reconciled to common Sense, or the fundamental Principles of
Christian Religion. And indeed he has discovered a great many Absurdities in
it, which are enough to put any man out of conceit with such a Doctrine; for
hence it follows (if we will believe him, for we have only his bare word for
it) That God entered into a new Covenant originally only for the sake of those
things, whereby that Covenant was ratified and confirmed. But how does this
follow? Did I ever affirm, that the Death of Christ did only ratify and
confirm the Covenant? Do I not every where assert that Christ's Death did
procure and purchase, as well as seal the Covenant of Grace? And I hope God may
be said to enter into Covenant for the sake of a meritorious Cause. What he
means by Gods originally entering into Covenant, I cannot tell, unless it be,
that this was the first moving cause of Gods entering into Covenant: but this
can not be attributed to the Death of Christ upon any account, but to that free
Grace which first contrived the way of our Recovery, and sent Christ into the
world to accomplish it.

But however, does it not follow from this Assertion, That Christ was so the
Mediator Ibid.
of the new Covenant, that he died not for the Redemption of Transgressions
under the first Covenant, whereby the whole Consideration of his Satisfaction,
and of Redemption properly so called, is excluded; that there is no
consideration to be had of his Purchase of the Inheritance of Grace and Glory,
with many other things of the same importance. I see unless the Doctor get a
very good Second, there is no great danger in accepting his Challenge: for is
there any appearance of consequence in this, that because Christ by his Death
purchased and sealed the new Covenant, that therefore he did not die for the
Redemption of sins under the first Covenant, nor to purchase the Inheritance of
Grace and Glory? That which purchases a Covenant, purchases every thing
contained in it: Now the new Covenant contains the Promise of Forgiveness of
sin, and therefore whatever sins are pardoned in the new Covenant, were
expiated by the Death of Christ, without which there is no Remission, and
consequently could be no Promise of Remission: The new Covenant contains the
Promises of Grace and Glory, and therefore Grace and Glory are as much the
purchase of Christ's Death, as the new Covenant is.

The plain account of the matter is this, That Christ has expiated our sins by
his meritorious Death and Sufferings, and has purchased the Pardon of sin and
eternal Life; and whatever Christ has purchased by his Death, God has
promised to bestow on us in the new Covenant: So that the whole virtue of
Christ's Death is contained in the Covenant of Grace, i. e. whatever he has
purchased for us by his Death is there promised, and we must expect no other
benefit by the Death of Christ, than to be saved according to the conditions of
the new Covenant, which signifies the same thing with being justified and saved
by the Merits of Christ; and convinces us of the necessity of inherent
Holiness, which is the condition of the Gospel Covenant.

The last Absurdity the Doctor has discovered in my Assertion, argues him to be
a man of a very deep reach; That the Gospel or the Doctrine of the Gospel is the
new Covenant, which is only a perspicuous Declaration of it: Now suppose this
were never so great an Absurdity, how am I concerned in it? when I expressly
say, that the new Covenant (let it be what it will) is owing to the Merits and
Righteousness of Christ: Though it is a mighty subtle Distinction between the
new Covenant, and the perspicuous Declaration of it; which is like
distinguishing between a Law or Contract, and the Words whereby it is
expressed: How easy is it for such nice Metaphysical Wits to find or make
Absurdities in any thing!

But to proceed, I observe thirdly, that whereas our Church attributes our
Justification to such a Faith as comprehends in its notion Repentance and the
Love of God, and all internal Graces and Virtues, and a sincere purpose and
resolution to reform our Lives and external Conversation, and makes all this
absolutely necessary to our Justification; these men on the contrary attribute
our Justification to a particular Act of Faith, which they call a fiducial
Reliance or Recumbency on Christ for Salvation, abstracted from Repentance or
the Love of God, or any oath Grace or Virtue. And this I confess is very
agreeable to their notion of Justification by the Imputation of Christ's
personal Righteousness to us; for if we are made righteous only by being
clothed with the perfect Righteousness of Christ, nothing more can be required
of us in order to our Justification, but to apply the Righteousness of Christ
to our selves, which they tell us is done by coming to Christ for Salvation, by
receiving Christ, by resting and relying and rolling on Christ: There is no use
of Repentance or Charity or the Love of God in this affair, for they cannot
apply the Righteousness of Christ to us. If we come to Christ for
Righteousness, we must come without any Righteousness of our own: And yet it is
hard to understand how this fiducial Reliance on Christ can apply his
Righteousness to us; a confident Persuasion that Christ is ours may make a
fanciful application of his Righteousness to us, but a mere Reliance on Christ
makes no application, but only signifies a Hope, that it shall be applied: And
if they will be true to their Principles, that we are justified by the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to us, which is God's act, whereby he
applies the Righteousness of Christ, I cannot understand how we can be
justified by applying his Righteousness to our selves by Faith, which, if it
have any sense, must signify our imputing the Righteousness of Christ to our
selves (for the Righteousness of Christ can be applied to us only by
Imputation) which makes our Justification our own Act, and not Gods: For it is
as absurd to the full to say, that Faith is an Instrument in doing that which
is entirely Gods act, or that our Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to our
selves is an Instrument of Gods imputing his Righteousness to us. And then it
is worth considering which of these two Imputations must go first; if we apply,
that is impute, the Righteousness of Christ to our selves before God has
imputed it, this is a false Confidence and Presumption; if God imputes it
first, then we are actually justified, and there needs no Imputation or
Application of Faith to make this Righteousness ours: all that can be said in
this case, is what the Antinomians affirm, that we are first justified before
we believe, and that Faith is only a Sign or Evidence, not an Instrument of our
Justification.

But to let pass the Absurdities of this Doctrine, every one may perceive how
different this notion is from the sense of the Church of England, which does
not attribute our Justification to Faith as our own Act, much less to any
particular Act of Faith; but by Justification by Faith only intends no more
than that God will pardon our sins, if we repent of them, and reform our Lives,
and trust in the Mercies of God through the Merits and Mediation of our Lord
Jesus Christ: according to the sense of our Church, the sole object of our
trust is the Mercy of God through the Merits of Christ, and therefore the
proper Act of Faith is to embrace the Promise of Pardon upon the conditions of
Repentance and a new Life; we must first repent of our sins, and reform our
Lives, and then rely on the Mercy of God for our Pardon and Reward. But
according to this new Divinity, the sole object of our trust and reliance is
the perfect and personal Righteousness of Christ, which shuts out the Mercy of
God, and the meritorious Death and Sacrifice of Christ, and the Promises of
Pardon, and the necessity of an inherent and personal Righteousness, as
abundantly appears from what I have discourst above.

But fourthly, whereas our Church makes Christ only the meritorious cause of
our Justification, but still requires on our part Faith and Repentance and the
Love of God, as antecedent conditions of our Justification, these men found all
our hopes of Justification immediately on the Person of Christ. Every good
Christian hopes to be justified and saved by Christ, but not to be immediately
saved by Christ, i. e. by a bare Union to his Person, but by believing his
Gospel and obeying his Laws, which are necessarily required on our part to give
us an Interest in his Merits and Righteousness: but to assert that nothing is
necessary to our Justification, but to apply Christ and his Righteousness to
our selves by a fiducial Reliance and Recumbency, is to place our hopes
immediately in the Person of Christ, which is the foundation of Antinomianism.

For this reason among others, I charged them in my former Discourse with
setting up the Person of Christ in opposition to his Gospel, and making a new
Religion of the Person of Christ distinct from and contrary to the Religion of
his Gospel. For the Gospel requires a great many previous conditions to entitle
us to the Merits and Righteousness of Christ, as that we must repent of our
sins and reform our Lives, and become new Creatures, and then God will pardon
and reward us for the sake of Christ; but if an immediate Application of the
Righteousness of Christ to our selves by a fanciful and Enthusiastic Faith
will make all Christ ours, this makes all the conditions of the Gospel void and
useless, and sets up the Person of Christ and his Personal Righteousness
instead of his Laws and Religion. The Gospel attributes the Pardon of our sins,
and the Acceptance of our imperfect Services to the virtue and efficacy of
Christ's Sacrifice and Righteousness, and thus we are made righteous by Christ,
as by a meritorious Cause: But in this way the Righteousness of Christ must
serve instead of a personal and inherent Righteousness, which makes us so
innocent, that we need no Pardon, and so perfectly righteous, that we merit a
Reward.

This I take to be the grand Miscarriage in these men's Divinity, which indeed
is the foundation of Antinomianism (though the mistake be very taking and
popular, which makes an opposition to it very odious) that whereas Christ is
our Life and our Righteousness, our Wisdom and Power, and the Author of all
spiritual Blessings, but does not dispense these Blessings immediately to us,
but in such ways and methods, and upon such terms and conditions, as are
prescribed and declared in the Gospel; these men send us immediately to the
Person of Christ for Life and Righteousness, for Beauty and Comeliness, for
Grace and Wisdom, and for the supply of all our spiritual wants, which shuts
out his Gospel and Religion, or makes it wholly useless; and let but Dr. Owen
stand to what he asserts in his Vindication: We do not imagine, but believe P.
151.
from the Scripture, and with the whole Church of God, that we receive Grace
and Salvation from the Person of Christ, in those distinct ways, wherein they
are capable of being received; if by that he means, such ways as are prescribed
in the Gospel, and I declare, I have no controversy with him about this matter.

Thus for instance Christ is our Righteousness* as he is the meritorious cause
of the Pardon of our sins, and the Acceptance of our sincere but imperfect
services; but the way to be made righteous by Christ, is not immediately to go
to Christ for Righteousness, with all our sins and impurities about us, to be
clothed with his perfect and personal Righteousness, but to repent of our sins
and to believe and obey the Gospel, and then we shall be pardoned and rewarded
for Christ's sake.

Thus Christ is our Wisdom, as he has reveled those hidden Treasures of the
Divine Wisdom, which were conceled from former ages, but we must not go
immediately to the Person of Christ for this Wisdom, but we must search for it
in the Gospel, where it is reveled; and beg those divine Assistances, which are
necessary to enlighten our minds, and to bless our Studies and Enquiries.

Thus we must receive all supernatural Aids and Assistances from Christ to
renew and sanctify our Natures, and to make us holy as God is, Christ has by
his Death purchased the Gift of the Holy Spirit for those who believe: but we
must not expect to receive these vital Influences from Christ by such a natural
conveyance as water flows out of a fountain, or as the animal Spirits are
communicated to the Members of the natural Body; but we must consider and
meditate, and affect our minds with all the Motives and Arguments of our
Religion, and derive strength and power from the consideration of Christ's Death
and Sufferings, and Resurrection, and Ascension into Heaven, and Intercession
for us at Gods right hand, etc. to mortify our Lusts, and to transform us into
a Divine Nature: We must read and pray, and watch and fast, and communicate at
the Lords Table, and by these means put our selves under the guidance and
conduct of the Divine Spirit, who will never fail to do his part, when we are
so diligent in doing ours: But a bare trust and reliance on the Person of
Christ will not entitle us to his Divine Aids, no more than a presumptuous
Dependence on the Providence of God will secure a slothful man from want and
beggary. Christ is the fountain of all spiritual life, but we must not look on
this as a personal Grace in Christ, which must be immediately derived from his
Person; but as an act of Goodness and Power in the Administration of his
spiritual Kingdom, which is therefore dispensed in such regular ways, that
every one that pleases may certainly know how to obtain it, and that no man
must expect it any other way.

But now those Persons whom I oppose, if we may judge of their meaning by their
words, send sinners immediately to Christ for Life and Righteousness, for
Wisdom and Power, etc. and make all these personal Graces, which must be
derived immediately from the Person of Christ, when indeed they are no other
than the effects of his Prophetical, Priestly or Regal Offices, in publishing
the Will of God to us, or in expiating our Sins, or in governing his Church,
and dispensing his Grace in such ways and methods, as he has prescribed in the
Gospel.

And therefore as I observed in my former Discourse, they have either found out
a new Person for Christ distinct from his Godhead and Manhood; or which comes
to the same Knowledge of Christ, p. 201. Edit. 2. p. 140.
thing, have dressed up the Person of Christ with such personal Graces as do not
belong to his Person as God-Man, but are the effects of his Mediation. And here
the Doctor and Mr. Ferguson, and the rest of my Opponents raise a great cry,
and tell the world, that what I charge them with as a Interest of Reason etc p.
475.
Fault, that they have found out a Person for Christ distinct from his Godhead
and Manhood, they think not to have done it, would have been as far from Wit,
as Truth; because the Person of Christ is of a distinct consideration from his
Godhead and Manhood: And here they Philosophize at large concerning the Notion
of Suppositum and Persona and Hypostasis, and are glad with all their hearts to
find an occasion to avoid the true Question. Now I readily grant, that this was
not warily expressed, to prevent the cavilling humor of those men, who have no
other way to escape, but by taking Sanctuary in such Retreats: though what I
immediately add was sufficient to inform them what I meant by it, had they any
mind to understand it, that they distinguish the Person of Christ as Mediator,
from his Person as God-Man; and cloth this Person with such personal Graces,
as belong neither to his Divine nor Human Nature, nor to the Union of both.
Thus they talk of the Fullness and Riches, and Beauty and Loveliness, and
Righteousness, and Wisdom and Power, and Grace and Mercy of Christ, as personal
Graces, inherent in him, and derived immediately from his Person to us, whereas
I made it appear by a particular examination of those Scripture-phrases, that
all this is attributed to Christ, either with respect to his Doctrine, or
Sacrifice, or Mediation and Intercession for us; that they are the effects of
his several Offices, not properly the Graces of his Person, unless they will
make his Mediatory Office a distinct Person: And therefore we must expect to
receive the Communications of his Fullness or Riches, or Righteousness, or Grace
or Wisdom, not from a bare Union to his Person, but by believing and obeying
his Gospel, and in the conscientious use of such means as God has appointed
for the conveyance of Grace, and the Communication of all Spiritual Blessings
to us.

This I called dressing up the Person of the Mediator with all those Personal
Graces and Knowledge of Christ, p. 2 4. Edit. 2. p. 143.
Excellencies, which may make him a fit Savior, that those who are thus united
to his Person, need not fear missing of Salvation: This the Doctor thinks
profane, because the Vindicat. p. 153.
Preparation of the Person of Christ to be a fit and meet Savior for Sinners,
which I profanely compare to the dressing up of -- (of what, good Sir? Speak
out, and let us know the worst) is the greatest, most glorious and admirable
effect that ever infinite Wisdom, Goodness, Power and Love wrought and
produced, or will do so to eternity. Very right! God's fitting Christ to be a
meet Savior for Sinners, was an admirable effect of Wisdom and Power; but this
new Dress, they have put our Savior into, contains the greatest Mystery of
Iniquity and Antinomianism, that ever was invented; and I hope it is no
Profaneness to reprove such an uncouth Metamorphosis of our Saviors Person.
And here once for all, I shall desire my Readers to taken notice of their great
Artifice in perverting my Words either into Profaneness or Nonsense; that
whatever I speak against that odd and Fantastical Representation which they
make of the Person of Christ, they interpret as spoken against Christ himself
God-Man; which is just as if a man, who argues against a false and absurd
Notion of a Deity, should be charged with Atheism, or with Blasphemy against
God.

And that no man may any longer think that this Religion of Christ's Person, as
it is distinguished from the Religion of his Gospel, is a peculiar Conceit and
Invention of my own (as the Doctor would fain persuade his Readers it is) I
shall now make it appear, that this Distinction between the Person and Gospel
of our Savior is so far from being imaginary, that it is the very foundation
of Antinomianism.

Thus the Antinomians lay the foundation of their Religion in winning and
wooing D. Crisp's Christ's Preemin. p. 89
People unto Christ, and therefore tell us, that St. Paul, who had an excellent
faculty this way, observes what does most effectually take with people to
beguile their Spirits, and with a kind of Craft to catch their Affections, and
that accordingly he meets with every thing, that is most enamouring and taking
with people. Thus far Dr. Crispe and Dr. Owen very well agree in placing the
great Mystery of Religion in winning and wooing People unto Christ: though St.
Paul tells us, that the Ministers of the Gospel are Ambassadors of Christ,
beseeching the People in Christ's stead to be reconciled unto God: So that
Christ and his Ambassadors woo for God, but Antinomians woo altogether for
Christ, to win people to the Person of Christ.

Let us then consider what course they take thus to woo and win people unto
Christ: Now if by this wooing people to Christ, they understood no more than to
persuade men to embrace the Faith and Religion of Christ, the proper way to
effect it were to prove the Truth and Certainty of the Revelation made by
Christ, to represent the Excellency of his Religion, how easy and advantageous
his Commands are, how perfective of our Nature, and how necessary to dispose
and qualify us for future Happiness, to set before them those Rewards, which
Christ has promised to those who obey him, and those severe threatenings, which
he has denounced against the Workers of Iniquity; and to confirm them in the
belief and expectation of all this, by the consideration of the Incarnation,
Death; and Sufferings of the Son of God, who died to expiate our Sins, and to
purchase Pardon and Eternal life for all true Penitents, and rose again from
the dead and ascended into Heaven to intercede for us, to dispense the
influences of his Grace, to raise us to a new and spiritual life here, and at
the last Day to raise our dead bodies out of the dust, and to reward us with
Immortality and Glory: And then we may argue from the love of our Crucified
Savior to persuade men to live to him, who died for them. These and such like
Arguments are very powerful to persuade men to be Christians, but this is not
the way of wooing for Christ: You must with a holy guile catch peoples
affections, and make them fall in love with the Person of Christ, and therefore
you must describe his Personal Graces and Excellencies, and consider what is
most enamouring and taking with the People: Thus for instance, The World is
Ibid.
mightily taken with Beauty, with compleatness of Person; Oh, says one, let me
have a beautiful person, it is no matter how poor: Well then, Christ is a rare
piece, for such is the beauty of Christ, that there is no beauty like his: He
is the Image of the invisible God, the brightness of his Glory, and the express
Image of his Person: And Mr. Watson could have furnished him with a great many
other irrefragable proofs of Christ's beauty and loveliness, though, I think,
the Doctor had too much wit to have made Knowledge of Christ, p. 115. Edit. 2.
P. 77.
use of them.

But besides Beauty, some persons look for Lineage, what a Stock a person is of:
Well if this will take, then there is no Stock like this of Christ: he is of
the greatest House in the world, The First-begotten of all Creatures; He comes
of that great House of God himself. He is not a Younger Brother in this House
neither, for he is the First-begotten of the House, that is a great matter
among persons to marry the Heir of the Family; nay, he is the Only-begotten of
the House, there is never another in all the Family, and that is a great
encouragement; so that if men go all the World over, to find a Match in the
Noblest House, they will never meet with such a one as this of the Son of God:
which exactly agrees with Mr. Vincent's reasoning to persuade young Women to
choose Christ for their Husband.

Well, but if he be poor after all, I shall live but poorly with him: But
Christ is rich in Treasure too, it pleased the Father, that in him should all
fullness dwell: He has the whole World to dispose of, and therefore Gold and
Silver are not to be compared to him; which Notion Mr. Brooks has excellently
improved in his Riches of Christ.

Thus to conclude, You have a Proverb, That Batchelours Wives, and Maids
Children must be rare Creatures; that is, their fancy will devise what kind of
one they will have, and what kinds of perfections they desire: Let the fancy
devise what kind of perfections it can to please sense, Christ shall really
outstrip in perfection all these fancies, more than a Substance does outstrip
a shadow.

This is the great Mystery of Antinomianism (which some of our Modern Divines
call the Mystery of the Gospel, and the only spiritual Preaching of Christ) to
attribute every thing immediately to the Person of Christ, which is spoke of
him, either with respect to his Gospel, and Revelations, or his Propitiation
and Sacrifice, or his Mediation and Intercession for us, as to give some few
instances of it.

Thus it is a great Gospel truth, That Christ is the way to the Father, that he
is the way, the truth, and the life, both as he instructs us in the way to life
and happiness, how we may please God and save our Souls; and as he is our
Mediator and High Priest, by whom we have access to God: But then this
requires, that we study his will, and live in obedience to his Laws, that we
may have an interest in his Mediation, and may with a humble confidence put up
our Prayers to God in his name: Whereas the Antinomians, agreeably enough with
the Divinity of this last Age, make Christ such a way as excludes every thing
else, even his Laws, and Religion, Evangelical Righteousness and Holiness from
being the way; Christ himself, and nothing but Christ, though in a subservency
and subordination to him, can be the way.

Thus Dr. Crisp tells us, That Christ is the Christ alone exalted. Sermon. 1.
only way to free sinners from the guilt of sin; which is true in a sober
sense, that Christ only makes atonement for our sins, but in the Doctors
Divinity Christ is so the only way, that nothing else but Christ is required to
this, neither Repentance nor Evangelical Righteousness. The Gospel holds forth
the Lord Christ, as freely tendering himself to people, considering people only
as ungodly persons receiving him (that is, taking him for their own, to be
justified and saved by him) you have no sooner received him, Ibid. p. 7.
but you are instantly justified by him, and in this Justification you are
discharged from all the faults that can be laid to your charge. And his
Argument to prove this, is the same with Mr. Ferguson's, He was made sin for
us; here you see plainly our sins are so translated to Christ, that God does
reckon Christ the very P. 10.
Sinner; nay, God does reckon all our sins to be his sins, and makes him to be
sin for us; And what is the fruit of this? We are thereby made the
righteousness of God in him; if we be righteousness, where is our sinfulness to
be charged upon us? And he adds, Many think there is such a kind of sinfulness,
that is a bar to them, that though they would have Christ, yet there is not a
way open for them to take him. Beloved, p. 13.
there is no way of sinfulness to debar thee from coming to Christ, if thou
have a heart to come to him, and to venture thy self with joy against all
objections into the bosom of Christ to discharge thee of all thy sinfulness.
And the Mystery of this he immediately explains, The truth is, men dote upon
the establishing of their own righteousness to bring them to Christ, and it is
but presumptuous or licentious Doctrine, That Christ may be their trust, and
they receive him, and they considered simply ungodly as enemies. Now one Egg is
not more like another, than this Doctrine is like what we find in M. Shephard,
Watson, and D. Owen, Knowledge of Christ, p. 64, 65, 66, etc. p. 24. 129. Edit.
2. p. 45, 51, 9^. Ibid p. 49
as evidently appears from those many passages cited from them in my former
discourse.

Thus to proceed, Dr. Crisp observes, That Christ is a free way to all sorts of
persons, none excepted, none prohibited; for a Drunkard, for a Whore-master,
for a Harlot, an enemy to Christ. Or in Dr. Owens Phrase, For the greatest, the
oldest, the stubbornest transgressour: And what Dr. Owen pleads for himself,
that he only represented such grace in Christ as should encourage all sorts of
persons to come to him, will serve Dr. Crisp as well as himself: For he
expressly adds, Do not mistake me, I do not say, Christ is a free way to walk in
him, and yet to continue in such a condition; but for entrance into him Christ
is as free a way for the vilest sort of sinners as for any persons under
heaven: That is, the worst man in the world may have as good an interest in
Christ for Justification and Eternal life as the best; but when Christ has got
him, he will make him good. Of which more anon.

Thus Christ is a near way to the Father: he brings the Father unto men, and
becomes such Ibid. p. 60
a way, as that there is but one step from the lowest condition of sinfulness
to the highest of being the Son of God; That is, he who receives Christ,
though, at that instant of receiving him, he be the greatest sinner in the
world, yet in the next moment is the Son of God, and perfectly innocent and
righteous with the righteousness of Christ, and heir of eternal life.

And to take notice but of one passage more; Christ is a spacious, large,
elbow-room p. 84.
way: When a man enters into Christ, he enters into liberty and freedom. But
how is it said then, Srait is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads unto
life? Answer; By the straitness of the way is not here meant strictness of
conversation: But it is strait and narrow in this regard, that all a man's own
righteousness must be cut out of the way; it must be so narrow that there must
be nothing in the way but Christ; which is exactly parallel with Dr. Owen's
chastity of our affections to Christ, in not taking any thing (as our own
righteousness) into our affections and esteem for those Knowledge of Christ. p.
422. Edit. 2. p. 295.
ends and purposes, for which we have received Christ; that is, not to
contribute any thing to our Justification or Salvation. This is the effect of
making the Person of Christ in contradistinction from his Laws and Religion,
the immediate way unto the Father.

It were easy to give numerous instances of this nature, but these may suffice
to satisfy any intelligent man, that all those precious and charming
discourses of the Beauty, and Loveliness, and Fullness and Riches, and
Righteousness of Christ, and of wooing and winning Souls to Christ, as they are
managed by these men, are as formal hypocrisies, as Judas his Salutation of his
Master when he betrayed him; for the plain design is to advance his Person to
the prejudice of his Laws and Religion; whoever sends sinners immediately and
directly to the Person of Christ for Righteousness, and Justification, and
Eternal life, without first requiring Repentance, and the Love of God, and at
least the sincere purposes of a new life to entitle them to Grace and Mercy,
are downright Antinomians; whoever place the Essence of a justifying Faith in
a mere fiducial reliance on Christ, and a fancifull application of Christ's
Righteousness to themselves, place all their hopes immediately on the Person of
Christ, which is to make a new Religion of Christ's Person in opposition to his
Gospel.

But fifthly, I observe farther, That the Church of England makes Repentance,
and the Love of God, and the sincere purposes of a New life antecedently
necessary to our Justification, as appears from what I have discoursed above;
but these men absolutely deny, that Repentance, or the Love of God, or any
other internal Grace or Virtue, are necessary to our Justification by the
Righteousness of Christ; but that we are justified before and without them, at
least in order of nature. There are none of them indeed deny, that those who
are justified ought to live holily; but yet they assert, that God has no
regard to Repentance and Holiness in the Justification of a sinner, but that
all these follow our Justification, as the effects and fruits of it. God
justifies the ungodly in a proper sense, while they are ungodly, but whom he
justifies he sanctifies too, and makes them holy.

Now if any man should enquire, what great difference there is between these
two, since the necessity of Holiness is universally acknowledge; I answer, the
difference is just as much as between the necessity of an Event, and the
necessity of Duty, which, I think, is a very material difference in matters of
Religion; to place Holiness after Justification as a necessary effect and
consequent of it, acknowledges the necessity of Holiness, as to the Event, that
those who are justified shall be sanctified; but it destroys the necessity of
Duty, and undermines all the Arguments to a Holy life: God may sanctify us if
he pleases, by an irresistible and uncontrollable Power, but there is no
necessary Argument left to induce us as free Agents to purify our selves, and
to cooperate with the Divine Grace; which makes the whole Gospel, and all the
External Ministeries of Religion useless, the great design of which is to
furnish us with such cogent and persuasive Arguments, as by the concurring
assistance of the Divine Grace may effectually bow our Wills, and govern our
Affections, and transform us into a Divine Nature: If we are justified without
Repentance and a New life, if God accepts our Persons as Just and Righteous
only for the Righteousness of Christ imputed to us, and this gives us an actual
Title to Life and Immortality; what reason can there be assigned so cogent, as
to conquer our love to Sin, when there is no Argument to work either upon our
Hopes or Fears? The Hope of Heaven, and the Fear of Hell, are the great Motives
of the Gospel, but are of no use in this new Religion, since a justified Person
(who yet may be very wicked) is in no danger of Hell, and is secure of his
Inheritance in Heaven: For if a justified person may miss of Heaven, and fall
into Hell, his Justification is worth nothing, a man had as good be
Unjustified, as to perish with his Justification: And therefore though God, if
he pleases, may sanctify whom he first justifies, yet there is no Argument
left to persuade a justified person to be holy, if he may be justified without
it.

This I particularly showed in my former Discourse, where I examined Dr. Owens
Reasons for the necessity of Knowledge of Christ, p. 126. etc. Edit. 2. p. 88.
Holiness, which either prove nothing, or prove only the necessity of Event,
that God will necessarily make men holy; not such a necessity of Duty, as will
make every considering man, who has any value for his Soul, freely choose
Holiness. But instead of answering what I there urged, the Doctor in his p. 100.
Vindication transcribes a long Paragraph concerning the necessity of Holiness,
and leaves it to the judgment of his Readers, which I must needs say was very
boldly done, if he thought his Readers had any judgment; though it argued more
craft to give me a fresh challenge, as if I had yet said nothing to him.

The Doctor only takes notice of two or three things which I answered to his
Reasons for the necessaty of Holiness, and passes over all the rest as
unanswerable scoffing, which is his way to call that scoffing, which he cannot
answer.

As first he proved the necessity of Holiness Knowledge of Christ, p. 127. Edit.
^^. p. 88.
from the command of God, which had been a good Argument had it been used by
another man; but the Doctors Notion of Justification by the imputed
Righteousness of Christ only, evacuates this command, and therefore I enquired,
where is the Sanction of this Law? will he damn those, who do not obey, for
their disobedience? And will he save and reward those who do obey for their
obedience? Not a word of this, for this destroys our Justification by the
Righteousness of Christ only. And if, after all these Commands, God has left
it indifferent whether we obey or not, I hope such Commands cannot make
Obedience necessary.

This last Clause the Doctor recites, and cries out, Wonderful Divinity! A man
must Vindicat. p. 120.
needs be well acquainted with God and himself, who can suppose that any of his
Commands shall leave it indifferent whether we will obey them or no. This I
confess is wonderful Divinity; but I know no reason the Doctor should wonder at
it, because it is his own: For such indifferent things he makes all the Divine
Commands, while he makes them unnecessary to our Justification, which quite
destroys their Authority, and Sanction: For a Law (if it may be so called)
without Rewards and Punishments is left at the liberty of the Subject to obey
it or not; and such a Command cannot make Obedience necessary. But the Doctor
proceeds, But may we not, notwithstanding this Command, be justified and saved
without this Holiness? Wherein he designs to represent my Sense, though he have
changed the words, and answers, false and impertinent, we are neither justified
nor saved without them, though we are not justified by them, nor saved for
them: This is warily expressed, but will not serve his purpose, for by our not
being justified without Holiness, he means no more, than that God at the same
time, when he justifies, infuses the Habits of Grace and Holiness, renews and
sanctifies us too, and therefore we cannot be said to be justified without
Holiness, because we are justified and sanctified at the same instant, though
in order of nature we are Justified before we are Sanctified, and therefore in
our Justification God had no respect to any sly Antecedent Holiness, which, as
to the present Dispute, is the same thing as to be Justified without Holiness.
The Doctor professes it as his avowed Doctrine, That Holiness and Obedience is
neither the Cause, Matter, nor Condition of our Justification, and therefore
not Antecedently necessary: And expressly tells us, That the Passive
Righteousness of Christ only is imputed to us in the non-imputation Communion.
p. 187.
of Sin, and that on the condition of our Faith and new Obedience, so exalting
them into the room of the Righteousness of Christ, is a thing which in
Communion with the Lord Jesus, I have as yet no acquaintance withal. And a
little before: Are we then freed from this Obedience? Yes; But how far? From
doing it Ibid. p. 185.
in our own strength, from doing it for this end, That we may obtain Life
Everlasting. It is vain, that some say confidently, that we must yet work for
Life; it is all one as to say, That we are yet under the Old Covenant, Hoc fac,
and vives, we are not freed from Obedience, as a way of walking with God, but
we are as a way of working to come to him: So that Holiness contributes nothing
to our Justification, and Eternal life, and therefore we may as well be
justified and saved without them, which destroys the Necessity and Sanction of
the Divine Laws, and leaves it at every man's liberty to Obey, or not to Obey,
were they not overruled, like spiritual Machines and Engines, by an
irresistible Power.

In the next place the Doctor proves the necessity of Holiness from the Ends of
God in Election and Redemption; God Vindicat. p. 120.
Elected us, and Christ Redeemed us, that we might be holy. This is a very good
Argument too, if it be rightly managed, but that it can never be upon the
Doctors Principles; that is, if we deny the Antecedent necessity of Holiness to
our Justification: For if God have absolutely Elected us to Eternal Life
without any condition required on our part, only purposing to make those holy
by an irresistible Power, whom he has Elected; this only proves the necessity
of the Event, that those who are Elected shall be holy, but can be no Argument
to engage any man to press after Holiness: For this Election to Holiness does
not make Holiness necessary on our part with the necessity of Duty, or of a
Condition, without which we shall not be saved, but only makes it necessary on
Gods part as to the regular execution of his Decree of Salvation.

And the same may be said of Redemption; if we are so absolutely Redeemed by
the Death of Christ, as to have a right to all the benefits of it as
Justification and Eternal Life, without any condition required on our part. If
we are justified freely by the Grace of God, through the Redemption which is in
Christ Jesus, without any regard to Repentance or New Obedience to qualify us
for this Grace, then our Redemption by Christ cannot make it a necessary Duty
in us to be holy, though Holiness may follow as a necessary Effect.

This I expressed in fewer words, but to the same sense in my former Discourse.
Will the Father Elect, and the Son Redeem none but those who are holy, and
reject and reprobate all others? Does this Election and Redemption suppose
holiness in us? Or is it without any regard to it? For if we be Elected and
Redeemed without any regard to our being holy, our Election and Redemption is
secure whether we be holy or not. And so this cannot make Holiness necessary on
our parts, though it may be necessary on Gods part to make us holy, but that is
not our care.

This last Clause, wherein the strength of the Argument lay, the Doctor omits,
as not knowing what to answer, but as for the rest, cries out, Wonderful
Divinity again. Methinks he should consider, whose property it is so much to
wonder: But what is the reason of this wonder? Why, We are Elected and Redeemed
with regard unto our own Holiness, that is, Antecedently to our Election and
Redemption, for Holiness, being the Effect and Fruit of them, is that which he
opposes: But, pray Sir, where do I oppose this? Or what occasion had I to
oppose it in this place? My enquiry is only whether Election and Redemption
include any necessary condition on our part, without the performance of which
we cannot lay claim to the benefits of them, and whether Holiness be that
Condition; if they do not, then our Election and Redemption can be no Argument
on our part to live holily, though it may be a sufficient reason for God to
make us holy: If they do, then indeed Election and Redemption are a very
necessary reason, why we should live holily, but such a reason as the Doctor
dares not own.

Another reason, which he assigned for the necessity of Holiness, is, That it
is for our peace, by it we have Communion with God, wherein peace alone is to
be enjoyed: This is a very good Argument also in it self considered; for if
Holiness be the only way to enjoy peace and Communion with God, there is an
absolute necessity for every man, who consults the peace of his Mind, and the
safety of his Soul, to be holy, as God is: But this is not reconcilable with
his darling Notion of Justification by the Righteousness of Christ only,
without any regard to our Holiness and Obedience; for if we may be Justified
without any respect to Holiness, our Personal Righteousness cannot be necessary
to our peace with God, any more than it is to our Justification; for all
justified persons are in a state of peace and reconciliation with God.

And besides this I made it appear by two large quotations out of his Book of
Knowledge of Christ, p. 129. Edit. 2. P. 90.
Communion, that at other times he rejected our own Righteousness and
Obedience, and founded our Peace with God and Communion with him wholly and
entirely on Christ, and Justification by his Righteousness. Here he expresses
some indignation, that I would offer to frame the appearance Vindi^^^ p. 12^*
of a contradiction between what he says on the one hand, that there is no
Peace with God to be obtained by and for sinners, but by the Atonement, that is
made for them in the Blood of Jesus Christ, with the Remission of Sin and
Justification by Faith, which ensue thereon; and the necessity of Holiness and
Fruitfulness in Obedience to maintain in our own Souls a sense of that peace
with God, which we have being justified by Faith.

Now though we should (to bring him into a good humor again) put the
Controversy upon this Issue, that our Peace with God is only to be obtained by
the Atonement made by Christ, and Justification by the imputation of his
Righteousness, but that the sense of this Peace with God is owing to Holiness
and fruitfulness in Obedience, yet I cannot see how to reconcile them: For if
nothing more be necessary to put us into a state of Peace and Friendship with
God, but the Atonement and Righteousness of Christ, and we know, that this
alone, and nothing else can do it; How can our own Obedience and Righteousness,
which we know can contribute nothing to our Peace with God, be necessary to
give us a sense, that is, the knowledge of our Peace with God? And therefore
the Antinomians very agreeably to their own Principles, which are the very same
with the Doctor's, do reject our own Righteousness as well from being the Signs
and Evidences, as the Cause and Matter of our Peace with God: And the Doctor
and his Friends make Sanctification such a lame and imperfect Sign, that we had
as good have none, as I have largely showed Knowledge of Christ, p. 363, etc
Edit. 2. p. 224.
in my former Discourse.

And though we should suppose Holiness to be a very good Sign and Evidence of
our Peace with God, yet this only makes Holiness necessary as a Sign, not as
our Duty: It may be necessary on our part to our present Comfort, not to our
future Happiness.

And yet after all the Doctors swaggering, I cannot understand that his words
will bear this sense: For in the first place he brings in a man enquiring after
such a Righteousness, as may be a sure foundation of hope and comfort, and may
settle and compose his mind with respect to a future judgment, and shows the
various ways men take in order to this: That some labor to correct their
Lives, amend their ways, perform the Duties required, and so follow after
Communion p. 113.
Righteousness according to the Prescript of the Law: And in this Course do
many men continue long with much perplexity, sometimes hoping, oftener fearing,
sometimes ready to give quite over, sometimes vowing to continue, (their
Consciences being no ways satisfied, nor Righteousness in any measure attained)
all their days. So that here he rejects Holiness and Obedience, correcting our
Lives, amending our Ways, performing Duties, from being able to give us a
comfortable sense of our Peace with God, this can by no means allay our Fears,
and satisfy our Consciences; and I think no man, who is a Christian, who ever
heard of Christ's dying for our sins, can understand this in any other sense,
than that our Holiness and Obedience is wholly useless, not only to expiate our
sins (which every Christian knows to be the work of Christ, and the Effect of
his Death and Sufferings) but to maintain any comfortable sense of the Pardon
of our sins, and the Love of God in our Souls. I am sure he says the very same
thing, and assigns the very same reason for it which Dr. Crispe does, and
therefore there is some cause to think that they were of the same mind.

The Reasons Dr. Owen assigns, why there is no hope, no satisfaction of
Conscience in correcting our Lives, and performing Duties, are first, That men
have already sinned, and therefore there is a score Ibid.
and a reckoning upon them already, which they know not how to answer for by
their after Obedience: That is, their Righteousness, though never so perfect,
cannot expiate past Offenses.

Thus Dr. Crispe to the same purpose tells us, The Christ is he that saves the
Soul, Christ is our Peacemaker; that is; by his Expiation and Atonement. And
as Christ is Christ alone exalted. p. 18.
this Peacemaker, so all this Peace depends upon Christ alone: Beloved, if you
will fetch your Peace from any thing in the world but Christ, you will fetch it
from where it is not.

Dr. Owen's second Reason is, That if all former Debts should be blotted out,
yet they are no way able for the future to fulfill the Law, they can as well
move the earth with a finger as answer the perfection thereof. Thus Dr. Crispe
in the very same manner; Men forsake that peace, which is to be had in Christ,
Ibid
when they would have Peace out of Righteousness of their own. These are broken
Cisterns, and what Peace is there in them? Who can say I have washed my hands?
If there be sinfulness in them, where then is their Peace? etc. Fetch Peace
where it is to be had, let subduing of Sin alone for Peace; let Christ have
that, which is his due; it is he alone that speaks Peace.

To the same purpose I produced another passage out of the Doctor's Book of
Communion, where he asserts, That all our wisdom of walking with God consists
in our acquaintance with Christ; which is not very reconcilable with what he
says in this place, that Holiness is necessary to our Peace, and Communion, and
walking Knowledge of Christ. p. ^5. Edit. 2. p. 38.
with God: upon which account I had before charged him, with making Christ a
medium of Communion and Agreement between God and bad men, while they continue
so; to which he only answers according to his huffing way, that it is
flagitiously false: Let the indifferent Reader then be judge between us: He
Vindicat. p. 70.
describes the distance between God and Men in a state of nature, and how
impossible Communion. p. 119.
it is they should walk together: For God is light, and in him is no darkness
at all; we are darkness, and in us there is no light at all. He is Life, a
living God, we are dead, dead sinners, dead in trespasses and sins; He is
Holiness, and glorious in it, we wholly defiled, an abominable thing; He is
Love, we full of hatred, hating, and being hated; surely this is no foundation
of agreement, or upon that of walking together: What course then must we take
to come to an agreement with God, that we may walk with him? Must we reform our
Lives, and lay aside our Opposition to God, and return to our Duty and
Allegiance? Not a word of this; The Doctor only directs us to Dr. Crispe's near
way, wherein there is but one step from the lowest degree of sinfulness to the
highest of being the Sons of God. For he immediately adds, The foundation then
of this agreement is laid in Christ, hid in Christ; He, says the Apostle, is
our peace, he has made peace for us, he slew the enmity in his own body on the
Cross: So that there is nothing but Christ comes between men in a sinful
natural state, and a holy God to make up the difference; and therefore they are
in Communion with God, and in a state of agreement with him by the
interposition and mediation of Christ while they are wicked: And if the Doctor
reply, That Christ, who takes away the distance between God and Sinners, and
makes peace between them, does at the same time make those, who were wicked,
holy. Dr. Crispe himself asserts as much, and yet this does not alter the case,
for (according to this way) in order of nature they are in a state of agreement
with God before they are holy, and Holiness in its own nature contributes
nothing to this Agreement, but is only the Effect of it: And by the same
reason, that God can be reconciled to wicked men continuing so for one moment,
he may be so for ever.

But to proceed, The Doctor proves the necessity of Holiness with respect to
Sanctification, we have in us a New Creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. This New Creature
is fed, cherished, nourished, and kept alive by the fruits of Holiness. To what
end has God given us new hearts, and new natures? Is it that we should kill
them, stifle the Creature, that is formed in us in the Womb? That we should
give him to the old man to be devoured? To this I answered, The Phrase of this
is admirable, and the reasoning unanswerable; for if men be new Creatures, they
will certainly live new Lives, and this makes Holiness absolutely necessary by
the same reason, that every thing necessarily is, what is, when it is; but
still we enquire after a necessary Obligation to the practice of Holiness, and
that we cannot yet discover.

To this the Doctor replies, That the new Creature, whatever I may fancy, is
not a Vindicat. p. 125.
new conversation, nor a living holily, but it is the Principle and spiritual
ability produced in Believers by the power and grace of the Holy Ghost,
enabling them to walk in newness of Life, and holiness of Conversation. And
this Principle being bestowed on us, wrought in us, for that very end, it is
necessary for us, unless we will neglect and despise the Grace, which we have
received, that we walk in Holiness, and abound in the fruits of righteousness,
whereunto it leads and tends. Let him answer this if he can, and when he has
done so, answer the Apostle in like manner, or scoff not only at me, but at him
also. What Apostle the Doctor means I cannot tell, unless it be some Gnostick
Apostle and Teacher of Holiness; and I can as little guess, what he would have
me answer in all this: I agree with him about the nature of the New Creature,
if he only mean, that a New Creature is not made up only of External Acts of
Holiness, but is a new Principle of spiritual life, the Internal Habits of
Grace and Virtue wrought in us by the concurring assistances of the Grace of
God: but how does this make Holiness necessary? Yes, says the Doctor, it is
necessary we should live holily, unless we will neglect or despise the grace of
God, which was bestowed on us for this very end; that is, unless we will live
wickedly, which, I confess, is a demonstration, we must live holily unless we
live wickedly, which is the whole force of this answer, if it have any: For
suppose we should neglect and despise the grace of God; What then? Why, truly
nothing: the necessity of Holiness cease, unless you can show some very great
danger in doing so, that we shall lose our Justification and Salvation by it;
and then the necessity of Holiness does not result from the nature of the new
Creature, but from the great danger of living wickedly, because Holiness is
Antecedently necessary to obtain the Pardon of our Sins, and Eternal Life,
which the Doctor dares not own.

But I would fain know what he means by neglecting or despising the Grace of
God, is it to resist the grace of God, and to make it ineffectual? And can the
grace of God be resisted? Can it fail of its Effect? This is to assert a moral,
a Pelagian grace, as the Doctor often tells me: If this new Creature, this new
Principle of grace in us, produce the fruits of Holiness by a free and
voluntary choice, from Principles of reason and moral persuasion, together with
the supernatural assistances of grace, then it cannot it self be an argument of
the necessity of Holiness, but does it self stand in need of such Arguments
from the necessity and advantages of Holiness, as shall effectually incline and
determine it to a constant and vigorous practice of Holiness: And if this new
Creature produce the fruits of Holiness by a necessity of nature, merely by the
natural, or rather supernatural force and energy of Grace, then indeed it makes
Holiness necessary, as a necessary cause makes a necessary Effect, and the
Doctor need not fear, that this new Creature should be starved for want of
being fed and cherished with the fruits of Holiness. And indeed this is a kind
of Pelagian fear too, that the new Creature should perish for want of being
kept alive by the fruits of Righteousness; for all Orthodox Divines use to
assure us, that the new Creature can never die; that the least spark of grace
will live in the midst of a whole Sea and Ocean of corruption. However upon the
consideration of the whole it appears to be an excellent Argument to prove the
necessity of Holiness, that we must abound in the fruits of Holiness to keep
the new Creature alive in us, whereas the life of the new Creature is necessary
to produce these fruits of Holiness: A Tree must be alive to bring forth fruit,
and its bringing forth fruit is a sign that it is alive, but the fruit it self
contributes nothing to the life of the Tree: Acquired Habits are owing to
exercise, but an infused Principle of life in the Doctors way can neither owe
its being, continuance, nor increase to External Acts: I am sure in other cases
the Doctor is very much against working for life. And I can imagine no reason
why he should be for it now, but that it is absurd and senseless. And to make
the most of this Argument that may be, the whole result of it is this, that we
must live holily, that we may be holy; we must abound in the External fruits of
Holiness, that we may preserve an inward Principle of Holiness, for a new
Creature in the Doctors account is no more: But if the question be proposed,
what need there is of this new Creature, as well as of the fruits of it (which
ought to be taken into consideration when we enquire after the necessity of
Holiness, unless he thinks Holiness a mere External thing) I doubt in his way
he can find no good reason for it; unless he will say, that a new Creature is
necessary to produce the fruits of Holiness, and the fruits of Holiness are
necessary to feed and cherish the new Creature, and so they may be necessary
for each other, but for ought yet appears might both be spared. I know not
whether the Doctor will think all this an answer, but I am pretty confident (as
young men are apt to be) that other men will. This is all our Author returns to
those Objections I made against his reasons for the necessity of Holiness, the
rest he passes over as unanswerable scoffing; that they are unanswerable I am
verily persuaded, whether they be scoffing, let others judge; however whether
they be scoffing or not, any one will perceive, that in this Argument I may
securely scoff at the Doctor, without any danger of scoffing at any true
Apostle.

But though the Doctor have done with me, I have not thus done with him; since
at all turns he can talk of nothing less than Apostles, I shall acquaint the
World to what Apostles he is nearest related, such as Dr. Crispe, Saltmarsh,
and other Antinomian Apostles, who are to the full as Orthodox in this Point as
our Author, and assign the same reasons for the necessity of Holiness, and take
the same method to secure the Prerogative of Christ, and of Free Grace: which I
shall make appear by particular instances.

Dr. Owen pretends to be a great Friend to Holiness, and so does Dr. Crispe. He
tells us, That he does not speak against Holiness Christ alone exalted. Vol. 1.
p. 51.
and Righteousness, that becomes a people to whom Christ is a way, for holy and
righteous they shall be; Christ will make them holy, and pnt his Spirit into
them, to change their hearts, and work upon their Spirits. And therefore as Dr.
Owen takes care to assign the Righteousness of Christ its proper place, and
Gospel Obedience its place, so does Dr. Crispe.

Thus Dr. Owen tells us, We do by no Vindicat. p. 101.
means assign the same place, condition, state, and use, to the obedience of
Christ imputed to us, and our Obedience performed to God, if we did they were
really inconsistent. And thus Dr. Crispe assures us, that the consequence Ibid.
p. 193.
of his Doctrine is not to take men off from Obedience, but to take them off
from those ends which they aim at in Obedience, namely the end for which
Christ's Obedience serves. It does take men off from performing p. 207.
duties to corrupt ends, and from the bad use they are apt to make of Idolizing
their own Righteousness. Our own Righteousness is good in its kind, and for its
own proper uses, but then it proves a fruit of sin, ignorance, and a dangerous
stumbling block, when we go about to establish this Righteousness of ours, so
as to bring it into the room, and stead, and place of Gods Righteousness. So
far all is well on both sides; let us consider then, what those ends are, for
which the Righteousness of Christ must serve, and which must not be attributed
to our Righteousness.

Dr. Owen in the same place enforms us, That those who affirm, that our
Obedience is the condition or cause of our Justification, do all of them deny
the imputation of the Obedience of Christ unto us (in his Notion, he should
have said, for otherwise it is not true.) The righteousness of Christ is
imputed to us, as that on the account whereof we are accepted, and esteemed
righteous before God, and are really so, though not inherently. Our own
Obedience is not the Righteousness whereupon we are accepted and justified
before God, although it be acceptable to God, that we abound therein. There is
a necessity of good Works notwithstanding we are not saved by them, and that
is, that God has ordained, that we shall walk in them.

And Dr. Crispe speaks the very same thing: It will be worth the while to
consider, Ibid. p. 208. etc.
when our Righteousness is said truly to be established in the room and stead
of the Righteousness of God: viz. When men make their own Righteousness the
Sanctuary and Refuge that Gods righteousness only should be. As when men have
such imaginations as these, as long as men do not mend, there is no hope that
God will mend. They that put deliverance from sin and wrath upon the spiritual
performance of that Righteousness, which the Law does command of them, they do
put that Righteousness in the room and place of the Righteousness of God. It is
most true, that all the Righteousness of man cannot prevail with God to do us
good, there is but one mover of God, the man Christ Jesus, who is the only and
sole Mediator. If you will have your own Righteousness to be your Mediator with
God, to speak to God for you, to prevail with God for you, what is this, but to
put your Righteousness in the room and place of Christ? Which is the very same
with what Dr. Owen affirms, That our Righteousness can contribute nothing to
our acceptance with God. And if you will have Dr. Crispes sense in fewer words:
It is as much as to say, Our standing righteous by what Christ Ibid. p. 193.
has done for us, concerns us in point of Justification, in point of
Consolation,, and in the business of Salvation, we have our Justification, we
have our Peace, we have our Salvation only by the Righteousness Christ has
done for us. They are both you see agreed in attributing our Justification and
Salvation entirely to the Righteousness of Christ; and as for Peace and
Consolation the only difference is, that Dr. Owen sometimes attributes it to
Christ, and sometimes to Holiness, but Dr. Crispe is always consistent with
himself and his own Principles; and yet this difference is so very small, that
Mr. Saltmarsh undertakes to compound it, and to allow Christians of a lower
form to fetch their comforts from Holiness, as a mark and evidence, though a
very uncertain one.

And now they are agreed about the place of Christ's Righteousness, they cannot
differ about the place and use of Obedience; for whatever does not belong to
the Righteousness of Christ may be very safely attributed to the Righteousness
of man.

Thus for instance, the Reasons assigned by Dr. Owen for the necessity of
Obedience are, First, The Sovereign Appointment Vindicat. p. 104.
and Will of God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Thus Dr. Crispe tells us, That
one Christ alone exalted. Vol. 1. p. 70.
end of our good works is a manifestation of our Obedience and Subjection to
God. that is our Obedience to the Sovereign will and appointment of God; and
therefore he professes, I speak not, Beloved, against the doing Ibid. p. 210.
of any Righteousness according to the will of God revealed, let that mouth be
forever stopped that shall be opened to blame the Law, that is holy, just, and
good, or shall be a means to discourage people from walking in the Commandments
of God blameless.

Dr. Owen's second Reason is, That Holiness is one eminent and special end of
the peculiar dispensation of Father, Son, and Spirit, in the business of
exalting the glory of God in our Salvation. It is a peculiar end of God's
Electing love, the Son's Redeeming love, and it is the very work of the love of
the Holy Ghost. To the same purpose Dr. Crispe (though not so particularly)
tells us, that the end of good Works is, The setting forth Ibid. p. 70.
of the praise of the glory of the Grace of God: That is, of the Grace of God
in Electing, of the Grace of Christ in Redeeming, and of the Grace of the Holy
Ghost in Sanctifying.

But thirdly Dr. Owen tells us That Obedience is necessary with respect to the
end of it, and that whether we consider God, our Selves, or the World. First,
The end of Obedience with respect to God is his glory and honor; So says Dr.
Crispe too, That the end of good Works is the actual glorifying of God in the
World, that Ibid. p. 193.
our services may glorify God, that is, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Secondly, The ends assigned by Dr. Owen with respect to our selves, are
Honor, Peace, and Usefulness. The first of these I do not find Dr. Crispe
mention; because I suppose he might think it a greater honor to be clothed
with the perfect Robes of Christ's Righteousness, than with the rags and patches
of our own. The second he rejects, as Dr. Owen sometimes does, and ought always
to do, if he would be true to his own Principles. The third he owns, but refers
it to its proper head, where it ought to be placed, the end of holiness with
respect to others, in doing good in the World, and being profitable to men. p.
7^
That we may serve our Gentration, according to the Apostle's charge, that men
study P. 217.
to maintain Good Works, because says he, these things are profit able unto
men. There is this usefulness of our Righteousness, that others may receive
benefit by it, Let your light so shine before men, that they seeing your good
Works may glorify your Father which is in heaven, which compriseth Dr. Owen's
ends of Conviction and Conversion, and the benefit of all, for it must be
confessed, that Dr. Crispe has not so good a faculty, as Dr. Owen, in making
distinctions without a difference. Dr. Crispe indeed will by no means allow,
that our own Righteousness can keep off Judgments either from our selves, or
from other men, as Dr. Owen would have it, but thinks, that God can be moved
only by the Righteousness of Christ, and that if we must trust wholly in the
Righteousness of Christ for our deliverance from future punishments, we may as
reasonably trust him for present deliverances.

But to proceed with Dr. Owen, Fourthly, Holiness is necessary with respect to
the state and condition of justified persons, for they have a new Creature in
them, which must be nourished and kept alive by the fruits of Holiness. Now
though Dr. Crispe was never guilty of talking at this absurd rate, yet he says
that which is more intelligible, and wherein the true force of this reason, if
it have any, must consist, viz. that Holiness is necessary as it has a
necessary cause, a renewed and sanctified nature infused into Believers by
Christ. Thus he affirms, That there is no Person is a Believer, and has
recieved Christ, but after he has received Christ, he is created in this
Christ to good works, that he should walk in them. He that sprinkleth them with
clean water, that they become clean from all their filthiness, puts Ibid. p. 69.
also a new Spirit into them, and does cause them to walk in his Statutes, and
Testimonies. And the Doctor honestly confesses, that the only security against
the evil consequences of his Doctrine is the power and efficacy of the Grace of
God in bridling men's corrupt Passions. That the same Christ, who has born the
wrath of the Father, and p. 30
the effects thereof, the same Christ does take as strict an order to restrain
and keep in the Spirit of a man, as to save that man. This is the true and
clear way of arguing (according to these Principles) from the state of a
Justified person, because such a man is Sanctified too, and must live holily.

And fifthly, Dr. Owen assigns another reason of the necessity of Holiness.
That it is necessary with respect to the proper place of Holiness in the New
Covenant, as God has appointed, that Holiness shall be the means, the way, to
Eternal life; though it be neither the cause, matter, nor condition of our
Justification, yet it is the way appointed by God for us to walk in for the
obtaining of Salvation. The meaning of which is, not that Holiness contributes
any thing either to our Justification, or Salvation, but that God has ordained,
that he will first sanctify men, before he will save them: This is the method
God has designed in the execution of his Decrees, that he will first justify,
and then sanctify, and then save and glorify.

Now all this Dr. Crispe will readily own: For he asserts, that Christ will
take care to sanctify those whom he justifies. And that our Righteousness is
useful, as it is the Ordinance of God, wherein the Lord has Ibid. p. 2^.
appointed to meet with us, and wherein he will make good those things, which
before he has promised; which is all that can be meant by Dr. Owen's way,
which is neither the cause, nor matter, nor condition of our Justification, nor
of our Salvation neither, as he elsewhere tells us, that we must not work for
Everlasting life. And therefore when Dr. Crispe elsewhere tells us, That
Sanctification of life is not a p. 69.
jot the way of the justified person to Heaven, it is the business of a person
that he has to do in his way to Christ, but it is not the way it self to
Heaven. He only means, that Holiness is not such a way as Christ is, but would
never scruple to own it such a way as Dr. Owen makes it.

What Dr. Owen adds, that this Holiness is the whole expression of our
thankfulness to God, is so often repeated by Dr. Crispe, that I need not direct
to any particular places.

From all this it evidently appears, that as great a Friend as Dr. Owen would
seem to be to Holiness, Dr. Crispe is as great to the full, and that any
Antinomian may own the necessity of Holiness upon the same accounts that Dr.
Owen does. Indeed the parting Line is the Antecedent necessity of Holiness to
our Justification and Salvation, and whoever will not own this, I will be bound
to make it good against him, that he is an Antinomian, though he may not have
courage enough openly to defend all the fulsom consequences of that Doctrine.

And for a conclusion of this Argument I shall only observe these two things:
First, What great reason these men have to assert a natural and irresistible
efficacy of Grace in the Conversion of a Sinner. For they having taken away all
those Arguments which should work upon our Hopes and Fears, which are the
natural springs of action, there is nothing left, but an Omnipotent and
irresistible Power, to make men good: And therefore, as I observed before, Dr.
Crispe honestly acknowledges, That this were the way to take the bridle from
men, and make them kick up their heels, as the wild Asses upon Ibid. P. 30.
the Mountains, were a man to be guided by himself, and to order his own way
according to the pleasure of his own will, and therefore resolves the bridling
of men's Passions solely into the overruling power of Christ, which restrains
and keeps in their Spirits. Which he explains by this similitude, Although a
wild Ass upon the Mountains, being loose, runs at random, yet this Ass may be
taken, and so tamed, that he may be set as loose, as he was before, yet he will
not run unrulily, as he did before, by virtue of that ^aming that is upon him.
It is true, our natures themselves are mad, and if they had the reins, would
run wild; but you must know, that Christ breaks this wildness* and then he dare
let a Believer loose to that, in respect of which an Unbeliever, a wicked man,
would take advantage to sin. This is a plain confession, that the only security
against the evil consequences of this Doctrine consists in the restraints of
Omnipotent Grace. The Doctrine is apt in it self to give the reins to men's
ungoverned Lusts, and Passions, but Christ so tames the Spirit of a man, that
he shall not run away, though there be no bridle to keep him in: which, though
it be much for the necessity and commendation of irresistible Grace, is not
much for the credit of the Christian Religion.

Secondly, I observe also, what great reason these men have to cry out against
Selfishness, or Self-love, or against serving God in hope of a Reward, or for
fear of Punishment; because they have taken away all the Objects of our Hopes
and Fears; for if as Dr. Crispe well says, Christ have done all, that may be
done for us, then Ibid. p. 215.
there needs no doing at all for our selves. If our Justification and Eternal
Life be wholly owing to what Christ has done for us, then we must not work
either for Justification, or Eternal Life, as Dr. Crispe and Dr. Owen both
assert. For what reason then shall we serve God? If we get nothing by all the
righteousness we perform, then we had as good sit still, and do nothing. This,
says Dr. Crispe, is a carnal reasoning, and there is Selfishness at the botom
of it; and such a man had as good do nothing, for if he design his own good and
happiness, he serves himself, not God, and though he does perform Righteousness
never so exactly, if he serves himself, God will never reckon that he serves
him. At this rate Mr. Shephard, and others talk, as I showed in my Knowledge of
Christ, p. 413, etc Edit. 2. p. 295.
former Discourse, and here we see the plain reason of it. For it is not
imaginable, what should force men into such wild conceits, as to banish all the
natural principles of Action out of Religion, but that they had first formed
such uncouth Notions of Religion, as were inconsistent with all the Principles
of Human Nature: They first ascribe our Justification and Salvation entirely to
what Christ has done and suffered without requiring any condition on our part,
and then they were forced either to assert, that there was no need of serving
God at all, which they durst not own; or that we must serve God without
designing any benefit and advantage to our selves in doing so, because in their
way there is nothing to be gained by it; and therefore unless we will serve God
for nothing, we must not serve him at all: And I cannot but acknowledge, that
it was very craftily done of them, to cry up that as the very hight and
perfection of Christianity, which (how absurd and contradictory soever to the
Principles of Humane Nature, yet) they were forced to own, unless they would
renounce their darling and beloved Notions.

Thus I have given a plain and full account of the Doctrine of the Church of
England concerning the Justification of a sinner, and showed what little reason
these men have to talk of Articles and Homilies: All which I willingly submit
to the judgment of my Superiors, but neither expect nor fear an Answer from my
Adversaries.

CHAP. IV.
Concerning an acquaintance with Christ's Person.

THe Sum of what I charge Dr. Owen with in this matter is this, that, as far as
I can discover his meaning, by an Acquaintance with the Person of Christ, He
understands such a knowledge of what Christ is, has done, and suffered for us,
from whence we may learn those greater, deeper, and more saving Mysteries of
the Gospel, which Christ has not expressly revealed to us: Let us hear now how
the Doctor avoids this Charge, and I should be very glad, if he could come off
well, for I had much rather do public Penance in recanting an involuntary
mistake, than to find such pestilent Doctrines maintained and propagated by men
of note and fame: First then he tells his Readers, That I quarrel with him
about asserting the necessity of Acquaintance p. 26.
with the Person of Christ. This is a very ill beginning, and I have nothing to
answer to it, but that it is a mistake; for I acknowledge the necessity of
acquaintance with the Person of Christ, as much as the Doctor does, and no
where intimate the least dislike of it; but I frequently make use of this
expression afterward by way of reproach: That is, I often call those Persons,
who derive their Schemes of Orthodoxy from a pretended acquaintance with
Christ's Person by the name of Acquaintance of Christ, and this I must confess
is a fault, that I have given so good a name to them, and I wonder why they
should take it as a reproach: I was sensible that an Acquaintance with Christ
was too good a name, and therefore frequently mollified it with the addition of
a pretended acquaintance, which I should never have done, had I designed it as
a note of infamy; yet I thought it the most proper name to characterize those
men, who pretend to learn all saving knowledge from such an acquaintance with
the Person of Christ. But the Doctor adds, That the use of the word
Acquaintance in this matter is warranted by our Ibid.
Translation of the Scripture, and that properly, where it is required of us to
acquaint our selves with God: Here I perfectly agree with him, for I have no
quarrel with the word Acquaintance, but believe believe it to be a very good
English word, and our Translators did well to use it; nay I agree with the
Doctor too, that an acquaintance with the Person of Christ signifies the
knowledge of Jesus Christ, of his Person the Word made flesh, or the Son of God
incarnate; but yet I must beg the Readers favor to believe, that this is not
the Crime I charge the Doctor with, that he asserts it necessary p. 27.
that Christians should know Jesus Christ: Nor do I charge him with asserting
any acquaintance with the Person of Christ, which is not learned from the
Gospel. Nay, I do not so much as affirm, That the Doctor in express words owns
that there are any Mysteries of Religion, that are not to be found in the
Gospel, unless we are first acquainted with the Person of Christ. I always had
a better opinion of his prudence and skill in Humane Affairs than to imagine,
that he would thus publicly disown the Gospel-Revelation, or set up an
arbitrary Rule of Faith above it: What then is the Dispute between us? That is
easily discerned by any man, who has a mind to see it, and I cannot better
express it than by repeating my own words, That by an acquaintance with the
Person of Christ, he understands such a knowledge of what Christ is, has done,
and suffered for us, from whence we may learn those greater, deeper, and more
saving mysteries of the Gospel, which Christ has not expressly revealed to us.
This sense I put upon his words, and whether I have mistook him, the Reader has
liberty to judge, when he has perused my Defense.

The words, on which I found this charge, and which the Doctor does very wisely
suppress, are these: Christ is not only the wisdom of God, but made wisdom to
us, not only by teaching us wisdom, as he is the great Prophet of the Church,
but also because by the knowing of him, we become acquainted with the wisdom of
God, which is our wisdom. In which words the Doctor tells us, That Christ is
made wisdom to us; that is, that by him we learn all spiritual wisdom and
knowledge, all the Mysteries of Religion, these two ways: First, As he
instructs us in the will and wisdom of God, as he is the great Prophet of the
Church: This includes all the Revelations of the Gospel, which the Church of
Christ has hitherto thought sufficient to make a man wise unto Salvation; but
the Doctor has discovered another way, whereby Christ is made wisdom to us, and
that is, as by knowing of him we become acquainted with the wisdom of God,
which is our wisdom: So that this knowing of Christ, or being acquainted with
Christ is a way to be acquainted with the wisdom of God distinct from all the
Revelations of the Gospel: Let us then consider, since we have two ways of
learning wisdom, which of these is the best, and the Doctor clearly prefers an
acquaintance with the Person of Christ before the Revelations of the Gospel in
those words which follow, That these properties of God (his pardoning mercy,
etc) Christ has revealed in his Doctrine in that Revelation he has made of
God and his will, but the life of this Knowledge lies in an acquaintance with
his Person, wherein the express beams and glory of his Father does shine forth;
that is, that these things are clearly, eminently, and savingly to be
discovered only in Jesus Christ, as he explains himself. Here he distinguishes
again between the Revelations which Christ has made, and an acquaintance with
his Person, and prefers an acquaintance with his Person as the way to attain to
the most saving knowledge: The life of this knowledge lies in an acquaintance
with his Person, these things are clearly, eminently, and savingly to be
discovered only in Jesus Christ; that is, in the knowledge of his Person, as
distinguished from the Revelations of the Gospel: the Gospel of Christ
instructs us in the wisdom of God, but these things are discovered savingly
only in the Person of Christ, which, if I can understand plain English,
excludes the Revelations of the Gospel from making any saving discoveries of
the wisdom of God: And does not all this amount to what I charge him with, that
he sets up a new Rule of Faith above the Gospel, that he teaches such a
knowledge of Christ's Person, from whence we may learn those greater, deeper,
and more saving Mysteries of the Gospel, which Christ has not expressly revealed
to us; for if Christ has expressly revealed these things to us, I can by no
means understand, why they may not be as clearly, eminently, savingly
discovered in the Revelations of the Gospel, as in the Person of Christ.

Now though no man in his wits will openly profess to learn any other new
Mysteries from the Person of Christ, than what are revealed in the Gospel, yet
when men have set up a new Rule of Faith or Knowledge, they may learn new
discoveries too, if they please; especially if it be such a rule, as will bend
and comply with every man's fancy; and thus it has fared with the Doctor and
his Friends, as I have made appear by a whole Scheme of new Divinity, which is
wholly owing to this acquaintance with the Person of Christ, but has no solid
foundation in the Gospel.

But though the Doctors words be too plain and express to be evaded, yet I had
a surer foundation for this Charge than some loose or unwary expressions; for
the design of that whole digression of the excellency of Christ Jesus will
satisfy any impartial Reader, that I did not either mistake or pervert his
sense; for there he gives us many examples of this way of reasoning from the
knowledge of Christ's Person to discover those other great Mysteries of
Religion, which however they may be revealed in the Gospel of Christ, yet are
clearly, eminently, savingly discovevered only in Jesus Christ. He reduces the
sum of all true wisdom to three heads, the knowledge of God, and of our selves,
and skill to walk in Communion with God; and adds, That not any of them is to
any purpose to be obtained, or is manifested, but only in and by the Lord
Christ. Upon this I observed in my former Discourse, that p. 41^. Edit. 2. p.
29.
by is fallaciously added to include the Revelations Christ has made, whereas
his first undertaking was to show, how impossible it is to understand these
things savingly and clearly, notwithstanding all those Revelations God has
made of himself and his will by Moses and the Prophets, and by Christ himself,
without an acquaintance with his Person.

To this the Doctor answers, The fallacy pretended is merely of his own
coining. The p. 36.
knowledge I mean is to be learned in Christ, neither is any thing to be
learned in him, but what is learned by him. I do say indeed now, whatever I
have said before, that it is impossible to understand any sacred truth savingly
and clearly without the knowledge of the Person of Christ; but that in my so
saying I exclude the consideration of the Revelations, which Christ has made,
or that God has made of himself by Moses and the Prophets and Christ himself,
the principal whereof concerns his Person, and whence alone we come to know
him, is an assertion becoming the modesty and ingenuity of this Author. As for
modesty and ingenuity, the Doctor may take them to himself, since no man
deserves them better, but I would willingly put in for a share of truth and
honesty, if he can spare any: The Doctor says the fallacy is of my own coining,
pray why so? Because he does not exclude the Revelations which Christ has
made; nor do I say he does in these words, but the fallacy consists in not
doing it, which he ought to have done, if he would have been true to his
proposed design: He who undertakes to prove, that there are any sacred truths,
which cannot be clearly and savingly known by the Revelations of the Gospel
without an acquaintance with the Person of Christ, (which was the Doctors task,
as appears from what I have already said) though he need not wholly renounce
Revelation, yet he ought to consider the Revelations of Christ, and the
knowledge of his Person distinctly, and show that these truths are not clearly
manifested by Revelation, but are clearly and savingly discovered in the Person
of Christ: The first of these (especially with reference to some new
discoveries) the Doctor has done pretty honestly, for he has either alleged
no Scriptures for the proof of these grand Doctrines, or such, as every one may
easily see, do not clearly prove them; I shall now consider how he acquits
himself in the second, whereby it will evidently appear, that he sets up the
knowledge of Christ's Person as a way of learning Divine Truths distinct from
the Revelations of the Gospel: A few instances will be sufficient to clear this
matter; and that is all I at present design.

I shall begin with that terrible discovery of the naturalness of Gods
righteousness (vindictive justice) unto him, in that it was impossible, that it
should be diverted from sinners without the interposing of a Propitiation; this
the Doctor tells us is discovered in Christ, that is, in his Death and
Sufferings for Sin; what he means by a natural vindictive justice I shall
consider in its proper place, my present business is to examine, how he proves
a natural vindictive justice in God from the knowledge of Christ, and the only
Argument in that place is this: Those who lay the necessity of Of the
excellency of Christ. p. 93.
satisfaction merely upon the account of a free act and determination of the
will of God, leave to my apprehension no just and indispensable foundation for
the Death of Christ, but lay it upon a supposition of that which might have
been otherwise; but plainly God in that he spared not his only Son, but made
his soul an Offering for Sin, and would admit of no Atonement but in his blood,
has abundantly manifested, that it is of necessity to him (his Holiness and
Righteousness requiring it) to render indignation, wrath, tribulation, and
anguish unto Sin. To look upon it (Vindictive Justice) as that which God may
exercise or forbear, makes his Justice not a property of his Nature, but a free
act of his Will: And a will to punish, where one may do otherwise without
injustice, is rather ill will, than justice. If you resolve this Argument into
its several Propositions, it must proceed thus: It is very plain in Scripture,
that Christ died for our sins; so far Revelation goes. Hence the Doctor infers,
That it was absolutely necessary, that Christ should die for our sins; from
hence he infers, That it was absolutely necessary, that Sin should be punished;
and thence he infers, That Punitive and Vindictive Justice is so absolutely
necessary to God, that it is not at the free choice of his Will, whether he
will punish sin, or not, but he must do it: Now whether this Argument be good
or bad, I am not at present concerned to enquire, but shall only ask, whence
the Doctor learns all this train of Consequences, from which he at last
concludes, the naturalness and necessity of God's indictive Justice? Are we any
where told in Scripture, that because Christ died for sin, therefore it was
absolutely necessary he should die for Sin; and that it was absolutely
necessary he should die for Sin, because it is absolutely necessary that Sin
should be punished, and that it is absolutely necessary that Sin should be
punished, because God is so naturally just and righteous, that he cannot do
otherwise: If we are no where taught in Scripture to argue at this rate, then
here is a plain example how we may learn something from the knowledge of
Christ's Person, which the Gospel has not expressly taught us; how we may reason
from what Christ has done and suffered to draw such Conclusions, as are either
no where to be found in express terms in Scripture, or at least which we are no
where taught to draw from such Premises; which makes an Acquaintance with the
Person of Christ a new way of discovering Divine Truths distinct from the
Revelations of the Gospel; and if this be once acknowledged to be a good way of
reasoning, men may as well draw such Conclusions, as are no where to be found
in Scripture, as those which are.

By the same Argument the Doctor proves what the desert of Sin is: the demerit
of Sin is such, that it is altogether impossible that God should pass by any,
the least, unpunished: How does this appear? Why from the Person, who suffered
for it, who was the only Son of God, and if God would have done it for any
(passed by sin unpunished) he would have done it in reference to his only Son,
but he spared him not. The sum of which Argument is this, that because God
would not spare his only Son, after he had determined, that he should die as a
Sacrifice for sin, therefore he could not spare him, and therefore the demerit
of Sin is such, that it is impossible God should suffer it to go unpunished,
which is indeed a pretty Argument, but whether it be true or false, it is no
Scripture Argument, and therefore may serve for another instance of this new
way of reasoning from the knowledge of Christ.

This may suffice at present to make good my Charge, that the Doctor sets up an
acquaintance with the Person of Christ as a new medium of saving knowledge,
distinct from the Revelations of the Gospel; from whence we may clearly and
savingly learn those Divine Truths, which though they are pretended to be
contained in the Gospel, yet are not clearly and savingly to be learnt thence
without this knowledge of the Person of Christ; the plain meaning of which is,
that men must first reason from what Christ has done and suffered, and thence
form their Notions and Theories of Religion, and then it is very hard, if they
cannot find some obscure, ambiguous, or metaphorical expressions in Scripture
to countenance such conceits.

But this Book of Communion, out of which I have transcribed these passages,
was writ near twenty years since, and therefore to do the Doctor all the right
we can, let us consider whether in his later Writings he has expressed himself
more cautiously in this matter.

In his second Volume on the Hebrews, a Book of a very late date, p. 20. I find
this observation: A diligent attentive consideration of the Person, Offices,
and Work of Jesus Christ is the most effectual means to free the Souls of men
from all entanglements of errors, and darkness, and to keep them constant in
the profession of the truth: This is the very same Doctrine we had before, that
we must learn Divine Truths (which is much the same with being delivered from
errors and darkness) by a knowledge of the Person and Offices of Christ: For
the explaining of this he tells us there must be a diligent searching into the
Word, wherein Christ is revealed to us: The Scriptures reveal him, declare him,
testify of him, to this end are they to be searched, that we may learn and
know what they so declare and testify. Thus far it is very well, and would men
confine their knowledge of Christ and Divine Truths to the Revelation of the
Gospel, it would be an infallible preservative against all Error: But I do not
so well understand what he adds toward the conclusion of that Discourse: Unto
him (Christ) and the knowledge of him is all our study of the Scripture to be
referred, and the reason why some in the perusal of it, have no more light,
profit, or advantage, is, because they have no more respect unto Christ in
their enquiry. If he be once out of our eye in searching the Scripture, we know
not what we do, nor whither we go, no more than does the Mariner at Sea without
regard to the Pole Star. Truths to be believed are like Believers themselves,
all their life, power, and order, consist in their relation to Christ,
separated from him they are dead and useless. This is very profound and
Mysterious; we must search the Scriptures to know Christ, and the knowledge of
Christ must direct us in expounding the Scripture, as the Pole Star does the
Mariner to steer a safe and direct Course: We must consider all Truths in their
relation to Christ, which gives life, and power, and order to them. I wish the
Doctor had given us some examples of this, for I confess, I cannot understand
it. In p. 23. he tells us, But here lies the root of men's failings in this
matter: They seek for truth of themselves, and of other men, but not of Christ,
what they can find out by their own endeavors, what other men instruct them
in, or impose upon them, that they receive; few have that faith, love, and
humility, are given up to that diligent contemplation of the Lord Christ, and
his Excellencies, which are required in those, who diligently wait for his Law,
so as to learn the truth of him: So that it seems by eying Jesus Christ in
searching the Scriptures, he means a diligent contemplation of the Lord Christ
and his Excellencies, which will be a safer guide to all true saving knowledge
than all other enquiries whatsoever; so that still we must learn all Sacred
Truths from the knowledge of Christ's Person and Excellencies. And indeed this
he expressly tells us in the same Page, All the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge are hid in Christ, and therefore from him alone to be received, and
in him alone to be learned: In the due consideration of the Lord Christ are
these Treasures opened unto us. There is not the least line of truth, how far
soever it may be extended, and how small soever it may at length appear, but
the springs of it lie in the Person of Christ; and then we learn it aright,
when we learn it in the spring, or as it is in him, Ephesians. 4. 21. which when we
have done, we may safely trace it down, and follow it to its utmost extent. If
there be any sense to be made of this Discourse, it must be this, that we must
learn all Divine Truths from a consideration of the Lord Christ, his Person and
Excellencies, etc. because the Springs of all truth lie in the Person of
Christ, and without such a serious consideration of the Person of Christ to
direct and steer our Course, the study of the Gospel will avail us nothing:
That it is to no great purpose to understand Gospel Truths, unless we can find
out the springs, and the Center of them in the Person of Christ: He that looks
upon Gospel truths as Sporades, as scattered up and down independently one of
another, who sees not the Root, Center, and Knot of them in Jesus Christ, it is
most probable, that when he goes about to gather them for his use, he will also
take up things quite of another nature.

But it may be we may understand the Doctor better, if we consider the object
of this consideration, which is to free men from all errors and darkness, and
that is, the Person of Christ, his Offices, and Ibid.
his Work; this is the very thing I charged him with, that he affirmed, we must
attain to a saving knowledge of Divine Truths from a consideration of the
Person of Christ, and what he had done and suffered for us, so that I hope
every one will now believe, that this was no Calumny.

From Christ's Authrority as King he observes, p. 22. Men not considering the
Authority of Christ, either as instituting the Ordinances of the Gospel, or as
judging upon their neglect or abuse, are careless about them, or do not
acquiesce in his pleasure in them: This has proved the ruin of many Churches,
who neglecting the Authority of Christ, have substituted their own in the room
thereof: The consideration therefore of this Kingly Legislative Authority of
the Lord Christ by men, as to their present duty and future account, must needs
be an effectual means to preserve them in the truth, and from backslidings.
From the faithfulness of Christ as Prophet, he observes the same thing: He
being then ultimately to reveal the will of God, and being absolutely faithful
in his so doing, is to be attended unto: Men may thence learn, what they have
to do in the Church and Worship of God, even to observe and to do whatever he
has commanded, and nothing else. This is the very first Principle of
Phanaticism, which undermines the most prudent Orders and wholesome Constitutions
of any Church, and is another instance of this way of Reasoning from the
knowledge of Christ to discover those important Truths, which the Gospel no
where expressly teaches: Neither Christ nor his Apostles have any where told us,
that we must do nothing in the Worship of God, but what Christ has expressly
commanded, but this we must learn from an acquaintance with the Person and
Offices of Christ, from his Authority as King, and Faithfulness as Prophet,
which (if we will believe the Doctor) have left no room for the exercise of
Humane Authority, nor for the use of humane Prudence in Church Affairs.

But all this the Doctor spoke without an Adversary, let us now consider, how
he explains his own meaning in his Answer to my Discourse, which you may find
in page 33, 34. where he first denies, That he ever taught any other knowledge
of Vindicat. P. 33, 34,
Christ, or acquaintance with his Person, but what is revealed and declared in
the Gospel. This (as I observed above) I never charged him with, and he himself
seems to be sensible of it, and therefore adds; Yet I will mind this Author of
that, whereof if he be ignorant, he is unfit to be a Teacher of others, and
which if he deny, he is unworthy the name of a Christian, (this is a dangerous
Dilemma; for I confess, I am not at present disposed either to part with my
Rectorship, or my Christianity, and therefore let us hear what it is) namely,
that by the knowledge of the Person of Christ, the great Mystery of God
manifest in the flesh, as revealed and declared in the Gospel, we are led into
a clear and full understanding of many other Mysteries of Grace and Truth,
which are all Centred in his Person, and without which we can have no true nor
sound understanding of them: I shall speak it yet again, that this Author if it
be possible may understand it, (this is kindly done, since so much lies at
stake on it) or however that he and his Copartners in design may know, that I
neither am, nor ever will be ashamed of it: That without the knowledge of the
Person of Christ, which is our acquaintance with him, as we are commanded to
acquaint our selves with God, as he is the Eternal Son of God Incarnate, the
Mediator between God and Man, with the Mystery of the Love, Grace, and Truth of
God therein, as revealed and declared in the Scripture, there is no true useful
saving knowledge of any other Mysteries or Truths of the Gospel to be attained.
I wish I get well off, but I will do my best endeavor to understand it. By the
knowledge of the Person of Christ, the great Mystery of God manifested in the
flesh, as revealed and declared in the Gospel, we are led into a clear and full
understaneing of many other Mysteries of Grace and Truth, which are Centred in
his Person, and without which we can have no true nor sound understanding of
them. If by this he means, that we cannot understand those mysteries of Grace
and Truth, which concern the Person of Christ without knowing the Person of
Christ, this is a great Truth, but contains no great Mystery: As for instance,
Unless we have some knowledge of the Person of Christ, God manifested in the
flesh, we cannot understand the love of God in sending Christ into the World,
nor the great Mystery of Pardon and Forgiveness through the blood of Christ, we
can know nothing of his Death, and Resurrection, and Ascension into Heaven, and
Intercession for us at the right hand of God, and all those benefits we receive
from it; we cannot understand our Adoption in Christ to be the children of God,
nor our Union and Re^^^^on to him as our Head and Husband, as our Lord and
Savior, nor the communications of his Grace and Virtue to us, nor his Power
and Authority to raise us from the Dead, to judge the World, and to bestow Life
and Immortality upon his obedient Disciples: Not that the Springs of these
Truths lie in the Person of Christ, or must be learnt from a contemplation of
his Person, but from the Revelations of the Gospel. But the knowledge of
Christ's Person is necessary in order to understand those other Gospel
Mysteries, for the same reason, that it is necessary to understand, that there
was such a man as Alexander, before you can know what he did, where he was
King, what Battles he fought, what Victories he won; or by the same reason,
that you must first know the subject, before you can know the properties, and
qualifications of it. If this be all the Doctor intends, I must confess it is
very sound and Orthodox, but yet I must say, that time was, when he meant
otherwise, and his obscure way of expressing so plain a thing would make any
one suspect, that he meant something more still; and if he does, then after all
his soft and palliating expressions, it must come to this, That the Person of
Christ is the Spring and Fountain of all saving Knowledge, from whence we must
learn all those Mysteries, which are but obscurely and imperfectly revealed in
the Gospel, unless we make use of this knowledge of Christ and acquaintance
with his Person to expound and unriddle them: And indeed his second Explication
of his sense in this matter plainly looks this way: For under an acquaintance
with Christ he includes the knowledge of him, as the Eternal Son of God
incarnate, the Mediator between God and Man, with the Mystery of the Love,
Grace, and Truth of God therein, as revealed and declared in the Scripture.
This comprehends all those Revelations, which immediately concern the Person of
Christ, as his Nature, Offices, Mediation, and all the benefits which flow from
them, the Mystery of the Love, Grace, and Truth of God therein; And then he
adds, That without such a knowledge of the Person of Christ as this (which
contains all we can know, and all that is revealed in the Gospel concerning
Christ) There is no true useful saving knowledge of any other Mysteries of the
Gospel to be attained. This indeed is very warily said, and like a right
Sophister; set aside all the saving Mysteries of the Gospel, which concern the
Person, and Offices, and Mediation of Christ, and then there are no other
saving Mysteries to be discovered, or at least no saving knowledge of any other
Mysteries, because he knew very well, that no Christian could own any saving
knowledge, when he had laid aside the knowledge of Christ: And yet in this
saying he craftily insinuates too, that there are some other saving Mysteries,
which are to be discovered, when we are first acquainted with Christ; and he
should have done well to have told me what they are, and how they may be
discovered, since my Living or my Christianity lay at stake, and I am not very
good at guessing; but since he has here concealed this secret, we must learn
what it is from his former Writings, and then whatever danger there be in it, I
must needs say, that this acquaintance with the Person of Christ is a very ill
way of expounding Scripture, or of learning Gospel-Mysteries, as being that,
which different men may use to different purposes (as I showed in my former
Discourse) and from whence some men draw such Conclusions, as do quite evacuate
the ends and design of the Gospel.

This is sufficient to vindicate my self from those imputations of Falsehood and
Calumny, which occur almost in every Page of the Doctors Answer, but I shall
not dismiss this subject thus, but shall first show you, that there is such a
way of reasoning from the knowledge of Christ's Person now in great vogue among
some late Writers, and what Arguments I reject upon that score, as weak or
fallacious: And secondly, discourse something more particularly concerning this
way of reasoning.

As for the first, I have given instances enough of this nature in my former
Discourse, which were so plain and evident, that I thought the bare mentioning
of them was sufficient to convince any man from what Principles such Arguments
and Conclusions were deduced. But because I find, that my Adversaries are
willing to take no notice of the chief design for which those passages were
alleged, but to fall into some collateral Disputes, I must be forced more
expressly to state the matter in debate, and reduce it to another form and
method.

The Question then between us is plainly this, Whether any Persons pretend to
learn or prove the great Principles of their Religion from an Acquaintance with
the Nature, Person, Offices of Christ, distinct from the Revelations of the
Gospel. In my former Discourse I asserted, that they deduced such Doctrines
from, the knowledge of Christ, as are no where expressly contained in Scripture,
and I doubt not, but that will appear true, upon a particular examination of
such Doctrines as they have or shall fall in my way: but let the Doctrines be
true or false, the present dispute is, whether they make the knowledge of
Christ's Person a new medium of saving knowledge, from whence we may learn the
greater, deeper, and more saving Mysteries of Religion, distinct from the
Revelations of the Gospel: And that they do so is plain from this, that most of
the Arguments, from whence they deduce, and by which they prove their most
darling and mysterious Notions, are wholly owing to an acquaintance with
Christ's Person, and are no where expressed in Scripture. I have already given two
instances of this in his way of proving the naturalness of vindictive justice
to God, and the desert and demerit of sin, and shall now add some more.

The Doctor proves from the Deity of Christ (as I observed in my former
Discourse) P. 206.
the endless, bottomless, boundless grace and compassion that is in him, mercy
enough for the greatest, the eldest, the slubbornest transgressor, the
infiniteness of Grace with respect to the Spring or Fountain (the Deity of
Christ) will answer all our Objections. What is our finite guilt before it?
(How comes this guilt to be finite now? When we are so often told, that the
demerit of every sin is infinite, as being committed against an infinite God,
and requiring an infinite satisfaction for its Atonement) Show me the Sinner,
that can spread his iniquity to the dimensions (if I may so say) of this Grace.
I am glad to hear the Doctor put so fair a sense on these words, and to declare
to the World, that he designed no more in it, than to invite all sorts of
sinners, P. 170.
though under the most discouraging qualifications, to come unto Christ for
Grace and Mercy by Faith and Repentance: Though any man, who reads that long
Discourse about an endless, bottomless, boundless Grace and Compassion in
Christ, such an infinite Grace as makes nothing of our finite guilt, as all the
sins in the world cannot equal its dimensions, without one word of Faith or
Repentance, or a new life to qualify us for this mercy, especially if withal
he understood what a great Patron the Doctor is of the necessity of holiness
and obedience to qualify us for Gods mercy (as appears from what I have
already discoursed above) would not easily have guessed this to have been his
meaning: And whoever writes a Book which cannot be understood without a
Commentary, ought not to complain that he is mistaken, nor charge his Readers
upon that account with ignorance, falsehood, or calumny: Though for my part I
shall be very well contented he should write another Book consisting of little
else than those mild and gentle imputations of falsehood and calumny, so he will
but recant, or at least handsomely palliate those doctrines, which otherwise may
encourage bad men continuing so, to lay claim to such a boundless and
bottomless mercy.

But my present business is to observe, how the Doctor proves, that there is
such a boundless, bottomless Grace in Christ, and his Argument is taken from
his Divine Nature, which is infinite: For when the Conduit of his humanity is
inseparably united to the infinite inexhausted fonntain of the Deity, who can
look into the depths thereof; if now there be Grace enough for sinners in an
all sufficient God, it is in Christ. This is a plain instance of this way of
reasoning from an acquaintance with Christ, (with his Divine nature) which the
Scripture no where teaches, and which is weak and fallacious: For though the
Divine Nature be infinite, yet the exercise of mercy and compassion is
regulated by wisdom, and the free choice of the Divine Will, and therefore
though we may conclude from the Divine Nature, that God will be gracious and
compassionate to sinners, yet we cannot certainly know in what measures and
proportions God will exercise this Grace and Mercy without an express
declaration of his Will; and when God has declared his Will, as he has now done
in the Gospel, it is then at best to no purpose to argue from his Nature,
unless we have a mind to encourage Sinners to expect more Grace from the Divine
Nature than God has promised in the Revelation of the Gospel.

So that though we should suppose, that he did not consider this boundless
Grace in Christ p. 272.
as Mediator, but considered it as in him who is Mediator (which by the way
spoils all the comfort sinners might take from the boundless mercy of the
Divine Nature in Christ, if this be not in him as our Mediator, unless we may
expect more Grace from Christ upon his Personal account, than from his
Mediation, that is, more from the Person than from the Gospel of Christ, which
contains the terms of his Mediation, which he so vehemently disowns) yet I say
this Argument were weak and fallacious, because we cannot reason thus from the
Divine Nature it self, for though the Divine Nature be the Fountain of Grace
and Mercy, yet the Divine Will regulates the exercise of it, and assigns its
measures; much less can we reason thus from the Divine Nature considered in
Christ as our Mediator; for a Mediator as Mediator, though he be God-man, is
not the Fountain, but Minister of Grace, as Christ witnesses, That he came not
to do his own will, but the will of him that sent him. And thus he is
considered in Scripture, even where he is said to be the only begotten of the
Father, full of Grace and truth, which seems not primarily to refer to the
inherent glory and perfection of his Nature (though that may be proved from it)
but to the glory of his Ministry, which was the only glory the Apostles could
then discover, when his Essential Majesty was hid under a vail of flesh: and
therefore I think still, the Doctor would do well to make God the Father the
Fountain of Grace, for though when we consider the three Persons in the Sacred
Trinity in the Unity of the Divine Essence, what is attributed to one is
supposed to be attributed to the other; yet when we consider them under
different capacities and relations, it is not so: Christ as God essentially one
with the Father and Holy Spirit is the Fountain of Grace, as Mediator he is the
Minister of it; the Father sends, and Christ is sent; the Father prescribes his
work, and he finishes it: And therefore to make Christ as Mediator, the
Fountain of Grace is a derogation from God the Father, whom the Scripture makes
the first mover and supreme Agent in the work of our Redemption.

I observed in the same place another p. 209.
instance of this way of reasoning from the Divine Nature in Christ, to prove
that Eternity, Unchangeableness, and Fruitfulness of his Love. Now this, I say,
is a way of proving the Eternity, Unchangeableness, and Fruitfulness of
Christ's love, which the Scripture no where teaches, but is wholly owing to an
acquaintance with Christ: And I wonder that the Doctor should be at a loss to
know what it is I except against, whether it be, that the love of Christ, as he
is God is Eternal? Or that it is Unchangeable? Or that Vindicat. p. 177.
it is Fruitful, or Effective of good things unto the Persons Beloved? It is
neither of these in themselves considered, for I own all, as he very well
knows, but I except partly against his way of stating these things, and partly
against his way of proving them: or rather against both together. What he means
by this Eternal, Unchangeable and Fruitful Love, he tells us himself: The love
which I intend, and whereunto I ascribe those properties is the especial love
Vindicat. p. 183.
of God in Christ unto the Elect. This is such a love, as is Eternal without
beginning, and without end, as does not change with the changes of the object,
as the love of men does, and is so fruitful and effectual, as to love Life,
Grace, holiness into us, to love us into Covenant, to love us into heaven. Now
my business is not to dispute the case, whether God have elected some
particular Persons, whom he will infallibly bring to glory, which I never
denied yet, and I think never shall: But the question is, Whether the Eternity,
and Unchangeableness, and fruitfulness, of this Electing Love, can be proved
from the Eternity, and Immutability, etc. of the Divine Nature: The
inconvenience I then urged it with was this, If this love be so Eternal and
Unchangeable, etc. because the p. 210.
Divine Nature is so, then it was always so, for God always was what he is, and
that which is Eternal could never be other than it is now; and why could not
this Eternal, and Unchangeable, and Fruitful love as well preserve us from
falling into Sin, and Misery, and Death, as love Life and Holiness into us all.
To this the Doctor answers, That Gods love is in Scripture represented
Unchangeable, because he himself is so, but it does not hence follow, that God
loves any one naturally or necessarily. His love is a free act of his Will,
and therefore though it be like himself, such as becomes his nature, yet it is
not necessarily determined on any object, nor limited as to the Nature,
Degrees, Effects of it, which he proves from the different dispensations of the
Grace and Mercy of God under the Law and Gospel; and adds, God is always the
same that he was, love in God is always the same that it was; but the Objects,
Acts, and Effects of this Love, with the measures and degrees of them, are the
issues of the counsel or free purpose of his Will. Now this Answer is what I
would have, and plainly discovers the Sophistry of this way of reasoning: For
if this electing Love be not the immediate and necessary effect of the Divine
Nature, but the free choice and purpose of his Will, then we cannot learn
either that it is, or what it is from the bare contemplation of the Divine
Nature, but from the declarations of the Divine Will; for we can prove nothing
from the Divine Nature, but what has a necessary and inseparable connection with
some attribute and perfection in God; but where a free choice and counsel
intervenes, we must be contented to be ignorant, or to learn from Revelation.

We may certainly conclude from the holiness and goodness of God, that God will
love good men, and hate the wicked, because holiness includes in the very
notion of it a necessary love to goodness, and hatred of evil; and from the
immutability of God, we may conclude his unchangeable love to goodness, and
hatred of evil, as the Psalmist expresses it, Psalm. 103. 17, 18. But the mercy
of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him, and his
righteousness unto Childrens Children, to such as keep his Covenant, and to
those who remember his Commandments to do them. And this is all that can be
proved from the natural notion of an immutable love. But we cannot hence
conclude, that God has elected any particular persons as the objects of this
unchangeable love; whether this be so or no, must be determined by Revelation,
which contains the declaration of the free purposes and counsels of the Divine
Will.

It is impossible from the nature of God to determine, whether God has from all
Eternity decreed whatever shall come to pass in time; because the Decrees of
God are the free choice of his will, and therefore he might either decree, or
not decree, as he pleased: Nor does the immutability of his Decrees depend
immediately upon the immutability of his Nature, but upon the immutability of
his Counsel, for God may if he please make temporary and conditional Decrees,
which shall last but for a certain time, and be performed only upon certain
conditions as well as those which are absolute and peremptory: And therefore
when the Apostle to the Hebrews would prove the immutability of the
Gospel Covenant, he does not argue from the immutable Nature of God, who cannot
alter what he once decrees, but from his immutable Counsel, which he confirmed
to Abraham by an Oath, Heb. 6. 13, 14, 16, 17, 18. For when God made promise to
Abraham, because he could swear by no greater, he swear by himself, saying,
surely blessing I will bless thee, and multiplying, I will multiply thee; for
men verily swear by the greater, and an Oath for confirmation is to them an end
of all strife, wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto the Heirs of
Promise, the immutability of his Counsel, confirmed it by an Oath, that by two
immutable things in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a
strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to the hope set before us. So that
the foundation of our hope rests upon the unchangeable counsel and purpose of
God, confirmed by an Oath, which at most resolves it self not into an
unchangeable love, but into unchangeable truth and faithfulness, that God will
never alter that, which he has promised never to alter. This is plainly
expressed too in that Promise made to David concerning the perpetuity of his
Kingdom, wherein he was a Type of Christ, and of the Eternal duration of his
Kingdom, Psalm 89. 33, 34, etc. Nevertheless my loving kindness will I not
utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail; My Covenant will I
not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips; once have I swore
in my holiness, that I will not lie unto David, his Seed shall endure for ever,
and his Throne as the Sun before me. Thus to give but one instance more of this
nature, when God by the Prophet Isaiah makes such a gracious Promise of the
restoration of the Gentiles, and their incorporation into his Church, he
confirms it in the very same manner, Isa. 54. 8, 9, 10. In a little wrath I hid
my face from thee, for a moment; but with everlasting kindness will I have
mercy on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer; for this is as the waters of Noah
to me; for as I have sworn, that the waters of Noah should no more go over the
earth, so have I sworn, that I would not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee,
for the Mountains shall depart, and the Hills be removed, but my kindness shall
not depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant of my peace be removed, says
the Lord, that has mercy on thee.

And it is very observable, that throughout the Scripture, where it is said,
that God will not repent, it refers not to the immutability of his Nature, but
of his Counsels; Thus in 1 Samuel 15. 28, 29. Samuel acquaints Saul with his
immutable Decree to remove the Kingdom from him: And Samuel said unto him, the
Lord has rent the Kingdom of Israel from thee this day, and has given it to a
neighbor of thine, that is better than thou; and to assure him of the
Immutability of this Decree, he adds, And also the strength of Israel will not
lie, nor repent, for he is not a man, that he should repent. The like we may
see in Ier. 4. 28. where God denounces his severe Judgments against Jerusalem:
For this shall the Earth mourn, and the heavens above be black because I have
spoken it; I have purposed, and will not repent, neither will I turn back from
it: Whereas in other cases, notwithstanding the Immutability of the Divine
Nature, the Scripture frequently mentions Gods repenting both of the good and
of the evil, which he had thought to do, when the change of the Object required
such a change in his affections, and in the administrations of his providence:
Nay, in that very place where God assigns his own immutable Counsels, as the
reason why he had not destroyed the Posterity of Jacob, when they had so
grievously provoked him, yet he thought it no blemish to his Immutability to
assure them, that he would alter the administrations of his Providence
according to those changes and alterations which were in them; for his
immutable Promise to Abraham required, that he should not utterly destroy them,
and his immutable love to holiness and goodness required the latter, Mal. 3. 6,
7. For I am the Lord, I change not, therefore ye Sons of Jacob are not
consumed. Return unto me, and I will return unto you says the Lord of Hosts.
And this is what I asserted, that the only natural Notion of an immutable love,
which we can learn from the Contemplation of the Divine Nature, is that God
always loves for the same reason; that he always loves those who are good, and
hates those who are wicked, not that he always loves the same Person, let him
be good or wicked: And as for what the Doctor objects against this, that then
Vindicat. p. 187.
either God indeed never loves any man, be he who he will; or that he is
changeable in his love upon outward external reasons, as we are; I think by his
good leave I need choose neither of them; the first I by no means like, that
because God loves none but good men, therefore he loves no man, for though
there are but a few good men in the world, yet I hope there are some, and I do
as little like the other; for though God alter his love to any person, when he
ceases to be good, yet this is not to change upon outward External reasons, but
upon such reasons as are essential to his Nature; for it is contrary to the
holiness of the Divine Nature to love wickedness, or a wicked man: God's love
to holiness and hatred of evil is immutable as his nature is, and therefore
when any Person ceases to be good, God must cease to love, which does not argue
any change in God, but in the Object, and when the Object is changed, the
immutability of his love is the reason why he loves no longer.

As for what the Doctor adds, In the mean time, such a love of God toward
Believers, as shall always effectually preserve them meet Objects of his love
and approbation, is not to be baffled by such trifling impertinencies: Whether
what I have discoursed be a trifling impertinency let others judge; but when he
makes it a necessary effect of an immutable love effectually to preserve such
Persons meet Objects of love and approbation, he grants all that I have
contended for, that the immutability of Gods love in it self considered is no
argument, that he will always love the same Persons, unless they continue meet
objects of his love; for if the love of God be so immutable, as always to love
the same Person, be he what he will, then such a man is a meet Object of love,
while he continues the same Person, whatever his qualities are, and there is no
more required to this, than that God should uphold him in being: But if besides
his being such a particular Person, on whom God has fixed his love, there be
any other qualifications required to make him, and preserve him a meet Object
of love, then the Doctor must acknowledge, that Gods immutable love requires an
Object which does not change, one who persists and perseveres in the practice
of an Universal Righteousness, which is all I contend for, the immutable love
of God to good men, under that notion as good: For supposing any change in the
Object, God must either continue to love an unmeet Object, or else cease to
love: And let him choose which side he pleases; if the first, he attributes such
an immutability to God, as is inconsistent with wisdom and holiness, and
savours more of the stubbornness and impotency of humane Passions, than of a
Divine Love: If the latter, then he makes the Love of God as mutable and
Subject to changes as I do.

And as for that love of God to Believers, which always preserves them meet
objects of his love, the Doctor mightily mistakes me, if he thinks I designed
to oppose it; I acknowledge the perseverance of Believers to be the effect of
the Divine Grace, as well as their believing at first; but if he designs this
for a description of Gods electing love, which is the immutable cause both of
faith and perseverance, as it is plain he does, I wonder, why he calls it Gods
love to believers; for Election in the Doctors judgment considers no
qualifications in Persons; and what he calls Gods love, is more properly Gods
Decree to Love, when the Person is a fit object for it: And it is necessary to
distinguish between an immutable Decree to make and preserve a fit object of
love, and the immutability of the Divine Love; The first depends upon an
immutable Counsel; The second upon the persevering meetness and fitness of the
object to be Beloved.

I have already given several other instances of this way of reasoning from an
acquaintance with Christ's Person, from his being our Surety and Mediator, our
Vide supra p. 171. etc
Head and Husband, and the like, and intended to have added many more, but this
is sufficient to satisfy any impartial Reader, what I mean by an acquaintance
with Christ's Person, and how far the Doctor and his Friends may be charged
with it, and therefore at present I shall only briefly consider this way of
reasoning, and put a conclusion to this Argument.

Now I readily agree with Mr. Ferguson, that in many cases it is not only
justifiable, Interest of Reason, etc. p. 164.
but necessary to Reason from Revelation; and I must needs say, that the
instances he gives of it are unanswerable, but whether they may be called
deductions and consequences from Revelation let others judge: As the
application of general Precepts, Promises, and Comminations to single
Individuals, and universal directions to particular cases. The application of
ancient Prophesies to their Events, whereby the Apostles proved Christ to be
that Messiah who was to come. And the testimony of Miracles for the proof of a
Revelation, which are the principal instances Mr. Ferguson gives, as will
appear to any one who consults those Texts of Scripture, which he alleadges in
this behalf. But this is nothing to our present Dispute; the question is,
whether we may deduce any new Doctrinal Conclusions, which are neither expressly
taught in Scripture, nor can be found out by mere Principles of Reason, from
their supposed connection with some thing which is revealed.

And I think thus much we may safely say, that we can know no more of matters
of pure Revelation than what is revealed; whatever wholly depends upon the free
and Sovereign Will of God can be known no other way but by Revelation, as no
man can know the secret thoughts and counsels of a man, but those who learn
them from himself; and by the same reason that we can know nothing of these
matters without a Revelation, we can know no more neither than what is
revealed; which consideration alone is sufficient to overthrow this way of
reasoning from an Acquaintance Knowledge of Christ, Chap. 3. Sect. 3.
with the Person of Christ. This Argument I have managed at large in my former
Discourse, and know not what I should add to it here, unless it be a more
particular application of it to our present case.

As for instance, we learn from Revelation that Christ died for our sins to
make Atonement and Expiation for them, and to procure pardon and forgiveness
for all true Penitents; but because Christ died for our sins, it does not hence
follow that there is such a natural Vindictive Justice in God, as would not
suffer him to pardon sin without a full satisfaction: for Christ's Death being
the effect of Gods free Counsel, we can know no more of the cause, and reason,
and motive of it than he has revealed; there may be several other reasons
assigned on Gods part, why he should send Christ into the world to save
sinners, besides a natural Vindictive Justice, and the Scripture has assigned
several other reasons of Christ's Death, but has never assigned this: And
indeed unless we will assert that the Death of Christ did necessarily result
from the nature of God, and was not the effect of his free choice and counsel,
this reasoning must be false: For I hope they will acknowledge God to be as
necessarily good, as he is just (for there is no reason, why goodness should be
thought the free act of Gods Will and Counsel, and Justice the necessity of his
Nature,) and if so, then supposing the fall of man, which brought sin and
misery into the world, the Death of Christ was as absolutely necessary, as that
God should be good and just: The goodness of God (according to this way of
reasoning) made it necessary to redeem Mankind from that state of misery, and
the Justice of God made it necessary for him to punish sin. This punishment
must fall either upon the Sinner himself, or some other in his stead; the
Sinner cannot suffer the just desert of sin without being Eternally miserable,
and none else could expiate our sins but only the Son of God incarnate; who by
being Man was capable of suffering, and by being God, gave an infinite value to
his sufferings, answerable to the infinite demerit of sin: So that if God be as
necessarily Good as he is Just, his Goodness did as necessarily determine him
to provide a ransom for sinners, as his Justice did to punish sin, and there
being no other possible way of doing this, but by the Incarnation and
Sufferings of his own Son, the Death of Christ is as necessary an effect of the
Justice and Goodness of the Divine Nature, as Light is of the Sun.

Thus though Christ died for our sins, yet we cannot merely from the Death of
Christ certainly conclude, that he died for all, or only for some, that he died
for us absolutely or conditionally; for the extent and efficacy of Christ's
Death, as well as his Death it self, depends upon the Will and Counsel of God,
and therefore cannot be known without a Revelation.

Christ fulfilled all Righteousness, but we cannot hence conclude, that he
fulfilled all Righteousness for us, and that we are accounted righteous for the
sake of his perfect Righteousness imputed to us; for he might fulfill
Righteousness for a great many other reasons, and this is the most unlikely
reason of all: The same may be said of those choice Conclusions from Christ's
being our Head and Husband, our Surety and Mediator, our Physician, and
Shepherd, and Rock, and Life, etc. Whatever Conclusions we draw from these
which are not revealed in the Scripture are at best very uncertain and
lubricous, because all these Revelations and Offices of our Savior, with their
extent and virtue, and manner of their execution depend upon the free Counsel
of God, and therefore can be known only by Revelation.

Indeed, those who argue and reason from an Acquaintance with the Person of
Christ seem to be aware of this, and therefore they endeavor to reduce the
whole Mystery of our Redemption by Christ to necessary causes, that God could
not do otherwise, and that Mankind could not be saved in any other way, which
is enough to prejudice all wise men against the whole Systeme of their
Divinity, and yet they can take no other course to uphold their cause, for if
it be once supposed, that this may be otherwise, all their Arguments will be
found weak and unconcluding.

Thus for instance; if we suppose, that God may forgive true Penitents, without
exacting satisfaction, this destroys their Notion of a natural Vindictive
Justice, and their wild conceit about the nature of Christ's satisfaction,
which is built on it, as if it were only to gratify an inexorable revenge. If
it be supposed, that God may forgive our sins, and accept and reward our
sincere though imperfect services for the sake of Christ's Death, and
Sufferings, and Righteousness, without accounting us perfectly innocent and
perfectly righteous with the Righteousness of Christ; if God may for Christ's
sake dispense with the rigor and severity of the Law, and accept of sincerity
instead of perfection, than all their Arguments for the necessity of imputation
(in their notion of it) fall to the ground.

If Christ may be our Surety and Mediator, and yet not be obliged to fulfill all
Righteousness in our stead, if Christ may fulfill all Righteousness, and yet
this Righteousness not be imputed to us; if the antecedent necessity of
Repentance and a new Life may be reconciled with the Grace of God, and the
Merits of Christ, than to be sure it is not necessary it should be otherwise,
and then all their Arguments are weak and fallacious, for if they do not
conclude necessarily, then the contrary may be true.

And is it not strange presumption for any men to say, that there is no other
possible way for God to save Sinners than what they have described in their
ill-digested Systemes, and yet all their Arguments from an acquaintance with
Christ's Person proceed upon this, and can never be made good without it. For
if they be not necessarily true, they may be false: And if they may be false,
they are no good foundation for our Faith. We have an excellent instance of
this in Mr. Ferguson's way of proving the Mystery of the Trinity from its
necessary connection with the Doctrine of Original Sin: For the Interest of
Reason, P. 35.
Mystery of the Trinity has a necessary Connection with the Work of our
Redemption by the Incarnation of the Son of God, and the Work of our Redemption
by the Incarnation of an infinite Person has the like Connection with the
necessity of satisfying Divine Justice, in order to dispensing of Pardon to
repenting Offenders, and the necessity of satisfying Justice for the end
aforesaid, has a necessary Connection with the Doctrine of the corruption of
Mankind; and the corruption of Humane Nature is both fully confessed, and may
be demonstrated by reason. And thus the Mystery of the Trinity is at last
demonstrated by reason, that is, from the wickedness and degeneracy of Mankind.

And thus they reason in other cases; they prove the necessity of a Vindictive
Justice, and the necessity of Satisfaction, and the necessity of the
Incarnation and Sufferings of the Son of God, and the necessity of his
fulfilling Righteousness, and the necessity of Imputation, nay, a necessity of
the Divine Decrees themselves; For the Arguments, which they commonly allege
in these cases, if they have any force in them, must prove all this to be
necessary, and without this can prove nothing else.

When we discourse of the free Counsels and Purposes of the Divine Will, we
must learn from Revelation what God has done, and what he will do, not argue
what he must do: Or we may confirm our Faith by considering how fit and
becoming it is, and how agreeable to the Divine Nature and Perfections, or at
most may argue probably from some collateral Circumstances, to prove the thing
likely and probable, an instance of which I gave at large in my former
discourse; but Knowledge of Christ. Chap. 3. Sect. 3.
we must pretend to know no more of matters of pure Revelation, than what is
revealed, unless we can either comprehend the infinite Methods of the Divine
Wisdom, or discover a necessity of Nature in God, that he could do no other
than what we fancy; or can pretend to a Spirit of Prophecy and Revelation, to
discover those hidden Mysteries to us, which are either concealed or obscurely
hinted in the External Revelation of the Letter. And indeed, sometimes they
talk at this rate, as if every particular man must have an immediate Revelation
from Christ to enable him to expound the External Revelation, which is but a
dead Letter without it; and I know no other secure refuge they have, but to
take Sanctuary in Enthusiasms and pretended Inspirations.

CHAP. V.
Concerning the Union of Believers to Christ, and the imputation of Pelagianism.

IT is time now to proceed to the consideration of our Union to Christ, in
which Argument Mr. Ferguson has put out his whole strength, such as it is,
which consists only in some Childish Cavils, false Representations, and
insolent and foolish Triumphs. Though I wonder he has no more craft, than to
tell such improbable Stories, as confute themselves. As for instance, he
charges my Notion of Union to Christ with disserving holiness; Why, what is my
Notion of Union? That I expressed in few words, That Interest of Reason in
Religion, P. 443, etc
Christ is a spiritual King, and all Christians are his Subjects, and our Union
to Christ consists in our belief of his Revelations, obedience to his Laws, and
subjection to his Authority: How can this disserve Holiness, which makes
Holiness and Obedience Essential to our Union? This is a very improbable Story,
and I doubt he will find few Vouchers for it: And yet to see the power of wit;
he has two or three as plain proofs of it as heart can wish.

For first he observes, that I acknowledge, that in one sense we must be united
to Christ before we can be holy: But then he ought to have been so honest, as
to have told what sense that is. I shall transcribe that passage, and leave men
to judge what they please of our Author. Our Union Knowledge of Christ, p. 349.
to Christ is more or less perfect, according to our seize in true Piety
and Virtue. The first and lowest degree of our Union to Christ is a belief of
his Gospel, which in order of nature must go before Obedience to it; but yet it
includes a purpose and resolution of obeying it; and in this sense we must be
united to Christ before we can be holy, because this belief of the Gospel is
the great Principle of Obedience: But then our Union is not perfected without
actual Obedience, this makes us the true Disciples of Christ, when we are
fruitful in good Works. So that all I affirm is, that we must first believe the
Gospel before we can obey it, and that a sincere belief of the Gospel, and a
hearty resolution of obeying it, does begin our union to Christ before we may
have the opportunities of External Obedience: The Internal acts of the mind, as
Faith and Repentance, and the love of God, and the sincere purposes of a new
Life, are antecedently necessary to our Union to Christ; but External Holiness
and Obedience, which requires time and opportunities of action, which are not
always in our power, may not always go before, but must always follow to
complete and perfect our Union. Which I thus explained in the same place:
Christ receives bad men as soon as they believe his Gospel, and resolve to be
good, but their Reward is suspended upon the performance of these Vows, and
this is no reproach to his Holiness.

But still Mr. Ferguson can prove, that I make our Union to Christ to be
perfected without actual obedience, though I expressly affirm the contrary,
because I say, That to be in Christ signifies no more than being members of his
visible Church, which is made up of Hypocrites, as well as sincere Christians:
And so I say still, That where Christ speaks of such branches in him as bear no
fruit, Joh. 15. 2. By being in him he can intend no more than being Members of
his visible Church by a public profession of Faith in him, for otherwise this
Phrase of being in him cannot be applied to hypocrites, who bear no fruit; But
how does it hence follow, that our Union to Christ is completed without
Obedience? For did I ever assert, that an External Union to the visible Church
did complete and perfect our Union to Christ? And if it does not, then I hope
we may safely assert, that to be in Christ is sometimes taken in that Latitude
of sense, as to include Hypocrites as well as sincere Christians, and yet not
assert a complete and perfect Union to Christ without Obedience.

But it is very pretty to observe our Authors Criticism upon our Saviors
words, Every branch in me that bears not fruit, Ibid. p. ^45.
which he says may as well be read, Every branch that bears not fruit in me,
he takes away: Now suppose we should be so civil, as to grant him this, What
will he gain by it? Why, then the true import of it is this, That unless we be
in Christ we can bring forth no fruit to God, and that what show of being
branches we make by an External Membership in the Church, yet that shall be no
obex to Christ's disclaiming and renouncing our works. His design is to prove,
that every branch in me does not signify those branches which are in Christ;
and therefore he will not join In me with branch, but with bears fruit, which
being a very dull observation may pass for his own: For I would fain learn of
Mr. Ferguson in what this branch is: It is certain de fide, that it is a
branch, unless he can find some new reading to avoid that too; Of what then is
it a branch? There is nothing in the Context to which this branch can refer,
but only the Vine, which is Christ; and therefore if it be a branch, do what he
can, it must be a branch in the Vine, a branch in Christ. And then I have a
farther scruple still (supposing we did allow his reading) how a branch, which
is not in Christ the Vine can bear fruit in Christ the Vine: And therefore if
it be acknowledged, that God expects from such branches, that they should bear
fruit in Christ, it must be confessed, that in one sense or other they are in
him; for they can in no sense be said to bear fruit in him, till in some sense
they may be said to be in him. And there is still one little difficulty behind,
what is meant by God's taking away those branches which bear not fruit in
Christ: This is a plain Allusion to the Husbandman's cutting dead and fruitless
branches off from the Vine, and so signifies the Excision of such fruitless
branches from the body of Christ; and how can they be cut off, and taken away
from Christ, if they were never in him.

And yet after all our Author is forced to return to what he designed to
confute, and by a Branch to understand one who lives in External Membership
with the Church, and by so doing makes a show of being a branch in Christ, that
is, (as he must mean, if he means any thing) of being vitally united to him,
when he is not; which is as much as ever I asserted in this matter; only he
will by no means allow, that these branches may be said to be in Christ, though
he owns them to be members of the visible Church of Christ; and yet he has no
way to prove, that a branch in this place signifies a Church member, but only
because it is called a branch in Christ.

A second and third Argument, whereby Mr. Ferguson proves my Notion of Union to
Christ to be destructive to Holiness, are both resolved into this, That I deny
Ibid. p. 447, etc
the supernatural assistances of Grace from Christ to make men holy; and
therefore that Holiness and Obedience, which alone I make necessary to our
Union to Christ is not true Gospel-holiness, as not being owing to an infused
Principle derived from Jesus by the effectual operation of the Holy Ghost. And
that it is impossible for any Persons, though completely and perfectly united
to Christ, to attain true Holiness for the future, because Christ is not
considered as a quickening Head, and a vital root of influences to us. Now
though I suppose Mr. Ferguson and I shall hardly agree about the manner of the
Holy Spirits working in us, which he affirms to be by a real and Physical
operation, yet I never denied, but have expressly owned the Divine Influences of
Grace from Christ, as will appear plainly before I conclude this Chapter. But
suppose for once that I had denied this, and had affirmed, that men might be
holy without it, would it hence follow, that I rejected the necessity of
holiness, or made it impossible to Mankind, because (though falsely) I should
assert, that men are and may be holy without such supernatural strength and
power. Yes, for this is not a Gospel-Holiness, which is wholly owing to the
Divine Grace: But does the efficient cause then constitute the nature of
things? Suppose two men, one immediately created by God, another begotten in
the ordinary course of nature, but both perfectly alike, as to all the
Essentials of Humane Nature, does this make such a difference between them,
that one must not be called a man, as well as the other, because one was
created, and the other begotten. Thus in the same manner, suppose one man
immediately created by God perfectly righteous and holy, as Adam was; Another,
who is renewed and sanctified by infused Principles of Grace, and by the
Physical operation of the Spirit; And a third, who by diligence and industry,
by reason and discourse, and the wise improvement of his natural faculties,
has arrived to the same temper of mind, to the same Principles and Habits of
Action, which were immediately created in the first, and Physically infused
into the second. If there were such a man, as this, I would willingly
understand, why he should not be accounted as truly and properly holy as either
of the former; by the same reason, that he is as true a man, who is begotten by
the strength of nature, as Adam was, who was immediately created, or as Christ
was, who was formed in the Virgins Womb by the overshadowing of the Holy Ghost.

The original Holiness of God is the Pattern of all Holiness, and the holiness
of Creatures consists in a conformity to the Divine Image, not in being
produced by a Divine Power: The sanctifying operation of the Holy Spirit is
necessary to the Being, not to the Nature of Holiness: Could that which we call
Holiness be produced by the strength of natural Reason, and our natural
Faculties, it would be nevertheless Holiness for that: And therefore unless Mr.
Ferguson can prove, that that Holiness, which I make essential to our Union to
Christ, is defective in something which constitutes the nature of Holiness,
though he could prove that I attributed Holiness to the strength and power of
Nature, he will only make himself ridiculous, by charging my Notion with
destroying the necessity of Gospel-holiness.

But this whole charge was the effect only of a weak and contemptible revenge,
because I had charged them (and made good my charge) with placing our Union to
Christ before holiness of life: What defense can Mr. Ferguson make against
this? Truly none at all, but according to his old way he denies it, without
attempting to answer any thing which I alleged in the proof of it: And yet
(which argues him to be a man of much Knowledge of Christ. Chap. 4. Sect. 4.
greater courage than wit) at the very same time he denies and owns it, or
which comes much to one, professes that it is very indifferent to him, whether
it be so or not. He tells us, All that we plead Interest of Reason, p. 440, 441.
for is this; That as previously to our Union with Christ, we are polluted and
unholy, so by that very act, whereby he unites us to himself, he infuses those
Principles into us, whereby our natures are cleansed, and we come to be
denominated holy and pure. Here he expressly acknowledges, that before our Union
to Christ we are polluted, and unholy, and therefore we must be united to him
while we are unholy, for every minute before, our Union is previous to it.
Well, but then by the same act that he assumes us into Union with himself, he
transforms our natures. Suppose that yet we are unholy till we are united, for
we are made holy by virtue of our Union; and our Author tells us, That it is a
needless enquiry, whether our Renovation in order of nature precede our Union
with Christ, or whether our Union go before our Renovation, seeing in order of
time they are not only inseparable, but that which is the new Creature, the
Seed of God, and Divine Nature in us is the very bond of our Cohaesion. Say you
so Sir? Is this a needless enquiry? Then it seems it is indifferent, whether we
be considered as united to Christ before or after we are holy; and why then
should he pretend so much to abhor the thoughts of our being united to Christ
while we are unholy? And yet how this agrees with making the New Creature the
bond of Cohaesion, I cannot understand, since in order of nature, we can have
no notion of any Union before or without its bond.

But to consider this a little, whether it be so indifferent to place our Union
to Christ in order of nature before or after our Renovation: (For I never
charged them with saying that those, who are in Christ may continue unholy,
because they, as well as the Antinomians, do affirm, That Holiness is a
necessary and Physical effect of our Union to Christ, though their Principles
overthrow the necessary Obligations to it) whoever is considered as united to
Christ must be considered in a state of favor and acceptance with God, as
clothed with the perfect Righteousness of Christ, as pardoned through his
Blood, and so an actual Heir to Eternal Life and Glory; now if a man may be
considered as pardoned, and justified, and an Heir of Glory in order of nature
before he is holy, before he repents of his sins, or loves God, or so much as
resolves and purposes to obey him, this I am sure overthrows the whole
Christian Religion, which denounces the wrath of God against every man, who is
wicked, to the very last minute, wherein he may be considered as wicked, and
promises Pardon and Eternal Life only to those who actually repent and love
God: If we may be considered in order of nature, as united to Christ before we
are holy, then there is nothing in Sin contrary to the nature of our Union, and
then we may as well be united to Christ in order of time, as in order of
nature, before we are holy, and then we may (if Christ please) as well continue
united, as at first be united to him without holiness: For if neither the
nature of the Gospel Covenant, nor the nature of God and Christ, hinder such a
Union between Christ and bad men, while they may be considered as bad, then
nothing can hinder their continuing bad after they are united to Christ, but an
arbitrary Decree, or an irresistible Power. Christ may make them good if he
pleases by an Almighty Power, but there is no reason can be assigned, why he
may not as well own them, while they continue wicked, as receive them into
Union with himself, while they were considered as such. Christ may undertake
the cure of bad men, as Physicians do the cure of the sick, this was the great
end of his coming into the world, not to call the Righteous, but Sinners to
repentance; but to unite them to himself, to receive them into a state of
favor and reconciliation, to interest them in his Righteousness, to make them
Heirs of Glory, while they are considered as bad, in order of nature before
they are renewed and sanctified, is contrary to the holiness of his Nature, to
the express declarations of his Gospel, and perfectly alters the whole frame of
the Christian Religion.

This gives us a little taste, what candor and honesty we may expect from our
Author in his ensuing Discourse, in the examination of which I shall not
confine my self to his method, but shall content my self to vindicate my own
Discourse of Knowledge of Christ, Chap. 4. Sect. 1.
our Union to Christ in that order and method wherein it lies, which will give
me occasion to consider whatever I am concerned to answer in Mr. Ferguson's
Chapter of Union, and then his scurrilous reflections, and Childish
impertinencies will need no answer.

The two first Propositions which I laid down in order to explain our Union to
Christ are these: First, That those Metaphors, which describe the Relation and
Union between Christ and Christians, do primarily refer to the Christian
Church, not to every individual Christian. And secondly, That the Union of
particular Christians to Christ is by means of their Union to the Christian
Church. Which Mr. Ferguson tells us, Are Interest of Reason, P. 597.
in his opinion things coincident: If by Coincident he means, that one follows
from the other, I readily grant it; but if he means, that the Propositions are
the same, which have neither the same subject nor predicate, he might have
spared his reflections either upon my Logic, or accuracy of Writing, as being a
very incompetent Judge of either: But the Propositions are distinct and proved
by different Mediums; that which proves the first Proposition does not
immediately prove the second; though Mr. Ferguson would persuade the world,
that I had argued at Ibid. P. 611.
that inconsequent rate, and charges my Logic with the miscarriages and
failures of his own, which was the most effectual way he could take to make it
ridiculous. And yet after he had charged them with being coincident
Propositions, which signify the same thing, at the very next turn he is so far
from owning them coincident, that he will not allow one to be so much as a just
consequent from the other: For having recited that Paragraph, whereby I proved,
That the Metaphors, which describe the Relation and Union between Christ and
Christians, do primarily refer to the Christian Church, not to every individual
Christian: He adds, To this I answer. 1. That were this Discourse of our Author
framed into a Syllogism, the incongruity between the Conclusion and Premises
would easily appear. For example, Christ is the Head of the Church, ergo, no
particular Believer is united to him, but by means of their Union with the
Church. Let us learn then how he disproves it; I deny (says he) the Consequent,
(I suppose he would have said Consequence, had he understood the difference of
those Logical terms) his Reason is this: Surely, though the King be immediate
Head to the whole Kingdom, yet he is immediate head to every Individual Person
in it. As for that word Immediate, I shall let it alone till anon, but our
Author says very right; The King is the Head of every Subject, as well as of
the whole Kingdom, and so is Christ the Head of every particular Christian, as
well as of the whole Church; but this is not the thing in Controversy: The
question is, Whether a King, who is Head only of his own Kingdom, can be said
to be the Head of any single Person, who is not of his Kingdom, and therefore
whether such a Person must not first be incorporated into his Kingdom, before
he can be related to the King as his Head: Thus Christ is primarily styled a
Head with reference to his whole Church, which is his body, and therefore those
who are not of this Church and body cannot be related to him, as to their Head;
the only way to be related to Christ, as our Head, is to be incorporated into
his Church, which is his body: For no head has relation to any members, which
are not united to its own body.

But our Author proceeds: 2. The Church and its Individual Members being of an
Homogenious nature, what soever is praedicated essentially of the whole, is
equally praedicated of every part. If by this he only means, that Christ may as
well be called the Head of particular Christians, as of the whole Christian
Church, I readily grant it, though it be nothing to the purpose; but the
Proposition is the most absurd and senseless that ever was framed. A River is a
Homogeneous body, and yet every drop of water cannot be called a River. The
Union of several things of the same nature gives them a new denomination, which
cannot belong to every particular: A Kingdom consists of a great many men, who
are as much of the same Homogeneous nature as men, as Christians are, as they
are Christians; and yet every particular man cannot be called a Kingdom. The
body of Christ consists of a great many particular Christians, and yet every
Christian is not the body of Christ: And besides this, it is fulsomly absurd to
say, that the Church and its Individual Members are of an Homogeneous nature:
For the Church is an organized body, which consists of several Christians, who
considered as Members, are of as different a nature as the hand, and eye, and
foot, which are of different use, necessity, and honor: So the Apostle tells
us, 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13, 14, etc. For as the body is one, and has many members,
and all the members of that one body being many are one body, so also is
Christ. And he particularly mentions the Foot, and the Ear, and the Eye, which
no man yet thought to be of an Homogeneous nature, till Mr. Ferguson blessed
the world with this Discovery. His third and fourth Arguments proceed upon the
same mistake, and indeed are the very same in terminis: That every member of
the body, as well as the whole body is united to the Head, that the Church is
Christ's Body, and we are all Members in particular, which is the very thing I
contend for. But Mr. Ferguson ought to have proved, that every member is the
body of Christ, or that any one can be a member of Christ, without being a
member of his body; that any Christian can be said to be married to Christ, or
to be his Spouse upon any other account, than with respect to his relation to
the Church, which is his Spouse. That these expressions may be used of
particular Christians upon account of their relation to the whole body, I deny
not; but the primary use of these Metaphors is to describe the relation between
Christ and his Church, and are secondarily applied to particular Christians,
and particular Churches as they are members of the Universal Church.

But to come closer to the business, Mr. Ferguson's great spite is at the
second Proposition, That the Union of particular Christians with Christ is by
means of their Union to the Christian Church. Now methinks our Author in common
prudence ought not to have expressed too great a zeal against this Notion, till
he had found out some better way of stating it: And yet there are two or three
plain questions, which I am sure he can never answer, without owning all I
contend for in this matter.

As first, whether Christ have more than one body; I suppose he dares not say
he has, because the Apostle has expressly told us, that there is but one body,
as there is but one Spirit, Ephesians. 4. 4. And therefore I would ask him secondly,
whether every Christian, as a Christian, be not a member of Christ; this I
presume he will not deny neither; and therefore thirdly I enquire farther,
whether any Christian can be a member of Christ without being a member of his
body: And unless our Author be very fond of non sense, and thinks every thing
true which is unintelligible he dares not say it; and then the Consequence is
very plain, that no man can be considered as a Christian, that is, as united to
Christ, without being considered as incorporated into the Christian Church: For
no man can be a member of Christ without being a member of his body, which is
his Church.

Mr. Hooker, in that very Paragraph which Dr. Owen alleadges, as he thought,
Vindicat. p. 15.
against me, asserts this in as express words as ever I did: In God we actually
are no longer than from the time of our actual Adoption into the body of his
true Church, into the fellowship of his Children. For his Church he knows and
loves, so that they, that are in the Church, are thereby known to be in him.
Our being in Christ by Eternal Foreknowledge saves us not, without our actual
and real Adoption into the Fellowship of his Saints in this world. For in him
we actually are by actual incorporation into that Society, which has him for
their Head, and does make together with him one body. I am not ashamed to
confess, that I cannot answer this, though the comfort is, that I have no need
to do it. If Dr. Owen be of this mind, as methinks he should be by this
quotation, I would desire him to answer Mr. Ferguson; if he be not, let him
answer Mr. Hooker, or at least give an account to the world for what purpose he
alleged his authority, for grant but this, and I see nothing in that long
Paragraph, which will do him any kindness, or me any injury. But to return to
Mr. Ferguson, there needs no more to take off the force of his little Cavils,
than to state the true meaning of that Proposition, That particular Christians
are united to Christ by means of their Union to the Christian Church; which I
perceive he either does not, or will not understand. And I shall do that in
these following Propositions.

First, this does not signify, that it is one thing to be united to the
Church, and another thing to be united to Christ, but our Union to Christ
consists in our Union to the Christian Church, as at other times I express it:
For there is no other way for a member to be united to the Head, but by being
united to the body: And by its Union to the body it is united to the Head; and
we cannot so much as consider any priority of nature, much less of time between
these two: For though we may distinctly consider the relation, which is between
the particular members of the body to each other, and that relation, which
every particular member has to the head, and for a more distinct conception of
them, may represent one as the means to the other; yet when we consider the
relation which is between the head and particular members, we can form no other
Notion of it, than their Union to that body which is united to the Head. Hence
it is, that Knowledge of Christ. p. 145, etc
when I explain that Metaphor of Christ's being a Vine, sometimes by Vine I
understand the Christian Church, which is founded on a belief of the Gospel of
Christ, and is united to him as their Head: Sometimes I express it more
distinctly, that I am the Vine signifies, Christ together with his Church,
which is his body, in which Mr. Ferguson fancies great contradictions: That the
Vine should sometimes signify the Church, sometimes Christ together Interest
of Reason, etc. p. 459.
with his Church; but this savours only of his dullness and hebetude, to use his
own Phrase, or which is as likely, of a prevaricating conscience. For when I
say the Church is the Vine, no man in his wits could imagine, that I excluded
the consideration of Christ the Head, especially when I immediately explain it
by Christ and his Church, that is the Head and the Body: For it is the very
same thing, when we speak of our Union to Christ, to say, that we are united to
Christ, or that we are united to his Church, that we are united to the Head, or
to the Body, since our Union to both is the very same: And therefore it is
indifferent whether we explain this Metaphor of the Vine by the Christian
Church, which is the body of Christ, and inseparably united to the Head, or by
Christ considered as Head, which implies a necessary relation to his body, to
which particular Christians are united. We are in Christ as members are in the
body, which unites them to the head, which is our being engrafted into this
spiritual Vine: Christ is in us, as the Head is in the members, by his
Influences and Government, by his Word dwelling and abiding in us, Ioh. 15. 7.
And now I hope no man will believe me so senseless, as to deny the Union of
Christians to the Person of Christ (as Mr. Ferguson would persuade the World I
do) when I acknowledge Ibid. p. 461. 499.
our Union to him, as the Head of the Church, as the great Prophet, and Ruler,
Prince and Savior of his body, which he is, as he is a Person: And therefore
when I affirm, That when Christ speaks in the first Person I and in Me, he
cannot mean this of his own Person, but of his Church, Doctrine, and Religion,
according as the circumstances of the place require; the plain meaning of it is
this, that we must not consider the Person of Christ as abstracted from his
being the Head of his Church, and the great Prophet and Teacher of it, as these
men do, as will appear more in what follows.

Secondly, I observe, that we are united to Christ and to the Church by the
very same act, as it must necessarily be, if the Union be the same. Faith in
Christ, and such a public profession of it, as he requires, unites us to
Christ, and incorporates us into the Christian Church, that is, makes us
members of Christ's body, which is our Union to him. We are not first united to
Christ by Faith, and then united to the Church by our subsequent choice and
consent, by explicit Contracts, as some imagine without any reason or
president of the Apostolic Age; but that Faith, which unites us to Christ,
incorporates us into his Church, makes us members of his body, wherein our
Union consists, and that obliges us, as we will own our Christianity, to a
visible Communion with the Church, where it may be had.

Thirdly, to make this yet more clear, we must consider what is meant by the
Church in this question: Now the general Notion of a Church is, a Religious
Society founded on the belief of the Gospel, and an acknowledgment of the
Authority of Christ, and united to him as their Head; who rules and governs
them either immediately by himself, or by the mediation of Church Officers,
authorized by him for that purpose. That Christ designed not only to reform and
save some particular men, but to erect a Church, and to unite all his Disciples
to himself in one body, is so very evident, that were not men acted by Faction
and Interest, it could admit no serious dispute: All the Metaphors, which
describe our Union to Christ, do primarily refer to the Christian Church, as I
observed before: Christ is the Head, and the Church his body, and the Apostle
tells us, that there is but one body; and that he is the Savior of the body,
and that he has redeemed his Church with his own blood: The Jewish Church was
Typical of the Christian, and they were all of one Family, the carnal Seed and
Posterity of Abraham, and were all united by the same Laws, and Religious
Ceremonies, and there was no way for an Alien to partake of the Privileges of
that holy people, but by being incorporated into the body of Israel (who were
the Heirs of the Promises) by Baptism and Circumcision. Now as the Jews were
the carnal Posterity of Abraham, so the Apostle tells us, that Christians are
his spiritual Seed, the Sons of God, and the Children of Abraham by Faith, Gal.
3. 26, 29. (i. e.) We are admitted into Abraham's Family, and made Heirs
according to Promise: When God cast off the Jewish Church, he did not leave
himself without a Church in the world, but as some of those branches were
broken off, so the Christians, who before their Conversion were many of them
Pagan Idolaters, a wild Olive tree, were graffed in among them, and with them
partake of the root and fatness of the Olive tree, Romans 11. 27. So that Christ
did not come to dissolve, but to reform the Church: He owns no relation to
particular men, as scattered Individuals, but as incorporated into his Church.
Now the internal Union of the Church to Christ consists in a sincere and lively
Faith, and a voluntary subjection to his Authority; the External Ligaments of
it, are an External and visible profession of our Faith, and solemn Vows of
Obedience (which is regularly according to our Saviors Institution performed
in Baptism) and external and visible Communion, and the external Ministries of
Grace, to which our Savior has ordinarily annexed the internal operations of
his Spirit, as will appear more hereafter.

Now though Internal Union by a sincere and hearty Faith, and a subjection of
our selves to the Laws and Government of Christ will unite us to his invisible
Church, where there is no visible Society of Christians professing the faith of
Christ, and living in a regular Communion and Fellowship with each other; Yet
where there is, we cannot be united to Christ's body without a visible
incorporation into his Church: For the visible and invisible Church of Christ
is but one body, and to renounce the Communion of the visible Church, where it
may be had without any injury to our internal Union, that is, without being
forced to renounce any Article of the Christian Faith, or to violate any of the
Christian Laws, is in effect to renounce Christianity: For Christ has
appointed no other ordinary method of our Union to his body, but those ordinary
and regular ways of incorporation into his Church, and though he will dispense
with ordinary ways in extraordinary cases, yet we have no reason to think he
will ordinarily do so, which would be to dissolve his visible Church, or to
make External Communion the most arbitrary and precarious thing in the world.

A secret Faith in Christ, and acknowledgment of his Authority does not
ordinarily unite us to his body, but is only a necessary qualification, and
disposition to such a Union: But in order to an actual Union there is required
such a public profession of our Faith, and solemn Vows of Obedience, performed
with such initial Rites, as our Savior has appointed, as does actually
incorporate us into the Christian Church, as makes us members of the Universal
Church, visible or invisible, and more immediately unites us to the particular
Church wherein we live; just as it is in our admission into any Relation or
Society, there is required an antecedaneous consent to qualify us for it, but
this alone does not unite to such a Society, without such particular
Ceremonies, or public Oaths and Engagements as by the Laws of that Society are
required to our actual admission: And therefore in the Ancient Church the
Clinici, who delayed their Baptism till they were under the apprehensions of
death, though all their lives they professed the Faith of Christ, yet refusing
by this holy Rite to be actually incorporated into the Church, they were looked
on at best as a very imperfect sort of Christians, of whose state there was
just reason for doubt and jealousy.

Fourthly, we may observe some difference in the manner of our admission into
the Church according to the different states and dispensations of it: We may
consider the Church in its Idea and Embrio, before there be any visible Society
of Christians, and in this case, though the first Believer cannot be said to be
admitted into any Society of Christians, yet he may be said to be admitted into
the Church: For then the Church signifies Christ, who is the Head, and such a
platform and Idea of a Society, which is to be set up in the world, formed
according to such a model of Laws and Government, Privileges, and Immunities
as are described in the Gospel. This is no other than what is necessary in the
first forming of any Societies upon a public Charter or Commission: He who is
first admitted into any College or Corporation is made a member of that
Society, though as yet there be none but himself, for there is the foundation
of a Society laid, where there is a Head and Governor, and public Laws, and
Constitutions, and Privileges for the Government of it.

Thus when our Savior did converse upon earth, and was a visible Head, then
the way to be united to him was immediately to put themselves under his
Government, to go directly to him, and to profess their Faith and subjection to
him: Upon which account Faith is called coming to Christ, which Phrase is never
used to signify believing, but only in the Gospels, and with reference to that
time, while he conversed on earth: But since Christ ascended into heaven, and
left a visible Authority in the Church, there is no other way of admission into
his Church but by the Ministry of men invested with his Authority, nor is there
any other way of submitting our selves to the Authority of Christ, but by a
regular subjection to Knowledge of Christ, p. 162.
the Discipline and Government of the Church as you may see more at large in my
former Discourse.

These things being premised, it will be a very easy task to answer all Mr.
Ferguson's little Cavils. As 1. He argues. If particular Christians be united
to Christ only Interest of Reason, etc. p. 59^.
by virtue of a previous relation to the Church, I would then fain know of Mr.
Sherlock, how the whole Church comes to be united to the Lord Jesus. If this
will do him any kindness, it is quickly answered: For the whole Church is
united to Christ, just as particular Christians are united, by Faith and
Obedience: The only difference is, that the Church is united as a body,
particular Christians as members of that body. The foundation of this Objection
is, That our Author imagined, that our Union to the Church, and our Union to
Christ, were two distinct things, and that we are united to Christ and to the
Church by two different acts, and then indeed his Argument would have entangled
me in a Circle, but I have already broke this Circle in my first and second
Propositions. For though the Church being an aggregate body of believers, can
no other ways embrace the Revelations of the Gospel, or yield obedience to its
commands but in the virtue of what her particular constituent members do; yet
this may be done in such a manner, as to unite them all to Christ, not as
single Individuals, but as formed and cemented into a regular and
well-proportioned body.

His second Argument in short is this, That the Christian Church being nothing
else but the collective body of Christians, it naturally follows, that they
must in priority of nature be Christians before they can any way belong to the
Church. But I can imagine no reason for this; for it is sufficient, if they be
made Christians by their Union to the Church, for then the Church will still be
the collective body of Christians. And indeed if every Christian be a member of
Christ, it is not imaginable how any should be a Christian, before he be united
to the body of Christ.

His third Argument is, That the Apostles were immediately united to Christ
without any antecedent relation to the Church, and therefore every Individual
Christian may be so too: And this he proves, because there was no Christian
Church pre-existent to them, into whose Fellowship and Society they could be
admitted: But this I have already answered in my fourth Proposition, that we
may be said to be admitted into the Church, where there is no visible Society
of Christians to join with: If Christ might then be called the Head of the
Church, I know no reason why the Apostles at that time might not be called the
members of it. And though the Apostles were immediately under the Government
and Instruction of Christ, while he was visibly present with them, yet I
suppose there may be some reason assigned, why other Christians cannot be so
immediately united to him, now he is not present as a visible Head on earth.

Thus far, Mr. Ferguson tells us, he has discoursed these things, taking the
Church for the Universal Catholic visible Church, which is the most favorable
acceptance to befriend my Notion; But I can tell him a more favorable
acceptance than this, which he durst not touch on, The Universal Catholic
Church, visible or invisible: For the visible and invisible is the same Church
of Christ, and every Christian being a member of Christ's body, which is but
one, every Christian is as truly united to the invisible, as to the visible
part of it; and where there is no visible Church, our Union to Christ is
secured by our Union to the invisible Church. Had Mr. Ferguson thought on this,
he would not have urged that Argument from the Union of the Apostles and first
Believers to Christ, without any pre-existent Church to be united to: Unless he
thinks that Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and all the good men, who lived before
Christ's Incarnation, were not of his Church, and then I would desire him to
tell me how they were saved. Whoever is admitted into the Christian Church must
of necessity be admitted by the Ministers of some particular Church, but yet
this makes him a member of the Universal Church, which is Christ's body. Our
relation, as we are Christians, is to the whole body of Christ, and to a
particular Church, as a branch and member of it; our Christianity is not
confined to any particular Society of Christians, but our obligation to
external fellowship with any sound part of the Church of Christ, wherever the
Providence of God casts us, is our antecedent relation, at least in priority of
nature, to the whole Christian Church. Thus I am sure our Church of England in
her Office of Baptism declares, that she receives the baptized Person into the
Fellowship of Christ's Church, not of this, or that particular Church, but of
the whole Church of Christ, and teaches her Children, that in their Baptism
they are made the members of Christ, which word is of a larger import than the
members of a particular Church: And St. Paul tells us, that as there is but one
body, so there is but one Baptism, which makes us members of that one body.
This was one Argument whereby the Fathers in the Council of Carthage proved the
invalidity of that Baptism which was administered by Heretics and Schismatics,
who separated from the Church; because they being out of the Church, could not
admit any one into the Catholic Church. Frustra ille putat se esse baptizatum,
cum non sit baptisma nisi in Ecclesia, unum, and verum, quia Deus unus, and
fides una, and Ecclesia una est, in qua stat unum baptisma, and sanctitas, and
caetera; nam quae foris exercentur, nullum habent salutis effectum. Now whether
they Cy^r Conc. Carthag.
were mistaken in their Conclusion or not, the Premises were the received
Doctrine of the Catholic Church, owned by those very Fathers, who opposed the
rebaptization of Schismatics.

We are united to Christ by our Union with the Catholic visible or invisible
Church, which necessarily includes our visible Fellowship and Society with that
particular Church, wherein we live, when we may hold Communion with it without
renouncing the Christian Faith, or violating any express Law, which our Savior
has given us; as I discoursed more fully in my other Book: And when Knowledge
of Christ. p. 165, etc
we cannot join in Communion with any visible Society of Christians without
renouncing our fidelity to Christ, our Union to Christ is then secured in our
spiritual Union to his invisible Church and body.

Now this gives a plain solution to all Mr. Ferguson's Arguments, whereby he
proves, That Communion with a particular Church cannot be the medium of a
Christians Union to Christ. Though I never asserted this any other ways, than
as communion with a particular Church, where it may be had, is essential to our
Union with the Universal Church. But let us hear what he says: First, there may
be some Individual Christians, where there is no particular instituted Church
of Christ into which they can be admitted. Then if they be Christians, they are
united to the Universal Church: But there can be no particular Church without
the pre-existence of Individual Believers. Right, but every Individual Believer
is not a Christian till he be incorporated into the Christian Church: Faith is
necessary to qualify a man for admission into the Church, but though God may
dispense with extraordinary cases, yet ordinarily Faith alone does not make a
man a Christian, as appears from the third Proposition: We must believe and be
baptized if we will be saved: For Baptism ordinarily incorporates us into the
Christian Church, to which alone the Promises of Salvation are made. And
whereas a late Author thinks to evade the force of this Argument by observing
that our Savior Separation yet no Schism. P. 9.
adds, But he that believes not shall be damned, Mark 16. 16, So that men
shall be damned merely upon account of their unbelief, and not merely for want
of baptism, provided they have faith: It is on the contrary very evident that
no such thing can be concluded from our Saviors words: He first lays down the
terms of Salvation, Faith, and Baptism, and methinks those men make very bold
with our Savior, who affirm, that we may be ordinarily saved (for our Savior
speaks here of ordinary cases) without Baptism; but then he adds, who shall be
damned, and they are Unbelievers of two sorts: such Infidels as refuse Baptism,
and such unbelievers as are baptized: So that he that believes not, shall be
damned, signifies, that though Faith and Baptism be necessary to Salvation, yet
unbelief alone whether men be baptized or not shall damn them: For I would ask
this Author, whether supposing that our Savior had designed in those words, He
that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved, to signify, that Faith and
Baptism were both necessary to Salvation, it had been proper for him to have
added, but he that believes not, and is not baptized, shall be damned: which
would have damned only unbaptized Infidels, and have given too great reason to
baptized hypocrites and unbelievers to hope for salvation.

But to return to Mr. Ferguson, his second Argument is this, That Christians
may be obliged upon their loyalty to Christ to renounce Communion, not only
with the particular Church with which they have walked, but to suspend
fellowship with any particular Church, that lies within the circle and compass
of their knowledge. If there be a just cause for this, it will be their
vindication, and this will not prejudice their union to the invisible Catholic
Church; But I hope all good Christians will be more wary of this than our
Author and his Friends are, for humor, and frowardness, and interest will not
justify a separation.

His third Argument is of the same nature, and needs no other answer, That
Christians may be injuriously cast out of the Communion, not only of one, but
of every particular Church, and yet remain united to Christ: If they be
injuriously cast out, it shall be no prejudice to them, for Christ will reverse
all unjust Sentences; such men are still united to Christ, and therefore are
united to his body, the Catholic invisible Church: But what he adds, that a
man may be justly secluded for a time from communion with any particular
Church, and yet his union to Christ not be dissolved: Though it make nothing
against me, for if he be still united to Christ, he is united to the Catholic
Church, though secluded from the Communion of the visible Church; yet it is
directly contrary to the sense of all antiquity, and makes the censures of the
Church vain and useless things: What is the meaning of that authority our
Savior has granted to his Apostles and Ministers, Whatsoever you bind on
earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever you loose on earth, shall be
loosed in heaven; if they may bind, and Christ loose, if they may justly
separate men from the body of Christ, and yet Christ keep them united to
himself? which I fear must be unjustly done, if the other be justly; unless he
will say, that the Church may justly separate men from Christ, and Christ
justly keep them united to himself. All Divines indeed grant, that whatever is
done errante clave through ignorance and mistake, or for some worse reasons, is
rectified by Christ; but to say that Christ makes void the just and regular
Censures of his Church, is expressly contrary to his declared will, and is in
effect to repeal and countermand that authority which he has left in his
Church: and therefore so far as any man is justly separated from the Church, he
is separated from Christ too, and cannot regularly be restored again but by the
same authority. But I suppose Mr. Ferguson (and he has some reason for it) is
of Mr. Watson's mind, That neither Sin nor Satan can dissolve our Union with
Christ, and then I know no reason, why it should dissolve our Union with the
Church neither.

His fourth Argument is, That none are to be received under the notion of
members into a particular Church, but upon a presumption that Christ has
received them. But it is sufficient, if they be such as Christ will receive and
own, when they are incorporated into his Church; and indeed Mr. Ferguson's way
is downright nonsense. For Christ's receiving men is his admission of them
into his Church, as members of his body, and if Christ must receive them, first
he must own them for members of his Church, before they are members of his
Church, and no man is fit to be admitted as a member of the Church, before he
be a member of the Church: As for what he adds, that men must first be
Believers before they be admitted members of the Church, is very true, but
Faith only does not make them Christians, as I showed above.

His fifth Argument is, That it is a Persons submitting himself to the Laws and
Authority of Christ, which swayeth and influenceth him to submit to Pastors and
Teachers, and to join with others in the fellowship of the Gospel; and by
consequence our union with a particular Church is so far from being the bond of
our Union with the Lord Jesus, that on the contrary our Union with him is the
motive and inducement of our joining into fellowship with a particular Church.
This is so far from being true, that on the contrary we have no visible way of
submitting to the Authority of Christ, but by submitting our selves to that
Authority and Government, which he has left in his Church: For Christ does not
govern us now as a visible head, but by the Ministry of men, whom he has
invested with authority for that purpose. The belief of Christ's Power and
Authority is the reason of our subjection to the Church, but we do not actually
submit to the Authority of Christ on earth, but by our actual subjection to the
Church, as I showed above in the fourth Proposition. As for his proof from the
example of the Churches of the Macedonians, that they first gave themselves to
the Lord, and then unto them (the Apostles) by the will of God, 2 Cor. 8. 5.
Which he thus expounds, That it was by taking upon them the observance of
Christ's commands, that they found themselves obliged to coalesce into Church
Societies; it is a famous example of our Author's skill or honesty in
expounding Scriptures; for the Apostle speaks nothing there of Church
Societies, or the reason of their entering into them, which was no dispute in
those days, when Independency was not yet hatched; but he commends the bounty
and charity of the Macedonians in contributing to the necessities of the poor
Saints, and their great forwardness to it, that they did not need to be stirred
up by the Apostles to so good a work, but on the contrary earnestly entreated
them to receive the gift, and take upon them the fellowship of the ministering
to the Saints. And the account the Apostle gives of it is this, that they first
gave up themselves and all they had to the service of Christ, and then
committed their liberal contributions into their hands to be disposed of for
the propgation of the Gospel, and the relief of the Saints. This was the
commendation of their charity, that it was not the effect of importunate
solicitations, but of hearts entirely devoted to Christ and the service of the
Church: though (...), does not signify, that they first gave themselves to the
Lord, and then to us, but they first gave themselves to the Lord and to us, his
Apostles, who are invested with his Authority, and then expressed their bounty
and liberality to the poor Christians.

His last Argument is, That an imagination of our being united to Christ by the
mediation of an Union with the Church, seems to have been the foundation of the
Papal Vicarious Political Head: But pray how so? Because I assert, that Christ
is the Head of the Church, which is his body, and that he is a head only to his
body, and therefore, that none can be united to Christ as their head without
being members of his body, therefore there must be a Papal Vicarious Political
Head? I must now do as M. Ferguson does, deny the consequent, for I am sure
there is no consequence in it. He imagines that our Union to Christ, and our
Union to the Church, are two distinct Unions, and therefore if we are united to
Christ by our Union to the Church, there ought to be a Universal Vicarious Head
on earth, to whom we may be united: Whereas we are united to no head but
Christ, and we are united to this Head, as all members are, by our Union to his
body, which is his Church: To be united to a Vicarious Head in order to our
Union to the Real Head, if it be not senseless and ridiculous, yet is founded
neither on reason, nor Scripture, nor any analogy or resemblance in nature; but
to be united to the body that we may be united to the head is necessary in
order of nature; for no member is any other ways united to the head but by its
Union to the body: The whole Church is the body of Christ, and Apostles, and
Prophets, and Bishops, are but members of this body, though of greater use,
dignity, and authority than meaner Christians; as in the natural body some
members are more honorable and useful than the rest. But who told Mr. Ferguson
that Christ is not the immediate Political Head of his Church, and that
therefore there must be a Vicarious Head? He represents this as my opinion,
though I never said so, nor thought so: I have said indeed, that particular
Christians are not immediately united to the person of Christ, but are united
to Christ by their Union to his Church: But it does not hence follow, that
Christ is not the immediate Head of every Christian, much less that he is not
the immediate head of his whole Church: except he will say, that the Head in
the natural body is not the immediate head of the body, and of every member in
it, because the hand and the foot are not immediately joined to it.

These are Mr. Ferguson's Arguments to prove, that we are not united to Christ
by p. 469.
being united to the Christian Church, most of which he alleadges also upon
another occasion to prove, That one living in the Fellowship and Communion of
no visible Church may be a Christian (which was the avowed Doctrine of Socinus)
by this we may guess, what weight he laid upon them, and I am not at leisure to
repeat my answers, as often as he repeats his Arguments, but dare venture them
at one proposal against his frequent repetitions.

And therefore to proceed, among other Arguments whereby I confirmed that
Notion, that our Union to Christ consists in our Union to the Christian Church.
I argued from the nature of the two Sacraments, Baptism, and the Lords Supper,
which our Savior has appointed, as Symbols of our Union with him. Our first
undertaking of Christianity is represented in our Baptism, wherein we make a
public profession of our faith in Christ, and solemnly vow obedience to him,
and it is sufficiently known, that Baptism is the Sacrament of our admission
into the Christian Church.

Now in answer to this Mr. Ferguson tells us, 1. That Baptism is neither the
medium of p. 615.
our Union with the Catholic visible Church, nor that whereby we become
members of a particular instituted Church. I hope our Author will not here too
challenge me with contradicting the Church of England, which so expressly
teaches us, that in our Baptism, we were made the members of Christ, the
Children of God, etc. I observed before, that Baptism admits us into the
Catholic Church visible or invisible, and admits us into particular Churches
as members of the Universal Church, which signifies no more, than that by
virtue of our being members of the Universal Church, we have a right, and are
under an Obligation to visible Communion with any particular Church, wherein we
live, if there be no just and necessary cause to hinder it.

Let us hear now how Mr. Ferguson disproves this: he tells us, that Baptism is
not the medium of our Union with the Catholic visible Church, he should say
the Rite and Ceremony of our admission and incorporation into the Church, for
as much as a person may be of the Universal visible Church, and yet not be
baptized. How does he prove this? Because there have been many who (partly
through want of opportunity to enjoy the Ordinance of Baptism, partly through
other motives, though they are not justifiable) have denied themselves the
mercy of the Baptismal Laver, and yet to suppose that thereupon they are not
Christians, is to renounce all exercise of charity, and to involve our selves
under the guilt of condemning those whom the Lord has received, in which
Argument there are almost as many absurdities as words. He attempts to disprove
the received Doctrine of the Church by a judgment of charity, so that if a man
will not be very charitable his Argument is worth nothing; and indeed his
Arguments do as often need the exercise of charity, as most I ever met with:
And yet in the next breath he charges those with guilt, who condemn them whom
the Lord has received: But if Gods receiving them be only a judgment of
charity, how comes he to be so sure of it as to pronounce, that the Lord has
received them, and to condemn all those who deny it, without offering the least
word to prove it? But suppose that we are so charitable as to hope that God may
receive them, yet how does this make them members of the Catholic visible
Church? To be sure they are not visible members of any Church, for if they were
they would not need the judgment of charity to make them so, and if they be not
visible members, they cannot be members of the visible Church: Those who want
the opportunities of Baptism, cannot be members of the visible Church, for it
is supposed they do not live where there is any visible Church, otherwise they
might have the opportunity of Baptism; and those who refuse to be baptized upon
unjustifiable reasons, certainly were never received into the Catholic visible
Church, (which never owns any members but those who are baptized) though they
may be entertained in private Clans and Conventicles.

But is not this a pretty Argument against Baptism being the regular way, which
Christ has appointed for our admission into his Church, because there are some
few favorable cases, which require the exercise of our charity, to hope that
God may be merciful to them who are not baptized; whereas this very
supposition, that it requires the judgment of Charity is a plain
acknowledgment, that Baptism is the regular way of making men Christians, and
that there is some reason of doubt, whether Christ will own them members of his
Church who are not baptized.

All Divines of any note tell us, that where men want the opportunity of
Baptism, Baptism in voto, in our wish, and desire, and purpose, will be
accepted; as for those who deny themselves the mercy of Baptism upon
unjustifiable grounds, we must leave them to the secret judgment of God; they
have not the ordinary title to the Promises of the New Covenant, and what
extraordinary mercy God will vouchsafe to them who reject the ordinary methods
of grace no man can tell.

His Arguments whereby he proves, that Baptism does not admit us into a
particular instituted Church, are first because it is possible that a person
may be baptized where there are not enough to form any particular instituted
Church: What of that? May it not confer a right, and lay an obligation to
Communion with a particular Church, when we come where it is? Which is all that
is meant by our admission into a particular Church by Baptism: Well, but it may
sometimes be found necessary to deny the Privileges of Membership in an
instituted Church, even to such as have been baptized: That is, if they be
found forging of bonds, or guilty of any other scandalous sin, they may be
censured and excommunicated; and who ever denied this? Nay, is not this an
Argument that Baptism admits them into the Church, because such persons only
are subject to the Censures of it? And how they can be cast out of the Church,
I know not, except they were in it: The sum of this Argument is this, That
Baptism does not admit us into the Church, because baptized persons, living
disorderly, may be cast out of it.

But there were baptized Christians before any particular Churches were
erected. Be it so; then they were members of the Universal Church, and thereby
qualified to be members of a particular Church, when there should be one.

Secondly he proves, that we are not admitted into the Church by Baptism,
because none ought to be admitted to Baptism, but those who are antecedently
judged to be Christians: For which he quotes Acts 8. 37. where Philip tells the
Eunuch, that if he believed he might be baptized: it seems he knows no
difference between a Believer and a Christian, but I have taken notice of this
already. Faith is necessary to our Baptism, and to qualify us to be admitted
into the Church; but besides this, an actual incorporation into the Church by
Baptism is necessary to make us Christians, and to entitle us to the
Privileges of Christ's body.

In his third and fourth Propositions he designs to say something against me,
but I cannot imagine what it is. He tells us, That our submitting to the
Ordinance and Institution of Baptism, is a visible profession of our owning the
Authority of Christ: So say I too; it is such a profession of our subjection to
Christ, as Christ has made necessary to our incorporation into his Church: But
we must own the Authority of Christ, before we can make this profession of
owning it. Right, we must believe Christ to be Lord and Savior, but this alone
does not make us Christians, unless we make such a profession of it, and be
admitted into the Church by such public Rites and Ceremonies as Christ has
made necessary to that end. The consent of both Parties is necessary to a
Marriage, but this alone will not make the Marriage without such a public
solemnization of it as is required by the Laws of Countries: For when there is
a legal way appointed for declaring our consent, no Government takes notice of
any consent, till it be declared in Form of Law.

Our Author tells us, That Baptism is both a Badg and Symbol of our Profession,
and a Bond and Obligation upon us, to discharge the duties, which our
Profession of Christianity calls us to. And it is so by a perpetual
Institution: Now if we consider the nature of a Covenant, which requires
sealing on both sides, it will appear, that this Ceremony is essentially
necessary to our admission into the Gospel Covenant, (or which is all one, to
our admission into the Christian Church) God has sealed to us in the Death of
his Son, whereby he has confirmed and ratified the Gospel Covenant, but till we
seal to him in Baptism, no previous faith and consent can give us a title to
the benefits of the Covenant.

In his fourth Proposition he tells us, That the Union of the Catholic visible
Church, consisting in a joint profession of the same Lord, Faith, and Baptism,
there does therefore upon a persons submitting to the Ordinance of Baptism,
such a relation to the whole Catholic visible Church emerge, as that he is
rendered a complete member of the Church, under the notion of Catholic
visible: And adds, So far is our Union with the visible Church by means of
Baptism, from being the medium of our Union to Christ, that it is our
dedicating our selves to Christ by this august Ceremony, which constitutes us
complete members of the Church under the notion of visible. He tells us, that
Baptism makes us members of the Catholic Church, so say I: But it makes us
members of the Catholic Church by dedicating us to Christ, so say I too; and
therefore our Union with the Visible Church by means of Baptism is not the
medium of our Union to Christ: But how does this follow, when Baptism dedicates
us to Christ, not as single Individuals, but as members of his body, that is
his Church? For that which dedicates us to Christ as members of his body,
unites us to Christ by uniting us to the Church: But Baptism makes us complete
members, whereby he would insinuate, that we were members before, though
incomplete; but this he ought to have proved, which he has not yet, and never
can do: And indeed a complete, and incomplete member seems to be no very good
sense; for the same relation admits of no degrees; one Child under the notion
of a Child is as completely the Fathers Child as any other of his Children are;
and if we be indeed members of the Church, that is united and related to the
Church, we are complete members; for what ever makes us members, makes us
members, and we cannot be more or less members: A member may be sound or
rotten, weak or strong, and upon that score may be a perfect, or imperfect
member; but considering only the relation of membership, which is the present
case, every member is as much a member as any other.

But Baptism makes us complete members of the Church only under the notion of
Catholic visible; How comes this to pass now? When in his first Proposition,
he would by no means allow, that Baptism united us to the Universal visible
Church; and yet here it makes us complete members of the Church under the
notion of visible: How will he answer his own Argument? That men were baptized
before there was any particular visible Church formed, and if there were no
particular visible Church, certainly there could be no Catholic visible Church
neither: Unless we can imagine, that there may be a Kingdom, which consists of
a great many subordinate Societies, and Corporations, and Families, before
there is so much as any one Family.

Baptism admits us into the Church of Christ under the notion of Christ's body,
not under the notion of visible or invisible, unless we think, that the
Covenant of Grace, and all the Promises of it, which are sealed to us in
Baptism, be made only to the Church under the notion of visible: and then I
shall not blame the Church of Rome for making Visibility one mark of the true
Church.

But to proceed, I argued also from the nature of the Lords Supper, which is a
Sacrament, and Symbol of our Union to Christ and Fellowship with him after we
are incorporated into his Church, and signifies and represents that near
conjunction which is between Christ and the Christian Church, and the mutual
Fellowship of one Christian with another, as members of the same body. Which is
a plain Argument, that Christ owns us, not as single Individuals, but as
members of his body, as incorporated into the Christian Church.

To this Mr. Ferguson answers: 1. The Supper of the Lord, though a Sacrament of
p. 619.
Union, yet it cannot be the first medium of our Union to the Church, seeing
none have a right to it, but such as are already Church members. Nor did I ever
say it was the first medium, but that it represents that near conjunction which
is between Christ and the Christian Church, and every particular Christian, as
incorporated into the Church; For as the Apostle says, (to use our Authors own
words in another place) seeing it is one P. 626.
loaf ((...)*) of which we partake, we are therefore one body (viz. in Christ)
who participate of that one loaf, 1 Cor. 10. 17. Pichorellus well observes,
that Paul does not say, we are one loaf or bread, (though our Translation
renders it so) but that he argues from the Coalition of the clusters of the
small corpuscles of meal (surely our Author was taught this bombast by the
School master in Sir Philip Sidney) of which a Loaf is kneaded and contexed to
the identity and oneness, that intervenes between Christ and Believers,
(intervening identity and oneness is a great elegancy.) But our Author seems to
have abused Pichorellus not only in a fantastical Translation of his words,
but in perverting the sense of them, whose words, as he has set them in the
margin, are these: Non dicit Paulus fideles unum esse panem, sed ab uno panc
ducit similitudinem: Paul does not say, that all Believers are one bread, but
takes a similitude and resemblance from one bread; What to do? To prove the
oneness and identity, which intervenes between Christ, and single Believers? as
Mr. Ferguson would represent it; no, but to prove that near alliance and
conjunction which is between the whole body of Believers, which are as closely
compacted into one body, as the several particles of flour are, when they are
kneaded into one Loaf, and so as one body are united to Christ, and entertained
at his Table. Agreeably to St. Chrysostoms account of the words, as they are
translated also by our Author, What is that Loaf? It is the body of Christ.
What are those who partake of it? They are the body of Christ, not many bodies,
but one. For as the many grains of which a loaf is formed, are so convened into
one mass (mighty elegant still) that the distinction and diversity one from
another does not appear. (...), in the same manner are we conjoined to Christ,
and one another; or according to the order of St. Chrysostoms words, to one
another and to Christ: So that though this holy Supper be not the first medium
of our Union to the Church, yet it represents the Union of the Christian
Church, and of all particular Christians in it, in one body to Christ, which
was all I designed to prove by it.

In the second place he tells us, That by the Lords Supper we ratify our
perseverance, and renew our engagements of being the Lords. And thirdly, That
it is a Symbol of our Union to Christ and to each other. And so we are very
well agreed, and it is time to give over this Dispute.

Thus I have brought off my two first Propositions safe and sound, but before I
proceed to the rest, I must remove a rub or two which Mr. Ferguson has thrown
in my way: For he charges me with denying our Union to the Person of Christ,
and our immediate Union to his Person; and this indeed I do in some sense, and
if he had been either an honest man, or a fair Disputant, he ought to have
declared in what sense I disowned it; but instead of this he fills several
Pages with long and senseless Harangues to prove, that we must be united to the
Person of Christ, and that it would have been as consistent with my design to
own, as to deny it, when indeed I never denied it, but expressly owned it, in
that sense which he would now contend for: And to give a plain demonstration of
the honesty and ingenuity of this Author, I shall transcribe one Page out of my
former Discourse, which concerns this matter. The design of all Knowledge of
Christ. P. 200.
these distinctions is to prove the Union of Persons between Christ and
Believers, and because I find this Author has bewildred himself, I will
endeavor to help him out; for it is a very plain case, if Christ and Believers
are united, their Persons must be united too: For the Person of Christ is
Christ himself, and the Persons of Believers are Believers themselves; and I
cannot understand how they can be united without their Persons, that is,
without themselves: But then they are united by mutual relations as the Person
of a Prince and of his Subjects, of a Husband and his Wife are united, or by
mutual affections, or common interest, not by a natural adhesion of Persons:
But because I find it does not satisfy these men, that Christ and Believers
are united, unless their Persons be united too, it makes me suspect, that there
is a greater Mystery in this Union of Persons than every one apprehends. Upon
this I considered what they meant by the Person of Christ, and our Union to
him: So that I do not impeach them, for not being satisfied, that Christ and
Believers are Interest of Reason, etc. P. 499.
united unless their Persons be united too, as Mr. Ferguson represents it, but
from their making such a difference between our Union to Christ, and our Union
to his Person, I reasonably concluded, that they meant something more by our
Union to the Person of Christ than every one was aware of; and so indeed I
found it, as appears from what I discoursed in that place. And to give as short
and perspicuous an account of it as possibly I can here: I observe, that by the
Person of Christ to which we are united, they mean such a Person, as has done
all for us, and has undertaken to do all in us: And by an immediate Union to
this Person; they mean at most an immediate application of themselves to his
Person by reliance and recumbency, which gives them an interest in all that
Christ has done and suffered, by virtue of an Union to his Person.

First, By the Person of Christ to which we are united, they mean such a Person
as has done all for us, and has undertaken to do all in us. As for the latter
part of this, that Christ has undertaken to do all in us: I shall reserve it
to be considered under the head of Political Union, and shall at present
confine my Discourse to his having done all for us. This is their notion of
Christ's being our Surety and Mediator, that in our stead he has satisfied the
justice of God, and fulfilled all righteousness, and that we are made righteous
by his Personal Righteousness, which he performed in his own Person, but in our
stead, and as representing us: And I should wonder that Mr. Ferguson denies
this, but that I now know him too well to wonder at any thing he says. For
Doctor Iacomb has industriously endeavored to prove this notion of Christ's
being our Surety to do all in our stead; and Dr. Owen has with as great
endeavors, and with like success, attempted to prove this from Christ's being
our Mediator: But how far either the notion of a Surety, or of a Mediator is
from countenancing any such Doctrine, I have made abundantly evident in my
former Discourse, to which Mr. Ferguson replies nothing, but entertains and
amuses his Knowledge of Christ, Chap. 4. Sect. 3.
Readers with some School pedantry in the derivation of the words (...) and
(...), which he learnedly observes comes (...). But to leave these little
Criticisms to Schoolboys; and to reduce the Controversy into a short compass,
the fundamental mistake is this, that they represent Christ as a Surety and
Mediator for some particular men, not as the Surety and Mediator of the
Covenant. I made it appear, that though we should grant, that Christ is called
a Surety and Mediator, with respect to his undertaking for some particular
persons, yet they cannot reasonably argue from the notion of a Surety and
Mediator to prove, that Christ fulfilled all righteousness for those, and in
their stead, whose Surety and Mediator he was; and, as I have observed above,
my Adversaries have been forced to quit this way of arguing from the general
notion of a Surety and Mediator among men: But indeed the foundation of this
notion is false, that Christ did undertake for particular persons, to do all
for them, which was required of them, by virtue of any Law, as Dr. Owen
represents it.

Christ by his death made a general Atonement and Expiation for Sin, and with
his Blood procured, purchased, and sealed the Covenant of Grace, wherein God
promises pardon of Sin and Eternal Life to those who believe and obey the
Gospel; and thus his blood is the blood of the Covenant, and he is the Surety
and Mediator of the Covenant: But that what Christ did and suffered, he should
do in the name and stead only of some particular Persons, as their Surety,
Proxy, Surrogate, or Substitute, has not the least foundation in Scripture, and
is the first cause, and the only support of the Antinomian Heresy.

Mr. Ferguson founds Christ's Suretiship on the Covenant of Redemption, that
is, on that Covenant, which some modern Divines so much talk of, between God
the Father, and Christ concerning the Salvation of the Elect: that God the
Father gives so many persons by name to Christ, to be saved by him, and upon
his voluntary undertaking that work, he stands in the room and stead of those
men, and does and suffers what ever was required of them, acting for them as a
common person: that God imputes all their Sins to Christ, and imputes his
Righteousness to them, and reckons it as much theirs as if it had been
personally performed by them: Gods appointing of Christ to this work, and his
accepting of it, puts him into the room and stead of the Elect, and whatever is
done by him as their Surety and Mediator, is reckoned as done by them. If this
could be proved, it were somewhat to the purpose, but if no such thing appear,
as Christ's acting in the name and stead of any particular men, this utterly
subverts their notion of Suretiship: For a Surety, or Proxy, or Surrogate, or
what ever you will call him, who acts in the name and stead of others, so that
what he does, is reckoned as done by those for whom he acts, must do what he
does in the name, and as representing the persons of some certain particular
men. For to act in the name and stead of another in this sense, and yet not to
represent any certain person, is a contradiction.

I do not deny, but that Christ may properly be said to die in our stead, loco
nostro and vice nostra, in as much as his Death was a proper Expiatory
Sacrifice for Sin, or as Grotius explains that Phrase, Vice nostra Christum
esse mortuum, hoc est, nisi Christus esset mortuus, nos fuisse morituros, and
quia Christus mortuus est, nos non morituros morte aeterna; That Christ is said
to die in our stead, because unless Christ had died, me must have died, and
since Christ has died, we shall not die an Eternal death. De satisf. Cap. 9.
But then Christ did not so die in our stead, much less fulfill Righteousness in
our stead, as to personate us, as our Substitute, Attorney, or Proxy, and the
difference between these two is vastly wide: for in the first Case, Christ only
so dies in our stead, that in virtue of his Expiation and Sacrifice he
procures, confirms, and ratifies, a Universal Covenant of Grace with mankind
upon certain terms, and conditions to be performed by us; hence his blood is
called the blood of the Covenant, and he the Surety of the Covenant: But for
Christ to act in our stead, so as to represent and personate us, gives us an
immediate actual right to the purchase of Christ's Death, and to the merit of
his Righteousness; for what is thus done in our stead, is in Law and Justice
reckoned as done by us, and therefore can admit of no intervening condition to
entitle us to it. In the first sense Christ may die for all mankind, and be a
propitiation for the sins of the whole World, and the Sacrifice and Expiation
of his Death be very well reconciled with a conditional Covenant. But in the
second sense he can be said to die for none, but those particular men, whose
persons he represented as their Surety and Proxy; and who have an immediate
right to what ever he has done and suffered for no other reason, but because he
acted in their name and stead: Which resolves the whole Covenant of Grace
between God and man into the Covenant of Redemption, as they call it, between
God and Christ.

Mr. Ferguson has a great mind to say Interest of Reason, etc. p. 540.
something against this notion of Christ's being the Surety and Mediator of the
Covenant; and not such a Surety and Mediator for particular persons as acts in
their name and stead, and does for them what ever was required of them by any
Law. He first excepts against my Notion of a Surety of a Covenant, that it
signifies no more than to confirm and ratify this Covenant, and to undertake
for the performance of it, that all the Promises of the Covenant shall be made
good upon such terms and conditions as are annexed to them. And first he would
fain insinuate the charge of Socinianism against it, though he confesses, that
both Grotius and Dr. Hammond go this way, but yet my Paraphrase has more
affinity to Schlichtingius's Gloss, than to either of theirs, which is said
with the usual ingenuity of our Author, without any pretense or show of
reason: For there is nothing in my Paraphrase like Schlichtingius's, which I
had never seen. As he has set it down in the Margin, Schlichtingius's Comment
is this: Sponsor foederis appellatur Jesus, quod nomine Dei nobis sposponderit
i. e. fidem fecerit Deum foederis promissiones servaturum esse, non vero quasi
pro nobis sposponderit Deo, nostrorumve delictorum solutionem in se receperit.
That Jesus is therefore called the Surety of the Covenant, because he has
promised us in Gods name, that God shall keep and perform the Promises of the
Covenant, not that he undertook for us to God, by taking upon himself the
discharge of our debts, or sins; That is, by making Atonement and satisfaction
for sin. Which is so far from being my sense, that it is directly contrary to
it.

For when I say, that Christ's being the Surety of the Covenant, signifies his
confirming and ratifying the Covenant, and undertaking for the performance of
it, under those Phrases of consirming and ratifying, I include whatever Christ
did in order to the full and complete ratification of the Covenant, and had a
principal regard to that Expiation and Atonement which he made for sin, which
was the procuring cause of the Covenant of Grace, and the Seal and ratification
of it: For thus Covenants were confirmed by Sacrifices in the Eastern
Countries. Thus Moses confirmed the Covenant between God and the people of
Israel, by sprinkling the book and all the people with the blood of the
Sacrifice, saying, this is the blood of the Testament, which God has ordained
to you, Heb 9. 19, 20, 21. Upon which account the blood of Christ is called the
blood of sprinkling too, because by his blood God did seal and confirm the
Covenant of Grace, as the sprinkling the blood of beasts did confirm the
Mosaical Covenant, as I expressly observed in my former Discourse, from whence
Mr. Ferguson Knowledge of Christ. p. ^^^.
might have learned what I meant by confirming and ratifying the Covenant.

Now this alone answers all Mr. Ferguson's Objections against my Notion of a
Surety of a Covenant. He tells us, that the Surety of a better Testament, and
Mediator of a better Covenant are equipollent terms, (though he produces no
other reason for it, but that Christ is called a Surety in one place, and
Mediator in another, whereas the notions seem to be somewhat different) and
that his being styled a Surety has respect not to his Prophetical, but
Sacerdotal Office; and what follows from hence? Why therefore Christ's being
our Surety does not signify his confirming and ratifying the Covenant, which
had been an unanswerable objection, had I attributed the confirmation of the
Covenant to Christ only as Prophet, and not as Priest; but now proves nothing
but our Authors great forwardness to answer Books before he understands them,
or great skill in affixing perverse senses on them.

But Mr. Ferguson has one extraordinary Argument to prove, That there is
nothing of ratifying the Covenant, and undertaking for the performance of it
intended in the term of Suretiship, because this shakes God's infinite
veracity, which is the foundation of all Divine Faith. We may sometimes
question, whether such a declaration come from God, but admitting once, that it
is his, there is no room left to suspect its being true; and therefore Christ
could not confirm the Covenant; For Christ needed a testimony from God to
confirm his mission, but God needed none from him to establish his being true
and unchangeable. But he quite mistakes the state of the question, for Christ's
confirmation of the Covenant is not his giving testimony to the truth and
faithfulness of God, but such a confirmation of the Covenant, as is made by a
purchase, and by a Seal; which is an evidence to us that the Covenant is
confirmed past all revocation, which no Covenant is, till the Seal is put to
it; or to use the Apostles Argument from the nature of a Testament, which is
not in force till the death of the Testator; which reason the Apostle assigns,
why the first Testament was dedicated with blood, and why this New Testament
should be dedicated, and confirmed, and ratified with the blood of Christ, Heb.
9. 15, 16, etc. which gives a plain Answer to his other Argument, That the
Apostle reckoning up all the evidences of the Immutability of God's Counsel,
has omitted this, and thereby precluded it from the number of them. Whereas in
this very place the Apostle tells us, that this New Testament receives its
force and final confirmation from the death of Christ, who is the Testator. And
whereas he adds, Other security in order to our consolation we need not, nor
has God thought fit to give any but his Promise and Oath; and for this
alleadges Gods Oath to Abraham, Heb. 6. 16, 17. though we should acknowledge,
that God confirmed his Covenant and Promise to Abraham only by an Oath, yet it
is as plain, that he has confirmed his Covenant with us by the Death of his
Son; and indeed God ratified his Covenant with Abraham too by Sacrifice, and
that at Abraham's request, Genesis 15. 8, 9, 10, etc. And this Mr. Ferguson at
last acknowledges, that the enacting of the Covenant of Grace (which I suppose
includes a final ratification of it) respects Christ's undertaking to be made
sin, and to undergo the Curse, as the moral cause and condition without which
there had been no overtures of mercy made to the Sons of men: And that upon
this account is Christ called the Surety of the Covenant. This is a very dilute
account of the Death of Christ, to make it only the condition sine qua non,
without which God would not have made overtures of mercy* but he mends this in
what follows, that It was in consequence of Christ's susception to be our
Sponsor, and with respect to the obedience of his life, and Sacrifice of his
Death, as the procuring and deserving cause that God entered into a Covenant
with mankind, etc. Which is no more than I always affirmed, excepting by
Sponsor he means, that Christ did act in the name and stead of any particular
men.

Having thus got rid of Mr. Ferguson's Objections against my Notion of Christ's
being the Surety of the Covenant (for what he discourses of Christ's being a
Mediator having nothing new in it, deserves no particular consideration) I come
now to show what necessity there is of rejecting that Notion of Christ's being a
Surety and Mediator for particular persons, to do for them in their name and
slead, whatever was required of them by virtue of any Law; and that in short is
this, that it is one of the first and fundamental Principles of Antinomianism,
from which are deduced all those pernicious Doctrines which alter the whole
frame and design of Christianity, and do naturally tend to debauchery and
licentiousness.

I shall give but some short hints of this, because the thing is sufficiently
evident and notorious. Thus from hence they argue, that the very sins and
iniquities of the Elect, and not only the guilt and punishment of them, is laid
on Christ, because he stands so in our stead, as to become just what we were:
Have thou been an Idolater? Have thou been a Blasphemer? Have thou been a
Murderer, an Adulterer, a Thief, a Liar, a Drunkard? etc. If thou have a part
Crisp. Christ alone exalted. Vol. 2. p. 88, 89.
in the Lord Christ, all these transgressions of thine become actually the
transgressions of Christ, and so cease to be thine, and thou ceasest to be the
transgressor, from that time they were laid upon Christ, to the last hour of
thy life. Christ himself is not so completely righteous, but we are righteous
as he was; nor we so completely sinful, but he became, being made sin, as
completely sinful as we. So that here is a direct change, Christ takes our
persons, and condition, and stands in our stead, we take Christ's person, and
condition, and stand in his stead; what the Lord beheld Christ to be, that he
beholds the Members of Christ to be; what the Lord beholds the Members of
Christ to be in themselves, that he beholds Christ himself to be. This is very
true arguing from this Principle, that Christ did to all intents and purposes
stand in the stead, and represent the persons of particular men; and thus far
Dr. Owen and Mr. Ferguson agree very well with Dr. Crisp.

But secondly, Dr. Crisp argues farther, That every Transgression, first and
last, great and small, one with another, are carried away Ibid. p. 90, 91.
at once, and laid upon Christ: Which is a necessary consequence of the other;
for if all our sins were laid on Christ, and he took them away with one
Sacrifice for sin, then they must be taken away all together. Whatever
sinfulness you have committed, do commit, or shall commit, there was one
Sacrifice once offered by Christ, through which he has perfected them that are
sanctified.

And thirdly, from hence it follows, that we are actually acquitted from the
time of our sins being laid upon Christ: For sin cannot be laid upon Christ,
and continue upon the sinner too; and therefore from the time of sins being
laid upon Christ, the sinner is acquitted and justified. But for the fuller
explication of this, Dr. Crisp distinguishes between God's laying Iniquity upon
Christ by way of obligation, by way of execution, and by way of his own
application Ibid. p. 244.
of it to his people; by way of obligation God did lay iniquity on Christ, when
he did tie, and bind, and oblige himself to it. And that is from all Eternity,
then he did it in his own determinate Counsel, when in his own Counsel he did
determine it should be done. But this was a secret tie and obligation upon God,
but God did lay the Iniquity of his people upon Christ openly, when he did
openly bind himself by Covenant p. 248.
to do it: viz. in that first Promise which he made to Adam after his Fall.

Put then God laid Iniquity on Christ by way of execution, as he in time served
the execution upon Christ, which may be considered, as it was virtual, or as it
was actual and real. The execution was served upon Christ in the virtue of it,
from the first instant that ever there was a transgression committed, and not
only at that time when sin was first committed, and from thence to the time of
his suffering, but also afterward from the time he had suffered to the p. 254.
end of the world. For you must know that Christ was to bear the sins of the
Elect from the beginning to the end of the world, and he was to discharge this
debt at once, and therefore he does not actually do this, either at the
beginning or at the end of the world; but in the fullness of time Christ came
and reckoned with the Father, and the Father has so much of him for all that
is past, and as much for all for aftertimes to the end of the world: Says
Christ to the Father, here is so much for every one of mine, p. 256.
that they have run out for the time that is past, and here is so much for
every one of my Members that shall come after; they will commit so many sins in
time to come, here is so much for all that sin they shall commit. And this is
Gods serving execution actually upon Christ, when he died upon the Cross in the
fullness of time.

But thirdly, as for Gods laying Iniquity upon Christ by way of particular
application of it to this and that man: You must observe, That concerning the
Elect in general, as they were in the eye of the Lord, before they had a real
Existence and Being, so all their Iniquities p. 265.
were laid upon Christ from Eternity: But the particular application of this
grace to persons must be in time, and this done either secretly or manifestly.
As for this secret application (which is so called, because it is a secret
thing for a time to these for whom he does it) it is at the very instant that
such a person has a being in the world: the manifest application is, when the
sinner actually believes, and thereby knows, that God has laid his sins on
Christ. In the secret application of this grace unto a person, this person has
a full discharge; and in the manifestation he has the comfort of this
discharge. So that every elect Sinner is justified from Eternity, as Christ
died and bore his sins from Eternity, viz. in the Counsel and Decree of God:
His sins are actually paid for, and removed from his Surety too, from the time
of Christ's suffering upon the Cross. From that time there was not one sin to
be reckoned, either to Believers who are Christ's Members, or to Christ
himself, he having them made satisfaction, and upon it given p. 259.
out unto the world it is finished: And this discharge is actually, though
secretly, applied to them, as soon as they have any being, and they know that
they are discharged as soon as they believe: This is the Antinomian account of
Justification; and supposing their first Principle, that Christ did represent
the persons of the Elect, and do all in their name and stead, I cannot see how
it is possible to confute it. I confess, I cannot answer Dr. Crisp's reasoning;
That God has not one sin to charge p. 272.
upon any Elect person from the first moment of conception, till the last
minute of his life: because the Lord has laid it on Christ already. He did lay
sins on him; When did he lay them? When he did pay the full price for them. Now
suppose this person uncalled commits Iniquity, and that this Iniquity is
charged upon him; seeing that his iniquities are laid upon Christ already, how
comes it to pass that they are charged upon this Elect Person again? How come
they to be translated again from Christ, and laid upon this Person? Once they
were laid upon Christ, it must be confessed, for the blood of Christ cleanses
us from all sin. Was there by one act of Christ, the expiation of sin, and all
at once, that are committed from the beginning of the world to the end thereof;
how comes it to pass that this and that sin should be charged upon the elect
persons, when they were laid upon Christ long before? And, I profess, I cannot
see one hairs breadth difference between Dr. Owen and Dr. Crisp in this matter,
unless it be, that Dr. Crisp speaks his mind plainly and honestly, and Dr. Owen
endeavors (if it be not a natural infirmity) to cloud his sense with a
multitude of words, and to lose himself and his Readers in a labyrinth of
distinctions, as to give some plain evidences of it.

Dr. Owen, in his Book entitled, Salus electorum sanguis Jesus, or, The death
of death in the death of Christ, p. 145. Printed 1648. lays down these
Propositions. First, That the full and due debt of all those for whom Christ
was responsible, was fully paid in to God according to the utmost extent of the
Obligation. Secondly, That the Lord, who is a just Creditor, ought in all
equity to cancel the Bond, to surcease all Suits, Actions, and Molestations
against the Debtor, full payment being made to him for the Debt: And since he
ought to do this, we need not doubt but he, being a just Creditor, does do it.
Thirdly, That the Debt thus paid was not this, or that sin, but all the sins of
all those for whom, and in whose name this payment was made. Fourthly, That a
second payment of a debt, once paid, or a requiring it, is not answerable to
the justice which God demonstrated in setting forth Christ to be a propitiation
for our sins; and therefore it is not just with God to require the payment of
that Debt again of us, which Christ has already paid for us. And fifthly,
That, whereas to receive a discharge from further trouble, is equitably due to
the Creditor, who has been in Obligation, his Debt being paid; the Lord having
accepted of the payment from Christ, in the stead of all them for whom he died,
ought in justice, according to that Obligation, which in free grace he has put
upon himself, give them a discharge. And Sixthly, considering that relaxation
of the Law, which by the Supreme Power was effected, as to the persons
suffering the punishment required, such actual satisfaction is made thereto,
that it can lay no more to their charge for whom Christ died, than if they had
really fulfilled in the way of obedience, whatever it did require. Now I can by
no means understand what all these Propositions can signify else, but to
prove, that those for whom Christ died, are discharged upon his payment of
their Debt, and so are justified from Eternity, as Christ paid their Debt from
Eternity, in the Decree of God, and are justified in time, as soon as they are
capable of it, that is, as soon they are in being.

In his Book of Communion, p. 204. he has ten Propositions, much to the same
purpose; He there tells us, That Christ in his undertaking of the work of our
Redemption with God, was constituted and considered, as a common public person
in the stead of them, for whose reconciliation to God he suffered. And that
being thus a common Person, upon his undertaking as to merit and efficacy, and
upon his actual performance, as to solemn declaration, (this is what Dr. Crisp
calls Gods laying iniquity upon Christ by way of Obligation, and by way of
Execution) was as such (as a common person) acquitted, absolved, justified, and
freed from all and every thing, that on the behalf of the Elect, as due to
them, was charged upon him, or could so be: So that he was from all Eternity
upon his undertaking, and in time upon his actual performance, as a common
Person, that is, in the name, and as representing the persons of the Elect,
acquitted, absolved, and justified; and therefore as it follows, Christ
received the general acquittance for them all, and they are all acquitted in
the Covenant of the Mediator, whence they are said to be crucified with him, to
die with him, to rise with him, to sit with him in heavenly places, namely, in
the Covenant of the Mediator. This is what Dr. Crisp calls a secret application
of Gods laying iniquity upon Christ to particular persons, which is done before
they know it; and the only difference between him and Dr. Owen is, that Dr.
Owen will not allow this to be a discharge of the Elect in their own persons,
but only in the Person of the Mediator; and Dr. Crisp thinks it more proper to
say, that this is a personal discharge of them, since it is done in their names
and persons, but it is no great matter who speaks most properly, when the thing
is the same.

In another Discourse of the Death of Christ, in answer to Mr. Baxter's
Objections against his Treatise of Redemption, p. 72. he asserts, that the
Elect have an actual right to all that was purchased by Christ's Death before
believing, and that is equivalent to their having a right from Eternity, or
from the first moment of their being. And he offers it as his one opinion,
Whether absolution from the guilt of sin, and obligation unto death, though not
as terminated in the conscience (that is, though it be not known to the Person,
which is Dr. Crisp's secret application) for complete Justification, do not
precede our actual believing, and expounds the Justification of the ungodly,
Romans 4. to this sense, as Dr. Crisp expressly does. And though he dare not
assert complete Justification to be before believing, yet he affirms, that
absolution is, as it is considered, as the act of the Will of God, that is
secret, and known only to God; for a discharge from the effects of anger
naturally precedes all collation of any fruits of love, such as faith is. And
the difference between this absolution and complete Justification is no more
but this: That absolution wants that act of pardoning mercy, which is to be
terminated and completed in the conscience of a sinner. That is, though such a
man be pardoned before believing, yet he can have no sense of his Pardon before
believing, which is exactly Dr. Crisp's notion: And absolution wants the hearts
persuasion of the truth and goodness of the Promise, and the mercy held out in
the Promise. And it wants the Souls rolling it self on Christ, and receiving
Christ, as the Author and Finisher of that mercy, an All-sufficient Savior to
them that believe. All which signifies no more, than that Absolution is before
and without Faith; for this apprehending the truth and goodness of the Promise,
and rolling it self on Christ according to the Doctors notion, constitute the
justifying Act of Faith.

And therefore when the Doctor elsewhere tells us, that the Elect, till the
full Communion. p. 205.
time of their actual deliverance, determined and appointed to them in their
several Generations, be accomplished, are personally under the Curse of the
Law, and on that account are legally obnoxious to the wrath of God. He only
chooses to contradict himself, to avoid the imputation of Antinomianism: For by
their actual deliverance, I presume he must understand the time of their actual
believing; and if they are absolved before they actually believe, how can they
be under the Law, or legally obnoxious to the wrath of God? And therefore he
immediately qualifies this, that though they are obnoxious to the Law and the
Curse thereof, yet not at all with its primitive intention of execution upon
them; which is as much as to say, that they are obnoxious to the Curse of the
Law, but not obnoxious to the execution of that Curse, which I take to be
nonsense. How then are they obnoxious to the Curse of the Law? Why, as it is a
means appointed to help forward their acquaintance with Christ, and acceptance
with God on his account: By which I suppose he means, that their Absolution
being at present secret, and not terminated and completed in the Conscience,
they are terrified and scared with the threatenings of the Law, as fancying
themselves to be under it, when they are not, and this makes them fly to Christ
for refuge and sanctuary. And though Dr. Crisp indeed do not like this way of
affrighting men to Christ by the Law, yet the difference is not great, and
makes no material alteration in the Scheme of their Religion.

And therefore when Dr. Owen adds, That it was determined by Father, Son, and
Ibid*
Holy Ghost, that the way of the actual personal deliverance of the Elect from
the Sentence and Curse of the Law, should be in and by such a way and
dispensation, as might lead to the praise of the glorious grace of God, and to
glorify the whole Trinity, by ascending to the Fathers love through the works
of the Spirit and Blood of the Son. All that he means by it is this, that we
shall have no sense of our Absolution by the Blood of Christ till we actually
believe, nor be actually possessed of Eternal Life, till we be renewed and
sanctified, all which Dr. Crisp will own, and is consistent enough with our
Justification, or Absolution from Eternity, since Faith and all other blessings
are the effect of our antecedent Absolution in Christ, as the Doctor confesses.
And this is all Mr. Ferguson means, when he tells us, That Christ's own
discharge was an Interest of Reason, etc. p. 549.
immediate consequent of his sufferings, and they for whom he suffered had also
immediately a fundamental right of being acquitted, but their actual
deliverance was to be in the way and order, that he, who had substituted
himself in our room, and he, who had both admitted and been the Author of the
substitution thought fit to appoint. This is the necessary consequence of this
Doctrine, that if Christ acted as a Surety in the name and stead of particular
persons, then those for whom he acted are absolved and justified by the
undertaking or actual performance of Christ, either from Eternity, or from the
first moment of their being.

I might add several other Consequences, which necessarily result from this
Doctrine, and are the peculiar Principles of Antinomianism, as that we must not
pray for the forgiveness of sins, because they are long since removed by the
death of Christ, but only for the sense of this forgiveness; that God sees no
sin in his people, because their sins are laid on Christ, and that therefore we
must not lay sin upon our own Consciences neither, unless we will make our
Conscience a Christ: But this is enough to show how fruitful this Principle is
of absurdities, and what reason I have to reject our Union to the Person of
Christ, considered as one, who has done all for us, in our name and stead.

And now I need not insist long on the second thing proposed, viz. our
immediate Union to the Person of Christ: For though all Christians are in some
sense immediately united to Christ, as I have shown above, yet in the
Antinomian sense of an immediate Union, I do utterly reject it, whereby they
understand an Union to the Person of Christ, without any intervening Conditions
on our part. And this they must necessarily do according to their notion of the
Person of Christ. They explain this, as I observed in my former Knowledge of
Christ, Chap. 4. Sect. 3.
Discourse, by a Conjugal Relation, and a Legal Union.

As for a Conjugal Relation, which consists in such a Union of Persons, as is
between a Man and his Wife, which intitles us to all the personal excellencies
and perfections, Beauty, Comeliness, Riches, and Righteousness of Christ, as
Marriage intitles a Woman to her Husbands Estate; and secures us from the Wrath
of God, and the Accusations of the Law, as a woman under Covert is not liable
to any Action or Arrest. I perceive Mr. Ferguson gives it over as indefensible;
for among all the sorts of Unions, which he reckons up, he takes no notice of
this, which is the most charming and inviting Union, and most acceptable to the
Sisterhood, the best Friends to Conventicles of any other: But I suppose Mr.
Vincent will not give it over so, and therefore I observe, that this must be an
immediate Union, which requires nothing else but an embracing and clasping
Faith, which unites their persons to each other: This Faith is no condition of
Union, but only such a consent to have Christ, as is necessary to make the
Match or rather like joining hands, which is the Ceremony of Marriage: Though
indeed the Marriage was made before, as they say all Marriages are, in Heaven.
Eternal Election marries them to Christ, and this consenting Faith gives them
only a comfortable sense of their Matrimonial Union, as will appear by
considering the nature of Legal Union, whereby we are united to Christ, as to
our Surety and Mediator, who does all for us in our name and stead.

Now it is a plain demonstration, that this Union to Christ, as to our Surety
and Mediator, is immediate, for it is entirely Gods act in electing some
particular persons, and giving them to Christ, to do all for them in their name
and stead. And therefore Dr. Crisp truly argues, that it is God, and only God,
that can lay Christ alone exalted. Vol. 2. p. 186, etc
our sins upon Christ, that our Repentance, and Faith, and new Obedience cannot
do it: For this work of laying sin on Christ, in making him our Surety to do
all for us, was done long since, and is not to be done now. Christ has already
died for all, that he will die for; and if he did not die for us, nothing that
we can do now can lay our sins upon him; For as the Doctor reasons, if we could
a fresh by our Repentance and Faith lay our sins on Christ, as our Surety, how
should he get rid of them again? For there is no getting rid of sin, but by
dying for it, and Christ has already done that, and is not to die again.

If Christ's Suretiship consists in his dying and performing all righteousness
for particular persons, elected and chosen by God, our Union to Christ as to
our Surety must be from Eternity, or at least from the time of his appearing in
the world; for if he did not act as our Surety then, he cannot do so since,
unless we should suppose, that he must come into the world again, to act over
the same part in the name and stead of those who were left out of the first
Roll of Election, and therefore I do not wonder, that these men are so much
blundered, and talk backward and forward in those directions, they give to
their hearers, how to get into Christ; for the truth is, if we are not in
Christ already, there is no getting into Christ now, according to their
Principles. Election alone, and Gods giving us to Christ unites us to him, not
any act of our own, neither Faith, Repentance, or new Obedience; these at best
can only give us a comfortable sense of our Union to Christ, but can contribute
nothing at all to our Union it self.

And therefore Dr. Owen does roundly acknowledge, that Christ is reckoned to us
in Of the death of Christ. p. 77.
order of nature before we believe; and by Gods reckoning Christ to us, he
means, the imputing of Christ unto ungodly unbelieving sinners, for whom he
died, so far as to account him theirs, to bestow Faith and Grace upon them for
his sake. And if God reckon Christ to men before Faith, he must reckon him
theirs from the time of his giving them to Christ, for there can be no other
reason of his reckoning Christ to them at all. And to show how free and
absolute this gift of Christ is; he tells us, That there is no condition at all
in this stipulation. That Ibid. p. 65.
God should engage upon the death of Christ to make out Grace and Glory,
Liberty and Beauty, unto those for whom he died, upon condition they do so, or
so, leaves no proper place for the merit of Christ, and is very improperly
ascribed unto God. And therefore though the Covenant of Grace seem to run
conditionally, that if we repent and believe, we shall be saved; yet the
Covenant is indeed absolute, because these very conditions are part of Christ's
Purchase, and are promised without any condition; and though God will bring us
to Heaven in such a way and method, as he has thought fit to prescribe to
himself for the Glory of the Trinity, yet all this, in all the parts of it, is
no less fully procured for us, nor less freely bestowed on us, for Christ's
sake, and on his account, as part of his Purchase and Merits, than if all of us
immediately upon his death, had been translated Communion p. 206.
into heaven.

From all this it appears, what they mean by an immediate Union to the Person
of Christ, such an Union to Christ as our Mediator and Surety, as is founded
only on Electing Grace, without any thing required on our part, and in this
sense, though I deny not particular Election, yet I disown our immediate Union
to the Person of Christ.

Christ is the Surety and Mediator of the Covenant, who having with his own
blood made a general Atonement and Propitiation for the sins of the whole
world, purchased and sealed the Covenant of Grace, wherein he promises pardon
of sin, and Eternal Life to all those who repent and believe the Gospel. Such a
faith in Christ, as makes us members of his Body, which is his Church, alone
entitles us to all the benefits of his Death and Passion; and therefore he is
said to redeem his Church with his own blood; for though his Sacrifice was
general and universal, yet none have an actual interest in it, but his Church,
and the particular Members of it. This unites us to Christ, and applies his
Universal grace and mercy particularly to our selves. But to imagine, that
Christ was appointed by God to be a Surety only for particular Persons, and to
act in their name and stead, necessarily precipitates men into the very dregs
of Antinomianism, which in this loose, fantastical, and degenerate Age is the
only popular and taking frenzy.

It is time now to proceed to the vindication of my third and fourth
Propositions in my Chapter of Union, from the misrepresentations of Mr.
Ferguson, for this is all the skill he has shown here, to pervert my sense, and
to affix such Doctrines to me, as I never dreamt of. The third Proposition is
this, That the Union between Christ and Christians is not a Natural, but
Political Union; that is such an Union as there is between a Prince and his
Subjects. The fourth is this, That Fellowship and Communion with God, according
to the Scripture notion, Knowledge of Christ. Chap. 4. Sect. 1.
signifies what we call a Political Union; that is, that to be in Fellowship
with God and Christ signifies to be of that Society, which puts us into a
peculiar relation to God, that God is our Father, and we his Children, that
Christ is our Head and Husband, our Lord and Master, we his Disciples and
Followers, his Spouse and his Body. These two Propositions our Author tells us,
are according to the best understanding of enunciations he has, coincident and
equipollent; Interest of Reason, etc. p. 623.
which is a plain demonstration, how little his understanding is in these
matters, when the third Proposition concerns the nature of our Union, and the
fourth the explication of a Scripture term, which had been perverted to a very
different, if not contrary sense.

But to let pass this, and a great many other things of this nature, (as any
man must do, who would not undertake such a trifling task, as to prove, that
our Author neither understands Logic nor Philosophy, nor any other part of
good learning, of which there are abundant evidences in this very Treatise,
where he makes a great show and flourish with that little undigested knowledge
he has) his great Artifice in what follows is to conceal and misrepresent my
notion of Political Union, and then to scuffle learnedly and valiantly with his
own shadow and dreams. Sometimes he represents this Political Union to be only
such an External Relation as is between a Prince and his Subjects, and ever
denies, that I own any influences of Grace from Christ, as an influential head,
as he is pleased to call him. And therefore all his reasonings, proceeding upon
such an ignorant or wilful mistake, all I have to do, is to clear my own
notion, and to give an account of the reason, why I stated it in this manner.
As for the first: By a Political Union I understand such a Union between Christ
and Christians, as there is between a Prince and his Subjects, which consists
in our belief of his Revelations, obedience to his Laws, and subjection to his
Authority; and that this is the true notion of it, I gave sufficient evidence
in my former Discourse, to which I must refer my Reader. But then I observed,
that this Political Union, between Christ and his Church, may be either only
external and visible, and so hypocritical Professors may be said to be united
to Christ by the Ligaments of an external Profession; or true and real, which
imports the truth and sincerity of our obedience to our Lord and Master, that
we really are what we profess to be: And herein consists a material difference
between that External Union which is between a temporal Prince and his
Subjects, and the Union between Christ, who is a spiritual Head and King, and
the true Church, or true and sincere Christians, who are spiritual Subjects.
For, as the Authority of Earthly Princes can reach only the External man,
because they cannot know our thoughts any other ways than as they are expressed
in our outward actions, so the Union consists in an external Government, and an
external Subjection: But Christ, being a spiritual Prince, governs hearts and
thoughts too, and therefore our subjection to Christ, and consequently our
Union to him, must not be only external and visible, but internal and
spiritual, which consists in the subjection of our hearts and minds, of our
thoughts and passions to his Government. And this real and spiritual Union I
explained in four particulars.

First, as I have already observed, it consists in the subjection of our minds
and spirits to Christ, as our spiritual King. And secondly, this is represented
in Scripture, by a participation of the same nature, which is the necessary
effect of the subjection of our minds to him: Upon which account I observed,
that our Union to Christ is described by having the Spirit of Christ, Romans 89.
If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his: Which as it
respects the cause, whereby we are transformed into a Divine Nature, so it
signifies the Holy Spirits dwelling in us; as it signifies the effect, or that
Divine Nature, New Creature, (which Mr. Ferguson himself acknowledges to be the
very Interest of Reason etc. p. 441.
bond of our cohesion to Christ) so it is that same temper and disposition of
mind, which Christ had; which, as I expressly observed, is called, having the
Spirit of Christ by an ordinary figure of the cause for the effect, for all
those virtues and graces, wherein our conformity to Christ consists, are called
the fruits of the Spirit. And in the Page before, that it is called being born
of the Spirit, because all Christian Graces and Virtues are in Scripture
attributed to the Spirit of God as the Author of them. And now I dare trust any
man of common ingenuity to judge, whether I make our Union to Christ a mere
external thing, or leave out the consideration of the Spirit of God in our
Union to Christ, when I assert, that that new nature, all those Christian
graces, wherein our conformity and internal Union to Christ consists, are owing
to the indwelling of the Holy Spirit. And whereas Mr. Ferguson is so critical,
that it will not satisfy him, that the Spirit is present in the hearts of
Believers in respect Ibid. p. 646.
of that New Creature, Divine Nature, and spiritual being, which he has
wrought in them, but immediately also; I would fain learn of him, what he means
by this immediate presence of the Spirit; for if the Holy Spirit be a divine
and infinite being, which is present every where, how can he be more
immediately present in one place, or in one person, than in another, but only
by a more peculiar manifestation of himself in his effects and operations? As
God, who fills all places with his presence, is said to dwell in Heaven,
because there he manifests his glory in a more peculiar manner.

But I cannot without some indignation Ibid. p. 645.
observe, how our Author has profaned this holy Union between Christ and
Believers by comparing it with the impure mixtures of a man with a Harlot, and
representing the Apostle to argue at this rate. The Apostle tells us, That he
who is joined to the Lord is one spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 17. Which I thus explained,
That herein consists our Union to Christ, that we have the same temper of mind
which he had, (wrought in us by the same Holy Spirit, which animates both the
Head and the Body, and every member of it, as I acknowledged before) for there
can be no Union between Souls and Spirits without this, that they are acted by
the same principles, and love and choose the same things, etc. Mr. Ferguson
disproves this from that opposition, which the Apostle (as he says) makes
between the Union of a man to a Harlot, and our Union to Christ; Know ye not,
that he which is joined to a Harlot is one body, but he that is joined to the
Lord is one spirit. From whence he argues, If the Union betwixt a man and a
Harlot, in the virtue of which they are one body, import more than merely a
likeness of temper and moral disposition, as surely it does, for as much as
there may be a similitude in sensual propensions and inclinations, where the
becoming one flesh through carnal conjunction interposeth not; much more does a
Believer's, being one spirit with the Lord, imply a higher kind of Union than
an affinity of dispositions. What fine work might a profane Wit make of this!
And indeed I would not have defiled my Paper with it, but only to have
vindicated our Apostle, and Christianity together from such sordid and impure
abuses: And any one, who consults the place, will easily perceive, that this
profane comparison is owing wholly to our Author, and that the Apostle has
nothing to do with it. For in the fifteenth verse he disswades them from
Fornication by this Argument, Know ye not, that your bodies are the members of
Christ, shall I take then the members of Christ, and make them members of an
Harlot, God forbid. The undecency of this is very evident, that the members of
Christ should be made the members of an Harlot, and therefore the Apostle
distinctly proves these two Propositions, that our bodies, as we are
Christians, are the members of Christ; and that that body which is joined to
the Harlot, becomes one flesh and body with her. This last he proves from the
primitive institution of Marriage, Two, says he, shall be one flesh; For an
Harlot is an uxor usuraria, who unlawfully supplies the place of Wife; and he
proves the latter, that our bodies also are the members of Christ, from that
intimate Union of Souls and Spirits betwixt Christ and Believers; He that is
joined to the Lord is one Spirit, and therefore his body too is a member of
Christ, for that intimate Union between the body and the soul will not admit a
separation; Christ first takes possession of our souls, and then challenges an
interest and propriety in our bodies, which must be preserved holy and pure, as
the Temples of God.

But then thirdly I observed, That there is a closer Union still, which results
from this, which consists in a mutual and reciprocal love; when we are
transformed into the Image of Christ, he loves us, as being like to him, and we
love him too, as partaking of his nature; He loves us, as the price of his
blood, as his own workmanship created unto good works, and we love him, as our
Redeemer and Savior; for which I produced Ioh. 14. 20. At that day ye shall
know, that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you: Where by day Mr.
Ferguson very wisely understands the glorified state, this Union being such a
Mystery, Ibid. p. 655.
as cannot be understood in this world, whereas the Circumstances of the place
determine it to our Saviors Resurrection, and the descent of the Holy Spirit,
and he himself explains the meaning of this Union, Verse. 21. He that has my
Commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me, and he that loves me,
shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and manifest my self to him.
To the same purpose Christ prays for his Disciples, Ioh. 17. 21. That they may
be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in
us. These Scriptures are alleged by Mr. Ferguson too, but to prove he knows
not what: He acknowledges, That it is not an oneness of Essence betwixt Ibid.
p. 628.
Christ and Believers, that is here to be understood; nor yet is it merely an
oneness of will and affection between the Father and the Son, but it is an
Essential Unity here meant. Well, Is there an Essential Unity then here meant
betwixt Christ and Believers? No, that he rejected before; What then? Why,
though we plead not for the same kind of oneness between Christ and Believers,
as is between the Father and the Son, yet we affirm that something more sublime
than barely a Political Relation is adumbrated and shadowed forth to us.
Something more than External-Political Union I believe is intended by them; but
what sublime thing is that, which is adumbrated and shadowed forth to us in
these words (which expressions argue, that our Author is not very clear in it)
that he tells us, that by alluding to that incomprehensible Idendity, which is
between the persons of the blessed Trinity through a numericalness of nature,
he would instruct us, that the Union between Christ, and those that are born of
God, is intimate, great, and Mysterious, as well as true and real. But Mr.
Ferguson elsewhere tells us, that all Unions are Mysterious, and there are
several sorts of intimate, and great, and true, and real Unions; so that we are
never the wiser for this account of our Union to Christ. But our Saviors plain
and obvious meaning is this, that as there is a perfect harmony of will, and
affections, and design, and a perfect agreement in Doctrine between the Father
and himself, founded on the unity of nature; so he prays that his Disciples may
be one also among themselves, and with God from their agreement in the same
belief, and participation of the same nature, and a unity and harmony of
Affections.

But then I observed fourthly, that this Union is expressed in Scripture by
resembling the Christian Church to Gods Temple, wherein he dwells, as formerly
he did in the Temple at Jerusalem. That God now dwells in the Christian Church
by his Holy Spirit, as he formerly did in the Jewish Temple by Types and
Figures, and that he does not dwell thus in the Christian Church only, as a
spiritual Society, but in every particular Christian, as I explained at large
in my former Discourse; which is a plain demonstration of our Authors honesty
in charging me with rejecting the Inhabitation of the Holy Spirit, and making a
mere External-Political Union between Christ and Christians.

This is sufficient to vindicate my own notion from the false representations
of this Author, and I might honorably enough retreat, and leave him to
skirmish with his own shadow, but to do all the right that may be to my cause,
and to satisfy all unprejudiced and teachable minds, I shall give some farther
account of the reason, why I stated the notion of our Union to Christ in this
manner.

And first, the true reason, why I did not more particularly discourse of the
influences of the Divine Spirit, but was contented to give some plain and short
intimations of it, was, because I principally designed to consider, what was
necessary on our part, as matter of duty, in order to our Union with Christ:
For here are the great and dangerous mistakes; here it is, that my Adversaries
have confounded the plain Notions of Religion, and lead men into intricate
Labyrinths and Meanders. What is necessary on Christ's part, he will be sure to
effect, whether we do so clearly and perfectly understand it or not; but unless
we understand, what is necessary on our part, it is impossible we should do it,
unless it be by perfect chance and accident: These new Divines cannot to this
day direct men how to get into Christ, or to be united to him. They talk of a
Legal and a Mystical Union, but what we must do to be thus Legally and
Mystically united to Christ they know not; we must expect till God gives Christ
to us, or till Christ unite us to himself, or rather till he give us a sense
and knowledge that we are united. And this is a very hard case, that when our
Eternal happiness depends on our Union to Christ, we should be so perfectly
ignorant how to attain to this Union.

Nay, they had so ordered the matter, that a very good man, who heartily
believes the Gospel of Christ, and makes conscience of obeying it, if he be so
weak as to hearken to their preachments, may be perplexed with Eternal Scruples
about his Union to Christ; while a bad man, who has a warm and Enthusiastic
fancy, and can work his imagination into all the various Scenes of the New
Birth, shall live in the perpetual embraces of Christ, and in the Raptures and
Ecstasies of assurance, and despise the low seize of morality and a good
life.

Now my principal design was to rectify these dangerous mistakes, to give men
such a notion of our Union to Christ, that they may certainly know by what
means they may attain this Union; and that good men may reap the comfort of it,
and bad men, though never such Seraphical hypocrites, may see all their hopes
confuted, and be forced either to let go all their pretenses of Union to
Christ, or enter upon a new course of life: And I could not better do this,
than by making it appear, that to be united to Christ signifies to be his
Disciples, to be incorporated into his Church by a public profession of Faith
and obedience, and to conform our hearts and lives to the Laws of the Gospel:
And therefore I chose all along to expound those expressions of being one
Spirit with Christ, of having the Spirit of Christ, of Christ's dwelling in us,
and the like, so as to explain what they signified on our part, viz. to be
transformed into the Image of Christ, to be animated by the same love of virtue
and goodness, to have the same Spirit, the same temper of mind which he had,
than to dispute concerning the manner of the Divine Spirits inhabitation, and
operation in us, which possibly will never be determined (as very few modes of
things are) and is not much material whether it be or not, so long as we
heartily believe, and importunately beg, and constantly rely on the assistances
of the Divine Grace.

Secondly, There is a further account to be given of this, because the gift of
the Spirit is consequent to our Union to Christ, but does not constitute the
formal nature of it. That there are some antecedaneous operations of the Holy
Spirit, whereby we are disposed to believe the Gospel, and to list our selves
into the number of Christ's Disciples, I do not deny; but these are of a very
different consideration from that gift of the Holy Spirit which is bestowed on
those who are actually incorporated into the Christian Church, and made the
Members of Christ: For Christ has promised his Holy Spirit only to those who
are actually united to him, and indeed in order of nature a member must first
be united to the body, before it can receive any influences from the Head. The
gift of the Holy Spirit is an act of Christ's Kingly Power and Authority, and
concerns only his Church, and the members of it: Just as Temporal Princes can
exercise no jurisdiction but over their own Subjects, and therefore we must
first be united to Christ, as members of his Church, before we can expect to
partake of the benefits and advantages (of which the gift of the Holy Spirit is
none of the least) of his Government.

God vouchsafes the assistances of the Holy Spirit to all men, to whom the
Gosspel is preached, to work Faith in them, but when men do actually believe,
and give themselves up to Christ in such regular ways, as he has appointed,
then the Holy Spirit is a constant Principle in them upon Covenant and Promise;
upon which account he is said to dwell in them, and to make his abode with
them, because he is always present as a Principle of a divine life; and
therefore according to the sense of Scripture, of the ancient Church, and of
the Church of England, the Baptism of the Spirit is annexed to our Baptism with
water, which is the Ceremony of our Initiation into the Christian Church, which
upon that account in the ancient Church was called (...), or illumination,
because the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of wisdom and knowledge was then bestowed
on them.

And indeed Dr. Owen and all my Adversaries, though they differ from me in
their Notion of our Union to Christ, yet do, and according to their Principles
must acknowledge, that we are first united to Christ, before the Holy Spirit is
bestowed on us. And Dr. Owen proves, that Christ is first reckoned unto us
before we believe, (and I can understand no difference between Christ's being
reckoned to Of the Death of Christ in answer to M. Baxter p. 77, etc.
us, and our being united to him, that is, our being reckoned to him) because
the Holy Spirit, which works faith in us, is bestowed on us for Christ's sake,
and upon account of our Union to him: And then certainly the Holy Spirit does
not primarily unite us to Christ, but is an effect and consequent of our Union
to him. And this I expressly asserted in my former Discourse, that this Union to
Christ entitles us to his peculiar care and providence, to the influences of
his grace, to the power of his Intercession, etc.

And thirdly, for the same reason I did not so largely and particularly
discourse of Christ's being an Influential Head (though I expressly own those
influences of grace, which we receive from Christ) because he is so only as he
is a Political Head. That is, as Temporal Princes govern their Subjects by
external Arts, and Methods of Discipline: So Christ, who is a Spiritual Prince,
governs his Subjects, and dwells in them by his Spirit. The gift of the Spirit
is an Act of his Regal Power, is bestowed only on his Subjects, and is
dispensed in such regular ways, as he has prescribed for the external Conduct
and Government of his Church. Thus the Spirit is at first conferred on us in
Baptism, and the daily supplies of it are administered upon our constant and
devout Prayers, as our Savior has promised, that God will give his Spirit to
them, who ask him: And we must expect the constant illuminations of the Spirit,
and the supplies of Grace in the administration of the Word and Sacrament of
the Lords Supper: By these means Christ as our Prince and Savior conveighs his
Grace to us, which requires our Communion with his Church in all Sacred
Institutions, and is the true basis and security of Ecclesiastical Authority.
Thus St. Paul tells us, That Christ is the Head from whom the whole body fitly
joined together and compacted, by that which every joint supplieth, according
to the effectual working in the measure of every part, makes increase of the
body to the edifying it self in love, Ephesians. 4. 15, 16. and Col. 2. 18. And not
holding the Head from which all the body with joints and bands having
nourishment ministered and knit together, increases with the increase of God.
In which places the Apostle represents the nourishment and increase of the
Christian Church, and of every member in it, by the growth of the natural body;
in which every member does not receive its influences and nourishment
immediately from the Head; but one member communicates to another in such just
and equal proportions, and regular ways, as may be most for the good of the
whole body. Thus every Christian, who is a member of the Church and body of
Christ, does receive the influences of Grace from Christ, for his increase and
nourishment, but he does not receive these influences immediately, but they are
bestowed on him by the Ministry of men in the regular administration of those
holy Institutions, which our Savior has appointed for that end; and this is
for the public benefit and advantage of the Christian Church, to secure the
Authority of Church Governors, and to preserve the Unity of Christians among
themselves.

This gives a plain account, why I would not call the Person of Christ the
Fountain of Grace, nor send Persons immediately to Christ for life, and power,
and all spiritual supplies, because though Christ be the great Minister of
Grace, yet we must not derive it immediately from his Person, but he dispenses
his Grace in the Preaching of the Word, or the administration of Sacraments,
and such other regular Methods, as he has appointed for the Government of his
Church, and the increase and growth of his spiritual body.

Whereas Dr. Owen, and Dr. Crisp, and the rest of the Antinomians, represent
Christ as such a Person, who has not only done all for us, but has undertaken
to do all in us, and that by such natural conveyances of Grace from his Person,
as there is of the animal spirits from the head to the rest of the members, and
that men must first be united to Christ before they can be capable of any
spiritual motion. So Dr. Crisp, very agreeably to what Dr. Owen asserts, tells
us, That Christ is Christ alone exalted. Vol. 1. p. 160. etc
the Head; now the Head is the Fountain of all animal Spirits, and of all
motion; without a Head, a man cannot hear, see, walk, feel, stir, nor do any
thing, seeing all these operations come from the Head; Christ is the Head of
his Church, he is the Fountain of all spiritual sense and motion; you may as
soon conceive that a man is able to see, whilst he has not a Head, as to think
a man may have spiritual eyes, whether the eye of Faith to behold Christ, or
the eyes of mourning to lament his wretchedness, before there be actually the
conjunction of Christ the Head to such a Body. Thus Christ is called Life, and
can any one be an active Creature before there be life breathed into him? -- As
a Body without a Soul is dead, so every Person in spiritual Actions is wholly
dead, till Christ, the Soul of that Soul, be infused into him to animate and
enliven him. For these men, as I observed before, having destroyed all the
Arguments to a good life, and all the regular and ordinary Methods of Grace,
are forced to resolve the renovation of our minds into a Natural, and Physical,
and Immediate operation of Christ upon our minds, which makes all his
Institutions very insipid and useless things, and destroys the Authority, and
Necessity of Christian Societies, if all Grace be so immediately derived from
the Person of Christ.

These things deserve a larger discourse, but I am now a hastening toward a
conclusion, and this is sufficient to vindicate my self, and my notions, from
that unjust and scandalous Imputation of Pelagianism, which can be attributed
only either to the ignorance of my Adversaries, or to their want of better
Arguments, or possibly to both.

CHAP. VI.
Containing an Answer to the charge of Socinianism, and the Conclusion of the
whole.

IAm now come to the last part of my Task, which may be dispatched in a few
words. Dr. Owen, and Mr. Ferguson, and the rest of my Adversaries, do at every
turn, especially when they have nothing else to answer, charge me with
Socinianizing. A charge which was as much unexpected, as undeserved; but is now
grown a very familiar Art among these accusers of the Brethren, to blast the
Reputation of those men, who make it their design to vindicate Christianity
from those absurd, and senseless, and pernicious Doctrines, which they have
broached under the name of Gospel Mysteries, and to reduce people to the
Communion of the Church of England, from which they have been seduced through
the Witchcraft and Enchantments of sublime and Seraphical nonsense; and if
ever it be just to express some indignation, it is in this case, for as the
Father observes, In causa haereseos neminem decet esse patientem; It becomes no
man to be tame and gentle when he is charged with Heresy; and therefore I did
not think fit wholly to pass over this charge in silence, nor yet shall I
insist long on it, since there is no other foundation for it, but unchristian
spite and malice. I suppose it will signify no great matter to vindicate my
self, nor those who suffer with me under the same Imputation, by a public
abrenunciation of Socinianism; for if this would do it, our Subscription to the
Articles of our Church, our constant use of the Liturgy, especially the Litany,
and Gloria Patri, the Nicene and Athanasian Creeds, the old and allowed Tests
of Orthodox Christians, which no Socinian will allow, and is the true cause why
they renounce our Communion, would be a sufficient justification both of my
self and them; But they who have made such a familiar practice of it to
dispense with the most Sacred Oaths and Promises, are apt to suspect all men to
be as faithless, as they have proved themselves: But however because the
clamours of these men have abused some innocent persons, and betrayed them to
very unjust apprehensions of my self, and many others, I do heartily declare,
that I am no Socinian, and that I do not know any Divine of the Church of
England, who can reasonably be suspected of that Heresy; though it is
notoriously evident, that those Sectaries, who are so ready to charge us with
Socinianism, have derived the greatest strength of their cause from Socinian
Writers, especially in the case of Anabaptism, Liberty of Conscience, and
unlimited Toleration, and rejecting the Authority of Civil Magistrates in the
External Conduct of Religious Affairs, as they have borrowed their other
Principles of Rebellion and deposing Princes from the worst of Papists.

The reason why Socinus has so ill a Character in the Christian Church, is his
denial of the Eternal Godhead and satisfaction of our Savior; but both these I
own, and make them the foundation of my Religion: I expressly call him the
Eternal Son of God, that Eternal Son of God by Knowledge of Christ. p. 81, 82.
Edit. 2. p. 56 Ibid. p. 330. 328. Edit. 2. p. 229. etc.
whom the worlds were made. I acknowledge that Christ died as a Sacrifice and
Expiation for sin, that by his Death he made Atonement for sin. That he
purchased, and procured, and scaled the Covenant of Grace in his own blood;
That Christ by his Death expiated our sins, and confirmed an Everlasting
Covenant; and being ascended up into Heaven, he there appears in the presence
of God for us, and perpetually intercedes in the virtue of his blood once
offered, which is of infinite more value than the repeated Sacrifices of the
Law. At this rate I discoursed not once or twice, but as often as occasion
served; and if this be Socinianism, I acknowledge my self to be a Socinian, and
if it be not, let others judge what my Adversaries are.

But let us consider, what pretenses they have for charging me with
Socinianism. And first Dr. Owen affirms, that I maintain Vindicat. p. 227.
the Socinian Notion of Justification: And now I am very well contented to be a
Socinian, for I have very good company in it, even the Church of England her
self, as I have made appear above: For my notion of Justification is no other
than what the Church of England does own and assert. But what is this Socinian
Notion of Justification? That we are justified by believing and obeying the
Gospel of Christ. This indeed the Socinians do assert, and so do I; and yet
there is a vast difference between us; because they reject the satisfaction of
Christ, as the meritorious cause of our Justification, which I own.

Upon the same account Ravenspergerus (such another zealous Bigot as my
Adversaries) charged Grotius with Socinianism, even when he writ against
Socinus at a better rate than these men are acquainted with, because he
attributed our Justification and pardon of sin to Faith in Christ, and
repentance from dead works, as Socinus does; and the answer, which Vossius
gives to him, may serve my Adversaries. Socinus, ^t ipse censor agnoscit, nullo
alio medio interveniente hanc fidel attribuit securitatem, id est, liberationem
a poena: Grotius Voss^i resp. ad Iudic. Ravensp. p. 283.
vero aliud statuit medium intervenire, nempe perpessiones Christi, habentes
rationem poenae, propter quas Deus nos a poenis velit liberare; Grotio igitur
prius est medium satisfactionis, quam fidei, at Socino solum medium est fides,
non satisfactio. i. e. Socinus attributes our security from the wrath of God,
or our deliverance from punishment, only to Faith, without any other medium; i.
e. Without the intervention of the Death and Sacrifice of Christ: But Grotius
asserts another medium of our Pardon and Justification; viz. the sufferings of
Christ under the notion of punishments, for which God was pleased to deliver us
from punishment. And therefore Grotius first attributes our Justification to
the satisfaction of Christ as the meritorious cause of it, and then to Faith,
as the Condition; But Socinus acknowledges Faith, but rejects Satisfaction. And
therefore Dr. Owen himself, when he formerly charged Mr. Baxter with
Socinianism upon the very same score, and drew a parallel between that account,
which Mr. Baxter gave of justification, and what is given by Slitchtingius, and
some other Socinians, was so modest then as to confess, that he was a Socinian
in this point, as far as any one could be, who acknowledges satisfaction; which
is as much as to say, that he was no Socinian.

Thus to proceed, they almost every where charge me with transcribing my
interpretations of Scripture out of the Socinian Expositors, and therefore I
must be a Socinian. Now suppose this were true, that I did make use of those
Expositions, which the Socinians give of many places of Scripture, what hurt is
there in it if there be no Socinianism in them? For I have heard men, who
understand very well what belongs to expounding Scripture, acknowledge the
Socinians to be excellent Expositors, where their own peculiar Notions are not
concerned, though no men play more tricks with Scripture, where they are: I do
very often make use of Mr. Calvin's Expositions, and why do not they hence
conclude me to be a Calvinist? And indeed in most of those places, where they
charge me with transcribing out of the Socinians, they might as justly have
charged me with transcribing out of Calvin, and, had they known all, with
greater reason too: For Calvin I did consult upon all occasions, but the
Socinians I never did.

I have already taken notice of and vindicated most of those Expositions which
my Adversaries charge with Socinianism, as I have occasionally met with them,
but Mr. Ferguson has put together some Texts, which he thinks I have so
expounded, as to destroy their evidence for the Godhead of Christ. I would not
(says our Author) Interest of Reason, etc. p. 475.
be thought to impeach Mr. Sherlock of opposing the Godhead of Christ, but
this I affirm, that if his glosses of Col. 1. 19. Col. 2. 3, 8. Joh. 14. 20.
Joh. 1. 14. (which are the very same that the Socinians impose upon those
places) be admitted, we have some of the main proofs of it, wrested out of our
hands. I always suspect our Author of some ill design, when he speaks fairly;
he will not impeach me of opposing the Godhead of Christ; but he will strongly
insinuate, that I secretly undermine the foundations of that belief, and that I
expound those Scriptures, which are produced for the confirmation of it, just
as the Socinians do, who deny it. I presume our Author was secure, that his
Proselytes would take his word for this, and never concern themselves to
examine the truth of it; for the imposture is so very obvious, that no man can
miss the discovery of it, who takes never so little pains in the inquiry.

Most of these places concern that account I gave of the fullness of Christ, and
Knowledge of Christ. p. 216. etc. Edit. 2. p. 151.
in what sense the fullness of the Godhead is said to dwell bodily in him, Col.
1. 19. Joh. 1. 14. Col. 2. 8. And the account I gave of it in short was this,
that the Evangelist and Apostles in these expressions had a peculiar respect to
the perfection of the Gospel-revelation, that Christ had now made a full and
perfect revelation of Gods will to the world; and much to the same purpose, I
confess, Slitchtingius, and other Socinians expound those Texts; but then Mr.
Ferguson might have observed, that I gave a large account of the reason of that
phrase, why the Apostle expresses the perfection of the Gospel-revelation by
the fullness of the Godhead dwelling bodily in Christ, viz. That this is an
allusion to Gods dwelling in the Temple at Jerusalem by Types and Figures,
which were the Symbols of his presence, -- And this Symbolical presence of God
in the Temple, was very agreeable to that Symbolical and Ceremonial Worship,
which he then instituted and commanded. But now he has sent his Son to
tabernacle among us, Joh. 1. 14. The Deity it self now dwells in the Temple of
Christ's body, not by Types and Figures, as he formerly dwelt in the Temple at
Jerusalem, but by a real and immediate presence and union. And therefore those
revelations, which are made by Christ, are answerable to the inhabitation of
the Godhead in him, contain a true and perfect declaration of Gods will in
opposition to the imperfect rudiments, and obscure Types and Figures of the
Law; so that (...), bodily is opposed to Figurative and Typical, and this is a
plain demonstration of the perfection of the Gospel revelation, that the
fullness of the Deity dwelt substantially in Christ, and we need not doubt, but
that so excellent a Prophet as he was, in whom the Deity it self inhabited,
has perfectly revealed Gods will to us. And now our Author had need rub his
forehead hard to maintain this to be the very same account which the Socinians
give of these Texts, or that this does evacuate the testimony of these
Scriptures for the Godhead of our Savior, when indeed this is the only way to
wrest these Scriptures out of the Socinians hands: whoever denies, that the
Apostle did by that expression of the fullness of the Godhead dwelling bodily in
Christ, intend to signify the perfection of that revelation, which Christ has
made to the world, must of necessity be baffled by the Socinians, there being
so many evident proofs of this from the whole design of the Apostle in that
place, that it cannot be avoided; and therefore the only way to vindicate these
testimonies for the Deity of our Savior, is not to argue from the primary
intention and design of the Apostle in that place, but from the nature and
reason of the expression; why the Apostle should describe the perfection of the
Gospel Revelation, by the fullness of the Godhead dwelling bodily in Christ,
which no man can give any tolerable account of, who denies the Deity of Christ.

But what will Mr. Ferguson say, if Mr. Calvin gives the very same account of
the words, which I do? and yet if he will but consult him upon the place, he
will find, that my gloss is much more like Mr. Calvin's than Slitchtingius's, or
any other Socinian's. His words are these, Cum dicit plenitudinem Deitatis
habitare in Christo, Calvin. in (...).
nihil aliud sibi vult, quam totum Deum in ipso inveniri, ut aliquid Deo melius
ac praestantius appetat, qui solo Christo non est contentus: i. e. when the
Apostle says, that the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in Christ, he means no
more, than that all God is to be found in him, and therefore he must desire
something better and more excellent than God, who is not contented with Christ
alone. And what he means by this he further explains, Summa est, quod Deus in
Christo se nobis plene ac in solidum exhibuerit. The sum is this, that God has
fully and perfectly declared himself to us in Christ. Here is the perfection of
the Gospel Revelation, which Mr. Calvin says is the sum of what the Apostle
intended in that expression; and therefore he tells us, that the Apostle by
Corporaliter bodily, understands substantialiter substantially: For the Apostle
opposes that manifestation, which Christ has made of God, to all others, that
ever were before; Deus enim saepius se exhibuit hominibus, sed in part, in
Christo autem totum se nobis communicate, alias etiam se manifestavit, sed in
figuris, in Christo autem essentialiter nobis apparuit. For God did often
manifest himself before, but those were partial and imperfect revelations, but
now he has communicated his whole self to us in Christ, i. e. the perfect
knowledge of his will: He manifested himself also in other ways, but it was in
Types and Figures, but now he has appeared essentially to us in Christ, that
is, as he is in himself.

Thus on Ioh. 1. 14. The word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we
beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father) full of
grace and truth. Mr. Calvin has this note, Simpliciter interpretor, Christum
Apostolis inde agnitum fuisse pro filio Dei, quod complementum omnium, quae ad
spirituale Dei regnum pertinent, in se haberet, denique quod in omnibus vere
and praestiterit redemptorem and Messiam. I expound this (says he) in the most
plain and simple manner, that hence the Apostles knew Christ to be the Son of
God, because in him was found the completion and perfection of whatever
appertained to the spiritual Kingdom of God, a fullness of truth and grace, and
that in all things he acquitted himself as a true Redeemer and Messiah.

On Ioh. 14. 20. At that day shall you know, that I am in my Father, and you in
me, and I in you, Mr. Calvin expressly asserts, that our Savior does not speak
de aeterna sua essentia simpliciter sed divinam illam virtutem, quae in eo fuit
patefacta, commenaat; Simply of his Eternal Essence, but commends that divine
power and virtue, which appeared in him; and accounts this the best answer to
the Arrians objection from these words, That Christ was God participatione
tantum and gratia, only by participation and by Grace.

On Ioh. 17. 21. That they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in
thee, that they also may be one in us. Mr. Calvin observes, Tenendum est,
quoties unum se cum patre esse in hoc capite pronunciat Christus, sermonem non
habere simpliciter de divina ejus essentia, sed unum vocari in persona
mediatoris, and quatenus caput nostrum est; That is, we must acknowledge and
own, that as often as Christ calls himself one with the Father in this Chapter,
it does not simply and primarily refer to the unity of the Divine Essence, but
he is one with the Father considered as Mediator, and head of the Church; That
is, as he acts in Gods name and authority, and does his will. And he adds, That
many of the Fathers expound these words, of Christ's being one with the Father,
as he was Eternal God, but this they were forced to by their contention with
the Arrians, long autem aliud Christi consilium fuit, quam ad nudam arcanae
suae divinit at is speculationem nos evehere, But Christ had a quite different
design in these words, than to raise them to a naked contemplation of his
secret and unsearchable divinity. And now if Mr. Ferguson will be a just and
impartial Judge, he must accost Mr. Calvin as he has done me. I would not be
thought to impeach Mr. Calvin of opposing the Godhead of Christ, but this I
affirm, that if his glosses of Col. 1. 19. Col. 2. 3. and 2. 8. Joh. 14. 20.
Joh. 1. 14. and add Joh. 17. 21. (which are as much the same as Mr. Sherlock's
with those the Socinians impose upon those places) be admitted, we have some of
the main proofs of it wrested out of our hands.

But to proceed, Dr. Owen has given in his charge against me very fully and
emphatically: He that shall consider what reflections are cast in this
discourse, on the necessity Vindicat. p. 131.
of satisfaction to be made unto divine Justice, and from whom they are
borrowed, the miserable weak attempt that is made therein, to reduce all
Christ's mediatory actings to his Kingly Office, and in particular his
Intercession; the faint mention that is made of the satisfaction of Christ,
clogged with the addition of ignorance of the Philosophy of it, as it is
called, well enough complying with them, who grant that the Lord Christ did
what God was satisfied withal, with sundry other things of the like nature,
will not be to seek whence these things come, nor whither they are going, nor
to whom our Author is beholden for most of his rare notions, which it is an
easy thing at any time to acquaint him withal.

The Doctors chief skill lies in scandalous insinuations, but he is just like
other men, when he comes to reason: As for that attempt to reduce all Christ's
Mediatory actings to his Kingly Office, I have given a sufficient account of
that in answer to Mr. Ferguson, and suppose I shall hear no more of it: As for
my faint mention of the satisfaction of Christ, clogged with an ignorance of
the Philosophy of it; what he calls a faint mention I cannot tell, but I did
more than once expressly assert it, and that very heartily, but I must beg his
pardon, that I dare not pretend to understand the strict Philosophy of that
Atonement made by Christ, so long as I assert, that every Christian may easily
learn all that is useful and necessary for him to know; We may all know,
whatever the Scripture has revealed about it, that Christ died for our sins,
that he died for us, that he is a propitiation for the sins of the whole world,
that we are reconciled to God by the death of his Son, that his blood is the
blood of the Covenant, that he has redeemed his Church with his own blood, and
has purchased and ratified the New Testament with his blood; which gives us
the greatest assurance of the pardon of our sins, and the promises of eternal
life upon the conditions of a lively active faith, which is made perfect by
works. But then there are some enquiries concerning this matter of a nicer
speculation, as wherein the proper nature of atonement and expiation consists,
in what sense the death of Christ may be said to satisfy the justice of God,
whether Christ died as the Surety of particular Persons, or as the Surety of
the Covenant; whether Christ suffered the Idem or the tantundem; what is the
immediate effect of Christ's death, whether to give an actual right to those for
whom he died to pardon and life, or to seal the Covenant of grace with mankind,
and to put all men into a possibility of salvation. I presume the Doctor knows,
that these and a great many more such questions are hotly disputed among those
very men, who do not use to make a very faint mention neither of the
satisfaction of Christ; and methinks the Doctor should for once have commended
the young man's modesty, that he would not peremptorily determine these matters,
rather than blame me for professing my ignorance.

And as for what the Doctor adds, that this favors of a compliance with them,
who grant that the Lord Christ did what God was satisfied withal. If I mistake
not, this is the utmost of what he himself can Of the death of Christ, in
answer to M. Baxter. P. 52.
bring it to, whether right or wrong I shall not now determine; for he expressly
affirms, that Christ could not merit of God, with that kind of merit, which
arises from an absolute proportion of things, and gives this wise reason for
it, because Christ in respect of his humane nature, though united to the Deity,
is a Creature, and so could not absolutely satisfy, nor merit any thing at the
hand of God. This merit (from an absolute proportion) can be found only among
Creatures, and the advancement of Christ's humanity takes it not out of that
number; neither in this sense can any satisfaction be made to God for sin. And
therefore he founds the merit and satisfaction of Christ upon Gods constitution
and determination, predestinating Christ unto that work, and appointing the
work by him to be accomplished, to be satisfactory, equalling (by that
constitution) the end and the means. Which at most signifies no more but this,
that what Christ did was not in its own nature satisfactory, but was only what
God was satisfied with upon account of his own constitution and determination.
And therefore all the merit the Doctor ascribes to Christ is the accomplishment
of that condition, which God required Ibid. P. 66.
to make way, that the Obligation, which he had freely put upon himself, might
be in actual force. Which he says is no more than what Mr. Baxter assigns to
our own works: By which we may learn what a lame and conditional merit and
satisfaction he attributes to Christ: Nay, he is so far from attributing any
merit and satisfaction to what Christ did, that he affirms, that the will of
God is not moved thereby, nor changed Ibid. P. 50.
into any other respect toward those for whom Christ died, than what it had
before, which I take to be complying with those who assert, that God was not
moved by the death of Christ to forgive sin, and who those are, I presume the
Doctor knows, since he has so often told me of them.

As for what he insinuates, that I deny the necessity of satisfaction to be
made unto divine Justice, I own the charge, and have as good company in it, as
heart can wish: for, not to take notice of our modern Writers, who (whatever
the Doctor may think of it) have writ at a better rate against the Socinians,
than the necessity men, Vossius gives us a particular account Resp ad Iudic.
Ravensp. P. 336.
of the concurring judgment of the ancient Fathers in this point.

The Author of that Book de Cardinalibus Christi operibus, Athanasius, St.
Austin, Leo M. Gregorius M. together with several eminent Divines of the
Reformed Churches, and particularly a great man of our own the Bishop of
Coventry and Lichfield, who in his Letter to Grotius, gives an account of the
sense of this Church in this point of the necessity of satisfaction: Nos in
sententia Augustini acquiescimus, non defuisse Deo pro sua omnipotentia and
sapientia alios modos possibiles, sed hunc convenientissimum esse visum. We
rest satisfied in St. Austin' s opinion, that God, who is infinitely wise and
powerful, did not want other possible ways (for the Redemption of Mankind) but
judged this the most convenient of all.

And here I must once more take notice of that account the Doctor gives of the
necessity of Satisfaction, which he resolves into a natural vindictive Justice,
which makes it impossible that Gods anger should be diverted Knowledge of
Christ, P. 45, 47. Edit. 2. P. 31, 33.
from sinners, without the interposing of a Propitiation. Upon which account he
tells us, that whatever discoveries were made of the patience and lenity of God
unto us, yet if it were not withal revealed, that the other Properties of God,
as his Justice and Revenge for sin, had their actings also assigned them to the
full, there could be little consolation gathered from the former. This account
(as I then thought and think so still) makes a very unworthy Representation of
Almighty God; as if he were so just, that he is cruel and savage, and
irreconcilable, till he has taken his fill of Revenge, and represents the whole
design of Christ's Death to be only a satisfaction of Revenge, without which God
could not be appeased; as if Divine Vengeance (as I then expressed it out of a
just indignation to such a horrid Doctrine) did glut and satiate itself with the
blood of Christ, instead of the blood of the sinner. This Dr. Owen makes very
severe Reflections on, as blasphemous and profane; and I will not deny upon
second thoughts, but that it might have been more inoffensively expressed; for
there is an Euphemia due from us, when we speak of sacred things, and it is not
fit always to represent such Doctrins in their true and proper colors: But
every one might easily perceive that I did not intend it as any disparagement
to the satisfaction of our Savior, to which we owe all our present Mercies and
future hopes, but as the natural Interpretation and Language of the Doctors
Argument.

I deny not that Anger, and Fury, and Vengeance are in Scripture attributed to
God, when it speaks after the manner of men, to signify the severity of those
judgments, which God will inflict upon obstinate sinners; but to think, that
the Death of Christ, who was his only and his beloved Son, was a satisfaction
of his natural and unappeasable Vengeance and Fury, is such an account as the
Scripture no where gives us of the Death of Christ, as is incredible in it
self, and irreconcilable with the other Perfections of the Divine Nature.

But let us hear what the Doctor has to say for himself, and he tells us, That
all he intended by that which he asserted, is no Vind. p. 43
more but this, that such is the essential Holiness and Righteousness of the
Nature of God, that considering him as the supreme Governor and Ruler of
Mankind, it was inconsistent with the holiness and rectitude of his Rule, and
the glory of his Government, to pass by Sin absolutely, or to pardon it without
Satisfaction, Propitiation or Atonement. That God being infinitely holy, does
perfectly hate all wickedness, and that as he is the supreme Governor of the
world, he justly may, and in some cases cannot consistently with his Holiness
and Wisdom, and the ends of his Government, do any other than punish sin, is
denied by no body that I know: But the Doctor proceeds farther, that God as a
holy and just Governor, is under a necessity of Nature to punish every sin
that is committed; that though the sinner repent of his sins, and humbly
confess and bewail them, and sincerely reform, yet Justice must be satisfied
either with the punishment of the sinner, or some other in his stead: Thus he
states it in his Diatriba de Iustitia, p. 2. Iustitiam peccati vindicatricem
Deo esse naturalem contendo, and in exercitio necessariam, i. e. I contend and
earnestly assert, that that Justice which takes vengeance on sin, is natural to
God, and necessary in the exercise of it. Now this is a very different thing
from the Justice of Government, which allows the most just and righteous Judges
to pardon Offenses, when the ends of Government may as well be attained by
Indulgence as by Punishment.

And therefore the Doctor distinguishes between Ius Regiminis positivum and
natural, Diatriba de Justit. p. 160.
between a positive and natural Right of Government: The Positive Right is such
as Magistrates have over their Subjects, and this (he asserts) they may recede
from in some extraordinary cases, when it is for the Public Good and Benefit
not to punish; because the Safety of the People and the Public Benefit, is the
supreme Law to such Governors: But the Natural Right of Government is that
which God has over his Creatures, and this is immutable, and therefore God
cannot recede from it; which as it is said without any reason (for whether the
Right be Positive or Natural, it does not alter the Nature, nor the prudent
Rules and Methods of Government) so it gives a plain account, what the Doctor
means by Gods Right of punishing as Governor, which answers to what we call
Revenge in private persons, which immediately respects himself and not the
public ends of Government; which is the true difference between private
Revenge and public Justice; and though this be all the Doctor intends, yet
that all is enough in all reason, and is the very all which I charged him with.

Well but I say as much as this comes to, when I assert, that God is an
irreconcilable enemy to all wickedness: By no means, for this does not prove,
that God must necessarily punish the sinner, but that he will certainly either
destroy sin or the sinner, that he can never be reconciled to any wicked man,
while he continues wicked, and that he will certainly express his displeasure
against all obstinate and incorrigible sinners; the difference is just as much
as between such a Justice as punishes the penitent, and that which punishes the
incorrigible; the first is such Severity at best, as becomes not a good Man,
and a wise Governor; the second is justified and applauded by the universal
consent of Mankind.

But the Doctor would retort all these ill consequences, which I cast upon his
Notion upon my self: He presumes, I own the Satisfaction of Christ, and this is
the first time he has ghessed right, but what then? Therefore also I own, that
God would not pardon any Sin, but upon a supposition of a previous Satisfaction
made by Jesus Christ: very right still, when he had decreed that he would not:
Here then lies all the difference between us, that he says God could not pardon
Sin without Satisfaction, and I say, that although he might have done so
without the least diminution of his glory, yet he would not: and this is a good
wide difference between could not and would not: The first represents
Satisfaction to be the effect of a private Revenge, the second to be the effect
of Wisdom and Counsel in choosing the most convenient way to dispense his
Pardon. God, we presume, had more ways than one to secure the Authority of his
Laws, the Glory of his Government, and to vindicate the Holiness of his Nature,
but he chose this as the best and fittest. It had not been consistent with the
Wisdom of God, as Governor of the world, to have pardoned sin in such a way as
would have reflected any disparagement on his Holiness, or loosened the Reins
of Government; and therefore if he had not chose this way, he would certainly
have chose some other, and then he might have rejected this, but could not
wisely reject all: Christ, according to these Principles, did not die for
sinners, because God could not forgive sin without such a penal satisfaction,
but because he preferred this way before all other, as the most effectual to
attain its end.

And now I presume my Readers may be as glad as my self, to see a Conclusion of
this long Dispute: Some possibly will think I have said too much, and some too
little: I have taken notice of every thing which was material in my
Adversaries, and of too many things which were not; and though I have not
particularly taken notice of Mr. POLHILL and ANTISOZZO, it was because there
was no need of it: Whatever is considerable in them is answered in these
Papers; and as for ANTISOZZO, I had no mind to play the Buffoon, as he does,
and I know no other way of answering him: And I hope the world will be
sufficiently convinced, what a desperate case Fanaticism is reduced to, when
they are forced upon all occasions to take Sanctuary in Buffoonry; but others
may do as they please, as for my part I am resolved this Controversy shall
never end in a Trial of Wit.

FINIS.

