A DISCOURSE Concerning the Nature, Unity, and Communion OF THE Catholic
Church. Wherein most of the CONTROVERSIES Relating to the CHURCH, Are briefly
and plainly Stated.

PART I.

By WILLIAM SHERLOCK, D. D. Master of the Temple.

LONDON. Printed for William Rogers at the Sun, over against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet. 1688.

A DISCOURSE Concerning the Nature, Unity, and Communion OF THE Catholic
Church.
The Introduction.
IN the Preface to the Vindication of some Protestant Principles of
Church-Unity and Catholic Communion, from the charge of Agreement with the
Church of Rome, I promised a Discourse about the Church, and intended to have
discharged that Obligation, which has been very importunately demanded of me,
long before this; and indeed had finished, what I now publish, several months
ago: I shall not trouble my Reader with the Reasons why I then laid it aside; I
hope The Preservative against Popery will satisfy him, that I have not been
idle in the mean time: but the true and only reason why I have delayed to
publish this Part, which has been so long finished, was because I intended to
finish the whole before I published it, which would have given more general
satisfaction to my Readers: But I have not leisure for that now, and think it
more advisable to publish a part than none at all, especially since what I here
publish is an entire Discourse concerning the Nature and Unity of the Catholic
Church.

It is sufficiently known, that there is no Argument of greater consequence in
our Disputes with the Church of Rome, than the Unity and Authority of the
Catholic Church. Nothing will serve them but to make the Church of Rome the
Catholic Church, and then no body is a Member of the Church Catholic, who is
not in Communion with the Church of Rome; and since no body can be saved but in
the Church, all Heretics and Schismatics, who are not in Communion with the
Church of Rome, must be damned, and there is a sad end of us all.

Thus the Catholic Church is an Infallible Teacher of Faith: for who dares
say, that the Catholic Church can fail, or err in Fundamentals? since Christ
himself has promised that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against his
Church: and therefore the Church of Rome, which is the Catholic Church and
Principle of Catholic Unity, must be Infallible; and no Christian ought to
dispute any thing which she has determined in matters of Faith.

The Bishop of Rome is the Head of this Catholic Church, St. Peter's
Successor, and Christ's Vicar upon Earth, and therefore he is the Supreme
Governor of the Church, from whom all other Bishops derive their Authority,
and to whom all Christian Princes and Emperors themselves are subject in
Ordine ad Spiritualia, which will go a great way to a Temporal Sovereignty, and
Universal Empire.

These pretenses indeed have been sufficiently baffled by Protestant Divines,
ever since the beginning of the Reformation; but we have to deal with men who
have confidence enough to be baffled and not to own it, to see all their
Arguments confuted an hundred times over, and to repeat them again with a good
grace, without replying to those Answers which have been so often given them,
or so much as taking notice that there ever had been any Answer made to them.

But after all that is said on one side and the other, I am very sensible there
never will be an end of these Wranglings, without settling the true Notion of
the Catholic Church; which, though a great many good things have been said
about it, I think was never thoroughly done yet: what my present Performance
is, I must leave other men to judge; but if my Notion be right, I am sure there
is an end of all the vain and arrogant Pretenses of the Church of Rome, as will
appear to any indifferent Reader, who peruses this Discourse with Care and
Judgment.

The foundation of all I have laid in an Inquiry into the true Notion of the
Unity of the Church Catholic; which gives occasion to state the true Notion of
the Church, and most of those Controversies which depend on it. I have here
only considered what is meant by the Unity of the Catholic Church, as that
signifies the whole Church of Christ both in Heaven and Earth, and the whole
Church of Christ on Earth. What relates to the Nature and Unity of particular
Churches, their Government, Union, and Combinations into one Catholic
Communion, must be reserved for a Second Part.

ERRATA.
Page 5. line 3. for intent, r. extent. p. 5. l. 13. for for, r. far. p. 32. l.
15. for universal, r. univocal.

CHAP. I.
Concerning the Unity of the whole Catholic Church in Heaven and Earth.
IT is acknowledged by all Christians, that Christ has but One Church, which is
his One Body: but then we must consider the intent of this One Church. The
Church on Earth indeed is but One, but this One Church on Earth is not the One
Church and One Body of Christ, but only a very little part of it. Christ has
but One Church and One Body in all, and therefore it must comprehend the whole
Church from the beginning to the end of the World, at least from the first
planting of a Church by Christ and his Apostles till the last Judgment, for
they all belong to this One Church, and, this One Body of Christ; so that for
the greatest part of this One Church is already translated into Heaven, and the
Church on Earth is but a very little part of the whole: for the Church in
Heaven, and the Church on Earth, are but One Church, and One Body. Here we must
lay the foundation, if we would rightly understand, what makes One Church; for
since this Unity comprehends the whole Church, we cannot argue merely from the
Churches being One, to infer any other kind of Unity, but what makes the whole,
but what unites the whole Church in Heaven and Earth into One Body, for that
only is the true Unity of the Church, because the whole Church in Earth and
Heaven is the One Church. And therefore to place the Unity of the Church in any
thing, which can concern only one part of the Church, but not the whole, as
suppose, that part only which is on Earth, not that which is in Heaven, is
manifestly absurd, because it does not give an account, how the whole Church is
One, and yet the Oneness of the Church properly relates to the whole, not to a
part: for a part be it never so much One, can be but One part, not the One
Church. Now hence we may learn, wherein the Unity of the Church does not
consist, and wherein it does.

1. Wherein the Unity of the Church does not consist. As 1. The Unity of the
Church does not consist in its being One organized Politic Body, under the
government of One visible Head on Earth: for tho a visible Head on Earth might
make the Church on Earth One, yet it cannot unite the Church on Earth and the
Church in Heaven into One Body, unless this visible Head on Earth be the Head
of the invisible Church in Heaven too: for if the Unity of the Church consists
in being united under One Head, that Head must be the Head of the whole Church,
or else the Church is not united in the Head, if the Head, which is the
principle of Union, be not the Head of the whole. Now I suppose, no Papist will
say, that the Bishop of Rome is the Head of the invisible as well as of the
visible Church, and then the Church is not one, by being united under the
Bishop of Rome; tho there are some things, which would make one suspect, that
the Church of Rome did believe the Pope to be the Head of the invisible as well
as of the visible Church; for if his Authority be confined to the Church on
Earth, one would wonder, whence he should pretend to canozie Saints in Heaven,
or to release Souls out of Purgatory, unless his being Christ's Vicar on Earth
makes him his Vicar in Heaven, and in Purgatory also; but this by the way.

If they say, that when they speak of the Unity of the Church, they mean only
the Unity of the Church on Earth, and that the Pope is the visible Head of this
Unity.

I answer, 1. That they must grant then, that they speak very improperly; for
the Church on Earth is not that One Church, which is the One Body of Christ,
and therefore the Unity of the Church does not consist in the Headship of the
Pope; but they ought only to say, that the Unity of the Church on Earth
consists in its Union to the Pope.

2. And therefore they must quit all their Arguments for the Pope's Headship,
taken from the Churches being One, the One Body of Christ; for the Church on
Earth is not this One Body of Christ, and therefore it does not follow, that
because Christ has but one Body, therefore the Church on Earth must have one
visible Head.

3. Nay they must confess, that the formal and essential Unity of the Church on
Earth does not consist in its Union to the Pope. For the Church on Earth is One
with the Church in Heaven, they being both but One Church, and therefore must
have the same essential Unity; for how they should be one by two sorts of
Unity, that is, be one without the same formal Unity, is very mysterious, and
near a kin to a contradiction. And therefore since the Unity of the Church in
Heaven does not consist in its Union to the Pope, no more does the Unity of the
Church on Earth, the Unity being the same in both. And thus all their Arguments
from the Unity of the Church on Earth, to prove an Universal Visible Head of
the Church, are lost too.

2ly. Nor does the Unity of the Church consist in joining together in the
external and visible Acts of Worship, or in maintaining mutual intercourse and
correspondence with each other; these are Duties which result from
Church-Unity, when they are practicable, (as I shall show more hereafter) but
the Unity of the Church cannot consist in them, for the Church in Heaven and
Earth are one without them; and so may distant Churches on Earth be one Church
without any such visible correspondence.

3ly. Nor can the Unity of the Church consist in such Articles of Faith as have
not always been the Faith of the Christian Church. For since the whole Church
in all Ages is but One, it can have but One Faith, and that cannot be the One
Faith, which has not been the Faith of the whole Church. And therefore it is
ridiculous to talk of such a Power in the Church of every Age, as to make or
declare new Articles of Faith, unless there be Authority to make a new Church
too in every Age; but then how the Church should change its Faith in every Age,
and yet continue one and the same Church, is worth inquiry. As far as any
Church has altered the Faith of the Apostles and Primitive Christians, it is
become a new Church, and a new Church, I think, is not the same with the old;
the Unity of the present Church, considered as a Church, does not consist only
in its Unity with it self, but with the Church also of former Ages; for unless
it be one with the Apostolic Churches, it cannot be the One Church of Christ:
and therefore tho all the Christian World should at this Day unite in the Faith
and Worship of the Council of Trent, it would be as much divided from the One
Church of Christ, as it differs from the Faith and Worship of the Primitive
Church.

I shall only observe here by the way, what a contradiction the Worship of
Saints and the Virgin Mary, is to the belief of One Church. For if the Church
in Heaven and in Earth be but One Church, then the most glorious Saints in
Heaven, not excepting the blessed Virgin herself, are but Members of the same
Body with us, which makes it as absurd to Worship them in Heaven, as it is for
one Member of the same Body on Earth to Worship another, for they are the same
Body still, and tho there is a great difference in honor between the Members
of the same Body, yet that relation that is between them will not admit of the
Worship of any Member. For it is no Act of Communion in the same Body, for one
Member to Worship another. To pay Divine Honors, to erect Temples and Altars
to the greatest Saints, advances them above the degree of Fellow Members, and
if they be not Fellow Members of the same Body, then the Church in Heaven and
in Earth is not One Church. From whence we may learn who they are who divide
the Unity of the Church, they who command the Worship of Saints and the Virgin,
or those who refuse it. We believe the Church in Heaven and Earth to be the One
Body of Christ, and that the most glorious Saints are but Members of the same
Body with us, and therefore not the Objects of our Worship, but of our
Brotherly Love and Honor; but those who Worship Saints destroy the Unity of
Christ's Body, by dividing the Church on Earth and the Church in Heaven, for
nothing is more contrary to the sense of Mankind than to Worship those of our
own Communion. And therefore the natural Interpretation of that Worship they
pay to Saints is, that they are not Members of the same Body with us, but are
as much above us, as the Object of our Worship is and ought to be.

2ly, This Notion of Church-Unity, that it must include the whole Church, from
the beginning of Christianity, to the end of the World, as well that part of
it, which is already transplanted into Heaven, as that which still sojourns on
Earth, which is all but one Body, may direct us, wherein to place this Unity of
the Church, which to be sure can consist in nothing, but what belongs to the
whole Church: any Notion of Unity, which does not explain, how the whole Church
is but One, must be false, because the Unity of the Church properly belongs to
the whole, and not to a part. Now as this Unity respects the whole Church, it
is impossible, there should be any other Head of Unity, but Christ; any other
medium of Unity, but the Gospel Covenant, nor any other kind of Unity, but the
Unity of one Spiritual Body, Communion, or Society: that we are all united by
the Gospel Covenant in One Body to Christ, the one and Only Head of the
Universal Church.

1. The Unity of the Church must consist in its Union to some one Head. This is
acknowledged by all Christians, and therefore I need not prove it; and it is as
evident, that none can be the Head of the Universal Church, but only Christ,
and that for this plain reason, because it is Union to Christ alone, which
makes the Christian Church. The Church is the Church of Christ, and therefore
he alone is the Head of his own Church: This the Romanists themselves grant,
that Christ alone is the Head of his Church, and that the Bishop of Rome is
only a vicarious Head, Christ's Vicar on Earth. But when we speak of the Unity
of the Universal Church, part of which is translated to Heaven, and part still
militant on Earth, it must be united in Christ alone; for as he needs no Vicar
in Heaven, where he himself is immediately present, so there can be no Vicar on
Earth, as a common Head of Unity for the Church on Earth and in Heaven; and
therefore the Unity of the whole Church cannot consist in its Union to such a
vicarious Head, as I observed before; and then there can be no other Head of
Unity but only Christ.

2. It is as evident also, that the only Medium or Bond of this Union between
Christ and the Church, is the Gospel Covenant: for that is the Foundation of
our relation to Christ: He is our Head and Husband, our Lord and Savior, we
his Subjects, Disciples, Spouse, and Body, by Covenant. And therefore the
Sacraments of the New Covenant, Baptism and the Lord's Supper, are the Federal
Rites of our Union to Christ: Baptism is our Regeneration, or New Birth,
whereby we are incorporated into his Body; in the Lord's Supper we spiritually
eat his Flesh and drink his Blood, which signifies and effects as intimate an
Union to him, as there is of our Bodies and the Food we eat; and this proves,
that there can be no other Head of Unity, but only Christ, because the Gospel
Covenant unites us to none else: which I take to be St. Paul's meaning, when he
reproves the Corinthian Schism: 1 Cor. 1. 12, 13. Now this I say, that every
one of you says, I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of Cephas, and I of
Christ. Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? or were ye baptized in
the name of Paul? That is, that there is no other Head, to whom we can be
united but only Christ, who purchased the Gospel Covenant by his Death, and
into whose Name we are baptized; His alone we are to whom we are united by
Baptism, we are in Covenant with none else, and therefore belong to him alone:
if they might have owned any other Head besides him, who died for them, and
into whose Name they were baptized, if Christ had made Peter the vicarious Head
of Unity, as the Romanists pretend, St. Paul's Argument, against these Sidings
and Factions, that one said he was of Paul, another of Apollos, a third of
Cephas or Peter, had not been good, for at least those who were united to Peter
were in the right: but St. Paul knew no other Head of Unity, but only Christ,
because the Gospel Covenant, which is the only Medium and Bond of Union, unites
us to no other Head, and therefore those, who said they were of Peter, or
belonged to him, as their Head and Center of Unity, which is the case of the
Church of Rome at this day, were as great Schismatics, as those who said they
were of Paul.

Now this Covenant extends to the whole Church, and therefore unites the whole
Church to Christ. For those who are translated into Heaven are still united to
Christ by the same Covenant with the Church on Earth. There are several Duties
indeed of this Covenant which the Saints in Heaven are exempted from, because
their state and condition there is above them. Their Faith and Hope is turned
into Sight and Enjoyment; their Spiritual Warfare is accomplished, for there is
no Devil, nor Flesh, nor World to tempt them; the Mystical Supper of our Lord
is celebrated by them not in external Symbols and Figures, but in a more divine
manner, in the immediate presence of the Lamb; but tho the Duties of the
Covenant change with their state and condition of life, yet the Covenant is the
same still; by this Covenant it is, that they are in Heaven, and still expect
the completion of their happiness in the Resurrection of their Bodies immortal
and glorious; and by the same Covenant it is, that we hope, when our Warfare is
accomplished also to get to Heaven, and to rise together with them, at the
sound of the last Trumpet: And therefore the whole Church in Heaven and Earth
is One, by being united to the same Head by the same Covenant.

3. The Unity then of the Universal Church can consist in nothing but this,
that the whole Church, both in Heaven and Earth, is united in One Body to
Christ. For since there is no other Head of Unity for the Church, but Christ,
the formal reason of this Unity must consist in the Union of the whole Church
to Christ, which makes the Universal Church the One Body of Christ, and this is
the Unity of the Church. For I think it is no less than a demonstration, that
the Unity of the Universal Church, which is part in Heaven, and part on Earth,
cannot be the Unity of an organized Body, which must consist in a regular
Subordination of different Ranks and Degrees of men, as the Church on Earth
does: For the Church on Earth and in Heaven, which is the One Church of Christ,
is no such one common governed Society; and therefore the Unity of the Church
cannot consist in the Unity of one External Government.

But how then is the whole Church but one Body? Truly I know no other way, but
that they are all united to Christ in the same Covenant, and all who are thus
united to him, Christ accounts his One Body. Thus Christ, as bearing his
Church, is compared to a Vine, all whose Branches, we know, are united only in
the Stock or Root, 15 John 1. and to an Olive Tree, 11 Romans 17. and to a
Sheepfold, which consists of single and individual Sheep, which are one Fold
only, because they are under one Shepherd, 10 John 16.

It is true indeed, the Church is called also the Body, and the Spouse of
Christ, but as that relates to the Universal Church, it does not signify an
organical Body (though that the Church on Earth is also by Christ's own
institution, of which more hereafter) but it is so called for mystical reasons,
which I shall briefly explain to you.

1. Now I first observe, that the Relation between Man and Wife is but an
Emblem and Figure of that Union which is between Christ and his Church. Hence
the Apostle exhorts Husbands to love their Wives even as Christ loved his
Church; and tells us of Marriage, It is a great mystery, but I speak concerning
Christ and his Church, 5 Ephesians. 25. 32.

2. That to be the Body and the Spouse of Christ, signifies the same thing.
Hence the Apostle argues, That men ought to love their Wives as their own
bodies, 28 v. For no man ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes and
cherishes it, even as the Lord the Church, 29. For we are members of his body,
of his flesh, and of his bones, 30. So that the Wife is the Body, the very
Flesh of the Husband, and so is the Church of Christ.

3. To understand this matter, why the Church is called the Body and Spouse of
Christ, we must enquire why the Wife is called the Body of the Man, Flesh of
his Flesh, and Bone of his Bone; and the reason of that is, because the Woman
was formed out of the Man. God at first formed Man with an entire humane Body,
of the Dust of the Earth; and out of Man, while he slept, he formed the Woman;
who though a distinct separate Person, yet was part of the Man, Flesh of his
Flesh, and Bone of his Bone: And this was a natural Marriage, for two were by
nature one Flesh; and this was the natural and fundamental reason of the
Matrimonial Union. For this cause shall a man leave his Father and Mother, and
cleave to his Wife, and they two shall be one Flesh. For though other Women are
not made as Eve was, no more than other Men are made as Adam was, yet the Woman
being originally of the Man, the reason holds as to the whole kind; and in
subsequent Marriages, a legal Ceremony and Contract does, what a natural
Formation did at first, that is, unites two into one Flesh.

Thus the blessed Jesus, out of great pity and compassion to fallen man,
intending to marry us unto himself, and thereby to recover us out of a state of
sin and misery, first marries our Nature to himself by an hypostatical Union,
as Man was created first, and then the Woman formed out of him. Christ took a
humane Body of the substance of a pure Virgin, which signifies that it was an
Espousable Nature which he took, and was a Pledge, and Earnest, and Medium of
our Marriage to him. For though we cannot be married immediately to the
Divinity, yet to a God Incarnate we may. For Marriage requires, that Husband
and Wife be of the same nature.

But this is not enough, that the Husband and Wife partake of the same Nature,
but the Woman must be formed out of the Man; which makes her Flesh of his
Flesh, and Bone of his Bone. And thus accordingly, the Church is formed out of
the Body of Christ, and is in a mystical sense his very Flesh and Bones, as St.
Paul speaks, We are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. For
the Sufferings of Christ in the flesh, gave life and being to the Church; he
purchased to himself a Church by his own Blood, that is, he formed to himself a
Church out of his broken Body, as Adam's Body was broken, and a Rib taken out
of him to form the Woman. And therefore as the Woman was made of the same Flesh
with Adam, so the Sufferings of Christ in his humane nature purchased a Church
not of Angels, but of Men, of the same nature with himself; as the Apostle
observes, 2 Heb. 16* For verily he took not on him the nature of Angels, but he
took on him the Seed of Abraham; and therefore is not the Savior of Angels,
but of men, is not married to the Angelical, but to the humane nature.

And to make the Analogy still more complete; as the Woman was formed out of
Adam's side, so was the Church out of Christ's side; for when he was pierced
with the Soldiers Spear, there came out of his side both Water and Blood, 19
John 34. and the Evangelist sets a peculiar remark upon it: He that saw it bare
record, and we know that his record is true: and he knows that he says true,
that ye might believe, 35 v. and this is especially observed, and great weight
laid on it; 1 John 5. 6. This is he that came by water and blood, even Jesus
Christ; not by water only, but by water and blood. This some think signifies no
more, but that it was a demonstration that he was truly dead; in that his heart
was wounded, where there is a Capsula, called the Pericardium, which contains
water, which being pierced, water came out together with blood; but the water
and blood came out distinct though from the same wound, which was never known
before, and cannot be done again by the greatest Artist; and though this might
be a reason why St. John might take notice of it in his Gospel, where he gave
an account of his death, yet it does not seem a sufficient reason why he should
lay such weight on it in his Epistles; This is he who came by water and blood,
not by water only, but by water and blood: and therefore I doubt not but the
ancient Fathers were in the right, who tell us, that the two Sacraments of the
new Covenant flowed out of his side, which are the formation of this spiritual
Spouse his Church, the birth and the nourishment of it; Baptism, and the Lords
Supper, which came from his wounded body, and have both of them a peculiar
respect to his Death and Passion.

Thus we see the Church is called Christ's Body and Spouse, for mystical
reasons, because it is formed out of his broken Body, his Death and Sufferings
giving life and being to the Church: and therefore it is but one Body, because
all those who are redeemed by his Blood, and united to him by Covenant, which
is a kind of Marriage-Vow and Contract, are his Body and Spouse. And therefore
the Sacraments of the new Covenant, Baptism and the Lords Supper, do no
otherwise unite us to each other, than they unite us all to Christ, which makes
us all one Body; or as the Apostle speaks, with respect to the Lords Supper,
For we being many, are one bread and one body, for we are all partakers of that
one bread. We all partake of the same Body of Christ, which is therefore called
the Communion of his Body and Blood; and therefore we all are but one Body: so
that it is a vain thing to inquire after any other Principle of Unity for the
whole Church, but the Union of all Christians to Christ, who are one Body by
their Union to one Head.

But it may be objected against this, that this confines the Church to the
company of the Elect, who are the mystical Body of Christ; that according to
this Notion, there can be no visible Church upon Earth; for no man can tell who
belongs to the mystical Body of Christ, which is made up only of true and
sincere Christians, and no man can see who they are, without seeing their
hearts. Now this is a mighty prejudice against any Notion, if it destroys the
visibility of the Church, which is so plainly taught in Scripture, and does,
for ought we know, unchurch the greatest Member of visible Church Members; if
the Church consist only of those who were elected from all eternity, and are in
time called by the Grace of God to a state of real Holiness and Sanctification,
and made the living Members of Christ's Body, I cannot possibly see how there
can be a visible Church on Earth; for this internal Grace which makes a
Churchmember is invisible, and therefore Church Members are invisible too, and
then I fear, the Church it self must be invisible, if all the Members of it are
invisible; for invisible Members cannot make a visible Society: and to say,
that the Field in which the Corn and the Tares grow together, is visible, will
not make the Church visible, unless this visible Field, as visible, be the
Church, and then the Tares as well as the Corn must be Church Members: for to
see where the Corn grows, if we cannot see the Corn, does not make the Corn
visible; and if the Corn only be the Church, invisible Corn cannot make a
visible Church. Which has made me often wonder that some learned Protestants,
and that of late too, have so much insisted on this Notion, which gives
manifest advantage to their Adversaries; and serves no end, that I know of, but
what may better be served without it.

But the Union of the Church to Christ, which I have now explained, is a
visible Union; for we are united to Christ by the Gospel Covenant, and the
Covenant is visible, the Sacraments of the Covenant, Baptism, and the Lords
Supper, are visible; the profession of Faith, and obedience to Christ, made by
these visible Sacraments, is visible also; and therefore the Church, which is
united to Christ by a visible Covenant, visible Sacraments, and a visible
Profession, is visible also.

But you will say, can wicked men then be Members of Christ's mystical Body? yes,
no doubt but they may in this World, if they can be in Covenant with him. We
are united by Covenant, and those who are thus united, are Members of his Body,
and Christ has but one Body, which is his Church, and mystical Spouse. And what
absurdity is there in saying, that men may be in Covenant with Christ, and not
perform the conditions of the Covenant, nor obtain the rewards of it, This no
man will deny, but that bad men, who live in visible Communion with the Church*
who are baptized in the name of Christ, and feast at his Table, are visibly in
covenant with him for if the Sacraments of the Covenant do not prove that we
are in covenant, no man can tell whether he be in covenant or not. Now all that
are in covenant with Christ are his Body, and unless we can find two Covenants
and two Bodies for Christ, we must grant that good and bad men in this World,
are in the same Covenant, and Members of the same Body. Our Savior tells us,
that there are some branches in him which bear no fruit, but they are in him
for all that, though they shall be taken away, and separated from him, 15 John
2. St. Paul disswades the Corinthians from Fornication, by this Argument, that
they are the Members of Christ: Know ye not, that your bodies are the members
of Christ? shall I then take the members of Christ, and make them members of a
harlot? God forbid, 1 Cor. 6. 15. Which supposes, that such a thing may be
done, that the Members of Christ may be made Members of a Harlot; and that
supposes, that very bad men may be Members of Christ's Body.

But are not all the Members of Christ mystically united to him? and can there
be such a mystical Union between Christ and bad men? I answer, if by mystical
Union be meant, being united in the same Life and Spirit, it is plain, that bad
men are not thus mystically united to Christ, for they are not living, but dead
Members of his Body, they are branches that are in the Vine, but bear no fruit;
and yet may be Members of his mystical Body, which is so called, not upon
account of any mystical Union, (which some men ^alk of, of but no man could
ever explain) but for mystical reasons, as I have already showed you. Now if
those mystical reasons, for which the Church is called the Body of Christ,
include wicked Professors, and concealed Hypocrites, as well as truly good Men,
then I hope bad Men may be said to be the Members of Christ's Mystical Body
without such a Mystical Union to him.

Now I observed before, the Mystical Reason why the Church is called the Body
of Christ, Flesh of his Flesh, and Bone of his Bone, is because he purchased
the Church with his own Blood; the Church is formed out of his broken Body, as
Eve was formed out of the Body of Adam. And therefore if bad Men; who are in
Covenant with Christ, are the purchase of his Blood, and have a Covenant-right
to the expiation of it, and all the benefits procured by it, then they are the
Members of his Mystical Body, Flesh of his Flesh, and Bone of his Bone. And
methinks no man should deny, that those who are in Covenant with Christ, should
have a Covenant right to the Expiation of his Death, and all the Blessings
purchased by his Blood; for otherwise we cannot tell, what it is to be in
Covenant, if it confer no right to the Privileges of it: and yet no man has a
right to the Purchase of Christ's Blood, but those, who are his Body; and
therefore if bad men may have such a Covenant-right, as certainly they have, if
they be in Covenant, then they are by Covenant united to his Mystical Body.

If you object, that by this reason all Mankind are Christ's mystical Body, for
He died for all Men, and therefore they are all the Purchase of his Blood, and
consequently they are his Mystical Body, which is formed out of his broken
Body: I answer, it is true indeed, that in some sense Christ died for all,
because none are excluded from the Benefits of his Death, who unite themselves
to his Body by Faith and Baptism; but yet he died for none, so as to give them
an immediate Right and Title to the Purchase of his Blood; for his Purchase is
confined to his Church, which is his Body; He is the Savior of the Body; He
loved his Church, and gave himself for it. And therefore his Church only is his
Mystical Body, Flesh of his Flesh, and Bone of his Bone, and the Sufferings of
his Natural Body extend no farther than his Mystical Body: and therefore Christ
is said to have reconciled both (Jew and Gentile) to God in one body by the
cross, 2. Ephesians. 16. That is, he has reconciled all both Jews and Gentiles, who
by Faith and Baptism are united in his one Mystical Body, to God by his
Sufferings on the Cross. So that we are not the Body of Christ, and cannot be
said to be the purchase of his Blood, till we are united to him by Covenant.

This we may learn from that Analogy there is between the Law and the Gospel.
The legal Sacrifices, especially that great Sacrifice on the Day of Expiation,
were typically of the Sacrifice of Christ, and the Carnal Israel was a Type of
the Spiritual Israel, or of the Christian Church, now as the Virtue and
Expiation of Legal Sacrifices was applicable only to the Carnal Israel, so the
Expiation of Christ's Death extends only to the Spiritual Israel, the Christian
Church, which is Christ's Mystical Body; which one thing, if well considered,
would answer all the Difficulties, and silence those fierce Disputes, about
Universal Redemption. However this shows, what difference there is between bad
Christians, and the world of Infidels; the first are visibly in Covenant with
Christ, and are the Purchase of his Blood, and have a Covenant-right to the
redemption of it, and therefore are Members of his Mystical Body, for none else
have any right to his Sacrifice; the other have no interest in him, nor
relation to him. And if we will not allow of this, I desire to know, who those
Children of the Kingdom are, that at the last day shall be shut out.

But is not our Mystical Union to Christ then an Union of Spirits, a
participation of his Nature and Life, having his Spirit dwelling in us, being
led by the Spirit, and walking in the Spirit? I answer, this is our Spiritual
Union to Christ, this is to live in him, to be quickened by him, but it is not
our Mystical Union, as that signifies such an Union, as makes us Members of his
Mystical Body; for that in a strict proper sense is only a Covenant Relation:
every Member of Christ's Mystical Body ought to partake of his Life and Spirit,
or else they are only dead and rotten Members, which shall be cut off, and
shall never inherit Eternal Life; but such dead Members are Members still, till
they are cut off, either by Church Censures in this World, or by the Sentence
of Christ in the next.

This Participation of the Life and Spirit of Christ is not our Mystical Union
to Christ, but the effect of it. We cannot receive the influences of Life and
Grace from Christ, till we are united to him, and made the Members of his Body;
for his Spirit only quickens and animates his own Body; and we are united to
his Body by Covenant, and by the Sacraments of it, which convey this Divine
Life and Spirit to us; and therefore Baptism is our Regeneration, or New Birth,
the beginnings of a New Life, because it incorporates us into Christ's Mystical
Body, which puts us under the influences and communications of his Life and
Spirit: as when a branch is engrafted into a stock, it receives nourishment and
life from it. So that these divine and supernatural influences are consequent
upon our Union to Christ, and though all, who are united to Christ, have these
influences of Grace, as the root naturally communicates its sap and juices to
all its branches, yet all do not improve it, do not digest it into principles
of life and action, do not bring forth fruits worthy of it, like dead and
withered branches, who cannot receive the sap and nourishment, which ascends
from the root, and would quicken them, were not its entrance stopped and hindered;
but notwithstanding this, they are members and branches still, though dead and
fruitless: There is no account indeed had of them, Christ knows them not, and
does not reckon them as his, and therefore the Description and Characters of
the Church in Scripture are such as belong only to living Members, to those
who are renewed and sanctified, and quickened by the Divine Spirit; but yet
they do belong to Christ's Mystical Body, though they are in it only, as a dead
Branch is in the Vine.

But how can the Church on Earth, and the Church in Heaven be one Church and
one Body, if the Church on Earth has such corrupt and rotten Members in it? for
the Church in Heaven has none but living and holy Members. I answer, the same
Covenant makes them the same Church, and the same Body of Christ, and that
there are bad Men in the Church on Earth, and none but Saints in Heaven, does
not prove, that they are two Churches, but that they are in two very different
states. Of right, none but sincere believers, and truly pious men, ought to be
Members of the Church on Earth, as well as in Heaven; but the government of the
Church, the receiving in, and casting out of the Church, being entrusted with
Men, who cannot see the Heart, or who are not careful in the Exercise of
Discipline to preserve the Purity of the Church, secret Hypocrites may be
received into the Church, and those, who are openly Profane may not be cast
out of it; but in the other World Christ makes the distinction, and separates
the Chaff from the Wheat, and therefore the Church in Heaven can consist only
of good Men, because bad Men can find no admission there. And besides this, it
is agreeable enough to the state of the Church on Earth, and indeed cannot well
be otherwise, that good and bad Men should be intermixed in it; because it is a
state of Trial and Discipline, of Growth and Improvement: Though bad Men, as that
signifies Hypocrites and Unbelievers, if they were known, ought not to be
received into the Church, yet if they be, by the Influences of Grace, and the
Instructions of the Word, and the Prayers of the Church, and the Examples and
Conversations of good Men, and the prudent Exercise of Discipline, they may be
reclaimed to Virtue, and become living Members of Christ's Body; those who were
dead before may recover a New Life by being engratted into this Heavenly Vine:
nay indeed though all men are not equally wicked, yet no Man has this Divine
Life, but only from Christ, and the communications of his Grace, which he
cannot receive from Christ, till he be united to him; and therefore the
Apostles required no other qualification for Baptism, but only Faith; the very
worst of Men, who believed in Christ, and professed obedience to him, were
received into the Church by Baptism, and put under the Influences of Grace,
without expecting till they had first reformed their Lives; which, besides the
Authority of the Apostles, seems to me much more agreeable to the
Gospel Dispensation, than that Discipline which was afterward used in the
Church, when they did not immediately baptize those, who professed to believe
in Christ, but kept them in the state of Catechumens a great while, till they
were instructed in the Principles of Christian Faith, and had given proof of a
holy and virtuous life; which is to expect, that men should become new
creatures, before they are born again, that they should walk in the Spirit,
before they have received the Spirit in Baptism, that they should bring forth
Fruit, before they are implanted into this Spiritual Vine. Now if Men, who have
lived very wicked Lives, may be admitted to Baptism, upon their profession of
Faith and Repentance, that in this Laver of Regeneration they may wash away all
their Sins, and become new creatures, and receive the Spirit of Grace and
Sanctification to reform their Lives, this shows, that the very Constitution of
the Church on Earth is such; that there may be very bad Men in it, unless all,
who are baptized should infallibly prove good Men: For bad Men, who profess the
Faith of Christ, and Repentance of their Sins, have a right to Baptism, where
they must receive Grace to mortify and subdue their Lusts, and renew their
Natures, and yet if after Baptism they resist the Grace and Spirit of God, they
will continue bad Men still, and this the Ministers of the Church can never
know, whether they will or not. Nay the Gospel Covenant admits the Children of
Christian-Parents to Baptism, and it is impossible to know, how those, who are
baptized in their Infancy, will prove, when they are Men: and yet these are all
Members of the Church, and the Mystical Body of Christ, at least till they are
cut off by the Censures of the Church: and there is no inconvenience in this,
if the Governors of the Church were but so strict in their Discipline, as to
prevent all Public Scandals: for since the Church on Earth is the School and
Nursery of Virtue, where bad Men may be reformed, and become Saints, since
Christ is that Spiritual Vine, from whom alone we can receive the
communications of a Divine Life, it is very fitting, that all believers should
be received into the Church, and incorporated into Christ's Body, for it cannot
be known, whether they will prove good or bad Men, fruitful or barren Branches,
till they partake of the sap and fatness of the Root, till they receive such
communications of Grace, as my renew them into a Divine Nature. And therefore
to say, that none but real Saints are Members of the Church on Earth, is to
make no difference between a School of Trial, Exercise, and Discipline, and the
state of perfect and consummate Souls; between a state of Warfare, where the
Victory is doubtful, and the triumphant company of Conquerors; between those,
who run in a Race, and those, who have won the Prize; for such a difference
there is between the state of the Church on Earth, and in Heaven. We cannot run
this Spiritual Race, unless we be in the Church, for there is no Prize, no
Crown, to run for out of it. And therefore those who lose, as well as those who
win the Prize, must be in the Church, and Members of it* They are all in the
same Covenant, that if they overcome, they shall receive the Crown: good men
conquer in this World, and triumph in Heaven; bad men are conquered, and they
lose their Crown, and this makes the separation and difference between the
Church in Heaven and Earth; in Heaven there are none but those, who have
conquered; on Earth all, who run in the same Race, and are engaged in the same
Warfare, are mixed together in the same Body and Society: those who conquer, and
those who are conquered, are of the same Company on Earth, but none but
Conquerors are crowned in Heaven.

Thus I have showed, wherein the Unity of the Church consists, that the whole
Church both in Heaven and Earth are united to Christ in the same Covenant,
which makes it his One Mystical Body: and it was necessary to lay the
foundation here; for without this it is impossible to understand, what the
Unity of the Church on Earth means, most of the mistakes in this matter being
plainly owing to that first and fundamental mistake about the true Notion of
Catholic Unity, as that includes the Unity of the Universal Church, part of
which is translated to Heaven, and part still militant on Earth.

Those who have been aware of this, that the Church in Heaven and Earth is but
one Church, have hence concluded, that the Catholic Church is only the number
of the Elect; that none but truly good men, who are renewed and sanctified by
the holy Spirit, are Members of Christ's mystical Body; which makes the Church
on Earth as invisible to us, as the Church in Heaven. Others, when they talk of
the Unity of the Church, never think of the Church in Heaven, and therefore
advance such a Notion of Church-unity, as excludes the Church in Heaven, as if
the Church on Earth were the whole Church of Christ; or that the Church in
Heaven and Earth were not one Church, or that the Notion of Church-unity must
not relate to the whole Church, but only to one part of it. Thus, as I observed
before, the Romanists do, who place the Unity of the Church in its Union and
Subjection to the Bishop of Rome, which can concern only that part of the
Church which is on Earth, for the Church in Heaven is not under his government.
Others considering that the Unity of the Church consists in the Union of all
the parts and members of it to Christ, have no regard at all to the Unity of
the Church on Earth, as that also is one Body and Communion; and therefore it
will be time now to apply this Notion of Church-unity to the Unity of the
Church on Earth.

CHAP. II.
Concerning the Unity of the Catholic Church on Earth.
IF the whole Church be one, to be sure every part of it must be one with the
whole, and therefore one with it self, with that same kind of Unity which
belongs to the whole. So that the Essential Unity of the Church on Earth, that
which makes a Church and makes it one, is that all true Churches are Members of
the One mystical Body of Christ, as being all united to him, as to their Head,
by the same Covenant. So that whatever makes a Church a true Church, makes it a
Member of the One Catholic Church, or of the One Body of Christ. And here
comes in what the Apostle makes essential to this One Body; One Lord, One
Faith, One Baptism, 4 Ephesians. 5. which signifies what I said before, being united
to Christ in the same Covenant. For Christ is the One Lord, to whom we are
united; the One Faith is the condition of this Covenant, and the One Baptism is
the faederal Rite of it, or the Sacrament of our Union to Christ. Where this is
not, there is no Church; and where this is, there is but one Church; how many
particular Churches, or distinct Communions soever this Church is divided into:
From whence it as evident, that there never can be more than one Church in the
World: for those Nominal Churches, which have not the same Lord, the same
Faith, the same Baptism, are no Churches; and all that have, are but one: Which
makes it a ridiculous Triumph of the Church of Rome, as if we Protestants did
not believe one Catholic Church, or could not tell where to find it, when we
profess to believe but One Church, and that all true Churches are Members of
this One Church.

For it is plain from this account, that though all the Churches in the World
were united in one Ecclesiastical Body, yet this external visible Union is not
the thing which makes them the one Body of Christ: They are one Body by being
all united to one mystical Head, the Lord Jesus Christ, not by an external and
visible Union to each other; this external Union is a Duty which all Christians
and Christian Churches are bound to observe, as far as possibly they can; but
all true Christians and Christian Churches are the One Body of Christ, whether
they be thus visibly united or not. But for the better understanding this
matter, we must consider, I. The true Notion of the Catholic Church on Earth.
II. What the Nature and Unity of a particular Church is, and how every
particular Church is a part of that Universal Catholic Church, which is the
Body of Christ. III. What that Unity and Communion is, which all distinct
particular Churches ought to maintain with each other, and whence this
Obligation results.


I. The true Notion of the Catholic Church on Earth: Now it is evident from
what I have already discoursed, that the true Notion of a Church is the caetus
Fidelium, or the company of the Faithful, of those who profess the true Faith
of Christ, and are united to him by Baptism. There can be no other Notion of
the Universal Church in Heaven and Earth, but the whole company and family of
the Faithful, who are united to Christ by covenant, and are his mystical Body
in the sense above explained: And if the Universal Church in Heaven and Earth
be the whole company of the Faithful, the Catholic Church on Earth must be the
whole number of the Faithful on Earth; for we must still retain the same Notion
of a Church, where the whole consists of universal parts, for there every part
has the same nature with the whole.

I know indeed of late the Clergy have in a great measure monopolized the Name
of the Church, whereas in propriety of Speech, they do not belong to the
definition of a Church: They are Members of the Church, as they are themselves
of the number of the Faithful; and they are the Governors of the Church, as
they have received Authority from Christ the Supreme Lord and Bishop of the
Church; but they are no more the Church, than the King is his Kingdom, or the
Shepherd his Flock: and therefore St. Paul expressly distinguishes the Church
from the Apostles and Ministers of it; 1 Cor. 12. 28. God has set some in the
Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after that
Miracles, then Gifts of Healing, Helps, Governments, diversities of Tongues.
These are placed in the Church, for the instruction, edification, and good
government of it; and therefore are of a distinct consideration from the Church
in which they are placed. Thus 4 Ephesians. 11, 12. He gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the
Body of Christ; that is, the Church of Christ: which is therefore distinguished
from the Pastors and Teachers of it. Thus in directing his Epistles to several
Churches, he gives us the definition of a Church, 1 Cor. 1. 2. Unto the Church
of God which is at Corinth, to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called
to be Saints, with all that in every place call upon the Name of Jesus Christ
our Lord, both theirs and ours: that is, the whole company of the Faithful. 1
Ephesians. 1. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, to the Saints
which are at Ephesus, and to the Faithful in Christ Jesus: Which is the true
definition of a Church. 1 Col. 2. To the Saints and faithful Brethren in
Christ, which are at Coloss. And 1 Phil. 1. he expressly distinguishes the
Saints or Church, as that signifies the company of the Faithful from the
Bishops and Deacons: To all the Saints in Christ Jesus, which are at Philippi,
with the Bishops and Deacons.

The Learned Launoy has produced various Texts of Scripture for this definition
of the Church, Johan. Launoius Nicolao Gatinaeo, Ep. 13. Vol. 8.
that it is the company of the Faithful; and has proved by the Testimony of the
Fathers in all Ages, even down to the Council of Trent it self, that this was
the received Notion of the Church, till it was altered by Canisius and
Bellarmine; Canisius puts Christ's Vicar into the definition; that the Church
is the visible collection of all baptized Believers, under one Head, Christ in
Heaven, and his Vicar on Earth; which makes the Church a Monarchy. Bellarmine
defines the Church to be a company of men united together by the profession of
the same Christian Faith, and the Communion of the same Sacraments, under the
government of lawful Pastors, but chiefly of the Bishop of Rome, as the one
Vicar of Christ on Erath; which makes the Church a kind of mixed and tempered
Monarchy; the government of Bishops, and the Pope as Supreme Vicar: whereas
before these men, neither Pastors nor Bishops, much less the Pope of Rome, were
ever put into the general definition of a Church: for as for St. Cyprian's
definition, I shall account for it hereafter.

And indeed it stands to reason, that they should not, for Pastors and Bishops
are set over the Church, are Overseers of the Flock, to instruct and govern it,
and therefore must be distinguished from the Church which they govern: The
Church is the mystical Body of Christ, which is in subjection to Christ the
Head; but the Bishops and Pastors of the Church, considered as such, represent
the Head, and not the Body; for they receive their Power and Authority from
Christ, and act in his place and stead: as he tells them after his
Resurrection, As my Father has sent me, so send I you, 20 John 21. And, He
that receives you, receives me, and he that receives me, receives him that
sent me, 10 Matthew. 40. and 13. John 20. And therefore as Christ the Head is
distinguished from his Body, so are those also who act under the Head, and
represent and exercise his Authority in the Church; as private Believers, they
are the Members of the Church; as Church Governors, they are the Vicars of
Christ.

Now from hence I shall observe some few things, the use of which we shall
afterward better understand.

As 1. That Bishops and Pastors are not the Church, but the Governors of the
Church: and therefore the Promises made to the Church, do not belong to the
Bishops of the Church; as that the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it:
which certainly proves, that the Church shall never totally fail, but does not
prove, that the Bishops, or any Bishop of the Church, shall be Infallible. For
the Bishops are not the Church: there are distinct Promises to the Church, and
to the Pastors and Ministers of it, and they ought to be kept distinct; which
will put an end to a great many Controversies between us and the Church of Rome.

Thus if St. Paul in his Epistle to Timothy, 1 Timothy 3. 15. calls the Church the
Pillar and Ground of Truth, whatever that signifies, it belongs to the Church,
or to the company of the Faithful, not merely to the Pastors and Bishops of it:
and therefore the Infallibility of the Pope or General Council can never be
proved from it, though the Pillar and Ground of Truth should signify
Infallibility.

Thus whatever Authority Popes or General Councils may challenge in matters of
Faith, yet if they decree any thing contrary to the common Faith of Christians,
their Decrees are not the Faith of the Church, but the Faith of Popes and
General Councils, who are not the Church, though they are the Governors of it:
and yet under this venerable Name of the Catholic Church, every packt
Conventicle challenges an indisputable Authority to its Decrees.

2. Nay, as Bishops are not the Catholic Church, so neither are they the
Representatives of the Catholic Church; much less is any one Bishop the whole
Catholic Church virtual. The Office of a Bishop is not to represent, but to
govern the Church, and therefore Bishops are not the Churches Representatives
by Institution, no more than the King is the Representative of his Kingdom: How
then do they come to be the Churches Representatives? Did all the Christians in
the World, who are the Catholic Church, ever entrust them with this Power? Did
they ever resign up their Faith into the hands of their Bishops? This never was
done, and yet no man has a Representative but by his own consent; and if it
could be done, Bishops then must sit in Council, not only as Bishops, but as
Lay Representatives, if two such different capacities are not inconsistent; and
yet Bishops have challenged this Authority only as Bishops, and excluded the
Laity, nay Presbyters themselves, from any Votes; and therefore such Councils
of Bishops, who acted only as Bishops, could not be the Representatives of the
Catholic Church. In matters of Discipline and Government, Bishops act not as
Representatives, but Governors of the Church, by that Authority which they
have received, not from the People, but from Christ; and their Decrees and
Constitutions about such matters, have a sacred and venerable Authority, when
they do not contradict any divine Laws and Institutions. But Bishops have no
Authority over the Faith of the Church, nay the Church herself has no Authority
to alter the Faith, and therefore can give no such Authority to her Bishops;
however, if she could, she never did, and therefore no Council of Bishops can
be the Church-representative in defining Articles of Faith. As Bishops are the
Supreme Pastors and Teachers of the Church, they may declare, what the Faith
is, and agree what Doctrines shall be taught in their Churches, and consent to
censure and excommunicate those, who will not profess to believe as they do;
but if they make any Decrees contrary to the common Faith of Christians, no
Christian is bound to believe them, nor is ever the worse for their Anathema's
and Excommunications; and it is a ridiculous thing for them to call this the
Faith of the Catholic Church, which is only the Decrees and Definitions of
some Bishops in it; who are far enough from being the Catholic Church. And
this I think sufficiently proves, that the most general Council, that ever was,
may err, and yet the Catholic Church not err; for Bishops are not the
Catholic Church, nor so much as the Representatives of it: and therefore could
it be proved, that the Catholic Church could not err, this would not prove the
Infallibility of a General Council, which is not the Church; for the Faith may
still be preserved pure and incorrupt among private Christians, even when
General Councils err.

3ly. I observe farther, that the whole Catholic Church on Earth is not one
organized Body; for it is only the whole company of the faithful, and no
Ecclesiastical Ministers or Pastors belong to the definition of it; and yet
unless some Ecumenical Pastor be essential to the Notion and Definition of the
Catholic Church, it cannot be one organized Body. The Catholic Church indeed
is organized by parts, that is, the whole Company of the Faithful are
distributed into particular Bodies under the government of particular Bishops,
which makes a particular Church, and is essential to the definition of it, of
which more presently; but the Catholic Church itself is the whole Company of
the Faithful, who are united in one Body to Christ only, who is the only Head
of his Church. Now hence it evidently follows,

1. That no organized Church can be the Catholic Church, nor the Bishop of it
an Ecumenical Pastor; because the Catholic Church is not organized, but every
organized Church is a particular Church. Which shows how vain the Pretenses of
the Church of Rome are to be the Catholic Church, and of the Pope of Rome to
be the Universal Bishop.

2. It as evidently follows, that there neither is, nor can be any visible
Tribunal of the Catholic Church, which shall be the Center of Catholic
Communion, and have Authority over all particular Churches in Matters of Faith,
and Worship, and Government. For the Catholic Church being no organized Body,
it has no Authority, and can have no Tribunal.

1. It has no Authority. For the whole Company of the Faithful, which is the
true Notion of the Catholic Church, are the Mystical Body of Christ, and in
subjection to him, as a Wife is subject to her Husband. The Catholic Church is
made up of particular and individual Christians, who are all immediately united
to Christ their Head, and are made one in him; and though Bishops as the
Ministers of Christ, have received Authority from him to govern the Church,
which they exercise in particular Churches, over which they are placed, yet as
Members of the Catholic Church, they are not considered as Bishops, but as
private Christians: for it is not their Authority in the Church, but their
Union to Christ, which makes them Members of his Body, and thus they are united
to Christ no otherwise then all other private Christians are. Now if the
Chatholick Church be only a company of private and particular Christians,
united immediately to Christ, and made one Body in him, the Catholic Church
has no more Authority, than particular Christians have, which is none at all.
The Catholic Church is united to Christ by a belief of his Gospel, obedience
to his Laws, and a participation of his Spirit, which is a state of perfect and
absolute subjection to him, and therefore can have no Authority to alter the
Faith, to make a new Creed, or a new Gospel, which would be to have power over
Christ, not to be subject to him. To be sure, unless we will grant this
Authority to every particular Christian, the Catholic Church cannot have it,
which is only the whole multitude of particular Christians, who are united
singly to Christ, and made One Body in him; and therefore are not such a Body,
as can make a new Faith, and new Laws, but are made One Body by embracing the
same Faith, which they must receive from Christ, but have no Authority to make;
because their receiving this Faith unites them into One Body in Christ, and
they continue One Body in Christ, no longer than they profess this Faith, and
therefore never can have Authority to change it: where a multitude of Men unite
themselves into One Body or Civil Society, to form and model their own
Government, and to make Laws for themselves, there the whole Authority is in
the Community, and they may make and alter and repeal Laws as they please: but
where a Society is formed by a voluntary submission of single and particular
Persons to known and stated Laws, and no man can be of this Society without
submission to these Laws, nor continue longer in it, than he does submit to
them, it is a contradiction to say, that such a Body of Men have any power over
the Laws, because it is only their submission to such Laws, which make them
such a Society: The whole Society in this case have no more Authority than a
single Man, for they are not a Society for Government, but for Obedience and
Subjection.

Christ indeed has placed an Authority in his Church for the Instruction and
Government of it, but an Authority in the Church, and the Authority of the
Church, are two very different things. The first signifies the Authority of
Christ, who is the Head; the second is the Authority of the Body, which is the
Church, the Head has Authority over his Church, and may appoint what Ministers
he pleases to exercise this Authority, but the Church has no Authority at all,
no more than the Body has, which is subject to the Head.

This may be thought a very nice distinction between the Authority in the
Church, and the Authority of the Church, but it is as useful, as it is true.
For tho the Authority of Christ must be much more sacred and venerable, than
the Authority of the Church, whatever Authority it were supposed to have, yet
the name of the Catholic Church is thought much more venerable than the name
of Bishops, tho they are the Ministers of Christ; and therefore those, who
would impose upon the Faith of Christians, talk of nothing less than the
Authority of the Catholic Church, which sounds very big, and frights people
into a submission. While they pretend only the Authority of Christ's Ministers,
private Christians make bold to examine their Commission, and how far their
Authority reaches, ^d whether they do not prevaricate in the exercise of this
Authority, as it is possible Ministers may do; but the name of the Catholic
Church strikes all dead, for who dare oppose the Decrees of the Catholic
Church? which is to condemn the whole Catholic Church of Error or Heresy; who
dares separate from the Catholic Church? which must be an unpardonable Schism,
and a state of Damnation; since it is universally agreed, that there is no
salvation to be had out of the Catholic Church; and thus when a packt
Conventicle of Schismatics and Heretics usurp to themselves the name of the
Catholic Church, they impose upon Christians under so venerable a disguise,
and enslave them to their own Dictates; but now all these Amusements vanish,
when we remember, that the Catholic Church has no Authority; that whatever the
Authority of Bishops in or out of Council be, it is not the Authority of the
Church, but the Authority of Christ, and it is not his Authority neither, when
they exceed their Commission, and teach such things as he has given them no
Authority to teach; and therefore we may reject such a Council of Bishops,
without condemning the Catholic Church, and renounce their communion, without
separating from the Catholic Church.

And this very consideration, that the Catholic Church has no Authority, and
therefore cannot innovate in Matters of Faith, nor alter the Laws and
Institutions of our Savior, is little less than a demonstration, that there is
no Authority in the Church neither to do it. For the Bishops and Pastors of the
Church, as (...) Christ's Ministers, so they are themselves Members of the
Catholic Church; now as they are Members of the Catholic Church, they must
receive nothing but what Christ has taught; for the Church is founded on the
Faith of Christ, and has no Authority to alter it: Now is it imaginable, that
Bishops as private Christians and Members of the Catholic Church are obliged
to believe nothing but what Christ has taught, and yet as Bishops, or Christ's
Ministers, have Authority to teach, what Christ has not taught? that is, that
as Bishops they have Authority to teach that, which as private Christians, they
themselves must not believe, if they will continue Members of the Catholic
Church: nay, can we imagine, that Christ has given Authority to his Ministers
to teach that, which the Catholic Church must not receive? for if the
Catholic Church has no Authority, it must no more receive new Doctrines, than
make them.

I know indeed, no body will pretend to an Authority of making new Articles of
Faith, but only of declaring what the Faith is; but this is the very same
thing, if this Authority of Declaring be such as to oblige all people to
believe such Declarations without any Dispute or Examination; for then they may
make a new Faith under a pretense of declaring the old; as we see the Council
of Trent has done, which has declared such Doctrines, as the Christian Church
was a stranger to before: and there is no difference, that I know of, between
declaring and making an Article of Faith, which was neither declared, nor made
before.

And therefore Christian Bishops and Pastors have no such Authority either to
make or to declare Articles of Faith, as can oblige all Christians to believe
it merely upon their Definitions and Declarations: It is their Office to Preach
the Gospel, to convince and persuade gainsayers by Scripture and Reason, which
obliges all Christians diligently and impartially to attend to their
Instructions, but yet leaves every man at liberty to judge, whether they Preach
the Gospel of Christ, or their own Inventions.

2ly. That the Catholic Church has no Authority, is evident from this also,
that it has no visible Tribunal, wherein to exercise this Authority. For the
Catholic Church is nothing else but the whole company or multitude of
individual Christians, who are all singly united to Christ, and made One Body
in him, and considered as the Catholic Church are not the One Body of Christ,
nor can be, under any other notion. So that had the Catholic Church any
Authority, it could be exercised only by the whole multitude of Christians, for
nothing else is the Catholic Church, and this is as impossible, as it is for
the whole multitude of Christians to meet together in one place.

But cannot the Catholic Church meet and act by its Representatives, as
Kingdoms and Commonwealths do?

I answer; I have already proved, that all the Bishops of the Church, much less
any one Bishop, cannot represent the Catholic Church; for as Bishops they are
not the Church, but the Governors of it under Christ; and no man ever yet
thought of any other Representatives for the Church; and it is evident de
facto, that there are no other Representatives; for the whole multitude of
Christians never did make choice of any such Representatives, and no man can be
represented but by his own consent: and if there could be any such
Representatives made by the unanimous Vote of all the Christians in the World,
(which I think is morally impossible) yet then the highest and most sovereign
Authority in the Church would be derived from the People, which* I suppose, the
Church of Rome will not very well like.

Nay indeed it is absolutely impossible, that the Catholic Church should be
represented; for the Catholic Church is the whole multitude of Christians,
considered as the whole company or multitude; now a multitude as a multitude
can never be represented by any thing but itself, there can be no formal, nor
virtual multitude, but the whole entire number. The Catholic Church signifies
all Christians, and if you leave out any of the number, it is not all, and
therefore is not the Catholic Church. Now if the Catholic Church have any
Authority, it must have it as it is the Catholic Church, that is, as it is the
whole company of Christians; for particular Christians have no such Authority,
as all men grant; and therefore that which destroys the Catholic Church, must
destroy its Authority too, and any thing less than all, makes it cease to be
Catholic; and therefore the Catholic Church cannot be represented by a few of
the whole number, because a few are not all, and therefore not the Catholic
Church. It is a different case indeed, when every particular man has an
original right and share in the Power, and the whole power is not formally
seated in the whole Body, for then it may by common consent be contracted into
one or more hands, by particular men's giving up their share in the Government,
as some fancy that civil Societies were first formed; but where the power is
formally seated in the whole, and not in particular Members, as the Authority
of the Catholic Church must be, if it be the Authority of the Church
considered as Catholic, there it is evident the Authority must continue in the
whole, and can by no consent be put into a few hands; and then it is impossible
that the Catholic Church can have any Representatives, nor consequently any
visible Tribunal.

And yet that Dispute between the Church of Rome and some Protestant Divines,
which is managed with so much warmth and zeal, about the perpetual visibility
of the Church, issues in this controversy about a visible Tribunal of the
Catholic Church; for nothing else will do the Protestant Cause any hurt, or
the Popish Cause any good. We do say, and we may safely say, that there always
has been, and ever will be a Visible Church; for while there are any men, who
visibly profess Christianity, there will be a visible Church: And what then?
what then? Why then you must hear the Church; then you must submit to the
Authority of the Church; then you must believe as the Church believes, and
receive your Faith from the Decrees and Definitions of the Church: But pray why
so? Has every visible Church this Authority? No; but the Catholic Church has.
Suppose that; but how shall I speak with the Catholic Church, which is
dispersed over all the World, and is nothing else but the whole number of
Christians all the World over? Now it seems impossible for me to speak with all
the Christians in the World, and to know what their Belief is in all matters of
controversy; and though the Catholic Church is visible, and part of it is to
be seen in England, and part in Holland, and part in France, etc. yet no man
can see it all together, nor speak with all the Christians in the World
together; and therefore though the Catholic Church be visible, it cannot
determine any one controversy, unless there be some visible Catholic
Tribunal, from which we must receive the Faith of the whole Church: This the
Papists assert, and make the Church of Rome to be that visible Catholic
Church, or visible Tribunal of the Catholic Church, to which all Christians
are bound to submit. Now besides what I have already proved, that the Catholic
Church neither has, nor can have any such visible Tribunal, suppose such a
thing might be, yet this Dispute about the visibility of the Church, is nothing
to the purpose: for though the Church be visible, it does not hence follow,
that the Catholic Church has such a visible Tribunal, to which all Christians
must submit; and if the visibility of the Church does not prove one Supreme
Catholic Tribunal, what do the Papists get by the Churches visibility, or what
do the Protestants lose by it?

The Church of Rome is a visible Church, and so is the Church of England; and
if mere visibility give this Authority to a Church, the Church of England has
as good Authority as the Church of Rome, because it is as visible a Church.

4. In the next place I observe, that the essential Unity of the Catholic
Church is not an external and visible Union of an organized Body, because the
Catholic Church it self is not an organized Body. There is and can be but one
Catholic Church, because the whole company of Christians is this Catholic
Church; but then the essential Unity of the Catholic Church does not consist
in an external and visible Union of all Christians, which is the Unity of civil
Societies, of Kingdoms, and Commonwealths, and other inferior Corporations,
which are united under one visible Government, which knits and ties them
together, as Nerves and Sinews do the Members of the natural Body; but though
there be an external and visible Union in and between particular Churches, of
which more presently, yet the Unity of the Catholic Church consists only in
the Union of all Christians to Christ, which makes them his one mystical Body.

This is a very material point in opposition to the Pretensions of the Bishop
of Rome, who will needs be the Supreme and Ecumenical Pastor, and Head of
Unity to the Catholic Church; and though the Christian World never owned him
so, as has been abundantly proved by learned men, especially by the Learned Dr.
Isaac Barrow in his Treatise of the Popes Supremacy, which is a sufficient
confutation of such a Claim, yet it will be of great use to show from the
Nature of the Catholic Church, and the essential Unity of it, that it cannot
be so; and there are several considerations, which will make this very evident.

1. That there is no other Head for the whole Catholic Church on Earth to be
united to, but only Christ: for the Catholic Church is the whole company of
Christians; and to whom can the whole company of Christians be united, but only
to Christ? For the whole Clergy, as well as Laiety, are included in the Notion
of the Catholic Church, in the whole company of Christians; and therefore
unless you can find out a Bishop who is not of the number of Christians, (and
such an one would be a very monstrous Head for the Christian Church) he cannot
be the Head, because he is a Member of the Catholic Church, and must himself,
with the rest of Christians be united to the Head: Which I think is a
demonstration that no Bishop can be the Head of the Catholic Church, because
it is a contradiction to be the Head and a Member of the same Body. A Bishop is
the Pastor and Governor of a particular Church, and a Member of the Universal
Church; but to be the Head of the Universal Church, of which he himself is a
Member, is a contradiction.

2. Nor can the essential Unity of the Church consist in our Union to any other
Head but Christ, because it is our Union to Christ alone, which makes the
Church; and that which makes the Church, must make it one; for what does not
belong to the essence of a thing, cannot be the principle of an essential
Unity. It is the Church of Christ, because it is united to him, and to him
only, by Faith and the Christian Sacraments; and therefore it is the One Church
of Christ, because the whole Church is united to him, and to him only, as it
must be, if no other Union can make a Church; and where there is but one Head
of Union, there can be but One Body. No other Union can make a Church, and
therefore no other Union can be essential to the Unity of the Church.

3. And therefore though our Savior had appointed an Universal Pastor, as the
Bishop of Rome pretends to be, yet he could not have been the Head of Unity to
the Catholic Church; he had in that case been the Supreme Governor, whom all
Christians had been bound to obey, nay more than that, he had been the Center
of Church Communion to all Christians; which is the external and visible Unity
of the Church, when all Christians live in the same Communion, like one
Household and Family. But there is a vast difference between the essential Unity
of the Church, and the external Exercise of it in a visible Communion among
Christians; between being one and living in Unity; Union to Christ alone makes
the Church one, but the exercise of this Unity in a visible Communion, is a
Duty which results from our Unity, and must be expressed in such ways as Christ
has prescribed, of which more anon; and had Christ appointed an Universal
Pastor, communion with, and subjection to, this Universal Pastor had been
necessary to the external Unity of Church Communion, but yet had not been that
which makes the Church One, which is one before and without it; the not
distinguishing of which, has occasioned great mistakes in this matter, as will
appear in the process of this Discourse.

4. I observe farther, that there is a wide difference between being a Supreme
Pastor, and a Vicarious Head of the Church, a Title which is given to the
Bishop of Rome, not without great injury to Christ our Head. Christ, had he
pleased, might have appointed a Supreme Pastor for the Government of his
Church; but as he is Head of the Church, he cannot have a Vicar, or Vicarious
Head: for though a Head signifies a Supreme Governor too in Scripture phrase,
yet Christ is not merely a Head of Government, but of Union; and though a
governing Head may have a Vicar or Lieutenant, yet a Head of Union cannot, no
more than a natural Head can; for the Union between Christ and his Church, is
as immediate, as between the Head and the Members, between the Husband and the
Wife, which will admit of no intermediate Vicars.

The Church is called the Body and Spouse of Christ, as I have already
observed, for mystical reasons, because it is formed out of his broken and
crucified Body, as Eve was out of the Body of Adam; upon which account we are
said to be Flesh of his Flesh, and Bone of his Bone; that is, the Church is
redeemed and purchased by the Blood of Christ: and thus he is the Head of that
Body which he himself has bought at the price of his Blood. We are united to
Christ by Faith in him, by being baptized in his Name, by feeding on the
Sacrament of his Body and Blood; the effect of this Union is, that we receive
from him the pardon of our sins, and the influences of his Grace and Spirit:
Thus Christ is our Head, and thus none but Christ can be the Head, not so much
as the Vicarious Head of the Church, as I think I need not prove. We are
redeemed by no other but Christ, and therefore the Church is his mystical Body
only; we are united to no other by Faith and Sacraments; our Union to no other
person can entitle us to the pardon of sin, and the grace of the holy Spirit,
and therefore Christ alone is the Head of Union to his Church; it is a Church,
and it is one Church, not by its Union to the Supreme Pastor on Earth, if there
were such an one, but by its Union to Christ: for the Unity of the Church
consist in its Union to its Head, and it is evident that the Church can have no
other Head but Christ; and therefore can have no other principle or center of
Unity.

Now from hence it plainly follows, that no Christian can separate from the
Catholic Church (in this sense of it, as it signifies the whole company and
family of Christians, which is the true Notion of the Catholic Church) while
he continues a Christian; for that is a contradiction, to be a Christian, and
not to belong to the whole number of Christians; that is, to be a Christian,
and to be no Christian: for if he be a Christian, he belongs to the number of
Christians, and then he is a Member of the Catholic Church, and consequently
not a Separatist from it: Nothing can separate us from the Catholic Church,
but what forfeits our Christianity, either a final Apostasy, or such Heresies
as are equivalent to Apostasy: Which shows how vainly the Church of Rome
charges us with Schism and Separation from the Catholic Church, because we
disown the Authority of the Pope, their pretended Head of the Church, and
reject a corrupt Communion, though we are Christians still, and we hope of a
much purer Communion than they are. Schism and Separation is a breach of the
external and visible Communion of the Church, not of the essential Unity of it;
the Church is one Church still, whatever Breaches and Schisms there are in its
external Communion; for the Unity of the Catholic Church consists in the Union
of the whole to Christ, which makes them one Body in him, not in the external
Communion of the several parts of it to each other. And therefore it is not a
Separation from one another, but only a Separation from Christ, which is a
Separation from the Catholic Church. But what the true Notion of Schism is, I
shall discourse more at large hereafter.

5. I observe further, that the Indefectibility of the Catholic Church does
not depend upon the Indefectibility of any organized Churches; for the
Catholic Church does not consist of organized Churches, as organized, but is
made up of particular Christians; and therefore while the whole Race of
Christians does not fail in the World, the Catholic Church cannot fail. There
is no Promise, that I know of, to any particular Church, that it shall not
fail, and all organized Churches are particular. Several of them have totally
failed, others have been very greatly corrupted both in Faith, and Manners, and
Worship, but had these Failures and Corruptions been much greater and more
general than ever they have been yet, while there are a number of good
Christians preserved in the World, though not united in one visible Body, the
Catholic Church does not fail; for since the Catholic Church is not an
organized Church, nor made up of organized Churches, as such, though all the
particular organized Churches in the World were so corrupt, as not to deserve
the Name of True Churches, if there be a number of good Christians preserved
among them, though unknown, and concealed, as it was in the time of Elias, the
Catholic Church is safe, amidst all the corruptions of particular Churches.

I am abundantly satisfied, that there always has been, since the first
planting of Christianity in the World and I believe always will be to the end
of the World a true visible Church, but yet I do not think the Indefectibility
of the Church necessarily requires a perpetual Visibility; that the Church must
needs be owned to fail, if there should be no visible organized Church, with
whom we could hold communion. This indeed would mightily eclipse, but not
extinguish the Church; for it is certain the Catholic Church subsists in
single and individual Christians, who may lie concealed from public not
notice, and therefore it is not sufficient to prove that the Church has failed,
though there were no visible Society of Christians, but what were corrupted
with damnable Practices and Errors.

It is very true were there no visible Society of Christians, no Administration
of Baptism, by which Men are made Members of the Christian Church and this
State should continue so long till the whole Race of baptized Christians were
lost in the World, there would be too much reason then to say, that the Church
had failed too, for I cannot see; how the Church can subsist without a number
of baptized Christians; but this never was the state of the Church, and I
believe never will be; for Antichrist himself sits in the Temple of God, which
supposes, that even in his reign there is a visible Society of Christians. Now
how corrupt and degenerate soever the External state of the visible Church may
be, while there is a Society of baptized Christians, though so corrupt in their
External Policy and Government, Faith, and Worship, that it may admit or a
dispute, whether they are a true Christian Church or not, yet though the visible
state of the Church may be Antichristian, there may be an invisible number of
Christians among them, who may preserve themselves from the Corruptions,
Superstitions, Heresies, and Idolatries, of the visible Church, and in these
men the Catholic Church is preserved from a to al failure.

Indeed this is the only difference between Protestant Divines in this Matter:
they all agree, that the Catholic Church shall not fail, because Christ has
promised it shall not fail, that the gates of Hell shall not prevail against
it; but some doubt, whether there shall be always a true visible organized
Church in the World. They agree, that there shall be always a visible Society
of Christians in the World, who shall profess the whole Christian Faith, and
administer the true Christian Sacraments, but they differ, whether such a
Church may be called a true Christian Church, if together with the true
Christian Faith and Sacraments, they set up an Antichristian Hierarchy, and
impose an Antichristian Faith and Worship. Those, who affirm, that such a
Church is a true Christian Church, do consequently teach, that the true Church
shall be always visible, tho it may be corrupt, even to the degree of
Antichristianism; those who affirm, that such a corrupt Church is not a true
Church, do also consequently affirm, that the true Church may be sometimes
invisible, and consist only of such private Christians, as preserve themselves
from those corruptions, which unchurch the visible Church: I may have occasion
to consider this more hereafter, all that I observe at present is, that this
does not alter the case, as to the indefectibility of the Church; for while
there is a visible Society professing the Christian Faith, and administering the
Christian Sacraments, the Catholic Church may subsist in an invisible and
unorganized number of Christians, who profess the true Faith without such
corrupt and Antichristian Mixtures. Were the Catholic Church an organical
Body, then indeed it must be always visible, and the Church would fail, if ever
it became invisible; but if the Catholic Church be an unorganized Body of
Christians, who are united only in Christ, it is possible, that it may be
unknown and invisible, as great numbers of private Christians may be, and yet
the Church not fail.

Now this shows the weakness and fallacy of several Arguments used by the
Church of Rome. As 1. That the perpetual visibility of the Roman Church proves
it to be that indefectible Church, of which our Savior promised, that the
Gates of Hell should not prevail against it. A Promise, which all men grant,
our Savior made to the Catholic Church, not to any particular Church, that
is, to the whole company of Christians, that there should never want a
succession of true Believers in the World, not to any particular organized
Church, or Body, of Christians, such as the Church of Rome is. And therefore
the indefectibility of the Church cannot prove, that it shall be always
visible, and then the uninterrupted visibility of any Church cannot prove, that
it is indefectible; for if the indefectible Church may be sometimes invisible,
then that visible Church may not be always indefectible; when the indefectible
Church is invisible, to be sure that Church, which at that time is visible, is
not the indefectible Church, and thus I am sure it may be, whether it has been
or not, but if it may be, the Argument is naught.

2. And so is that Argument to prove the Church to be infallible, because it is
indefectible. That it cannot err, because it never shall so grievously err as
to cease to be a Church. The indefectibilty of the Church, as you have already
heard, does not necessarily prove, that there shall be any one visible,
organized Church, which shall never fail; for the Church does not fail, while
there are any true Christians in the World; it may be preserved in a number of
single and concealed Christians, who are neither known to one another, nor much
less to the World. And therefore if indefectibility proves infallibility, it
proves only, that there shall be some private infallible Christians, not that
there is any visible infallible Church. For it can prove only those to be
infallible, who are indefectible, and therefore since it does not necessarily
prove, that any visible organized Church shall be indefectible, it cannot prove
any such Church to be infallible neither. The infallibility of private
Christians the Church of Rome will not allow, and yet if indefectibility prove
infallibility, this is all the infallibility which the indefectibility of the
Church can prove, that there shall always in the greatest degeneracy of the
Church be a number of private infallible Christians, who shall continue in the
true Faith and Worship of Christ. When our Savior says, that the Gates of Hell
shall not prevail against his Church, we may consider it either as a Promise,
or a Prophecy, or both, that there always shall be some sound and orthodox
Believers in the world, who in the greatest degeneracy of the Church shall be
the Seeds of a Reformation, and a new visible resurrection of it; now I hope
Christ can make good such a Promise (if we consider it as a Promise) without
bestowing infallibility upon any Christians, for men may be orthodox Christians
without being infallible; and if we consider it as a Prophecy, I hope Christ
can certainly foretell things, which have no necessary causes, and then he can
foretell, that there shall never want true Believers, though it is possible, there
might be none; that all Christians shall not err, though they are all fallible,
and therefore may err; and then neither the Promise nor the Prophecy can prove
the infallibility of any Christians: and this is all that Protestants can mean,
when they say, that the Catholic Church cannot err in Fundamentals, not that
there is any visible Society of Christians, which is infallible in its
definitions of fundamental Doctrines, but that the Catholic Church or the
whole number of Christians shall never err fundamentally, that is, that there
shall always be some true and orthodox Believers in the Church.

3. Nor is it a good Argument to prove any Church to be a new upstart Church,
because after some time of concealment it reassumes its visibility, and appears
openly in the World. The stabbing Question, as the Church of Rome thinks, to
the Reformed Churches is, Where was your Church before Luther? Those who own
the Church of Rome with all her Corruptions to be a true Church, have a plain
and easy Answer to this, That the Church was before Luther, where it was
afterward; for they did not make a new Church, but only reformed that part of
the old, which consented to such a reformation; they profess the same Faith
still, have the same Sacraments, and the same Christian Worship, but purged
from those Innovations and Corruptions, which had deformed the visible
Communion of the Roman Church, which can no more make a new Church, than a
man's washing off the dirt makes a new-Face. And I confess, I think, those who
deny the visible organized Church of Rome to be a True Church, do not want a
good Answer neither. For during the degeneracy of that Church, the Church might
subsist in those private Christians, who preserved themselves in a great
measure from the corruption of that Church, which might more easily be done
before the Reformation than since; for many of their Doctrines and Practices
were not then so peremptorily decreed by their Councils, nor so strictly
imposed upon the consciences of men, as the Council of Trent has since done.
And there are Evidences enough, that there never wanted some in all Ages, who
have condemned their Innovations, and that profound Ignorance, wherein that
Church brought up honest and devout men, was the true reason, why there were
not more; now all these men may be reckoned the Seeds of the Reformation, out
of which a visible Church would spring, as soon as a new light broke in upon
the World. There was no failure of the Church, though it was obscured and
concealed; we may as well say, that it is a new Sun, which rises every Morning,
not that which set at Night, as make a new Church of the visible Resurrection
of old and primitive Christianity, the Profession of which was never lost, tho
the Professors of it were not so visible. If the true Church be indefectible
and never fails, it can never be new again; and if the indefectibility of the
Church may be preserved in some private and unknown Christians, the want of a
visible Society of such pure and orthodox Christians cannot prove, that the
Church has failed, and then when the old Christian Church appears again with a
new glory, it is ridiculous to call it new, only because for some years it has
been concealed.

Thus I have considered the true Notion of the Catholic Church on Earth, which
there is so much talk of in our Disputes with the Church of Rome; and I hope
have made it appear, how little Service this can do them.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and are to be sold by W. Roger.
Bp Wilkins his Fifteen Sermons. Octavo.

Dr. Wallis of the Necessity of Regeneration: In Two Sermons to the University
of Oxford. Quarto.

-- His Defense of the Royal Society and the Philosophical Transactions;
particularly those of July, 1670. In Answer to the Cavils of Dr. William
Holder. Quarto.

The Necessity, Dignity and Duty of Gospel Ministers, discoursed of before the
University of Cambridge. By Tho. Hodges, B. D. Quarto.

The Peaceable Christian. A Sermon. Quarto. Price, 3 d.

A Treatise of Marriage, with a Defense of the 32d Article of the Church of
England, viz. Bishops, Priests and Deacons are not commanded by God's Law,
either to Vow the State of Single Life, or to Abstain from Marriage, etc. By
Tho Hodges, B. D. Octavs.

History of the Affairs of Europe in this present Age, but more particularly of
the Republic of Venice. By Battista Nani Cavalier, of St. Mark. Fol.

Sterry's Freedom of the Will. Folio.

Light in the Way to Paradise, with other Occasionals. By Dudley the 2d, late
Lord North. Octavo.

Molins of the Muscles, with Sir Charles Scarborough' s Syllabus Musculorum.
Octavo.

A Collection of Letters of Gallantry, Twelves.

Leonard's Reports, in Four Parts. The Second Edition. Folio.

The Complete Child; containing the best Forms of all sorts of Presidents, for
Conveyanees and Assurances; and other Instruments now in Use and Practice.
Quarto.

Sir Simon Degges Parsons Counselor, with the Law of Tithes and Tithing. In
Two Books. The Fourth Edition. Octavo.

An Answer to the Bishop of Condom (now of Meaux) his Exposition of the
Catholic Faith, etc. wherein the Doctrine of the Church of Rome is Detected
and tha^ of the church of England Expressed, from the Public Acts of both
Churches. To which are added Reflections on his Pastoral Letter.

THE Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome, truly Represented; in
Answer to a Book, entitled, A Papist Misrepresented, and Represented, etc.
Quarto. Third Edition.

An Answer to a Discourse, entitled, Papists protesting against Protestant
Popery; being a Vindication of Papists not Misrepresented by Protestants: And
containing a particular Examination of Monsieur de Meaux, late Bishop of
Condom, his Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, in the Articles
of Invocation of Saints, Worship of Images, occasioned by that Discourse.
Quarto. Second Edition.

An Answer to the Amicable Accommodation of the Differences, between the
Representer and the Answerer. Quarto.

A View of the whole Controversy, between the Representer and the Answerer;
with an Answer to the Representer's last Reply; in which are laid open some of
the Methods, by which Protestants are Misrepresented by Papists. Quarto.

The Doctrine of the Trinity, and Transubstantiation, compared as to Scripture,
Reason, and Tradition; in a new Dialogue between a Protestant and a Papist, the
first Part: Wherein an Answer is given to the late Proofs of the Antiquity of
Transubstantiation, in the Books called, Consensus Veterum, and Nubes Testium,
etc. Quarto.

The Doctrine of the Trinity, and Transubstantiation, compared as to Scripture,
Reason, and Tradition in a new Dialogue between a Protestant and a Papist, the
Second Part: Wherein the Doctrine of the Trinity is showed to be agreeable, to
Scripture and Reason, and Transubstantiation repugnant to both. Quarto.

An Answer to the Eighth Chapter of the Representer's Second Part, in the first
Dialogue, between him and his Lay-Friend.

Of the Authority of Councils, and the Rule of Faith. By a Person of Quality:
With an Answer to the Eight Theses, laid down for the Trial of the English
Reformation; in a Book that came lately from Oxford.

Sermons and Discourses, some of which never before Printed: The Third Volume.
By the Reverend Dr. Tillotson, Dean of Canterbury. 8o.

A Manual for a Christian Soldier, Written by Erasmus, and Translated into
English. Twelves.

A new and easy Method to learn to Sing by Book, whereby one (who has a good
Voice and Ear, may without other help) learn to Sing true by Notes. Designed
chiefly for, and applied to, the promoting of Psalmody; and furnished with
Variety of Psalm-Tunes in Parts, with Directions for that kind of Singing.

A Book of Ciphers, or Letters Reverst: being a Work very pleasant and useful,
as well for Gentlemen as all sorts of Artificers, Engravers, Painters, Carvers,
Chacers, Embroiderers, etc. Where you may find a Cipher for any Name
whatsoever, curiously composed after the newest Mode. By Jeremiah Marlow. Price
Bound 5 s.

A Persuasive to frequent Communion in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. By
Dr. Tillotson, Dean of Canterbury. In Octavo. Price 3 d.

A Discourse against Transubstantiation. In Octavo. Price 3 d.

The State of the Church of Rome when the Reformation began, as it appears by
the Advices given to Paul III. and Julius III. by Creatures of their Own. With
a Preface leading to the matter of the Book. 4o.

A Letter to a Friend, Reflecting on some Passages in a Letter to the D. of P.
in Answer to the Arguing Part of his first Letter to Mr. G.

The Reflecter's Defense of his Letter to a Friend, against the Furious
Assaults of Mr. I. S. in his second Catholic Letter. In four Dialogues. 4o.

A Discourse concerning the Nature of Idolatry: in which the Bishop of Oxford's
true and only Notion of Idolatry is Considered and Confuted. 4o.

The Protestant Resolved: or, a Discourse, showing the Unreasonableness of his
Turning Roman Catholic for Salvation. Second Edition. 4o.

A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of the Reverend Benj. Calamy, D. D. and late
Minister of St. Lawrence-Jury, Land. Jan. 7th, 1685/6.

A Vindication of some Protestant Principles of Church-Unity and
Catholick-Communion, from the Charge of Agreement with the Church of Rome. In
Answer to a late Pamphlet, Entitled, An Agreement between the Church of
England and the Church of Rome, evinced from the Concertation of some of her
Sons with their Brethren the Dissenters. 2d Edition.

A Preservative against Popery; being some Plain Directions to Unlearned
Protestants, how to Dispute with Romish Priests. The First Part. The Fourth
Edition.

The Second Part of the Preservative against Popery: showing how contrary
Popery is to the True Ends of the Christian Religion. Fitted for the
Instruction of Unlearned Protestants. The Second Edition.

These Four last by William Sherlook, D. D. Master of the Temple.


