A SERMON Preached at the TEMPLE-CHVRCH, December 30. 1694. Upon the Sad
Occasion of the DEATH OF OUR Gracious Queen And Published at the Earnest
Request of several Masters of the Bench of both Societies.

By William Sherlock, D. D. Dean of St. Paul's, Master of the Temple, and
Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

The Fourth Edition.

Edinburgh, Reprinted by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer
to His most Excellent Majesty, 1695.

XXXIX PSALM 9. I was dumb, and opened not my mouth, because thou did it.


THIS may be thought a very improper Text for the Feast of our Savior's Birth,
when our Mouths ought to be filled with the Praises of GOD, and sing with the
whole Quire of Angels, Glory be to God in the highest, on earth peace, good
will toward men, This indeed is that Peace, which the World cannot give, and
which the World cannot take away; whatever the External Appearances of
Providence are, here we find a safe Retreat, and a never failing Spring of Joy.
For, he that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall
he not with him also freely give us all things? Who then shall separat us from
the love of Christ? Shall Tribulation, or Distress, or Persecution, or Famine,
or Nakedness, or Peril, or Sword? -- Nay, in all these we are more than
Conquerors through him that loved us. For I am persuaded, that neither death,
nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to
separat us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, 8 Romans 32,
35, 37, etc. While our minds are warmed with such Thoughts as these, we shall
be able to bear up under the greatest Trials, if not with Cheerfulness, yet at
least with Patience, and a quiet Submission to the Will of God. And if ever
there were occasion for such Comfortable and Supporting Thoughts, the Divine
Providence has made it too necessary at this time, to bear the lose of an
Incomparable Lady, our most Gracious Queen; whose Death all Good Subjects must
lament, and I pray God forgive those that do not. Such severe Providence as
these, will teach the greatest and most unbroken minds, to serve the Lord with
fear, and to rejoice with trembling. But how severe soever Providence is in
some particular instances, the sense of the Divine Goodness in the Redemption
of Mankind by the Incarnation and Death of his own Son, should teach us to be
dumband not to open our mouths, because they all are his doings.

In speaking to which words, I shall 1. Inquire, what may be called the doings
of the Lord? 2. What it is to be dumb, and not to open our Mouths? 3. The force
of this Argument to oblige us to a quiet and patient Submission under the
greatest sufferings, That it is God's doing.

1. What may be called the Doing of the Lord? This may be thought a very
needless question; for are there are there any Events, Good or Evil, which are
not God's Doing? If we believe a particular Providence, we must answer, No; and
yet some things are more peculiarly God's Doings, than others are, with respect
to this present Argument, as Gods Doing it, is a reason for a quiet and patient
Submission to the Divine Will.

In many cases men bring Ruin and Misery upon themselves by their own sin and
folly, and then they may thank themselves for it; but have no reason to
complain of Providence, and when they cannot charge Providence with their
misfortunes, patience it self is not properly a Submission to God; because
their Sufferings are no more Gods Will, than their sin and folly is.

If men destroy their Estates by profuseness and prodigality, and their Bodies
by intemperance and lust; if ill-contracted Friendships, indiscreet Bargains,
or an ungovernable Tongue, perplex their. Affairs, and prove very troublesome
or dangerous, all this is owing not merely to Providence, but to themselves;
and they must be contented to reap the fruit of their own doings, and ought to
implore the Divine Goodness and Providence to Deliver them from the evil
Consequences of their own sin and folly.

Whatever evils we suffer, which are not the natural or moral effects of our
own sin or folly, they are properly Gods Doings, as inflicted by God, either
for the punishment of our sins, or for the Trial and exercise of our Virtues,
or to serve the wise ends of his Providence in the World.

Those Evils which we do not immediately bring upon our selves, God inflicts on
us, either by the ministry of wicked and injurious men, or by the Disorders of
Natural Causes, or by some seeming casual and fortuitous Events; for the
Actions of Men, the Powers of Nature, and what we call Chance and Fortune, are
all in the hands of God, and therefore all such events are more or less his
Doings.

But if we may say, that some things are more peculiarly the Cate of Providenc
than others, Life and Death are certainly so; no man can be Born or Die,
without the particular Order and Appointment of God: Our Savior tells us, Not
a sparrow falls to the ground without our Father, much less men; and assures
his Disciples, that all the hairs of their head are numbered, and their Lives
are more Sacred than their hairs. Some men are of opinion, That* God has
absolutely Decreed the certain Term and Period of every man's Life; But I know
no Foundation for this, either in Scripture or Reason; nor does any man believe
it, but those who subject all mankind, and all the Things of this World, to
irreversible Necessity and Fate, which is the strength of the Atheistick
Hypothesis; though incautiously espoused by some men, who are so far from being
Atheist, that I hope they are very good Christians. And therefore, I suppose,
these Christian Fatalists, if I may so call them, mean no more than what we all
own, That no Sparrow, much less a man, falls to the ground without our Father;
that God not only foreknows the period of every man's Life, and by what means he
shall Die, but with infinite Wisdom and Justice, Orders and Appoints it, not by
an absolute and unconditional Decree, but as the Wise Determination of a Free
and Just Providence.

And if God have any more concernment for Nations and Commonwealths, than he
has for particular men (as we, who can attend but a few things at once, and
therefore make the matters of greatest importance our more particular Care, are
apt to conceive) than the Lives and Deaths of Princes must be more particularly
Ordered and Determined by God: because Nations, it may be many Nations and
Countries, more than their own, are concerned in the consequence of it: and of
the more universal concernment any thing is, the more we are apt to think it
belongs to the Care of God.

For this reason some Philosophers have confined the Providence of God to the
Heavens, and Heavenly Bodies, which have such a universal influence on things
below: or to Nations and Public Societies, and to the several kinds and
species of Beeings, not to particular Men or Creatures.

And so far they were in the right, that if the Divine Providence could not
equally take care of the whole World, and of every particular Creature in it;
it would certainly in the first place, take care of the great Springs of
Motion. But though this be no reason for God's peculiar care of one thing more
than another, because his All-seeing Eye, and Almighty Arm, can equally take
care of all; yet our Savior has taught us from the worth and value of things,
that God will certainly take the more care of them, and in case of any
Competition, give the Preference to things of the greatest moment. Behold the
fowls of the air, for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into
barns, yet your heavenly Father feeds them; are ye not much better than they?
And if God so clothe the grass of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is
cast into the oven, shall he not much more clothe you, O ye of little faith?
Matthew. 6.26, 30. Where from God's care of mean inferior Creatures, the Fowls of
the Air, and the Grass of the Field, he more strongly concludes his care of
men; and by the same reason from his care of particular men, we may more
strongly conclude his care of Kingdoms and Nations, and therefore of the Lives
of Princes, who are the great Ministers of his Government and Providence, and
whose Lives or Deaths make such a mighty Change in the Affairs of the World. So
that when, or by what means soever Princes die, it is Gods doing; and how
severe soever we may feel it, We must be dumb, and not open our mouths, because
he had done it; which is the second thing to be explained.

2. What is meant by being dumb, and not opening our mouths. For this seems a
very hard saying in the strict literal sense, that we must not complain of our
Sufferings, when we feel 'em smart. Humane Nature cannot bear this, we must feel
our Sufferings, and when we feel them, we must complain: to have no sense of of
what we suffer, is Stupidity, not Submission; it is irreverence for the
Judgments of God, and in some cases the most unpardonable baseness and
ingratitude to men, to be unconcerned for the Death of our dearest Friends or
greatest Patrons and Benefactors, not to pay Natures Tribute to their Memories
in a Sigh and a Tear; not to long after them, and send some vain Wishes to call
them back; not to preserve their Idea fresh in our minds, and to think with
some uneasiness of those happy hours which their Conversation sweetened; to part
with our Friends, as if we suffered nothing by their loss, and were as well
without them, is so far from being a Virtue, that such a man is incapable of
everbeing a Friend, and never deserves to have any; much more then, when we
loss a public Friend and Benefactor, the greatest of Friends and Benefactors,
which is a good Princes.

Let us briefly consider what we have lost, in the loss of our Gracious Queen,
and try if we can bear the thoughts of it without complaining. She was the
Glory of her Sex; and an Ornament to the Crown she wore; made truly Great by
Nature, Birth, and Education. She had a large and capacious Mind, a quick and
lively Apprehension, and a piercing and solid Judgment: She had a strength and
firmness of Mind beyond her Sex, and such a dexterity in managing the greatest
Affairs, as would have become the greatest and most experienced Ministers.
Never was there greater skill in Government with less fondness for it, which
she could take up and lay down, with the same equality and indifferency of
Mind: though, I doubt, I must unsay that; for she was always grieved at the
occasion of taking the Government, and as glad to resign it.

Never was Majesty better tempered with easiness and sweetness. She knew how to
be familiar, without making her self cheap, and to condescend without meanness.
She had all the greatness of Majesty, with all the Virtues of Conversation; and
knew very well what became her Table, and what became the Council Board.

She understood her Religion, and loved it, and practiced it* and was the
greatest Example of the Age, of a constant, regular, unaffected Devotion, and
of all the eminent Virtues of a Christian Life. In the midst of all the great
Affairs of State, she would rather spare time from her sleep, than from her
Prayers, where she always appeared with that great composure and seriousness of
Mind, as if her Court had been a Nunnery, and she had had nothing else to do in
the World.

In all the Ease and Prosperity of Fortune, she had that tenderness and
compassion for those who suffered, which sufferings themselves cannot teach
meaner Persons. She was Charitable to the utmost of her Power, amidst all the
Expenses of War and Government, and when a proper Object was presented to her,
was always pleased when she could grant their Requests, and very uneasy to
deny.

In short, her greatest and most implacable enemies, (for Virtue it salf will
meet with Enemies in this World) had no other Fault to charge her with, but her
Throne; which is the only thing, for which most other Princes are valuable. She
ascended the Throne indeed before she desired it, but was thrust into it, not
by an hasty Ambition, but to save a sinking Church and Kingdom. And I hope
England will always have reason to say, that an empty Throne, could never have
been filled with a nobler Pair.

But though the necessary absence of the King, to give check to the Progress of
a powerful and insulting Monarch, engaged her more than she desired in State
Affairs, yet the promoting of True Religion, and the service of the Church of
England, [the greatest and best Nursery of it, since the Apostolic Age,] was
her constant and natural Care. This her Thoughts were full of, and she had
formed great and noble Designs, had she outlived the Difficulties and Expenses
of War; and been at leisure to attend the peaceful Arts of Government.

I have reason to say this, from those frequent Intimations I have had from our
late admirable Primate, who had great Designs himself to serve the Christian
Religion, and the Church of England, in its truest Interests; and had inspired
their Majesty's; and particularly the Queen, who had more leisure for such
Thoughts, with the same great and pious Designs: it may be no Churchman ever
had, I am sure not more deservedly, a greater Interest in his Prince's Favor;
and the great use he made of it, was to do public Service to Religion; and,
whatever some men might suspect to the Church of England, though it may be not
perfectly in their way: and the greatest Fault I know he had, was, that some
envious and ambitious men could not bear his Greatness, which he himself never
courted, nay, which he industriously avoided.

Before this, all England knew and owned his Worth; and had it been put to the
Poll, there had been vast Odds on his side, that he would have been voted into
the Sea of Canterbury; for no man had ever a clearer and brighter Reason, a
truer Judgment, a more easy and happy Expression, nor a more inflexible
fearless Honesty: he was a true and hearty Friend, and was a true Friend
wherever he professed to be so: though he had many Enemies at last, he took
care to make none. He was oblidging to all men; and though he could not easily
part with a Friend, he could easily forgive an Enemy, as that Bundel of Libels
witnesses, which was found among his other Papers, with this Inscription: These
are Libels; I pray God forgive them, I do.

But I cannot give you the just Character of this Great Man now; but what I
have already said, I confess is an Excursion, which I hope you will pardon to
the Passion of an old Friend, and learn from two great Examples, that neither
the greatest Innocence, Virtue, or Merit, can defend, either Crowned or Mitred
Heads from the lash of spiteful and envenomed Tongues. But what a loss has
Religion and the Church of England, in such a critical Time, in the Death of
such a Queen, and such a Prelate! I pray God make up this Loss.

In a word, That great Passion which afflicts and oppresses our good King,
gives an unexceptionable Testimony to the incomparable Worth of our deceased
Queen: The too severe and visible Effects of it, show, that it is not an
ordinary, nor a dissembled Passion: Nor is it an ordinary thing, for a Prince
of so great a Mind, who can look the most formidable Dangers, and Death it
self, in the face, without fear; whom all the Powers of France cannot make look
pale or tremble; to sink and faint, and to feel all the Agonies of Death in the
dying Looks of a Beloved Consort. All Story cannot furnish us with many.
Examples of such soft and tender Passions, in such a warlike and fearless Mind;
and what but a mighty Virtue could so charm a Prince, as to forget his natural
Constancy and Resolution? I Am sure, though we pay very dear for the Experiment
in the loss of an excellent Queen, we have so much the more reason to think our
selves happy in a King; for a due mixture and temperament of such fearless
Courage and Bravery, and such tender Passions, is the most perfect Composition
of an excellent Prince.

And now, it may be, you will tell me, that I have taken great Pains to confute
my Text, and that I have done it effectually; for we ought not to be dumb, but
may very justly complain of such a loss as this.

This I readily grant, That we may complain of such a loss; but this is no
confutation of my Text, We may complain, and give Ease and Vent to our Sorrows
by such Complaints, while we do not complain against God, and accuse him
foolishly. To submit to the Will of God, which is here expressed by being Dumb,
and not opening our Mouths, does not signify, not to feel our Losses and
Sufferings, or not to complain of them; but not to reproach the Divine
Providence, nor to cast off our Hope and Trust in God? Job felt his Sufferings,
and complained of them in as moving and tragical expressions, as any other Man
could, and yet is proposed to us, as an Example of admirable Patience, because
he did not Charge God foolishly, nor cast off his Hope in him.

This we never can have any reason for; for whatever we suffer, it is a wise
and merciful Providence which inflicts it: But yet Mankind are very apt, when
they suffer hard things, either to deny a Providence, or which is more absurd,
and unreasonable, to reproach; for if there be a God, he is Wise, and Good, and
Merciful, and Just, which is the Notion all Mankind have of God; and if this
God governs the World, all Events are ordered with Wisdom, Justice and
Goodness; and all thinking Men, in cool and sober Thoughts, will be ashamed to
quarrel with such a providence.

But yet we are very apt to ask Questions, which we cannot easily answer, and
then to make our own Ignorance an Objection against the Divine Providence.

As in the Case before us of the sudden and untimely Death of an excellent
Princess, who had Strength and Vigor of Age, which promised a much longer
Life, and who would certainly have done great Good to the World, as long as she
had lived; but is cut off in the Vigor and Strength of Age, and all her
Thoughts, even all her great and excellent Designs of doing Good to the World,
perish with her; while Tyrants and Oppressors live to be the Plagues and
Scourges of Mankind.

Now though we do not know the particular Reasons of such Providence, yet it
is easy to frame some general Answers, which may satisfy all the Friends of
Providence.

If the Objection relates to our selves, who suffer by this loss, there is a
very plain Answer to it, but a very terrible one; That God is Angry with us,
and by the untimely Death of an excellent Process, who made it her whole Study
and Design to do us Good, threatens his Judgments against us, if we do not take
Care to prevent them by a timely Repentance.

If the Objection relates only to the untimely Death of an excellent Princess,
that she should so suddenly be snatched away from the Joys and Pleasures of a
Throne; this is no Objection at all, at least not an Objection fit for
Christians to make: For can we think, that the greatest and most happy Monarch,
loses any thing by the Exchange, if he be translated from Earth to Heaven? That
the Joys of Paradise are not greater than a Crown? Our good Queen did not think
so, who knew what a Earthly Crown meant, but was willing to part with it for
Heaven; who saw Death approaching without fear, and prepared to receive its
Stroke with such calmness and sedateness of Mind, as nothing could give but an
innocent Conscience, and much greater Hopes.

And yet as for your selves, though we must acknowledge that we have received a
very great Loss, in the Death of an excellent Queen, yet we have no reason to
quarrel at Providence, while God preserves our King to go in and out before us.
We had indeed perpetual Day; and no sooner was one Sun withdrawn, but another
ascended our Horizon, with equal Luster and Brightness: This was a peculiar
Happiness which we never had before, and which the Necessity of our Affairs
required now; but though God has cut us short in this, we have a King still,
the Terror of France, and the Protector of Europe; a King, whom Affection as
well as Blood has Naturalized to us; who loves our Nation and our Church, which
he has once delivered, and God grant he may live long to settle and protect
both. We have no reason to fear our Enemies, either at home or abroad, while a
Prince is at the Helm, who wants neither Counsel nor Courage; especially if we
follow that noble Example, which the Two Houses of Parliament have set us, to
give him such fresh Assurances of our Fidelity, as may strengthen his Hands
against his and our Enemies Abroad, and make him easy and safe at Home.

To conclude, this is God's doing, and it becomes us to be dumb, and not to
open our Mouths, because he has done it: He is the Sovereign and Unacountable
Lord of the World; who shall say unto him, What do thou? Life and Death are in
his Hands; the Fates of Princes and Kingdoms. That he has done it, it should be
a sufficient Reason to us to submit, because though he does things great and
wonderful, and beyond our Understanding, yet he never does any thing but what
is wise and good: This I Am sure is the most effectual Way to turn even the
severest Ju^gements into Blessings, to reverence God, and to humble our selves
under his mighty Hand, and to implore his Mercy, to repair those Breaches he
has made upon us. We must not complain of Providence; but we may make our
Complaints to God, and be the more importunat in our Prayers for the
Preservation of our King. The Death of our Excellent Queen both calls for, and
will justify and recommend such humble Importunities; and the Preservation of
our King, will, in a great measure, make up this Loss to us; Which God of his
infinite Mercy grant, through our Lord Jesus Christ; to whom with the Father,
and the Holy Ghost, be Honor, Glory, and Power, now and for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

