Imprimatur.

Junii 4. 1687. Hen. Maurice RRmo in Christo P. D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a
Sacris.

A SHORT SUMMARY OF THE Principal Controversies BETWEEN THE Church of England,
AND THE Church of Rome.

BEING A VINDICATION of several PROTESTANT DOCTRINES, in ANSWER to a Late
PAMPHLET ENTITLED, Protestancy destitute of Scripture-Proofs.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXVII.

THE CONTENTS.
The State of the Controversy.
HOW far Protestants demand Scripture-proofs for all Doctrines of Religion.
Page 2 Protestants do not reject all Doctrines, which are not contained in
express words of Scripture. 3 But yet require express Scripture-proofs for all
necessary Articles of Faith, and therefore demand a Scripture Proof for the new
Trent-Articles, the belief of which is made necessary to Salvation. 4 The
silence of Scripture sufficient to reject any Doctrine as unscriptural. 5
Concerning Negative and Affirmative Articles, and the Requester's blunder about
them. 6
A Review of the several Protestant Tenets, for which He demands a
Scripture Proof.
I. Whether the Scripture be clear in all necessaries to every sober Inquirer.
The Scripture proofs of it vindicated. 8 Protestants do not reject the
Authority of Church-Guides, and the difference between a Protestant and a
Popish Guide. 10 II. Concerning the Spiritual Jurisdiction of the Secular
Prince 11 III. Concerning Justification by Faith alone. That justifying Faith
is a persuasion, that we are justified, is not the Doctrine of the Church of
England. 12, 13 IV. Concerning the substance of Bread and Wine after
Consecration. Whether these words, This is my Body, can be literally
understood. 14, 15 V. Concerning Christ's Presence in the Eucharist. 16 What
there is besides Substance and Efficacy belonging to our Savior's Body and
Blood. 17 The difference between the Virtues and Efficacy of an Institution,
and the Powers of Nature. ibid. Sacramental Signs and Symbols as effectual to
all the purposes of a Sacrament, as Christ's Natural Flesh and Blood could be.
18, 19 What a Sacrament of the Lord's Body means, and how distinguished from
his Natural Flesh and Blood. 20 How the Communion of Christ's Body and Blood in
the Eucharist differs from the mere influences of his Grace. ibid. VI.
Concerning the Adoration of Christ in the Eucharist, whether it be Idolatry. To
adore Christ is not Idolatry, to adore Bread and Wine is. 21 Whether the
Eucharist be nothing else but Christ; and to adore the Eucharist be only to
adore Christ. 22 VII. Concerning Communion in both kinds. The words of
Institution a plain Scripture Proof of the necessity of it. 24, 25 VIII.
Whether Chastity deliberately vowed may be inoffensively violated: this proved
not to be the Doctrine of the Church of England. 26 The Article concerning the
Marriage of Priests, in Edw. VI. and Queen Elizabeth's Reign, considered. 27, 28
IX. Whether all Christian Excellencies are commanded. 29 That Gospel
Exhortations include a Command. ibid. That the heights and perfections of
Virtue are commanded, and in what sense. 30 When you have done that is
commanded you, say we are unprofitable Servants, proved to be a plain
confutation of the Doctrine of Supererogation. 33 The meaning of this Question,
Whether all Christian Excellencies are commanded in Scripture, and to what
purpose it serves in the Church of Rome. 34 The meritorious works of the Church
of Rome are not commanded by God, nor are they any Christian Excellencies. Such
as the Monkish Vows of Poverty, Coelibacy, and absolute Obedience to Superiors.
36 This showed particularly of the Vow of Poverty. ibid. And Coelibacy. 37 And
Monkish Obedience. ibid. and 38 X. Whether every Seul as soon as expired is
conveyed to Heav^n or Hell. 39 Concerning Dives and Lazarus, and S. Paul's
desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. ibid. The Doctrine of the
Council of Trent concerning Purgatory. 42 This more particularly explained from
Cardinal Bellarmine. 43, 44 The design of it to acquaint our People, what
proofs they must demand for Purgatory. 45 A middle state between Death and
Judgment, which is neither Heaven nor Hell, does not prove a Popish Purgatory.
ibid. The Primitive Fathers did believe a middle state. 46 The difference
between this and a Popish Purgatory. As, 1. That this they affirmed of all
separate Souls, That none were received into Heaven before the Resurrection.
But Purgatory is not for all Souls, but for these only, who have not satisfied
for their sins. 47 2. They affirm this separate state, not to be a state of
Punishment, as the Popish Purgatory is, but of Joy and Felicity. 48 3. This is
an unalterable state till the Day of Judgment, and therefore no Popish
Purgatory, out of which Souls may be redeemed with Prayers and Alms. 50 The
Purgatory Fire which the Fathers speak of, does not prove a Popish Purgatory.
51 1. Because that is not till the Day of Judgment. S. Austin's Opinion of
Purgatory Fire explained, and proved very different from the Popish Purgatory.
52, etc. 2. All Men, excepting Christ himself, were to pass through the last
Fire, but the Popish Purgatory is not for all. 56 3. The Popish Purgatory Fire
is not for Purgation; but the Fire at the Day of Judgment, according to the
ancient Fathers, is. 57 Origen's notion of a Purgatory Fire. 58 4. There is no
Redemption out of this Fire by the Prayers and Alms of the living. Which is
upon all accounts the most comfortable thing in a Popish Purgatory. 60 The
ancient Practice of Praying for Souls departed, does not prove a Popish
Purgatory. 61 The Original of this Practice of Praying for the Dead. ibid. and
62 The state of the Controversies between Aerius and Epiphanius. 63, etc. For
what reasons the ancient Christians prayed for the dead. 64, etc. S. Austin's
account of the reasons of praying for the dead different from what the Fathers
before him gave 67 The custom of praying to the Saints, which was then
introduced, the occasion of this change. ibid. S. Austin first made three
distinctions of Souls departed. ibid. And yet the Popish Purgatory cannot be
proved from S. Austin. 68 S. Chrysostom's opinion of this matter different from
S. Austin's. 71, etc. XI. Concerning the Intercessions of the Saints in Heaven
for us. 74 The distinction between a Mediator of Redemption and Intercession.
75 No sense in that distinction between a Mediator of Redemption and
Intercession. 77 This distinction contrary to the Analogy both of the Old and
New Testament. 78 The difference between the virtue of the Sacrifice, the
Prayers of the People, and the Intercession of the Priest. 79 The difference
between the prayers of good Men for themselves and one another, and the
Intercession of a Mediator. 81 To fly to the Aid of Saints in Heaven derogates
from the Intercession of Christ. 83 Praying to Saints in Heaven more injurious
to God, than to a Mediator. 84 XII. Concerning the worship paid to the Cross
and Images. 86 Whether the worship they pay to the Cross and Images, be no more
than what we give to the Bible. ibid. The reasons why some Protestants have
charged the worship of Images with Idolatry. 88 No alterations made in the Law
against worshipping Images in the New Testament. 92 The reasons of the Second
Commandment, Moral and Eternal. 93 No material Temple, much less an Image
allowed under the Gospel. 95 The Primitive Church always understood the Worship
of Images to be forbid under the Gospel. 99 XIII. Whether the Pope be
Antichrist, and whether this be taught in the Homilies of the Church of
England. ibid. XIV. Concerning Prayers and Divine Offices in the Vulgar tongue.
101 The self-contradictions of this Author. 102 Whether S. Paul in 1 Cor. 14.
only forbid inspired and extempore prayers in an unknown tongue, not the settled
forms of Divine Offices. 104 All the Apostles arguments in that place against
speaking in an unknown tongue concern our ordinary devotions. 105 As 1. That it
is contrary to the edification of the Church. ib. 2. That it contradicts the
natural end and use of speech. 106 3. That it is contrary to the nature of
Prayer and religious worship, which must be a reasonable Service. 107 Whether
the people are bound to join in all the offices of public worship. 108 Whether
the people understand their prayers, though they are in Latin, which they do
not understand. 112 XV. Concerning Schism and Separation. 114 Separation from
the Errors of the Church of Rome is not a Separation from the Catholic Church.
116 Renouncing the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome no Schism. ibid. Such a
supremacy not essential to Catholic Unity. 117 Concerning the Ecclesiastical
combinations of neighbor Churches and Bishops into one body. ibid. In what
cases a particular Church may break off from such a body. 118 The Popes
Supremacy such an usurpation as may be renounced without the authority of a
general Council. ibid. The Church of England not originally subject to the
Bishop of Rome as the Western Patriarch. 121 The difference between Schism from
the Catholic Church, and the breach of Ecclesiastical Communion. 122 To reform
errors and corruptions in Faith and Worship can never, be a fault. 125 That the
Church of England does not separate from all other Christian Societies. 126
Concerning Communion in the Eucharist and other religious Assemblies. 129 What
Church we joined in Communion with, when we forsook the Communion of the Church
of Rome. 130 What Church we made the pattern of our Reformation. 131 In what
sense the Church of Rome her self was the pattern of our Reformation. 132 XVI.
Concerning the defection and apostasy of the Clergy of the Catholic Church,
and the Reformation of the Laity. 134 Whether the whole Clergy were against the
Reformation. 135 The Popish Clergy in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth did
own the King's Supremacy and wrote for it. 136, etc. We do not assert, That the
Church of Rome has apostatized from fundamental Truth and Holiness. 138 Whether
all kind of Idolatry be an Apostasy from fundamental Truth and Holiness. 139
The nature of that argument to prove, That a thing is not, because it cannot
be, when there is all other possible evidence to prove, That it is. 140 As that
the Church of Rome has not erred, because she cannot err. 141, etc. If the
Reformation be good, there can want no authority to reform. 147 The Supreme
Authority of any Nation has a regular Authority to declare, what shall be the
established Religion of that Nation, which is all that we attribute to Kings
and Parliaments in such matters. 250
ERRATA.
PAGE 53. l. 4. for now r. non. p. 123. l. 33. r. as shows. p. 14^. l. 14. dele
upon.

Some faults there are in Pointing, which I must leave to the Reader to
correct.

A VINDICATION OF SEVERAL Protestant Doctrines: BEING AN ANSWER TO A LATE
PAMPHLET ENTITLED, Protestancy destitute of Scripture-Proofs.
THAT I have taken so little an occasion to write so big a Book, I hope the
Reader upon his perusal will pardon. There is indeed a remarkable difference
between us and our Roman Adversaries in this matter; they can answer great
Books in two or three Sheets, if they vouchsafe to give any answer at all,
which they begin to be weary of: we answer two or three Sheets in large Books;
but then we have very different ends in writing too; they to make a show of
saying somewhat, to put by the blow by some few insignificant cavils; we, not
only to answer our Adversaries, which might be done in very few words, but, to
instruct our people, which requires a more particular Explication of the
reasons of things. But I shall make no Apology for my Book, till I hear that it
wants it; for it may be some may think it, as much too little, as others too
big.

He begins very regularly with the state of the Controversy between us, to
prove sixteen Protestant Tenets (as he calls them) by plain Scripture;
Scriptures, but so plain to us, for their Doctrines, as they require to be
yielded them by the Catholic Church for hers. What will be thought plain by
them, is a very hard matter to guess, when it seems, the second Commandment it
self is not thought by them a plain Scripture Proof against Image Worship, and
I despair of ever finding a plainer proof in Scripture for or against any
thing. But I told him in Answer to his request (p. 17.) that we desire no other
proofs from them, but what we are ready to give, either the express words of
Scripture, or plain and evident consequence, or the silence of Scripture, to
prove that any Doctrine is not in it. And though they may reasonably demand of
us, what we demand of them, yet they cannot reasonably demand more: and whether
I have not done him justice in this way, shall be examined again under the
several Articles of his request. In the next Paragraph he mightily despises the
Answer, and concluded the pamphlet unworthy a public or special notice, and
expected, if not more pertinent, yet at least more plausible replies to follow,
and I can assure him, that he was very ill advised, that he did not despise and
expect on; for his reply has given some credit and authority to that Answer,
and has now produced a Book, which if he be wise, he will despise too; though I
hope it will convince him, that Protestants do not mean to expose their
profession by silence, which I do not find them much inclined to at present.

But let us consider the state of the question. In answer to the Request to
prove some Protestant Tenets by plain Scripture, I told him this was a false
representation Ans. to request, p. 1.
of our Doctrine; for though we do make the Scripture the rule of our Faith,
yet we do not pretend to own no Doctrine, but what is contained in the express
words of Scripture. Our Church teaches us, Art. 6. that Holy Scripture
contains all things necessary to Salvation; so that whatsoever is not read
therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any Man, that it
should be believed as an Article of Faith, or be thought requisite or necessary
to Salvation. Where our Church distinguishes between what is read in the
Scripture, that is, contained in express words there, and what may be proved
thereby, that is, by plain and necessary consequence, from what is expressly
taught in Scripture; and yet confines such Proof as this only to Articles of
Faith, or what is thought requisite or necessary to Salvation. And the true
reason of this is, that the Church of England teaches the sufficiency of the
Holy Scriptures to Salvation, which is the very Title of this Article, and
therefore all things necessary to be believed to Salvation must be contained in
express words in Scripture, or be proved thence by plain and evident
consequence; which shows, that we are not strictly obliged to prove any thing
from Scripture, but what we teach for an Article of Faith, or as necessary to
Salvation. This is the reason, why we demand a Scripture Proof from the Church
of Rome for the new Articles of the Trent Faith; for if the belief of them be
necessary to Salvation, as they say they are, then either the Scriptures do not
contain all things necessary to Salvation, or they are bound to show, where
these Doctrines are contained in Scripture. For this reason the Church of
England, which owns the sufficiency of the Scripture to Salvation, rejects all
those Doctrines, which the Church of Rome without any Proof from Scripture
teaches as necessary to Salvation; and this we think reason enough to reject
them, that they are not contained in Scripture, which contains all things
necessary to Salvation.

Now our Author, and some of his size, who don't see half a Consequence before
them, think they have a mighty advantage of us in demanding the same Proofs
from us to justify our rejecting their Doctrines, which we demand of them to
justify their belief of them: that is to say, as we demand of them a
Scripture Proof, that there is such a place as Purgatory, they think, they may
as reasonably demand of us a Scripture Proof, that there is no such place as
Purgatory; just with as much reason as if one should tell me, that by the Laws
of England every Man is bound to Marry at twenty years old, and when I desire
him to show me the Law which makes this necessary, he should answer, though he
cannot show such a Law, yet it may be necessary, unless I can show him a Law
which expressly declares, that it is not necessary: whereas nothing is
necessary, but what the Law makes so; and if the Law has not made it necessary,
there is no need of any Law to declare, that it is not necessary. Thus the
Protestant Doctrine of the sufficiency of Scriptures to Salvation, requires us
to produce a plain Scripture Proof for every thing, which we believe necessary
to Salvation; but it does not require a Scripture Proof, that that is not
necessary to Salvation, which the Scripture has not revealed nor made necessary
to Salvation: for if the Scriptures contain all things necessary to Salvation,
it is a sufficient Proof, that such Doctrines are not necessary to Salvation,
which are not contained in the Scriptures: Unless we think, that the Scripture
must beforehand confute all possible Heresies, which might arise in the
Church, and tell us particularly in all points, what we must not believe, as
well as what we must.

This I observed was the case, as to those Articles of the Church of England,
which are opposed to the Corruptions and Innovations of the Church of Rome,
that they are negative Articles, and a negative Article only rejects such
Doctrines from being Articles of Faith, as are not contained in Scripture, and
it is ridiculous to demand a plain Scripture Proof, that such a Doctrine is not
in Scripture. We believe it is not there, because we cannot find it there, and
those who pretend it is there, cannot show it there; which is proof enough, and
all that the Subject is capable of.

This is what our Author attempts an Answer to in the preceding Paragraph, and
first, he says, that those of the thirty nine Articles, which are opposed to
Catholic Religion (so he calls the Popish Corruptions of Christianity) contain
Affirmative propositions, or may be resolved into equivalent affirmatives. What
then? Is the dispute about the terms wherein the Article is conceived, whether
they be Negative or Affirmative? or about the reason, why it is either affirmed
or denied, viz. that such a Doctrine is not taught in Scripture? for this is
all I meant by a negative Article, that we deny such a Doctrine to be contained
in Scripture. Now suppose I should say, There is no such place as Purgatory,
which is a negative Proposition, or that Purgatory is a late and fond
invention, which is affirmative, what difference is there between them? when
they both resolve into this, that Purgatory is not taught in Scripture; and
therefore the question is still the same, whether the Article be expressed
affirmatively or negatively, and no Man can be bound to prove by plain and
express Scripture, that Purgatory is not taught in Scripture.

Well! but though for a Negative, or every non-assent or suspense of assent, a
reason may not be given or required, yet for belief, for a solemn profession,
subscription and swearing of that belief (whether it be of negatives or
affirmatives) a reason may be assigned and required. What glorious and
triumphant Nonsense is here? How does a negative Article and non-assent come to
be the same thing? For we Protestants use to give our assent to negative
Articles: And why are not Men bound to give a reason of their non-assent, as
well as of their assent? And how are they more bound to give a reason of their
profession and swearing their non-assent, than they are of their bare
non-assent? And who ever dreamt, that Men are not bound to give a reason of
their non-assent, and of their profession of non-assent? and lastly, what is
all this to the purpose of demanding express Proofs of Scripture, that such
Doctrines, as suppose Purgatory, or the Invocation of Saints, etc. are not
taught in Scripture? And why is it not a sufficient reason of a non-assent, or
declared and professed denial of such Doctrines, that it does not appear, that
they are taught in Scripture?

But the Request, he says, proposed only affirmatives; and they have been
considered and answered already, and his Defense shall be considered again
without any Fencing or Tergiversation.

But the Thirty nine Articles not only declare, that the opposite affirmatives
are not in Scripture (for they may not be there, and yet be true) (but if they
be not there, we cannot know they are true, much less can they be Articles of
Faith, and necessary to Salvation) but also that they are rather, and plainly
repugnant to Scripture; this I confess does require a Scripture Proof, that a
Doctrine is not only not in the Scripture, but repugnant to it; but then a
plain and evident consequence from something else, which is taught in
Scripture, is all the proof, which can be expected in such cases, and this we
are ready to give, when our Author shall demand it. And now would not any one
wonder, how from these premises he concludes, that he has shown Protestants
obliged to give Scripture-reasons for their belief of Negatives; that is, if he
will speak to the purpose, that we are obliged to prove from plain and express
Texts of Scripture, that those Doctrines which we reject as unscriptural, are
not contained in Scripture; we must prove from Scripture, that that is not in
Scripture, which we say is not in it; which may be done indeed by a negative
Argument, from the silence of Scripture about it, but is not capable of a
direct and positive Proof.

Let us now take a review of his several Protestant Doctrines, for which he
demands a Scripture Proof, and see wherein the Answer was defective.

I. Scripture is clear in all necessaries to every sober Inquirer.
In answer to this I observed, that every plain Text of Scripture proved its
own plainness, and that as it needs no other Proof, no more than we need a
proof, that the Sun shines, when we see it; so if we did not find it plain, no
other argument or testimony could prove it to be plain: But this he takes no
notice of, but only endeavors to weaken two Scripture testimonies, which, I
said, do by a very easy and natural Consequence prove the plainness of
Scripture; for if the word of God be a light unto our feet, and a lamp unto our
paths, then it must be clear, if light be clear, Psalm 119. 105. if it be able
to make men wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15. then it must be plain and
intelligible Answer to Request, p. 2.
in all things necessary to salvation: to which he answers, that these Texts do
not reach the proposition to be proved: For if the word were a light to the
Prophet David' s feet, if all Scripture be given, that the Man of God may be
perfect, yet a perspicuity of Scripture in all necessaries to every sober
Inquirer, cannot be deduced thence, except every sober Inquirer be a Prophet,
or a Man of God, or at least subject to such: As if none but Prophets or
Apostles could understand the Scripture? But I thought light had been visible
to all Men, that have eyes in their Heads: and I am sure the same Prophet tells
us, that the Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul, the Testimony of
the Lord is sure, making wise the simple: the Statutes of the Lord are right,
rejoicing the heart, the Commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes,
Psalm. 19. 7, 8. Is this spoken only of Prophets too? Are there no other souls
to be converted, no other simple people to be made wise, no other hearts to be
rejoiced, no other eyes to be enlightened, but only theirs? And when S. Paul
tells Timothy, from a Child thou have known the Holy Scriptures, which are able
to make thee wise unto Salvation (which was the place I cited) does this prove,
that none but a man of God (for which he exchanges it, though that is not in
the 15. but 17. verse) can understand the Scriptures, when it seems, Timothy
understood them, when he was a Child?

However thus much he must grant in his own way, that the Scriptures are very
intelligible in all things necessary to Salvation; for otherwise a man of God,
the Pastors and Teachers of the Church, could not understand them, if they be
not so plain, that they may be understood; and if the Scriptures be plain and
intelligible in themselves, then he must grant, that at least all Men of Parts,
and Learning, and Industry, who are sober and honest Inquirers, may understand
them as well as Divines, unless he will say, that Divines understand them not
by the use of their reason and wise consideration, but by Inspiration and
Prophecy; and then it is not the Scripture, but the inspired interpretation of
it, which makes Men wise unto Salvation. At least he must grant, that the
Scriptures can make any other Man of God perfect, as well as the Pope; for this
is not spoke of S. Peter and his Successors only, but of Timothy, and any other
Man of God; and therefore there is no need, that all other Bishops and Pastors
should depend on the Pope, as an infallible Oracle.

Nay if the Scriptures are able to make the man of God perfect in the discharge
of his Ministry, of which S. Paul here speaks, for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, then the people also, who are to
be taught, may be made to understand the Scriptures, the Doctrines, Reproofs,
and Instructions of it; for as the Scripture is the Teachers Rule, so it is his
Authority too; and if the people cannot be taught to understand the Scriptures
in things necessary to Salvation, they cannot know, that such things are in
Scripture; which destroys the Divine Authority of the Preacher. For what he
teaches without Scripture, can only have his own authority, or the authority of
other Men like himself: and yet no Man can tell, whether what he teaches be in
the Scripture, who cannot in some measure understand the Scripture himself; and
if a Divine Faith must be founded upon the Authority of Scripture, which is the
only Divine Authority we now have; and no Man can believe upon the Authority of
Scripture, who cannot understand it; then it is as necessary, that all things
necessary to Salvation should be so plain in Scripture, that all persons at
least with the help of a Guide, should understand them; as it is, that all,
even the meanest Men, should know all things necessary to their Salvation.

For it is a Scandal to the Protestant profession to say, that we reject the
Authority of Church Guides, which we own as well as the Church of Rome; only
with this difference, That the Church of Rome will have Men believe their
Guides without reason or understanding; we have Guides not merely to dictate to
us, but to teach us to understand. As the Masters in other Arts and Sciences
do; who explain the reasons of things to their Scholars, till they attain to a
great Mastery and perfection of knowledge themselves: And if by the help of
such a Teaching, not an Imposing, Guide, Men may understand the Scripture in
all things necessary to Salvation, then the Scripture is plain and
intelligible, though an unlearned Man cannot understand it without a Guide; as
Mathematical demonstrations are certainly plain, if any thing be plain, though
unskilful Men cannot understand them without a Master; but that is clear and
plain in it self, which can be explained to every ordinary apprehension; and
such we assert the Scriptures to be in all necessaries. Learned Men can by
their own studies and inquiries understand the true sense of them; and the
Unlearned can be taught to understand them; and this is the use we make of our
Guides, not to submit our judgments to them without any understanding; but to
inform our judgments, that we may be able to see and understand for our selves.
Thus our Savior taught his Disciples, he opened their understandings, that
they might understand the Scriptures; Thus the Apostles and Primitive Doctors
instructed the World, by expounding the Scriptures to them, which does not
signify merely to tell them, what the sense of Scripture is, and requiring
them to believe it; but showing them out of the Scriptures, that this is, and
must be, the true sense of it; and we need not fear, that Protestancy should
suffer any thing from such Guides as these, though the Church of Rome indeed
has felt the ill effects of them.

II. The Secular Prince has all spiritual jurisdiction and F, Prot.
authority immediately from and under God.
Here, he says, I behave my self, as if I were under apprehensions, and durst
neither own nor reject this Tenet, and yet in my Answer, I expressly show, what
the Church of England means by the Kings Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Answer to
Request, p. 3.
Causes; which signifies no more than that the King is Supreme in his own
Dominions, and therefore there is no Power, neither Secular nor Ecclesiastic,
above him; for if there were, he were not Supreme. And this I said might be
proved from Romans 13. 1. Let every Soul be subject to the higher powers: to
which he answers, that this proves more than I grant. It proves ministering the
Word and Sacraments to belong to the Higher Powers. How so? Yes this it does,
unless ministering the Word and Sacraments be not a soul affair, be no act of
power. Learnedly observed! because every soul must be subject to the Higher
Powers, therefore the King has all Power in soul-affairs, and therefore of
ministering the Word and Sacraments: But if every soul only signify every Man
(without excepting the Pope himself) then I suppose all Ecclesiastics as well
as Secular persons are included in it; and if all must be subject to the King,
then the King is Supreme over all; but things are at a low ebb in the Church of
Rome, when such silly Quibbles must pass for Arguments.

III. Justification by Faith alone (viz. a persuasion that we are justified) is
a wholesome Doctrine.
In answer to this I denied, that our Church teaches, that justifying Faith is
a persuasion, that we are justified. He grants, that some of the Church of
England have condemned it (p. 4.) but yet he may as justly charge us with it,
as we charge the Church of Rome with Doctrines contrary to their General
Councils, and constant Profession; and we grant he may, for if such things be
done, they are very unjust both in him and us; we deny, that we do any such
thing, and have lately abundantly vindicated our selves from such an
imputation; let him do as much for himself if he can. But Cranmer was of this
mind, by whom the Articles were devised; But how does that appear? and if he
were, what is that to us, when there is no such thing in our Articles? will he
allow the Council of Trent to be expounded according to the Private opinions of
every Bishop, that was in it? The Antinomians plead the Doctrine of the
eleventh Article, as the Parent of their irreligion, and so they do the
Scriptures: And what then? Will he hence infer, that the Scriptures countenance
Antinomianism, because they allege Scripture for it? And why then must this be
charged upon our Articles? Though what some may have done, I cannot tell, but
Antinomians don't use to trouble themselves with our Articles. But the
strictest Adherers to the Primitive Reformers in Doctrine (the Puritans) assert
this Solifidian Parenthesis, as the genuine and literal sense of Justification
by Faith alone, and of the eleventh Article: Why the Puritans the strictest
Adherers to the Primitive Reformers in Doctrine? but we need not ask a reason
of his sayings, who understands nothing about what he speaks: For the Puritans
did not and do not believe, That justifying Faith is a persuasion, that we are
justified, but they place justifying Faith in an act of recumbency on Christ
for Salvation, and dispute vehemently against his Notion of it. But, he says, I
might have given them a Text asserting, what I confess our Church teaches, viz.
that justification by Faith only is a wholesome Doctrine, and very full of
comfort, which intimates no necessity of repentance to Justification, none of
the Sacraments. Yes it does, and of good works too, as the conditions of our
Justification, though not as the meritorious causes of it; for all this our
Church comprehends in the notion of a living Faith, which alone justifies; and
then I suppose as many Texts as there are, which attribute our Justification to
Faith, so many proofs there are, that Justification by Faith alone, as opposed
to all Meritorious Works, is a wholesome Doctrine, and very full of comfort.

IV. The substance of Bread and Wine remains after, what it was before,
sacerdotal Consecration.
Here he takes no notice of any one word, which I returned in Answer: The sum
of which is, that the material substance before and after Consecration is the
same, that is, that they are Bread and Wine still, but by virtue of Christ's
Institution, after Consecration they are not mere Bread and Wine, but a
Sacrament of our Redemption by Christ's Death, and to such as rightly and
worthily, and by Faith receive the same, the Bread which we break is a
partaking of the Body of Christ, and likewise the cup of blessing is a
partaking of the Blood of Christ, as our Church teaches: And this I proved must
be the sense of the words of Institution, This is my Body, and urged such
arguments for it in short, as he durst not name again, much less pretend to
Answer; but instead of that he endeavors to prove (p. 5.) that the words of
Institution, This is my Body literally understood, do expressly prove, that the
substance of Bread does not remain at all after Consecration: For the Eucharist
is Christ's Body and Blood, which if substantially Bread and Wine, it cannot
really be. A change less than that of the substance of the Elements, is
insufficient to render them really and truly, what the Text says they are,
after Consecration.

But did not I give him my reasons, why these words could not be understood
literally of the natural Body and Blood of Christ? And is it enough then for
him to say, that in a literal sense, they must signify a substantial change of
the Bread and Wine into Christ's natural Body and Blood, without answering,
what I urged against it? and yet in a literal sense it cannot signify so: For
if This refers to the Bread, which our Savior took, and blessed and brake,
(and it can refer to nothing else) then the literal sense of the words is, This
Bread is my Body; and if Bread be the Body of Christ, then the substance of the
Bread cannot be changed, for Bread cannot be the Body of Christ, if it be not
Bread. Let him choose, which he will, either This signifies this Bread, or it
does not: If it does, then the Bread cannot be substantially changed; for the
Bread is the Body of Christ, and therefore is Bread still, is Bread and the
Body of Christ too; if it does not, then how does he prove, that the words of
Consecration in a literal sense, transubstantiate the Bread into the Body of
Christ? For This does not signify the Bread, and therefore This is my Body
cannot signify, that the substance of Bread is transubstantiated into Christ's
Body. I wonder our Author is not ashamed at this time of day to talk at this
rate, after somany excellent Books as have been written upon this Argument; to
save my self any farther trouble, I shall direct my Reader to the late
Dialogues about the Trinity and Transubstantiation, and the Discourse of the
Holy Eucharist in the two great points of the Real Presence and the Adoration
of the Host; where he will find abundant satisfaction also to the two next
Points, which follow.

V. Our Lord's Presence in the Eucharist is merely gracious and influential,
and if more, only to the faithful.
In answer to this I showed him, what we meant by Christ's Presence in the
Eucharist, that he is so present, that his Body and Blood, with all the
benefits of his Death and Passion, are exhibited to worthy Receivers, as much
as he could have been Answer to Request. p. 5.
had we eat his natural Flesh and drank his Blood, which is somewhat more than
the mere influences of his Grace: but, he says, I assert our Lords
Eucharistical Presence not to be substantial, that is, I suppose, that the
natural substance of his Body is not there, and therefore that he is not
corporally present; and this indeed I do assert. Therefore (says he) unless
entirely absent, our Lord must be present in the Eucharist by grace and
influence only: what is there besides substance and efficacy belonging to our
Savior's Body and Blood? no color of Scripture is produced for this Zuinglian
proposition.

If he will allow no medium between Christ's Corporal and Substantial Presence,
and his Grace and Influence; since it is demonstrable, that he is not
corporally present, we must in this sense allow, that he is present only by his
Grace and Influence, as that is opposed to a corporal presence. And all Men
must allow this, who deny Transubstantiation, or Consubstantiation. But what is
there besides Substance and Efficacy belonging to our Savior's Body and Blood?
I answer, there can be nothing naturally belonging to any Body besides its
substance, and natural virtues and powers, which he calls its Efficacy; but by
Institution there may; and we take the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper to be an
Institution, and therefore not to have a natural, but instituted Virtue and
Efficacy. For the very notion of an Institution is, that all the Virtues and
Efficacy of it is not owing to Nature, but to the Will and Appointment of God.
Whatever is a natural power, is no Institution, no Sacrament; for the effect
there is wholly owing to Nature, not to God's appointment, which acts by a
Power and Influence superior to Nature. Which, I think, is little less than a
demonstration, that the natural Body and Blood of Christ is not substantially
present in the Eucharist; for whatever Efficacy and Virtue we attribute to
eating the Flesh and drinking the Blood of Christ, it is either a natural
effect of this eating the Body and drinking the Blood of Christ, or it is not.
If it be, then it is no Sacrament, which works not by the powers of Nature, but
of Institution. If it be not, what need is there of Christ's bodily presence in
the Sacrament? when a Sacramental Body of Christ, consecrated Bread and Wine,
to represent and exhibit his broken Body and his Bloodshed for us, by virtue of
an Institution, may be as effectual to all the ends and purposes of a
Sacrament, as his natural Body could be; which can have no Sacramental
Efficacy, but by virtue of an Institution.

The benefits we expect from this Sacramental feeding on Christ's Body, is an
interest in the merits of his Death and Passion, viz. the forgiveness of our
sins, the communications of his Grace and Spirit, and a right to immortal life.
Now I would desire to know, whether these are the natural effects of a corporal
eating Christ's natural Body? He purchased all this for us indeed by his Death
and Passion; but is pardon of sin, which is God's free and gracious act,
incorporated with Christ's natural Body? and will a corporal eating of his Body
communicate it to us? Do the communications of Grace and Spiritual life flow
from the Body, or from the Spirit of Christ? Is it the contact of his Body,
that makes our bodies immortal, or the inhabitation of his Spirit in us? What
is that Efficacy then, which he attributes to Christ's natural Body, and
supposes to be inherent in it? A natural efficacy, such as can belong to human
bodies, signifies nothing to the purposes of a Sacrament, and there can be no
other efficacy inherent in Christ's natural Body; unless he will say, that
pardon of Sin, and Spiritual Grace, and a power of making other bodies
immortal, are the inherent and essential properties of Christ's Body.

But suppose it were so; how can the mere presence of Christ's Natural Body in
the Sacrament, which we neither see, nor touch, nor eat, communicate all these
divine virtues to us? For if it be by Natural Communication, it must be by
contact; for Bodies have no other way of working upon each other; and yet they
will not allow, that we touch the Body of Christ, no more than that we see it;
or that we break it between our Teeth, or chew it, or digest it in our
Stomachs, that is, they will not allow, that we naturally eat it; and then how
can it naturally communicate its virtues to us?

So that though the Natural Body of Christ were present in the Sacrament, those
divine Graces we expect from it, must be the effects of a Sacramental
Institution, not of Nature; and therefore the Natural presence of Christ's Body
is of no use in the Sacrament; for God may as well annex all the benefits of
his Death and Passion to the Sacramental signs of his Body and Blood, as to his
Natural Body; and the Power and Efficacy of the Institution will be the same
either way. And when the natural presence of Christ's Body in the Eucharist is
so absolutely impossible, such a contradiction to the sense and reason of Man
kind, and of no use to the purposes of a Sacrament, but what may as well be
otherwise supplied; and the Sacramental eating of Christ's Body in efficacious
signs is so easy and intelligible, and by the power of an Institution equally
effectual, and so agreeable to the Nature of all other Institutions and
Sacraments both of the Old and New Testament, what should incline Men to
expound those words of our Savior, This is my Body, of his Natural Body,
contrary to all the Sacramental forms of speech used in Scripture, did they not
think it meritorious to believe impossibilities and contradictions.

To return then a more direct Answer to our Author's question, what there is
besides Substance and Efficacy belonging to our Savior's Body? I answer, by
Nature there is nothing else, but by Institution there is; for there is the
Sacrament of the Lord's Body, which is neither the natural Substance, nor the
natural Efficacy of his Body, but a Sacramental Communion in the merits and
Efficacy of his Death and Passion, which is a spiritual eating the Flesh and
drinking the Blood of Christ. And since he wants Scripture for this, I will
give him a very piain Text, 1 Cor. 10. 16. The cup of Blessing which we bless,
is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? the Bread which we break, is it
not the Communion of the Body of Christ. Thus S. Paul explains, what our
Savior said, This is my Body, and, This is my Blood, by this is the Communion
of Christ's Body and Blood: That is, that those, who by Faith partake of the
Sacramental Bread and Wine, do communicate in the Body and Blood of Christ.

This is a different thing from the mere influences of his Grace; for it is our
interest and Communion in his Sacrifice, which is the meritorious cause and
spring of all Divine Influences and Communications: We must be mystically and
spiritually united to Christ to have Communion in the Sacrifice of his Body and
Blood, and then we receive the fresh supplies of Grace from him, which are the
purchase of his Death, and the effect of our Union to him; and this Communion
with the Body and Blood of Christ, we receive in the Lord's Supper, which is
instituted by Christ, for that very purpose, and therefore it is called the
Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ; because it is the Sacrament of our
Union to him, whereby we communicate in his Body and Blood; and if this be
Zuinglianism, I see no help for it, but we must be contented to be Zuinglians.

VI. Adoration of the Eucharist, (i. e. of our Savior under the species of
Bread and Wine) is Idolatry.
I answered; There was no such proposition as this taught in the Church of
England. We teach indeed, that Bread and Wine in the Eucharist remains Bread
and Wine after Consecration, and that to adore Bread and Wine is Idolatry. To
adore our Savior is no Idolatry, but to adore Bread and Wine for our Savior
may be as much Idolatry, as to worship the Sun for God.

Instead of answering this he tells us, This blasphemous Tenet is taught by our
Church, and which is a little worse, is practiced by theirs. For the majority
of our pretended Bishops did Vote for the Test, and do all of them take it, and
I hope will keep it too. That it is a Canon of our General Council, the
Parliament; and therefore it is very good Law, and that is all we desire for
our Religion from Parliaments, and thank God that we have it; and since they
are a General Council, may they insist upon their Infallibility. But what is
the matter with the Test? Why, it declares our Adoration of the Eucharist
(which is the Adoration of nothing but Jesus Christ) to be Idolatry. Is the
Eucharist then nothing but Jesus Christ? does the Council of Trent say so? Is
this the Doctrine of any of their Schoolmen, Canonists, or Divines? Nay, will
this Author venture to say, that the Eucharist is nothing but Jesus Christ
himself? Which is speck and span New Popery, if this be the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome. No! he does not, dares not, say, that the Eucharist is nothing,
but Jesus Christ; but he says, that the Adoration of the Eucharist, is the
Adoration of nothing but Jesus Christ. But what palpable nonsense is this; For
if the Eucharist be something, which is not Jesus Christ, then the Adoration of
the Eucharist must be the Adoration of something, which is not Jesus Christ.
And yet though we should suppose the Doctrine of Transubstantiation to be true,
yet the natural Flesh and Blood of Christ, according to the Doctrine of the
Council of Trent, though it be present in the Sacrament, is not the Sacrament.
For there can be no Sacrament of the Eucharist without the species of Bread and
Wine: and yet the Council of Trent decrees, that the worship of Latria, which
is due to the true God, be Council. Trid. Sess. 7. de Eucharistia cap. 5.
given to this most Holy Sacrament: And that we might know, what they meant by
the Sacrament, they tell us, it is that, which is instituted by Christ, to be
received or eaten, which certainly is the species of Bread and Wine: For they
being sensible, how absurd it is to worship, what we eat, to prevent this, they
tell us, that it is nevertheless to be adored, because it is instituted to be
received, or eaten. The reason indeed they give for it is, because Christ is
present in this Sacrament; but though the presence of Christ be the reason of
this Adoration, yet the whole Sacrament is the object, which is not merely the
natural Body and Blood of Christ, but the species of Bread and Wine, under
which is contained the Body and Blood of Christ; and therefore to adore the
Sacrament is not to adore nothing but Jesus Christ, for the Sacrament is
somewhat more.

But then if the Doctrine of Transubstantiation be false, they have no other
object of their worship but Bread and Wine; and thus the Church of England
believes, and thus our General Council the Parliament, which made the Test,
believed, and thus all Men, who dare trust their own Senses, and Reason,
believe; and if it be blasphemy to teach, that the worship of Bread and Wine is
Idolatry, some of the m^st Learned Divines of the Church of Rome have been
guilty of this Blasphemy, and I should be glad to hear, what our Authors
opinion is of it.

VII. All Christians, whenever they communicate, are obliged to receive in both
kinds.
For this I urged the express words of institution, which do as expressly
command us to drink of the Answer to Request, p. 7.
Cup, as to eat of the Bread; so that if there be any command in Scripture to
receive the Bread, there is the same command to receive the Cup: nay indeed as
if our Savior had purposely intended to prevent this Sacrilegious taking away
of the Cup from the People; whereas in delivering the Bread, he only says,
Take, Eat; when he blessed and delivered the Cup, he expressly commanded; Drink
ye. all of it. And I further argued from the nature of the Eucharist, which as
it was instituted in both kinds, so it is not a complete Sacrament without it:
and yet our Author rubs his forehead, and confidently tells his Readers; Nor
for this point can a Scripture command be discovered in the Answer. Though the
thirtieth Article affirms, that both parts of the Lords Sacrament, by Christ's
ordinance and commandment, ought to be ministered to all Christian Men alike:
what he means by this I cannot guess; for if he will not allow an express
institution, to be a Scripture Proof; I despair of ever finding a
Scripture Proof for any thing; unless he can tell me, what proof there can be
of an institution, but the words of Institution: does this Institution then
contain a command to receive the Eucharist? if it does not, how does he prove,
that all Christians are bound to receive the Eucharist? if it does, then Take,
Eat; is a command to receive the Bread: and by the same reason, Drink ye all of
this, is a command to all to receive the Cup; and both these being a part of
the same Feast, and commanded at the same time; our Church had reason to say,
that both parts of the Lord's Sacrament, by Christ's ordinance and commandment,
ought to be administered to all Christian Men alike. The Church of Rome thinks
the words of Institution a plain and necessary command to consecrate in both
kinds, without which they grant it is not a Sacrament; now what other command
have they for consecrating, than we have for receiving in both kinds? the words
of Institution are all that we have about this matter; and let them give me
reason, how the same words come to signify consecration, but not receiving, in
both kinds? nay they grant that the Priest who consecrates must receive as well
as consecrate in both kinds; and yet the Institution is in the same form of
words, without making any distinction between the Priest and the People; and
how the same words should command the Priest to receive in both kinds, and not
the People, is somewhat mysterious. I am apt to think, that the Fathers of the
Council of Constance, who decreed the communion Council. Corstant. Sess. 13.
in one kind with a non obstante to our Savior's Institution, did suspect,
that there was a Scripture Proof for communion in both kinds, or there had been
no need to have made an exception to our Savior's Institution, and to have set
up the authority of the Church against it. The Church of Rome allows, that it
is lawful for the People to communicate in both kinds, and have reserved this
authority of granting such a liberty to the Pope, now how can it be lawful,
unless Christ has allowed it, and where has he allowed it, unless in the words
of institution; and they prove more than allowance, even a command; if, Drink
ye all of this, be of the Imperative Mood.

VIII. Chastity deliberately vowed may be inoffensively violated.
This, I said, is no Doctrine of our Church, nor are Protestants now concerned
in it, though some of the Monks and Nuns at the beginning of the Reformation
were: and though I did not undertake a just defense of the Marriages of such
devoted persons, yet I offered several things in Apology for them; and said so
much, that our Author did not think fit to make any reply to it, but only
answers to my denial, that this is a Doctrine of our Church: He says, This
proposition is a Doctrine of the Answerers Church, except his be not the same
Church with Edward the Sixths, or the thirty second Article have another sense,
than when composed by Cranmer: For all Bishops and Priests then in the Western
Church had deliberately vowed chastity, and the Article says, It is lawful for
them to marry, which certainly violates their vow. No Scripture is alleged
justifying a Tenet, so impure, so persidious.

Thus by consequence he proves, that it is the Doctrine of our Church, that
chastity deliberately vowed may be inoffensively violated; because in K. Edward
the Sixth and Archbishop Cranmer's days, it was the Doctrine of this Church,
that the Bishops and Priests then in being, who had deliberately vowed
chastity, might notwithstanding marry. But suppose this was not the Doctrine in
King Edward's days, what becomes then of his consequence? and yet this is the
truth of the case. For the Article then only taught, that Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, are not commanded to vow the state of single life without marriage;
neither by God's Law are they compelled to abstain from Matrimony: but there is
not one word, whether those, who were Bishops and Priests at that time, and
were under the vow of Coelibacy (though every Priest, as a Priest, was not by
the Laws of this Church, bound to undertake such a vow, though they were forbid
by the Canons to marry) might marry or not. For though the Article asserts,
that they were not compelled by God's Law, to abstain from Matrimony; yet it
does not say, that they could not debar themselves this liberty by voluntary
vows; or that if they had done so, they might inoffensively break those vows,
which is a very different question. Indeed in Queen Elizabeth's Reign in the
Convocation held at London, 1562. this Article is enlarged. Bishops, Priests,
and Deacons, are not commanded by God's Law either to vow the estate of single
life, or to abstain from marriage. Therefore it is lawful also for them, as for
all other Christian Men, to marry at their own discretion, as they shall judge
the same to serve better to godliness. But this Article does not say, that
those Bishops and Priests, who were entangled with a vow of Coelibacy might
lawfully marry, but only their being Bishops and Priests was no hindrance to
their Marriage: Whether there was any other impediment, it concerned them to
consider; but these obligations of Vows, which any of them were then under,
being a personal thing; the present decision of that Controversy was not
thought fit to be made an Article of Religion. So that though some particular
Persons were at that time concerned in this question, yet the Doctrine of our
Church, never was concerned in it; for there never was any Synodical definition
of it; and therefore there is no need of producing Scripture-Proofs for it. But
yet notwithstanding this, I am far from condemning those Bishops and Priests,
and Nuns, and Friars, who did then marry; for I am sure a chaste Marriage is
more acceptable to God, than an impure Coelibacy: and those Abominations which
were discovered at the Dissolution of Monasteries, were enough to make Men
abhor such vows of Chastity, as he calls them: and I am very much of the
opinion, that it were still better for Priests to marry, than to debauch their
Penitents or Converts. Thus much for his impure and perfidious Tenet.

IX. All Christian excellencies are commanded.
This, I told him, I thought S. Paul had determined, Philip. 4. 8. Whatsever
things are true, whatsoever things are honest, etc. think on these things. For
if these general expressions do not comprehend all Christian excellencies, I
know not what does. To this he answers, Unless besides comprehending, it
command them, that Scripture will not prove the Tenet. And the mode of
expression (that is, its being in the Imperative Mood, Think on these things)
does not prove it to be a command, because it is common to an exhortation as
well as precept. Suppose this, then at least it may be a Command, as well as an
Exhortation, and he can never prove, that it is not a Command, and therefore
can never confute any Man, who says it is a Command. But suppose it be an
Exhortation; I thought that the Exhortations of the Gospel, had always included
a Command; and I desire one instance of any Exhortation in Scripture, which
relates to things necessarily good or evil, which does not include a Command.
Indeed the style of the Gospel does not run in the form of Laws, but of
exhortatory Commands, enforced with Reasons and Arguments to persuade; and it
is an effectual way to baffle all the Precepts of the Gospel, if such
Exhortations as are made in common to all Christians, have not the force of a
Command.

But I observed farther, That whatever Virtues are commanded, we must always
reckon, that the heights and perfections of those Virtues are commanded, for
God can command nothing less than a perfect Virtue; and if this be true, then
all Christian Excellencies must be commanded; unless they be such Excellencies
as are no Virtues, which I fear may be the case. All Christian Virtues are
commanded in Scripture, without any bounds or limitations set to our duty; and
I always thought, that Justice, and Goodness, and Charity, Meekness and
Humility, Temperance and Chastity, the Love of God and Men, did signify
perfect Virtues, and a perfect Virtue must be perfect in degrees, as well as in
its kind; and the Gospel is so far from limiting our duty, that it makes the
Divine nature it self our pattern and example. That we must be followers of
God, (...), Imitators of God, like dear Children. And that we must be perfect
as our Father, which is in Heaven, is perfect; which advances our duty to the
utmost possible seize in Virtue.

But then I added, that the attainment of the highest perfections in Virtue is
not made the necessary condition of our Salvation. Though a perfect Virtue be
commanded, yet for Christ's sake a sincere, though imperfect, obedience shall
be accepted. But the more perfect and excellent Virtue shall have the more
perfect and excellent reward; which is reason enough for us to aspire after the
greatest perfections. And yet those degrees of perfection, which we are bound
to attain to, must bear some proportion to what we have received from God. For
to whom much is given, of them shall be much required. Which shows, that such
seize as bear proportion to our receipts, shall be exacted from us as a
just debt; which may make different degrees of Virtue in different Men matter
of strict duty.

This, our Author says, imports, that proportion, not equality must be in our
accounts to our abilities. This I do not well understand; for an equal
proportion is an equality. But this, he says, does not agree with this
Doctrine, that we must always reckon the heights and perfections of Virtues are
commanded. His reason for it is this: The Account corresponds to our Abilities
(so sure does the Command) but all Abilities are not the same in all; how then
can God's Commands be so to all, as they are, if he always enjoins the heights
and perfections of Virtues?

The Account, he says, corresponds with our Abilities, and therefore the
Command must: but how does he prove this. God will accept of us, according to
our Abilities, which is an act of Grace and Favor, and owing to the Merits and
Intercession of Christ; and therefore his Commands too, which are the Eternal
and Unalterable Rules of Righteousness, must be proportioned to our Abilities:
as if God might not in Grace and Mercy accept of less, than in Justice he can
require; or as if it became a Holy and perfect Being to Command less, than a
perfect Virtue.

But all Abilities are not the same, how then can God's Commands be so to all?
that is, the same to all Men. And are not his Commands the same to all Men? Do
his Commands differ, as Men's Abilities do? How many several Gospels, and
several Laws, then must we have? And where do we find these several Commands
proportioned to Men's several Abilities? We have but one Gospel, that I know of,
and the Laws of it, are the same to all; and it is necessary it should be so;
that all Men may know, that they are bound to be as good as they can; and not
absolve themselves from any degrees of Virtue, as above their Abilities; and
therefore not Commanded them by God: This is what God will do himself, when he
comes to judge the World; He will mercifully consider, whether Men have done,
what they could, and will accept of a little, when it is their best; but we
must know, that it is our duty to do all the good we can, and therefore that
the Law requires the most perfect Virtue; which will engage us to do our best,
and use our utmost endeavors to, please God; and then depend on his Grace to
accept our sincere endeavors instead of perfection.

Had I indeed said, That God had made the heights and perfections of Virtue
absolutely necessary to the Salvation of all Men, then he might have confuted
me from our Savior's Rule of proportion, To whom much is given, of them shall
be much required: but this I expressly denied, that every Man should be damned,
who does not attain to the highest perfections. And expressly affirmed, That a
sincere Christian shall be saved, notwithstanding his many defects, but our
reward shall be proportioned to our several degrees and seize in Virtue.
That the most perfect Virtue shall have the most excellent reward. And this is
enough to confound the pretense of Merit, and works of supererogation;
especially that senseless Doctrine of one Man's meriting for another; which is
the foundation of Popish Indulgences. For if the most perfect Virtue be matter
of Duty, and under Command, how is it possible, that any Man can do more than
his Duty? unless he can do something better than the best. And if our reward be
proportioned to our best actions, what redundancy of Merits can there be, when
all the good we do, is so amply rewarded?

Thus, I observed, our Church confuted the Popish Doctrine of Supererogation,
from what our Savior tells his Disciples, When ye have done all, that are
commanded to you, say we are unprofitable servants. To this our Author answers,
If to supererogate did signify (with Catholics) to profit God, then the
fourteenth Article (condemning the Teachers of works of Supererogation, of
Arrogance and Impiety) had been solidly founded on, When you have done all that
are commanded to you, say we are unprofitable servants. But we meaning no such
thing, the Article perverts Scripture. This is an admirable answer, which does
somewhat more than pervert, for it ridicules the Text. For might not the
Disciples have answered our Savior, as this Disputer does, we are not so
silly, as to think, we can profit God, but yet we may supererogate, and deserve
some thanks from him. It is true, God being infinitely happy and perfect in
himself, we can make no addition to him, and therefore cannot in a strict sense
profit him; nor therefore could our Savior understand it in this sense; but as
that Servant may be said to profit his Master, and to deserve thanks, who does
more than is his duty, so might we be said to be profitable Servants, could we
also supererogate, or do more than is our duty; and here our Savior's argument
lies; that when we have done all that is commanded us, all the good, that we
can possibly do, yet we must confess our selves unprofitable Servants, because
we have done nothing, but what was our duty: and if the Apostles themselves
did, and could do, no more than was their duty, I think our Church might very
well charge these Teachers of works of Supererogation with Arrogance and
Impiety; if to advance themselves above the Apostles be Arrogance, and to make
God a debtor to them be Impiety.

But that our People may a little understand the weight and moment of this
Controversy, it will be necessary briefly to unriddle it.

Of what consequence the Doctrine of Purgatory is in the Church of Rome, is
sufficiently known; for a Church, which can persuade People, that without her
help, they must be damned for some hundred or thousand Years (for Purgatory is
nothing else but a Temporal Damnation, as Hell is Eternal, which is the only
difference between them) must needs have a great authority over all sorts of
persons, who are conscious to themselves, that they do not live so innocently
as to be out of danger of Purgatory: But the Doctrine of Purgatory it self
could do the Church no service, had she not the power of Indulgence to remit
the pains of Purgatory; and yet Indulgences are owing to the stock of Merits,
which the Church has the keeping and disposal of; and yet there can be no
Merits without some works of Supererogation, and there can be no Works of
Supererogation, if no Man can do more than what is commanded, than what is his
duty to do: For when we do no more than our duty, we must confess our selves to
be unprofitable Servants, as that is opposed to Merit: For no Man merits merely
by doing his duty. And this occasions this Dispute, whether all Christian
excellencies are commanded; for if we can do no good thing, but what is
commanded, there is no room left for Merits nor Works of Supererogation; and
then there can be no stock of Merits to be the Fund of Indulgences, and then
Purgatory will be so uncomfortable a Doctrine, that no Man will trust to it,
but will think it his interest to live virtuously, that he may escape both Hell
and Purgatory, and go to Heaven when he dies; and then the Church of Rome will
lose her Authority, and her gainful Trade together.

This is the plain state of the case; and therefore to do the Church of Rome
Right, she principally attributes Merit to such good Works, as she calls them,
which God has no where commanded; but whether these be Christian excellencies
or no, would be considered. The Monkish vows of Poverty, Coelibacy, and
absolute Obedience to their Superiors, are thought a state of Perfection and
Merit; and if they be so, these are works of Supererogation indeed, for they
are no where commanded by God; but I confess, I cannot understand the
excellency of them, especially not as practiced in the Church of Rome.

It is an argument of a great and excellent mind to live above this World, and
to despise all the Charms and Flatteries of it; but what Virtue it is to
renounce the possession of any thing in this World, I cannot tell: It is in it
self no Virtue, that I know of, to be Poor, and therefore it can be no Virtue
to choose Poverty. The World was made for the use of Man, and to use it well is
an Argument of Virtue; but merely to have nothing in the World is none: To bear
want with a patient mind, and a quiet submission to the Divine Providence, is a
Virtue; but to choose want is none: Much less is it any virtue to renounce our
private Possessions, to live plentifully upon a common Stock, and to be as
intent in enriching a Monastery, as any Man can be to advance his private
Fortunes; which is no great argument of a contempt of the World. And no more is
it, to renounce all honest and industrious ways of living, as some do, and to
turn imperious and godly Beggars, and live deliciously on the spoils and
superstition of the people.

Coelibacy it self is no Virtue, for then Marriage, which is the Ordinance of
God, and a Popish Sacrament, must be a Vice. For there is no Virtue, strictly
so called, but is opposed to some Vice; and Coelibacy is opposed to nothing but
Marriage: and therefore we must seek for the virtues of Coelibacy, not merely
in a vow against Marriage, which is no Virtue; but as it signifies a great
mortification to all bodily Pleasures, and is a means to advance us to a more
Divine and heavenly state of Mind: and every degree of Virtue we attain to,
shall receive a proportionable reward: And thus Coelibacy, though it be not a
state of Perfection it self, yet may advance us to a more perfect State, and if
we are the better Men for it, we shall have the greater reward. But to vow
Coelibacy, and to burn with Lust, and to practice all the impurities of the
Stews; to renounce Marriage, and to defile Wives and Virgins, and still to call
this a more perfect State than Marriage, is a work of Supererogation indeed,
but whether it be supererogating Virtue or Vice, God will judge; who has forbid
all uncleanness, and instituted Marriage, not only for the propagation of
mankind, but as a remedy against Lust.

To vow absolute obedience to any Creature, without reserving to our selves a
judgment, whether what he commands be good or evil, is so far from being a
State of Perfection, that it is an encroachment upon the Divine Prerogative,
and gives such obedience to Men, as is due only to God. This is expressly
contrary to our Savior's precept, But call no Man Rabbi, for one is your
Master, even Christ, and all ye are Brethren. And call no Man your Father upon
earth; for one is your Father, which is in Heaven. Neither be ye called
Masters; for one is your Master, even Christ, Matthew 23. 8, 9, 10. which does
not oppose the use of these names in common Speech; but forbids us to ascribe
such an Authority to any Man on Earth, as is due only to God and Christ: And if
a vow of blind obedience does not make Men our Masters in this forbidden sense,
I think nothing can. Thus voluntary and unnecessary severities to the Body,
which serve no ends of Mortification or Devotion; saying over a great number of
Ave Mary's, going in Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, or Loretto, or to the Shrine of
any other powerful Saints; to give all our Estates for saying Masses for the
Dead; to adore Relics and Images, to kiss the Pavement of such a Church, or
some Cross drawn on it; to say over some particular Prayers, so many times a
day, or to pray before such a particular Altar; and such like things, as by the
liberality of Popes, have so many thousand years Indulgence for a reward, are
indeed works of Supererogation, because God has not commanded them, but I doubt
are no Christian excellencies. Such things as these make Men Saints, and enrich
the Church with Merits, and much good may do them with it.

X. Every Soul as soon as expired is conveyed to Heaven or Hell.
In Answer to this, I told him, that the Scripture gives us no account of any
other places of rewards and punishments in the other World, but Heaven and
Hell. And that this proposition, that every Soul, as soon as expired, is
conveyed to Heaven or Hell, is only an Inference from this Doctrine, that we
know of no other place, they should go to after death, the Scripture having not
told us of any other. That our Church, though She rejects Purgatory, yet has
not determined against an intermediate State, between Death and Judgment.
Though Christ's Parable of Dives and Lazarus, and S. Paul's desire to be
dissolved and to be with Christ, look fairly toward proving that good Men go
to Heaven, and bad Men directly to Hell, when they die.

He takes notice only of this last passage of Dives and Lazarus and S. Paul;
and says, that this would prove something, if three Souls be All, or All Souls
expire in either Dives' s fitness for Hell, or Lazarus' s and S. Paul' s for
Heaven. But he should have taken the whole proof together; that there is no
mention made in Scripture of any other place of rewards or punishments in the
next World, but Heaven and Hell; and that wherever we have any account of the
state of Men after Death, we either hear of them, in Heaven or Hell. As Dives,
when he died, was immediately tormented in Hell, and Lazarus was conveyed into
Abraham's bosom, and S. Paul expected, when he died, to go immediately to
Heaven, and to be with Christ: but we read of no Man, who went to Purgatory
when he died: and what other proof can we have of this, but that Heaven is
promised to good Men, and Hell threatened against bad Men; and we have some
examples of both recorded in Scripture; unless we expect the Scripture should
give us a complete Catalogue of all, who were saved or damned in those days.

As for Men's fitness for Heaven or for Hell, when they die; I know not well,
what he means by it. For Men may be fit, as he calls it, for Hell, who are not
as wicked, as Dives, and we all have reason to hope, that those may be fit for
Heaven, who are not so holy as St. Paul was. Though there are different degrees
of Vice and Virtue, which may qualify Men for different degrees of rewards and
punishments, yet as we read in Scripture, but of two states in the other World,
Heaven and Hell, so we read but of two distinctions of Men in this World, the
good and the bad, to whom these promises or threatenings belong. Now every Man,
when he dies, must be one of these; either a penitent or an impenitent sinner;
for the Scripture knows no medium between them. If he be a penitent sinner, by
the gracious terms of the Gospel, he has a right to pardon of sin, and eternal
life; and why is not that Man fit for Heaven, who has a Covenant-right to it?
and what should detain him in Purgatory, who has an immediate right to Heaven?
if he be an impenitent sinner, Hell is his portion, and he must have it.

But after all, this is no controversy between us, and the Church of Rome,
whether every Soul as soon as expired is conveyed to Heaven or Hell; but
whether those, who shall finally be saved must suffer the pains of Purgatory in
the other World, before they shall be received into Heaven. Our Author has a
mind to confound these two, and seems to think it proof enough, that there is a
Purgatory, if there be a middle state between death and judgment, which is
neither Heaven nor Hell; and possibly those, who do not understand this
Controversy, may be deceived with such pretenses, and therefore it will be
convenient briefly to state this matter.

There have been, I confess, very different opinions among some of the Fathers,
about the state of Souls departed, both before and since the Resurrection of
Christ from the dead, as you shall hear more presently; and there may be very
different opinions about it still, and I believe will be among thoughtful and
inquisitive Men, and no great hurt done neither, while they are not made
Articles of Faith, nor the foundation of some new and unscriptural worship.

But that our People may not be imposed on with sham-proofs, which are nothing
to the purpose (as it is plain this Author intended to do in this Article) it
will be necessary plainly to represent the Doctrine of the Church of Rome
concerning Purgatory, that they may know, what proofs to demand of it.

Now the Council of Trent determines no more, than that there is a Purgatory,
and that the Souls, which are detained there, are helped by the suffrages of the
faithful, but principally by the most acceptable Sacrifice of the Altar: and
commands the Purgatorium esse, animasque ibi detentas, fidelium suffragiis,
potissimum vero acceptabili altataris sacrificio juvari praecipit Sancta
Synodus Episcopis, ut sanam de purgatorio Doctrinam, a sanctis patrib^s and
sacris conciliis traditam, Christi fidelibus credi, teneri, doceri, and ubique
predicari diligenter studeant. Council. Trid. Sess. 25. decret. de purgat.
Bishops diligently to take care, that the wholesome Doctrine of Purgatory
delivered by the holy Fathers and Councils, be believed, held, taught, and
preached, to Christ's faithful People.

The Fathers of this Council were very careful, not to determine, what
Purgatory is, what the punishments of it are, where the place of it is, but
refer us to former Fathers and Councils for it: and therefore among the rest, I
suppose, they mean the Council of Florence; where this purgation is expressly
affirmed to be by fire; and to be a state of punishment. Cardinal Bellarmine,
who wrote since the Council of Trent, understood Fathers and Councils, and the
sense of the Roman Church, as well as any Man, and therefore I shall briefly
show, what he thought of this matter.

That Bellarmine did believe, that Souls departed were purged with fire, is
abundantly evident from what he discourses, on 1 Cor. 3. and from De purgat. l.
1. cap. 5. cap. 10. l. 2. cap. 10, 11, 12.
those testimonies of the Fathers, which he abuses to this purpose.

But for what end these punishments serve, is as considerable as Purgatory fire
it self; and they, Bellarmine tells us, are to expiate venial sins, or such
mortal sins, whose guilt is pardoned, but not the temporal punishment due to
them; For according to the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, there are some
venial sins, which in their Cap. 11.
own nature do not deserve eternal, but only temporal punishments: and as for
mortal sins, when the guilt of them is pardoned by the Sacrament of Penance, by
Confession, and the Absolution of the Priest, yet there remains a temporal
punishment to be undergone by the penitent, either in this World, or in
Purgatory. So that if Men die under any venial sins, or mortal sins, whose
guilt is remitted, which they have not made complete satisfaction for in this
World, they must bear the temporal punishments of these sins in Purgatory: and
therefore as very good Men, who have neither any venial, nor mortal sins, to
satisfy for, go directly to Heaven, when they die; and bad Men, who are under
the guilt of mortal sins, go directly to Hell: so those, who are indifferently
good, i. e. who have only venial sins, or the temporal punishment of mortal
sins to make satisfaction for; what is wanting of a complete satisfaction for
these sins, while they lived, must be made up in Purgatory.

For we must not think, that this fire of Purgatory is for the purging or
reforming sinners, that they may ascend more pure and refined into Heaven; but
only and merely to bear that Temporal punishment, which is due to sin. For Idem
l. 2. cap. 3, 4.
the Cardinal industriously proves, That the Souls in Purgatory can neither
merit nor sin; that they are perfect in Charity, and consequently in all other
Graces; and come no more perfect out of Purgatory, than they went in; but when
they have paid the uttermost Farthing, have undergone all that Temporal
punishment, which is due to their sins, then they shall be released, and
received into Heaven.

But because this is a very uncomfortable Doctrine, That Men must lie many
Hundred or Thousand Years in Purgatory, which differs from the torments of Hell
only in the continuance Ibid. c. 14.
of them, (for Purgatory is as hot as Hell, but one is Temporal, and the other
Eternal) which is a very terrible consideration, that we must be tormented for
many Hundred Years, though not for ever; therefore they tell us, that the Souls
in Purgatory may be relieved by the Prayers and Alms of the living, and by the
Sacrifice of the Mass; and principally by Indulgences, which Cap. 16.
the Pope dispenses and applies to particular Persons, out of the Treasury of
the Church, which consists of the Merits of supererogating Saints.

This short account I have given of the Doctrine of Purgatory; not that I
intend to spend time to confute it now; to show how groundless it is; how
injurious to the Goodness of God, and to the Merits of Christ; how contrary to
the Sense of the Primitive Church, and of most, if not all, Christian Churches
at this day, excepting the Church of Rome; but to let our People see, what kind
of proofs they must demand for Purgatory; which alone will be sufficient to
secure them from the attacques of their wittiest Adversaries. As to show this
particularly.

First, to prove a middle state between Death and Judgment, which is neither
Heaven nor Hell, does not prove a Popish Purgatory. Who ever is acquainted with
the Writings of the Fathers of the first four Ages, must confess, that this was
a received Opinion among them; that no Man, excepting Christ himself, was
received into Heaven till the day of Judgment. I shall not multiply Quotations
to this purpose, which the Learned know where to find. Irenaeus and Irenaeus l.
5. contr. haeres. c. 31. Tert. de anima, cap. 55.
Tertullian prove this from the example of Christ, to which we must be
conformed. For Christ himself did not ascend into Heaven till after his
Resurrection; but as his Body rested in the Grave, so his Soul went into the
place of Souls departed; and when he arose again, then he ascended into Heaven.
And thus we must do also. When we die, our Souls shall live in those places,
which God has prepared for separate Souls, and there they must remain till the
Resurrection; and when we have reassumed our Bodies, we shall be admitted into
the highest Heavens, whither Christ is ascended. This they affirm in opposition
to those Gnostick Heretics, who taught, that as soon as they died, they should
ascend above the Heavens to him whom they called the Father, which,
Supergrediuntur ordinem promotionis justorum, and modos (al. motus)
meditationis ad incorruptelam ignorant. Ir. ibid.
Irenaeus says, is to exceed the order of promoting just Men, as being ignorant
of the regular gradations and advances to Incorruption. And this he attributes
to their denial of the Resurrection of the Flesh; for it is no wonder, that
such Men should not know the order of the Resurrection, who deny the
Resurrection. From whence it is plain, that in Irenaeus Qui ergo universam
reprobant resurrectionem, and quantum in ipsis est, auferunt eam de medio, quid
mirum est, si nec ordinem resurrectionis sciunt. -- Ibid.
his Opinion, no Man who believed the Resurrection of the Flesh, could
reasonably think, that the Souls of good Men did ascend into Heaven till Soul
and Body was united at the Resurrection: since Christ himself did not ascend
into Heaven till after his Resurrection: though he grants that some did believe
so, who were Orthodox in the Article of the Resurrection, though herein they
agreed with Heretics. That this Quidam ex his, qui putantur rec^e credidisse
-- baereticos sensus in se habentes. Ibid.
was the Opinion of Justin Martyr, Lactantius, Hilary, S. Ambrose, S.
Chrysostom, and diverse others, is at large proved by the learned Mr. Dally, and
vindicated from the exceptions of Cardinal Bellarmine. Dall. de poenis and
satisf. l. 5.


But how this differs from a Popish Purgatory will appear in these three
particulars.

First, That they affirmed this of all separate Souls, That none were received
into Heaven before the Resurrection. Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, whatever
they were; they continue in the state of separate Souls, and have not their
full reward, and are not received into the highest Heavens, till the
Resurrection of their Bodies. This is the Lex Mortuorum, as Irenaeus calls it,
the Law of, the Dead; the ordo promotionis justorum, the order (...)
in which just Men shall be advanced. For as S. Chrysostom affirms, If the Body
do not rise, the Soul remains uncrowned, out of that state of blessedness,
which is in Heaven. Whereas the Popish Purgatory is not for all Souls, but only
for those, who have not made a perfect satisfaction for their sins in this
life; and therefore must endure the temporal punishments due to them in
Purgatory. Whereas the Souls of all Children, who die after Baptism, before the
commission of any actual sin, and the Souls of good Men, who have completed
their satisfaction in this life, according to the Doctrine of the Church of
Rome, ascend directly into Heaven: which is expressly denied by these Ancient
Fathers; and was taught by few in those days, but by such Heretics, as denied
the Resurrection of the Body.

Secondly, According to these Ancient Fathers, this separate state, wherein the
Souls of good Men continue till the Resurrection, is not a state of punishment,
as the Popish Purgatory is, but of Joy and Felicity. They were divided indeed
about the place, where the Souls of good Men lived till the Resurrection; some
placed it in secret receptacles within the Earth, and therefore called it the
Infernum, as Tertullian did; others thought it was above the Earth in some
Celestial Region, but below the highest Heavens; but they all agreed, that it
was not Heaven, and that it was not a state of punishment, but of rest and
happiness: and therefore they called it Locum divinae amoenitatis recipiendis
sanctorum spiritibus destinat^m. Tert. Apol. cap. 47.
Abraham's Bosom, and Paradise, which they distinguish from Heaven. Tertullian
calls it a place of Divine pleasantness, appointed for the Spirits of holy Mon.
The Author of the Questions and Answers to the Orthodox, in Justin Martyr,
expressly tells us, That when the Soul goes out of the Justin Martyr l. resp. ad
Orth. quaest. 75.
Body, there is a great difference made between the Righteous and the Wicked.
For they are carried by Angels to such places, as are proper for them. The
Souls of just Men into Paradise, where they have the conversation and sight of
Angels and Archangels, and the vision ((...)) of our Savior Christ; as it is
written, being absent from the body, we are present with the Lord. -- From
hence Bellarmine concludes, That by Paradise this Author understands Heaven,
because there we shall have the Vision of Christ, and therefore that Paradise
must signify that place, where Christ is present: Which is directly contrary
to the Doctrine of this Author, who makes Paradise only a receptacle of
separate souls, till the Resurrection. But though it be not Heaven, there is,
he says, a great communication between Heaven and Paradise; for they have the
frequent visits and conversation of Angels and Archangels, whom they see and
converse with, as they do with one another; but when he speaks of Christ, he
expressly makes a distinction between their sight of, and conversation with
Angels, and Christ; for this latter is only (...) by way of Vision, as we see
things, which are absent and at a distance; but yet this does so strongly
affect them, that he thinks, that of S. Paul may be applied to it, being absent
from the Body, we are present with the Lord. And certainly this is no Popish
Purgatory, but as they thought, the very next degree of happiness to Heaven it
self.

Thus S. Hilary expressly asserts, that the state of Souls departed is a state
of happiness; and Hilar. in Psalm. 2. and in Psalm. 120.
S. Ambrose tells us; that while the fullness of time comes, the Souls are in
expectation of such a Resurrection as they deserve: Punishment expects some,
and Glory others; and yet neither bad Souls Ergo dum expectatur plenitudo
temporis, expectant animae Resurrectionem debitam. Alias manet poena, alias
gloria. Et tamen nec illae interim sine in^^ia, nec istae sine fructu. Ambr. de
bono mortis cap. 10.
are in the mean time without punishment, nor the good without reaping some
fruits of their Virtue: But I need not multiply Quotations to prove that which
no modest Man, who is acquainted with the Doctrine of the Fathers, can deny.

Thirdly, Another difference is, That this is an unalterable State till the day
of Judgment, and therefore no Popish Purgatory, out of which, as the Church of
Rome pretends, Souls may be redeemed by the Prayers and Alms and Masses of the
Living, and ascend immediately into Heaven. This is evident from what I have
already said, that this State is to last till the Resurrection, according to
the sense of the ancient Fathers; as Tertullian expressly affirms, that Heaven
is open Nulli patet coelum terra adhuc salva, ne dixerim clausa, cum
transactione enim mundi reserabuntur regna coelorum. Tert. Apol. cap. 47.
Chrysostom. Hom. 29. in Matthew.
to none, while this Earth lasts; but the Kingdom of Heaven shall be opened
with the end of the World: And S. Chrysostom observes from the Parable of Dives
and Lazarus; that the Souls of Men after their depature out of these Bodies,
are carried to a certain place, from whence they cannot go out, when they will,
but there expect the terrible day of Judgment: Which plainly shows, what his
belief was, that they must continue in that State, which they enter upon at
Death, till the Resurrection: And this I think is sufficient to show the
difference between a Popish Purgatory, and that middle state between Death and
Judgment, which the ancient Fathers taught.

Secondly, Nor is it sufficient to prove a Popish Purgatory, that the Ancient
Fathers did believe, that all Men must pass through the Fire at the day of
Judgment. That those, who were perfectly good, should receive no hurt nor
damage by it; that those who had any remains of corruption about them, should
be detained a longer or shorter time in that last Fire, till they were purged
from their sins; and that bad Men should irrecoverably sink down into endless
burnings. This was a received opinion among the Ancient Fathers, that at the
day of Judgment all Men should be tried by Fire, which is so universally
acknowledged, that I need not prove it by particular Quotations. But yet there
is an irreconcilable difference between this opinion, and the Popish Doctrine
of Purgatory; as will appear in these particulars.

1. That the Popish Purgatory is now, and has been in being at least since the
time of our Savior; and that those, who deserve the fire of Purgatory, fall
into it, when they go out of these Bodies; whereas the Fire, which the Fathers
speak of, is not till the day of Judgment. This was the opinion of Lactantius,
Hilary, Ambrose, and S. Augustine himself: who expressly tells Aug. l. 16. de C.
D. c. 24.
us, that this Fire is at the end of the World, in fine seculi; and therefore
not the Popish Purgatory, which, as they would persuade us, is already kindled,
and has been for many hundred Years.

Indeed S. Augustine, though he owns that fiery trial at the last Judgment, as
the Fathers before him did; yet he has something peculiar in this matter, which
none of the Fathers before him ever taught; and therefore having no Authority
of Tradition, it must rest wholly upon his own Authority, who had no more
Authority to invent any new Doctrine in his Age, than we have in ours: There
are three or four places in S. Augustine, which do speak of some Purgatory
fires, which some Men must undergo between Death and Judgment, which looks most
like the Popish Purgatory of any thing in the Ancient Fathers; and I believe
was the first occasion of it; which may be the reason, why this Doctrine has so
much prevailed in the Latin Church, which was acquainted with S. Austin's
Writings; when it has been always rejected by the Greeks, as is evident from
the Council of Florence. But there are two things to be said to this:

First, That St. Austin speaks very doubtfully about it. That there may be such
punishments after this life (he says) is not incredible, and we may examine,
whether there be any such Tale aliquid etiam post hanc vitam fieri incredibile
non est, and utrum ita sit, quaeri potest; and aut inveniri, aut latere,
nonnullos fideles per ignem quendam Purgatorium, quanto magis minusve bona
pereuntia dilexerunt, tanto tardius, eitiusve, salvari. Aug. Enchirid. c. 69.
thing or not; and it may either be found, or may still continue a secret,
whether some Christians, according to the degree of their love and affection
for these perishing enjoyments, be not sooner or later saved by a certain
Purgatory fire; and in another place he says, he does not reprove this opinion,
for it may be, it is true: now redarguo, quia forsitan verum est. De C. D. l.
21. c. 25. And elsewhere he says, That though such speculations may serve for
his own, or other Men's, instruction, yet he does not attribute any Canonical
authority to them, and therefore he was very far from making it an Article of
Faith, as the Church of Rome has done. Cum iis quae descripsimus, ita nostra
vel aliorum exerceatur, vel erudiatur, infirmitas, ut tamen in eis nulla velut
canonica constituatur authoritas. Aug. de octo Quaest. Dulcilii Quaest. 3.


Secondly, And yet, though St. Austin speaks of a Purgatory fire after death,
and before the day of judgment, he seems by his whole discourse never to, have
thought of such a Purgatory, as the Church of Rome has invented. The occasion
of what he says to this purpose, is that noted place, 1 Cor. 3. 11, 12, 13, 14,
15. For other foundation can no man lay, than that is laid, which is Jesus
Christ. Now if any man build upon this foundation, gold, silver, precious
stones, wood, hay, stubble; Every Man's works shall be made manifest: for the
day shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire; and the fire shall
try every Man's work of what sort it is: if any Man's work abide, which he built
thereupon, he shall receive a reward. If any Man's work shall be burnt, he shall
suffer loss; but he himself shall be saved, but so as by fire. Some there were,
who from this place concluded; that those who held the foundation, who believed
in Christ, and continued in the unity of the Church, how wicked soever their
lives were, should at last be saved by fire: This St. Austin vehemently
opposed, though it is very like the Doctrine or Practice of the Church of Rome,
which sends all good Catholic sinners, how wicked soever their lives have
been, to Purgatory; especially if they have had time to confess, and receive
Absolution. They absolve all that confess, and no Man, who is absolved at the
hour of death can go to Hell; but how wicked soever he is, he shall at last be
saved by the fire of Purgatory. In opposition to this, St. Austin expounds wood
and hay, and stubble, which some Aug. Enchiridion ad Laurent. cap. 67, 68, 69.
build upon the foundation, not of such sins as the Scripture tells us, will
shut us out of the Kingdom of Heaven, such as St. Paul mentions, 1 Cor. 6. 9,
10. Neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, etc. shall enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven, but of such a great passion for the present enjoyments
of this World, though lawful and innocent in themselves, that we cannot lose
them without great trouble and anxiety of mind: for when such Men must suffer
the loss of all these things for Christ; if they hold the foundation, if they
prefer Christ before all other things, they will suffer the loss of all things
for him; but then that fondness they have for this World, will make the loss of
these things very afflicting; doler urit, such sorrow burns their Souls, and is
a kind of Purgatory fire to them in this World, which those good Men escape,
who sit loose from all present things, and therefore are not so much affected
with the loss of them; but those who love this World too passionately, if
notwithstanding they can bear the loss of all for Christ, shall be saved, but
so as by fire; shall smart for their loving this World too well in those
burning and Purgatory flames, which an inordinate love and grief will kindle in
their Souls.

This is what St. Austin understands by being saved by fire in this World, that
sorrow with which those are burnt, when they lose these things, who loved them
too much, while they had them; but this Purgatory is in this life, and St.
Austin questions, whether there may not be something like this, aliquid tale,
in the next World: that is, that after death Men who loved this World too well,
may be greatly afflicted for the loss of it; which is all the Purgatory fire
before the day of judgment, that St. Austin ever thought of; and he was the
first, that ever thought of this; and yet this is nothing at all to a Popish
Purgatory, as every body will grant. So that though St. Austin was doubtful,
whether there may not be some Purgatory punishments after death, for those who
were too fond of this life; that is, whether their leaving this World, and
going into such a different state, where they can enjoy nothing, they were fond
on here, will not greatly afflict and burn and torment their minds, either a
longer or shorter time according to the degree of their love to this World: yet
neither St. Austin, nor any of the Fathers thought, that there was any material
Purgatory fire (such as the Popish Purgatory is) till the end of the World.

Secondly, Another difference between that fire which the Fathers mention, and
the Popish Purgatory fire, respects the persons, who are to be tried in it. For
the Fathers taught, that at the day of judgment all Men, excepting Christ
himself, must pass through the fire: not St. Peter, nor St. Paul, nay not the
blessed Virgin herself excepted. This is expressly asserted by Lactantius,
Hilary, Ambrose, and many others. We must all be tried by Fire, whoever desires
to return into Paradise, ideo unusignem illum sentire non potuit, qui est
justitia Dei, Christus, quia peccatum Ambros. Sermon 20. in Psalm. 118.
non fecit. Christ only, who is the righteousness of God, and never committed
any sin, escapes that fire: but they believed, that all Mankind besides must
pass through it, that perfect good Men shall pass, unhurt and untouched; that
those who are imperfectly good must be purged by fire, and shall suffer by the
flames of it a longer or shorter time, as their purgation requires; and that
bad Men shall sink for ever into those bottomless Lakes of Fire and Brimstone.

But the Popish Purgatory is neither for very good, nor very bad Men. Bad Men
immediately go to Hell, and perfect Saints ascend directly into Heaven without
passing the fire of Purgatory; which therefore cannot be that fire, the Fathers
speak of, which the most perfect Saints must pass thorough into Heaven.

Thirdly, Another difference is, That the Popish Purgatory Fire is not for
purgation; but the Fire at the Day of Judgment, according to the ancient
Fathers, is. I observed before, that the Popish Purgatory is not to make Men
better, for the Souls in Purgatory are perfect in all Graces, and can neither
merit nor sin; All that they have to do in Purgatory is to make satisfaction
for that temporal punishment, which is due to their sins: their sins are
already pardoned, and their Souls are purged; they perfectly love God, and are
beloved by him; and yet unless they be relieved by the Prayers, and Alms, and
Masses of the living, they may lie several Ages, in Purgatory, bearing the
punishment of their sins, when they are both pardoned and cleansed from sin;
which may seem a little odd to those Men, who remember, that Christ has born
the punishment of our sins; and who know no other end of punishments, but
either to reform the sinner, or to take vengeance on their sins, which there is
no room for, when the sin is pardoned.

But now, though the ancient Fathers do deny, that there is any purgation of
sin between Death and Judgment; but that every Soul continues in the same
state, wherein Death found it, till the Day of Judgment; yet they make the Fire
at the Day of Judgment to be truly Purgatory; to purge us from all the remains
of Corruption, just as Gold is purged and refined in the Fire: and therefore
they tell us, that perfect Souls shall pass through the Fire unhurt; but if
there be any Lead mingled with our Gold, that must be burnt and dissolved
before we can pass through this Fire into Heaven: now though this be very
unintelligible also, how a material Fire can purge and refine a Soul, yet it
shows, how much this differs from the Popish Purgatory, which burns and
torments indeed, but does not purge and refine, and therefore is very
improperly called a Purgatory Fire.

Origin indeed, whom Cardinal Bellarmine, and others quote for this Purgatory
Fire, as they do also Plato and Virgil, did believe a Purgatory Fire in a true
and proper sense; for he believed all punishments, whether in this World, or in
the next, were only Purgatory; that is not merely for punishment, but for the
correction and amendment of those, who suffered. And therefore he did also
believe, that the very worst of Men, nay the Devils themselves, should at last
be purged and cleansed by Fire, and restored to a state of happiness. The sum
of his Opinion in short was this, That at the Day of Judgment, Christ will
destroy this World with Fire, as he is said, to come in flaming fire, taking
vengeance on them, that know not God. And this Fire, which shall burn the World
at the last Day, seems to be that Purgatory Fire, of which Origin, and some
other Fathers speak. Though I know some thought this Fire to be in the upper
Regions, so as to intercept our ascent into Heaven without passing through it.
This will try all Men; for all must pass through this Fire, as the Ancients
believed; and those, who had Hay or Stubble, or any combustible matter about
them, who had any remains of corruption to be purged away, must stay in it a
longer or shorter time, till they were thoroughly purged from their sins; this
as you have heard, was the general opinion of the Fathers, as well as of
Origin, and therefore Origen's Purgatory Fire is not the Popish Purgatory,
because that is not kindled till the Day of Judgment. But then Origin thought,
that this purgation extended to the worst of Men, and to Devils themselves;
that though they might lie many Ages in this Fire, before they are perfectly
purged, yet they should be purged at last, and restored to the favor and
enjoyment of God. For which he was generally condemned by the Ancient
Christians, and principally by the Fifth general Council. And yet there were
other Fathers, who were in some degree tainted with this opinion. For there are
plain marks of it in Gregory Nyssen, if his works were not corrupted by the
Origenists, as some suspect; and in S. Hierome himself. For though some would
not allow of the final Salvation of Devils, yet they believed this of all
Mankind, though never so wicked; others thought this must be confined to all
Christians; others to all those Christians, who were not guilty of Heresy or
Schism, how wicked soever they were otherwise. These opinions are rejected and
condemned by the Romanists, as well as by us, and therefore they ought not to
allege such Authorities as these, which are nothing to their purpose. For that
there will be such a fire at the day of Judgment, does not prove, that there is
one already kindled; and a Purgatory fire, which cleanses and purges our sins,
does not prove, that there is such a Purgatory Fire, as is only to punish
those, whose sins are already pardoned and cleansed.

Fourthly, There is another considerable difference between this Popish
Purgatory, and the fire at the day of Judgment; that there is no redemption out
of this by the Prayers, and Alms, and Masses of the living; which is the most
considerable thing in the Popish Purgatory; and that for which I fear the
Church of Rome does principally value it. For this sets a good price upon
Indulgences, gives great Authority to their Priests, inriches their
Monasteries, and is the great support of the Roman Hierarchy. But as the
Fathers say not one word about this, so the account I have already given of
their opinions, is a demonstration, that they could not think of any such
thing; because this fire is not till the day of Judgment, and then I suppose,
when we all come to be judged, you will grant it is too late to offer Prayers,
and Alms, and Masses, for the Redemption of our selves or others from these
Purgatory flames. The Fathers thought, that we must all undergo this purgation
by fire, which would be longer or shorter, as we had more or fewer sins to be
purged away, and therefore here can be no place, for the suffrages and
intercessions of the living. According to the Popish Doctrine, those Souls, who
are redeemed out of Purgatory, must be redeemed before the day of Judgment, and
those who are not redeemed before, are on course redeemed then, for the Roman
Purgatory must end at the day of Judgment; though the Purgatory fire the
Fathers speak of, does but begin then.

Thirdly, This gives occasion to another observation: That the ancient practice
of Praying for Souls departed, does not prove that there is a Popish Purgatory,
or that those ancient Christians did believe that there was. That this was a
very ancient practice I readily grant, as all Men must do, who know any thing
of these matters, and yet from what I have discoursed it is evident, that they
never dreamt of such a Purgatory, as the Church of Rome has now made an Article
of Faith of, and therefore they could have no regard to the Redemption of Souls
out of Purgatory in their Prayers for the dead, because they did not know of
any such place.

But to what original then shall we attribute this custom of praying for the
Dead? Truly, that is hard to say; there is not the least footsteps of it in the
Canonical Scripture, neither of the Old nor New Testament, as Tertullian and
others acknowledge; and when it first came into the Church we cannot tell: that
tender concern Men have for the memory of their dead Friends, which the
Heathens themselves showed in their Oblations and Sacrifices, and funeral Rites
for the Dead, seem to have given occasion to it; and those who were converted
from Paganism to Christianity, might still believe, that the Dead challenged
some part of our care and regard, which at first was tempered with a due
respect to the Laws of Christianity, but soon increased into greater excesses,
as it is the Nature of all Superstitions to do. Prayers for the Dead seem at
first to be used only at their Funerals, in time grew Anniversary, and were
celebrated by their own Friends and Relations, not with Propitiatory
Sacrifices, but with some offerings for the relief of the Poor; and thus by
degrees it crept into the service of the Church; and at the Celebration of the
Eucharist, the Bishop or Priest made mention of the names of Martyrs and
Confessors, and Bishops, and those who had deserved well of the Church, and
particular Christians in their private Devotions, remembered their own Relations
and Friends; and thus it became a Custom, without inquiring into the reasons of
it; till from this very custom, people began to conclude, that such Prayers,
and Commemorations were very profitable to the Dead; and that those, who had
not lived so well as they should do, might obtain the pardon of their sins by
the Prayers, and Intercessions of the living: Which I confess was a very
natural thought, and shows us the easy progress of Superstition; that customs
taken up without any good reason, will find some reason, though a very bad one,
when they grow popular. Upon this Aerius condemns the practice, and is reckoned
among Heretics for it: Though he only desired to know, for what reason the
names of dead Men are recited in the Celebration of the Eucharist, and prayers
made for them; whether by this means, those, who died in sin might obtain the
pardon of their sins; which he thought, if it were true, would make it
unnecessary for Men to live virtuously, if they had good pious Friends, who
would pray for them, when they are dead: Epiphanius undertakes to confute
Aerius; and we may easily perceive by him, that they were not so well agreed
about the reason of it, as they were in the practice: Had he understood the
Popish Doctrine of Purgatory, how easy had it been to answer it; that the
reason of it was, that those, who had died in a state of Pardon, but had not
made complete satisfaction for the Temporal punishment due to their sins, were
to undergo this punishment in Purgatory; and that they might be relieved and
delivered from Purgatory by the Prayers and Alms of their living Friends. This
answer no doubt Epiphanius would have given had he known it, but he says not
one word of this matter, which is a strong presumption, that he knew nothing of
it; and gives such other answers, as are no answer to Aerius.

Aerius demanded, what benefit the dead received by the prayers of the living,
whether they would obtain for them the pardon of their sins or not; to this
Epiphanius says not one word, but gives such reasons for it, as respect the
living not the dead. As that it signifies our belief, that those who are dead
to this World, do still live in another State, are alive to God: That it
signifies our good hopes of the happy state of those, who are gone hence, and
to make a distinction between Christ, and all other good Men: For we pray for
all but him, who interceeds for us all. Very worthy reasons of praying for the
dead! but however, what is all this to a Popish Purgatory? The two first
reasons do utterly overthrow it, which signify, what good hopes we have of the
happy and blessed state of our deceased Friends, not that they are tormented in
Purgatory, but that they rest in the Lord: And so does the third, which
declares, that they prayed for all but Christ himself. For Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and the blessed Virgin her self; for so the Church
did, till praying for these Saints and Martyrs, was turned into Prayers and
Supplications to them; and yet I suppose, no Man will say, that they prayed for
these Glorious Saints, to pray them out of Purgatory; when the Church of Rome
her self will grant, that they were never in it.

There were some opinions in the ancient Church, which if they were not the
first original of this custom of praying for the Dead, yet were made use of by
the Fathers to explain the meaning and use of it. Thus as I have showed you,
the Fathers believed, that the souls of good Men after Death did not
immediately ascend into Heaven, but were detained till the Resurection of their
Bodies, in a place of Rest and Happiness, which they called Abraham's Bosom, or
Paradise: Now their Happiness not being complete, they thought it very fit to
recommend them unto God in their Prayers, and beg God to remember them, which
supposes, that they were not in the immediate presence of God; for it would be
absurd to beg God to remember them, who constantly attend his Throne and
Presence: And therefore they pray not for souls, who are tormented in
Purgatory, but qui dormiunt in somno pacis, who sleep in peace, qui
requieverunt in fide, who dying Cyrilli Hierosol. liturgia.
in the true Faith, are gone to Rest; qui dormierunt and quieverunt in fide,
who, sleep and rest in the Faith, as we find in the ancient Liturgies: And yet
they pray, that God would give them rest, Sir. orationes. Bibl. patrum. T. 6.
by the water of rest in the bosom of Abraham with Isaac and Jacob, that he
would nourish them in a pleasant place by the waters of rest: that is, That he
would continue and increase this intermediate state of Rest and Happiness to
them. For they did not think it improper to pray for what they knew, the souls
departed already enjoyed; no more than we do in this State, to pray for such
blessings, as we already have.

Another opinion among them, was concerning the Millennium or thousand Years
Reign with Christ on Earth, which was to be before their admission into Heaven,
in the new Jerusalem, which comes down from Heaven. Now during these thousand
Years they thought, that all just Men should rise again, but some sooner, and
others later according to their different merits. Some at the beginning of the
thousand Years, others two or three hundred Years after, others nearer the
conclusion of them, according to their different merits and deserts; as
Tertullian particularly explains it. And as the Learned Mr. Dally Tertull.
contra Marcion. c. 24. Dall. de poenis and satisf. l. 5. c. 9. Tert. de monog.
c. 10.
observes, several passages in their Prayers do plainly refer to this: As when
Tertullian directs a Widow to pray for her Husband, primae Resurrectionis
consortium, a part in the first Resurrection. And S. Ambrose prays for Gratian
and Valentinian, Te quaeso, sum Deus, ut carissimos Ambr. de obitu Val.
suvenes matura Resurrectione suscites, and resuscites: That God would raise
those beloved young Men with an early Resurrection. The like may be seen in the
Gothic Missal, and elsewhere; and this I think has nothing to do with the
Popish Bibl. Patr. T. 6.
Purgatory.

Another opinion they had regard to in their prayers for the dead was the fire
of the day of Judgment, which they believed all Men must pass thorough, before
they could enter into Heaven, and continue a longer or shorter time in it, as
they had more or fewer sins to purge away: And therefore this last and terrible
Judgment being yet to come, they prayed, that God would forgive their sins; and
be merciful to them, and deliver them in the day of Judgment, of which there
are some remains still in the Roman Offices for the Dead.

Thus according to Men's different opinions, they had different intentions in
their prayers for the dead, which is a sign, as I observed before, that though
they were agreed in the practice, the original reasons of this practice were
not known, but Men guessed at them, as they could, and altered their reasons,
as they changed their opinions.

Hence it is, that S. Austin and S. Chrysostom, though they never dreamt of a
Popish Purgatotory, yet speak very differently of these matters from those, who
went before them. For in their days they began to call upon the Saints, and to
beg their help, and then S. Austin thought it very improper to pray for those,
whose help they themselves expected: According to that known saying of his,
That he is injurious to a Martyr, who prays for him. Hence he makes three
distinctions of souls departed, which the Church never heard of before. From
whence I doubt not, but the Church of Rome learnt their distinctions, and
accordingly allotted three different States for these three sorts of Men,
Heaven, Purgatory, and Hell. For S. Austin taught, that some were so perfectly
good, that there was no need of Prayers or Oblations for them; others
imperfectly good; and for these, prayers were profitable; others very bad, who
cannot be redeemed by the suffrages of the living. The first of these the
Church of Rome place in Heaven, the second in Purgatory, the third in Hell; and
let us first see, whether S. Austin were of that mind; for if he were not, they
cannot prove a Purgatory from him, whatever becomes of his prayers for the dead.

Now it is evident, that Saint Austin was of the same mind with those Fathers,
who went before him, concerning the state of souls departed; viz, that none
were received into Heaven till the Resurrection; as he expressly affirms of all
souls, that during the time between death, and the last Resurrection, they are
kept in hidden receptacles. Enchirid. ad Laurent.
He divides the Church into two parts, that which is still on Earth, or that
which after death rests in the secret receptacles and seats of souls. Which he
calls Abraham's Bosom, and De civit. Dei l. 12. c. 9.
teaches, that all departed souls, either rejoice in Abraham's Bosom, or are
tormented in eternal Fire: And that by Abraham's Bosom he does not mean Heaven,
is evident from what he elsewhere says; that though after this life we shall
not go to that place, where the Saints shall be, when it shall be said to them,
Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the Kingdom prepared for you from the
foundations of the world, (which he represents as the common belief of all
Christians, for he says, quis nescit? Who knows not this?) yet we may be there,
where Dives saw Lazarus at rest, viz. in Abraham's Bosom; in illa requie certe
securus, expectabis judicii diem, Idem, Tract, 10. in Ep. Joan.
in that rest you will securely expect the day of Judgment.

So that though S. Austin thought, that some souls were so good and perfect,
that there was no need to pray for them, yet he did not think, that the most
perfect souls ascended immediately into Heaven, as the Church of Rome now
teaches; but were happy and at rest in Paradise or Abraham's Bosom till the
Resurrection.

Nor did he think, that those for whom he says our prayers are available, those
who are imperfectly good, did after this life go into Purgatory, there to bear
the punishment of their sins. For what S. Austin thought of Purgatory, you have
already heard, which has nothing like a Popish Purgatory in it. He prayed for
his Mother Monica, that God would forgive her all her sins, and show mercy to
her; did he believe then, that his Mother was in Purgatory? by no means; for he
expressly says, and credo, jam feceris quod to rogo, sed voluntaria oris mei
approba domine. I believe, thou have already done, what I now pray for, but
accept O Lord the free will offerings of my mouth. He believed his Mother was
in a state of rest; but hoped, that God would accept his pious affection for
his Mother, and that she was not yet so perfect, but she might receive some
benefit by it. To be sure the Church of Rome can never reconcile this prayer
with their Doctrine; for they teach, that sins are not pardoned in Purgatory,
but those, who are pardoned before they die, suffer the temporal punishment of
their sins in Purgatory; whereas S. Austin does not Pray, that his Mother may
be delivered from the pains of Purgatory, but that God would forgive her sins.

The truth is, S. Austin was at a great loss between vindicating the ancient
practice of the Church in Praying for Souls departed, and giving a reasonable
and justifiable account of it: the Church did pray for Souls departed, and
therefore there must be some reason given of it; or else these Prayers are vain
and hypocritical, if they serve no good end. And yet in his days they began to
think, and he himself was of that mind, that there were a great many Saints and
Martyrs, who did not want their Prayers; who were fitter to be Intercessors
themselves for those on Earth, than to receive any benefit from their
Intercessions: and yet the Church prayed for all; for the most perfect Saints,
for the Apostles and Martyrs, and the blessed Virgin her self. This he knew not
how to reconcile, but by saying, That when the Church prayed for Saints and
Martyrs, Prophets and Apostles, the meaning of her Prayers was not to intercede
with God for them, but to praise God for their Graces and Virtues; but when she
prayed for meaner Christians, her Prayers were Intercessions for Pardon and
Rest to their Souls; and yet they were all prayed for in the same form of
words, and the ancient Church made no such distinction between them: and thus
he reconciles the matter by expounding the same words to two different and
contrary senses, as they are applied to different subjects, which has taught
the Church of Rome, when occasion serves, to soften her Prayers, by expounding
them contrary to the plain and natural signification of the words: that the
most direct and formal Prayers to Saints and the Virgin for all Temporal and
Spiritual Blessings, when they please, shall signify no more than a bare Ora
pro nobis, Pray for us.

About this time S. Chrysostom also, in the Greek Church, defended this
practice of Praying for the Dead; and yet the Doctrine of Purgatory never was
received in the Greek Church, as appears from the Council of Florence; which is
a plain sign, That though the Roman Doctors think they have proved Purgatory,
if they can but prove, that the ancient Church used to Pray for the Dead,
(which no Body denies) yet the Greek Church did not, and does not to this day,
think this a good consequence; for they Pray for the Dead, but deny a Popish
Purgatory. Which shows, that though they prayed for the Dead, they did it for
other reasons, than the Church of Rome now does.

And yet S. Chrysostom does not agree with S. Austin in that distinction he
makes of Souls departed, which shows that there was no certain tradition about
this matter, but Men of Wit and Learning framed different Hypotheses and
Schemes of things to themselves, as they thought, they could best give an
account of this practice: For this was the thing both S. Austin and S.
Chrysostom were intent on, to justify the practice of the Church, so that
their Prayers for the Dead might not be thought vain and hypocritical.

But whereas S. Austin distinguishes Souls departed into three orders; those,
who are so perfectly good, that they need not our Prayers; others, less
perfect, to whom our Prayers are beneficial; and a third sort so wicked that
their estate is irrecoverable, and so past the relief of our Prayers; S.
Chrysostom mentions but two sorts, sincere good Christians; Chrysostom. Sermon. 3. in
Philip. ed. Savil. Tom 4. p. 20. and in Hebr. Ser. 4. p. 453.
and Infidels, and such as die without Baptism, and bad Christians, whom he
places in the same rank. As for the first, he expressly tells us, that after
Death they are in a state of Rest and Happiness, and upon this very account
condemns those extravagant expressions of sorrow at their Funerals; and
therefore he never thought of a Popish Purgatory; for I think we have great
reason to lament those, who are in Purgatory, a place of torment, though not
Hell. As for others, he thinks, Chrysostom. Homil. 21 in Act. T. 4. p. 734.
they deserve our Sorrow and Compassion, and Prayers and Alms, not that this
can deliver them out of the state of the damned, but that he thought it gave
some little ease and relief to their torments. And this was not only the sense
of S. Chrysostom, that the damned themselves were eased by the Prayers of the
living, but S. Austin seems to be of the same mind, when he says, that the
suffrages of the living are profitable, either ut Aug. Enchirid. ad Laurent.
plena fiat remissio, aut tolerabilior sit ipsa damnatio; to obtain perfect
forgiveness, or to make damnation it self more tolerable. And I think what
Basil of Seleucia relates concerning Thecla, That by her Prayers she obtained
the Soul of Falconilla, who died a Pagan, signifies, that he believed something
more than this; that the Prayers of the living may not only ease the torments
of the damned, but deliver them out of Hell it self.

Now this the Church of Rome believes no more than we do. They reject all the
reasons for which the Ancients prayed for the Dead, and have invented some new
reasons, which the ancient Fathers never thought of, viz. to Pray Men out of
Purgatory: and therefore though they still Pray for the Dead, and we do not;
yet they no more Pray for the Dead, in the sense of the ancient Church, than we
do: however, I think, from hence it appears, that they cannot prove a Popish
Purgatory from the practice of the ancient Church in Praying for the Dead;
which is all I intended to prove at this time.

XI. Desiring the Intercessions of the blessed, is more superstitious, and
derogatory to our Lord's Mediatorship, than entreating the Prayers of holy Men
Militant.
This I answered, Was as plain in Scripture, as that Christ is our only
Mediator in Heaven, who alone (like the high Priest under the Law, who was
Answer to Request, p. 10, 11.
his Type) is admitted into the Holy of Holies, to make expiation, and to
interceed for us. -- The sum of what we teach about this matter is this: That
we must worship none but God, and therefore must not Pray to Saints and Angels,
as our Savior teaches; Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall
thou serve. That there is but one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ
Jesus; and therefore we must not make more Mediators to our selves, nor put our
trust in the Intercession of Saints and Angels. Thus far we have plain
Scripture proof; and then we think common sense teaches us the rest: That it is
an injury to an Only Mediator to set up other Mediators with him. That good Men
on Earth are not Mediators, but Supplicants, which is no encroachment on
Christ's Mediatorship; and that Saints in Heaven according to the Church of
Rome, Pray as Mediators and Intercessors, who appear in the presence of God for
us; and this is not reconcilable with Christ's Only Mediatorship in Heaven.

To this our Author answers, Page 7. It is not at all in Scripture, that our
Savior is our only Mediator of Intercession; therefore this proposition is not
plain there. If such an only Mediatorship of Intercession be plain in
Scripture, it had been easy and kind to have named such a plain Scripture. Yet
none is brought, unless the Answerer meant, Thou shall worship the Lord thy
God, etc. for such a one. Truly I see not how he can deduce from it any thing
to his purpose, till it appear, that all Prayer is Divine Worship, or that we
Pray to Saints just as we do to God. This is all his answer, and I think, I
might trust every ordinary Reader with it without any reply; but I must be
civil to our Author; and therefore will try, if I can make him understand this
matter.

The Reader will easily see, That that Text, Thou shall worship the Lord thy
God, and what he has concealed in an, etc. as if he were afraid to let his own
People, who possibly may read his Book, know what follows, and him only shall
thou serve, was never intended to prove, that Christ is our only Mediator of
Intercession. The proof I insist on, is in 1 Timothy, 2. 5. There is one God,
and one mediator between God and men, the Man Christ Jesus. But says our
Author, this does not prove, that there is but one Mediator of Intercession.
But why does it not prove this? Is a Mediator of Intercession a Mediator? if he
be, and there be but one Mediator, then there is but one Mediator of
Intercession; for there is but one Mediator in all. As for his distinction
between a Mediator of Redemption and Intercession, there is no such distinction
to be found in Scripture; and therefore when S. Paul asserts without any
distinction, that there is but one Mediator, I think we have reason to do so
too; for if we admit of unscriptural distinctions, I know no Article of our
Faith, but what may be distinguished away.

When the Apostle says, There is but one God, why may not a Heathen distinguish
upon this; That it is very true, there is but one Supreme and Sovereign God,
though there are many inferior Deities; as well as a Papist say, That there is
but one Mediator indeed of Redemption, but there may be many Mediators of
Intercession? For both here, and in 1 Cor. 8. 5. The Apostle makes Christ the
one Mediator, just as God is the one God, and that sure signifies the only God,
and the only Mediator. For though there be, that are called Gods, whether in
Heaven, or in Earth, (as there be Gods many, and Lords many) but to us there is
but one God the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him. Where, as one God is
opposed to the multitude of Heathen Gods, so one Lord, or one Mediator (as
Baalim and Lords signified, those mediating powers between the Gods and Men) is
opposed to the many Lords and Mediators among the Heathens.

Indeed as there is no foundation in Scripture for this distinction between a
Mediator of Redemption and Intercession, so there is no sense in it; for the
office of a Mediator, considered as a Mediator, consists wholly in
Intercession; whence his authority and interest to intercede arises, is of
another consideration: and therefore S. John distinguishes between Christ's
being an Advocate for us, and a Propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2. 1, 2. if
any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous.
And he is the Propitiation for our sins. Christ is our only Redeemer, who has
bought us with his own Blood; but to be our Redeemer, and to be our Mediator
and Advocate are two things: by the Constitution and Appointment of God both
these are united in one person; that he who is our only Redemer, is our only
Advocate also; but yet to redeem with his Blood, and to intercede with his
Father for us, differ as the death of the Sacrifice does from the intercession
of the Priest. To Redeem and make Atonement for our sins by shedding his Blood
upon the Cross, is not his Intercession for us; and to intercede for us in
Heaven is not to redeem us by shedding his Blood, though he intercedes in
virtue of his Blood. So that though Christ be our Redeemer, yet considered as
our Mediator, and Advocate, his mediation consists wholly in his Intercession
for us: And therefore to say, that there is one Mediator, and one Intercessor
is the very same thing. Suppose then the Apostle had said, there is one God,
and one Intercessor between God and Men, the man Christ Jesus; would this have
proved, that there are no Mediators of Intercession but only Christ? Or would
they still say, that there is an Intercessor of Redemption, and Intercessors of
Intercession, and yet that there is but one Intercessor?

But besides this, this very distinction between a Mediator of Redemption, and
a Mediator of pure Intercession, that is, such a Mediator as mediates in virtue
of his Blood and Sacrifice, and a Mediator, who intercedes only by prayers, and
personal interest and Merits, is contrary to the Analogy both of the Old and
New Testament. For as there is no Remission or Expiation, so there is no
mediation without Blood. For to mediate and intercede is not merely to pray for
another, but it signifies a Ministerial authority to apply the virtues and
merits of a Sacrifice.

Thus it was under the Law of Moses: The High Priest was the Mediator, or as
the Apostle speaks, every High Priest taken from among men, is ordained for men
in things pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts and Sacrifices for
sins. Heb. 5, 1. Thus he mediates by offering Gifts and Sacrifices, by making
Atonement and Expiation of sin. And no Man has authority to do this, but by
God's Appointment. No man takes this honor to himself, but he that is called
of God, as was Aaron, v. 4. Since there is no remission of sins without
shedding Blood, without the Atonement and Expiation of Sacrifice; there can be
no mediation but in virtue of the Sacrifice; and therefore there can be no
Mediator, but he who offers the Sacrifice, which confines mediation to the
Sacerdotal Office. And therefore if we have but one High Priest, there can be
but one Mediator also between God and Man.

But that we may rightly apprehend this matter, and be able to distinguish
between the prayers of good Men for themselves and for each other, and the
intercessions of a Mediator; we must distinctly consider the virtue of the
Sacrifice, the prayers of the people, and the Intercession of the Priest, all
which must concur to an effectual Prayer, to obtain our requests, and desires
of God. Thus it was in the Mosaical Law. The Sacrifice was slain instead of the
sinner, and to bear the punishment of sin, and without shedding of blood there
was no remission. Prayers could not expiate sin without a Sacrifice; and
therefore even in the time of the Patriarchs an Altar, which is for Sacrifice,
was the place of their Devotions. Thus Noah, as Genes. 8. 20.
soon as he came out of the Ark built an Altar, and offered Sacrifice to God.
Thus we frequently read, how Abraham in his Travels wherever he made any stay,
built an Altar unto the Lord, and called upon the name of the Lord; that is,
Genes. 12 7, 8. Chapter 26. 25. 35.
he offered Sacrifices and Prayers to God. The like we read of Isaac and Jacob:
So that an Altar was the place of their solemn Devotions; that is, they offered
up their prayers to God in virtue of a Sacrifice. For sinners must not go
directly to God without the Atonement and Expiation of a Sacrifice.

Hence under the Law, while the Priest offered the Sacrifice, the people
offered up their prayers to God to ascend together with the Sacrifice; and
therefore those, who lived in places remote from Jerusalem, which was the only
place of Sacrifices; or those who could not attend the daily Sacrifices in the
Temple, yet were to observe the time of offering their Sacrifices, for the time
of their Prayers: Whence it is that the time of offering the Sacrifice is
called also, the hour of Prayer. Act. 3. 1.


Thus the people were to offer a Sacrifice for sin, and to offer up their
prayers in virtue of the Sacrifice; but then neither their prayers nor their
Sacrifice were acceptable to God, unless they were offered by the Priest: who
sprinkled the blood of the Sacrifice upon the Altar to make Atonement; and
offered Incense as an emblem of their prayers: To which the Psalmist alludes.
Let my prayer be set before thee as Incense; Psalm. 141. 1.
and the lifting up of my hands, as the evening Sacrifice. And therefore the
Evangelist observes, that the whole multitude of the people were praying Luke
1. 10.
without at the time of Incense: that their prayers might ascend as Incense.

Thus we expressly read in the Book of the Revelations, of An Angel, who stood
at the Altar, having a golden Censer, and there was given unto him much
incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all Saints upon the golden
Altar, which was before the Throne; and the smoke of the Incense, which Revel.
8. 3, 4.
came with the prayers of the Saints, ascended before God out of the Angels
hand.

Which expressly applys these legal Types to the state of the Gospel, that great
Sacrifice and great High Priest, who presents our prayers to God. The death of
Christ upon the Cross was the Sacrifice for all our sins; in virtue of this
Sacrifice we pray to God; but Christ our great High Priest, is now ascended
into Heaven to present himself before his Father, to offer his own blood, and
in virtue of that, to offer our prayers to him. This is the work of a Mediator
and High Priest, not so much to pray for us, as to offer up our prayers to God,
in the virtue and efficacy of his own Sacrifice, and with the authority of a
heavenly Mediator and High Priest.

Now this plainly shows the difference between the prayers of good Men for
themselves and one another, and the Intercession of a Mediator. Good men are
humble supplicants, but they offer up their prayers to God, not in their own
name, but by the hands of their great High Priest, and in the merits of his
Sacrifice; which is subordinate to the mediation of Christ, and as consistent
with it, as the prayers of the people under the Law were with the Atonement and
Expiation made by the Priest, who offered the Blood of the Sacrifice, and the
Incense to God. The work of a Mediator is to present our Prayers and Petitions,
and to give value and efficacy to them, and therefore we must pray our selves,
we must put up our Petitions to God, or our Advocate and Mediator cannot
present them; but is it injurious to the Office of an Advocate, that we draw up
a Petition, which he is to present to our King? So that the prayers of good Men
for each other is no encroachment upon the Office of a Mediator; for our
prayers for others, as well as for our selves must be offered to God by the
hands of our Mediator.

And this shows also, that to desire the prayers of good Men on Earth is no
derogation from the Intercession of Christ: for we only desire them to join
with us in our Petition; just as if we should procure some persons of worth and
note to subscribe our Petition to our Prince, which is no injury to our
Advocate, who presents it. For they are two different things, to subscribe a
Petition, and to present it to our Prince.

And besides this, a prayer, though it be the prayer of the best Man in the
World, is but a prayer still, and may be answered or rejected, as God sees fit;
but whatever prayer is presented by our Mediator is always granted: For he
mediates with authority, and power: he is able Hebr. 7. 25.
to save to the uttermost all those, that come unto God by him, seeing he ever
lives to make intercession for them. Under the Law, the atonement and
expiation of the Priest was always valid to all the intents and purposes of the
Law, that is, to an external and legal purity; much more is the mediation of
Christ effectual; for if it ever miscarried, he could not be the object of our
Faith and hope. A supplicant may heartily desire our good; but our Mediator, by
virtue of his office obtains all the petitions and prayers he presents, and
every body sees, that these two are very consistent.

But though to desire the prayers of good Men for us on Earth do not derogate
from the Intercession of Christ; yet to fly to the aid of Saints in Heaven
does. For that makes them our Advocates and Intercessors, not our fellow
Supplicants, whereas there is but one Mediator in Heaven, who appears in the
presence of God for us; as under the Law only the High Priest could enter into
the Holy of Holies, which was a Type of Heaven, and did prefigure that great
See Answer to Papists protesting against Protestant Popery.
High Priest, who was to ascend into Heaven with his own Blood.

I am sure the Church of Rome does not look upon the Saints in Heaven to be our
fellow supplicants, as good Men on Earth are, but to be our Advocates and
Intercessors, and then they are Intercessors in Heaven, where none but the High
Priest was to intercede, and they are Intercessors without a Sacrifice, which
is contrary to the Analogy both of the Old and New Testament. For we have no
more Intercessors, than Priests; and we have but one High Priest, who is
ascended into Heaven, and appears in the presence of God for us. And if
intercession be annexed to the Priesthood, I desire to know, how the Virgin
Mary comes to be so powerful a Mediatrix, and Advocatress; for we never heard
of any she-High Priest before.

This is answer enough to what he intimates, that desiring the Intercessions of
the blessed is not more superstitious and derogatory to our Lord's
Mediatorship, than entreating the Prayers of holy Men Militant; For to pray for
one another in this World is as consistent with the mediation of Christ, as to
pray for our selves; but the Intercessions of Saints for us in Heaven is
inconsistent with the only Mediatorship of Christ.

But praying to Saints in Heaven, which he modestly calls Desiring the
Intercessions of the blessed, is of a different consideration, and more
injurious to God, than to a Mediator, considered only as our Mediator. For
prayer is an act of worship peculiar and appropriate to God, and therefore not
due to our Mediator himself, if he were not God. We must pray to God in the
name of our Mediator, and present our Petitions to God by him, but if our
Mediator were not God, we must not pray to him; and thus they are injurious to
our only Mediator, when they pray to God in any other name, and expect to be
heard for the sake and merits of any other Mediator, but only Christ, as they
always do on the Festivals of their Saints: but to pray to Saints also is an
additional crime; it is giving the peculiar worship of God to creatures; which
I told him was expressly forbid by our Savior, Thou shall worship the Lord thy
God, and him See the Object of Religious worship, Part 1. and the Answer to
Papists Protesting against Protestant Popery, Sect. 4.
only shall thou serve. But (says our Author) I see not, how he can deduce from
it (this last Text) any thing to his purpose, till it appear, that all Prayer
is Divine worship, or that we pray to Saints just as we do to God. But now
methinks, till he make the contrary appear, it is very much to the purpose. For
prayer is appropriated to God in Scripture, and all Mankind have thought prayer
an act of religious worship, and have been able to distinguish between a
religious prayer, and begging an Alms, or making any request to our earthly
Prince, or Parents, or Friends; and if our Author does not understand this, I
have directed him in the Margin, where he may be better informed.

XII. Honoring the Cross, the Relics and Representations of our Lord and his
Saints, with that degree of Reverence, as we do the Gospels, (commonly kissed
and sworn by) Altar, and other sacred Utensils is, Idolatry.
This I told him was ill represented; for those who charge them with Idolatry
in worshipping the Cross, and Relics, and Images, charge them also with
giving more religious Honors and Worship to them, than that external respect,
which we allow to the Gospels, and religious Utensils, as both the Decrees of
their Councils, and the visible practice of their Church proves.

To this our Author replies. Our general Councils tell Protestants we pay no
other honor to any Protestancy destitute of Scripture-Proofs, p. 8.
creature, than what? than such an external respect as is due to the Bible? I
never heard before, that they made the Bible the object of their worship, but I
am sure some, which they call general Councils, have defined the Worship of
Images and Relics, witness the second Council of Nice, and the Council of
Trent. It is strange to me, that at this time of day, he can think to impose
upon Protestants with such shams. Surely he has never read the Doctrines and
Practices of the Church of Rome truly represented, the Answer to Monsieur de
Meaux, or to Papists Protesting against Protestant Popery, nor the Vindication
of the Catechism truly representing the Doctrines and Practices of the Church
of Rome in answer to the first and second Sheets, of the second Part, of the
Papist Misrepresented and Represented. Is our Author then one of those, who are
employed some times to do a little job at Writing, but are not permitted to
read any of our Books, but what and when their Superiors please? This gives an
account of that Mystery how they can so confidently urge such things, as all
the World now laughs at, for poor Men, they know no better; and what some so
uncharitably call impudence, is only ignorance.

He proceeds. Their Test and Homily call the honor we pay to sacred persons
and things, Idolatry. We must either then challenge Protestants, to prove this
proposition, or conclude them calumniators. We know, what we profess and
practice to be as the Catholic Church teaches, we hear our Doctrine and
Practice confidently said, and solemnly subscribed to be Idolatry. Sure then we
may conclude, that Protestants believe the proposition, and decent it is, that
they give a reason of a Faith so injurious to the Catholic Church, or
henceforward renounce it.

This still makes good my conjecture, that he has only heard in general of such
a charge as this, but never read the Arguments, whereby some Protestants make
good this charge, at least as they apprehend: for methinks had he known these
proofs, he should first have answered them before he had called for more; but I
assure him, it will be an easier task to conclude them Calumniators, than to
undertake to answer them, and therefore if he be wise let him stick to that; if
they believe and practice, as the Church of Rome teaches, (which in defiance of
common sense, he will call the Catholic Church) I am sure they give another
kind of honor to the Cross, and Relics and Images, than to the Bible; but if
he thinks, that the Catholic Church always taught what the Church of Rome now
teaches, I would desire him to read a late Discourse entitled; The Antiquity
of the Protestant Religion concerning Images, which will better inform him.

But since he calls so importunately for proofs, it may be thought very uncivil
to deny him; and therefore I shall briefly represent to him the reasons, why
some Protestants have charged the Church of Rome with Idolatry in worshipping
the Cross, and Images, and shall be very glad for the sake of the Church of
Rome to see them well answered.

They lay their charge in the second Commandment, which forbids the worship of
Images, and all representative objects, and say that the words are so large as
to comprehend all manner of Images, which are set up for worship, that the Law
expressly forbids, without any distinction of the end and intention of doing it,
all external acts of adoration, as bowing down to them or before them: that it
does not merely forbid the worship of Images as Gods; for the Heathens
themselves were never so senseless as to believe that their Images of Wood or
Stone, or Silver or Gold, were Gods, but only visible representations of their
invisible Deities. That it does not only forbid the worship of the Images of
Heathen Gods, but of the Lord Jehovah; for the reason whereby Moses enforces
this commandment is, that they saw no similitude on the day, that the Lord
spoke to them in Horeb out of the midst of the fire, Deuteronomy. 4. 15. and therefore
they must take good heed unto themselves, lest they corrupt themselves with
Images: that they saw no Image of God is a good argument against their making
and worshipping the Image of the true God, but it is no direct argument against
the Images of Heathen Gods; and therefore this must be a prohibition of
worshipping the true God by Images.

Another Scripture argument against Image Worship is from the infinite
perfections and excellency of the Divine Nature, that no Image can be made of
God, but what must be a reproach and debasement of his Majesty. To whom then
will ye liken God, or what likeness will ye compare to him, etc. Isaiah 40. 18,
etc. and this surely is an argument against making and worshipping any Image of
the true God.

They consider farther that Aaron's Calf was not an Image of a false God, but a
Symbolical representation of the Lord Jehovah; For they expressly call it, the
God, which brought them out of the Land of Egypt, and when Aaron himself
appointed a Feast for the Worship of this Molten God, He said, to^morrow is a
Feast to the Lord, or to Jehovah, Exodus 32. 4, 5. and therefore these
Israelites are charged, with changing their glory, (i. e. the Lord Jehovah, who
was the Glory of Israel) into the similitude of an ox, which eats grass,
Psalm. 106. 20. But how can this be true, if they did not intend this Calf as a
Representation of the Lord Jehovah. And it is evident, that they made this Calf
only as a Divine presence to go before them in the absence of Moses; For while
Moses delayed to come down out of the mount, the people gathered themselves
together unto Aaron, and said unto him, Up, make us gods, which shall go before
us: for as for this Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt,
we know not what is become of him, Verse 1. So that they did not think of
changing their God, but only wanted a Visible and Symbolical presence of God
with them, instead of Moses; who, when he was with them, was a kind of Divine
presence; God conversing familiarly with him, and by him giving them directions
and orders what to do: and yet the worship of this Calf, which was not
worshipped as a God, or the Image of a false God, but as a Symbolical
Representation of the Lord Jehovah, was Idolatry.

The like may be said of the Calves at Dan and Bethel, which Jeroboam set up in
imitation of the golden Calf, and for Symbolical representations of the God of
Israel. For so he himself tells them, Behold thy Gods, O Israel, which brought
thee up out of the land of Egypt; that is, the Lord Jehovah, whom Jeroboam did
still own and Worship. For he had no intention to change their God, but only to
prevent their going up to Jerusalem three times 1 Kings 12. 28.
in the Year to Worship there, according to the Law; which he feared might
prove the destruction of his new Kingdom. And therefore God himself makes a
great difference between the sin of Jeroboam and the sin of Ahab, who
introduced 1 Kings 16, 31. 32.
the worship of Baal, a false God. And therefore though Iehu still preserved
the golden Calves, which Jeroboam set up, yet he calls his Zeal in destroying
Baal, his Zeal for the Lord Jehovah. 2 Kings 10. 16.
Which is another Scripture-example of Idolatry in worshipping the Image or
Representation of the True God.

Another instance is the Brazen Serpent, which Moses set up in the Wilderness,
which was neither a God, nor the Image of any God, neither of the Lord Jehovah,
nor of any Heathen God; and was not at first set up to be worshipped, but only
to be looked on by those, who were stung with fiery Serpents; and was preserved
as a kind of holy Relic, as a lasting memorial of that deliverance God
wrought for them by it. But when the Children of Israel burnt Incense to it,
though they could intend to Worship no other God in it, but the Lord Jehovah,
who gave it that miraculous Power, and could Worship it only as a memorative
Sign of God's mighty Power, yet Hezekiah destroyed it, with the other
Instruments of Idolatry, 2 Kings 18. 4. And yet I think I could make a much
better Apology for the Worship of the Brazen Serpent, than of the Cross. For
that was a Type of Christ crucified, a Type of God's own appointment, a
miraculous and wonder-working Type, which I should think should as much deserve
to be worshipped, as the Picture or Image of the Tree whereon our Savior died.
For if a memorative Sign of Christ deserve such Divine Honors, let them give
me a reason, if they can, why the Type of a cruoified Savior ought not as much
to be worshipped by the Jews in those days, as the Figure of Christ's Cross now.

Thus the Protestants argue against the worship of Images from the Second
Commandment, and from the Reasons and Authorities of the Old Testament, and as
for the New Testament, they can find no alteration made in this Law there: we
are commanded indeed to keep our selves from Idols, but the Gospel has given us
no new notion of Idolatry, and therefore they reasonably conclude, that what
was Idolatry under the Old Testament, is so under the New. And indeed they look
upon the Second Commandment as a natural or moral Law, and such Laws Christ
neither did, nor could alter, no more than he could alter the Eternal Reasons
of things. For the Prohibition of Image Worship is founded in the Invisibility,
Purity, Spirituality, and immense Glory and Perfections of the Divine Nature,
which cannot be represented by matter; and these Reasons are as unchangeable as
God is, and the Law must be as unchangeable as the Reasons of it. And therefore
we find these very Reasons urged by St. Paul in the times of the Gospel;
Forasmuch as we are the Offspring of God, we ought not to think, that the
Godhead is like unto Gold, or Silver, or Stone graven by Art, or man's device,
Acts 17. 29. Not as if the Heathens fancied, that their Gods were like the
Images they worshipped; for this is not only denied by their Philosophers, but
Maximus Tyrius Dissert. 38.
the very Nature of the thing shows it; for they worshipped such kind of
Images, as it was impossible for them to conceive should be the likeness of any
God; not only the Images of Men, but unpolished Stones, and Trees, Birds, and
Beasts, and creeping things; which they did not take to be Gods, nor the proper
likenesses of their Gods, but symbolical Representations of them; but the
Apostles Argument is this, That it is a ridiculous thing to make any Image of
God, when we cannot make any thing like him, as foolish a thing as it would be
to paint a Sound; and that it is an affront to so glorious a Being, to
represent him by that which is so very unlike him, and so infinitely unworthy
of his Majesty and Greatness. And though this Argument from the Invisibility
and Spirituality of the Divine Nature does not conclude against making the
Images of Christ and his Apostles, who had the shape and figure of men, which
might be painted or carved, no more than it did against many Images of Heathen
Gods; most of whom were no better than dead Men and Women, yet it holds against
the worship of any Image; for God alone, who is a pure and infinite Spirit, is
the sole Object of our religious Worship; and to worship God by an Image, is to
reproach his Nature, and to debase him as low as matter; and to worship that
which can be painted, is to worship a false Object; for Christ as God, and so
only he is the Object of our Worship, cannot be painted; and to worship any
material Image, though it be not made for the Supreme God, is yet a Reproach to
the Divine Nature, as it signifies that something which is divine, and a fit
Object of our Adorations, may be represented by material Images and Pictures.

But the Protestants consider farther, that if the Worship of Images was forbid
by the Law of Moses, it must needs be much more contrary to the Gospel of our
Savior, which has less to do with Matter and Sense, than the Law had. Our
Savior tells us, That God is a Spirit, and those who worship him, must worship
him in Spirit and in Truth, in opposition to the external, and typical, and
figurative Worship of the Law; and if this typical Worship which was allowed
when the Worship of Images was forbid, be now abrogated as less pure and
spiritual, they think it very strange, that the Worship of Images, which is the
most gross and material, and unmanly Worship that can be invented, shall be
allowed under the spiritual state of the Gospel.

And there is one Argument to this purpose, which I would desire our Author
seriously to consider, viz. That there is no material Temple in the Christian
Church, much less Statues and Images; for the understanding of which, we must
consider what notions the Heathens had of their Temples, what notion the Jews
had of it, and that there is no such Temple in the Christian Church.

As for the Heathens, their Temples were the Houses of their Gods, where they
dwelt, and were confined, and shut up by some Magical Spells and Charms, as the
Images of their Gods were fastened there, that they might be always present to
attend the Sacrifices and Worship of their Votaries: For they did not believe
that their Gods were omnipresent, and therefore they confined their presence to
Temples and Images, that they might know where to find them. Their Temples were
the places where they kept the Statues and Images of their Gods, to whom such
Temples were dedicated, and where they believed such Gods dwelt: according to
that of Menander; -- (...)
(...).
That a just and righteous God must tarry at home to defend those who placed
him there. This Origin gives an account of in his third and seventh Book
against Celsus, and the thing is so known, that I need not prove it, a Temple
and an Image in the Heathen Theology were inseparably united; an Image to
represent their God, a Temple as a House for him to dwell in, and where they
might be sure to find him.

Under the Jewish Law God so far condescended to the weakness of that People,
as to a have visible Presence among them; first in the Tabernacle, and then in
the Temple at Jerusalem; but though he had his Temple, yet he had no Image,
which the Heathen World thought essential to a Temple. For though a symbolical
Presence was no confinement of God, nor injurious to his Majesty, yet a
material Image was: And yet Solomon in his Prayer of Dedication, took care to
prevent the Heathen notion of a Temple, as if Cod were confined to it; for he
owns his Omnipresence, that he fills both Heaven and Earth; only he prays, that
he would have a more particular regard to that place, and to those Prayers
which should be offered up there; 1 Kings 8. 27, 28, etc. But will God indeed
dwell on the earth? Behold the Heaven, and Heaven of Heavens cannot contain
thee, how much less this house that I have builded? Yet have thou respect unto
the Prayer of thy Servant, and to his Supplication, O Lord, my God, to hearken
unto the cry, and to the Prayer which thy Servant prays before thee this day:
That thine eyes may be open to this House night and day, etc.

And therefore we may observe, that the Temple was so contrived as to be a
figure of the whole world. For the Holy of Holies was a figure of Heaven into
which the High Priest entered once a year, Heb. 9. 24. and therefore the rest
of the Temple signified this earth, and the daily worship, and Service of it;
which plainly signified to them, that that God who dwelt in the Temple, was not
confined to that material Building, but filled Heaven and Earth with his
Presence, though he was pleased to have a more peculiar regard to that place,
and to the Prayers and Sacrifices which were offered there. And yet it seems
that God would not so far have indulged them at that time, as to confine his
Worship and peculiar Presence to a certain place, had it not been for the sake
of some more Divine Mystery. For Gods Symbolical and Figurative Presence in the
Tabernacle and Temple was only a Type of the Incarnation of the Son of God, of
his dwelling among us in a humane Body or material Temple, as St. John plainly
intimates 1 John 14. The word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld
his Glory, the Glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of Grace and
Truth; (...), he Tabernacled among us; dwelt among us as God under the Law did
in the Tabernacle or Temple; and Christ expressly calls his Body the Temple 2.
John 19. Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up, which the
Evangelist tells us, he spoke of the Temple of his Body, 21. v. and he affirms
himself to be greater than the Temple 12. Matthew. 6. he being that in Truth of
which the Temple was a Figure; God dwelling among us, God dwelling in human
Nature. For this Reason the Worship of God was confined to the Temple at
Jerusalem, to signify to us that we can offer up no acceptable Worship to God,
but in the Name and Mediation of Christ.

But now under the Gospel all these Types and Figures being accomplished in the
Person of our Savior; as their Priesthood and Sacrifices, so their Temple also
had an end; as Christ expressly tells the Woman of Samaria, who disputed with
him about the place of Worship, whether it were the Temple at Jerusalem or
Samaria; Woman believe me, the hour comes when ye shall neither in this
Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem Worship the Father, John 4. 21. which cannot
signify that they should Worship God neither at Jerusalem nor Samaria, for
there were famous Churches planted by the Apostles at both these places, where
they Worshipped God in Spirit and in Truth; but it signifies that there should
be no material Temple, that the Presence of God should not be confined to a
certain place, as then it was to the Temple; which occasioned that Dispute
between the Jews and Samaritanes, in which Temple God was perculiarly present;
but wheresoever they Worshipped God in Spirit and in Truth, the place should
make no difference in their Acceptance, as it did under the Law; which is not
opposed to the erecting of decent and separate places of Worship under the
Gospel, but only to the Notion of a Temple.

That this was the sense of the Primitive Christians, that they had no material
Temples, as the Heathens had, is evident from their Writings; for the Heathens
made this objection against them, that they had no Temples nor Images; which is
owned and answered by Origin against Celsus lib. 8. Minutius Faelix, Arnobius,
Lactantius:

The force then of the Argument is this, If under the Gospel God does not allow
of so much as a Temple or Symbolical Presence, which he did allow of under the
Law, when he forbad Images, much less certainly does he allow Images now, which
he forbad under the Law. But Protestants have another Argument to prove, that
the Worship of Images is forbid by the Gospel as well as by the Law; and that
is, that the Primitive Church always understood it so, as is evident from the
Writings of the Ancient Fathers, who condemned the Worship of Images, and urged
such Arguments against it in their Disputes with the Heathens, as had easily
been retorted upon themselves had they practiced the same thing; and yet this
was never objected against them by their wittiest Adversaries in that Age,
though when Image Worship began to be introduced into the Church, it was
presently objected against the Christians both by Jews and Heathens; and which
is more than this, besides all the other Arguments which they used, they
alleged the Second Commandment as the Reason, why they could not Worship
Images, which is a certain Proof, that they then thought the Second Commandment
was still in force. But I shall not enlarge upon this, because it is so well
done in a late Discourse concerning the Antiquity of the Protestant Religion,
Part 2. concerning Images to which I refer my Reader.

13. The Pope is Antichrist.

I answered, This has been affirmed by some Protestants, but is no Article of
our Church, and therefore Answer to Request. p. 12.
we are not bound to prove it, but when we have a mind to it. No Man ever
pretended that there is any such Proposition in Scripture, as that the Pope is
Antichrist, but some think, that the Characters of Antichrist and the Man of
Sin, are much more applicable to him than the Universal Headship and
Infalibility.

To this our Author answers (p. 8.) Do only some Protestants, and no Homily
(subscribed as containing a Godly and wholesome Doctrine, necessary for these
times, Article the Fifty fifth) though the Church of England owns but Thirty
nine Articles; affirm the Pope to be Antichrist? Yet we meet with no Scripture
brought to prove this Godly necessary Doctrine.

Now though I could tell him, that every saying in an Homily has not the
Authority of an Article, yet I need not enter into that Dispute; for I am
pretty confident it is no where expressly asserted in any of our Homilies, that
the Pope is Antichrist. The most that looks that way, is in the Second Part of
the Homily for Whitsunday; where from their opposition to some Gospel Doctrine,
and preferring their own Decrees before the express Word of God, it is proved,
that, they are not of Christ, nor yet possessed with his Spirit. From their
Pride and Arrogance in challenging an Universal Headship, and advancing
themselves above Sovereign Princes, or in the Scripture Phrase, above all that
is called God, and treating Emperors and Kings with the greatest insolence and
scorn: Our Church concludes, that they had not the Spirit of God, but the
Spirit of the Devil; that wheresoever ye find the Spirit of Arrogance and
Pride, the Spirit of Envy, Hatred, Contention, Cruelty, Murder, Extortion,
Witchcraft, Necromancy, etc. assure your selves, that there is the Spirit of
the Devil and not of God; albeit they pretend outwardly to the World never so
much Holiness, that such wicked Popes as these are worthily accounted among the
number of false Prophets and false Christ's; so that at most the Homily does but
reckon these Popes in the number of false Christ's, but does not make the Pope
the Antichrist. It concludes with a Prayer, That God by the comfortable Gospel
of his Son would beat down Sin, Death, the Pope, the Devil, and all the Kingdom
of Antichrist; where I confess the Pope is put in very ill Company, and a fair
intimation given that he may have some relation to the Kingdom of Antichrist,
but yet he is not expressly called Antichrist.

And therefore as for his demand of Scripture Proof, let him seek for it in
those Writers who expressly affirm the Pope to be Antichrist; where it may be he
will find more than he will like, or can easily answer. I told him before that
the Scripture does not expressly name who is Antichrist, or the Man of Sin, but
gives such Characters of him, as some think the Pope of Rome has the best claim
to: It is enough for us to know, that he usurps such an Authority as Christ
never gave him, preaches such Doctrines as Christ never taught, encourages such
Actions as are contrary to the true Spirit of the Gospel; and that is reason
enough for us to reject him.

14. Every Prayer used in Divine Offices, must be in a Language vulgar and
intelligible to every Auditor. For the Proof of this I alleged St. Paul's
Discourse, 1. Cor. 14. and must now consider what Prot. dest. p. 9.
he tell us is the Apostles mind in it, viz. that whoever had the gift of a
Tongue strange to all the Auditory, should forbear to dictate therein Extempore
Sermons, Prayers, etc. containing matter, as well as the Tongue inspired into
the Speaker: I say this gift (of no use, but used for ostentation in such a
case) was to be reserved till either the Speaker or some Auditor could and did
interpret, that the rest might edify. Now will it follow from hence, that all
the settled Forms of Divine Offices (to many of which there is no necessity,
that all specially join and intend) be in the vulgar, or intelligible to every
Auditor? It is enough (to comply with the Apostles Doctrine) that all new
Extempore Prayers, and Instructive or Exhortatory Discourse (by Actions,
Ceremonies, or Circumstances, or other way not interpretable) be, as they are,
in the Vulgar. But for the fixed Forms of Divine Offices, that they be in a
Language the most certain and the most intelligible, not only in Christendom,
but in every Auditory. Intelligible I say, where needful, to every one by
either Actions, Ceremonies, and Circumstances, or by Custom, Affinity with the
Vulgar, or Books intepreting and containing Prayers correspondent to every
part, wherein the Auditory is concerned.

I have Transcribed the whole, because it is as choice a Paragraph as we shall
ordinarily meet with. The only difficulty I see in it, is to know at which end
to begin to answer, for if I understand him, the beginning and conclusion of
this Paragraph do not well agree. In the beginning he would confine the
Apostles Discourse against Prayers in an unknown Tongue, to inspired and
extempore Prayers and Sermons, but that notwithstanding this, the settled Forms
of Divine Offices may be in an unknown Tongue; in the conclusion he would fain
insinuate, that though the Public Offices of the Church of Rome be in Latin,
which is not the Vulgar Tongue now in any Nation, yet they are in a Language
the most certain and the most intelligible, not only in Christendom but in
every Auditory. It seems he had some little Qualm came over his Conscience,
some secret Convictions that Men ought to understand their Prayers; and
therefore he roundly asserts, that Latin is the most intelligible Language,
that is, the most known and best understood of any Language in Christendom, and
to every Auditory. Now if this be so, what need all this Dispute about Service
in an unknown Tongue? what need of distinguishing between extempore Prayers,
and settled Forms of Divine Offices? we are all it seems agreed, that Public
Prayers ought to be in an intelligible Language, and that which is intelligible
to every Auditor; the only difference is whether Latin be as well understood in
all the Auditories in England, as English is.

Well, but this is a very great Riddle, and requires some skill to make it out;
for our English Auditories believe themselves that they do not understand
Latin, but they may be mistaken for ought any body knows; let us than see how
our Author makes it out, Intelligible, I say, where needful, to every one by
either Actions, Ceremonies, and Circumstances, or by Custom, Affinity with the
Vulgar, or Books interpreting, and containing Prayers correspondent to every
part, wherein the Auditory is concerned; that is, as we use to say, you must
know their meaning by their gaping; and thus forsooth, Latin is a very
intelligible Language to those who do not understand one word of it. What
shuffling and trifling is this! do the People understand Latin Prayers, or do
they not? if they don't, then the Service is performed in an unknown Tongue to
them, which St. Paul expressly condemns; and whatever they understand about the
Business, yet they do not understand their Prayers; which is the Dispute
between us: If these dumb Signs can teach People their Prayers, then it is
lawful for them, it seems, to know their Prayers, and then why may they not
pray in a Language which they understand? for Words are more expressive of
Thoughts, than Actions, and Ceremonies, and Circumstances can be, which can
only tell in general what we are about, not what we say; and as for Books to
interpret our Prayers, what need we go so far about? Why may we not pray in the
Vulgar Tongue as well as interpret Prayers in a Vulgar Tongue? And what shall
those do who have no Books and cannot read? This is direct Boys play, to make
an offer of giving something, but to pull back your hand if any one offers to
take it.

Let us then consider, how he can adjust this Matter with St. Paul; and the sum
of what he says is this, that St. Paul only forbids Inspired and Extempore
Prayers in an unknown Tongue, where there is no body to interpret, but the
settled Forms of Divine Offices may be in an unknown Tongue for all that. This
is certainly as little as can be said, and as little to the purpose; for
whoever considers the place, will find that all the Apostles Arguments are
against an unknown Tongue, for this very Reason, because it is unknown and not
understood; and then if we must not use an unknown Tongue in Religious Worship,
we must not use an unknown Tongue in our settled and ordinary Devotions. There
are three Arguments the Apostle uses, which I think, will reach our ordinary
Devotions, as well as inspired Gifts. 1. That it is contrary to the Edification
of the Church. 2. That it contradicts the natural use of speaking. 3. That it
is contrary to the nature and end of Prayer.

1. It is contrary to the Edification of the Church. Now, Brethren, if I come
unto you, speaking with 1 Cor. 14. 6.
Tongues, what shall I profit you, except I shall speak to you either by
Revelation, or by Knowledge, or by Prophesying, or by Doctrine? That is, unless
I speak something to you, which you can understand, and 19.
which may inform your Judgment; as he adds, In the Church I had rather speak
five words with my Understanding, that by my voice I might teach others also,
than ten thousand words in an unknown Tongue. Now if these extraordinary Gifts
of the Spirit were to be valued and used only for the Edification of the
Church, and to speak to the Instruction of others, is to be preferred before
speaking in an unknown Tongue by Inspiration; then certainly the ordinary
Service and Worship of God, which is instituted on purpose for the Edification
of the Church, must be in a known Tongue, when the extraordinary Gifts of the
Spirit themselves must give place to Edification. For if the Apostle would have
made any exception, methinks he should have excepted these extraordinary Gifts:
For one would think, whenever the holy Spirit inspires men, they ought to speak
whatever Language it be in: for it seems strange, that any man should forbid
these to speak, whom the Spirit inspires; and yet we see the Exercise of these
Gifts were restrained to make them serviceable to the Church, and not to be for
mere Pomp and Ostentation. But for men, who have no pretense to any such
Inspiration, to affect to speak in an unknown Tongue that they may not be
understood, is to deprive the Church of the Edification of Religious Offices,
without any pretense for doing so.

2. To speak in an unknown Tongue, contradicts the natural end and use of
Speech. For even things without life giving sounds, whether Pipe or Harp,
except Verse. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
they give a distinction in the sounds, how shall it be known what is piped or
harped? For if the Trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself
to the Battle? So likewise you, except ye utter by the Tongue words easy to be
understood, how shall it be known what is spoken, for ye shall speak into the
Air? There are, it may be, so many kinds of Voices in the World, and none of
them without signification: therefore if I know not the meaning of the Voice, I
shall be unto him that speaks a Barbarian, and he that speaks shall be a
Barbarian unto me. Is this Argument only against inspired Tongues, or against
the use of all unknown Tongues, among Persons who do not understand them? For
this relates to the use of Speech in common Conversation, as well as in the
Offices of Religion; and if Speech was given us to communicate our Thoughts to
each other; if it be so vain, and absurd, and useless a thing to talk to men in
a Tongue which they do not understand, it is much more absurd in Religion,
which does more straightly oblige us to mutual Edification. For the use of words
even in Prayer, is not for the sake of God, but men. God knows our thoughts,
and therefore a mental Prayer is as acceptable to him without vocal words; but
the use of words is either to affect our selves, and then they must be such
words as we our selves understand; or to direct others in the matter and form
of their Prayers, and then they must be such words as they understand; or to
unite the Affections and Desires of the whole Congregation at the same time in
the same Petitions, which is essential to public Worship; and then they must
be such words as we all understand; but to speak words which no body
understands, is to speak to no purpose, which is absurd in common Conversation,
but profane in Religion.

3ly. Another Argument St. Paul uses against an unknown Tongue, is, That it is
contrary to the nature of Prayer and religious Worship, which must be a
reasonable Service, and therefore requires the exercise of the Understanding,
as well as Affections. For if I pray in an unknown Tongue, my Spirit Verse. 14,
15, 16.
prays, but my understanding is unfruitful. What is it then, I will pray with
the spirit, and will pray with the Understanding also; I will sing with the
Spirit, and I will sing with the Understanding also. Else when thou shall bless
with the Spirit, how shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned (that
is, every ordinary Christian, who has not this gift of Tongues, or of
interpreting Tongues; for there were no Clarks in those days to say Amen for
the whole Congregation) say Amen at thy giving of thanks, seeing he
understands not what thou say? And if the Exercise of supernatural Gifts
themselves, which the Apostle seems here to call praying by the Spirit, be not
an acceptable Worship to God, without the acts of our Reason and Understanding,
certainly an unknown Tongue is much more unjustifyable in our ordinary
Devotions. If the whole Congregation must say Amen to those Prayers which are
offered to God, and it be a ludicrous thing to say Amen to what we do not
understand, then whether the Prayers be inspired, or composed, it is necessary
that the whole Congregation should understand them.

But our Author (though very timerously) insinuates an Answer or two to this
one Reason, why he thinks the settled Forms of Divine Offices are tacitly
excepted by the Apostle, and need not be performed in the vulgar, and
intelligible to every Auditor, comes in in a Parenthesis, and indeed was as fit
for a Parenthesis as any thing could be; for he will presently see, that it
might have been spared. To many of which (Divine Offices) there is no necessity
that all specially join and intend: By which I suppose he means, that there are
several Offices in the Church of Rome, which People are not bound to attend to,
nor join in, and therefore there is no need they should understand them.

1. Now in the first place, I desire to know why there should be any such
Divine Offices in public Worship, which the People are not bound to join in?
Methinks the Apostle's Argument against speaking in an unknown Tongue, because
it is contrary to Edification, holds as well, and for the same Reason, against
such Offices as these, which certainly are not much for Edification, when
People are not bound to join in them; unless every thing in public Worship
must be done for Edification, and therefore must be understood by the People
who are to be edified by it, the Apostles Argument against these inspired
Tongues is not good; for if our Author had been present when St. Paul wrote
this, he could have easily answered him, that there was no need that the whole
Congregation should understand these inspired Men; but let those understand who
could, and if no body understood it, what hurt did it do? Nay, the Exercise of
such extraordinary Gifts did edify those who saw and heard, though they did
not understand; and when the Spirit inspires men to speak in unknown Tongues,
we have reason to think, that the Spirit did not intend that every one should
understand them; and that is reason to believe, that the exercise of such Gifts
was very fitting, though they were not understood. Let our Author try now how
he can justify St. Paul's Argument against unknown, though inspired Tongues,
upon the Principle which he has laid down, That the People are not bound to
join in all the Offices of public Worship; That any thing may be done in
public Worship, which is not for public Edification: or let him try if he can
say half so much for such settled Forms of Divine Offices, as People are not
bound to join in, and therefore not bound to understand, as may be pleaded for
the occasional Exercise of miraculous and inspired Gifts in an unknown Tongue:
and if he cannot, then this Answer he gives about such Offices as People are not
bound to join in, is a better Answer to St. Paul, than it is to Protestants, a
much better Vindication of the Exercise of such unknown Tongues, than of the
use of Latin Service where Latin is an unknown Tongue.

For, secondly, I would ask our Author, whether there be any Offices of
Religion, which People are bound to attend to, and to join in? His saying, That
there are many, which they are not bound to attend to, supposes, that there are
some, which they are bound to attend to, and to join in; and his making this an
Argument for Service in an unknown Tongue, that there are many Offices, which
they are not bound to attend to, and therefore not to understand; (for there
must be the force of his Argument, if it have any) supposes, that they must
understand what they must attend to, and join in: how then does this justify
the Latin Service of the Church of Rome? For their whole Service is in Latin,
an unknown Tongue; and therefore according to his Reason, the People are not
bound to attend to, or join in any part of their Worship, because they
understand none of it. And is not that a pretty kind of public Worship, which
no body is bound to attend to, or join in? not the Priest himself, when he does
not understand Latin, which, as they say, too often happens in Catholic
Countries.

3ly. Since our Author says, That there are only many, not all Divine Offices,
which the People are not bound to join in, he would have done well to have
given us some mark of distinction, that we might have known what Offices People
must join in, and what not. For I cannot for my life think of any Act of
public Christian Worship, which all Christians are not bound to join in. I
should think it very convenient, that all Christians should attend to, and join
in the holy Sacraments when they are administered; for if they must not bear
their parts there (which must be their own Act, or it signifies nothing, it
being a making and renewing a solemn Vow and Covenant with God) to be sure they
can be concerned in nothing else: And therefore the Offices of Baptism and the
Lords Supper, ought to be administered in the vulgar Tongue, that every Body may
understand them.

Thus, if men are bound to pray to God, and to praise him, surely they are
bound to join in public Prayers and Praises; and then according to this Rule,
the public Prayers and Hymns of the Church ought to be in the vulgar Tongue.
And I cannot imagine a Reason why the People ought not to attend to reading the
Lessons, the Epistles, and Gospels; for I know no other use of reading them,
but that the People might hear, and understand them, and be edified by them;
and then they also should be in the vulgar Tongue. In short, there is nothing
is an Office of Religion, but what the People are concerned in, and therefore
must attend to it, and join in it, unless it be not their Duty to attend to,
and join in the Worship of God: And therefore our Author by insinuating this
Principle, That People must understand what they are bound to attend to, and
join in, (which is so agreeable to common sense, that he could not resist it)
has effectually overthrown and condemned the Latin Service, unless he can
prove, that People are not concerned to join in the Worship of God; and then I
desire to know why they must be present at it?

4. But suppose, as he says, that there were no necessity that all should
specially join, and attend to all religious Offices, yet were it not better,
that they should? Were it not more for the Edification of the Church, and of
every particular Christian, that they should understand their Prayers, and all
join in the same Petitions, with the same devout Affections, than that they
should only gaze upon the Priest, and be not Worshippers, but mere Spectators
of religious Worship? Now if it be better to understand our Prayers, than not
to understand them, to offer up a reasonable, than unreasonable Service to God;
if it be better to worship God, than merely to see him worshipped; then how can
he justify Service in an unknown Tongue? For when the Apostle disputes against
speaking with unknown Tongues, the Argument whereon he founds the unlawfulness
of it, is, That it is against Edification; and this Argument must hold against
Latin Service, unless Ignorance edifies more than Knowledge; which I believe
at this time of day our Author will not care to say.

Secondly, His next Answer is what I before took notice of; That the People do
understand their Prayers, though they be in Latin. The meaning of which, is no
more but this; That by frequent attendance at Mass, and observing the Actions
and Ceremonies used by the Priest, some of them understand whereabout the
Priest is, and what he is a doing: they know, when they hear the Bell, and see
the Elevation of the Host, that they must fall down and worship, etc. but do
not understand one word that is said. But this is only to understand the
Actions and Ceremonies, not the words; and cannot answer the end of public
Prayer, which is to offer up our common Petitions to God with one Heart and
Mind. The use of words in public Prayer, is to direct and determine our
Thoughts, and to excite our Affections; for this Reason the Priest reads the
Prayers with an audible Voice, that all the People may join with him, and these
indeed are Public and Common Prayers; but now in the Church of Rome the Priest
reads the Prayers, but the People do not join with him, because they do not
understand him; but the most they can do is by Actions and Ceremonies, to guess
at what part of the Service he is, and either only look on, or if they be very
Devout, entertain themselves with some good Pious Thoughts, or put up some
private Prayers to God, or it may be to the Virgin Mary, or some Saint, while
the Priest is saying Mass; and thus the Priest prays by himself, and the
People, if they do pray, pray by themselves, and have no other Benefit of the
Public Offices of the Church, but only to see what the Priest does, which at
best can only fill them with some Religious Amusements, or with confused, and
indistinct, and Enthusiastic Devotions. It is plain, that in the Church of
Rome, the Devotions of the People are left to their own Extempore Conceits,
which is a thousand times worse than the Extempore Prayers of the Preachers,
who may be Men of Parts and Learning, and able to suggest very Proper
Petitions, and very Pious Thoughts, and to excite very Devout Passions in their
Hearers; and is it not very odd that the Church should have settled Forms of
Divine Offices, Composed Forms of Prayer and Praise, and yet the People, who
will pray, must be left to their Extempore Devotions; is this also for the
Edification of the Church? Is not this Fanaticism with a Witness.

To conclude this Argument, I know no practice in the World more directly
contrary to the sense of all Mankind than Prayers in an unknown Tongue. There
was no Nation, nor no Religion in the World ever professedly guilty of it, but
the Church of Rome; and there can be no Reason imaginable why they should
conceal their Worship, unless they are ashamed of it, or suspect that no
disinterested Man can like it when he knows it; and it is as odd a Task to
prove that Men must understand their Prayers, as it would be to prove that the
use of Speech is to be understood.

15. A Company of Christians voluntarily separating from all other Christian
Societies, condemning their Doctrines and Rites, destitute also of any visible
correspondence with them in the Eucharist, in any Religious Assemblies or
Solemn Devotions; can, notwithstanding this perverse, entire, and manifest
Separation be a Mystical Member of Christ in Catholic Unity, and a Charitable
part of the Catholic Church.

In answer to this I told him, that if he applies Answer to Request. p. 13.
this to us, it is manifestly false; for though we do not Communicate with the
Church of Rome in her corrupt Worship, yet there are many Christian Churches
with which we can and do Communicate; and separate our selves no farther from
any Society of Christians, than they separate themselves from the Primitive and
Apostolic Church; that if the Church of England be a true Apostolic Church in
Faith, and Worship, and Government, and separates from other Churches only upon
account of such Corruptions as will justify a separation, what should hinder
her from being a Mystical Member of Christ, in Catholic Unity, and a
Charitable part of the Catholic Church? for a true Apostolic Faith and
Worship does certainly make us the Mystical Members of Christ's Body, or else I
desire to know what does? That Catholic Unity is not violated by a just
separation, and dangerous Corruptions in Faith and Worship are a just cause of
separation. Come out from among them, and, be ye separate, says the Lord; and
touch not the unclean thing and I will receive you 2 Cor 6. 17.

All that our Author replies to this is, that This Protestancy destitute of
Scripture Proofs. p. 10.
Proposition relates to matter of Fact, which we affirm Protestants to have
done, and desire them to make out by Scripture the Lawfulness of it, and its
consistency with Catholic Unity and Charity. But I denied that we had done
this, and gave him in short my Reasons why I denied it, which methinks might
have deserved some notice: and as for our separation from the Corruptions of
the Church of Rome, that I gave him my Reasons for, and such as, it seems, he
had no mind to answer; that separation might sometimes be lawful and necessary,
and therefore not chargeable with Schism, nor a breach of Catholic Unity, I
proved from the Text now quoted. Come out from among them, etc. to which he
says, If I intend this for a Proof, then it must import that it is the Duty of
one Christian, or a Party pretending to be a National Church to come out of the
Catholic Church, and be separate from her; less than this will not reach the
Protestant Case, and so much as this will by no means agree with one Holy
Church, wherein alone the Communion of Saints, Remission of Sins, and Life
Everlasting are to be found.

But how is this the Protestant Case? How does separation from the Church of
Rome, and that no farther neither than she is Corrupt, come to be a separation
from the Catholic Church? He knows that we deny the Church of Rome to be the
Catholic Church, and we know that he can never prove it to be so; and whatever
Church or Churches have corrupted the Faith and Worship of Christ, we shall
make no scruple at all to separate from them in such Corruptions, and have the
whole Gospel to justify us in it; for in such Cases we are under the same
obligation to separate, that we are to profess the true Faith, and practice the
true Worship of Christ.

All that can be charged upon the Church of England is, that she renounced the
Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, and denied Obedience and Subjection to that
See, which never had any Divine Right to claim it: and that she reformed those
Errors in Doctrine, and Corruptions in Worship, which she formerly was guilty
of. This charge we readily own, but deny that this is Schism of Separation from
the Catholic Church.

For till our Author can prove that the Unity of the Catholic Church consists
in subjection to the Bishop of Rome, it is ridiculous to charge us with
breaking Catholic Unity, by denying that Obedience which we do not owe; and
when he can prove this essential to Catholic Unity to submit to the Bishop of
Rome, as the visible Head of the Church, we will own our selves to be
Schismatics. But then I must mind him what he is to prove, viz. that by a
Divine Institution the Bishop of Rome is the visible Head of Unity, to whom all
Churches must submit, for nothing can be essential to the Unity of the Church
but what Christ himself has made so; and what is not absolutely essential may
be changed and altered, when there is absolute necessity for it, without a
sinful breach of Unity; and therefore though they cannot make good their claim
to this Universal Supremacy, not so much as See Dr. Barrows Treatise of
SuPremacy.
by Ecclesiastical Canons and Constitutions, and ancient Customs, as has been
often proved by Learned Protestants; yet to shorten that Dispute, which to be
sure none but Learned Men can be judges of; whatever Jurisdiction or Primacy
they pretend to, have been formerly granted by Ancient Councils to the Bishop
of Rome, may be retrenched or denied without the Guilt of Schism, when it
proves a manifest Oppression of the Christian Church, and serves only to
justify and perpetuate the most Notorious and Intolerable Corruptions of the
Christian Religion. And the Reason is very plain, because all human
Constitutions are alterable, and what is alterable ought to be altered, when
the indispensable Necessities of the Church and of Religion require it.
Catholic Unity requires no Superiority, or Jurisdiction of one Bishop or one
Church over another, but only Mutual Concord and Brotherly Correspondence; and
therefore a Church which rejects any Foreign Jurisdiction, may yet maintain
Catholic Unity, as the African Churches did in St. Cyprians days. The
Combination indeed of Neighbor Churches and Bishops, for the more convenient
Exercise of Ecclesiastical Discipline and Government, we grant was very
Ancient, and is of great use to this day; but if such Combinations as these
degenerate from their first Institution, and by the Tyranny and Encroachments
of some usurping Bishops is improved into a Temporal Monarchy, and invasion
upon the inherent Rights and Liberties of all other Bishops and Churches, I
would desire to know why these Oppressed Bishops and Churches may not vindicate
their own Rights and Liberties, and cast off such an intolerable Yoke?

No, you will say, when such a Superiority and Subordination of Churches is
Ordered and Decreed by general Councils, which is the Supreme Authority in the
Church, no change nor alteration can be made but by an equal Authority; and
therefore no particular Bishops or Churches can reject any such Jurisdiction,
unless it be revoked by a general Council, without the guilt of Schism.

Now in Answer to this, Let us consider, 1. Suppose such an aspiring Bishop has
usurped such an Authority, as was never Orginally granted him by any Council;
that he has improved a Primacy of order (which yet is more than the Nicene
Canons granted to the Bishop of Rome) into a Supremacy of Jurisdiction, and has
enlarged his Patriarchate beyond its original Bounds, may not that be taken
away without a general Council, which was usurped indeed but never given?

2ly. Suppose a general Council had granted what it had no right to give; as it
must have done, if ever any general Council had granted or confirmed the Popes
Pretensions, of being the Universal Bishop and visible Head of the Church, and
the Fountain of all Ecclesiastical Authority, and granted away these Rights and
Powers, which are inherent in every Church, and inseparable from the Episcopal
Office. For it is not in Ecclesiastical as it is in Civil Rights; Men may
irrevocably grant away their own Civil Rights and Liberties, but all the
Authority in the Church cannot give away it self, nor grant the whole entire
Episcopacy, with all the Rights and Powers of it, to any one Bishop. If Bishops
will not exercise that Power which Christ has given them, they are accountable
to their Lord for it; but they cannot give it away, neither from themselves,
nor from their Successors; for it is theirs only to use, not to part with; and
therefore every Bishop may reassume such Rights, though a general Council
should give them away, because the grant is void in it self.

3ly. Especially when the Regular means of Redress is made impossible by such
Usurpations; when the Christian Church is so inslaved to the Will and Pleasure
of one Domineering Bishop, that there can be no general Council unless he call
it, and preside in it, and confirm it by his own Authority; and how impossible
it is this way to cast off such an usurping Power, when the Usurper must be the
Judge in his own Cause; I need not prove, especially when Christian Princes and
Bishops are so devoted to the Sea of Rome, either linked to it by secular
Interests, or overawed by Superstition; that it is in vain to expect that such
a Council should Redress such Abuses, as they themselves are fond of; or if
they would have them Redressed if they could, yet dare not venture to attempt
it; must all Bishops now and Churches quietly submit to such Usurpations,
because the greatest number of them will not, or dare not, vindicate their own
Rights? Is it then unlawful for Christian Bishops to Exercise that Authority
which Christ has given them, and of which they must give an Account, if they
happen to be outvoted by other Bishops; I grant the less number of Bishops
cannot make Laws for the Universal Church, in opposition to the greater
numbers; whatever Constitutions owe their Authority to mutual Consent, must in
all reason be confirmed and overruled by the greater numbers; but the less
number, nay any single Bishop may observe the Institutions of our Savior, and
exercise that Authority which he has given him, without asking leave of general
Councils, nay in opposition to them; for the Authority and Institution of our
Savior is beyond all the general Councils in the World.

4. Especially when we have the consent of much the greater number of Bishops,
without their meeting in a general Council. All the Eastern Bishops, which are
much more numerous than the Western, I cannot say, have cast off the Authority
of the Bishop of Rome, because they never owned it, but yet they oppose and
reject his Authority, as much as the Bishops of England do; and therefore our
Reformers in casting off the Pope, did nothing but what they had the Authority
of the whole Eastern Church to justify; which I take to be as good as a
Council of Western Bishops, though they may call it General: For the Business
of a Council in such cases, is not to consent to some new Laws, but to declare
ancient and original Rights; and if we have their authentic Declarations in
this matter, we need no more: For we do not so much want their Authority, as
their Judgment in this Point. It is a very daring thing to oppose the universal
Consent of the whole Christian Church; and no private Bishops, nor National
Combination of Bishops, would be able to bear up against such a Prejudice; but
when we have the concurrent Opinions of the greatest number of Christian
Bishops, we need not much concern our selves for want of the Formality of a
Western Council, who are interested Parties; yes, you will say, at least the
Church of England was subject to the Jurisdiction of the Western Patriarch, and
therefore ought not to have innovated without the Patriarchal Authority, and a
Patriarchal Council, nor to have rejected the Patriarchal Authority, which was
confirmed by ancient Councils. Now, not to dispute this at present, Whether
England were subject to the Bishop See Dr. Stilling fl. Origines Britan. p.
106. etc.
of Rome, as the Western Patriarch, which it is certain our British Bishops,
when Austin the Monk came into England, would not own; and which was never
granted by any ancient General Council: and the Submission of the English
Bishops afterward by Fear or Flattery, could never give such a Right as should
oblige all their Successors for future Ages; yet I say this Patriarchal
Authority is not the Dispute between the Church of England and the Church of
Rome. Our Reformers took no notice of the Patriarchal Authority, but the
Universal Headship and Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, as is evident from the
Articles of our Church, in which there is no mention of it: And this was such
an Usurpation as might be renounced, without the Authority of any Council, as I
have already shown. Indeed his Patriarchal Authority, if he had any,
necessarily fell with it: For when he challenges such an exorbitant Power, so
far exceeding the Bounds and Limits of a Patriarchal Authority, and will
exercise all, if he exercise any, and will hold Communion with none upon any
other terms, and will not be confined to a mere Patriarchal Jurisdiction, we
must necessarily renounce all Subjection to him to deliver our selves from his
Usurpations; when his pretended Patriarchate is swallowed up in his Universal
Headship, he may thank himself, if he forfeits what he might with a better
Appearance make some Pretense to, by challenging so much more than ever was his
right. And the Patriarchal Authority it self, could he have made any pretenses
to it, which he never could over the Church of England, which was originally a
free and independent Church, being but a human Constitution, may be renounced
without Schism, when necessity requires it; and certainly, if ever there can be
any necessity for such a Rupture, it becomes necessary then, when it swells
into a boundless, and unlimited Authority, to the Oppression of the whole
Christian Church in her essential Rights and Liberties.

5ly. There is one thing more I would have observed for the right stating of
this Dispute about Schism. viz. the difference between Schism from the
Catholic Church, and the Breach of Ecclesiastical Communion between different
Churches. In the first Sense Schism cuts us off from the Body of Christ, and
consequently puts us out of a state of Salvation; and therefore it can be
nothing less than a Separation from the Communion of the Church in things
essential to Faith, or Worship, or Government; for in this sense no man can be
a Schismatic, without, in some Degree or other, forfeiting his Christianity,
and his essential Right to Christian Communion.

Ecclesiastical Communion is the Union of several distinct Churches into one
Ecclesiastical Body for mutual Advice and Counsel, and the more pure
Administration of Discipline. When several Bishops who have originally all the
same Authority in the Government of their several Churches, bestow different
Powers on some Bishops, whom they advance above others with the Title and
Authority of Metropolitans, or Patriarchs, with a Power of calling Synods, and
receiving Appeals, and the principal Authority of Ordinations; and govern their
several Churches by such Ecclesiastical Laws, as are agreed on by common
Consent, or the major Vote, This is a very useful Constitution, and of great
Antiquity in the Church, if it had not its beginning in the Apostles times; and
for any Bishop or Church causelessly to break such a Confederacy as this, is a
very great Evil, and has the Guilt and Crime of Schism; but yet it does not
seem to be such a Schism as divides the intrinsic Unity of the Catholic
Church, and cuts off such a Church from the Body of Christ. For the Unity of
the Catholic Church consists in one Faith, and Worship, and Charity, and such
an external Communion, when occasion offers, shows, that we are all the
Disciples of the same common Lord and Savior; and own each other for Brethren;
but the Church may be the one Body of Christ, without being one Ecclesiastical
Body, under one governing Head, which it is impossible the whole Christian
Church should be; and therefore a Church which divides it self from that
Ecclesiastical Body, to which it did once belong; if it have just and necessary
Reasons for what it does, is wholly blameless, nay, commendable for it; if it
have not, it sins according to the nature and aggravation of the Crime; but
still may be a Member of the Catholic Church, and still enjoy all the
Privileges of a true Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, the
Forgiveness of Sins, and the Promises of everlasting Life: Which shows us how
the holy Catholic Church in the Creed may be One, notwithstanding all those
Divisions of Christendom, which are occasioned by the Quarrels of Bishops, and
the Disputes about Ecclesiastical Canons, and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.
Those who are the Beginners or Fomentors of such Divisions, shall answer it to
their Lord and Judge, as they shall all their other personal Miscarriages: but
it would be very hard, if such a Church, which in its Faith and Worship is
truly Catholic, should be cut off from the Body of Christ, and all the Members
of it put out of a State of Salvation, because the Bishops and Pastors of such
Churches think fit to divide themselves from that Ecclesiastical Body, to which
they were united by Custom, or ancient Canons. Now this is the most they can
make of our forsaking the Ecclesiastical Communion of the Church of Rome; That
we have divided our selves from the Bishop of Rome, to whom by Custom, or some
pretended Canons, we owed Obedience and Subjection; which I have proved to be
very innocent in us, because it was necessary: But suppose it were a causeless
and criminal Separation, yet it is only an Ecclesiastical Schism, which does
not separate us from the Catholic Church, though it does from that
Ecclesiastical Body, of which the Bishop of Rome makes himself the Head.

This, I think, is a sufficient Justification of the Church of England in
rejecting the Authority of the Church of Rome; and her reforming the Errors and
Corruptions of Faith and Worship, needs no defense at all, though there were
never a pure and reformed Church in the World besides her self. For I would
desire our Author to tell me, whether it be a fault to reform the Corruptions
of Faith and Worship. Can it be a fault then to believe as Christ has taught,
and to worship God as he has prescribed? Is it possible that the true Catholic
Faith and Worship should ever be a Crime? if it be not, then it can be no fault
to make the Doctrines and Institutions of our Savior, the Rule of our Faith
and Worship; and that is all that we mean by reforming; not to mend Christian
Religion, but to return to Primitive Christianity. To cast such Doctrines out
of our Creed, as Christ never taught, and to reject all new and suspected
Worships: And if it be always a Duty to profess what Christ and his Apostles
have taught, and to practice as they have commanded; then if ever we believed
or practiced otherwise, it is necessary to reform; which is not in a proper
sense to reform the Church, or the Christian Faith and Worship, but to reform
our selves. For the Christian Faith and Worship is always the same; and if
there be any thing to be reformed, it must be our own Errors and Mistakes.

What then is the Fault of the Church of England? Why cannot she be a mystical
Member of Christ in Catholic Unity, or a charitable part of the Catholic
Church? The Charge is drawn up against her, under three Heads. 1. That she
voluntarily separates from all other Christian Societies. 2. Condemns their
Doctrines and Rights. 3. Has no visible Correspondence with them in the
Eucharist, nor in any religious Assemblies, nor solemn Devotions. Let us
consider these distinctly.

1. The Church of England voluntarily separates from all other Christian
Societies. This I told him was false as to matter of Fact; for there are a
great many Christian Societies which we can, and do hold Communion with, as
opportunity serves; and he can never make good this Charge, but by denying,
that there are any other Christian Societies besides the Church of Rome; which,
I suppose, is what he intends. Well! we do separate, he says, and that
voluntarily from the Church of Rome, that is, from all Christian Societies. Now
I grant we do separate from the Bishop and the Church of Rome, considered as
the Principle and Center of Catholic Unity, as I observed before; but
considered as a Christian Church, so I deny, that we separate from the Church
of Rome, or any other Christian Church, as far as they are Christian, and we
are bound to communicate with them no farther. For, I pray, consider what
Christian Communion is, which certainly is nothing else but to communicate in
the true Christian Faith and Worship; for to communicate in Judaism, Paganism,
Mahumatism, or any unchristian Doctrines or Practices, certainly is not
Christian Communion: And therefore every Church is more or less perfect in
Christian Communion, according to the Purity and Perfection of her Faith and
Worship. If then the Church of England professes the true Christian Faith, and
worships God according to the Gospel of his Son, without any corrupt Mixtures
and Innovations, as far as true Faith and Worship reaches, she is in Communion
with all the Christian Churches in the World; for she agrees with them in all
that they believe or practice, which is truly Christian, and Christian
Communion extends no farther.

Well, but when the whole Church was agreed in Faith and Worship, we broke this
Bond of Unity by a pretended Reformation. Suppose this, the Question still is,
Whether this Unity of the Church was a Christian Communion? for if it were not,
it is no Separation from the Christian Church, to leave its Communion in those
things which are not Christian: And therefore the whole Controversy will still
turn upon this Point, whether the Reformation of the Church of England be a
true Gospel Reformation; for if we reformed nothing but what ought to be
reformed, then we separated no farther than we ought to separate; and such a
Separation, if you will call it a Separation, I hope, is no Crime. Did Elias
separate from the Jewish Church, because he broke their Unity in the Worship of
Baal, and reduced them to the Institutions of the Moisaick Law, which was the
Standard of their Religion and Communion? Just so the Church of England
separated from the Church of Rome, by rejecting those Articles of Faith, and
Forms of Worship, which are not Christian. Some kind of Separation indeed there
must be between a pure and a corrupt Church, but if you would know on which
side the Separation is criminal, you must consider on which side the corruption
is; for necessary Truths can never make a criminal Separation. The Church which
forsakes the Truth, is always guilty of the Separation, not the Church which
forsakes Errors; and therefore it is a ridiculous thing to charge those with
the Schism, who only forsake the Company, when those are the Schismatics, who
forsake the Truth. And yet this is the only pretense for the Church of Rome to
charge us with Schism, That they did not leave us, but we left them; they kept
where they were, and we went out from among them, and forsook their Communion;
but it was because they had first forsaken the Apostolic Communion, by
corrupting the Apostolic Faith and Worship. They were the Deserters and
Separatists, we only returned to the true Christian Communion, and were very
sorry to leave them behind us. The short of it is this, if we cannot justify
our Reformation, we are Schismatics; if we can, we are none: And I would
desire all Protestants to take notice of this short Answer, and stick to it;
for it is as certain as any Demonstration in Euolid, that no man can be a
Schismatic, who forsakes no Society of Christians any farther than they
forsake the Truth.

2. The next charge is, that we condemn their Doctrines and their Rights; but
do we condemn any thing which ought not to be condemned? if we do it is indeed
a fault; but if we don't, why are we blamed for it?

3. We have no visible Correspondence with them in the Eucharist, nor in any
Religious Assemblies, nor Solemn Devotions. How so? we visibly receive the
Eucharist our selves, and perform our Solemn Devotions in Public Assemblies,
and this is to Communicate with the whole Christian Church in the same
Sacraments and Worship, and the only way that distant Churches have to
Communicate with each other in Sacraments and Worship; unless he thinks the
Church of England must travel into France, and Spain, and Italy, into Greece
and Egypt, and all other remote Churches to Communicate with them.

No, but when their Worship is brought home to us, we refuse to join with them;
right! for according to the Laws of Catholic Communion, when they are in
England they ought to Communicate with us, not we with them, according to St.
Austins Rule, to observe the Rights and Usages of the Church, whither soever we
come, as far as they are Innocent; if we denied to receive them to our
Communion, they might with better reason charge us with Schism; but we are not
bound to forsake the Communion of our own Church to follow Foreign Customs at
home.

But when we do come where their Worship is the Established Religion, we still
refuse to Communicate with them; we do so indeed with the Roman Church, but not
with all other Christian Societies; and the Reason is, because we believe their
Worship is sinful, and no Christian is bound to Communicate in a sinful
Worship, as they themselves must grant: So that still this whole Controversy
issues in this, whether the Terms of their Communion be not sinful; if they be,
this will justify our Non-communion with them; if they be not, we are
Schismatics, and by this we are willing to stand or fall.

So that this charge of Schism upon the Church of England is very absurd and
ridiculous, unless they can charge us with Schismatical Doctrines and
Practices; if we separate for the sake of a Corrupt Faith or Worship, we are
Schismatics indeed; but if we separate, only because we will not profess any
Erroneous Doctrines, nor Communicate in a corrupt Worship, unless the true
Faith and true Worship can make Men Schismatics, we may very securely scorn
such an Accusation.

And it is as impertinent a Question to ask us what Church we joined in
Communion with when we forsook the Communion of the Church of Rome: For if by
joining in Communion with other Churches, they mean uniting our selves in one
Ecclesiastical Body with them, putting our selves under the Government of any
other Patriarch, so we joined in Communion with no other Church, and there was
no reason we should; for we were Originally a free independent Church, which
owed no Subjection to any other Church, but had a plenary Power to decide all
Controversies among our selves, without appealing to any foreign Jurisdiction;
and when we had delivered our selves from one Usurper, there was no reason to
court a new one, this not being necessary to Catholic Unity and Communion.

If by joining in Communion with other Churches, they mean, what other Churches
we made the Pattern of our Reformation, we freely confess we made no Church of
that Age our Pattern; but I think we did much better, for we made the
Scriptures our Rule, and the Primitive and Apostolic Churches our Pattern,
which we take to be a more Infallible direction than the Example of any Church
then or now: If we must have been confined to the Faith and Practice of other
Churches then in being, without regard to a more Infallible Rule, and a more
unquestionable Authority, I confess, I should have chose to have continued in
the Church of Rome, which had the most visible and flourishing Authority of any
other Church at that time; but our Reformers did believe, and very rightly,
that no Church had any Authority against the Scriptures and Primitive Practice,
and then they were not concerned to enquire whether any other Church did in all
things believe and practice as they taught, but what the Faith and Practice of
the Apostles and their immediate Successors was; and yet they very well know,
that most of those Doctrines and Practices, which they condemned in the Church
of Rome, were condemned by other Churches also, though it may be those other
Churches might have some less Errors and Corruptions of their own. If the
Scriptures and the Example of the Primitive Churches be a sufficient Authority
to justify a Reformation, then the Church of England is blameless, though no
other Church in the World followed this Pattern but our selves; for this is the
Rule and Pattern which they ought all to follow, and if they do not, it is not
we are to blame, but themselves.

And yet what if I should say, that our Reformers made the Church of Rome her
self, the Pattern of our Reformation; and indeed this is the plain truth of the
Case. For we framed no new Creeds, no new Articles of Faith, no new Forms of
Worship, no new Models of Government, but retained all that is Ancient and
Apostolic in the Church of Rome, and only rejected those Corruptions and
Innovations, which were introduced in several Ages, and confirmed all together
by the Council of Trent. Our Faith is contained in the Apostles, Nicene,
Athanasian Creeds, which are all owned by the Church of Rome, and were the
Ancient Faith of the Catholic Church. We own the two Christian Sacraments,
Baptism and the Lords Supper, which were expressly Instituted by our Savior
himself, and which the Church of Rome owns. We Worship one God through Jesus
Christ, who is that one Mediator between God and Man, as the Church of Rome
confesses, though she brings in a great many other Mediators by the help of a
distinction. Our public Liturgy is so conformed to the Ancient Liturgies of
the Roman Church, that it has been often objected to us, though very peevishly
and absurdly, by Dissenters, that our Common Prayer is taken out of the Mass
Book: Our Litanies, Collects, Hymns, are many of them taken out of the old
Latin Liturgies, only we have changed the Popish Legends into Lessons out of
the Old and New Testaments, and have left out Prayers to Saints, and all the
Corruptions of the Mass, and other Superstitions: So that in Truth the Church
of England is the exact Resemblance of the Church of Rome in her state of
Primitive Purity, before her Faith and Worship were corrupted with new and
superstitious Additions; and it is plain that this was the Rule of our
Reformation, not to form and model a new Church, but only to Purge the Church
from all new Corruptions, and to leave the old Foundations and Building as it
was; and if we have indeed retained all that is Ancient and Apostolic in the
Church of Rome, and rejected nothing but Innovations in Faith, and Corruptions
in Worship; they need not enquire for a Church which believes all that we do,
for the Church of Rome her self does so, and if they believe more than they
should, it is no fault that we do not believe all that they do; and therefore
we had no need to seek for any other Church to join with; for we staid where we
were, and did not leave our Church, but Reform it; and a Man who does not pull
down his House, but only cleanses it, and makes it a more wholesome Habitation,
needs not inquire for a new House to dwell in.

To conclude this Argument, our positive Faith and Worship is the same still
with the Church of Romes, and therefore they cannot blame us for it; and in
those Doctrines and Practices wherein we have forsaken the Church of Rome, we
have the Authority and Practice of most other Churches to justify us, which do
not own the Supremacy of the Pope, nor Transubstantiation, nor Purgatory, nor
Communion in one kind, nor Latin Service, nor the Worship of Images, with
several other of the Trent Innovations: So that in truth we are so far from
separating from all Christian Societies, that there are few things in our
Reformation, but what are owned and justified either by the Church of Rome her
self, or by some other Churches; not to take notice now, that there are few
things in our Reformation but what some Doctors of the Roman Communion, have
either justified, or spoke modestly of.

16. The whole Clergy of the Catholic Church may Apostatize from Fundamental
Truth and Holiness, whilst part of a National Laity may preserve both, discover
the Clergies defection, and depriving them heap to themselves Teachers of their
own sending and instruction.

In Answer to this I told him, that if by this he Answer to Request.
meant, that the whole Clergy of the Christian World did at the time of the
Reformation maintain the Doctrines of the Church of Rome, which were rejected
and condemned only by a Major Vote of a Parliament of Laymen in England, all
the World knew how false it is. For, 1. There were many other Churches, and
better parts of the Catholic Church than the Church of Rome, which did not own
those Doctrines and Corruptions, which we reject. 2. Nay the whole Clergy of
the Roman Church did not, for many of our English Bishops and Clergy were as
Zealous for the Reformation as any Laymen; so were the German Reformers, who
were Originally Popish Monks and Priests, and yet did not follow the Laity, but
lead them way to the Reformation.

In reply to this, he says, I manifest my self meanly Protestancy destitute of
Scripture Proofs.
versed in the Story of my own Party, or no friend to Ingenuity and Truth. For
it is certainly true and attested by Protestant Historians and Records, that
all the Bishops, and the whole Convocation declared against Lay-supremacy and
other Protestant Points, and for Noncompliance therewith were almost all
deprived; the Queen and her Lay-Parliament enacting Supremacy, whereby she
imposed new Doctrines, displaced the Catholic Clergy, and created Prelatick
Ministers. And whether he or I be most in the right let the Reader Judge. For,
1. It is plain I did not speak only of the Clergy of England, but of the whole
Clergy of the Catholic Church, as he himself stated the Question; and he
answers only to the Clergy of England, and with what Truth shall be examined
presently: For if the whole Clergy of the Catholic Church have not
Apostatized, whatever the Clergy of the Church of Rome has done, he loses the
very Foundation of his Request to us, to prove that the whole Clergy of the
Catholic Church have Apostatized from Fundamental Truth and Holiness, for we
are not bound to prove that which is false; but he who allows no Catholic
Church but the Church of Rome, must consequently allow no Clergy of the
Catholic Church, but the Roman Clergy, but we grant neither one nor the other;
and yet as I showed the Roman Clergy themselves were the first Reformers; and
therefore what he insinuates cannot be true, that the whole Roman Clergy
opposed the Roman Laity in the Reformation.

2. As for the English Reformation, he confines it in his Answer only to the
Story of Queen Elizabeth, and what was done in her Reign; but the Article he
would have proved, and the Answer I gave to it has no such limitation; and I
must still repeat, that all the World knows, and, the Histories and Records of
our Church assure us, that the Popish Bishops and Convocation in Henry the
Eight's days did acknowledge the Kings Supremacy, and in higher Terms than Queen
Elizabeth would challenge it. Indeed the late Oxford Writer, or rather
Publisher of Books, charges this upon Church Government. Part. 5. English
Reformation chapter 2. p. 21.
that force they were under; that is, that the Clergy was taken in a
Praemunire, and the King would not compound the Business with them, unless they
acknowledged him to be the Head of the Church. But does this prove that they
did not make this Recognition? if force or flattery can corrupt the whole
Clergy; then it seems the whole Clergy of the (Roman) Catholic Church may
Apostatize from Fundamental Truth and Holiness, if they fall first into a
Praemunire, and meet with a King who will take the Advantage of it; and are not
the Clergy then admirable Guides to follow? especially if they can be so
overawed, as not only to make such a Profession, but to Write and Dispute for
it, and use all variety of Arguments to persuade People to believe it.

The Institution for the necessary Erudition of a Burnets History of the
Reformation, part 1. book 2. p. 137.
Christian man, was agreed on in Convocation, and published by Authority.
Bishop Gardener wrote a Book de vera Obedientia, to which Bonner prefixed a
Preface upon the same Argument. Stokesly, Bishop of London, and Tonstal Bishop
of Duresm, wrote in defense of the Kings Proceedings, to Cardinal Pool; and
many Sermons were preached by several Bishops to the same purpose; out of which
Dr. Burnet has collected the Arguments used by them, both against the Power of
the Pope, and for the Supremacy of the King: And during that Session of
Parliament, which took away the Power of the Pope in the year 1534. A Bishop
preached every Sunday at St. Paul's Cross, and taught the People, that the Pope
had no Authority in England. Was all this matter of force too, and fear of the
Praemunire, which was pardoned in Parliament, Anno 1531. three years before?

Let us now consider what passed under Queen Elizabeth: And methinks, what was
good Doctrine in King Henry's time, should be good Doctrine still: and yet it
is true, that many Bishops then did protest against the Act for Supremacy, and
refused the Oath when it was offered them; and that many of those Bishops who
had wrote, or preached for it before, such as Bonner, Bishop of London, and
Tonstal of Duresm, which seems to lessen their Authority in this matter; and
when the Nation had so lately had the sense of the whole English Roman Clergy
in this Point, their present obstinacy to confirm their former Opinions,
without answering their former Reasons, was no sufficient cause why a
Lay-Parliament should not renew such Laws without the consent of the Clergy,
which were at first made with it: not a Bishop dissenting, excepting Fisher
Bishop of Rochester: And whereas he talks in such a strain, as if this were
opposed by the whole Clergy, and that they were almost all deprived for it, the
account which the Visiters gave the Queen, is very different, that of 9400
beneficed Men in England, there were no more but fourteen Bishops, six Abbots,
twelve Deans, twelve Archdeacons, fifteen Heads of Colleges, Burnets Histo ry
of the Reform. part 2. l. 3. p. 401.
fifty Prebendaries, and eighty Rectors of Parishes, that had left their
Benefices upon account of Religion, which is a very inconsiderable number to
the whole.

3. I answered farther, That we do not say, that the Roman Church her self has
apostatized from fundamental Truth and Holiness. We do grant, that they have
retained the true Faith and Worship of Christ, though they have fatally
corrupted both by Additions of their own. And therefore we are not bound to
prove, that the whole Clergy of the Catholic Church may apostatize from
fundamental Truth and Holiness; for we do not say they did.

All that he replies to this, is, That this Apostasy (at the least) is taught
in the 19 and 21 Articles and Homilies against the Peril of Idolatry. That is
to say (for I suppose that is his meaning) that the Church of England charges
the Church of Rome with Idolatry, and Idolatry is an Apostasy from fundamental
Truth and Holiness. But if men may be guilty of some kinds of Idolatry, and of
very great corruptions in Faith and Worship, without denying any fundamental
Article of the Christian Faith, then Idolatry it self does not prove such an
Apostasy from fundamental Truth. And this is the opinion of those who own the
Church of Rome a true, though a corrupt Church, notwithstanding they charge her
with idolatrous Practices. For they consider, that the Jewish Church was guilty
of Idolatry in the Worship of the Golden Calf, and the Calves at Dan and
Bethel, and yet were a true Church still, because they worshipped only the true
God, the God of Israel, though in an idolatrous manner. And I would advise our
Author not to insist too peremptorily on this, That Idolatry is an Apostasy
from fundamental Truth, till he is sure that he can clear himself and his
Church from the charge of Idolatry. I know very well what he aims at, to
disprove the charge of Idolatry, because Idolatry is an Apostasy from
fundamental Truth and Holiness; and thus the Church cannot apostatize, and
therefore cannot commit Idolatry; which is like their proving, that the Church
has not erred, because it cannot err: Whereas if de facto it appears that the
Church has erred, that is a Demonstration that it can err. Thus if de facto it
appears that the Church is guilty of Idolatry, this is a Demonstration, that
either Idolatry is not such a fundamental Apostasy, or that the Church may fall
into such an Apostasy. Those who say, that Idolatry is not such an Apostasy,
are not bound to prove that the Church may fall into such an Apostasy from
fundamental Truth, to make good their charge of Idolatry. Those who say, that
Idolatry is such an Apostasy, are bound to prove, either directly, that the
Church is not guilty of Idolatry, or by consequence that she cannot be, because
she cannot apostatize from fundamental Truth: so that the Proof lies on their
side, not on ours; we are not bound to prove that the Church may apostatize
from fundamental Truth and Holiness, because we have no occasion to say it may;
but they are bound to prove that the Church cannot so apostatize, because it is
the best defense they have against the charge of Idolatry.

But I cannot pass on without briefly considering the nature of this Argument,
to prove that a thing is not, upon a pretense that it cannot be, when there is
all other possible evidence to prove that it is; which is now the modish and
popular way of disputing, and the very last refuge of the Church of Rome. If
you charge them with Errors and Corruptions in Faith and Worship, and prove
your charge beyond the possibility of a fair Reply, they presently take
sanctuary in the Indefectibility or Infallibility of their Church. Their Church
cannot err, because the Council, or Pope, or at least both of them together,
are infallible: Or, as others say, Tradition is infallible; for the Church must
believe to day, as it did yesterday, and to morrow as it does to day, and so
from one Generation to another; and therefore it is impossible there ever
should be any change in the Faith of the Church. The Church cannot be guilty of
Idolatry, because it cannot apostatize from fundamental Truth and Holiness; and
so in other cases: And therefore the way they take with their new Converts, is
not to dispute particular Controversies, but instruct them well in this one
Point, which puts an end to all other Disputes, That the Church cannot err, and
cannot apostatize from fundamental Truth and Holiness; and then it is certain,
whatever she teaches, she cannot err; and whatever she does, is not Apostasy.
Now not to show at present how vainly the Church of Rome challenges to her
self the Title, Privileges, and Prerogatives of the Catholic Church, and
appropriates all those Promises to her self, which were made to the Church in
general; nor to examine the meaning of those Texts, whereon she founds this
pretense of Infallibility, I shall only consider, whether this Plea, the Church
cannot err, therefore she has not erred; the Church cannot apostatize from
fundamental Truth and Holiness, therefore she is not guilty of Idolatry; which,
say they, is such an Apostasy, be sufficient to satisfy any honest inquisitive
man, who can read the Scriptures, and compare what the Church now believes and
practices, with the Doctrines and Institutions of our Savior. For,

1. When such Errors and Corruptions are notoriously evident, though but in any
one instance, to argue that the Church has not erred, because she cannot err,
is to dispute against matter of fact, like the Philosophers disputing against
the possibility of Motion; and no Argument whatsoever is good against matter of
fact, True, you will say, if it were notoriously evident that the Church has
erred, there were an end of her Infallibility; but this is matter of dispute,
whether she have erred or not, and then if you can prove that she cannot err,
you effectually prove that she has not erred. No such matter; for if she be
charged with Errors, and plain evidence brought, that she has actually erred,
unless you can as plainly take off this evidence, it weakens and overthrows all
the Proofs for Infallibility whatever they are; and therefore the pretense of
Infallibility is of no use in this dispute, but to cheat the ignorant and
unwary; for if I can prove that such Doctrines and Practices of the Church of
Rome are Errors and Corruptions, till I am satisfied that they are not, I can
never believe that Church to be infallible, which I can prove has erred: and
therefore while any charge against the Errors of the Church of Rome remains
unanswered, it is too soon to talk of her Infallibility; for actual Error is a
just confutation of Infallibility, but the pretense of Infallibility is not a
just Plea against the charge of actual Error; because if I can prove my charge
against them, that they have erred, that disproves their Infallibility, and
then nothing else can prove it: So that this Infallibility can do them no
service at all in this Dispute, whether they have erred or not; for if I can
prove that they have erred, I overthrow all their Proofs of Infallibility; and
whether they have erred or not, is not to be tried by their Infallibility, but
by the Rule of Truth and Error, which are the Holy Scriptures; so absurd it is
to think to determine all the Controversies now in dispute among us, by the
Churches Infallibility.

It is indeed a most certain Truth, that if the Church be infallible, she
cannot err, and therefore she has not erred; and it is as certainly true, that
if the Church has erred, she can err, and therefore is not infallible. The
Romanists assert the first, the Protestants the second; but there is this
difference between these two Pleas, That if we can make good our charge against
them, that they have actually erred, this is a direct and positive Proof
against their Infallibility; but though it be as certainly true, that an
infallible Church cannot, and has not erred, yet whatever Proofs they bring of
the Churches Infallibility, they are not a direct Answer to that charge, That
she has actually erred, and can have no force to prove her Infallibility, till
that charged be answered, because there can be no Proof against matter of fact.
And therefore when they begin with the Proof of Infallibility, they begin at
the wrong end; for when the Church is charged with Error, if they would not
lose their labor, they must prove that she has not erred, before they prove
her to be infallible; for otherwise after all the pains they have taken to
prove her Infallibility, if they cannot deliver her from the charge of having
erred, their Labor is lost, and therefore it is best to try that first; which
shows what a Sophistical Argument it is to prove that the Church has not erred,
because she is infallible and cannot err; for they must first prove that she
has not erred, before they can prove her to be infallible; for till this be
removed, it is an effectual Bar to all other Proofs of Infallibility. And thus
their compendious way of making Converts, and confuting Heretics, is nothing
but Sophistry and a Cheat; and if men would be sincere and honest Converts,
they must not flatter themselves with an Opinion of the Churches Infallibility,
but must examine the particular Disputes between us, and be thoroughly
satisfied that the Church of Rome has not erred, before they embrace her
Communion.

2. For if it appear, that the Church of Rome has been guilty of Error or
Apostasy, this is a certain Demonstration, that either those Scripture-promises
which she alleges, do not belong to her, or do not signify what she brings
them for; for whatever Christ promises, he will certainly perform; and
therefore if the Church of Rome has erred, he never promised she should be
infallible. To be sure when the Sense and Application of such Texts of
Scripture are disputed, as they are between Protestants and Papists, that side
must have the advantage, which is confirmed by the Event, and matter of Fact;
and therefore if it appear the Church of Rome has erred, the Protestant
Interpretations of those Texts, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build
my Church, and such like, are to be preferred before the Popish
Interpretations, which apply them to the Bishops of Rome, as the Infallible
Guides of the Church, especially when that evidence we have that the Church has
Erred, is much more plain and notorious, then that Christ has promised that she
shall not Err; when the Scripture Proofs, that the Church of Rome has Erred in
several Doctrines and Practices which she now teaches, are much plainer than
those Texts are, by which they prove that she cannot Err: if I can prove by
plain Texts that she has Erred, this shall teach me how to expound those
obscure Texts, from which some would prove that she cannot Err. Indeed it is
very happy that no Man believes Christ has promised Infallibility to the Church
of Rome, but those who believe that she has not Erred; for if they did, it
would be a very dangerous State of Temptation, and a very ill Argument in the
hands of an Infidel against Christianity; for they would rather charge Christ
with a breach of his Promise, which would destroy his Authority, than believe
contrary to the plainest and most convincing Evidence, that the Church of Rome
has not erred; and indeed it would stagger the Faith of a Christian, if the
pretended Promises of Infalibility to the Church of Rome, were as plain as her
Errors are; for what should any Man do in that case? believe that she has not
erred, because of the Promise of Infalibility, or disbelieve the Promise
because she has erred? When both sides are equally plain, and yet can never be
reconciled, it is a sore Temptation to believe neither, when I know not which
to choose, and cannot possibly believe both. So that to urge the Infallibility
of the Church that she cannot err against the plainest evidence that she has
erred, may make some Men Infidels, but can make no considering Man a
Roman Catholic.

But to return to our Author, though I think I have not left him all this time,
I gave a fourth Answer to this Reqnest, which he takes no notice of, viz. If
the first discovery of this Defection had been made by Laymen, and afterward
acknowledged by the Clergy, who joined in the Reformation, I should not have
thought the Reformation ever the worse for it. For if the Clergy corrupt
Religion, we have reason to thank God if he opens the Eyes of honest and
disinterested Laymen. For this is the great grievance, that the Clergy should
Apostatize, and a National Laity discover the Clergies Defection and reform it.
This is now the fashionable way of Disputing against the Reformation of the
Church of England, that it was not regularly done by the consent of the Major
part of the Clergy in a National Synod, which first ought to have been
obtained, before the Queen and the Parliament had made any Laws about it; which
is the whole design of a late Oxford Book against Church Government Part. 5.
concerning the English Reformation.
the Reformation. Now this I confess seems to me a very strange way of
Reasoning, unworthy of Christians, especially of Christian Divines; for not to
enter now into the History of the Reformation, which those who please may learn
from Dr, Burnet, who has Published the Authentic Records of the most material
Transactions in it, yet I say,

1. If the Reformation be good and necessary, there can want no Authority to
reform; and my Reason is, because it is Established by the Authority of Christ
and his Apostles, which is a good Authority to this day; for to Reform Abuses
and Corruptions, signifies no more than to Profess the pure and uncorrupted
Faith and Worship of Christ; and I desire to know whether Christ have not given
sufficient Authority to every Man to do this? or whether there be any Authority
in Church or State which can de jure forbid the doing it, and make it unlawful
and irregular to do so? if there be, truly Christ and his Apostles have
preached the Gospel to very little purpose, if we must not believe or practice
as they teach, unless our Superiors will give us leave. How could the Gospel
have been at first planted in the World upon these Principles? Jews and
Heathens had a regular Authority among them to determine matters of Religion,
and this Authority opposed and condemned the Faith of Christ; and therefore
unless particular Men had reformed for themselves, and joined themselves to the
Fellowship of the Apostles, they must have continued Jews or Pagans to this
day. For as for what our Author says, that sueb a change in Religion ought to
have some Scripture, or because Extraordinary, should have Miracles to
countenance it: I answer, we have both, we have reformed according to the
Scriptures, and can justify our Faith and Worship by the Scriptures, and a
Scripture Reformation is confirmed by Miracles, because the Doctrine of the
Gospel is so confirmed; and we no more want new Miracles to confirm our
Reformation, than to confirm the Authority of the Christian Religion; for
Reformed Christianity is nothing else but the old Primitive Apostolic
Christianity; and therefore we have the same Authority to reform now, which the
Apostles at first had to preach the Gospel; for their Authority to preach the
Gospel is, and will be to the end of the World, a sufficient Authority to all
Men to believe it, and consequently to renounce all Errors and Corruptions in
Faith and Worship, which are contrary to it.

2. As for the Authority of the Clergy, whatever it be, it is certain Christ
gave them no Authority to preach any other Gospel than what he had taught them,
which is the express Commission which he gave to the Apostles themselves; and
therefore whatever Decrees, and Definitions they have made contrary to the true
Faith and Worship of Christ, are void of themselves, and want no Authority to
repeal them.

As for that distinction between making and declaring new Articles of Faith, it
is a mere piece of Sophistry; for if they have the power of declaring, and no
body must oppose them, nor judge of their Declarations under the pretense of
declaring, they may make as many new Articles of Faith as they please; as we
see the Council of Trent has done: This Extravagant Authority they give to the
Clergy, of making Decrees and Canons concerning Faith and Worship, which shall
oblige the Laity to a blind Obedience and implicit Faith, is a most ridiculous
pretense, unless it be supported with Infallibility; and See the Authority of
Councils, with the Appendix. in Answer to the eight Theses of the Oxford
Writer, And the Judge of Controversies.
yet you have already heard, that the pretense of Infallibility it self, though
it may silence those Men's objections, and stop their farther inquiries who do
really believe it, yet it is no defense against the charge of Errors, nor a
sufficient Answer to that charge; and how vain the pretense it self is, has
been abundantly proved in some late Treatises.

This is enough to show how insignificant that charge is against the
Reformation, that those Bishops and Priests who were at that time in Power, and
were zealously addicted to the Interests of Rome, would not concur in it,
though afterward much the greater numbers submitted to it, and thereby gave it
an after confirmation, which is as much as they can pretend for the
confirmation of some of their General Councils. I grant, nothing can be looked
on as the Act of the Clergy, which is not done by a regular Authority,
according to the Rules of that Church. nor do we pretend that the Reformation
was perfected or finished by the regular Authority of the Popish Clergy, though
several of them were Zealous in it; but we say it is never the worse for that;
if they can prove that what we call a Reformation is faulty upon other
Accounts, then we will grant that to reform against the consent of the Clergy
did greatly aggravate the Crime; but if the Reformation were just and
necessary, and a true Reformation of the Errors and Corruptions of
Christianity, the dissent of the Clergy could not and ought not to hinder it,
for they had no such Authority from Christ, either to corrupt Religion, or to
hinder the Reformation of it.

3. The Supreme Authority of any Nation has a regular Authority to declare what
shall be the Established Religion of that Nation; and therefore the Queen and
the Parliament could make the Reformed Religion the National Religion
Established by Law; and this is all that we Attribute to Kings and Parliaments.
We do not justify our Reformation because it was confirmed by the Authority of
Parliament, but because it is agreeable to Scripture; But we Thank God that he
then inclined the heart of the Queen and Parliament to Establish the
Reformation, and heartily pray that he would still continue it to us and to our
Posterity for ever.

Amen.
The End.
Books lately printed for Richard Chiswell.
THE History of the Reformation of the Church of England. By GILBERT BURNET, D.
D. in two Volumes. Folio.

The Moderation of the Church of England, in her Reformation, in avoiding all
undue Compliances with Popery, and other sorts of Phanaticism, etc. by TIMOTHY
PULLER, D. D. Octavo.

A Dissertation concerning the Government of the Ancient Church: more
particularly of the Encroachments of the Bishops of Rome upon other Sees. By
WILLIAM CAVE, D. D. Octavo.

An Answer to Mr. Serjeant's [Sure Footing in Christianity] concerning the Rule
of Faith: With some other Discourses. By WILLIAM FALKNER, D. D. 4o.

A Vindication of the Ordinations of the Church of England; in Answer to a
Paper written by one of the Church of Rome, to prove the Nullity of our Orders.
By GILBERT BURNET, D. D. Octavo.

An Abridgment of the History of the Reformation of the Church of England. By
GILB. BURNET, D. D. Octavo.

A Collection of several Tracts and Discourses, written in the years 1678,
1679. etc. by Gilbert Burnet. D. D. To which are added, (1) A Letter written to
Dr. Burnet, giving an Account of Cardinal Pool's secret Powers. (2) The History
of the Powder Treason, with a Vindication of the Proceedings thereupon. (3.) An
Impartial Consideration of the Five Jesuits dying Speeches, who were Executed
for the Plot, 1679. In Quarto.

The APOLOGY of the Church of England; and an Epistle to one Signior Scipio, a
Venetian Gentleman, concerning the Council of Trent. Written both in Latin, by
the Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN JEWEL, Lord Bishop of Salisbury: Made
English by a Person of Quality. To which is added, The Life of the said Bishop:
Collected and written by the same Hand. Octavo.

A LETTER writ by the last Assembly General of the Clergy of France to the
Protestants, inviting them to return to their Communion. Together with the
Methods proposed by them for their Conviction. Translated into English, and
Examined, by GILB. BURNET, D. D. Octavo.

The Life of WILLIAM BEDEL, D. D. Bishop of Kilmore in Ireland. Together with
Certain Letters which passed betwixt him and James Waddesworth (a late
Pensioner of the Holy Inquisition of Sevil) in Matter of Religion, concerning
the General Motives to the Roman Obedience. Octavo.

The Decree made at ROME the Second of March, 1679. condemning some Opinions of
the Jesuits, and other Casuists. Quarto.

A Discourse concerning the Necessity of Reformation, with respect to the
Errors and Corruptions of the Church of Rome. Quarto. First and Second Parts.

A Discourse concerning the Celebration of Divine Service in an Unknown Tongue.
Quarto.

A Papist not Misrepresented by Protestants. Being a Reply to the Reflections
upon the Answer to [A Papist Misrepresented and Represented]. Quarto.

An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, in the several
Articles proposed by the late BISHOP of CONDOM, [in his Exposition of the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church.] Quarto.

A Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the CHURCH of ENGLAND, against
the EXCEPTIONS of Monsieur de MEAUX, late Bishop of Condom, and his VINDICATOR.
Quarto.

An Answer to THREE PAPERS lately printed, concerning the Authority of the
Catholic Church in Matters of Faith, and the Reformation of the Church of
England. Quarto.

A Vindication of the Answer to SOME LATE PAPERS concerning the Unity and
Authority of the Catholic Church, and Reformation of the Church of England.
Quarto.

An Historical Treatise written by an AUTHOR of the Communion of the CHURCH of
ROME, touching TRANSUBSTANTIATION. Wherein is made appear, That according to
the Principles of THAT CHURCH, This Doctrine cannot be an Article of Faith.
Quarto.

A CATECHISM explaining the Doctrine and Practices of the Church of Rome; with
an Answer thereunto. By a Protestant of the Church of England. Octavo.

A Papist Represented and not Misrepresented: Being an Answer to the First,
Second, Fifth and Sixth Sheets of the Second Part of the [Popish Representer];
and for a further Vindication of the [CATECHISM, truly representing the
Doctrine and Practices of the Church of Rome.] Quarto. In 3. Discourses.

The Lay-Christian's Obligations to read the Holy Scriptures. Quarto.

The Plain Man's Reply to the Catholic Missionaries. 24o.

The Protestant's Companion: Or an Impartial Survey, and Comparison of the
Protestant Religion as by Law established, with the main Doctrines of Popery.
Wherein is shown, that Popery is contrary to Scripture, Primitive Fathers and
Councils; and that proved from Holy Writ, the Writings of the Ancient Fathers,
for several hundred Years, and the Confession of the most Learned Papists
themselves. Quarto.

Mr. Chillingworth's Book called [The Religion of Protestants a safe way to
Salvation] made more generally useful, by omitting Personal Contest, but
inserting whatsoever concerns the Common Cause of Protestants, or defends the
Church of England. With an Addition of an Useful Table, and also of some
genuine Pieces of the same Author never before Printed, viz. about Traditions,
against the Catholicism and Infallibility of the Roman Church. And an Account
of the Arguments which moved him to turn Papist, with his Confutation of the
said Arguments. Quarto.

A Discourse of the Holy Eucharist, in the two great points of the Real
Presence and the Adoration of the Host. In Answer to the Two Discourses lately
printed at Oxford on this Subject. To which is prefixed a large Historical
Preface relating to the same Argument. Quarto.

The Pillar and Ground of Truth. A Treatise showing that the Roman Church
falsely claims to be That Church, and the Pillar of That Truth, mentioned by S.
Paul in his First Epistle to Timothy, Chap. III. Verse. 15. Quarto.

A Brief Discourse concerning the Notes of the Church, with some reflections on
Cardinal Bellarmin's Fifteen Notes. Quarto.

An Examination of the Cardinal's First Note, concerning [The Name of
Catholick].

-- His Second Note, [Antiquity]. -- His Third Note, [Duration]. -- His Fourth
Note, [Amplitude or Multitude, and variety of Believers]. -- His Fifth Note,
[The Succession of Bishops]. -- His Sixth Note, [Agreement in Doctrine with the
Primitive Church]. -- His Seventh Note, [Union of the Members among themselves,
and with the Head]. -- His Eighth Note, [Sanctity of Doctrine].
(The rest will be published Weekly in their Order).

A Defense of the Confuter of Bellarmin's Second Note of the Church [Antiquitr]
against the Cavills of the Adviser. Quarto.

The Peoples Right to read the Holy Scriptures asserted. In Answer to the 6th,
7th, 8th, 9th and 10th Chapters of the [Popish Representer, Second Part].

Two Discourses: Of Purgatory and Prayers for the Dead. Quarte.

A Short Summary of the Principal Controversies between the Church of England,
and the Church of Rome. Being a Vindication of several Protestant Doctrines, in
Answer to a late Pamphlet entitled [Protestancy destitute of Scripture-Proofs].

FINIS.

