SOME Seasonable Reflections ON THE DISCOVERY OF The late Plot. BEING A SERMON
Preached on that Occasion.

By WILLIAM SHERLOCK, D. D. Rector of St. George Buttolph-lane, London.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Basset, at the George in Fleet Street. and Fincham
Gardener, at the White horse in Ludgate Street. 1683.

The Preface to the Reader.
THe reason, why I publish this Sermon, is partly to gratify the desires of
some, partly to prevent the misrepresentations of others, but chiefly for the
same end, for which I preached it, viz. to take the advantage of this present
opportunity, to make some impressions upon men's minds, which I fear at other
times, they will not so easily receive.

I hope all honest men, even Dissenters themselves, do from their hearts abhor
those villainous designs against the Life of our King, which God of his great
mercy to these Kingdoms, has so lately brought to light: and while they are
possessed with such an abhorrence of the Treason, it seems to me, to be a very
proper season to put them in mind by what means such evil designs have been
first formed and encouraged and brought to ripeness and perfection; that those,
who have been cheated into a Faction by some plausible pretenses, and have
followed the general noise and outcry in the simplicity of their hearts, may
take warning for the future, and avoid every step and advance toward Sedition
and Treason, as well as abhor the Treason it self.

It was impossible to do this, without calling to mind a great many things,
which to be sure, those who are any ways concerned, are not now willing to hear
of; and that with such plainness, as is necessary to convince men of the evil
nature and tendency of such practices: but God is my witness, that I did not
this with the least design to upbraid or reproach any men, or party of men, but
with the same honest and charitable intentions, though it may be not with the
same skill, that a Surgeon uses in searching a wound to the very bottom;
which is very painful indeed, but absolutely necessary to a Cure.

Some persons, I hear, have objected against this Discourse, that I seem to
charge this Plot upon the Protestant Dissenters, and insinuate that it is a
Fanatic, a true Protestant Plot. God forbid that all Protestant Dissenters
should be concerned in this Plot, I hope better things of many of them; nor do
I undertake to meddle with such matters. All that I meant, is nothing but what
is evident to any man, who believes a Plot, that this horrible Conspiracy has
been contrived and carried on by those men, who of late have pretended to be
the only true Protestants; a name, which they would not allow to any man, who
appeared zealously concerned either for the King, or the Church of England.
Whether such men have any Religion or none, whether they go to Conventicles, or
to give the better grace to the business, sometimes hear the Common Prayer, is
all one to me. I am sure the turbulent spirit, which has of late acted our
Dissenters, and their unwillingness to believe any Plot still, gives too just a
suspicion of many of them.

Though we are all bound to praise and adore the Divine goodness in defeating
such wicked designs, yet I am so far from triumphing over these men, that I
cannot but pity and mourn over them; my heart bleeds for that scandal, that is
done to Religion, that advantage which is given to the common enemy, for the
sin and the fall of great Men, and the ruin of Noble Families; but what is
done, cannot be undone again: our care must look forward, to times to come, to
remove the occasions, to root up the very seeds and principles of Sedition,
that these shakings and convulsions of State may at last settle in a profound
and secure Peace and Tranquillity. If this plain discourse can contribute any
thing to so happy an end, I have all that I aimed at both in Preaching and
Printing it; however, I have the satisfaction of an honest design, which is a
reward to its self; and gives that inward contentment and pleasure, which the
reproaches and censures of the World, which too often attend such undertakings,
can never disturb.

A SERMON.
XVIII. PSALM, v. 50. Great deliverance gives he to his King, and shows
mercy to his Anointed, to David and to his Seed for evermore.
THis Psalm was penned by David in a thankful remembrance of those many
wonderful deliverances, which God had wrought for him; and particularly his
deliverance from the hands of Saul, a jealous, powerful, and implacable enemy,
as we are expressly told, 2 Samuel 22. 1.

This Pious Prince, though he were immediately advanced to the Throne by God
himself, could not escape the Conspiracies of his enemies both at home and
abroad: for Men of Turbulent and restless Spirits, will be sure to find or make
some pretenses or occasions of quarrel, under the most just and equal
Government.

Sometimes men dispute the right of Succession; but this they could not do
here, unless they would dispute Gods right to place and displace Princes; for
David was immediately chosen by God, and anointed by his Prophet, and yet this
could not secure him from Conspiracies and Rebellions.

Others pretend great Oppression and Maladministration of Government, though
their licentious noises and clamours sufficiently confute it; for men, who are
most oppressed dare say the least of it. The Liberties and Properties of the
Subject, is an admirable pretense to deprive the Prince of his Liberties and
Properties; and those who have any Liberty and Property to loose, seldom gain
any thing by this: for when they have secured their Liberties and Properties
against their Prince, it is a much harder task to secure themselves from their
Fellow Subjects. Men who have no Property have some encouragement to Rebel, and
fight for Property; for it is possible they may get something in the scramble,
when all Law and Property ceases, but the property of the Sword: but methinks
men of Honor and plentiful Fortune, should not be so zealous for transferring
Properties, to enrich Beggars, and submit their necks to the Yoke and
Government of their own Slaves; which our late experience has taught us to be
the glorious effect of Rebelling for Liberty and Property.

Others make Religion a pretense for their Rebellion, Religion, the greatest
and the dearest interest of all; but methinks it is a dangerous way for men to
Rebel to save their Souls, 13 Romans 2.
when God has threatened Damnation against those who Rebel: but this is as vain
a pretense as Liberty and Property; for no men fight for Religion, who have
any. Religion is a quiet, peaceable, governable thing; it teaches men to suffer
patiently, but not to Rebel. And were there any true concernment for Religion
in this pretense, can we imagine, that the most professed Atheists, the most lewd
profligate wretches, the greatest Prodigies and Monsters of wickedness, should
be so zealous for Religion? But it is evident, it is not Religion, such men are
zealous for, but a Liberty in Religion; that is, that every one may have his
liberty to be of any Religion, or of none; which serves the Atheists turn, as
well as the Sectaries, but is not much for the honor or interest of true
Religion.

So that whatever the pretenses are, it is an ambitious, discontented,
revengeful spirit, an uneasy, restless, fickle and changeable humor, which
disturbs public Government, and undermines the Thrones of Princes; and
therefore it is no wonder, if the best Princes and the best Governments in the
world be disturbed by such men; David himself could not escape, he had a great
many enemies, but David's God was greater than they all, for great deliverance
gives he to his King, and shows mercy to his Anointed, to David and to his
seed for evermore.

There is something peculiar in these words, which cannot be applied to any
other Prince: for as David was King of Israel, so he was a Type of the Messiah,
who was to descend from his loins, and that promise or prediction that he
would show mercy to his Anointed, to David and to his seed for evermore,
received its full accomplishment, in the Kingdom of the Messiah, who is said to
set upon the Throne of David; but yet those deliverances God wrought for David,
were personal too, and an example of Gods care and protection of Pious and
Religious Princes. And when we see the same good providence watching over our
Prince, and securing him from the bloody designs of wicked men, we have reason
thankfully to acknowledge it, as David did; great deliverance he has given to
our Prince, he has shown mercy to his Anointed. Now know we, that the Lord
saves his Anointed, 20 Psalm, 6, 7, 8.
he will hear him from his holy Heaven with the saving strength of his right
hand. Some trust in Chariots, and some in Horses, but we will remember the Name
of the Lord our God: they are brought down and fallen, but we are risen and
stand upright.

My present Discourse therefore shall consist of those two parts. 1. Briefly to
observe to you, those many great Deliverances which God has wrought for our
King. 2. I shall make some practical Reflections on it, especially with
reference to this late Discovery.

1. To observe to you, those many great deliverances which God has wrought for
our King. His troubles have not been much unlike, I am sure not inferior to
David's, and his Deliverances have not been less strange and wonderful. I am not
a going to give you a History of his Life, but only to point you to some
remarkable passages of it, which it becomes us all thankfully to remember.

I suppose no man doubts, how many dangers a Prince is exposed to, who flies
before an enraged and victorious enemy; who knows not whither to go, where to
hide himself, whom to trust: this was the condition of our Dread Sovereign, who
was hunted as a Partridge in the mountains, pursued by his own Rebellious
Subjects, who had usurpt his Throne, and thirsted after his Blood. But then God
found a hiding place for him, and delivered him from the desire and expectation
of his enemies.

But still his condition was calamitous, he was forced to live in Exile and
Banishment, divested of Royal power, and all the ensigns of Majesty, reduced
to a precarious, and sometimes a necessitous state, while he saw his Friends
impoverisht and ruined, his Loyal Subjects oppressed, his Enemies triumphant, too
vigilant, and too powerful to allow any hope to see an end of these troubles.
But that God, who can do what he pleases, and oftentimes does such things, as
no humane force nor power can effect, put an end to these troubles also; and
restored him to his Fathers Throne in Peace and Honor, and with the universal
joy and triumph of his Subjects: and I suppose you will reckon this a
deliverance, a great and wonderful deliverance both to Prince and People; a
deliverance immediately wrought by God; without Humane policy, contrivance, or
power. To see a Prince whose Father was Murdered, and himself forced into
banishment by his own Subjects, without any power of his own, without the help
and assistance of Foreign Allies; while his Friends at home were oppressed,
while the same power that drove him out, was still in the hands of his enemies;
while so many persons who were in greatest power were concerned for their own
preservation to keep him out; while those who wished his return, durst not
whisper any thing tending to call the King back again; I say, to see a Prince
in such circumstances, without striking a blow, without shedding a drop of
Blood, return again in the throngs and crowds, and with the acclamations of his
Subjects, is no less a Miracle, than dividing the sea to give a safe passage to
the Israelites: for the Psalmist represents it as an argument of equal power to
still the noise of the the seas, the noise of their waves, and the tumult of
the people. 65 Psalm. 7.
This is the Lords doings, and it is mavelous in our eyes; now know we, that
the Lord saves his Anointed, he will hear him from his holy Heaven with the
saving strength of his right hand.

And that good Providence, which brought our King back again, has watched over
him ever since. Though he returned in a happy day, when the Seas were smooth
and calm, when no frowns were to be seen on men's forheads, but such cheerful
looks as signified the inward pleasure and serenity of their minds, yet it
could not be expected, that this calm would always last. I think we may now
venture to say, without fear of being censured, that there are two sorts of
men, that are restless and implacable, and always working under ground, and
both of them with an equal pretense of Religion: I mean the Papist and the
Fanatic. I shall not take notice of those several weak attempts they have made
since the happy Restoration of our Prince; there is something greater to
employ our thoughts at this time, some more signal demonstrations of that great
deliverance God gives to his King.

We have now for many years had little other discourse than of a Popish Plot, a
wicked hellish design against the Life of our King, and the Religion and
Liberties of his Subjects. This was a formidable design, laid close and in the
dark, prosecuted with deep Counsels and combined interests. We may remember,
for I think we cannot easily forget, what horror and consternation surprised us
at the news; we lived in perpetual fear of the Life of our Prince, in perpetual
fear of our own: how did the name of Popery deservedly stink among us! how did
men abhor a Religion, which is nourisht with Blood, with Royal and innocent
Blood! How zealous were men in their discoveries, how watchful in their Guards,
how devout in their Prayers for the preservation of their Prince, and of their
Religion! And though possibly we have not seen to the bottom of that Plot to
this day, and it may be never shall, yet blessed be God, there was enough
discovered to prevent the mischief; we still enjoy our Religion, we still see
our Prince, and rejoice under the benign influences of his Government;
hitherto God has saved his Anointed from a Popish, I pray God still defend him
from a Fanatic Plot.

A Fanatic, a true Protestant Plot? surely that is impossible; there can be no
danger from that corner; this is only a scandal cast upon innocent and
peaceable men. Truly this has been so often said, and with so much confidence,
that we had like not to have believed it possible, till it had been too late.
It was sufficient to prove any man to be a Papist, who durst own it possible,
for such good men to Rebel, or Plot against the King and Government; and yet it
was very hard not to think that possible to be done, which had been done once
already, and that so lately, as not to be forgot, though it was pardoned; an
Act of Oblivion could not wipe it out of men's memories, especially when they
saw the same things begin to be acted over again, with the same Religious
pretenses. I am apt to think, we had been more secure from the Popish Plot,
than for ought I know, we may yet be, had not these men abused peoples fears
and dangers of Popery to the disturbance of the Government, and to the carrying
on their Antimonarchical and Fanatic designs. We remember how soon the Popish
Plot was turned into a great noise and cry against the Church of England; and
no way was thought so fit to keep out Popery, as to pull down the Church; and
thus the poor Church of England, which had escaped the rage and fury of Rome,
had like to have been sacrificed to a true Protestant zeal, which no doubt had
given a fatal blow to Popery. Hoc Ithacus velit, and magni mercentur Atridae.

How things proceeded after this to the disturbance of the public peace, and
the interruption of the ordinary course of Justice, you all know, as well as I;
and wise men quickly saw, and honest men could not forbear warning the people,
whither these things tended: and they met with a good reward for it; they were
all Papists in Masquerade, and especially the Loyal Clergy were loaded with all
the contempt and ignominy, which an enraged and envenomed zeal, and some
witless scriblers could cast on them. Whole vollies of Pamphlets flew about to
poison the people with lewd and Seditious Principles; but to talk or write or
preach about Obedience to Government, or patient suffering for a good cause,
was to betray the Protestant Interest, and to invite a Popish Successor to cut
our Throats: and what all this ends in, thanks be to God, we now see, and I
hope, time enough to prevent it.

I do not pretend to tell you any thing which you do not all know; Time, and
the care of our Governors, and the guilty Consciences of Rebels, and the good
providence of God, I hope, will make further Discoveries, and bring these
secret works of darkness into open view; but we know enough to praise God for
his great deliverance, which he has given his King; we know enough to admire
and adore that infinite wisdom who by the most seemingly casual and contingent
events, can so easily disappoint and defeat the designs of wicked and bloody
men. Who ever suspected, that the fire at Newmarket was sent by God for the
preservation of our King and his Royal Brother, for the preservation of these
Kingdoms, of our Liberties and Religion? Wonderful are thy works, O Lord, and
thy ways past finding out.

This short account I have given you, is an excellent Comment upon my Text, a
case very parallel to David's. The deliverances of our Prince are no way
inferior to that mercy God showed to David, when he delivered him from the
Lion and the Bear, from the uncircumcised Philistin, from a persecuting Saul,
from a Rebellious Absalom, from a Treacherous Achitophel, from the strivings of
the people. Great deliverance shows he to his King, and shows mercy to his
Anointed.

2. And thus I proceed to make some practical Remarks and Observations on this,
which was the thing I principally designed. And they are these.

1. What a vain and fruitless attempt it is to Plot against the Life and Crown
and Dignity of our Prince, when God undertakes the defense and protection of
him. Setting aside the wickedness and impiety of it, it is a foolish and
dangerous design. Whoever considers only the probable events of humane actions,
will be easily convinced, how unlikely it is, that such Plots should take
effect. To miss the very critical m^nute, spoils all the design; and yet after
all the skill and contrivance they can use, there are ten thousand casualties
to disappoint them. Such designs cannot be acted alone, but require numerous
confederates; and what security can there be, that no one man in such a number
shall betray the Secret? Some possibly may be touched with remorse and horror of
Conscience, may be frighted with the very thoughts of that Villainy which they
designed to act; and then they need no body to betray them but themselves, for
no man can long together conceal the fire, which burns in his own breast. Other
men may get into the company, and acquaint themselves with all their Intrigues,
and act so cunning a part, as to be mistaken for confiding persons; may appear
most zealous and most forward in the business, and all this while betray their
Counsels, and put an effectual stop to them, when they are ripe for execution:
and it is impossible for the cunningest men to prevent this, who have not a
Casement into men's Breasts. Other men, who enter into the Confederacy to make
their Fortunes, may happen to consider, that it is much the safest and most
effectual way to do this by discovering the Plot, than by acting it. The power
of Wine sometimes unlocks a Secret, and saves a Kingdom; some unexpected
Quarrels and Animosities among the Conspirators, a mutual jealousy of each
others greatness; a hasty dispute about dividing the Riches and Honors and
Power of the Nation, before they have it, may tempt them to hang one another,
and leave the Spoil which they had already devoured in their hopes and
expectations, to the right owners.

A desire to rescue some friend out of the common ruin, may save a Kingdom.
Walls and Hedges have Ears, and the very Birds of the Air may tell the matter.
Their Cabals may be observed and suspected, and their affectation of Secrecy
may betray them. Their guilt is often seen in their looks, and creates
jealousies and suspicions of some secret design; and an unlucky word, which he
meant nothing by, who spoke it, may make them think themselves discovered; and
this is a ready way to make them discover themselves. The Heart of the stoutest
Rebel may fail him, when he comes to give the fatal blow; or he may miss of his
aim, or his Gun may not go off, or he may distrust his own escape, and not be
hardy enough to sacrifice his own life in the Cause; and a thousand other
accidents, which it is impossible for me to reckon up, may save the Devoted
Prince, and Hang the Conspirators: and those had need be men of very desperate
Fortunes, or very little understanding, who engage in such desperate designs.

But when to this we add the consideration of the Divine Providence, which
peculiarly interests it self in the disposal of Kingdoms, and in all the great
Changes and Revolutions of Public affairs, unless these men were of the
Privy Council of Heaven, and could hold intelligence with the Secret Decrees
and purposes of God for the Government of the World, they can never be secure
of Success, how hopeful soever their projects and designs appear.

If God take any care of human affairs, if he concern himself at all in the
Government of the World, we may certainly conclude that his providence does
principally order the Fate and Revolutions of Kingdoms and Commonwealths. Some
Philosophers have questioned, whether God condescended so far, as to take
notice of particular creatures; but all who acknowledged his Providence,
thought the great Concernments of Kingdoms, the placing or displacing of
Princes, worthy of his care and peculiar regard: and therefore we, who are
assured by our Savior, that Gods care and providence extends to the Sparrows,
and the Lilies of the Field, cannot doubt, whether he Rules and Governs in the
Kingdoms of men, whether he who takes care of every particular creature, takes
care of the general concernments of humane Societies, wherein the happiness of
all particular men is involved. And can these men then think to pull down and
to set up Princes at their pleasure? God may sometimes suffer Treason and
Rebellion to be prosperous, but it can never prosper, but when God pleases; and
it is impossible Rebels should ever know that, and therefore it is impossible,
they should have any reasonable security of success.

There is nothing more expressly contrary to the revealed will of God, than
Treasonable Plots and Conspiracies against Sovereign Princes: and though God
does many times permit those things to be done, which he has forbid to be done,
or else no man could ever be Guilty of any Sin; yet his forbidding of it is a
plain argument, that he does not approve it, that he will not countenance it,
nay, that he will not permit it, but where he sees great and wise reasons to do
so.

God never indeed interposes by an irresistible power to hinder men from
choosing that which is wicked, for he offers no force and violence to men's
Wills: but when this wickedness is injurious to others, who are the objects of
his care and providence, he many times interposes to prevent the mischief. The
lives of private men are not at the disposal of every Ruffian; not a Sparrow
falls to the ground without our Father, much less a man, much less a Prince, on
whose life and fortune the lives and fortunes of so many thousands depend.

And therefore no man can reasonably promise himself success in Plotting
against his Prince, but he who certainly knows, that God for some wise but
hidden reasons, will suffer such a Villainy to take effect; which no man can
know without a Revelation; and we cannot think, that God will encourage any man
by an extraordinary Revelation to do that, which he himself has expressly
forbid, and threatened with Eternal death.

So that all such men act at infinite uncertainties; besides the punishments of
the other World, which are reserved for Traitors; besides the many Natural
contingencies and uncertainties of humane actions: if they believe, that there
is a Providence which Governs the World, they have ten thousand to one against
them, that God will not permit them to do, what they design: and those are bold
men indeed, who dare vie Stratagems and Power with God!

Especially when they Plot against a Prince who seems to be the Darling of
Providence, who has received so many wonderful and miraculous deliverances, as
if he were still reserved for some Extraordinary service in the World. One
would have thought, the discovery of the Popish Plot, which no doubt was
managed with as much Secrecy, with as wary Councils, and deep Intrigues, as any
thing ever was, should have discouraged any new attempts in this Age: it should
have brought to mind that Triumphant Psalm, 2 Psalm. 1, 2, 3, 4.
Why do the Heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing? the Kings of the
earth stand up, and the Rulers take Counsel together (a more powerful Faction
than some private Malcontents) against the Lord, and against his Anointed,
saying, Let us break their Bonds asunder, and cast away their Cords from us. He
that dwells in the Heavens shall laugh them to scorn, the Lord shall have
them in derision. At least it is time now to take warning, lest we be found
fighters against God: it is a vain and a dangerous attempt to conspire his
ruin, whom God has hitherto so miraculously preserved.

Secondly, There is another Observation on these late Plots and Conspiracies,
which no man can avoid making, and that is, how dangerous the disputes and
differences of Religion are to the public Peace and welfare of any Nation.
Christian Religion indeed is the greatest security of Government, both in its
precepts and examples; It commands every Soul to be subject to the higher
powers, and threatens eternal Damnation against Rebels; It teaches us to give
to every one their due; Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom,
Fear to whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor. It strictly enjoins the practice of
all sociable Virtues, and charms those boisterous passions, which disturb
humane conversation; it requires us to obey our Superiors in all lawful
things, and quietly to submit and suffer, when we cannot obey. And the blessed
Jesus, who was the Author of our Religion, and our great Pattern and Example,
did himself practice these Laws, which he gave to us. He lived in obedience to
the Civil powers; and though the Jewish Nation, which was a free people, the
lot and inheritance of God himself, were then in subjection to the Romans, yet
he would not give them the least encouragement to shake off the yoke, but
commands them to give nnto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the
things that are Gods. Though he was a King, yet he was not Caesar's Rival; for
his Kingdom was not of this world, and therefore he did not arm his Subjects to
fight for him, as he told Pilate. 18 Joh. 36.
His Kingdom was not to be set up in the world by force and power, but he gave
testimony to the truth with his Blood, and commanded his Disciples to do so
too. He died himself upon the Cross, and made this the condition of our
Discipleship, to take up our Cross and follow him; and thus the Apostles and
the Primitive Christians did, they cheerfully followed their Master to the
Cross, and conquered by suffering. Christianity was planted in the world by no
other arts but the foolishness of Preaching, by preaching that absurd and
ridiculous Doctrine, as the world then accounted it, of a Crucified Jesus; and
it defended it self only by a resolute and patient suffering for the Name of
Christ. This is the true temper and spirit of Christianity. Under the most
barbarous and persecuting Emperors, no Christian ever suffered as a Rebel;
they gave no other disturbance to the Government, than by confessing themselves
Christians, and suffering for it. Their numbers indeed were very formidable,
but nothing else; for in imitation of their great Master, they went as Lambs to
the slaughter, and as sleep before their shearers are dumb, so they opened not
their mouths.

But notwithstanding this, our daily experience tells us, that when Religion is
divided into Factions and Parties, or rather men are divided into Factions and
Parties upon account of Religion, there is nothing more imbitters men's spirits
against each other, nor gives greater disturbance to public Government. All
the troubles and miseries, which for these late years have overwhelmed this
unfortunate Island, have been owing to this cause; Religion has been made
either the reason or the pretense of all: Papists plot and conspire the death
of a Protestant Prince to bring in Popery, and professed Protestants, it seems,
do the same thing to keep out Popery; and thus a Protestant Prince, and a truly
Protestant, or rather a true Primitive and Apostolic Church, is in danger of
both.

And is there not great reason then for Princes, who love their Lives and their
Crowns, to keep a watchful eye over such busy, potent, and dangerous Factions?
shall it be called Persecution for Religion, to punish Traitors, or to keep
under a factious and turbulent Spirit? If the Consciences of Subjects will
serve them to Rebel for Religion, it seems a very hard case, if the Conscience
of the Prince must not allow him to hang 'em for their Rebellion: and yet no
wise Prince will put it upon that hazard neither, if he can help it, to suffer
his Subjects to deserve to be hanged. To curb a growing Faction by prudent and
timely Restraints, is a much better and safer way.

The truth of this is readily owned, when it is applied to the Papists. They
are men of such dangerous Principles and Practices, as not to be suffered to
live in any Protestant Kingdom; and truly so they are, and thanks be to God, we
have very good Laws against them; and whatever they may do in private, they
dare not outface Government with their public and numerous Conventicles; they
walk in the dark, and dare not own themselves to be what they are.

But yet I cannot but wonder upon what Principles those men Act, who are so
Zealous against Popery, and think it such an unpardonable fault in Governors,
to suffer any Papist, especially a Popish Priest, though never so obscurely and
privately, to live among us, and yet at the same time think it Persecution, a
horrible Persecution, not to grant a general Liberty and Indulgence to all
other Dissenters. The difference between these two cases must either respect
their Religion, or the security of the Government.

As for their Religion, I believe Popery to be a very corrupt Religion, and the
greatest Apostasy from Christianity of any other Sect or Profession, which
deserves the name of Christian; but yet I am so professed an enemy to Popery,
that Iabhor that Popish principle of persecuting men merely for Religions sake,
which can no more be justified in Protestants against Papists, than in Papists
against Protestants. It is certainly the duty of a Prince to use his power and
interest to Establish the true Religion in his Kingdoms, to encourage the
sincere professors of it, and to lay such restraints upon others, as may be
sufficient to make them consider, and hearken to wise instructions, that it may
be no man's temporal interest to dissent from the Religion of his Prince: and it
is the duty of Church-Governors not to receive any into the Communion of the
Church, or to cast them out again, who do not profess the same Faith, or will
not conform to the Worship and Discipline of the Church. And this is all, that
I know of in this matter; and if men will call this Persecution, it is a sign,
they know not what Persecution means; for the Primitive Christians, who were
indeed persecuted, would have thought such usage as this, a very easy and
prosperous State.

So that the difference must lie, if any where, in the Security of the
Government. That no Protestant Prince or Kingdom, can be secured from the
attempts and Conspiracies of Papists, whose Principles and Practices are
destructive to Government: and this is the very true reason of those severe
Laws, which were made in this Kingdom against Popery. And it must be
acknowleged, that there was formerly a vast difference between Papists and
Protestants upon this account, and therefore a sufficient reason for any Prince
to make a difference between them; and I wish, I could say, it were so still,
but I dare not, I cannot say so. To deny that professed Protestants have ever
Rebelled against their Prince, is to deny, that there ever was a Civil War in
England, that there ever was a Protestant Prince Murdered by his Protestant
Subjects with all the mock-formalities of Law and Justice; and he must have
somewhat more than the impudence of a Jesuit, that can deny this. And I would
to God, we had but one instance of this, though that was a very bad one; it
might have left some place for hope still, that this was not the temper nor the
Principles of the men, but some unlucky juncture of Affairs, which transported
them beyond the bounds of their Duty, and their own avowed Principles. The
happy Restoration of our Banished Prince might in some measure have expiated
their former guilt, and they might have recovered their innocence, and the
reputation of Protestant Loyalty, had they manifested the sincerity of their
repentance by abhorring all the Principles and Practices of Rebellion: but he
must be a bold man indeed, who dares make excuses for those who prove Rebels a
second time; and he must be a bolder Prince, who will trust them.

And when every little Creature is so vastly concerned for Liberty and
Property, can we think our Prince should be the only unconcerned Person, when
the Liberty and Property of his own Life and Crown is at stake? Or can any
reasonable man expect, that he should encourage those Religious Factions, which
by frequent experience he finds troublesome and dangerous to his Throne? When
Religion turns into a State-faction, to curb and restrain and quell such
pretenses, is not to invade the rights of Conscience, or the liberties of
Religion, but to secure the public Peace, and to prevent the occassions of new
Rebellions. And no sober Dissenter can reasonably blame his Prince for this,
though he may blame those, and ought to express a just indignation against
them, who forfeit this liberty by abusing it for a Cloak of maliciousness.

And if we ever desire to see the peace and prosperity of our Sion, is it not
high time to unite in Religion, which is the only thing, that can bless us
with a firm and lasting peace? All our late troubles have been owing to the
differences of Religion; and while the cause of dissentions remains, though
there may be some expedients at present found out to palliate the distemper,
yet nothing can remove it. All men seem to be very sensible of this, and very
desirous of an Union; but the question is, how or in what we shall Unite.

Shall we unite in Popery? God forbid! the salvation of our Souls is somewhat
dearer to us than temporal peace, and that we believe to be exposed to infinite
hazard in the Communion of so corrupt a Church. A firm and universal Agreement
indeed in any thing, will secure the public peace, but we must not make our
Religion so wholly subordinate to temporal ends. If we can save our Souls, and
secure the public peace together, such a Religion ought to be chosen upon a
double account; but if both these interests cannot be united, we must take care
to save our Souls, and trust the Providence of God with our other concernments.

Shall we then unite with the different Sects and Parties of Christians, which
are among us? This is to unite without Union. It is to unite indeed against
something, but to unite in nothing. The several parties of Dissenters, who
separate from the Church of England, differ as much from each other, as they do
from us. They may unite and combine together in pulling down, but they can
never unite in setting up any thing: they can unite in Tumults, and public
Disturbances, but they can never unite in Peace. When they had pulled down the
Church of England, they could set up nothing in its room, but a prodigious
increase of Heresies and Schisms.

There is nothing then to unite in, but the Church of England, as by Law
established, which will both secure the interests of our Souls and the public
peace. And why should we not unite in this Church? which is the Glory and the
Bulwark of the Reformation, the envy and the terror of Rome. Whose Fathers and
first Reformers were Martyrs against Popery, and who her self has been a Martyr
for Loyalty. Those infinite dangers we are surrounded with on all hands,
methinks should strongly incline all honest men, impartially to examine the
reasons of their Separation: and I am confident, not only what has been
formerly written in the Defense of this Church, but what has been lately
offered for the satisfaction of Dissenters, would open the Eyes of all sincere
men to see their mistakes, if they would but calmly, without prejudice or
passion, read and consider it. It is demonstrable, we can unite no where else;
and is it a desirable state, to be perpetually struggling and contending with
intestine Commotions? to be hating, reviling, undermining, each other? For Gods
sake, beloved Christians, let us at last consider the things which make for
peace, and those things, whereby we may edify each other. And in order to do
this, I observe further,

3. How dangerous a rash boisterous intemperate Zeal is, though it be for the
best things, and against the worst. Whatever private discontents, revengeful or
ambitious designs, might secretly act some great men, who know how to practice
upon the zeal and the ignorance of the people; yet nothing is more evident,
than that the first visible occasion of these new Troubles and Conspiracies,
which have endangered the Life of our King, and the Ruin of his Government,
was laid in a mighty zeal against Popery, and for the preservation of the
Protestant Religion. The Popish Plot was the first Scene in this new Tragedy.
Those bloody designs raised the fears, the jealousies, the indignation of men;
and a love to their Prince and to their Religion, kindled and blew up their
Zeal into such a violent flame, as threatened an universal desolation, and
became more formidable, than the danger it intended to remove. A great and
passionate Zeal, like a distempered love, blinds men's eyes, and makes them
mistake both their Enemies and their Friends. It fills their head with endless
jealousies and fears, and makes them start and run away from their own shadow.
Such a boisterous Zeal is the Frenzy and Calenture of Religion, which makes men
incapable of all sober Counsel, and prudent Resolves, and precipitates them
into the most wild extravagant and irreligious attempts. There is nothing more
pernicious than Zeal when it gets a head, and bears down all the considerations
of Reason and Religion before it. When men are conscious to themselves, that
they are engaged in a good Cause, and have honest designs, it makes them more
bold and venturous: for though few men dare own it, yet the actions of too many
sufficiently proclaim, that they think they may strain a point, and dispense
with strict duty, when it is to serve a good Cause, when the honor of God, and
the interest of Religion is concerned: such a zeal does violently push men
forward, but it does not steer well, nor observe its Compass; and thus it is
too often seen, that men who begin with a zeal for Religion, insensibly slip
into State-Factions, and are engaged vastly beyond what they first designed,
and engaged so far, that they cannot retreat with safety or honor, but must
either Conquer or be Conquered.

Let us then above all things have a care of our Zeal, that we may not mistake
an earthly fire, which burns and consumes, for that divine and harmless flame,
which is kindled at Gods Altar. A true Zeal for Religion, is nothing more nor
less, than such a hearty love for it, as makes us very diligent in the practice
of it our selves, and contented, if God sees it fit, to lay down our lives for
it, and very industrious to promote the knowledge and practice of Religion in
the world by all lawful and prudent means. A true Christian Zeal will not
suffer us to transgress the strict bounds of our duty to God, or of our duty to
Men, especially to Kings and Princes, whatever flattering prospect of advantage
it may give. To lie, to forswear our selves, to hate and revile each other, to
Reproach and Libel Governors in Church and State, to stir up, or countenance
with the least thought, any Plots, Seditions, or Rebellions against the King,
is not a Zeal for God, nor for Religion; for this wisdom is not from above, but
is earthly, sensual and devilish: for where strife and contention is, there is
confusion, and every evil work.

4. Let our past experience therefore teach us, to watch over the least
stirrings, and first appearances of a seditious and factious Spirit, either in
our selves or others, however it may be disguised with a pretense of Religion.
Faction, like other Vices, has but very small beginnings; but when those
beginnings are indulged, it soon improves and gests strength. Omne in
proecipiti vitium stetit: when men once espouse a Party, like those, who are a
running down hill, they cannot stop, when they please. Discontents and
Jealousies are easily fomented, when we have once given admission to them; and
the busy Factors and Agents for Sedition, when they find us never so little
disposed and prepared to receive the impression, use their utmost art and
skill, all the methods of insinuation and address, to make us Proselytes. I
doubt not but many men have died Rebels, and suffered as Traitors, who at first
did as much abhor the thoughts of Treason and Rebellion, as any of us can. Thus
I doubt not but it was in our late Troubles, and thus I believe it is at this
day.

Let such examples as these make us wary, how we begin to entertain, or to
whisper our Discontents and Fears; how we begin to listen to suspicions of our
Prince, or of his Government, and to hear with pleasure, any scandalous stories
or reflections on either: those who can with content and pleasure hear their
Prince, and his Government reviled, will soon think him not fit to be their
King.

And the great danger of such beginnings is, that we are not apt to observe
them in our selves or others, when Religion is concerned in the quarrel. We
think it all Zeal, pure zeal, and cannot suspect our selves or others, to be in
any danger of turning Rebels. But whatever is in its own nature a degree and
tendency toward Rebellion, is so, where ever, and in whomsoever it is found;
and there is always more danger, that the beginnings of Vice should corrupt the
best temper of Mind, than any hope, that a sound and Religious disposition
should correct the malign influences of such a Vice. Some men's Religion does as
much incline them to Faction, as secular interest does other men; and there is
no such dangerous Faction, as that which is bred and nourished by the
Corruptions of Religion. The Jewish Zealots, and the Christian Enthusiasts of
all sorts, are too plain an example of it. And therefore when men, who make
great pretenses to Religion begin to talk or act Factiously, a fair opportunity
is as like to make them Rebels as any other men. Thus we often see it is, and
this is a sufficient reason to suspect all such beginnings, either in our
selves or others, whatever glorious pretenses we may have.

Let this at last teach us to learn from experience. One would wonder* that
there should be any occasion for such an Observation as this: for those, who
have not understanding nor reach enough to foresee the issues and events of
things, yet when they have once seen, what the events of such actions have
been, when they see the same things acted over again, they expect to see the
same effects. Thus indeed it usually is, thus it ought to be, if men ever
intend to grow wise and happy; and yet our late observations will tell us, that
it is not always thus. For if it had, the same Game would never have been
played over twice, by many of the same men, in the same Age, and by the same
Arts and Methods, and yet the people deluded, and the world bore in hand, that
they designed nothing less, than to play the same Game again.

We saw all the Zeal, and all the Intrigues of 40. and 41. return again, and
yet it was an unpardonable crime for any man to say so, or for any man to look
as if he thought so. The cry against Popery was renewed, but indeed with a
great deal more reason, than they formerly had, for we were in eminent danger
of Popery; which is the only difference between those times and ours: but then
our real fears and dangers of Popery were presently abused to Factious designs,
and made a property of to serve some more secret Intrigues. The old cry was
against Popish Bishops, and a Popish Liturgy, and Popish Ceremonies, and in a
word, against the Popish Church of England; but one would have thought it
impossible, that ever the Church should at this time have been charged with
Popery, when the Popish Plot was principally intended against the Church of
England, and our King as the Supreme Governor and Defender of it; and yet this
was done too, and the King and the Church had like to have been brought into
the Plot against themselves. We heard new stories told of the growth of Popery
and Arbitrary Government, when thanks be to God, we saw nor felt no such thing.
This was the main subject of those infinite numbers of Pamphlets, that flew
about; the Bishops and Clergy were sure never to escape, besides those many
oblique and scurrilous reflections, which were made upon the King and his
Government: and it is hard to name any step, which was formerly taken to ruin
Church and State, which these men could possibly take, and did not. And yet few
men would see, whither all this tended, though no men were thought fit for any
public Trust or Office, but those who were eminent for their disaffection to
Church or State. I hope your eyes are opened now, to see what all this meant;
and methinks it is but a reasonable request to you, that if ever we should be
so unhappy, as to see these things acted over again, you would not need being
put in mind, what the natural tendencies and consequents are; which is the
only reason why I mention them now. We had like to have paid very dear for
disbelieving our own eyes and senses, and former experience; it is certainly a
cheaper and safer way to learn by former experiences than by new ones.

6. Let us now learn how dangerous a thing it is to interrupt the ordinary
Course and Methods of Justice, let the pretense be what it will. Justice is the
only support and security of Humane Societies; and a stop or a breach here, is
as fatal and dangerous, as a failure in the foundation, or the main pillars,
which support the building. When men are rescued from the hands of Justice,
against the most clear and notorious Evidence, upon a mere presumption of their
innocence, and a good opinion of them. What security can there be to the
Government, when let men do what they will, if they can get and maintain a
reputation of Zealous Patriots for their Country and Religion, they are out of
the reach of Justice? Had not the good Providence of God interposed, this very
thing might have cost our King his Life and his Crown, and involved this
miserable Nation in a bloody War This Plot might possibly have been discovered
sooner, before it was so ripe for execution, had Justice had its due course;
which I think, it becomes all Persons, who are concerned in it, seriously to
consider, with such guilt and confusion, as it deserves.

7. I observe, that in times of public danger, when we have Enemies on both
sides, it concerns us to keep a watchful eye upon both extremes. It is indeed a
very hard thing to do this, but it is impossible we should be safe without it.
While our thoughts are wholly employed to secure our selves on one hand, where
our danger is present and visible, it gives opportunity to an unseen and
unobserved Enemy, to assault us on the other.

When the Popish Plot was discovered, all men's mouths were opened against
Popery; we saw no other Enemy, we feared none, we suspected none; nay, when
there was too much reason for our suspicions, we would believe none; we thought
it impossible, that men, who expressed such an abhorrence and detestation of the
Popish Plot, should be laying new Plots themselves. And we see now, what
advantage they made of our security. And now the great danger is, that the
Discovery of this Anti-Popish Plot, should make men secure of Popery, and think
there is no danger now from that corner. For my part, I am abundantly
satisfied, that we are in great danger of both, and in the greater danger of
both, because their contrary assaults give great advantages to each other. The
Papists now may Father their Plots upon Protestants, and Protestants upon
Papists; and we may be involved in Blood and Confusion, and neither know our
Friends nor our Enemies. God of his infinite mercy preserve our King and these
Kingdoms, our Liberties, Laws, and Religion, from the wicked conspiracies* of
all our Enemies.

Which is the last thing I shall recommend to you, to praise God for his
preservation of our King hitherto, and earnestly to beg, that the same good
Providence would still watch over him for the time to come.

And certainly if ever we had reason to praise God for any Deliverance, we have
for this, which is such a comprehensive mercy, as extends to all our
concernments of Soul and Body in this world. If we value our own Lives, our
Liberties, and Religion, if we value the Security of the Government, and the
public peace and safety, we have reason to bless God for the preservation of
our King. Who can without horror consider, what a distracted face of things we
had seen at this day, had this Plot taken effect? who knows, who should have
acted his part in that Tragedy? by what Mark or Test, they would have
distinguished Friends from Enemies? Or what comfort had it been to any Loyal
Subject, and good Christian, to have survived the Murder of his Prince, and the
ruins of Church and State, and to have been an eyewitness of those barbarous
Villainies, which would have been acted under a Mask of Religion? Blessed be
that God, who gives deliverance to his King, and shows mercy to his
Anointed. Blessed be that Alwise Being, who sits upon the Circle of the
Heavens, and sees and laughs at, and defeats all the most secret Plots and
Conspiracies of wicked men. Let us bless God, and let us honor our King, and
receive him with Joy and Thanksgiving as a new Gift and Present from the hands
of God. When we are heartily thankful for the mercies we have already received,
this will make our prayers more effectual for the continuance of them.

O Lord save the King, who puts his trust in thee: send him help from thy
holy place, and evermore mightily defend him: let his enemies have no advantage
against him, nor the wicked approach to hurt him. Which God of his infinite
mercy grant, through our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and the
holy Ghost, be honor and glory and power, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

