Humble and Modest PROPOSALS Tendered to the Consideration of Both Houses of
PARLIAMENT, FOR UNITING THE Protestant Interest IN THIS NATION For the Present
Age, And preventing our DIVISIONS for Future.

LONDON: Printed for C. P. and are to be sold in the Strand. 1680.

Humble and Modest PROPOSALS For Uniting the PROTESTANT INTEREST IN THIS NATION.
I Doubt not but every pious and sober Protestant of this Nation is now in
great grief and anguish of heart to observe the passionate Differences and
unchristian Dissentions, which daily increase amongst Christians united in one
and the same Doctrine of their Religion, and reformed from the Errors and
Superstition of the Church of Rome; which cannot but oblige every serious man
who wishes Peace and Prosperity to the Kingdom he lives in, to consider what
should be the occasion of those unhappy and ruinous Divisions we have so long
suffered under, and to offer probable means for the composing of them.

As to their first rise, I doubt not but they owe their Original to the
different manner of the Reformation, and the establishing of the Orders which
each Church did think fit and convenient for it self, (as the Reverend and
Pious Mr. Hooker acquaints us) which were so peremptorily established under
that high commanding Form, which rendered them to the People as things
everlastingly required by the Law of that Lord of Lords, against whose Statutes
there is no exception to be taken; by which means it came to pass, that one
Church could not but accuse and condemn another of disobedience to the Will of
Christ, in those things where manifest difference was between them: Whereas the
self-same Orders allowed, but yet established in more wary and suspense manner,
as being to stand in force till God should give the opportunity of some general
Conference what might be best for them afterward to do; This, I say, had both
prevented all occasion of just dislike which others might take, and reserved a
greater liberty unto the Authors themselves of entering into farther
consultation afterward; which, though never so necessary, they could not
easily now admit, without some fear of derogation from their Credit: And
therefore that which once they had done, they became for ever after resolute to
maintain.

Now if we consider the shortness of that time wherein our first Reformation
continued under Edward the Sixth, and the necessity of many learned and pious
Ministers of the Church of England to flee into foreign Countries (as
Strasburgh, Geneva, etc.) in Queen Mary's Reign, for the preservation of their
lives, where they frequently conversed with those eminent Divines, who were the
great Reformers there; it is no wonder that some of them should return better
pleased with their Discipline than their own, especially considering that
several of them had intimate Acquaintance and Conversation with one of the
Reformers, whom the Reverend Mr. Hooker thought incomparably the wisest man
that ever the French Church did enjoy since the hour it enjoyed him. In Queen
Elizabeth's, King James, and our late Sovereign's Reigns, it is well known how
our Differences still increased, until that unhappy War broke out, by which the
Nonconforming Interest prevailed, so that the Presbyterian Discipline was
endeavored to be fixed as the established Form of Government in this Nation;
our Universities, Preachers, Writings, Education, etc. were generally modelled
thereto: by which means the greatest number of the Trading part of the Kingdom,
many of the Gentry, and some few of the Nobility (observing the Precepts and
Practices, Life's and Deaths of most of that Clergy to be pious and exemplary)
joined with men of this or the like Persuasion. Since which time it pleased God
to restore our present Sovereign to his Throne, and the Wisdom of the Nation
thought it convenient to establish the same Discipline which our first
Reformers judged prudential; not abating or leaving indifferent those
Ceremonies, which unhappily have occasioned those hither-to-irreconcilable
Differences between the Church of England and the Dissenters in it, and have
been matter of dispute between the Reformers, even from the first Reformation
from Popery: Upon which account many of the Nonconforming Divines laid down
their Livings, and the old Disputes began afresh to be revived; and so are like
to be continued, until we be either ruined by Popery, or healed by Moderation,
which is the only Salve to cure the Churches wounds, and that admirable
Weapon-Salve formerly proposed to the wisdom of Superiors by the Reverend Dr.
Stillingfleet; who having highly commended the prudence and temper of the
French Churches in composing their public Forms of Prayer, that they were so
far from inserting any thing controversial into them, that Papists themselves
would use them. And says he, The same temper was used by our Reformers in the
composing our Liturgy in reference to the Papists, to whom they had an
especial eye, as being the only Party then appearing, whom they desired to
draw into their Communion, by coming as near them as they well and safely
could. And certainly those holy men who did seek by any means to draw in others
at such a distance from their Principles as the Papists were, did never intend
by what they did for that end to exclude any truly tender Consciences from
their Communion. That which they had laid as a Bait for them, was never
intended by them as a Hook for those of their own Prefession; but the same or
greater Reason which made them at that time yield so far to them then, would
now have persuaded them to alter and lay aside those things which yield matter
of offense to any of the same Profession with themselves now: For surely none
will be so uncharitable toward those of his own Profession, as not to think
there is as much reason to yield in compliance with them, as with the Papists.
And it cannot but be looked upon as a Token of God's severe displeasure against
us, if any, though unreasonable Proposals of Peace between us and the Papists,
should meet with such entertainment among many, and yet any fair offers of
Union and Accommodation among our selves be so coldly embraced and entertained.
Thus far our Reverend and Learned Dean of Paul's. Upon these and some other like
Considerations, I should humbly propose to the Wisdom of this present
Parliament, some probable means to put an end to our present Differences, and
to Unite us for the future; that so we may become a flourishing Nation, free
from the Factions and Divisions of former Ages.

For the First.
1. I Humbly propose, That the Ceremonies at present enjoined by Law, might be
left to the liberty of the Clergy to use or lay aside; and that because the
Dissenters on the one hand do declare that their conformity to them would be
sinful, and the Church of England on the other hand has not only declared
upon our first Reformation in the account she has given of Ceremonies, why
some be abolished and some retained, That as those Ceremonies were taken away
which were most abused, and did burden men's Consciences without any cause; so
the other that remain are retained for a Discipline and Order, which (upon just
cause) may be altered and changed. But since his Majesty's Restoration, the
Church of England has again declared in her Preface to the Common Prayer, That
the particular Forms of Divine Worship, and the Rites and Ceremonies appointed
to be used, being things in their own nature indifferent and alterable, and so
acknowledged; it is but reasonable that upon weighty and important
Considerations, according to the various exigency of times and occasions, such
changes should be made therein, as to those that are in place of Authority
should from time to time seem either necessary or expedient. Accordingly we
find that in the Reigns of several Princes of blessed memory since the
Reformation, the Church upon just and weighty consideration her thereunto
moving, has yielded to make such Alterations in some particulars, as in their
respective times were thought convenient. Thus far the Church of England. And
of late I find, that a very eminent Member thereof, the Reverend Dean of
Canterbury, has acquainted us in a public Sermon preached by him at the
Yorkshire- Feast, That though it was not for private persons to undertake in
matters of public concernment, yet he thought he had no cause to doubt but the
Governors of our Church (notwithstanding all the advantages of Authority and
Reason too, as they thought, on their side) were persons of that Piety and
Prudence, that for Peace sake, and in order to a firm Union amongst
Protestants, they would be content, if that would do it, not to insist upon
little things, but to yield them up, whether to the infirmity or importunity,
or, perhaps, in some very few things, to the plausible exceptions of those that
differed from them.

Now seeing the Church of England has once and again declared her excellent
temper and moderation for the preservation of Peace and Unity in the Church,
the great end and design of all Church Government, we have little reason to
question her readiness (at such a time as this is) to comply with so modest a
Proposal as a liberty of using or refusing those Ceremonies, which she says,
In their own nature are indifferent and alterable, and upon weighty and
important considerations, may be changed, etc. especially considering that by
this condescension of hers, she will certainly bring into her Communion a great
number of the pious, moderate, and more considerative Non-conformists: Which
will not only add strength to her self, but give a great joy and content to
all those who have wished well to the Peace, Unity, and Prosperity of this our
Church and Nation; and have long made it the subject of their Prayers, that
they might live to see those days in England, wherein Judah might not vex
Ephraim, nor Ephraim envy Judah.

2. I would likewise humbly propose, That the rest of the Protestant Dissenters
from the Church of England, might be indulged by Act of Parliament, provided
they neither Preached, Wrote, nor discoursed against the Doctrine or Government
of the Church as by Law established; and that, because Charity, which is kind,
and thinks no evil, would oblige a sober and indifferent person to believe that
the reason of their Separation from our Church, did only proceed from a
tenderness of Conscience (impressed upon them by the force of their Education,
Study, Conversation, etc.) lest in complying with the present established Form
of Worship, they should sin against God, and wound the peace of their own
Souls: for otherwise their own present quiet and interest must necessarily have
obliged them to a different Practice, they having been under a continual danger
and hazard of the execution of the Laws at present established against them;
whereby they have been not only deprived of that Maintenance which by the
countenance of Authority they might otherwise have expected and publicly
enjoyed, but exposed to many wants, difficulties, and sufferings.

As to the Uniting of us for the future,
I humbly propose to the wisdom of this present Parliament, That an Act might
be passed, whereby every person (after a limited term of years) intending to
take holy Orders, should be incapacitated for any Church-preferment, or for a
License to preach in private Congregations, who could not give a satisfactory
account of his proficiency and ability in Church History and Primitive
Learning, whereby he might be able to give a clear and plain account of what
Discipline and Order were used in the Church of God nearest our Savior's and
the Apostles days, when Differences and Errors in Doctrine or
Church Government began first to spring up; with the Authors, occasion, and
effects thereof. The Advantages which must necessarily attend the making of
such a Law, would be very great both to our interest in Church and State;
amongst which I beg leave to name the following.

1. We might hereby (for the future) more assuredly hope for, and expect Peace
and Union amongst our Ecclesiastics; they having been all well acquainted with
Primitive practice, and therein with the rise and growth of all Heresies,
Schisms, and Divisions in the Church, and with the fatal consequences that have
attended them; whereby in all probability they would not more rationally than
unanimously make choice of one and the same Form of Worship and Discipline, but
most heartily unite in their affections to one another, endeavoring with all
their united strength to maintain the Church in Peace and Purity.

2. By this means we might be assured to enjoy the most Learned Clergy that
ever this Nation brought forth, who would not only prove a greater Bulwark
against Popery on the one hand, but Schism and Faction on the other; and being
so well accomplished for the Ministerial Function (before they enter into it)
might much more assuredly engage the affection and hearts of their people, by
spending in private the greatest part of the Week in instructing them in the
Principles, and encouraging them in the Practice of the Christian Religion; a
Duty, alas, too much neglected in our days.

3. By this means we might be sure of Preferments to answer every man's merit,
especially if the Parliament should think it prudential to raise a sum of Money
for the purchasing all Impropriations and Advowsons, the latter of which to be
annexed to the several Colleges in both Universities; one of the principal
reasons we can give at present why we have more Clergymen than Livings, being
this, That a great number of ordinary Countrymen and Tradesmen, out of an
ambitious design to make their Children Gentlemen, do send them to the
Universities, though they be not able to maintain them above three or four
years: Whereas were there such a Law (as I proposed) once established, they
would be willing to bring them up to honest Professions and Trades, much more
suitable for them; and persons of better Estate and Quality would be encouraged
to bring up their Children in the Universities, and continue them there until
they were arrived to that pitch of Learning, which would not only render them
honorable to foreign Nations, and highly serviceable to their own, but would
capacitate them for the enjoyment of a Preferment suitable to their Parents
charge, and their own pains and industry.

In short, I heartily wish that we might often and seriously remember our
blessed Saviors Prediction, that a Kingdom divided against it self, cannot
stand; and likewise consider that fate which attended the Faction and Division
of the Jews; which grew to that height, that they could not forbear destroying
each other, even when their declared Enemies the Romans were coming to besiege
their City. From which, good Lord deliver us.

POSTSCRIPT.
UPon some Considerations, I thought it would not be unacceptable to print the
Speech of that wise and great General and Emperor Vespasian, to his Roman
Officers; who seeing the Jews at great variance and civil discord amongst
themselves, pressed Vespasian their General not to lose this opportunity,
affirming that it was Gods providence (who fought for them) that the Jews
should be at civil discord among themselves; and that therefore he should not
over-slip so good an occasion, lest the Jews should quickly be friends again
one with another, either by the weariness of Civil Wars, or else repenting
themselves of that which they had done. To whom Vespasian thus answered:

That they were ignorant what was to be done, and desirous rather, as it were
in a Theater to show their forces and strength, than with him to consider what
was profitable and expedient. For (said he) if we presently assault them, our
coming will make concord amongst our Enemies, and so we shall bring upon our
selves their forces yet firm and strong; but by expecting a little while, we
shall have less ado to conquer them, their chiefest forces being destroyed by
their own Civil War. God is more our Friend than you are aware of, who without
any labor and pain will deliver the Jews into our hands, and will give us the
Victory without endangering our Army. Wherefore it is rather our part to be
beholders of the Tragedy, than to fight against men desirous of death, and
troubled with the greatest evil possible, to wit, Domestical Sedition and Civil
War. And if any think that the Victory is not so glorious, because gotten
without fight, let him know and consider the uncertain events of War; and that
it is better, if it be possible, to get a Victory without bloodshed, than
therewith to hazard a Defeat: For they who by counsel and advice do any act,
deserve no less praise than they who by force of Arms atchieve a Victory.
Moreover, in the mean time that the Enemies destroy one another, our Soldiers
may take rest, and so be stronger and better able to fight when need shall
require. Besides, it seems not that there is much haste required to get the
Victory; for the Jews neither prepare Arms nor Engines of War, nor levy any
Forces, nor seek for Aid; and so by delay no damage can ensue, but they will
plague one another more by Civil War, than our Army by attacquing their City.
And therefore whether we consider Prudence or Glory, we have nothing to do but
let them ruin themselves; for in case we should even at this present make our
selves Masters of that great City, so it would be justly said, that the Victory
was not to be imputed to us, but to their Discord.

Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum. FINIS.

