THEIR Present Majesty's GOVERNMENT Proved to be Thoroughly Settled, AND That we
may Submit to it, without Asserting the Principles of Mr. Hobbs.

Showing also, That Allegiance was not Due to the Usurpers after the late Civil
War.

Occasioned by some Late Pamphlets against the Reverend Dr. Sherlock.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavel, at the Peacock in St. Pauls-Church-Yard,
1691.

THEIR Present Majesty's GOVERNMENT Proved to be Thoroughly Settled, etc.
HAving lately perused several Pamphlets, which the Authors style, Remarks on
Dr. Sherlock's New Book about the Case of Allegiance due to Sovereign Powers, I
find they pretend to Charge him with Hobbism: I presume, it may not be thought
useless to give the True State of the Case, and thence to prove the Lawfulness
of our Submission to Their Present MAJESTY'S; and that without approaching or
Bordering upon the Opinion of Mr. Hobbs, who I still think is much in the
wrong, as I shall show by and by: And this I shall the rather do, because it
may help to remove the Prejudices of our Brethren, who have not yet owned the
Government, being scandalized, that we seem to favor his Principles.

Having wiped off this Stain, I shall briefly show, That those Principles, by
which I am governed, are not dangerous to the Thrones of Princes: This I
undertake to prove, Because, any Principle that shakes the Throne, would be a
Stumbling Block to all Loyal Men, and at least prejudice them against such
Arguments as may be urged to prove our Submission Lawful: And it seems the more
necessary to give this Argument its full Weight, because the Learned Dr.
Sherlock has but touched upon that Point, and only balances this Danger on the
Princes side, with the Doctrine of Non-Resistance on our Part; and indeed, it
shows an excellent Providence, That God has so settled the Governments of the
World, as to establish an irresistible Power in each Government, to preserve
the Peace of it, and yet lays a most considerable Restraint upon such
Governors, by putting it into the Power of their oppressed Subjects, to be
idle Spectators of their Danger in the day of Trial, and to transfer their
Allegiance as soon as any prosperous Conqueror can get into their Thrones.

But I think we have something more to offer on this Subject, viz. That our
Principles are not prejudicial to Princes, or dangerous to their Crowns; or at
least, according to these Principles, all good Princes (as for such as are
Arbitrary and Tyrannical, they must shift for themselves) may have great Hopes
of Recovering their Dominions, if by the Misfortune of War, or any other
Accident, they be driven from their Thrones; which seems not to be enough
provided for, by the Hypothesis that our Learned Author has given us: For if as
soon as any Usurper has got quiet Possession of the Throne, Submission be then
peremptorily and absolutely required, as a Duty incumbent on all the Members of
that Government, then the Case of a good and a bad Prince, when they are once
dispossessed, seem to be equally desperate, viz. Neither of them can with any
Moral Assurance, promise themselves any Assistance at home, from such as were
their Subjects: Whereas, I am concerned to see Princes, so unlike in
themselves, to be set on the same foot in their Quarrels; and I am in pain, to
say something, which may support the Hopes of injured Innocence; I presume I
shall do it: If I fail in the Attempt, I hope the Reader will impute it to an
honest Zeal, to protect Virtue and Innocence, that has blinded my Eyes.

And in prosecution of this design, I shall prove, That there was no Obligation
to submit to the Usurpers after the late Civil War, and that though we should
suppose them in the quiet Possession of the Government; I hope that I shall be
able to make all this appear Reasonable, without denying the Doctrine taught in
Bishop Overal's Convocation-Book; it may look somewhat like a Contradiction,
but I must desire my Readers Patience until I can come at it.

To contract this Discourse, as much as I can, I shall make this one
Supposition, That Princes, who originally have no Right to their Thrones, when
their Government is thoroughly settled, are invested with God's Authority, and
must be obeyed by all the Members of that Government, in as full a Manner, as
any other, the most Legal and Rightful Princes can challenge: This Principle is
plainly taught in Bishop Overal's Convocation-Book, and I think fully cleared
by the Learned Doctor Sherlock; and he is so able to maintain what he has
advanced, that it would be great presumption in me, to endeavor to set it in a
better Light.

Taking it then for granted, That all such Princes are to be reverenced and
obeyed by their Subjects; our Enquiry is, When a Government may be said to be
Thoroughly Settled?

This to me seems a very Knotty Question, and will require some thoughts to
Resolve it; and I know not how to do it, but by looking back to the Original of
all Sovereign Power, where we have been much in the dark; some saying, Lo it is
here, and, Lo it is there; some one thing and some another; one raising all
Sovereignty from the natural Paternal Authority, another founding it in
Conquest, a third in Election; others again pretending, that the several
Soveraignties of the World have had several Originals: But for my part, with
submission to better Judgments, I shall assert, that all Sovereignty is founded
in submission; and this shall be the Thread to my following discourse, which if
I can maintain, I doubt not but to prove all that I have promised on this
Point: For if it appears, that no Man is a Subject but upon his own submission,
and that Conquest without this can give no Man Authority to Govern, and Command
me as his subject; then it plainly follows, that dominion is not founded in
power; and that power, and a quiet possession, is no certain sign to us, that
God has given the Sovereign Authority with it.

I Assert then, that all Civil Government, whether it be Elective, or
Hereditary, Aristocracy, Democracy, or any other Form of Civil Government, it
is all founded in submission; and I think there needs no other proof of this
Doctrine, but to say, that a free man can never be made another's subject, but
by his own consent, or submission, either in his own Person, or by his
Representative: By the fortune of War, I may become another Man's Prisoner, but
he must have my own consent to make me his subject; by the fortune of War, a
Foreign Prince or a Rebellious Subject may get possession of our whole Kingdom,
Usurp the Crown, and have the full and quiet Administration of the Government,
and as it is usually done, Claim our Obedience as his Subjects: But in Truth,
he has no true Title to it; indeed, if the War was just, all the whole property
is his until we enter into Conditions; but the Obedience of Subjects is not due
from us, until we have declared, and acknowledged him to be our Sovereign; and
this I may call a Reciprocal Obligation, which either may refuse: Nor will it
argue much bounty in the Conqueror to return us our Liberty and Property, in
lieu of our Obedience; because without Obliging our Consciences, he can hope to
reap but little fruit from all his Conquests; he can never be secure in his
Throne, nor settled in his Government, until he has some Tie upon our
Consciences; as we are his prisoners, he may Torment and Punish us; but all
this while he has no hold upon our Consciences, all things are Lawful against
him as against a public Enemy, and we are free to draw our Swords against him,
as soon as we can escape out of his hands; so that on these Occasions, a
Conqueror is forced to stand Armed, or to bind our hands until he can bind our
Consciences.

And this seems to be the key to understand those passages, quoted out of
Bishop Overal's Convocation-book: The New Government is then thoroughly settled,
when the new Prince has the full Administration of the Government, and is owned
as Sovereign by the Representatives of the people freely chosen; we must then
submit not only for Wrath, but Conscience sake, because it is the Ordinance of
God. Here therefore, I must presume to assert, that the right of Government is
not derived from God, without the consent or submission of the people; I do not
say it is not derived from God, but the consent of the people, together with
the full Enjoyment of the Regal Power, is our Visible Evidence, that such a
Prince has received his Authority from God; for till this be done, we cannot
with any propriety of speech, say that the Government is settled, nor is it
called the Ordinance of God until it be settled. I say, Submission only makes a
Through Settlement, because, notwithstanding a quiet possession, it is probable
whole multitudes may wait an opportunity to overturn it, unless the Nation has
declared its willingness to Acquiesce by Representatives, who are the mouth of
the people, and empowered to speak their minds.

I Would not have it thought, as if by this, I denied the Power of God, to set
an Usurping Tyrant over us against our wills; for God can do it if he please,
and make us the instruments of it; when he means thus to afflict any Nation, or
People, he can so incline their hearts, as to make them receive him to be their
King, who shall be their Scourge; Or the Usurping Tyrant having them in his
Power, may make them willing to be his Subjects, on such Conditions as they can
get: And thus God can set a bad King over us in some sense against our wills,
and yet it is our own Act: For we owe him no Obedience, and are not Obliged to
Reverence, and Obey him on the score of Conscience, until his Government be
settled by our receiving him to be our Sovereign, either in our own Persons, or
by our Representatives.

I presume it will be sufficient to clear this Point, if I first prove, That
our Present Civil Governments could have no other Original; and further, show
in what sense the Men of succeeding Ages, and our present Times, are not said
to be Subjects, without their own consent or submission.

For the Reasons already given, I do suppose all Civil Governments must have
their Original, either from Submission, or from the Paternal Authority: Now
none of our present Princes can Claim their right from Paternal Authority,
because it cannot be thought that any Prince now living, should be able to make
good his Claim, as the direct Heir from Noah; though they want no flatterers, yet
none of them are so vain as to give out, that they are the Heirs of this great
Family; so that I shall take it for granted, that all pretenses to Sovereign
Authority from Paternal Power, are absolutely out of doors: And at present I
can foresee nothing Material, that may be objected against this Hypothesis,
unless it be what our Learned Author seems to object, viz. That as natural
Authority is the most sacred, so no Man had Authority to give it away; that is,
if I mistake not his meaning, a Father having Sovereign Authority over his
Children, and Childrens Children, etc. may not Transfer this Authority to any
other Person.

Now to clear this doubt, Perhaps it would be no difficult Task.

First, To show the Necessity of Transfering this Authority as families
multiplied; for every thing that is Absolutely necessary is Lawful, just as we
say it was Lawful for Cain to Marry his own Sister.

Secondly, If it were Unlawful in the Original, a long Succession wipes off the
Stain, as our Author plainly grants.

Thirdly, It being impossible to Govern the whole World by the care and
inspection of one Man, and it being impossible to point out the direct Heir in
each Country, and again impossible to settle the Limits of his Government: I
Conclude it was Lawful for every Parent to Transfer, so much of his Authority
to some Single Person, as was necessary to preserve Peace in the Neighborhood,
reserving still so much to themselves as might preserve a Filial Obedience; and
this might be done, as we see it is at this day amongst us, though a stranger to
their blood, were invested with a Sovereign Authority over them.

But Lastly, though no Authority, be so Sacred as what is Natural, yet I conclude
it Lawful, not only on Necessary, but Prudential accounts to Transfer it: If
any denis it is gratis dictum, when they publish their Reasons, it will be time
enough to put in our Answer.

So that in short, I suppose it Lawful for any body of Free Men, to invest any
one of themselves, or a stranger, with a Sovereign Authority over them: And
that all our Present Governments did begin in this manner, is more than
probable, because none of them could have such Authority by any other means;
the pretenses from Paternal Authority are out of doors, Conquest will lay no
Obligation to Obedience on a Man's Conscience, and therefore nothing but Consent
or Submission can do it.

It matters not whether this Submission was procured in gratitude for former
Obligations, or by Flattery, or for fear of Rough Treatment; it may be
sometimes a willing submission, and sometimes an Hard Choice, but ones own
Submission only binds his Conscience; if he would brave his Adversary, and not
yield to become his Subject, or Vassal, he would, as we say, be his own Man, as
soon as he escaped his Adversaries hands; whereas having once received him for
his Sovereign, his Conscience is for ever bound; and if I may so say, he
carries his Chains with him to the Remotest Corners of the World: All Nations
as far as I know being agreed, that no Subject can shake off his Obedience at
his pleasure; and agreeable to this Pinciple they all Act, on occasion, calling
any of them home, and proceeding against such as refuse to Obey their Summons,
which you must confess ought never to be done by a bare Conqueror; I mean, who
is not yet owned by the Estates: Or if such a Prince should pretend to Recall
such as are Fled from his Usurped Government, though he has the Sword, and the
whole Power in his hands, yet I suppose you will not say that such Refugies are
obliged to return, and act the part of good subjects.

This therefore is a plain indication, that all our present Civil Governments
were founded, and settled in the Consent, or Submission of our Ancestors; It
remains now, to show that their Posterity, and we of this Present Age, are not
properly said to be subjects without our own submission: And it is Necessary to
prove this, as well in Elective as Hereditary Governments; because the
Government is not there Dissolved upon the Death of the Prince, nor would any
Member of it be loose from his Obedience, though he should deny to Concur with
them in the Election of a New King, and claim his Liberty at or before the
Election.

I say then, as our Ancestors voluntarily submitted to be Subjects of this
Hereditary Monarchy, so it is presumed to be our own Choice, they were as
properly our Representatives, as those that we now Choose in our own persons,
and our Consent is as well presumed to the Enacting of their LAWS, as to those
that are now made; and they transmitted no more Liberty to me, than they
reserved to themselves: Nor is it any great Strain to presume our Consent in
this Case; for, to give this Argument all the Force I can, I will suppose my
self born in a very unhappy Government; but as a bad Government is better than
none at all, so I should think it no foolish Choice, to Answer for my
Offspring, that they should be subject to the same Government, and might
rationally suppose, that if they could now appear, they would ratify it in
their own persons; because, all Civil Societies must soon be dissolved, if the
Child be not born in the same Condition with his Parents; I mean, subject to
the same Laws, and the same Government: Therefore, as my Ancestors did presume
to Consent for me, that I should be subject to all the Laws which they Enacted,
(for as yet I know no other Reason of my being subject to them); so amongst
other things, they did Consent for me, that I should be subject to such a
Government, to such and such a Prince: The Reason holds in both, by Virtue of
their Act. I did as much Consent to be a Subject to the King of England, as I
did Consent to any other Law which they Established: They thought it no
Presumption to Consent for us, and we yet tread in their steps; for whatever
Laws are now Enacted, will oblige our Posterity, as if it were their own Act;
we Represent those that are yet unborn, and Choose for them; and as you find by
what has been said, may rationally presume to do so.

Obj. If it be Demanded, On what Account our Ancestors, Three or Four Hundred
Years ago, should Choose a King for us?

Ans. The Answer is very obvious, viz. They well understood the Conveniences
of Government, and therefore might well presume our Consent, to be Members of
it, upon as good Terms as they could get; because, as I said before, a bad
Government is better than none, since therefore they were to Choose for
themselves, as well as their Posterity, and had an equal Interest in this great
Affair, they might presume to Consent for us, seeing they consulted our
Happiness and Security in the World; or if they acted foolishly and
unfaithfully, yet since the thing must be done, or the World would become an
Aceldama, they might on good Grounds presume our Consent, and Choose for us, as
we yet do for our Posterity in other Cases; or indeed in the same Case,
whenever we transfer any part of our Liberty, by enlarging the Prerogative of
the Crown. We may Act wisely or foolishly, as it happens, but we Act not for
our selves alone, it affects our whole Posterity, whom we Represent, and who
are supposed to Consent with us, for otherwise, I cannot see how it should
oblige their Consciences.

Obj. But it may further be Objected against this Hypothesis, That the Major
Vote cannot include my Consent, unless I please.

Ans. I grant it, if a New Government were now to be Erected, it could not; but
where we could not Act in our own Persons, our Ancestors being our true
Representatives, it was rational to presume on our Consent in what they did for
us; and since we could not Choose for our selves, our Consent is most
rationally presumed to the Major Vote, as it is at this day, when any New Law
is established; and since we cannot all act in our own persons, I suppose,
every Wise Man would rather stand obliged by the Major Vote, than entrust his
whole Property in the breast of those more peculiar Representatives, whom he
elects himself, since it gives them so large a Power, and therefore is a Trust
too great to be put into the hands of any one Man; and on this Account our
Ancestors might well presume to Consent for us, that in these Cases we should
be obliged by the Major Vote.

Indeed, at first sight it may seem somewhat hard, that our Ancestors should
not reserve a Liberty to every particular Man to Choose for himself. We are
naturally very fond of this Liberty, but in the main, it cannot be done,
because no considerable Body of Men can be thus governed; and as it appears by
the Event, they who have reserved most of this Liberty, have acted the most
imprudently. Thus I suppose we are in some Measure sensible of the great
Inconveniences incident to an Elective Government in Poland, where, at their
Dyets, nothing is Enacted by a Major Vote, but only by a general Consent; the
Wheel of Government moves so heavily, that that great People, who in their
Persons are Valiant, in their Councils not inferior to their Neighbors, and
in their Numbers, as Considerable as any Nation in Europe, are become the Sport
of Fortune, being miserably harrass'd by every Puny Invader; and for want of
giving away a little more Liberty, many of them frequently lose it all;
Multitudes being daily carried into a miserable Captivity by their Enemies, by
reason of those Dilatory Proceedings: So that our Ancestors might well presume
to Consent for us, in passing away this Liberty; And indeed, with us there is
such a true Temper observed, betwixt Liberty and Prerogative, that the whole
Frame of our Laws, seem to be of our own inditing, being such as every Wise Man
would Consent to, though we were to begin afresh. But this is more than needs be
said; for if our Ancestors had Acted very Foolishly, and made our Condition
much worse than it is, their Laws would have still Obliged us, they would have
been looked upon as our own Act, because they were our Representatives.

And now I hope it appears, I had some Reason to say, that no Man is a Subject
without his own Consent, or Submission; but before I proceed to build upon this
Principle, it may be necessary to remove the scruples of one sort of men (for
they are no Arguments) against what is advanced.

Object. They may say, if Subjects give their Prince his Authority, they may
take it away again, if they please.

Ans. But we say, they give Him not his Authority, though he has it not without
their Consent, or Submission; they are only the Pipes, or the Channels, whereby
God Almighty conveys his Authority to him: For as I said before, to shorten my
discourse, I take it for granted, that all Government is the Ordinance of God,
and therefore though the subjects may Elect the Person, it is God that gives Him
his Authority. It is a Woman's own Consent, that makes her Subject to the Law of
her Husband; but yet Marriage being Gods Ordinance, as well as Government, when
it is done she cannot Recall, or Reassume her Liberty.

But only for Argument's sake, we will suppose all Authority derived from the
People; yet then I say, it cannot be recalled, but by the Consent of all
Parties concerned. And though our Representatives, may presume the Consent of the
People, yet the King having a Negative Voice, nothing of this Nature, according
to our Constitution, can be done without him, whilst he is able and willing to
protect us: But if he abandons his People, and cannot, or will not come to
protect us; and our Representatives, to prevent the utter ruin of the
Commonwealth, do then agree, and declare the Sovereignty to be in the next
Heir, that can protect us; and thus settle him in the full Administration of
the Government, we must then submit, not upon Mr. Hobbs his base Principle,
because dominion is founded in Power; but by Virtue of the Determination of our
Representatives, which is looked upon as the Act of the whole People, and
includes the Consent of every Particular Person, which, as it appears by this
discourse, is the only Visible means of conveighing a Sovereign Authority to
any Person. And if this quiet possession, together with the free Consent of our
Representatives, will not be thought a Through Settlement, I can think of
nothing that can strengthen it, unless it be the Resignation of the Late King,
which I presume, ought never to be expected, and would as much be wanted, upon
the most Evident Conquest, as it is in this Case here before us. And therefore,
I hope I may Conclude, that our Government is now Thoroughly Settled, and that
we who submit to it cannot be charged with Hobbism; since we do not say that
any Prince, who has quiet possession of the Throne, can Claim our Obedience,
but only such as are Confirmed, and Settled in it by the Determination of our
Representatives: This I think is a very Natural Explication of those Passages
in Bishop Overal's Convocation-Book, which require our Obedience to a
Government Thoroughly Settled; for that Government must needs be very Slippery
and Tottering, which our Representatives, who are supposed to have the Hearts,
and to be the Mouth of the People, will not Confirm.

And for as much as I was satisfied, that my own submission was both just and
rational, without bordering upon Mr. Hobbs his base Principle, which I always
detested: on this Occasion, I thought it Necessary to Recollect my thoughts on
this subject, and commit them to writing, that I might the more closely
examine, how well my Reasons Hung together. But I could not set them in a True
Light, without spinning them out to this length, before I came to the matter in
hand, which I chiefly designed, viz. To show what a Vast Difference there is
betwixt Mr. Hobbs, his Opinion of Government, and our own.

His comes from the Father of Lies; Ours I hope from the God of Truth; his is
the dictate of self-interest, ours the Resolves of Reason and Conscience: He
says all Sovereignty, or all dominion is Founded in Power, we say no such
thing: The greatest Conqueror cannot Compel us to be his Subjects without our
own submission; though he has Power over our Country, and our persons, yet he can
lay no Obligation upon our Consciences to become his Subjects. This must be our
own act, either in person, or by our Representatives: And if this Notion will
bear the Light, there is no pretense to say as Mr. Hobbs does, that his having
the Power of the Sword, makes us become his Subjects.

And as this Hypothesis does entirely Wipe off the Stain of Hobbism, so
likewise is it a great support, or at least not dangerous to the Thrones of
good Princes; for one would suspect that his thoughts were ill grounded, if
they obliged him to maintain such Principles; and indeed, it is a Melancholy
thing to think, that we should be obliged as good Subjects to pay Obedience to
the first Conqueror, that shall get quiet possession of the Throne, as Mr.
Hobbs has taught us.

But according to this Hypothesis, the Government of the New Prince is never
Thoroughly Settled, until he has acquired the Consent of the People; there is no
Obedience due to him, until they Confirm his Authority.

And this I call a great Security to all good Princes; for supposing it
necessary to have their Consent to Confirm a Government, that began perhaps in
Usurpation, and settle it, I know nothing more, that a Good, but Dispossessed
Prince, can desire to maintain his Hopes of an happy Turn of Affairs, to
Re-instate him in his Dominions: For Men may say what they will, and suggest,
That every Body is ready to Adore the Rising Sun; and that the worst Title,
provided it be prosperous, never wants hands to support and strengthen it; but
for my part, I could never be Tempted, nor do I think we ever had reason to
make such odious general Censures: And as I hope we now want not many honest
Patriots, who would have supported the late King James, to the last drop of
Blood, had his Government been so Legal, as to have merited such a Sacrifice;
so even in this Age, to the Honor of our Holy Religion, we want not many
Generous Instances of Men's Integrity to this rational Principle: For though
Cromwell had as quiet Possession of the Three Kingdoms, as any Conqueror could
hope for, though he had all our Persons naked and helpless, in his Power, and
at one Time, no Armed Force against him, either at home or abroad; yet he could
never compass the Consent of the People in a Free Convention or Parliament, as
I shall show you by and by.

This therefore may extremely exalt the hopes of all good dispossessed Princes,
who being just and innocent, may rationally expect, that the Free
Representatives of the People, will not own the Usurped Power; and so long as
this is not done, they may as rationally hope for Succor from their Subjects,
on the first fair Occasion.

Obj. But some may say, How can this be? Is it probable that an Usurper, in the
quiet Possession of the Throne, should not, though with some Difficulty,
procure an Acknowledgment of his Authority from our Free Chosen Representatives.

Ans. I say it is probable, and this late Instance of a lasting Usurpation,
where it could not be done, is a Convincing Proof, That it may be so again, if
we should ever see the like unhappy Occasion.

I will grant that we live in a wicked Generation, and that the worst Tyrant
will have many Followers, if it be but for Spoil and Plunder. He may be able to
influence some by his Favors, others by his Threats; others again may go along
with him out of pure Zeal, to reform such Grievances, as he shall please to
Object against. But what is this toward influencing the Whole, or the Major
part of the Nation? The Power of our Representatives is derived from so many
Persons, that the Usurpers Bounty can reach but few of them; his Menaces, when
they are so general, lose much of their Force, and as soon as he pretends to
the Sovereignty, many of his most Zealous Followers prove his worst Enemies: If
he should pretend to Corrupt the Representatives themselves, it is too
considerable a Body to be awed by Menaces, too numerous for his Favors,
generally of too great Integrity to accept his Bribes, and of better Fortunes
than to need them; so that on this Score, a Dispossessed Good Prince might well
promise himself an After-Game.

Obj. But again it may be Objected, That if it be not Lawful to pay Allegiance
to those Usurpers, whose Authority is not Confirmed by our Representatives,
then our Condition at such Times, must needs be extremely hazardous and
desperate, being naked and destitute, and exposed to the Fury of those, who
have all the Power in their hands.

Ans. I cannot but say these are most unhappy Circumstances; but in a general
Calamity, every good Man should be willing to bear his Share, and venture his
Security, and even sacrifice his private Interest, to preserve the Ancient
Government, and Royal Family.

Besides, in such Cases the Danger is not so great, as we generally presume it
is: Indeed, it can hardly be thought, but the Usurpers will sacrifice some
Worthy Patriots to their Ambition, as those did in the late Times; but when
they find a good Title, cannot be attained without a Sea of Blood, and much
present Danger to themselves, they generally sit down as contented as they can,
only with a quiet Possession: And as for those Leading Men, whose Zeal may have
exasperated the Usurpers Fury, they may live concealed, or generously follow
their Unhappy Master into Exile, and there patiently wait the Happy Hour: Nor
as the World goes with them, will they look upon this Honorable Banishment, as
an hard Choice, since if it were just to submit to the Usurpers, they could not
but expect to be looked upon with an evil Eye, and perhaps to be Crushed at the
first Opportunity.

And this, I hope, is sufficient to Convince any reasonable Man, That these
Principles are not dangerous to the Thrones of Princes; for we do not Assert,
with Mr. Hobbs, That as soon as any Prince or Rebel has got Possession of the
Throne, we immediately thereby become his Subjects: Nay, though they should
get, and keep quiet Possession of it, we yet say there is no Obedience due from
us, until their Usurped Power be Settled, and Confirmed by our Representatives,
whom we style the Fathers of our Country, who are the most knowing in these
Affairs, and being at the Helm, can best judge, Whether things be come to that
Extremity, or not: But, Morally speaking, this Recognition cannot be procured
from them, but in the utmost Extremity; and in short, then only when they are
entirely in the Power of a Conqueror, and sufficiently weary of their
Dispossessed Prince, by reason of his Arbitrary and Illegal Proceedings.

Thus it literally happened after the late Civil War; for notwithstanding all
the Endeavors that were used by the Usurpers, they could never procure an
Acknowledgment of their Authority from our Free Chosen Representatives, as I
shall now show you by representing the true Matter of Fact, from Mr. Whitlock's
Memoirs, who must be allowed to speak as favorably to this Point, as the Case
would bear.

And here, I suppose, it will not be necessary I should say any thing of that
part of the Parliament, commonly called the Rump; they indeed usurped the
Government, but there was not so much as the Face of a general Consent in the
Nation. Much less need I mention those 120 Persons, whom Oliver, as General of
the Army, called together; who at last devolved, what Authority they had on
him: It was never pretended they had any other Parliaments or Representative
Body of the People to confirm their Power.

So that we are already come to Cromwell's Government, as Protector, in which
alone, if any where this Settlement is to be found.

Now Cromwell had but Two Conventions or Parliaments, as he called them, both
which we will consider, as also what they did toward Settling his Authority,
by a Free Parliamentary Submission, which we here presume to be necessary to
make a Through Settlement.

His first Parliament was Summoned June 9th. 1654. and there is very good
Reason to suspect there could be no free Election, because there were such
Restrictions and Limitations, which the Sheriff was to lay upon the People,
e're they could be admitted to give their Votes.

Another Circumstance, which must necessarily prejudice the Freedom of this
Parliament, was a strange Innovation made by the Protector, in admitting Thirty
Scotch, and Thirty Irish Members into it: For, could we suppose all the English
Members Freely Chosen, so great an Accession of Strangers must needs be a great
Clog to the English. For if we may suppose these Sixty Strangers at the
Protector's Devotion, they, with the Help of some Friends they were sure to
find here, might probably do things in Favor of the Protector, against the
Sense of the People of England, whose Opinions are best known by our own
Members: And that these Sixty Strangers, were the Protectors Creatures, is no
improbable Supposition; because, he would not otherwise have made this
Innovation, or have fetched them so far for nothing. Besides, Five Sheriffdoms
in Scotland returned, that not one fit to be a Representative, was to be found
within their Liberty; which shows, That the Protector, and his Statesmen, were
very nice in their Choice.

I might also Object against this Parliament, (and let it be Observed, That the
former, and this Objection, lies also against his last Parliament) That it was
not Free, because the Protector took upon him, to call only so many Persons as
he pleased, augmenting the Number of Representatives in some places, and
diminishing in others, according to his own Humor, without any Color of Law;
and having taken this Liberty, you may imagine he was careful to call most of
the Representatives from those places, where he had most Creatures, as I might
easily make it appear, if it were worth my Time.

But let us Consider what this Parliament did, when once they were come
together.

After some few Preliminaries, we find them Entering on the Grand Debate,
Concerning the Articles of the Protectors instrument of Government, and that in
such a manner as made him jealous of their proceedings; and then he thought it
High time, to impose a Recognition upon them, which they were to Sign, before
they were suffered to sit again in the House: This Recognition (which may be
seen in the Memoirs) can in no sense be called a Public Act, since it was not
first Voted in the House: And Effectually, upon this, many of them left that
pretended Parliament, and they who did Sign it, presently Voted, that it should
not be Construed to Comprehend the whole instrument, Consisting of Forty-two
Articles; which was, as much as to say, they reserved still to themselves a
Power to Break with him, in Case they could not Agree afterward upon the said
Articles.

And if we still Trace on their Proceedings, we find them always very Busy in
their Debates, about the Government, and never able to come to any Conclusion
about it, (unless I think upon Two Articles in Forty-two) till the Protector,
being jealous of them, in great Heat Dissolved them.

His second Parliament Met September 17. 1656. And it must be confessed, that
this Parliament, did as far as they were able, Confirm his Usurped Authority:
But nothing is more Evident, than that, this was a packt Number of his own
Creatures; and as the Business was then Managed, it is Ridiculous to think,
they could speak the Peoples sense in this matter.

For they were not only Crampt, as the former Parliament had been; but as our
Author observes, none of them were suffered to enter the House, without a
Certificate, that they were approved by the Protectors Council: And when almost
an Hundred of the Members, who were Secluded upon that Account, demanded
Entrance, it was slavishly voted by the rest, that they should make their
Application to the Council, for their Approbation: This produced a most Sharp
Remonstrance, Signed with their own Hands, as may be seen at Large in the
Memoirs, page 640 And if there were nothing more, this is enough to Void and
Null all their Proceedings; This is sufficient to show, that this was possibly,
the most packt Assembly, that ever pretended to the Name of a Parliament; and
that there is not the least Color of Reason, to say, that what they did, could
any ways be the Act of the People; Though this was the best Title the Protector
had to his Government, as he himself thought, not being Solemnly Inaugurated
before this pretended Submission, of the People in Parliament, as he called it.

I Should now proceed to Consider the Case of Richard, but there need not many
words to Blow off his Title; since the only Parliament He Had, as its freedom
was questionable on the former accounts, and because of the Exclusion of some
Members, who it seems were unworthy, because they had been in Arms against the
Rump Parliament; so they never came to any Conclusion, about the Recognition of
his Authority.

And after all, if those pretended Parliaments had owned both Oliver, and his
Son after Him, yet we could not call it the Consent of the Nation, because of
the Violent Exclusion of the True House of Peers.

As for what followed, Richard, until the return of King Charles, every body
knows it was perfect Anarchy, and confusion. It is certain however, there never
was any Parliament to Confirm the Authorities then in being: and since that is
the only Legal way, to Testify the consent of a People, we may safely Conclude
the Usurpation was never Settled.

I might proceed in this Argument, and at least make it probable, that if
Cromwels Government had been Confirmed, as far as the free Consent of our
Representatives could have Settled it, yet it would not have been the duty of
all Private Men, to own his Authority; which, though it be not at all necessary
to maintain my opinion, I shall by way of Digression insist a little upon. Now
this may seem a contradiction to what I have already Asserted, or at least
Inconsistent with the Doctrine Taught in Bishop Overal's Convocation-Book, but
I presume it is neither; and I only urge it, that the True State of the
Controversy betwixt us, and some of our brethren, may the better be conceived,
who insinuate, as if it were one and the same thing to pay Obedience to the
present Government, or to that of the late Protector, or any other in his
Circumstances: What has been said already, does sufficiently show the Vanity of
these Men; and therefore it must be observed, that if I fail in this attempt,
it will not Prejudice those Principles I undertook to maintain; therefore, what
I say on this head, must stand or fall alone, and I only propose it to the
Consideration of Wiser Men.

What I have to say, Runs upon this Supposition, that an Usurped Authority is
not to be Obeyed, nor judged to be the Ordinance of God, until it be Thoroughly
Settled?

It may be asked then, If there be quiet possession, and it be confirmed by our
Representatives, what distinction can excuse us from paying Obedience to such
Powers?

I Answer, our Representatives had no Authority to destroy the Monarchy: And
therefore if they had thus Transgrest the Limits of their Power, it would not
have Obliged those whom they Represented.

If it be Urged, that they have an Unlimited Power:

I Answer, it is True, but not unless, when they Act in their own Sphere, and
in Conjunction with the King.

Obj. But it may further be Objected, that at this rate our Representatives
could not Transfer our Allegiance to their Majesty's, since they could not make
any binding Act without a King.

Ans. I deny it. This they can do, as I shall show you by and by; but it is an
Exception from this Rule: They alone, can do no other Act, that can Oblige us:
for instance, they cannot impose Taxes, or make Laws that shall Oblige us. In
these, and in all other Cases, (except this instance now before us, of
Confirming the Authority of a New King) it is our interest and security, that
nothing should be Enacted, but by the Consent of the King, and our
Representatives; and therefore, since we Commission them to Act only with the
King, they can never Act without him.

Thus for instance, If a Conqueror has got the whole power into his hand, they
may Transfer our Allegiance to him; Or if the Royal Family should be Extinct,
they may proceed to a New Election. But if they pretend to Govern us
themselves, without a King, this is more power, than we have given them; for we
never Trusted the whole Legislative Authority in their hands; and I know not
how they should come by it otherwise.

Obj. But some will say, in such a Case it is Devolved to them.

Ans. I deny it, they may have Power to dispose of the Crown as they please,
but not to Assume the whole Sovereignty to themselves. By this means they will
Lessen our Security; for whereas now we are Obliged only by Laws made by the
King, and our Representatives, we should then be Obliged by Laws, made only by
themselves; which I may say, is contrary to our Fundamental Law, viz. To be
Governed by a King and our Representatives.

The Chain of my Discourse, has led me into these untrodden paths, I will
Disentangle my self, as soon as I can, but all this was necessary to prove the
thing I am aiming at. But to proceed,

Obj. Against this it may be Objected, that if the ROYAL FAMILY were Extinct,
the whole Power would be Lodged in the Hands of our Representatives, and who
may Resist them?

Ans. To prevent the Dissolving of the Government, it is Necessary, they should
take the Sword into their Hands; but if they will not declare a New King,
according to Custom, I cannot see why they may not be Compelled to it, since
they have their Power only in Trust, not in their own Right: Thus in Poland,
upon the Death of the King, if the Representatives of the People, who on that
occasion are Entrusted with the whole Power, should pretend to be Lords
Paramount, and would not proceed to a New Election; I know not why the People
should not demand their Right, which is to be Governed by a King.

Now this would have been our Case, if our Representatives, in the late times,
had patcht up a Government without a King: Though this had been done by our
Representatives, it could not properly be called the Act of the People, because
we never gave them such Authority. This you cannot but grant, unless you will
presume, that we Commission them to destroy the Monarchy; which as you find can
hardly be supposed in an Elective Kingdom, upon the Death of their King; but it
is perfect Nonsense to suppose it, in an Hereditary Government, whilst the
Royal Family is yet in being. It may be supposed, that we Commission them to
Elect a King, in Case the Royal Line should Fail, or finding two pretenders, to
declare who has the best Title, or to appoint a Protector, in Case of Infancy,
or Lunacy; Or to receive a Conqueror into the Throne, in case our Natural
Prince, be Fled out of His Kingdom, and incapacitated to protect us, and they
in no condition to make opposition; or to invest the next Heir, with Royal
Authority in case of Desertion, especially if the deserting Prince, dare not,
or cannot come to protect us; their enquiry not being, how he came into that
condition, but whether he be in a Capacity to Protect us; and if he be not,
they are then free to invest the next Heir with the Royal Authority: In all
these Cases our Representatives may well presume on our Consent, though they Act
without the King, because it is almost Absolutely necessary, these things
should be done; and intolerable inconveniences would ensue, perhaps to the
utter Ruin of the Commonwealth, if they were not done: But to presume, that we
give them Authority to take, and keep the whole Legislative Power in their own
Hands, or to destroy the Monarchy, this is a strain beyond my comprehension, at
least it is not Properly the Act of the People; and therefore they, whom they
represent, must Ratify it in their own Persons, ere they can pretend a Through
Settlement.

But then, if the People all the while show great uneasiness under this
Usurpation, if their cries be loud and clamorous, and many of them absolutely
refuse to own the Authority; This has not the Face of a Settlement: Here is
nothing, that looks like a general consent; and that though we should suppose our
Representatives to have owned the Usurpt Authority; (for as by the Fundamental
Laws of the Nation, we only Authorize them to act with the King;) so whatever
they shall do without a King, is not valid, unless it be in the Cases before
mentioned, which both Necessity and Reason will allow; whereas, neither
Necessity nor Reason can be pleaded in the former Instance.

But I do not pretend, that what I have said on this Point, will amount to any
thing like a Demonstration; a short-sighted Man may chance to find greater
Flaws in it, than I am now aware of: Perhaps, my Zeal for Monarchy, has too
much heated my Imagination; and I can only say, in my Excuse, That I have no
pleasing Idea's of a Commonwealth; and therefore, would willingly shut the
door against it.

But if this will not stand the Test of a Judicious Reader, let this Long
Parenthesis pass for nothing, we need no such precarious Principles; our Case
is good without it, as you may find in the other parts of this Discourse.

And now I have nothing more to trouble my Reader with, but only to Answer Two
or Three Objections which could not so conveniently be considered in the Body
of this Discourse; and then draw some Conclusions from it.

Obj. First then it may be Objected, That according to these Principles, we are
now Settled upon a Legal and Rightful Government.

Ans. First, If this be well proved, so much the better; it is then no Argument
against me.

Secondly, I can see no good Reason, Why we should not own it to be a Legal and
Rightful Government, unless it be, that our Heads are perplexed with the nice
Distinction of a King de Iure, and a King de Facto: By a King, de Iure, we
commonly mean a Prince who has the Crown by Right of Inheritance; and it is
thought, that any other Person can be, at best, but a King, de Facto: Upon
this, many suppose, that His Present Majesty cannot be King, de Iure, at least,
during the Life of King James; but yet may be obeyed, because the Law, made in
the 11th. of Henry 7th. determines our Obedience to a King, de Facto. It is
True, that Law indemnifies those who shall obey the King in the time being, as
the Words of the Act run; that is, the King in possession, Whether he Claims
the Crown by Right of Inheritance, or otherwise. But if Interpreters shall say,
That he only is a King, de Iure, who Claims his Crown by Right of Inheritance,
it is a visible Mistake; for all Mankind, as far as I know, are agreed, That a
Conqueror, who makes a just War, upon the Submission of the Conquered Nation,
becomes a King, de Iure: and if in this present Case, His Majesty is justly
invested with the Royal Authority, he is so likewise, as I think I have proved:
So that, you find this common Interpretation is imperfect; a King, de Iure,
should not so peremptorily be restrained to a King by Inheritance; but we run
away with the Mistake; and without Considering, seem to yield the Point, as if
His Present Majesty were only a King, de Facto.

I cannot say, Whether such as are skilled in the Laws, will allow of this
Interpretation; but with submission, I presume it is agreeable to reason, and
does not defeat the Design of the Law. To say, That a King, without a Title, is
a King, de Iure, is a Contradiction; but to suppose, that he that originally
wants a Title, does by an Act of Recognition, receive a Title; this we may
suppose, without straining or forcing our Reason: I am sure it does not sound
so harsh, as to require Obedience to an Illegal Government, for Conscience
sake. On other Occasions we make no Scruple to say, That a Sentence in a Court
of Judicature, gives a Man a Title to an Estate; and upon this, the Tenants and
Vassals, though it were procured corruptly, are to look upon him, and pay him
Homage, as the Legal Possessor; and the like may be said in the Case before us,
if our Representatives, without any good Reason, had placed His Majesty on the
Throne, he had then been a King, de Facto, a Legal Possessor in the Eye of the
Law; but if they acted according to Reason and Conscience, as I presume they
did, he is then King, de Iure.

And if this were allowed for Sense, we should not be driven to say, That God
Almighty requires our Obedience to Illegal Governments; which I cannot yet
assent to, notwithstanding all the Authorities, which are brought to support
this Doctrine. I acknowledge once for all, That God removes Kings, and sets
up Kings, as He pleases; He is not bound by Humane Laws, as we are; and when He
has set up a New King, He must be obeyed; but an Usurped Sovereignty must not
be ascribed to God, or it does not appear to be His Act, until the New King
gets quiet possession, together with an Act of Recognition; it is then soon
enough to ascribe the Revolution to the Hand of God: When God means to carry
things to this Length, He does by one means or other, dispose the Peoples
Hearts, to receive such a Prince, and then he has God's Authority.

Obj. But it may be urged, That this Explication defeats the Design of the Law;
which, as they say, was Enacted, to indemnify such as assisted Henry the
Seventh, in case of a New Revolution; because, originally he had no good Title
to the Crown; for if quiet Possession, and the Recognition of our
Representatives, gives a Title, it may be said, there was no need of this Law.

Ans. First, Abundans Cautela non nocet; They could never make themselves too
secure; and therefore, lest their Enemies, as it was in the Fable, should say,
that their Ears were Horns, they did wisely provide against it, fencing
themselves with an Act of Parliament, though really there was little Occasion for
it; but lest their Enemies might afterward pretend, That Henry the 7th. was
not King, de Iure, they declared it Lawful to Obey a King, de Facto; though at
the same time, there was no great Reason to Enact it barely on his Account.

And I presume, the rather, to make this Construction of it, because it is
scarce credible, That Henry the 7th. (who had so many Claims to the Crown, viz.
Blood, Conquest, Marriage, and all strengthened by an Act of Recognition)
should suffer his People to say, that he had no Rightful Title to the Crown;
whereas it is said, he was the most suspicious Prince then living; and
therefore, it is very improbable, he should own such a Blot in his Title, which
must be, if he made himself thus a King, de Facto, only.

Secondly, If this be an empty, groundless Surmise, His Majesty is yet a Legal
King, because this Law supposes we may have such a King: And I may say, King
James was no more; for though he had his Authority from God, the Law only was
our Evidence of his Authority; just as we say, Marriage is the Ordinance of
God; yet if a Man be not Married by the Form, which the Law prescribes, we
presume to call it no Marriage. But after all, we are very unfortunate, if this
Law, which was made to Govern and Direct us in our Obedience, should prove the
main Foundation of all our Scruples; for perhaps, if our Forefathers had not
troubled us with this nice distinction of a King de jure, and a King, de facto,
we should not have coined it on this occasion, but have generally submitted to
their Majesty's, as Lawful and Rightful King and Queen.

Obj. But Secondly, against this Hypothesis may be Urged our Vulgar Maxim, That
Conquest gives Right; for if there be any Truth in this saying, there is no
need of our Consent.

Ans. This I have in part answered before, and if the Maxim be ill grounded, it
must shift for it self.

Secondly, I allow there is some Truth in it, Conquest may give a Prince Right
to the Conquered Dominions. When we are Conquered, we lose our Property. But I
cannot conceive, that he should have Right to our Obedience, and our Persons,
as so many Cattle, and Stock upon the Ground; and in short, if you would make
this the sense of it, the condition of a Conquered People, would be most
intolerable, since we thus bind their consciences without Reserving them any
Property; it being agreed by all, that a Conqueror has the whole Property in
the Conquered Country; and we only plead to have their consciences free, until
they can make Terms for themselves, which I think ought not to be included in
this Maxim; or if it be, I had rather quit the Maxim, than lose my Liberty.

I Should now have done, only it may be convenient to draw some Conclusions
from this Hypothesis, which may not be disagreeable to men of our Principles.

As first, If this be true, then it was not his Majesty's Sword, nor his
Armies, that gave him his Authority over us, but our Representatives; in the
Condition we were in, did justly Transfer our Allegiance to him, as I have
already Demonstrated. This therefore must be great satisfaction to us all, that
notwithstanding this great Revolution, things have run in the Right Channel,
and that he did not get into the Throne, by Illegal means, which being
supposed, we may the better hope for prosperity under his Government.

Secondly, If these Principles be True, then his Majesty was not Elected as
some affirm; for in as much, as the Late King was not able, or willing to
Protect us, the Crown Naturally Devolved on his Majesty, (for if Her Majesty,
and Her Royal Highness the Princess of Denmark be pleased to postpone their
Right, what is that to us) and if his Majesty upon the Late Kings Leaving the
Kingdom, did not presently take it, but left the doubt to be decided by our
Representatives, it is no more than might be done upon a Descent, if there were
two pretenders to the Royal Dignity; which being thus determined, I presume
would not be Deemed an Election; their Act does not so much give the Crown, as
determine, to whom it did belong. And I think this is much the same Case to
that which is now before us; viz. The Consent of the Estates, to place his
Majesty on the Throne, does no more Derogate from his Right, than the Act of
Recognition, past by King James the First, did suppose a Flaw in his Title.

Thirdly, Upon these Principles we may also Silence those Rash Men, who for
Reasons best known to themselves, frequently tell us, that the Government was
dissolved, when the Late King left us.

But surely these Men cannot see an inch before them, and I am almost ashamed
to give them a serious answer. Let them tell me, if the Government did thereby
Crumble into pieces, by what Right did our then Representatives, Erect another
on the Ruins of it? If the Fountain of Honor failed, what Right had the
Nobility to their Peerage, and why might not the meanest Peasant send his
Representative, as well as any Landed Man, or free Burgher? These questions are
too difficult to be resolved, unless it be upon the supposition, that the Old
Government was then in being. They were at a loss indeed, to know in whom the
Government should be vested, and they came together to determine this great
question, which they soon Wisely Resolved; And unless we quietly submit to what
is done, by our Representatives in these Exigencies, we might as well say the
Government was Dissolved, when the King Left us, if the remaining Powers might
not Determine, where we should Pay our Obedience: For I suppose those
Confusions, what by an unruly Rabble, and a Disbanded Army, did sufficiently
show the necessity of fixing somewhere; and I humbly suppose it is as evident
to all Mankind, that the Late King would not, or could not come to Act his part
in the Government.

But lastly, upon these Principles (if it were necessary to refute such vile
Reproaches) we might secure our last Unhappy Prince, from being accounted the
Grand Rebel, as he is styled in a late Scurrilous Pamphlet: For if it is only
our own Consent, that makes us Subjects, we may at least be so favorable to
the Ruins of Majesty, as to excuse him from being a Subject or a Rebel; since
he cannot be the Head, he has not consented to be any other Member of the
Government, not being here in Person, or any Deputed from him; though this
cannot be said of any other Person, since they are Represented in our Estates,
whether they will or not: Nor upon any other Hypothesis can I Conceive it
Rational, to exclude the Late King himself from being a Member of this Present
Government; but this way he is set at Liberty, and consequently, as free to
Invade Their Majesty's Dominions, as any other Prince. If he molest us with an
Unjust War, he must expect, at the Great and Dreadful Day, to give Account for
all the Desolations and Bloodshed, that shall ensue upon it: If he is injured,
he has a good God to Fight his Battles, and we a Merciful Creator, that I hope
will Compassionate our Sins of Ignorance: I hope I may well call them so; for
my part, my Conscience bears me Witness, That I think it my Duty to submit to
Their Present Majesty's Government; and that I see nothing, that moves a
Scruple in my Heart, but the contrary Example of some Worthy Men, who, I am
persuaded, Act with great Sincerity: But since Example is no Argument, and if
it were, is much stronger on our part; I dare not but follow the Dictates of my
own Conscience.

FINIS.,
Some BOOKS lately Printed for Robert Clavel.
POlitical Arithmatick, or a Discourse concerning the Extent and Value of
Lands, People, Buildings, Husbandry, Manufacture, Commerce, Fishery, Artizans,
Seamen, Soldiers, public Revenues, Interest, Taxes, Superlucration,
Registries, Banks, Valuation of Men, Increasing of Seamen, of Militia's,
Harbors, Situation, Shipping, Power at Sea, etc. As the same Relates to every
Country in General, but more particularly to the Territories of His Majesty* of
Great Britain, and his Neighbors of Holland, Zealand, and France. By Sir
William Petty, late Fellow of the Royal Society.

The Frauds of the Romish Monks, and Priests, set forth in Eight Letters,
written lately by a Gentlemen in his Journey into Italy, and published for the
benefit of the public.

A late Letter concerning the Proceedings in Scotland, and Sufferings of the
Episcopal Clergy in that Kingdom, price 6 d.

Roman Forgeries in the Councils, during the first four Centuries, together
with an Appendix concerning the Forgeries, and Errors in the Annals of
Baronius. By Thomas Comber, D. D. Praecentor of York.

A Scholastical History of the Primitive and general use of Liturgies in the
Christian Church, together with an Answer to Mr. David Clarksons late Discourse
concerning Liturgies, in two Parts in Octavo. By Thomas Comber, D. D.

Seasonable Reflections on a late Pamphlet, Entitled, A History of Passive
Obedience since the Reformation, wherein the true Notion of Passive Obedience
is settled, and secured from the malicious Interpretations of ill designing Men.

The Golden Rule, or the Royal Law of Equity Explained.

A Sermon Preached before the Court of Aldermen, and City of London, at
Guid-Hall Chapel, on Sunday December, the 16th, 1688. Both by I. Goodman, D. D.


