A SERMON PREACHED At the Funeral of the Reverend RICHARD MEGGOT D. D. AND LATE
Dean of WINCHESTER, December. 10th. 1692. AT TWICKENHAM.

By WILLIAM SHERLOCK, D. D. Dean of St. Paul's, Master of the Temple, and
Chaplain in Ordinary to their Majesty's.

IMPRIMATUR,

Geo. Royse R. Rmo. in Christo Patri ac Dom. Dom. Johanni Archiep. Cantuar. a
Sacris Domest.
December. 18. 1692.


London: Printed for W. Rogers at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetsteet. 1693.

A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of Dr. Meggot, December. 10. 1692.

I PHIL. 23, 24. For I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart,
and to be with Christ, which is far better. Nevertheless to abide in the flesh
is more needful for you.
ST. Paul wrote this Epistle to Philippi from Rome, where he was in Bonds for
the Gospel; but though his Body was confined to a Prison, his Soul, his great
Divine Soul was at Liberty to visit the Churches he had planted, to advise and
counsel and comfort them, to increase their Knowledge, and to confirm their
Faith, to inflame their Zeal, and to spur them forward to more perfect
Seize in all Piety and Virtue.

The Philippians seem greatly concerned least the Progress of the Gospel should
be hindered by St. Paul's Imprisonment, and least they and the whole Church
should be deprived of the Labors and Ministry of so great an Apostle, should
this Persecution extend to Life, as they had reason to fear it would.

As for the first, St. Paul assures them, That his Bonds were for the
furtherance of the Gospel; for his Imprisonment was taken notice of both in the
Court and City, which made Men curious to know, what that Doctrine was, which
he preached, and for which he suffered Bonds, and this published the Gospel
more effectually than his Preaching could have done, v. 12, 13, etc.

As for the second, he tells them, He was no farther concerned either about
Life or Death, but that Christ might be magnified in his Body. If he lived, his
Life was wholly devoted to the Service of Christ, and of his Church; if he
died, it would be for his own great Advantage. To me to live is Christ, and to
die is gain; verse. 20, 21. and this made it a hard choice to him, whether he
should desire to live or die: whether he should get rid of his Bonds, and make
his Escape out of a troublesome World into the Regions of Ease and Rest, to reap
the Fruit of his Labors here in the eternal Enjoyment of his Lord, whom he had
so faithfully served; or whether he should live to Encounter with a thousand
Difficulties and Deaths in the Service of Christ, and of the Souls of Men. What
I should chose I wot not: for I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to
depart and to be with Christ, which is far better: nevertheless, to abide in
the Flesh is more needful for you.

Was there ever such a Dispute as this before, That a Man, who was as certain
to go to Heaven, as he was to die; who had himself been snatched up into the
third Heavens, and had his Mind possessed with strong and vigorous and lively
Idea's of the Glories of that place, who had seen and heard such things as
could not be expressed; who saw a Crown, a glorious immarcessible Crown
prepared for him; I say, that such a Man should make any question what he
should chose, whether immediately to take possession of this Crown and Kingdom,
or to live longer in this World to suffer Bonds and Imprisonments, Hunger, and
Cold, and Stripes, and all the ill usage, which he had so often met with, for
no other reason but still to preach the Gospel, and to enlarge the Borders of
Christ's Church. What a Contempt is this, not only of the little Pleasures and
Satisfactions, but even of all the Miseries of Life! what a Triumph is this
over the World, over all the Frowns and Terrors of it! what a Triumph is this
over Self! such a degree of Self-denial as the Gospel it self does not command,
which is in some sense to deny Heaven, to deny all the Joys of Christ's
Presence for the sake of doing good! for it is to delay, to put off Heaven, to
adjourn his own Happiness, that he may live the longer to serve his great
Master, though with great Difficulties and Labors. What Love was this to his
Lord! what Love was this to the Souls of Men! it is certainly the most perfect
imitation of the Love of Christ, that is possible to Man; Christ so loved us as
to come down from Heaven to live a laborious Life, and to die an accursed Death
for us; this great Apostle so loved his Lord, and so loved the Souls of Men,
that he made it his choice to stay some time out of Heaven, and to encounter
all the Miseries and Terrors of this Life, to serve Christ and his Church.
Where is this Divine Spirit now to be found! Let us, my beloved Brethren, who
are entrusted also with the Care of Souls by the great Shepherd and Bishop of
our Souls, blush to think how far short we fall of this Example: let this
inspire us with a flaming Love and Zeal for the Souls of Men, for whom Christ
died, and make us at least contented to deny our selves some of the Ease and
Security and Pleasures of Life, to serve the Church of Christ, which he has
purchased with his own blood.

But to keep my self within some Bounds, I shall briefly Discourse on these two
Heads, which are very proper for this Occasion, and very proper to my Text.
First, The great Rewards of faithful Pastors and Ministers of Christ, and how
much it is for their advantage to be removed out of this World. St. Paul was
very sensible of this, which made him desire to depart, and to be with Christ,
which is far better. Secondly, How necessary the Lives of such Men are to the
Church, and what a great loss it is, when God removes them out of it.
Nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for you.

1. Let us then consider in the first place the great Rewards of the faithful
Ministers of Christ, and how much it is for their advantage to depart, and to
be with Christ. Now I do not here intend a comparison between Heaven and Earth:
Good God! what different things are these? and what Christian doubts, whether
Heaven be a happier Place than this World? Heaven! whither no Troubles or
Sorrows can follow us; no persecuting Sword, no persecuting Tongue: where we
shall be delivered from all the Wants, Necessities, and Infirmities of the
Body, from Hunger and Cold and Nakedness, from wracking Pains and languishing
Sicknesses; where there is eternal Ease and Rest and Joy, without labor,
without discontents, without quarrels; where our Souls shall be perfected in
knowledge and in love; where we shall dwell in the Presence of God, see him as
he is, and know him even as we are known; where we shall dwell with Christ,
adore his Love, behold his Glory, and be transformed our selves into the
likeness and image of his Glory. We have but obscure imperfect Conceptions of
these things now; Heaven will outdo our highest Expectations, as much as the
most perfect state of Happiness in this World, always falls short of what we
expected; and this is the case of all good Men, it is a mighty happy Change
they make, when they remove from Earth to Heaven.

But there are different Degrees of Glory in the next World, proportioned not
only to our different seize in Virtue, but to those different Trusts and
Services which we have been employed in, and have faithfully discharged here.
We read of the Reward of a Prophet, that he who gives a Cup of cold Water to a
Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall have a Prophets Reward, which must
signify some peculiar Reward that shall be bestowed on Prophets: We know so
little of the other World, that we cannot conceive, what these different
Rewards shall be: The Prophet Daniel represents it by an external Glory, 12
Dan. 3. And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament,
and they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever. But
our Savior represents this by a different degree of Rule and Empire, 12 Luke
42. 43, 44. And the Lord said, who then is that faithful and wise steward, whom
his Lord shall make ruler over his household, to give them their meat in due
season: This is the honorable Character of Gospel Ministers in this World,
that they are Rulers in God's household, to instruct and feed them with the Word
of Life; and their Reward is proportioned to their Work; Blessed is that
servant, whom his Lord, when he comes shall find so doing. Of a truth I say
unto you, that he will make him ruler over all that he has. What this Rule
signifies in the other World is a Mystery to us, especially since we have
fancied the other World to be only a State of Contemplation, not of Action,
where we shall have nothing to do but to see God, and to love and to praise
him, but no service to do for him; but we know there are different orders of
Angels, who are employed in great Trusts and Offices, Archangels, Angels,
Thrones, Dominions, Principalities and Powers, which are names of Rule and
Government, though we know not what their Power and Authority is nor how they
Govern; in like manner our Savior promises his Apostles, verily I say unto
you, that ye which have followed me in the regeneration, when the son of man
shall sit on the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones,
judging the twelve tribes of Israel, 19 Matthew. 28. The like we may see in the
Parable of the Pounds and Talents; He who had gained ten Pounds had Rule over
ten Cities; and he who gained five Pounds had Rule over five Cities: for these
Servants to whom the Lord gave these Pounds and Talents to improve, plainly
signify his Stewards, and the Ministers of his spiritual Kingdom: for no other
Persons have in so peculiar a manner, this honorable Character of the Servants
of Christ throughout the Gospel. And if there be Order and Government among the
Angels themselves, Why should we think that there is nothing like this among
glorified Saints? if Angels are the Ministers of God, there is no reason to
think that Heaven is a State of mere Rest and Contemplation, especially when
Happiness consists in Action. And if Christ have any Ministers of his spiritual
Kingdom in the next World, it is most reasonable to think, that those shall
have the greatest Authority, and be employed in the noblest Services, who have
been his faithful Stewards and Ministers in this World. For the Church on Earth
and in Heaven is the same Church, though their State be very different; and
therefore they do not lose their relation to Christ, nor their station in his
Church by removing to Heaven. It is a sacerdotal Kingdom, our High Priest is
King, and therefore a Priest of Jesus, how mean soever this be thought now,
will be one of the highest Characters in Heaven. What the Happiness of this is
we cannot tell; but we know that there are no empty Titles in Heaven, but every
degree of Dignity there signifies a peculiar degree of Happiness, and what an
advantageous exchange then is it for a faithful Minister of Jesus to be removed
from Earth to Heaven.

For let us consider what the State of Christ's Ministers is in this World;
what it was in St. Paul' s days he tells us, 2 Cor. 6. 4 -- 10. In all things
approving our selves as the Ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions,
in necessities, in distresses, in Stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in
labors, in watchings, in fasting; by pureness, by knowledge, by long
suffering, by kindnesses, by the Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned, by the word of
truth, by the power of God, by the Armor of righteousness on the right hand
and on the left; by honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report, as
deceivers and yet true; as unknown and yet well known; as dying and behold we
live, as chastened and not killed; as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor,
yet making many rich; as having nothing, and yet possessing all things. Which
describes a most laborious Life, a Scene of Wants, of Difficulties, of
Sufferings; a perpetual exercise of passive Virtues, to reconcile the most
appearing Contradictions, to live and struggle and contend in this World, and
to fetch their Comforts and Supports from Heaven.

This indeed is not always the State of the Christian Church, nor of the
Ministers of it; but yet in the greatest external Prosperity of the Church, the
Ministers of Religion, who discharged their Trust with Diligence and
Faithfulness, find many difficulties to encounter.

The care of Men's Souls is itself a mighty Trust, and Who is sufficient for
these things? consider but the Charge St. Paul gives to Timothy 1 Epist. 4. 11,
etc. Let no man despise thy youth, but be thou an example of the believers, in
word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity; give
attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine, neglect not the gift that
is in thee, which was given thee by Prophecy, by laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery: Meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them, that thy
profiting may appear to all; take heed to thy self, and to thy doctrine;
continue in them, for in doing this thou shall both save thy self, and then
that hear thee. Here is work enough to employ the whole Man, and our utmost
care and diligence and prudence; work for the Study, for the Closet, for the
Pulpit, as the same Apostle exhorts and charges Timothy, to preach the word, to
be instant in season, out of season, to reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all
long-suffering and Doctrine, 2 Timothy 4. 2. But yet though there be labor and
diligence in this, it would be a delightful work, were our Labors always
blessed with success; could we rescue the Souls of Men from the Dominion of
their Lusts, and from the Power of the Devil, could we turn them from Darkness
to Light, and from the power of Satan unto God, but we must often expect to
labor all might and catch nothing, we must contend with the Lusts and Vices of
Men, must bear their Folly, their Frowardness, their Reproaches, and Censures,
and injuries, be thought Troublesome, Pragmatical, and Busybodies, for our
charitable Exhortations and Reproofs, and watchfulness over their Souls. And
when the Church is at ease and rest from without, how often is it rent and torn
in Pieces with Schisms and Heresies? as St. Paul forewarned Timothy, the time
will come when they will not endure sound Doctrine, but after their own lusts,
shall they heap to themselves Teachers, having itching ears, and they shall
turn away their ears from the truth, and be turned unto fables, 3, 4. ver. and
what infinite Labors and Difficulties does this create to the Ministers of the
Gospel, to heal the Breaches of the Church, to confute Heresies, Atheism,
Infidelity, and to be scorned and persecuted for it with a bitter Rage and
Zeal. That St. Paul might well add, But watch thou in all things, endure
afflictions, do the work of an Evangelist, make full proof of thy ministry, 5
verse. We ought not indeed to be discouraged by such difficulties as these,
because our Reward will be great in Heaven, but it will be a happy Day, when
Our warfare shall be accomplished, when we shall cease from our labors, and
our works shall follow us: when we can say with St. Paul, I have fought a good
fight, I finished my course, I have kept the faith, henceforth there is laid up
for me a Crown of righteousness.

2. Thus to die is their gain, Nevertheless, it is more needful for the Church,
that they should abide in the flesh: And a great loss it is to the Church, when
they die. I need not use many words about this, for the case is plain. The
Death of every good Man who is very useful to the World, in what way soever he
be useful, is a very great loss; for Death puts an end to his doing any more
good in this World: but as to take care of the Souls of Men, is to do the
greatest good to Mankind, because the Happiness of our Souls is of the greatest
concernment to us, so to lose a faithful and a prudent Guide must be the
greatest loss.

We indeed of this Church, have great reason to bless God, that he has sent
forth so many able and painful Laborers into his Harvest, that it is not the
loss of every good Man that can much affect us at ordinary times: For there are
great numbers of wise and good Men to perpetuate a Succession of able and
faithful Guides: but a St. Paul is at any time, and in any Age of the Church a
great loss: Nay, Men who are much Inferior to St. Paul, but yet fitted with
peculiar Abilities to serve the Church at some certain Seasons, and in some
difficult Circumstances, are a very sensible loss at such a time, when their
service is most needful.

A Man of Council and Conduct, who is fit to sit at the Helm, and knows how to
steer in a Storm, is a great loss, in times of Difficulty and Trouble, when the
Church is assaulted on all hands, and it is hard to avoid one Mischief or
Inconvenience without running into another.

A Man of Goodness and Temper, who knows how to govern his own Passions, and
how to soften and manage the Passions of other Men, is a very sensible loss,
when the Passions of Men are broke loose, and disturb the Peace of the Church,
and even threaten the ruin of it.

A Man of Learning and sound Judgment, who can distinguish between Truth and
Error in all its most artificial and flattering Disguises, is a great loss,
when old Errors are revived, and new ones broached; when we must dispute over
again the very Being of a God, the truth of the Scriptures, and Articles of the
Christian Faith.

A Man of great Diligence and Industry, Courage and Resolution, to defend the
Truth, to oppose Heresies and Schisms, to preserve the Unity of the Church, and
the Integrity of the Christian Faith, is a very great loss, when the Church is
encompassed and assaulted with busy and restless Enemies.

A Man of an exemplary Life, and untainted Virtue, who shines like a Light in
the midst of a crooked and perverse Generation, who maintains the declining
Honor and Repuration of Religion and true Virtue, is a mighty loss in a
profligate Age, when men are grown such Strangers to the sincere Practice of
Virtue and Religion, that they begin to think there is no such thing.

But I can go on no farther, the very mentioning of these things brings the
fresh Idea of our deceased Brother to mind, and the afflicting Sense of that
great loss, which we suffer by his Death. It becomes us to Reverence and Adore
the Wisdom of the divine Providence, even when we cannot understand the Reasons
of it. We are certain God is never wanting in his Care of his Church, and yet
had we been made Judges of this Case, we should have thought it a very ill time
to have spared him.

He was abundantly furnished with all good Learning, both for Use and Ornament;
he was an accomplished Scholar, and a well studied Divine; he knew Books and
read them, and judged of them: He was a Scribe instructed unto the Kingdom of
Heaven, who like a Householder could bring forth out of his treasure things New
and Old, 13 Matthew. 52. He had carefully perused the ancient Philosophers,
Orators and Poets, to discover what Nature taught, which gave him a truer
Knowledge and greater Value for the Excellency and Perfection of the
Gospel-Revelation.

He had true and clear Notions of Religion, and he was Master of them; he knew
why he believed any thing, and was neither prejudiced nor imposed on by popular
Opinions; he was a hearty and zealously Assertor of the Doctrine, Worship,
Government and Discipline of the Church of England; he saw nothing material,
which could be changed for the better, which made him jealous of Innovations,
as not knowing where they would end. He was a Friend to all sincere Christians,
pitied their Mistakes, and bore with their Frowardness, but did not think that
Christian Charity required him to sacrifice Truth, or good Order and Government
to the pretenses of Peace and Unity.

He was for several Years a very diligent and constant Preacher to a numerous
Auditory, till his own Diocesan who knew his Worth, and the weakness of his
Constitution, and was desirous to preserve him for the Service of the Church,
provided this place where we now are, for his Ease and Health, and Retirement;
where he lived many Years a constant Preacher, though his Labors were then
divided between his two Cures, which did not lessen his Preaching, but made the
Benefit of it the more diffusive. For indeed he was an admirable Preacher, not
for Noise and Lungs, but for well digested useful pious Discourses, delivered
with all that becoming Gravity, Seriousness, and a commanding Elocution, as
made them sink deep into the Minds of his Hearers, and made them hear. This I
speak with Assurance and Confidence in this place, which was so long blessed
with his Labors, with what fineness of Thought, perspicuity and easiness of
Expression instructing and entertaining Images of Things, he expounded the
Doctrines, and inculcated the Laws of our Savior; how plainly he Taught, with
what Vehemence and Passion he Exhorted, with what tender Sharpness he Reproved:
remember how he used both to Please and Instruct, to Chide and Shame you
without making you angry, how he has warmed and chaffed your Minds into the
most pious and serious Resolutions, and sent you home from this place wiser and
better then you came; and if you grew cold, and suffered your good Resolutions
to die again, consider I beseech you, what Account you have to give.

As he grew in Years, it was necessary by degrees to ease his Labors, he could
not Preach so often, but yet continued to Preach. And yet had he not Preached
at all, or much less then he did, he had not ceased to be a very useful Pastor
to the Church; for he was a Man of great Experience, and great Prudence and
Foresight; fit for Government and Counsel; who knew Men and Things; was
dexterous in his Applications, zealous without Passion or Peevishness, steady
and resolved without violent Oppositions, and needless Provocations; who served
the Church and the Truth with little Noise, and without making many Enemies:
And I am sure at such a time as this, there is more need of such Men, and a
much greater scarcity of them, than of good Preachers

But he was not only a good Preacher and a prudent Guide, but a very good Man:
he Preached continually by his Life and Example: his Conversation was Innocent,
Entertaining, and Useful; he was a true sincere Friend, very Courteous,
Affable, Civil to all Men, but never pretend Friendship where he had none: he
was ready to do all good Offices, was Liberal, Generous, and Charitable; a Man
of a true public Spirit, who scorned to serve himself to the Injury of others,
who hated little Arts and Tricks, mean and servile Compliances: he was an open
and generous Enemy, if we may ever call him an Enemy, who never wished, never
intended any hurt to any Man; but my meaning is, that when any Dispute and
Quarrel happened, as such things will sometimes happen, he was open and
undisguised, any Man might know what he disliked, and had no reason to fear any
thing worse from him, than what he would tell them. In a Word, he was a very
good Christian, and that made him good in all Relations, and that Crowned all
his other Labors; he took care as St. Paul did, Lest while he preached to
others, he himself should become a castaway. And now he is gone to rest, and
we must all shortly follow him; God grant that we may all so run our Race, and
finish our Course, that when we depart this Life we may rest in Him, as our
hope in this our Brother does, and may receive that Crown of Righteousness,
which God the Righteous Judge, will at that Day bestow on all his faithful
Servants, and on all those who love his Appearing.

FINIS.
Books Published by the Reverend Dr. Sherlock, Dean of St. Paul's, Master of the
Temple, and Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's.
AN Answer to a Discourse, entitled, Papists protesting against Protestant
Popery. Second Edition, 4to.

An Answer to the Amicable Accommodation of the Differences between the
Representer and Answerer. 4to.

A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of the Reverend B. Calamy, D. D. 4to.

A Vindication of some Protestant Principles of Church-Unity and
Catholick-Communion from the Charge of Agreement with the Church of Rome. 4to.

A Preservative against Popery; being some plain Directions to unlearned
Protestants how to dispute with Romish Priests. In Two Parts with the
Vindication, in Answer to the Cavils of Lewis Sabran, Jesuit. 4to.

A Discourse concerning the Nature, Unity, and Communion of the Catholic
Church. First Part. 4to.

A Sermon Preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen of
the City of London, on Sunday Nov. 4th. 1688. 4to.

A Vindication of the Doctrine of the Holy and Ever Blessed Trinity, and the
Incarnation of the Son of God, etc. The Second Edition. 4to.

The Case of the Allegiance due to Sovereign Powers stated and resolved
according to Scripture, Reason, and the Principles of the Church of England.
Sixth Edition. 4to.

A Vindication of the Case of Allegiance due to Sovereign Powers, etc. 4to.

A Sermon Preached at White Hall before the Queen, on the 17th of June, 1691.
being the Fast Day. 4to.

A Practical Discourse concerning Death. The Fifth Edition. 8vo.

A Practical Discourse concerning a Future Judgment. Third Edition. 8vo.

A Sermon Preached before the Honorable House of Commons at St. Margarets
Westminster, January 30th. 1691/92 4to.

A Sermon Preached before the Queen at Whitehall, Febr. 12th. 1691/92. 4to.

The Charity of Lending without Usury, and the true Notion of Usury stated, in
a Sermon Preached before the Right Hounourable the Lord Mayor at St. Bridget's
Church, on Tuesday in Easter-week, 1692. 4to.

A Sermon Preached at the Temple-Church, May 29. 1692. and Printed at the
Desire of the Bench-Table of the Honorable Society of the Inner Temple. 4to.

A Sermon Preached before the Queen at White Hall, June 26th. 1692. 4to.

Printed for W. Rogers.

