IMPRIMATUR,

Z. Isham, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris.
September. 11, 1689.
A Practical Discourse CONCERNING DEATH. BY WILLIAM SHERLOCK, D. D. Master of
the TEMPLE.

LONDON: Printed for W. Rogers, at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleet Street. MDCLXXXIX.

To the Worshipful THE MASTERS of the BENCH, And the rest of the Members of the
two Honorable Societies OF THE TEMPLE.
My much Honored Friends,
ONE reason of Publishing this Plain Discourse is, because I cannot now Preach
to you, as formerly I have done, and have no other way left of discharging my
Duty to You, but by making the Press supply the place of the Pulpit. Part of
this You have already heard, and should have heard the rest, had I enjoyed the
same Liberty still; which God restore to me again, when He sees fit, if not,
His will be done.

And the only reason of this Dedication is, to make this public and thankful
Acknowledgment (before I am forced from You, if I must be so Unhappy) of Your
Great Respects, and many singular Favors to me; which have been always so free
and generous, that they never gave time, nor left any room for me to ask;
especially that obliging Welcome You gave me at my first coming, I mean Your
Present of a House, which besides the Conveniences and Pleasure of a
Delightful Habitation, has afforded me that, which I value much more, the
frequent opportunities of Your Conversation.

Though I am able to make You no better Return than Thanks, I hope, that Great
MASTER, whom I serve, will; and that GOD would multiply all Temporal and
Spiritual Blessings on You, is, and always shall be, the sincere and hearty
Prayer of,

GENTLEMEN, Your Most Obliged and Humble Servant, W. Sherlock.

THE CONTENTS.
THe Introduction Page 1 CHAP. I. The several Notions of Death, and the
Improvement of them 4 SECT. I. The first Notion of Death, that it is our
leaving this World, with the Improvement of it 6 SECT. II. The second Notion of
Death, that it is our putting off these Bodies 35 SECT. III. Death considered
as our entrance upon a new and unknown State of Life 69
CHAP. II. Concerning the Certainty of our Death 89 SECT. I. A Vindication of
the Justice and Goodness of God in appointing Death for all Men 92 SECT. II.
How to improve this Consideration, that we must certainly die 110
CHAP. III. Concerning the time of our Death, and the proper Improvement of it
125 SECT. I. That the general Period of Humane Life is fixed and determined by
God, and that it is but very short 128 SECT. II. What little reason we have to
complain of the Shortness of Humane Life 184 SECT. III. What Use to make of the
fixed Term of Humane Life 144 SECT. IV. What Use to make of the Shortness of
Humane Life 162 SECT. V. The time, and manner, and circumstances of every
particular Man's Death, are not determined by an Absolute and Unconditional
Decree 185 SECT. VI. The particular time when we are to die, is unknown and
uncertain to us 196 SECT. VII. That we must die but Once, or that Death
translates us to an unchangeable State; with the Improvement of it 234
CHAP. IV. Concerning the Fear of Death, and the Remedies against it 328 The
Conclusion 351
ERRATA.
PAge 130. l. 8. for unreasonable read unanswerable. p. 214. l. 13. r. at
present.

A Practical Discourse CONCERNING DEATH.
9 Hebrews 27. It is appointed for Men once to die.
The INTRODUCTION.
THere is not a more effectual way to revive the True Spirit of Christianity in
the World, than seriously to meditate on what we commonly call the four last
things; Death, Judgment, Heaven, and Hell: For it is morally impossible men
should live such careless lives, should so wholly devote themselves to this
World, and the service of their Lusts, should either cast off the fear of God,
and all reverence for his Laws, or satisfy themselves with some cold and
formal Devotions, were they possessed with a warm and constant sense of these
things. For what manner of Men ought we to be, who know that we must shortly
die, and come to Judgment, and receive according to what we have done in this
World, whether it be good or evil; either eternal Rewards in the Kingdom of
Heaven, or eternal Punishments with the Devil and his Angels.

That which first presents it self to our thoughts, and shall be the Subject of
this following Treatise, is Death, a very terrible thing, the very naming of
which is apt to chill our Blood and Spirits, and to draw a dark veil over all
the Glories of this Life. And yet this is the condition of all Mankind, we must
as surely die, as we are born: For it is appointed unto Men once to die. This
is not the Original Law of our Nature; for though Man was made of the dust of
the Earth, and therefore was by nature Mortal, (for that which is made of dust
is by nature corruptible, and may be resolved into dust again) yet had he not
sinned, he should never have died; he should have been immortal by Grace, and
therefore had the Sacrament of Immortality, the Tree of Life, Planted in
Paradise. But now by Man Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin, and so
Death passed upon all Men, for that all have sinned, 5 Romans 12. and thus it is
decreed and appointed by God by an irreversible Sentence, dust thou art, and
unto dust thou shall return.

Now to improve this Meditation to the best advantage, I shall 1. Consider what
Death is, and what Wisdom that should teach us. 2. The certainty of our Death,
that it is appointed unto Men once to die. 3. The time of our death, it must be
once, but when we know not. 4. The natural fears and terrors of Death, or our
natural aversions to it, and how they may be allayed and sweetened.

CHAP. I. The several Notions of Death, and the Improvement of them.
1. WHat Death is; and I shall consider three things in it. 1. That it is our
leaving this World. 2. Our putting off these earthly Bodies. 3. Our entrance
into a New and Unknown state of Life; for when we die, we do not fall into
nothing, or into a profound sleep, into a state of silence and insensibility
till the Resurrection: But we only change our place, and our dwelling; we
remove out of this World, and leave our Bodies to sleep in the Earth till the
Resurrection, but our Souls and Spirits live still in an invisible State. I
shall not go about to prove these things, but take it for granted, that you all
believe them: For that we leave this World, and that our Bodies rot and
putrify in the Grave needs no proof, for we see it with our eyes; and that our
Souls cannot die, but are by nature Immortal, has been the belief of all
Mankind; The Gods which the Heathens Worshipped, were most of them no other but
dead Men, and therefore they did believe, that the Soul survived the Funeral of
the Body, or they could never have made Gods of them: Nay, there is such a
strong sense of Immortality imprinted on our natures, that very few Men, how
much soever they have debauched their natural Sentiments, can wholly deliver
themselves from the fears of another World. But we have a more sure Word of
Prophecy than this; Since Life and Immortality is now brought to light by the
Gospel. For this is so plainly taught in Scripture, that no Man, who believes
that, needs any other proof. My business therefore only shall be to show you,
how such thoughts as these should affect our minds: What that Wisdom is, which
the thoughts of Death will naturally teach us; how that Man ought to live, who
knows, that he must die, and leave his Body behind him to rot in the Grave, and
go himself into a new World of Spirits.

SECT. I. The first Notion of Death, that it is our, leaving this World, with
the improvement of it.
1. FIrst then let us consider Death only as our leaving this World: a very
delightful place you will say, especially when our circumstances are easy and
prosperous; here a Man finds whatever he most naturally loves, whatever he
takes pleasure in; the supply of all his wants, the gratification of all his
senses, whatever an earthly creature can wish for or desire; The truth is, few
Men know any other happiness, much less any thing above it; they feel what
strikes upon their senses; this they think a real and substantial good, but as
for more pure and intellectual joys, they know no more what to make of them,
than of Ghosts and Spirits; they account them thin vanishing things, and wonder
what Men mean who talk so much of them: Nay good Men themselves are apt to be
too much pleased with this World, while they are easy here; something else is
necessary to wean them from it, and to cure their fondness of it, besides the
thoughts of dying, which makes the Sufferings and Afflictions and
Disappointments of this Life, so necessary for the best of Men. This is one
thing which makes the thoughts of Death so terrible; Men think themselves very
well as they are, and most Men think that they cannot be better, and therefore
very few are desirous of a change: Extreme miseries may conquer the love of
Life, and some few Divine Souls may long with St. Paul to be dissolved and to
be with Christ, which is best of all, but this World is a beloved place to the
generality of Mankind, and that makes it a very troublesome thing to leave it:
whereas did we rightly consider this matter, it would rectify our mistakes
about these things, and teach us how to value and how to use them. For

1. If we must leave this World, how valuable soever these things are in
themselves, they are not so valuable to us. For besides the intrinsic worth of
things, there is something more required to engage the Affections of Wise Men.
viz. Propriety and a secure Enjoyment. What is not our own, we may admire if it
be Excellent, but cannot dote on; and what is worth having, increases or
decreases in value proportionably to the length and certainty of its
continuance, what we cannot enjoy is nothing to us, how excellent soever it be,
and to enjoy it but a little while, is next to not enjoying it, for we cannot
enjoy it always; and such things cannot be called our own, and this shows us,
what value we ought to set upon this World, and all things in it; even just so
much as upon things that are not our own, and which we cannot keep.

We use indeed to call things our own, which we have a legal title to, which no
Man can by Law or Justice deprive us of, and this is the only property we can
have in these things, a property against all other human claims; but nothing
which can be taken from us, nothing which we must leave, is properly our own;
for in a strict sense nothing is our own but what is Essential, either to our
Being or to our Happiness. Creatures are Proprietors of nothing, not so much as
of themselves, for we are his who made us, and who may unmake us again when he
pleases; but yet there are some things proper to our natures, and that is all
the natural propriety; we have; but what is thus proper to us we cannot be
deprived of without ceasing to be, or being miserable.

And this proves that the things of this World are not our own, that they are
not proper and peculiar to our natures, though they are necessary to this
present state of Life: While we live here we want them, but when we leave this
World we must live without them, and may be happy without them too: There is a
great agreeableness between the things of this World and an Earthly nature,
they are a great support and comfort to us in this mortal state; and therefore
while we live in this World we may value the enjoyments of it, for the ease and
conveniences of Life; but we must neither call this Life nor any enjoyments of
it our own, because they are short and perishing; we are here but as Travelers
in an Inn, it is not our Home and Country, it is not our Portion and
Inheritance but a moveable and changeable Scene, which is entertaining at
present, but cannot last. Let us then consider, how we ought to value such
things as these, and to make it as plain and self-evident as I can, I shall put
some easy and familiar Cases.

1. Suppose you were a Traveling through a very delightful Country, where you
met with all the Pleasures and Conveniences of Life, but knew, that you must
not tarry there, but only pass through it; would you think it reasonable to set
your Affections so much upon it, as to make it uneasy to you to leave it? And
shall we then grow so fond of this World, which we must only pass thorough,
where we have no abiding City, as to enslave our selves to the Lusts and
Pleasures of it, and to carry out of this World such a Passion for it, as shall
make us miserable in the next: For though Death will separate us from this World,
we are not sure that it will cure our Earthly Passions; we may still find the
torment of Sensual Appetites, when all Sensual Objects are removed: This was
all the Purgatoryfire St. Austin could think of, that those who loved this
World too much here, though otherwise innocent and virtuous Men, should be
punished with fruitless desires and hankerings after this World in the next;
which is a mixed torment of desire and despair. For though indeed it is only
living in these Bodies, which betrays the Soul to such Earthly Affections, yet
when the impression is once made, and is strong and vigorous, we are not sure
that merely putting off these Bodies will cure it; as we see Age it self in Old
Sinners does not cure the wantonness of Desire, when the Body is effaete and
languid; and this I should think were Reason enough to convince every Man, who
considers, that he is not to live here always, how much it concerns him not to
grow over-fond of present things; for to contract an eternal Passion for what
we cannot always enjoy, must needs make us miserable.

2. If then we must not entertain a fondness for those things, which we cannot
keep, let us in the next place consider, how we must use those things, which we
have but a present and momentary possession of; for use is apt to beget a
fondness. Suppose then again, that in your Travels abroad, you pass through
such a delightful Country, what is it, that prevents your fondness, but only
considering, that you are not at home, that you must not always see and enjoy
what you now do; and therefore all the fine things you meet with, you rather
look upon as curiosities to be remarked in story, or to be tried by way of
experiment, or to be used for present necessity, than as such things which are
to be enjoyed, which you know they are not: And did we use the World thus, we
should never grow over fond of it. Those, who Marry would be as though they
Married not, and those who weep, as though they wept not; and those who
rejoice, as though they rejoiced not, and those who use this World, as not
abusing it, because the fashion of this World passes away: The World it self
will not last long, though it will outlast us, but we are to continue here so
little a while, that we have no reason to call it our home, or to place our
enjoyment in it: It is an old and a good distinction, that some things are only
for use, and somethings for enjoyment. The first we value only for their use,
the second we account our happiness. Now it is certain, that what is transient
and momentary can be only for use, for Man is a miserable Creature, if what is
his happiness, be not lasting; and a very foolish Creature if he places his
happiness in what is not lasting. Now this should make a vast difference in our
affections to things. We cannot blame any Man who lets loose his affections
upon that which is his happiness; for there neither can nor ought to be any
bounds set to our desires or enjoyment of our true happiness; but what we
account only for use, we have no farther concernment for, but only as it is of
use to us; and this confines our desires and affections to its use; and were
this the measure of our love to present things as it ought to be, we could not
err, nor entertain any troublesome or vicious passion for them: As for instance;
What is the natural use of eating and drinking but to repair the decays of
nature, and preserve our Bodies in health and vigor? Now as great delicacies,
and curiosities, as there are in nature both of Food and Liquors, if Men valued
them only for their use, they would never be guilty of excess, nor grow so fond
of them, as if they were made only to eat and drink, and to judge of the
differences of Tastes. To value things for their use, is to value them no
farther than they are useful, and this is the only value which is due to things
which we must leave; for they can be only for present use: But when we come to
place our happiness, as all sensual Men do, in things which were designed only
for our use; it both makes us extravagant in the use of them, [which often
proves a great mischief to us in this World;] and creates such an unnatural
passion for them, as they cannot answer, which makes them vain and empty and
unsatisfactory while we have them, and fills us with vexation, and all the
restlesness of a furious passion and appetite when we want them; as we must do
at one time or other, either before, or to be sure when we leave this World.

3. Let us suppose again, that in our passage through Foreign Countries, where
we are not to stay long, we should not meet with all those necessaries and
conveniences of Life, which we have at home; that the Country is barren, the
way rough and mountainous; the Road infested with Thieves and Robbers, but
without any convenient reception for Travelers; the People rude and Barbarous,
and Insolent to Strangers: will a Wise Man be over-solicitous about such
hardships as these in Traveling? Does he not comfort himself, that he is not
to stay there, that this will not last long; that these difficulties will only
recommend his own Country to him, and make him hasten home again, where he
shall remember with pleasure, what is now uneasy and troublesome?

And is there not as much reason for Christians to bear all the Evils and
Casualties and Sufferings of this Life with an equal mind, remembering that they
are not to stay always here? That this Life is but their Pilgrimage, they are
from home, and therefore must expect the usage, which Strangers and Travelers
ordinarily meet with: That they are not to live here always, is a sufficient
proof, that their happiness does not consist in present things, and then if
they can make a shift, though it may be it is a hard shift, to pass through
this World, the scene will be altered, and they shall find a kinder reception
in the next. This is the Foundation of Contentment in all Conditions, and of
Patience under Sufferings, that Death, which is not far off, when it removes us
out of this World, will remove us from all the Sufferings of it: And why should
we not bear up with the courage and resolution of Travelers in the mean time;
when we have home, a Peaceful and Eternal home in our prospect.

4. Once more, to conclude this Argument: Suppose a Man in his Travels through
a Foreign Country, should be commanded immediately to leave the Country,
unless he would forswear ever returning to his own Country again. Would not a
wise Man consider, that if he had not been commanded to leave that Country, he
did not intend to have staid long in it; and therefore it would be an
unaccountable folly and madness in him, to abjure his own Country, where his
Father and Kindred and Inheritance is, only to gratify his curiosity in
staying a little longer there. And can we then think it a hard command (when we
know we must shortly die, and leave this World, that whether we will or no, we
cannot stay long in it) to sacrifice our very Lives, rather than renounce our
hopes of Heaven and a better Life: When we know that we must leave this World;
what does it signify to die a little sooner than it may be in the course of
nature we should, to obtain an immortal Life? To go to that Blessed Jesus, who
lived in this World for us, and died for us, and is ready to receive us into
that Blessed Place where he is, that we may behold his Glory. I am sure it is a
very foolish thing for a Man, who must die to forfeit an immortal Life, to
reprieve a mortal and perishing Life for some few years.

II. As Death, which is our leaving this World, proves that these present
things are not very valuable to us, so it proves, that they are not the most
valuable things in their own natures; though we were to enjoy them always, it
would be but a very mean and imperfect state in comparison of that better Life,
which is reserved for good Men in the next World. For 1. It is congruous to the
Divine Wisdom and Goodness, that the best things should be the most lasting.
Wisdom dictates this; for it is no more than to give the preference to those
things which are best. The longest continuance gives a natural preference to
things; we always value those things most, which we shall enjoy longest, and
therefore to give the longest duration to the worst things, is to set the
greatest value on them, and to teach mankind to prefer them before that, which
is better. What we value most, we desire to enjoy longest, and were it in our
power, we would make such things the most lasting; which shows, that it is the
natural sense of mankind, that the best things deserve to continue longest, and
therefore we need not doubt, but that infinite Wisdom, which made the World,
has proportioned the continuance of things to their true worth. And if God have
made the best things the most lasting, then the next World in its own
intrinsic nature is as much better then this World, as it will last longer.
For this is most agreeable to the Divine Goodness too, and Gods love to his
Creatures, that what is their greatest and truest happiness should be most
lasting. For if God have made Man capable of different degrees and states of
happiness, of living in this World and in the next, it is an expression of more
perfect goodness (as it is most for the happiness of his Creatures) that the
most perfect state of happiness should last the longest; for the more perfectly
happy we are, the more do we experience the Divine Goodness, and he is the most
perfectly happy, who has the longest enjoyment of the best things.

2. It seems most agreeable also to the Divine Wisdom and Goodness, that where
God makes such a vast change in the state of his Creatures, as to remove them
from this World to the next, the last state should be the most perfect and
happy. I speak now of such Creatures, as God designs for happiness, for the
reason alters where he intends to punish. But where God intends to do good to
Creatures, it seems a very improper method to translate them from a more
perfect and happy to a less happy state. Every abatement of Happiness is a
degree of Punishment, and that which those Men are very sensible of, who have
enjoyed a more perfect Happiness: And therefore we may certainly conclude, that
God would not remove good Men out of this World, were this the happiest place.

Yes, you will say, Death is the Punishment of Sin, and therefore it is a
Punishment to be removed out of this World, which spoils that Argument, that
this World is not the happiest place, because God removes good Men out of it:
For this is the effect of that curse, which was entailed on Mankind for the sin
of Adam, dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return.

Now I grant, Death, as it signifies a separation of Soul and Body, and the
death of both, which was included in that Curse, was a Curse and a Punishment,
but not as it signifies leaving this World, and living in the next.

We have some reason to think, that though Man should never have died, if he
had not sinned, yet he should not always have lived in this World. Human nature
was certainly made for greater things than the enjoyment of sense: It is
capable of nobler advancements; it is related to Heaven, and to the World of
Spirits: and therefore it seems more likely, that had Man continued innocent,
and by the constant exercise of Wisdom and Virtue improved his faculties, and
raised himself above this body, and grown up into the Divine Nature and Life,
after a long and happy life here, he should have been translated into Heaven,
as Enoch and Elias were without dying. For had all Men continued innocent, and
lived to this day, and propagated their kind, this little spot of Earth had
many Ages since been over-peopled, and could not have subsisted without
transplanting some Colonies of the most Divine and Purified Souls into the
other World.

But however that be, it is certain, that being removed out of this World and
living in Heaven is not the Curse: This fallen Man had no right to; for he, who
by Sin had forfeited an earthly Paradise, could not hereby gain a Title to
Heaven. Eternal Life is the gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord, it is
the reward of good Men, of a well spent life in this World, of our Faith and
Patience in doing and suffering the Will of God; it is our last and final
State, where we shall live for ever, and therefore the Argument is still good,
that this World cannot be the happiest place, for then Heaven could not be a
reward. Though all Men are under the necessity of dying, yet if this World had
been the happiest place, God would have raised good Men to have lived again in
this World, which he could as easily have done, as have translated them to
Heaven.

Now if this World be not the happiest place, if present things be not the most
valuable, as appears from this very consideration, that we must leave this
World (for to this I must confine my discourse at present) there are several
very good uses to be made of this. As 1. To rectify our Notions about present
things. 2. To live in expectation of some better things. 3. Not to be
over-concerned about the shortness of our Lives here.

1. To rectify our Notions about present things. It Is our opinions of things
which ruin us. For what Mankind account their greatest happiness, they must
love, and they must love without bounds or measures: And it would go a great
way to cure our extravagant fondness and passion for these things, could we
persuade our selves that there is any thing better. But this I confess, is a
very hard thing for most Men to do, because present things have much the
advantage of what is absent and future. Some who believe another life after
this, what ever great things they may talk of the other World, yet do not seem
thoroughly persuaded, that the next World is a happier state than this; for I
think they could not be so fond of this World, if they were. And the reason of
it is plain, because happiness cannot be so well known, as by feeling; now Men
feel the pleasures and happiness of this World, but do not feel the happiness
of the next, and therefore are apt to think, that that is the greatest
happiness, which does most sensibly affect them. But would they but seriously
consider things, they might see reason to think otherwise, that the unknown
joys and pleasures of the other World are much greater than any pleasures,
which they feel here. For let us thus reason with our selves. I find I am
mortal, and must shortly leave this World; and yet I believe, that my Soul
cannot die, as my Body does, but shall only be translated to another state:
whatever I take pleasure in in this World, I must leave behind me, and know not
what I shall find in the next: But surely the other World, where I must live
for ever, is not worse furnished than this World, which I must so quickly
leave. For has God made me immortal, and provided no sorts of pleasures and
entertainments for an immortal state, when he has so liberally furnished the
short and changeable Scene of this Life? I know not indeed what the pleasures
of the next World are, but no more did I know, what the pleasures of this World
were till I came into it, and therefore that is no argument that there are no
pleasures there, because I do not yet know them; and if there be any pleasures
there, surely they must be greater, than what are here, because it is a more
lasting State: For can we think, that God has emptied all his Stores and
Treasures into this World? Nay, can we think, that he has given us the best
things first, where we can only just taste them, and leave them behind us? which
is to excite and provoke an appetite, which shall be restless and uneasy to
Eternity. No surely! the other World must be infinitely a more happy place than
this, because it will last infinitely longer; The Divine Wisdom and Goodness
has certainly reserved the best things for Eternity; for as eternal beings are
the most perfect, so they must be the most happy too; unless we can separate
perfection and happiness: And therefore I cannot but conclude, that there are
greater pleasures, that there is a happier state of Life then this, because
there is a Life which lasts for ever.

2. This will naturally teach us to live in expectation of better things, of
greater, though unknown and unexperienced pleasures, which methinks all Men
should do, who know, that there are better things to be had; and that they must
go into that State, where these better things are to be had. For can any Man be
contented with a less degree of happiness, who knows there is a greater? This
is stupidity and baseness of Spirit; an ignoble mind, which is not capable of
great hopes; Ambition and Covetousness indeed are ill names, but yet they are
symptoms of a great and generous Soul, and are excellent Virtues, when directed
to their right Objects, that is, to such Objects as are truly great and
excellent, for it is only the meanness of the Object, which makes them Vices;
to be ambitious of true Honor, of the true Glory and Perfection of our
Natures, is the very principle and incentive of Virtue: But to be ambitious of
Titles, of Place, of some Ceremonious respects, and Civil Pageantry, is as vain
and little, as the things are which they court. To be covetous of true and real
Happiness, to set no bounds nor measures to our desire or pursuit of it, is
true greatness of mind, which will take up with nothing on this side
perfection; for God and Nature have set no bounds to our desires of happiness,
but as it is in natural, so it ought to be in moral agents, every thing grows
till it comes to its maturity and perfection; but then Covetousness is a Vice,
when men mistake their Object, and are insatiable in their desires of that
which is not their Happiness; as Gold and Silver, Houses and Lands, what is
more than we want, and more than we can use, cannot be the happiness of a Man.
And thus it is on the other hand; though Humility be a great Virtue, as it is
opposed to earthly ambitions, as it sets us above the little opinions and
courtship of the World, which are such mean things, as argue meanness of Spirit
to stoop to them; yet it is not Humility, but sordidness, to be regardless of
true Honor. Thus to be contented with our external Fortune in this World, what
ever it be; to be able to see the greater prosperity and splendour of other Men,
without envy, and without repining at our own meanness is a great Virtue;
because these things are not our happiness, but for the use and conveniences
of this present Life, and to be contented with a little of them for present
use, is an Argument, that we do not think them our happiness, which is the true
excellency of this Virtue of Contentment; but to be contented, if we may so
call it, to want that which is our true happiness, or any degree or portion of
it, to be contented never to enjoy the greatest and the best things, is a Vice
which contradicts the natural desires of happiness, and you may call it what
you will, if you can think of any name bad enough for it. It is the most
despicable temper in the World, to have no sense of true Honor or Happiness,
or when we know there are greater and better things, to take up with some low
enjoyments. And therefore let the thoughts of this ennoble our minds, and since
there are better things in the other World, let us use our utmost endeavors to
possess our selves of them; let us live like Men, who are born for greater
things then this World affords; let us endeavor to inform our selves, what the
happiness of the next World is, and how we may attain it, and let us use all
present things, as those who know there are infinitely greater and better
things, reserved for us in the next World.

III. This should teach us also, not to be over-concerned for the shortness of
our lives. Our lives indeed are very short, they fly away like a shadow, and
fade like the Flowers of the Field, and this were a very unsupportable thought,
were there either no life after this, or not so happy a life as this. But
besides all the other proofs we have of another life, the very shortness of our
lives may convince us, that Death does not put an end to our being. For can we
imagine, that so noble a Creature as Man is, was made for a day. Man, I say,
who is big with such immortal designs, full of projects for future ages, who
can look backward and forward, and see an Eternity without beginning and
without end. Who was made to contemplate the wonders of Nature and Providence,
and to admire and adore his Maker? Who is the Lord of this lower World, but has
eyes to look up to Heaven, and view all the glories of it, and to pry into that
invisible World which this veil of Flesh intercepts the sight of: Man, who is
so long a Child, and by such slow steps arrives to the use of Reason, and by
that time he has got a little Knowledge, and is earnestly seeking after more;
by that time he knows, what it is to be a Man, and to what purpose he ought to
live, what God is, and how much he is bound to Love and Worship him; while he
is ennobling his Soul with all Heavenly Qualities and Virtues, and Coppying out
the Divine Image; when the Glories of Humane Nature begin to appear, and to
shine in him, that is, when he is most fit to live, to serve God and Men; then
I say, either this mortal Nature decays, and dust returns to its dust again, or
some violent distemper or evil accident cuts him off in a vigorous age, and
when with great labor and industry he is become fit to live, he must live no
longer. How is it possible to reconcile this with the Wisdom of God, if man
perishes when he dies; if he ceases to be, as soon as he comes to be a man. And
therefore we have reason to believe, that death only translates us into another
World, where the beginnings of Wisdom and Virtue here grow up into perfection;
and if that be a more happy place than this World, as you have already heard,
we have no reason to quarrel, that we live so little a while here. For seting
aside the Miseries and Calamities, the troubles and inconveniences of this
Life, which the happiest men are exposed to (for our experience tells us, that
there is no complete and unmixt happiness here) setting aside, that this World
is little else than a Scene of Misery to a great part of Mankind, who struggle
with want and poverty, labor under the oppressions of Men, or the pains and
sicknesses of diseased Bodies, yet if we were as happy as this World could make
us, we should have no reason to complain that we must exchange it for a much
greater happiness. We now call it death to leave this World, but were we once
out of it, and enstated in the happiness of the next, we should think it were
dying indeed to come into it again. We read of none of the Apostles, who did so
passionately desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ, as St. Paul, and
there was some reason for it, because he had had a taste of that happiness,
being snatched up into the third Heavens Indeed could we see the Glories of
that place, it would make us impatient of living here, and possibly, that is
one reason, why they are concealed from us, but yet reason tells us, that if
death translate us to a better place, the shortness of our lives here is an
advantage to us, if we take care to spend them well, for we shall be the sooner
possessed of a much happier Life.

III. From this Notion of Death, that it is our leaving this World, I observe
farther, what this life is, only a state of growth and improvement of trial and
probation for the next: There can be no doubt of this, if we consider what the
Scripture tells us of it, that we shall be rewarded in the next World, as we
have behaved our selves in this: That we shall receive according to what we
have done in the Body whether good or evil: Which proves, that this life is
only in order to the next; that our eternal happiness or misery shall bare
proportion to the good or evil, which we have done here. And when we only
consider, that after a short continuance here, man must be removed out of this
World, if we believe, that he does not utterly perish when he dies, but
subsists still in another state, we have reason to believe, that this life is
only a preparation for the next. For why should a man come into this World, and
afterward be removed into another, if this World had no relation, nor
subordination to the next? Indeed it is evident that man is an improvable
Creature, not created at first in the utmost perfection of his Nature, nor put
into the happiest state he is capable of, but trained up to perfection and
happiness by degrees. Adam himself in a state of innocence was but upon his
good behavior, was but a probationer for Immortality, which he forfeited by
his sin; and as I observed before, it is most probable, that had he continued
innocent, and refined and exalted his nature by the practice of Divine Virtues,
he should not have lived always in this World, but have been translated into
Heaven. And I cannot see, how it is inconsistent with the Wisdom of God to make
some Creatures in a state of Probation; that as the Angelical Nature was
created so pure at first, as to be fit to live in Heaven; so Man, though an
earthly, yet a reasonable Creature, might be in a capacity, by the improvement
of his natural powers, of advancing himself thither: As it became the manifold
Wisdom of God to create the Earth as well as the Heavens, so it became his
Wisdom to make Man to inhabitate this Earth, for it was not fitting, that any
part of the World should be destitute of reasonable Beings to know and adore
their Maker, and to ascribe to him the glory of his Works: but then since a
reasonable Nature is capable of greater improvements than to live always in
this World, it became the Divine Goodness to make this World only a state of
Probation and Discipline for the next, that those who by a long and constant
practice of Virtue had spiritualized their Natures into a Divine Purity, might
ascend into Heaven, which is the true Center of all intelligent Beings. This
seems to be the original intention of God in making man, and then this earthly
life was from the beginning but a state of growth and improvement to make us
fit for Heaven, though without dying.

But to be sure the Scene is much altered now, for Adam by his sin made himself
mortal, and corrupted his own nature, and propagated a mortal and corrupt
nature to his Posterity; and therefore we have no natural right to Immortality,
nor can we refine our Souls into such a divine Purity as is fit for Heaven, by
the weakened and corrupted powers of Nature; but what we cannot do, Christ has
done for us; he has purchased Immortality for us by his Death, and quickens and
raises us into a new Life by his Spirit; but since still we must die, before we
are immortal, it is more plain than ever, that this life is only in order to
the next, that the great business we have to do in this World, is to prepare
ourselves for Immortality and Glory.

Now if our life in this World be only in order to another life, we ought not
to expect our complete Happiness here, for we are only in the way to it; we
must finish the Work God has given us to do in this World, and expect our
reward in the next: And if our reward cannot be had in this World, we may
conclude, that there is something much better in the next World, than any thing
here.

If this Life be our time to work in, we should not consult our ease and
softness and pleasures here, for this is a place of labor and diligence, not
of rest: We are a traveling to Heaven, and must have our eye on our journeys
end, and not hunt after Pleasures and Diversions in the way.

The great end of living in this World is to be happy in the next, and
therefore we must wisely improve present things, that they may turn to our
future account. Must make to our selves Friends of the Mammon of
Unrighteousness, that when we fail, they may receive us into everlasting
Habitations. What concerns a better life must take up most of our thoughts and
care, and whatever endangers our future happiness must be rejected with all its
charms. It would not be worth the while to live some few years here, were we
not to live for ever, and therefore it becomes a wise man, who remembers, that
he must shortly leave this World, to make this present life wholly subservient
to his future happiness.

SECT. II. The second Notion of Death, that it is our putting off these Bodies.
II. LEt us now consider Death as it is our putting off these Bodies; for this
is the proper Notion of Death, the separation of Soul and Body, that the Body
returns to Dust, the Soul or Spirit unto God, who gave it: when we die, we do
not cease to be, nor cease to live, but only cease to live in these earthly
Bodies, the vital Union between Soul and Body is dissolved, we are no longer
encloister'd in a Tabernacle of Flesh, we no longer feel the impressions of it,
neither the pains nor pleasures of the Body can affect us, it can charm, it can
tempt no longer. This needs no proof, but very well deserves our most serious
Meditations.

For, 1. this teaches us the difference and distinction between Soul and Body,
which men, who are sunk into flesh and sense are so apt to forget, nay, to lose
the very notion and belief of it: all their delights are fleshly, they know no
other pleasures, but what their five senses furnish them with; they cannot
raise their thoughts above this body, nor entertain any noble designs, and
therefore they imagine, that they are nothing but flesh and blood, a little
organized and animated Clay, and it is no great wonder, that men who feel the
workings and motions of no higher principle of life in them, but flesh and
sense, should imagine that they are nothing but flesh themselves: though methinks
when we see the senseless and putrefying remains of a brave man before us, it
is hard to conceive, that this is all of him, that this is the thing which some
few hours ago could reason and discourse, was fit to govern a Kingdom, or to
instruct Mankind, could despise flesh and sense, and govern all his bodily
Appetites and Inclinations, was adorned with all divine graces and Virtues, was
the glory and pride of the Age; And is this dead Carkase, which we now see, the
whole of him? Or was there a more divine Inhabitant, which animated this
earthly Machine, which gave life, and beauty, and motion to it, but is now
removed?

To be sure, those who believe, that Death does not put an end to their being,
but only removes them out of this body, which rots in the Grave, while their
Souls survive, live and act, and may be happy in a separate state, should
carefully consider this distinction between Soul and Body, which would teach
them a most Divine and Heavenly Wisdom.

For when we consider, that we consist of Soul and Body, which are the two
distinct parts of Man, this will teach us to take care of both: for can any
man, who believes he has a Soul, be concerned only for his Body? A compound
Creature cannot be happy, unless both parts of him enjoy their proper
pleasures. He who enjoys only the pleasures of the Body, is never the happier
for having a humane and reasonable Soul; the soul of a Beast would have done as
well, and it may be better; for bruit Creatures relish bodily pleasures as
much, and it may be more, than Men do, and reason is very troublesome to men
who resolve to live like Bruits; for it makes them ashamed and afraid, which in
many cases hinders, or at least allays their pleasures: And why should not a
man desire the full and entire happiness of a man? why should he despise any
part of himself, and that, as you shall hear presently, the best part too? And
therefore at least we ought to take as much care of our Souls as of our Bodies:
Do we adorn our Bodies that we may be fit to be seen, and to converse with men,
and may receive those respects which are due to our quality and fortune; and
shall we not adorn our Souls too, with those Christian Graces which make us
lovely in the sight of God and men? The Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit,
which is in the sight of God of great price; which St. Peter especially
recommends to Christian Women as a more valuable ornament than the outward
adorning of plaiting the hair, or wearing gold, or putting on of apparel, 1
Peter 3. 3, 4. The ornaments of Wisdom and Prudence, of well - governed
Passions, of Goodness and Charity, give a grace and beauty to all our actions,
and such a pleasing and charming air to our very countenance, as the most
natural Beauty, or artificial Washes and Paints can never imitate.

Are we careful to preserve our Bodies from any hurt, from pains and sickness,
from burning Fevers, or the racking Gout or Stone, and shall we not be as
careful of the ease of the Mind too? To quiet and calm those Passions which
when they grow outrageous, are more intolerable than all natural or artificial
Tortures; to moderate those Desires, which rage like Hunger and Thirst; those
Fears which convulse the Mind with trembling and paralytick motions; those
furious Tempests of Anger, Revenge, and Envy, which rufle our Minds, and fill
us with Vexation, Restlesness and Confusion of Thoughts; especially those
guilty Reflections upon ourselves, that Worm in the Conscience which gnaws the
Soul, and torments us with shame and remorse, and dreadful expectations of an
Avenger* These are the Sicknesses and Distempers of the Soul; these are Pains
indeed more sharp and pungent and killing pains than our Bodies are capable of;
The spirit of a man can bear his infirmity, natural Courage, or the powers of
Reason, or the comforts of Religion, can support us under all other Sufferings,
but a wounded spirit who can bear? And therefore a man, who loves ease, should
in the first place take care of the ease of his Mind, for that will make all
other sufferings easy; but nothing can support a man whose mind is wounded.

Are we fond of bodily Pleasures? are we ready to purchase them at any rate?
And if we be men, why should we despise the pleasures of the mind? if we have
Souls, why should we not reap the benefit and the pleasures of them? Do you
think there are no pleasures proper to the Soul? have we Souls that are good
for nothing? of no use to us, but only to relish the pleasures of the Body? Ask
those who have tried, what the pleasures of Wisdom and Knowledge are, which
does as much excel the pleasures of seeing, as Truth is more beautiful and
glorious than the Sun: ask them what a pleasure it is to know God, the greatest
and best Being, and the brightest Object of our minds, to contemplate his
Wisdom and Goodness and Power in the Works of Creation and Providence; to be
swallowed up in that stupendous Mystery of Love, the Redemption of Sinners by
the Incarnation and Sufferings of the Son of God: ask them, what the pleasures
of Innocence and Virtue are; what the Feast of a good Conscience means; which
is the greatest Happiness, to give or to receive; what the Joys even of
Sufferings and Persecutions, of Want and Poverty and Reproach are for the sake
of Christ: ask a devout Soul, what transports and ravishments of Spirit he
feels, when he is upon his knees, when with St. Paul he is even snatched up
into the third Heavens, filled with God, overflowing with praises and divine
joys: And does it not then become a man, who has a reasonable Soul, to seek
after these rational, these manly, these divine Pleasures, the pleasures of the
Mind and Spirit, which are proper and peculiar to a reasonable Creature? Let
him do this, and then let him enjoy the pleasures of the Body as much as he
can, which will be very insipid and tastless, when his Soul is ravished with
more noble delights.

In a word, if we are so careful to preserve the life of our Bodies, which we
know must die, and rot and putrify in the Grave, methinks we should not be
less careful to preserve the life of our Souls, which is the only immortal part
of us: for though our Souls cannot die, as our Bodies do, yet they may be
miserable, and that is called eternal Death, where the Worm never dies, and
the Fire never goes out: For to be always miserable, is infinitely worse than
not to be at all, and therefore is the most formidable Death. And if we are so
unwilling to part with these mortal Bodies, we ought in reason to be much more
afraid to lose our Souls.

II. That Death is our putting off these Bodies, teaches us, That the Soul is
the only principle of Life and Sensation: The Body cannot live without the
Soul, but as soon as it is parted from it, it loses all sense and motion, and
returns to its original Dust; but the Soul can and does live without the Body,
and therefore there is the principle of Life. This may be thought a very common
and obvious Observation, and indeed so it is; but the consequences of this are
not so commonly observed, and yet are of great use and moment.

For 1. this shows us, that the Soul is the best part of us, that the Soul
indeed is the Man, because it is the only seat of Life and Knowledge, and all
Sensations; for a Man is a living, reasonable, and understanding Being, and
therefore a living reasonable Soul (not an earthly Body, which has no life or
sense, but what it derives from the Soul) must be the Man: Hence in Scripture
Soul so frequently signifies the Man; thus we read of the Souls that were born
to Jacob, and the Souls that came with him into Egypt, 46. Genesis that is his
Sons: and Soul signifies our selves, a Friend which is as thy own Soul, that
is, as dear to us as our selves, 13. Deuteronomy. 6. And Jonathan loved David as his
own Soul, that is, as himself, 1 Samuel 18. 3. For in propriety of Speech, the
Body has no sense at all, but the Soul lives in the Body, and feels all the
motions and impressions of it; so that it is the Soul only that is capable of
Happiness or Misery, of Pain or Pleasure; and therefore it is the only
concernment of a wise man to take care of his Soul; as our Savior tells us,
What shall it profit a man, though he gain the whole world, and lose his own
soul, or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? 16. Matthew. 26. The
reason of which is easily apprehended, when we remember, that the Soul only is
capable of Happiness or Misery, that it is the Soul which must enjoy every
thing else; And what can the whole World then signify to him who has no Soul
to enjoy it, whose Soul is condemned to endless and eternal Miseries? Such a
miserable Soul is as incapable of enjoying the World, or any thing in it, as if
it had lost its being.

2ly, Hence we learn the true notion of bodily Pleasures, that they are such
pleasures as the Soul feels by its union to the Body; for it is not the Body
that feels the pleasures, but the Soul, though the Body be the instrument of
them: and therefore how fond soever we are of them, we may certainly conclude,
that bodily pleasures are the meanest pleasures of humane nature; because the
union to these earthly Bodies is the meanest and most despicable state of
reasonable Souls. These are not its proper and genuine pleasures, which must
result from its own nature and powers, but are only external impressions, the
light and superficial touches of matter; and it would be very absurd to
conceive, that the Soul, which is the only subject of pleasure, should have no
pleasures of its own, but borrow its whole Happiness from its affinity and
alliance to Matter; or that its greatest pleasures should be owing to external
impressions, not to the actings of its own natural faculties and powers: Which
may convince us, as I observed before, that the pleasures of the mind are much
the greatest and noblest pleasures of the Man; and he who would be truly happy,
must seek for it not in Bodily entertainments, but in the improvements and
exercise of Reason and Religion.

3ly, Hence we learn also, that the Body was made for the Soul, not the Soul
for the Body; as that which in it self has no Life and Sense, is made for the
use of that which has. The Body is only a convenient habitation for the Soul in
this World, an Instrument of Action, and a Trial and Exercise of Virtue; but
the Soul is to use the Body and to govern it, to taste its pleasures, and to set
bounds to them, to make the Body serviceable to the ends and purposes of Reason
and Virtue, not to subject Reason to Passion and Sense: If the Body was made
for the use of the Soul, it was never intended the Soul should wholly consorm
it self to it, and by its sympathy with corporeal Passions, transform it self
into a sensual and brutish nature. Such degenerate Creatures are those, who
live only to serve the Body, who value nothing else, and seek for nothing else,
but how to gratify their Appetites and Lusts, which is to invert the order of
Nature, to fall in love with our Slaves, and change Fortunes and Shackles with
them. That our Savior might well say, He that commiteth sin is the Servant of
Sin; for this is a vile and unnatural subjection to serve the Body, which was
made to serve the Soul; such Men shall receive the reward of Slaves, to be
turned out of God's Family, and not to inherit with Sons and Freemen, as our
Savior adds, The Servant abides not in the House for ever, but the Son
abides for ever, if the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free
indeed, 8 John 31, 32.

III. That Death, which is our leaving this World, is nothing else but our
putting off these Bodies, teaches us, That it is only our union to these
Bodies, which intercepts the sight of the other World: The other World is not
at such a distance from us, as we may imagine; the Throne of God indeed is at a
great remove from this Earth, above the third Heavens, where he displays his
Glory to those blessed Spirits which encompass his Throne; but as soon as we
step out of these Bodies, we step into the other World, which is not so
properly another World (for there is the same Heaven and Earth still) as a new
State of Life. To live in these Bodies is to live in this World, to live out of
them, is to remove into the next: For while our Souls are confined to these
Bodies, and can look only through these material Casements, nothing but what is
material can affect us, nay nothing but what is so gross, that it can reflect
light, and convey the shapes and colors of things with it to the eye: So that
though within this visible World, there be a more Glorious Scene of things,
than what appears to us, we perceive nothing at all of it. For this vail of
Flesh parts the visible and invisible World: But when we put off these Bodies,
there are new and surprising Wonders present themselves to our view, when these
material spectacles are taken off, our Souls with its own naked eyes, sees what
was invisible before: And then we are in the other World, when we can see it,
and converse with it: Thus St. Paul tells us, That when we are at home in the
body, we are absent from the Lord; but when we are absent from the body, we are
present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. 6, 8. And methinks this is enough to cure us
of our fondness for these Bodies, unless we think it more desirable to be
confined to a Prison, and to look through a Grate all our lives, which gives us
but a very narrow prospect, and that none of the best neither, then to be set
at liberty to view all the glories of the World. What would we give now for the
least glimpse of that Invisible World, which the first step we take out of
these Bodies will present us with: There are such things as eye has not seen,
nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive: Death
opens ours eyes, enlarges our prospect, presents us with a new and more
glorious World, which we can never see, while we are shut up in Flesh, which
should make us as willing to part with this Vail, as to take the Film off of
our Eyes, which hinders our sight.

IV. If we must put off these Bodies, methinks we should not much glory nor
pride ourselves in them, nor spend too much of our time about them; For why
should that be our pride, why should that be our business, which we must
shortly part with? And yet as for pride, these mortal corruptible Bodies, and
what relates to them, administer most of the occasions of it:

Some men glory in their Birth, and in their Descent from Noble Ancestors, and
Ancient Families; which, besides the Vanity of it, for if we trace our
Pedigrees to their Original, it is certain, that all our Families are equally
Ancient, and equally Noble, for we descend all from Adam; and in such a long
Descent as this, no man can tell, whether there have not been Beggars and
Princes in those which are the noblest and meanest Families now: Yet, I say,
what is all this, but to pride ourselves in our Bodies, and our bodily Descent,
unless men think that their Souls are derived from their Parents too. Indeed
our Birth is so very ignoble, whatever our Ancestors are, or however it may be
dissembled with some pompous circumstances, that no man has any reason to glory
in it; for the greatest Prince is born like the wild Asses Colt. Others glory
in their external Beauty; which how great and charming soever it be, is but the
beauty of the Body, which if it be spared by Sickness and old Age, must perish
in the Grave; Death will spoil those features and colors which are now
admired, and after a short time, there will be no distinction between this
beautiful Body, and common Dust. Others are guilty of greater Vanity than this,
and what Nature has denied, they supply by Art; they adorn their Bodies with
rich Attire, and many times such Bodies as will not be adorned, and then they
glory in their borrowed Feathers: But what a sorry beauty is that, which they
cannot carry into the other World? And if they must leave their Bodies in the
Grave, I think there will be no great occasion in the other World for their
rich and splendid Apparel, which will not fit a Soul.

Thus what do Riches signify, but to minister to the wants and conveniences
and pleasures of the Body? And therefore to pride ourselves in Riches, is to
glory in the Body too; to think our selves more considerable than other men,
because we can provide better for our Bodies than they can. And what a mean and
contemptible Vice is Pride, whose subject and occasion is so mean and
contemptible? To pride ourselves in these Bodies which have so ignoble an
extraction, are of so short a continuance, and will have so ignoble an end,
must lie down in the Grave, and be food for Worms.

As for the Care of our Bodies; that must unavoidably take up great part of our
time, to supply the necessities of Nature, and to provide the conveniences of
Life; but this may be for the good of our Souls too, as honest Labor and
Industry and ingenious Arts are; but for men to spend their whole time in Sloth
and Luxury, in Eating and Drinking and Sleeping, in Dressing and Adorning their
Bodies, or gratifying their Lusts, this is to be vile Slaves and Servants to
the Body, to Bodies which neither need nor deserve this from us: after all our
care, they will tumble into Dust, and commonly much the sooner for our
indulgence of them.

V. If Death be our putting off these Bodies, then it is certain, that we must
live without these Bodies, till the Resurrection; nay, that we must always live
without such Bodies as these are: for though our Bodies shall rise again, yet
they shall be changed and transformed into a spiritual nature; as St. Paul
expressly tells us, 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43, 44. It is sown in corruption, it is
raised in incorruption; it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is
sown in weakness, it is raised in power; it is sown a natural body, it is
raised a spiritual body: For as he adds, 50 v. Flesh and blood cannot inherit
the kingdom of God, neither can corruption inherit incorruption. Which is true
of a fleshly Soul, but here is understood of a Body of flesh and blood, which
is of a corruptible nature: As our reason may satisfy us, that such gross
earthly Bodies, as we now carry about with us, cannot live and subsist in those
pure regions of Light and Glory, which God inhabits; no more than you can lodge
a stone in the Air, or breathe nothing but pure Ether: and therefore our
glorified Bodies will have none of those earthly passions which these earthly
Bodies have, will relish none of the pleasures of flesh and blood; that upon
this account we may truly say, that when we once put off these Bodies, we shall
ever after live without them.

Now the use of this Observation is so very obvious, that methinks no man can
miss it; for when we consider, that we must put off these Bodies, and for ever
live without them, the very next thought in course is, that we ought to live
without our Bodies now, as much as possibly we can, while we do live in them;
to have but very little commerce with flesh and sense; to wean ourselves from
all bodily pleasures, to stifle its appetites and inclinations, and to bring
them under perfect command and government; that when we see it fit, we may use
bodily pleasures without fondness, or let them alone without being uneasy for
want of them; that is, that we may govern all our bodily appetites, not they
govern us.

For a wise man should thus reason with himself: If I grow so fond of this
Body, and the pleasures of it, if I can relish no other pleasures, if I value
nothing else, what shall I do, when I leave this body? For bodily pleasures can
last no longer than my body does; what shall I do in the next World, when I
shall be striped of this body, when I shall be a naked Soul? or whatever other
covering I may have, shall have no flesh and blood about me; and therefore all
the pleasures I value now, will then vanish like a dream; for it is impossible
to enjoy bodily pleasures when I have no body: And though there were no other
punishments in the next Life, yet it is a great pain to me now, to have my
desires disappointed, or delayed; and should I retain the same fondness for
these things in the next World, where they cannot be had, the eternal despair
of enjoying them would be punishment enough.

Indeed we cannot tell what alteration our putting off these Bodies will make
in the temper and disposition of our minds. We see that a long and severe fit
of sickness, while it lasts, will make men absolute Philosophers, and give them
a great contempt of bodily pleasures, nay, will make the very thoughts of those
pleasures nauseous to them, which they were very fond of in health. Long
Fasting and Abstinence, and other bodily Severities, are an excellent means to
alter the habits and inclinations of the Mind; and one would think, that to be
separated from these Bodies, must needs make a greater alteration in our Minds,
than either Sickness or bodily Severities: That I dare not say, that a sensual
man, when he is separated from this body, shall feel the same sensual desires
and inclinations, which he had in it, and shall be tormented with a violent
thirst after those pleasures which he cannot enjoy in a separate state: But
this I dare say, that a man who is wholly sunk into flesh and sense, and
relishes no other pleasures, is not capable of living happily out of this body;
unless you could find out a new Scene of material and sensible Pleasures to
entertain him; for though the particular appetites and inclinations of the body
may cease, yet his very Soul is sensualized, and therefore is incapable of the
pleasures of a spiritual Life.

For indeed setting aside that mischief, which the unruly lusts and appetites
of men, and the immoderate use of bodily pleasures does either to the persons
themselves, or to public Societies; and the true reason why we must mortify
our sensual inclinations, is to improve our minds in all divine Graces; for the
Flesh and the Spirit cannot thrive together; sensual and spiritual Joys are so
contrary to each other, that which of them soever prevails, according to the
degrees of its prevalence, it stifles and and suppresses, or wholly subdues the
other. A Soul which is ravished with the love of God, and the Blessed Jesus,
transported with the spiritual hopes of another Life, which feels the passions
of Devotion, and is enamored with the glories and beauties of Holiness and
divine Virtues, must have such a very mean opinion of Flesh and Sense, as will
make it disgust bodily pleasures, or be very indifferent about them: and a Soul
which is under the government of Sense and Passion, cannot taste those more
intellectual and divine Joys; for it is our esteem of things which gives a
relish to them, and it is impossible we can highly esteem one, without
depretiating and undervaluing the other: It is universally true in this case,
what our Savior tells us, No man can serve two masters; for either he will
hate the one, and love the other, or else he will hold to the one and despise
the other: Ye cannot serve God and Mammon, 6. Matthew. 24.

The least beginnings of a divine Nature in us, is to love God above all the
World; and as we every day grow more devoutly and passionately in love with
God, and take greater pleasure in the spiritual acts of Religion, in praising
God, and contemplating the divine Nature and Perfections, and meditating on the
spiritual Glories of another Life, so we abate of our value for present things,
till we get a perfect conquest and mastery of them. But he who is perfectly
devoted to the pleasures of the Body, and the service of his Lusts, has no
spiritual Life in him; and though putting off these Bodies may cure our bodily
appetites and passions, yet it cannot give us a new principle of Life, nor work
an essential Change in a fleshly Nature: and therefore such a man, when he is
removed from this Body, and all the Enjoyments of it, is capable of no other
Happiness: Nay, though we are renewed by the divine Spirit, and have a
principle of a new Life in us, yet, according to the degree of our love to
present things, so much the more indisposed are we for the Happiness of
unbodied Spirits.

And therefore, since we must put off these Bodies, if we would live for ever
happily without them, we must begin betimes to shake off Matter and Sense, to
govern our bodily Appetites and Passions, to grow indifferent to the Pleasures
of Sense, to use them for the refreshment and necessities of Nature, but not to
be overcurious about them, not to be fond of enjoying them, nor troubled for
the want of them; never to indulge ourselves in unlawful Pleasures, and to be
very temperate in our use of lawful ones; to be sure we must take care, that
the Spiritual part, that the sense of God, and of Religion, be always
predominant in us; and this will be a principle of Life in us, a principle of
divine Sensations and Joys, when this Body shall tumble into Dust.

VI. If Death be our putting off these Bodies, then the Resurrection from the
Dead, is the Reunion of Soul and Body: the Soul does not die, and therefore
cannot be said to rise again from the Dead; but it is the Body, which like Seed
falls into the Earth, and springs up again more beautiful and glorious at the
Resurrection of the Just. To believe the Resurrection of the Body, or of the
Flesh, and to believe another Life after this, are two very different things:
the Heathens believed a future State, but never dreamt of the Resurrection of
the Body, which is the peculiar Article of the Christian Faith. And yet it is
the Resurrection of our Bodies, which is our Victory and Triumph over Death:
for Death was the Punishment of Adam's sin; and those who are in a separate
state, still suffer the Curse of the Law, Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall
return. Christ came to deliver us from this Curse, by being made a Curse for
us; that is, to deliver us from Death by dying for us. But no man can be said
to be delivered from Death, till his body rise again, for part of him is under
the power of Death still, while his body rots in the Grave: nay, he is properly
in a state of Death, while he is in a state of Separation of Soul and Body,
which is the true notion of Death: And therefore St. Paul calls the
Resurrection of the Body, the destroying Death, 1 Cor. 15. 25, 26. He must
reign till he has put all enemies under his feet, the last enemy that shall be
destroyed is Death: That is, by the Resurrection of the Dead; as appears from
the whole scope of the place, and is particularly expressed 54, 55, etc. So
when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall
have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass, that saying which is
written, Death is swallowed up in victory: O death where is thy sting! O grave
where is thy victory! The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the
law; but blessed be God, who has given us the victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ. This is the perfection and consummation of our reward, when our Bodies
shall be raised incorruptible and glorious, when Christ shall change our vile
Bodies, and make them like to his own most glorious Body. I doubt not, but good
men are in a very happy state before the Resurrection, but yet their happiness
is not complete, for the very state of Separation is an imperfect state,
because a separate Soul is not a perfect Man: a Man, by the original
Constitution of his Nature, consists of Soul and Body; and therefore his
perfect happiness requires the united glory and happiness of both parts of the
whole Man. Which is not considered by those who cannot apprehend any necessity,
why the Body should rise again, since, as they conceive, the Soul might be as
completely and perfectly happy without it. But yet the Soul would not be an
entire and perfect Man, for a Man consists of Soul and Body: a Soul in a state
of Separation, how happy soever otherwise it may be, has still this mark of
God's displeasure on it, that it has lost its body, and therefore the Reunion
of our Souls and Bodies has at least this advantage in it, that it is a perfect
restoring of us to the Divine Favor, that the badge and memorial of our Sin
and Apostasy is done away, in the Resurrection of our Bodies; and therefore
this is called the Adoption, viz. the Redemption of our Bodies, 8. Romans 23. For
then it is that God publicly owns us for his Sons, when he raises our dead
Bodies into a glorious and immortal Life. And besides this, I think, we have no
reason to doubt, but the Reunion of Soul and Body will be a new addition of
Happiness and Glory; for though we cannot guess what the pleasures of glorified
Bodies are, yet sure we cannot imagine, that when these earthly Bodies are the
instruments of so many pleasures, a spiritual and glorified Body should be of
no use: A Soul and Body cannot be vitally united, but there must be a sympathy
between them, and receive mutual impressions from each other; and then we need
not doubt, but that such glorified Bodies will highly minister, though in a way
unknown to us, to the pleasures of a divine and perfect Soul; will infinitely
more contribute to the divine pleasures of the Mind, then these earthly Bodies
do to our sensual pleasures. That all who have this hope and expectation, may,
as St. Paul speaks, earnestly groan within themselves, waiting for the
adoption, even the redemption of our bodies, 8. Romans 23. This being the day of
the Marriage of the Lamb, this consummates our Happiness; when our Bodies and
Souls meet again, not to disturb and oppose each other, as they do in this
World, where the Flesh and the Spirit are at perpetual Enmity, but to live in
eternal Harmony, and to heighten and inflame each others Joys. Now this
consideration, that Death being a putting off these Bodies, the Resurrection of
the Dead must be the raising our Bodies into a new and immortal Life; and the
Reunion of them to our Souls, suggests many useful thoughts to us: For

This teaches us how we are to use our Bodies, how we are to prepare them for
Immortality and Glory. Death, which is the separation of Soul and Body, is the
punishment of Sin, and indeed it is the cure of it too: for Sin is such a
Leprosy as cannot be perfectly cleansed without pulling down the House, which
it has once infected: But if we would have these Bodies raised up again
immortal and glorious, we must begin the Cleansing and Purification of them
here. We must be sanctified throughout, both in body, soul, and spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. Our Bodies must be the Temples of the Holy Ghost, must be holy
and consecrated places, 1 Cor. 6. 19. must not be polluted with filthy Lusts,
if we would have them rebuilt again by the Divine Spirit, after the desolations
which Sin has made. Thus St. Paul tells us at large, 8. Romans 10, 11, 12, 13.
And if Christ be in you, the body is dead, because of sin; but the spirit is
life, because of righteousness; That is, that divine and holy Nature, which we
receive from Christ, will secure the life of our Souls, and translate us to a
happy state after death; but it will not secure us from the necessity of dying:
Our Bodies must die as a punishment of Sin, and putrify in the Grave; but yet
they are not lost for ever, for if the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from
the dead, dwell in you; he that raised up Jesus from the dead, shall quicken
your mortal bodies, by his spirit which dwells in you; that is, if your
Bodies be cleansed and sanctified, be the Temples of the Holy Spirit, he will
raise them up again into a new Life. Therefore brethren we are debtors not to
the flesh, to live after the flesh, for if ye live after the flesh ye shall
die; but if ye through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall
live: If ye subdue the fleshly principle, if ye bring the Flesh into subjection
to the Spirit, not only your Souls shall live, but your Bodies shall be raised
again to immortal Life. And this is a mighty obligation on us, if we love our
Bodies, and would have them glorious and immortal, not to pamper the Flesh, and
gratify its appetites and lusts; not to yield your members servants to
uncleanness, and to iniquity unto iniquity, but to yield your members servants
to righteousness unto holiness; that being made free from sin, and becoming the
servants of God, ye may have your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting
life. As the same Apostle speaks 6. Romans 19, 22. it is our relation to Christ,
that our very Bodies are his Members; it is our relation to the Holy Spirit,
that our Bodies are his Temples, which entitles our Bodies to a glorious
Resurrection: But will Christ own such Bodies for his Members, as are Members
of a Harlot? Will the Holy Spirit dwell in such a Temple as is defiled with
impure Lusts? And therefore such polluted Bodies will rise as they lay down, in
Dishonor, will rise not to immortal Life, but to eternal Death.

For can we think those Bodies well prepared for a glorious Resurrection, to be
refined into spiritual Bodies, which are become ten times more Flesh than God
made them, which are the Instruments and the Tempters to all Impurity? Is there
any reason to expect that such a Body should rise again spiritual and glorious,
which expires in the flames of Lust, which falls a Sacrifice in the quarrel of
a Strumpet, which sinks under the load of its own Excesses, and Eats and Drinks
itself into the Grave, which scorns to die by Adam's sin, but will die by its
own, without expecting till the Laws of Mortality, according to the ordinary
course of Nature, must take place?

Holiness is the only principle of Immortality, both to Soul and Body; Those
love their Bodies best, those honor them most, who make them instruments of
Virtue; who endeavor to refine and spiritualize them, and leave nothing of
fleshly appetites and inclinations in them; those are kindest to their Bodies,
who consecrate them for Immortality, who take care they shall rise again into
the Partnership of eternal Joys: All the severities of Mortification,
abstinence from bodily pleasures, watchings, Fastings, hard lodging, when they
are instruments of a real Virtue, not the arts of Superstition, when they are
intended to subdue our Lusts, not to purchase a liberty of sinning, are the
most real expressions of honor and respect to these Bodies; It shows how
unwilling we are to part with them, or to have them miserable, how desirous we
are of their advancement into eternal Glories; for the less of Flesh they carry
to the Grave with them, the more glorious will they rise again. This is
offering up our Bodies a living Sacrifice, when we entirely devote them to the
service of God; and such living Sacrifices shall live for ever: for if God
receives them a living Sacrifice, he will preserve them to immortal Life.

But the highest honor we can do these Bodies, and the noblest use we can put
them to, is to offer them up, in a proper sense, a Sacrifice to God, that is,
willingly and cheerfully to die for God, when he calls us to suffering: first
to offer up our Souls to God in the pure flames of Love and Devotion, and then
freely to give up our Bodies to the Stake, or to the Gibbet, to wild Beasts, or
more savage Men. This vindicates our Bodies from the natural shame and reproach
of Death; what we call a natural Death is very inglorious, it is a mark of
dishonor, because it is a punishment of Sin: Such Bodies at best are sown in
dishonor and corruption, as St. Paul speaks; but to die a Martyr, to fall a
Sacrifice to God, this is a glorious Death; this is not to yield to the Laws of
Mortality, to Necessity and Fate, but to give back our Bodies to God, who gave
them to us; and he will keep that, which we have committed to his trust, to a
glorious Resurrection: and it will be a surprising and astonishing Glory with
which such Bodies shall rise again, as have suffered for their Lord; for if we
suffer with him, we shall also be glorified together: Which seems to imply,
that those shall nearest resemble the Glory of Christ himself, who suffer as he
did.

This is the way to make our Bodies immortal and glorious. We cannot keep them
long here, they are corruptible Bodies, and will tumble into Dust; we must part
with them for a while, and if ever we expect and desire a happy meeting again,
we must use them with modesty and reverence now. We dishonor our Bodies in
this World, when we make them instruments of Wickedness and Lust, and lay an
eternal foundation of shame and infamy for them in the next World; it is a
mortal and killing love to cherish the fleshly Principle, to make provision for
the Flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof: but if you love your Bodies, make them
immortal, that though they die, they may rise again out of their Graves, with a
youthful vigor and beauty; that they may live for ever without pain or
sickness, without the decays of age, or the interruptions of sleep, or the
fatigue and weariness of labor, without wanting either food or raiment,
without the least remains of corruptions, without knowing what it is to tempt,
or to be tempted, without the least uneasy thought, the least disappointment,
the least care, in the full and blissful enjoyment of the Eternal and Sovereign
Good.

SECT. III. Death considered as our Entrance upon a new and unknown State of
Life.
III. LEt us now consider Death as it is an Entrance upon a new and unknown
State of Life; for it is a new thing to us, to live without these Bodies, it is
what we have never tried yet, and we cannot guess how we shall feel ourselves,
when we are stripped of Flesh and Blood; what entertainments we shall find in
that place, where there is neither eating nor drinking, neither marrying nor
giving in marriage; what kind of business and employment we shall have there,
where we shall have no occasion for any of these things, which employ our time
here: for when we have no use of Food, or Raiment, or Physic, or Houses to
dwell in, or whatever our Union to these Bodies makes necessary to us now; all
those Trades and Arts, which are to provide these conveniences for us, must
then cease: This must needs be a very surprising change; and though we are
assured of a very great happiness in the next World, which infinitely exceeds
whatever men call happiness or pleasure here, yet most men are very unwilling
to change a known for an unknown happiness; and it confounds and amazes them to
think of going out of these Bodies, they know not whither. Now this
consideration will suggest several very wise and useful thoughts to us.

1. How necessary an entire Trust and Faith in God is: We cannot live happily
without it in this World, and I am sure we cannot die comfortably without it,
for this is the noblest exercise of Faith, to be able cheerfully to resign up
our Spirits into the hands of God, when we know so little of the state of the
other World, whither we are going. This was the first trial of Abraham's Faith,
when in obedience to the command of God, he forsook his own Country, and his
Father's House, and followed God into a strange Land, 11. Hebr. 8. By faith
Abraham, when he was called to go into a place, which he should after receive
for an inheritance, obeyed, and he went out, not knowing whither he went.
Canaan was a Type of Heaven, and Heaven is as unknown a Country to us, as
Canaan was to Abraham: And herein we must imitate this Father of the Faithful,
to be contented to leave our native Country, and the World we know, to follow
God, whithersoever he leads us, into unknown Regions, and to an unknown and
unexperienced Happiness. This indeed all men must do, because they cannot avoid
leaving this World, but must go, when God calls for them; but that which makes
it our choice, and an act of Faith and Virtue, is this, such a strong
persuasion of, and firm reliance on the Goodness and Wisdom and Promises of
God, that though we are ignorant of the state of the other World, we can
cheerfully forsake all our known Enjoyments, and embrace the promises of an
unknown Happiness. And there are two distinct acts of this, which answer to
Abraham's Faith in leaving his own Country, and following God into a strange
Land: the first is the exercise of our Faith while we live, the second when we
die.

To mortify all our inordinate Appetites and Desires, to deny ourselves the
sinful Vanities and Pleasures of this Life, for the Promises of an unknown
Happiness, in the next World, is our mystical dying to this World, leaving our
native Country, and following God into a strange and unknown Land; to quit all
our present Possessions in this World, to forfeit our Estates, our Liberties,
all that is dear to us here; nay, to forsake our native Country, rather than
offend God, and lose our Title to the Promises of an unknown Happiness, is, in
a literal sense, to leave our own Country at God's command, not knowing whither
we go; which is like Abraham's going out of his own Country, and living as a
Sojourner in the Land of Promise, without having any Inheritance in it: this is
that Faith which overcomes the World, which makes us live as Pilgrims and
Strangers here, as those who seek for another Country, for a heavenly Canaan,
as the Apostle tells us Abraham did; For by faith he sojourned in the land of
promise, as in a strange country, dwelling in tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob,
the heirs with him of the same promise; for he looked for a city which has
foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God, 11. Heb. 9, 10.

And when we come to die, and can with joy and triumph in an assurance of God's
promises, commend our Spirits to him, and trust him with our Souls, when we
know not the Country we go to, and never experienced what the happiness of it
is, without any concern or solocitude about it; this is a noble act of Faith,
which does great honor to God, and conquers all the natural aversions to
death, and makes it an easy thing to leave this World, and the object of our
desire and choice to see that promised Land, and taste those pleasures which we
are yet strangers to. We must live, and we must die in Faith too, as the
Patriarchs did, who all died in Faith, not having received the Promises, but
seeing them a far off; and for that reason, the other World must be in a great
measure unknown to us, for could we see it, could we before hand taste the
pleasures of it, or know what they are, it would be no act of Faith to leave
this World for it, to be willing to be translated from Earth to Heaven; but no
man is worthy of Heaven, who dares not take God's word for it; and therefore
God has concealed those Glories from us, and given us only a promise of a great
but an unknown Happiness, for the object of our hope, to be a trial of our
Faith and Obedience and Trust in him.

That the other World is an unknown State to us, trains us up to a great trust
and confidence in God; for we must trust God for our Souls, and for the next
World, and this naturally teaches us to trust God in this World too; to live
securely upon his Providence, and to suffer him to dispose of us, as he pleases.

Indeed no man can trust God in this World, who has not a steadfast Faith in
God, for the rewards of the next: for the external administrations of
Providence, are not always what we could wish; but good men are very well
contented, and have great reason to be so, to take this World and the next
together; and therefore are not solicitous about present things, but leave God
to choose what condition for them he pleases, as being well assured of his
goodness, who has prepared for them eternal rewards.

And those who can trust God with their Souls, who can trust him for an
immortal Life, for an unseen and unknown Happiness, will find no difficulty in
trusting him for this World; I mean those who are concerned for their future
Happiness, and take any care of their Souls. If all who are unconcerned for
their Souls, and never trouble their heads, what will become of them hereafter,
may be said to trust God with their Souls, then, I confess, this will not hold
true; for the greatest number of those who thus trust God with their Souls,
will trust him for nothing else: But* this is not to trust God, but to be
careless of our Souls; but now, when a man who steadfastly believes another Life
after this, and is heartily concerned, what will become of him for ever, can
securely rely on God's promises, beyond his own knowledge and prospect of
things; he will very easily trust God for every thing else: for he is not so
solicitous about any thing in this World, as he is for his Soul; and if he can
trust God with his dearest interests, surely he will trust him in less matters.
The Promises of eternal Life, through our Lord Jesus Christ, are the highest
demonstration of God's love to us; and he who is so well assured of God's love,
that he can trust him for Heaven, can never distrust his care and providence in
this World. The methods of God's Providence can never be so unknown to us in
this World, as the State of the other World is unknown; and if we can
cheerfully follow God into an unseen and unknown World, cannot we be contented
to follow him through the most dark and perplexed tracks of Providence here. So
that we have as little reason to complain, that the State of the other World is
unknown to us, as we have, that we must live by Faith in this World; for
absent, unseen, and unknown things, are the objects of our Faith: And those who
will trust God no farther than they can see, neither in this World nor in the
next, have no reason to depend upon his Providence here, nor to expect Heaven
hereafter.

2ly, The State of the other World being so much unknown to us, is a very good
reason, why we should cheerfully comply with all the terms and conditions of
the Gospel; to do whatever our Savior requires, that we may obtain eternal
Life. This, it may be, you will not so readily apprehend, and yet the reason of
it is very plain; for since the State of the other World is so much unknown to
us, we do not, and cannot know neither, what dispositions and habits and
complexion of Soul are necessary to fit and qualify us for this unknown
Happiness. But our Savior, who knew what that state is, knew also what is
necessary to that State; and therefore the wisest course we can take, is to
obey all his Laws without any dispute, not only as the Conditions of Happiness,
without which we shall not be admitted into Heaven, but as the necessary
Preparations for it. As to explain this by a parallel case, which you will
easily understand; Suppose we had pre-existed in a former state, as some say we
did, before we came into these Bodies, and before we knew any thing of this
World, or what the pleasures and entertainments of it are, should have been
told what kind of Bodies we must go into, no doubt but there would have been
wonderful wise disputes about the make and frame of our Bodies; we should have
thought some parts superfluous, or useless, or ill contrived; indeed, should
have wondered what such a Body was made for, as well we might, before we
understood the use of any part of it: but God, who knew what he intended us
for, provided such a Body for us, as is both beautiful and useful; and we
cannot want any part of it, but we are deprived of some conveniences and
pleasures of life. And thus we may easily suppose it to be, with reference to
the next World, that the habits and tempers of our Minds are as necessary to
relish the pleasures of that state, as our bodily senses are to taste bodily
pleasures; and since we do not particularly know what the delights of that
state are, and Christ does, we ought as perfectly to resign up ourselves to his
directions for the fashioning our Minds, as we trust God to form our Bodies for
us. Whatever Graces and Virtues he requires us to exercise in this World,
though we do not see the present use of them, though we may think them an
unnecessary restraint of our liberties, and very needless and unreasonable
severities, yet we ought to conclude, that Christ knew the reason of such
commands, and that such qualities and dispositions of mind will be found as
necessary in the next World, as our bodily senses are here.

And this we ought especially to conclude of such degrees and instances of
Virtue, as seem above our present state, and not so well fitted to our
condition of life in this World; for why should our Savior give us such Laws,
and exact such a degree of Virtue from us here, as abridges our present
enjoyments, and it may be exposes us to great inconveniences and sufferings,
were not that temper of Mind, which these Virtues form in us, of great use and
necessity in the next life? As for instance:

We should think it sufficient, while we live in this World, where there are so
many inviting objects, and while we are clothed with bodies of Flesh, which are
made for the enjoyments of sense, and have natural appetites and inclinations
to them, so to govern ourselves in the use of these pleasures, as neither to
make ourselves Beasts, nor to injure our Neighbors; and while we keep within
these bounds, to gratify our appetites and inclinations to the full; for it is
certainly the happiness of an earthly Creature to enjoy this World, though a
reasonable Creature must do it reasonably: But not to love this World, seems a
hard command to a Creature who lives in it, and was made to enjoy it; to
despise bodily pleasures, to subdue the fleshly principle in us, not only to
Reason, but to the Spirit, to live above the Body, and to strive to stifle not
only its irregular, but even its natural appetites, and to taste the pleasures
of it very sparingly, and with great indifference of mind, seems a very hard
saying to Flesh and Blood: We should think it time enough to have our
conversation in Heaven, when we come thither; but it is plainly above the state
of an earthly Creature to live in Heaven, to have all our joys, our hopes, our
treasure, and our hearts there: The state of this World would be very happy and
prosperous without such a raised and refined and spiritualized Mind, and
therefore these are such Virtues as are not necessary to the present
constitution of this World, and therefore can be only in order to the next.

Thus it is sufficient to the Happiness and good Government of this World, that
men do no injury to each other, and that they express mutual Civilities and
Respects, that they take care of those whom Nature has endeared to them, and
that they be just, and in ordinary cases helpful to others; and therefore this
is all, that the state of this World requires. But that Divine and Universal
Charity, which teaches us to love all Men as ourselves, even our Enemies, and
those who hate and persecute us; to forgive the injuries we suffer, and not to
revenge and retaliate them, not to render evil for evil, nor railing for
railing, but contrariwise, blessing: I say, this wonderful Virtue does not only
lie extremely cross to selflove, but is hardly reconcilable with the state of
this World: for the practice of it is very dangerous, when we live among bad
men, who will take advantage of such a bearing and forgiving Virtue, to give
great occasions for the constant exercise of it, and nothing but a particular
providence, which watches over such good Men, can secure them from being an
easy prey to the Wicked and Unjust: Nay, we see, this is not practicable in
the Government of the World; Civil Magistrates are forced to punish evil Doers,
or the World would be a Bedlam; and therefore those who have thought such
public executions of Justice, to be inconsistent with this Law of Forgiving
Injuries, and not revenging ourselves, have made it unlawful for Christians to
be Magistrates, because hanging, or whipping, or pilloring Malefactors, is not
forgiving them, as certainly it is not: A very absurd Doctrine, which makes it
necessary that there should always be Heathens in every Nation, to govern even
a Christian Kingdom, or that the Christian World should have no Government at
all, though nominal and professed Christians have as much need of Government, as
ever any Heathens had. But this forgiving Enemies is only a private Virtue, not
the Rule of public Government, which shows, that the state of this World is so
far from requiring this Virtue, that it will admit only the private exercise of
it, and that too under the protection of a particular providence, to defend
those good men who must not avenge themselves. Now such Virtues as the state of
this World does not require, we must conclude, are only in order to the next,
and that though we do not so well discern the reason, and use of this divine
Charity here, yet this temper of mind is absolutely necessary to the Happiness
of the other World; and for that reason it is, that Christ requires the
exercise of it now; for we cannot imagine any other reason why our Savior
should make any acts of Virtue, which the state of this World does not require
the present exercise of, the necessary terms and conditions of our future
happiness, but only that such dispositions of mind are as necessary to
qualify us to relish those divine pleasures, as our bodily senses are to
perceive the delights and pleasures of this World. This is a mighty obligation
on us to obey the Laws of our Savior, as the methods of our advancement to
eternal Glory; not to dispute his commands, how uneasy or unreasonable soever
they may now appear, for the reasons of them are not to be fetched from this
World, but from the next; and therefore are such, as we cannot so well
understand now, because we know so little of the next World; but we may safely
conclude, that Christ knows a reason for it, and that we shall quickly
understand the reason of it, when we come into the other World: and therefore
we should endeavor to exercise all those heights of Virtue, which the Gospel
recommends to us, for as much as we fall short of these, so will our Glory and
Happiness abate in the other World.

3ly, Though the State we enter on at Death, be in a great measure unknown to us,
yet this is no reasonable discouragement to good men, nor encouragement to the
bad: 1. It is no reasonable discouragement to good men; for though we do not
know what it is, yet we know it is a great Happiness; so it is represented to
us in Scripture, as a Kingdom, and a Crown, an eternal Kingdom, and a never
fading Crown: now would any man be unwilling to leave a mean and homely Cottage
to go and take possession of a Kingdom, because he had never yet seen it,
though he had heard very glorious things of it, from very faithful and credible
Witnesses? For let us a little consider in what sense the Happiness of the
other World is unknown.

1. That it is not such a kind of Happiness as is in this World, that it is
like nothing, which we have seen or tasted yet: But a wise and good man cannot
think this any disparagement to the other World, though it would have been a
real disparagement to it, had it been like this World: for here is nothing but
Vanity and Vexation of Spirit, nothing but an empty Scene, which makes a fine
show, but has no real and solid Joys: Good men have enough of this World, and
are sufficiently satisfied, that none of these things can make them happy, and
therefore cannot think it any disadvantage to change the Scene, and try some
unknown and unexperienced Joys; for if there be such a thing as Happiness to be
found, it must be something which they have not known yet, something that this
World does not afford.

2. When we say, that the State of the other World is unknown, the only meaning
of it is, that it is a State of such Happiness, so far beyond any thing we ever
experienced yet, that we cannot form any Notion or Idea of it; we know that
there is such a Happiness, we know in some measure wherein this Happiness
consists, viz. in seeing God, and the Blessed Jesus, who loved us, and gave
himself for us; in praising our great Creator and Redeemer; in conversing with
Saints and Angels; but how great, how ravishing and transporting a Pleasure
this is, we cannot tell, because we never yet felt it; our dull Devotions, our
imperfect Conceptions of God in this World, cannot help us to guess what the
Joys of Heaven are; we know not how the sight of God, how the thoughts of him,
will pierce our Souls, with what ecstasies and raptures we shall sing the Song
of the Lamb, with what melting affections perfect Souls shall embrace, what
glories and wonders we shall there see and know, Such things as neither eye
has seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to
conceive. Now methinks this should not make the thoughts of death uneasy to
us, should not make us unwilling to go to Heaven; that the Happiness of Heaven
is too great for us to know, or to conceive in this World: For,

3. Men are naturally fond of unknown and untried Pleasures; which is so far
from being a disparagement to them, that it raises our expectations of them,
that they are unknown: In the things of this World, enjoyment usually lessens
our esteem and value for them, and we always value that most, which we have
never tried; and methinks the Happiness of the other World, should not be the
only thing we despise, before we try it; all present things are mean, and
appear to be so, when they are enjoyed: but what ever expectations we have of
the unknown Happiness of the other World, the enjoyment of them will as much
exceed our biggest expectations, as other things usually fall below them; that
we shall be forced to confess, with the Queen of Sheba, when she saw Solomon's
Glory, that not the half of it was told her: It is some encouragement to us,
that the Happiness of Heaven is too big to be known in this World; for did we
perfectly know it now, it could not be very great; and therefore we should
entertain ourselves with the hopes of this unknown Happiness, of those Joys,
which now we have such imperfect conceptions of. 2. Nor is it on the other hand
any encouragement to bad men, that the Miseries of the other World are unknown;
for it is known, that God has threatened very terrible Punishments against bad
men; and that what these punishments are, is unknown, makes them a great deal
more formidable; for who knows the power of God's wrath? who knows how
miserable God can make bad men? This makes it a senseless thing for men to
harden themselves against the Fears of the other World, because they know not
what it is: And how then can they tell, though they could bear up under all
known Miseries, but that there may be such Punishments as they cannot bear?
That they are unknown, argues, that they are something more terrible than they
are aquainted with in this World; they are represented indeed by the most
dreadful and terrible things, by Lakes of Fire and Brimstone, Blackness of
Darkness, the Worm that never dies, and the Fire that never goes out: But bad
men think this cannot be true in a literal sense, that there can be no Fire to
burn Souls, and torment them eternally. Now suppose it were so, yet if they
believe these Threatenings, they must believe that some terrible thing is
signified by everlasting Burnings; and if Fire and Brimstone serve only for
Metaphors to describe these Torments by, what will the real Sufferings of the
Damned be! for the Spirit of God does not use to describe things by such
Metaphors as are greater than the things themselves. And therefore let no bad
man encourage himself in Sin, because he does not know what the punishments of
the other World are. This should possess us with the greater awe and dread of
them, since every thing in the other World, not only the Happiness, but the
Miseries of it, will prove greater, not less, than we expect.

CHAP. II. Concerning the Certainty of our Death.
HAving thus showed you under what Notions we are to consider Death, and what
Wisdom we should learn from them, I proceed to the second thing, the Certainty
of Death; It is appointed to men once to die: (...), it remains, it is
reserved, and as it were, laid up for them.

I believe no man will desire a proof of this, which he sees with his eyes; one
Generation succeeds another, and those who live longest, at last yield to the
fatal Stroke. There were two men indeed, Enoch and Elias, who did not die, as
Death signifies the separation of Soul and Body, but were translated to Heaven
without dying; but this is the general Law for Mankind, from which none are
excepted, but those whom God by his Sovereign Authority, and for wise Reasons
thinks fit to except; which have been but two since the Creation, and will be
no more till Christ comes to Judge the World: For then St. Paul tells us, those
who are alive at Christ's second coming, shall not die, but shall be changed, 1
Cor. 15. 51, 52. Behold, I show you a mystery, we shall not all sleep, but we
shall all be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last
trump; for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible,
and we shall be changed. This is such a Change as is equivalent to Death, it
puts us in the same state with those who are dead, and at the last Judgment
rise again.

SECT. I. A Vindication of the Justice and Goodness of GOD, in appointing Death
for all Men.
BUt before I show you what use to make of this Consideration, that we must all
certainly Die, let us examine, how Mankind comes to be Mortal: This was no
dispute among the Heathens, for it was no great wonder that an earthly Body
should die, and dissolve again into dust: it would be a much greater wonder to
see a Body of Flesh and Blood preserved in perpetual youth and vigor, without
any decays of Nature, without being sick or growing old. But this is a question
among us, or if it may not be called a question, yet it is what deserves our
consideration, since we learn from the History of Moses, that as frail and
brittle as these earthly Tabernacles are, yet if Man had not sinned, he had not
died.

When God created Man, and placed him in Paradise, he forbad him to eat of the
Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil: Of every tree of the garden, thou may
freely eat, but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not
eat of it; for in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die, 2. Genesis
16, 17. And when, notwithstanding this threatening, our first Parents had eat of
it, God confirms and ratifies the Sentence, Dust thou art, and to dust thou
shall return, 3. Genesis 19. What this Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil was, is
as great a mystery to us, as what the Tree of Life was, for we understand
neither of them; which makes some men, who would not be thought to be ignorant
of any thing, to fly to Allegorical Senses: but though I would be glad to know
this, if I could, yet I must be contented to leave it a Mystery, as I find it.
That which we are concerned in is, that this Sentence of Death and Mortality,
which was pronounced on Adam, fell on all his Posterity: As St. Paul tells us,
1 Cor. 15. 21, 22. That by man came death, and in Adam all die. And this he
does not only assert, but prove, 5. Romans 12, 13, 14. Wherefore by man sin
entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for
that all have sinned: for until the law sin was in the world, but sin is not
imputed, where there is no law; nevertheless death reigned from Adam till
Moses, even over them who had not sinned, after the similitude of Adam's
trangressions. The design of all which is to prove, that men die, or are
mortal, not for their own sins, but for the sin of Adam: Which the Apostle
proves by this argument, because though all men, as well as Adam, have sinned,
yet till the giving the Law of Moses, there was no Law, which threatened Death
against Sin, but only that Law given to Adam in Paradise, which no man else
ever did, or ever could transgress, but he: Now sin is not imputed where there
is no law; That is, it is not imputed to any man to death, before there is any
Law which threatens death against it: That no man can be reckoned to die for
those sins, which no Law punishes with death. Upon what account then, says the
Apostle, could those men die, who lived, between Adam and Moses, before the Law
was given, which threatens death? And yet die they all did, even those who had
not sinned after the similitude of Adam's transgression; who had neither eaten
the forbidden Fruit, nor sinned against any other express Law threatening death:
This could be for no other sin but Adam's; he sinned and brought Death into the
World, and thus Death passed upon all men for his sin, notwithstanding they
themselves were Sinners; for though they were Sinners, yet that they died, was
not owing to their own sins, because they had not sinned against any Law, which
threatened death, but to the sin of Adam; and therefore in a proper sense, in
Adam all die.

Now this is thought very hard, that the sin of Adam should bring death upon
all his Posterity, that one man sinned, and all men must die; and therefore, I
suppose, no man will think it improper to my present Argument, to give you such
an account of this matter, as will evidently justify the Wisdom and Goodness,
as well as the Justice of GOD in it.

I. In the first place then I observe, that an immortal Life in this World, is
not the original Right of earthly Creatures, but was wholly owing to the Grace
and Favor of God. I call that an original Right, which is founded in the
Nature of things; for otherwise, properly speaking, no Creatures have any right
either to being, or to subsistence, which is a continuance in being: It is the
Goodness and the Power of God, which both made the World, and upholds and
sustains all things in being. And therefore Plato confesses, that the inferior
Gods, those immortal Spirits, which he thought worthy of Divine Honors, were
both made by the Supreme God, and did subsist by his Will: for He who made all
things, can annihilate them again, when he pleases; and therefore their
Subsistence is as much owing to the Divine Goodness, as their Creation: But yet
there is a great difference between the natural gift and bounty of God, and
what is supernatural, or above the nature of things: What God makes by nature
immortal, so that it has no principles of Mortality in its constitution,
Immortality may be said to be its natural Right, because it is by nature
immortal, as Spirits and the Souls of Men are: And in this case it would be
thought very hard, that a whole race of immortal Beings should be made mortal
for the sin of one; which would be to deprive them of their natural Right to
Immortality, without their own fault. But when any Creature is immortal not by
Nature, but by supernatural Grace, God may bestow this supernatural Immortality
upon what conditions he pleases, and take the forfeiture of it, when he sees
fit; and this was the case of Man in Innocence. His Body was not by Nature
immortal, for a Body made of Dust, will naturally resolve into Dust again; and
therefore without a supernatural power, an earthly Body must die; for which
reason God provided a remedy against Mortality, the Tree of Life, which he
planted in Paradise, and without which man could not be immortal: so that
Mortality was a necessary consequence of his losing Paradise, for when he was
banished from the Tree of Life, he could have no Remedy nor Preservative
against Death. Now, I suppose, no man will question, but God might very justly
turn Adam out of Paradise for his disobedience, and then he must die, and all
his Posterity die in him: for he being by Nature mortal, must beget mortal
Children, and having forfeited the Tree of Life, he and his Posterity, who are
all shut out of Paradise with him, must necessarily die: Which takes nothing
from them to which any man had a right, (for no man had a natural right to
Paradise, or the Tree of Life) but only leaves them to those Laws of Mortality,
to which an earthly Creature is naturally subject. God had promised Paradise
and the Tree of Life to no man, but to Adam himself, whom he created and placed
in Paradise; and therefore he took nothing away from any man, but from Adam,
when he thrust him out of Paradise; Children indeed must follow the condition
of their Parents; had Adam preserved his right to the Tree of Life, we had
enjoyed it too, but he forfeiting it, we lost it in him, and in him die: We
lost, I say, not any thing that we had a right to, but such a supernatural
Privilege, as we might have had; had he preserved his Innocence: and this is a
sufficient Vindication of the Justice of God in it. He has done us no injury;
we are by nature mortal Creatures, and he leaves us in that mortal state: and
to withdraw favors upon a reasonable provocation, is neither hard nor unjust.

II. For we must consider farther, when Sin was once entered into the World, an
immortal Life here became impossible, without a constant series of Miracles.
Adam had sinned, and thereby corrupted his own nature, and therefore must
necessarily propagate a corrupt nature to his Posterity: His earthly Passions
were broke loose, he now knew good and evil, and therefore was in the hands of
his own counsel, to refuse or choose the good or evil: and when the Animal Life
was once awakned in him, there was no great dispute, which way his affections
would incline. To be sure it is evident enough in his Posterity, whose
boisterous passions act such Tragedies in the World. Now suppose in a state of
Innocence, that the Tree of Life would have preserved men immortal, when no man
would injure himself, nor another; when there was no danger from wild Beasts,
or an intemperate Air, or poisonous Herbs; yet, I suppose, no man will say, but
that even in Paradise itself, (could we suppose any such thing) Adam might have
been devoured by a Beast, or killed with a Stab at the Heart, or had there been
any Poison there, it would have killed him, had he eaten or drunk it, or else
he had another kind of Body in Paradise than we have now, for I am sure that
these things would kill us: Consider then how impossible it is, that in this
fallen and apostate State, God should preserve Man immortal without working
Miracles every minute: Men's passions are now very unruly, and they fall out
with one another, and will kill one another, if they can; of which the World
had a very early example in Gain, who slew his Brother Abel; and all those
Murders and bloody Wars since that day, put this matter out of doubt: Now this
can never be prevented, unless God should make our Bodies invulnerable, which a
body of flesh and blood cannot be without a Miracle: some die by their own
hands, others by wild Beasts, others by evil Accidents, and there are so many
ways of destroying these brittle Bodies, that it is the greatest wonder that
they last so long; and yet Adam's body in Paradise was as very Earth, and as
brittle as our Bodies are; but all this had been prevented, had men continued
innocent; they would not then have quarrelled or fought, they would not have
died by their own hands, nor drunk themselves into a Feavour, nor over-loaded
Nature with riotous Excesses; there had been no wild Beasts to devour, no
infectious Air, or poisonous Herbs, and then the Tree of Life would have
repaired all the decays of Nature, and preserved a perpetual Youth; but in this
state we are now, the Tree of Life could not preserve us immortal; if a Sword
or Poison can kill, which shows us how impossible it was, but that Sin and
Death must come into the World together: Man might have been immortal, had he
never sinned; but brutish and ungoverned passions will destroy us, without a
Miracle. And therefore we have no reason now to quarrel at the Divine
Providence, that we are mortal, for in the ordinary course of Providence, it is
impossible it should be otherwise.

III. Considering what the state of this World necessarily is, since the Fall
of Man, an immortal Life here is not desirable: No state ought to be immortal,
if it be designed as an act of favor and kindness, but what is completely
happy; but this World is far enough from being such a state. Some few years
give wise men enough of it, though they are not oppressed with any great
Calamities; and there are a great many Miseries, which nothing but Death can
give relief to: This puts an end to the sorrows of the Poor, of the Oppressed,
of the Persecuted; it is a Haven of Rest after all the Tempests of a
troublesome World; it knocks off the Prisoners Shackles, and sets him at
liberty; it dries up the Tears of the Widows and Fatherless; it cases the
complaints of a hungry Belly, and naked Back; it tames the proudest Tyrants,
and restores Peace to the World; it puts an end to all our Labors, and
supports men under their present Adversities, especially when they have a
prospect of a better life after this. The labor and the misery of Man under
the Sun is very great, but it would be intolerable, were it endless: and
therefore since Sin is entered into the World, and so many necessary miseries
and calamities attend it, it is an act of Goodness, as well as Justice, in God,
to shorten this miserable life, and transplant good men into a more happy, as
well as immortal State.

IV. Since the Fall of Man, Mortality and Death is necessary to the good
Government of the World: nothing else can give check to some men's Wickedness,
but either the fear of Death, or the execution of it; some men are so
outragiously wicked, that nothing can put a stop to them, and prevent that
mischief they do in the World, but to cut them off: This is the reason of
capital punishments among men, to remove those out of the World, who will be a
plague to Mankind, while they live in it. For this reason God destroyed the
whole Race of Mankind by a Deluge of Water, excepting Noah and his Family,
because they were incurably wicked: For this reason he sends Plagues, and
Famines, and Sword, to correct the exorbitant growth of Wickedness, to lessen
the numbers of Sinners, and to lay restraints on them: And if the World be such
a Bedlam as it is, under all these restraints, what would it be, were it filled
with immortal Sinners!

Ever since the Fall of Adam, there always was, and ever will be a mixture of
good and bad men in the World: and Justice requires that God should reward the
Good, and punish the Wicked: But that cannot be done in this World, for these
present external Enjoyments are not the proper Rewards of Virtue. There is no
complete Happiness here; man was never turned into this World, till he sinned,
and was flung out of Paradise; which is an argument, that God never intended
this World for a place of Reward and perfect Happiness; nor is this World a
proper place for the final punishment of bad Men, because good Men live among
them; and without a Miracle bad Men cannot be greatly punished, but good Men
must share with them; and were all bad Men punished to their deserts, it would
make this World the very Image and Picture of Hell, which would be a very unfit
place for good Men to live and to be happy in: As much as good Men suffer from
the Wicked in this World, it is much more tolerable, then to have their ears
filled with the perpetual cries of such miserable Sinners, and their eyes
terrified with such perpetual and amazing executions: Good and bad Men must be
separated, before the one can be finally rewarded, or the other punished, and
such a separation as this, cannot be made in this World, but must be reserved
for the next.

So that considering the fallen State of Man, it was not fitting, it was not
for the good of Mankind, that they should be immortal here. Both the Wisdom,
and Goodness, and Justice of God required, that Man should die, which is an
abundant Justification of this divine Decree, That it is appointed for men once
to die.

V. As a farther Justification of the Divine Goodness in this, we may observe,
that before God pronounced that Sentence on Adam, Dust thou art, and to dust
thou shall return, he expressly promised, that the seed of the woman shall
bruise the serpent's head, 3. Genesis 15. In his Curse upon the Serpent, who
beguiled Eve, I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy
seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel:
Which contains the promise of sending Christ into the World, who by death
should destroy him, who had the power of death, that is, the Devil, and deliver
them, who 2. Heb. 14, 15.
through fear of death, were all their life time subject to bondage; i. e.
before he denounces the Sentence of Death against Man, he promises a Savior
and Deliverer, who should triumph over Death, and raise our dead Bodies out of
the dust, immortal and glorious. Here is a most admirable mixture of Mercy and
Judgment! Man had forfeited an earthly Immortality, and must die; but before
God would denounce the Sentence of Death against him, he promises to raise up
his dead Body again to a new and endless Life: And have we any reason to
complain then, that God has dealt hardly with us, in involving us in the sad
consequences of Adam's Sin, and exposing us to a temporal Death, when he has
promised to raise us from the Dead again, and to bestow a more glorious
Immortality on us, which we shall never lose. When Man had sinned, it was
necessary that he should die, because he could never be completely and
perfectly happy in this World, as you have already heard; and the only possible
way to make him happy, was to translate him into another World, and to bestow a
better Immortality on him: This God has done, and that in a very stupendous
way, by giving his own Son to die for us; and now we have little reason to
complain, that we all die in Adam, since we are made alive in Christ: to have
died in Adam, never to have lived more, had indeed been very severe upon
Mankind; but when death signifies only a necessity of going out of these
Bodies, and living without them for some time, in order to reassume them again
immortal and glorious, we have no reason to think this any great hurt: Nay,
indeed, if we consider things aright, the Divine Goodness has improved the Fall
of Adam, to the raising of Mankind to a more happy and perfect state: for
though Paradise, where God placed Adam in Innocence, was a happier state of
life than this World, freed from all the disorders of a mortal Body, and from
all the necessary cares and troubles of this Life, yet you will all grant, that
Heaven is a happier place than an earthly Paradise; and therefore it is more
for our happiness to be translated from Earth to Heaven, than to have lived
always in an earthly Paradise: You will all grant, that the state of good men,
when they go out of these Bodies, before the Resurrection, is a happier life
than Paradise was, for it is to be with Christ, as St. Paul tells us, which is
far better, 1. Phil. 23. And when our Bodies rise again from the Dead, you will
grant, they will be more glorious Bodies than Adam's was in Innocence: For the
first man was of the earth earthy, but the second man is the Lord from heaven,
1 Cor. 15. 47. Adam had an earthly mortal Body, though it should have been
immortal by Grace; but at the Resurrection our Bodies shall be fashioned like
unto Christ's most glorious Body: The righteous shall shine forth like the sun
in the kingdom of the Father, that as we have born the image of the earthy, we
shall also bear the image of the heavenly, 1 Cor. 15 49. So that our Redemption
by Christ has infinitely the advantage of Adam's Fall, and we have no reason to
complain, That by man came death, since by man also came the resurrection of
the dead. That St. Paul might well magnify the Grace of God in our Redemption
by Christ, above his Justice and Severity, in punshing Adam's Sin with Death,
5. Romans 15, 16, 17. But not as the offense, so also is the free gift: For if
through the offense of one many be dead; much more the grace of God, and the
gift by grace, which is by one man, Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many. And
not as it was by one that sinned, so is the gift: for the judgment was by one
to condemnation; but the free gift is of many offenses unto justification. For
if by one man's offense, death reigned by one; much more they which receive
abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness, shall reign in life by
one, Jesus Christ. Where the Apostle magnifies the Grace of God upon a fourfold
account: 1. That Death was the just Reward of Sin, it came by the offense of
one, and was an act of Justice in God; whereas our Redemption by Christ is the
Gift of Grace, the free Gift, which we had no just claim to. 2. That by Christ
we are not only delivered from the effects of Adam's Sin, but from the guilt of
our own: For though the judgment was by one to condemnation; the free gift is
of many offenses unto justification. 3. That though we die in Adam, we are not
barely made alive again in Christ, but shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ;
which is a much happier Life, than what we lost in Adam. 4. That as we die by
one man's offense, so we live by one too; By the righteousness of one, the free
gift comes upon all men unto justification of life. We have no reason to
complain, that the Sin of Adam is imputed to us to Death, if the Righteousness
of Christ purchase for us eternal Life. The first was a necessary consequence
of Adam's losing Paradise; the second is wholly owing to the Grace of God.

Thus we see, what it is that makes us mortal: God did not make Death; he
created us in a happy and immortal state, but by man sin entered into the world,
and death by sin. What ever aversion then we have to Death, should beget in us
a greater horror of Sin, which did not only at first make us mortal, but is to
this day both the cause of Death, and the Sting of it: No degree indeed of
Virtue now can preserve us from dying; but yet Virtue may prolong our lives,
and make them happy, while sin very often hastens us to the Grave, and cuts us
off in the very midst of our days. An intemperate and lustful man destroys the
most vigorous constitution of Body, dies of a Feavour, or a Dropsy, of
Rottenness and Consumptions, others fall a Sacrifice to private Revenge, or
public Justice, or a Divine Vengeance, for the wicked shall not live out half
their days. However, setting aside some little natural aversions, which are
more easily conquered, and Death were a very innocent, harmless, nay, desirable
thing, did not Sin give a sting to it, and terrify us with the thoughts of
that Judgment, which is to follow: quarrel not then at the Divine Justice in
appointing Death, God is very good, as well as just in it, but vent all your
indignation against Sin; pull out this sting of Death, and then you will see
nothing but smiles and charms in it, then it is nothing but putting off these
mortal Bodies, to reassume them again with all the advantages of an immortal
Youth. It is certain indeed we must die, this is appointed for us, and the very
certainty of our death will teach us that Wisdom which may help us to regain a
better Immortality then we have lost.

SECT. II. How to improve this Consideration, that we must certainly Die.
FOr, 1. if it be certain that we must Die, this should teach us frequently to
think of Death, to keep it always in our eye and view: For, why should we cast
off the thoughts of that which will certainly come, especially when it is so
necessary to the good government of our lives, to remember that we must die? If
we must die, I think it concerns us to take care, that we may die happily, and
that depends upon our living well; and nothing has such a powerful influence
upon the good government of our lives, as the thoughts of Death: I have already
showed you, what Wisdom Death will teach us; but no man will learn this, who
does not consider, what it is to die; and no man will practice it, who does not
often remember, that he must die: but he that lives under a constant sense of
Death, has a perpetual Antidote against the Follies and Vanities of this World,
and a perpetual Spur to Virtue.

When such a man finds his desires after this World enlarge beyond, not only
the wants, but the conveniences of Nature, Thou Fool, says he, to himself,
what is the meaning of all this? what kindles this insatiable thirst of Riches?
why must there be no end of adding House to House, and Field to Field? is this
World thy home, is this thy abiding City? do thou hope to take up an eternal
Rest here? Vain man! thou must shortly remove thy dwelling, and then whose
shall all these things be? Death will shortly close thy eyes, and then thou
shall not so much as see the God thou worshippest; the Earth shall shortly
cover thee, and then thou shall have thy mouth and belly full of clay and dust.
Such thoughts as these will cool our desires to this present World; will make
us contented when we have enough, and very charitable and liberal of what we
can spare: For what should we do with more in this World, than will carry us
thorough it? What better and wiser use can we make of such Riches, as we cannot
carry with us into the other World, than to return them thither before hand in
acts of Piety and Charity, that we may receive the rewards and recompenses of
them in a better life? that we may make to our selves friends of the mammon of
unrighteousness, that when we fail, they may receive us into everlasting
habitations.

When he finds his mind begin to swell, and to increase as his fortune and
honors do, Lord, thinks he, what a bubble is this! which every breath of Air
can blow away. How vain a thing is Man in his greatest glory, who appears gay
and beautiful like a Flower in the Spring, and is as soon cut down and
withered! Though we should meet with no change in our fortune here, yet we
shall suddenly be removed out of this World; the scene of this life will
change, and there is an end of earthly Greatness. And what a contemptible mind
is that, which is swelled with dying Honors, which looks big indeed, as a body
does which is swelled out of all proportion with a Dropsy, or Timpany, but that
is its Disease, not a natural Beauty. What am I better than the poorest Man,
who beggs an Alms, unless I be wiser and more virtuous than he? Can Lands and
Houses, great Places and Titles, things which are not ours, and which we cannot
keep, make such a mighty difference between one man and another? are these the
Riches, are these the Beauties and Glories of a Spirit? are we not all made of
the same mould? is not God the Father of us all? must we not all die alike, and
lie down in the dust together? and can the different parts we act in this
World, which are not so long as the Scene of a Play, compared to an eternal
Duration, make such a vast difference between men? This will make men humble
and modest in the highest fortune, as minding them, that when they are got to
the top-round of Honor, if they keep from falling, yet they must be carried
down again, and laid as low as the dust.

Thus, when he finds the Body growing upon the Mind, and intoxicating it with
the love of sensual Pleasures, he remembers, that his Body must die, and all
these Pleasures must die with it; that they are indeed killing Pleasures, which
kill a mortal Body before its time; that it does not become a man who is but a
Traveller in this World, but a Pilgrim and a Stranger here, to study Ease, and
Softness, and Luxury; that a Soul, which must live for ever, should seek after
more lasting Pleasures, which may survive the Funeral of the Body, and be a
spring of ravishing Joys, when he is stripped of Flesh and Blood. These are the
thoughts which the consideration of Death will suggest to us, as I have already
showed you: And it is impossible for a man, who has always these thoughts at
hand, to be much imposed on by the Pageantry of this World, by the transient
Honors and Pleasures of it.

It is indeed, I think, a very impracticable Rule, which some men give, To live
always, as if we were to die the next moment. Our lives should always be as
innocent, as if we were immediately to give up our accounts to God; but it is
impossible to have always those sensible apprehensions of Death about us, which
we have when we see it approaching: but though we cannot live as if we were
immediately to die, (which would put an end not only to all innocent Mirth, but
to all the necessary Business of the World, which I believe no dying man would
concern himself for,) yet we may, and we ought to live as those who must
certainly die, and ought to have these thoughts continually about us, as a
guard upon our actions: For whatever is of such mighty consequence to us, as
Death is, if it be certain, ought always to give Laws to our Behavior and
Conversation.

2ly, If it be certain we must die, the very first thing we ought to do in this
World, after we come to years of understanding, should be to prepare for Death,
that whenever Death comes, we may be ready for it.

This, I confess, is not according to the way of this World; for dying is
usually the last thing they take care of: This is thought a little
unseasonable, while men are young and healthful and vigorous; but, besides the
uncertainty of our lives, and that it is possible, while we delay, Death may
seize on us before we are provided for it; and then we must be miserable for
ever; which I shall speak to under the next Head. I doubt not but to convince
every considering man, that an early Preparation for Death is the very best
means to make our lives happy in this World, while we do continue here. Nor
shall I urge here, how a life of Holiness and Virtue, which is the best and
only Preparation for Death, tends to make us happy in this World, delivers us
from all those Mischiefs which the wildness and giddiness of Youth, and the
more confirmed debaucheries of riper Years expose Men too; for this is properly
the commendation of Virtue, not of an early Preparation for Death: And yet this
is really a great engagement and motive to prepare betimes for Death, since
such a Preparation for Death will put us to no greater hardships and
inconveniences, than the practice of such Virtues as will prolong our lives,
preserve or increase our fortunes, give us honor and reputation in the World,
and makes us beloved both by God and men. But setting aside these things, there
are two advantages of an early Preparation for Death, which contribute more to
our Happiness, than all the World besides, 1. That it betimes delivers us from
the fears of Death, and consequently from most other fears. 2ly, That it
supports us under all the troubles and calamities of this life.

1. It betimes delivers us from the sears of Death; and indeed it is then only
a man begins to live, when he is got above the fears of Death. Were men
thoughtful and considerate, Death would hang over them in all their Mirth and
Jollity, like a fatal Sword by a single Hair; it would sour all their
Enjoyments, and strike terror into their hearts and looks: But the security of
most men is, that they put off the thoughts of Death, as they do their
preparation for it: they live secure and free from danger, only because they
will not open their eyes to see it. But these are such examples as no wise man
will propose to himself, because they are not safe: and there are so many
occasions to put these men in mind of Death, that it is a very hard thing not
to think of it, and when ever they do, it chills their Blood and Spirits, and
draws a black and melancholy Veil over all the Glories in the World. How are
such men surprised, when any danger approaches? when Death comes within view,
and shows his Sith, and only some few sands at the bottom of the Glass? This
is a very frightful sight to men who are not prepared to die; and yet should
they give themselves liberty to think, in what danger they live every minute,
how many thousand accidents may cut them off, which they can neither foresee
nor prevent; fear, and horror, and consternation would be their constant
entertainment, till they could think of Death without fear; till they were
reconciled to the thoughts of dying, by great and certain hopes of a better
life after death.

So that no man can live happily, if he lives like a man, with his thoughts,
and reason, and consideration about him, but he who takes care betimes to
prepare for Death and another World: Till this be done, a wise man will see
himself always in danger, and then he must always fear: but he is a happy man
who knows and considers himself to be mortal, and is not afraid to die: his
pleasures and enjoyments are sincere and unmixt, never disturbed with a Hand
writing upon the Wall, nor with some secret qualms and misgivings of mind; he
is not terrified with present dangers, at least not amazed and distracted with
them. A man who is delivered from the fears of Death, fears nothing else in
excess, but God: and fear is so troublesome a passion, that nothing is more for
the happiness of our lives, than to be delivered from it.

2. As a consequent of this, an early Preparation for Death will support men
under all the troubles and calamities of this life: There are so many troubles,
that Mankind are exposed to in this World, that no man must expect to escape
them all; nay, there are a great many troubles, which are unsupportable to
humane Nature, which there can be no releif for in this World: The hopes and
expectations of a better life, are, in most cases, the safest retreat: a man
may bear his present sufferings with some courage, when he knows that he shall
quickly see an end of them, that Death will put an end to them, and place him
out of their reach: For there the wicked cease from troubling, and there the
weary be at rest; there the prisoners rest together, they hear not the voice of
the oppressor; the small and great are there, and the servant is free from his
master, 3. Job 17, 18, 19.

So that in many cases the thoughts and expectations of Death is the only
thing, that can support us under present sufferings; but while the thoughts of
Death itself are terrible to us, this will be a poor comfort: Men who are under
the sense of guilt, are more afraid of Death, than they are of all the Evils of
this World: Whatever their present sufferings are, they are not so terrible as
lakes of fire and brimstone, the worm that never dies, and the fire that never
goes out: So that such men, while they are under the fears and terrors of
Death, have nothing to support them under present miseries. The next World,
which Death puts us into the possession of, is a very delightful prospect to
good men; there they see the rewards of their labor and sufferings, of their
faith and patience: They can suffer shame and reproach, and take joyfully the
spoiling of their goods; since these light afflictions, which are but for a
season, will work for them a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.
But men who are not prepared to die, while they are afraid of Death, can find
no relief in the thoughts of it, and therefore want the greatest support that
we can have in this life against the sufferings of it: The sooner we prepare to
die, the sooner we are delivered from the fears of Death, and then the hope of
a better life will carry us cheerfully through this World whatever storms we
meet with.

3ly, Since we must certainly die, it makes it extremely reasonable to
sacrifice our lives to God, whenever he calls for them; that is, rather to
choose to die a little before our time, then to renounce God, or to give his
Worship to Idols, or any created Beings, or to corrupt the Faith and Religion
of Christ: There are arguments indeed enough to encourage Christians to
Martyrdom, when God calls them to suffer for his sake: the love of Christ in
dying for us, is a sufficient reason why we should cheerfully die for him; and
the great rewards of Martyrdom, that glorious Crown which is reserved for such
Conquerors, made the Primitive Christians ambitious of it: It is certain there
is no hurt in it, nay, that it is a peculiar favor to die for Christ, because
those persons who were most dear to him were crowned with Martyrdom; but our
present argument shows us, at what an easy rate we may purchase so glorious a
Crown; for we part with nothing for it: We die for God, and we must die whether
we die Martyrs or not: and what man then, who knows he must die, and believes
the rewards of Martyrdom, can think it so terrible to die a Martyr? No good
Christian can think that he loses any thing by the bargain, to exchange this
life for a better: for as many years as he goes sooner out of this World, then
he should have done by the course of Nature, so many years he gets sooner to
Heaven; and I suppose that is no great loss: It is indeed a noble expression of
our love to God, and our entire obedience and subjection to him, and of a
perfect trust in him, to part with our lives for his sake; but what can a man,
who knows he must die, do less for God then this, to part with a life, which he
cannot keep, willingly to lay down a life for God, which would shortly be taken
from him, whether he will or not.

4ly, This shows us also, what little reason we have to be afraid of the power
of Men; the utmost they can do, is to kill the Body; a mortal Body which will
die whether they kill it or not: which is no mighty argument of power, no more
than it is to break a brittle Glass; nor any great hurt to us, no more than it
is to die, which we are all born to, and which is no injury to a good man: and
therefore our Savior's counsel is very reasonable, 12. Luke 4, 5. Be not
afraid of them who kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do:
but I will forewarn you, whom you shall fear, Fear him, which after he has
killed, has power to cast into hell; yea, I say unto you, fear him.

This is very reasonable, when the fear of God and men is opposed to each
other, which is the only case our Savior supposes. No man ought foolishly to
fling away his life, nor to provoke and affront Princes, who have the power of
Life and Death: this is not to die like a Martyr, but like a Fool, or a Rebel.
But when a Prince threatens Death, and God threatens Damnation, then our
Savior's counsel takes place, not to fear men but God: for indeed God's power
in this is equal to men's at least; men can kill, for men are mortal, and may be
killed; and this is only for a mortal Creature to die a little out of order:
but God can kill too; and thus far the case is the same. It is true, most men
are of the mind, in such a case, rather to trust God then men, because he does
not always punish in this World, nor execute a speedy vengeance. And yet when
our Savior takes notice, that God kills as well as men, it seems to intimate
to us, that such Apostates, who rather choose to provoke God then men, may meet
with their deserts in this World: for no man is secure, that God will not
punish him in this World; and Apostates of all others, have least reason to
expect it. Those who renounce God, for fear of men, are the fittest persons to
be examples of a sudden Vengeance. But then when men have killed, they can do
no more, they cannot kill the Soul; and here the power of God and men is very
unequal, for when he has killed, he can cast both Body and Soul into Hell fire:
This is a very formidable power indeed, and we have reason to fear him; but the
power of men, who can only kill a mortal Body, is not very terrible; it ought
not to fright us into any sin, which will make us obnoxious to that more
terrible Power, which can destroy the Soul.

CHAP. III. Concerning the Time of our Death, and the proper Improvement of it.
LEt us now consider the time of our Death, which is once, but when uncertain.

Now when I say the time of our Death is uncertain, I need not tell you that I
mean only it is uncertain to us, that is, that no man knows when he shall die;
for God certainly knows when we shall die, because he knows all things, and
therefore, with respect to the foreknowledge of God, the time of our Death is
certain.

Thus much is certain as to Death, that we must all die; and it is certain
also, that Death is not far off, because we know our lives are very short:
before the Flood men lived many hundred years; but it is a great while now
since the Psalmist observed, that the ordinary term of humane life had very
narrow bounds set to it, The days of our years are threescore years and ten;
and if by reason of strength they be fourscore years, yet is their strength
labor and sorrow: for it is soon cut off, and we fly away, 90. Psalm. 10.
There are some exceptions from this general Rule, but this is the ordinary
period of humane life, when it is spun out to the greatest length; and
therefore within this term we may reasonably expect it, for in the ordinary
course of Nature our Bodies are not made to last much longer.

Thus far we are certain; but then, how much of this time we shall run out, how
soon, or how late we shall die, we know not, for we see no age exempted from
Death; some expire in the Cradle, and at their Mother's Breasts, others in the
heat and vigor of youth, others survive to a decrepit age, and it may be
follow their whole Family to their Graves. Death very often surprizeth us, when
we least think of it, without giving us any warning of its approach; and that
is proof enough, that the time of our Death is unknown and uncertain to us.

But these things deserve to be particularly discoursed; and therefore with
reference to the time of our Death, I shall observe these four things, not so
much to explain them, for most of them are plain enough of themselves, as to
improve them for the government of our lives:

I. That the general Period of Humane Life, which is the same thing with the
Time of our Death, is fixed and determined by God. II. That the particular time
of every Man's Death, though it be foreknown by God, who foreknows all things,
yet it does not appear, that it is peremtorily decreed and determined by God.
III. That the particular time, when any of us shall die, is unknown and
uncertain to us. IV. That we must die but once; It is appointed for all men
once to die.
SECT. I. That the general Period of Humane Life is fixed and determined by GOD,
and that it is but very short.
I. THat the general Period of Humane Life, which is the same thing with the
Time of our Death, is fixed and determined by God: That is, there is a time set
to humane Life, beyond which no man shall live, as Job speaks: 14 Job 5. His
days are determined, the number of his months are with thee, thou have
appointed his bounds, that he cannot pass. Which does not refer to the period
of every particular man's life, but is spoken of Man in general, that there are
fixed bounds set to humane Life, which no man can exceed.

What these bounds are, God has not expressly declared, but that must be learnt
from Observation: Such a time as most commonly puts a period to men's lives, who
live longest, may generally pass for the common measure of humane Life, though
there may be some few exceptions.

Before the Flood, no man lived a thousand years, and therefore we may
conclude, that the longest term of humane Life, after the Sentence of Death was
passed on man, was confined within a thousand years. Methusalah, who was the
longest liver, lived but nine hundred sixty nine years, and he died; so that no
man ever lived a thousand years: And comparing this Observation with that
Promise of a thousand years reign with Christ, which is called the first
Resurrection, and is the portion only of Martyrs and Confessors, and pure and
sincere Christians, 20 Revel. I have been apt to conclude, that to live a
thousand years, is the privilege only of immortal Creatures; that if Adam had
continued innocent, he should have lived no longer on Earth, but have been
translated to Heaven without dying; for this thousand's years reign of the
Saints with Christ, whatever that signifies, seems to be intended as a
reparation of that Death which they fell under by Adam's sin: but then these
thousand years do not put an end to the happiness of these glorious Saints, but
they are immortal Creatures, and though this reign with Christ continues but a
thousand years, their happiness shall have no end, though the Scene may change
and vary; for over such men the second death has no power: Or else this
thousand years reign with Christ must signify an eternal and unchangable
Kingdom, a thousand years being a certain earnest of Immortality; but there is
an unreasonable Objection against that, because we read of the expiring of
these thousand years, and what shall come after them, even the final Judgment
of all the World. But this is a great Mystery, which we must not hope perfectly
to understand, till we see the blessed accomplishment of it.

But though before the Flood some persons lived very near the thousand years,
yet after the Flood the term of life was much shortened: Some think this was
done by God, when he pronounced that Sentence, 6 Genesis 3. And the Lord said, My
spirit shall not always strive with man, for that he also is flesh, yet his
days shall be an hundred and twenty years. As if God had then decreed, that the
life of man should not exceed an hundred and twenty years; but this does not
agree with that account we have of men's lives after the Flood; for not only
Noah and his Sons, who were with him in the Ark, lived much longer than this
after the Flood; but Arphazad lived five hundred and thirty years, Salah four
hundred and three years, Eber four hundred and thirty years, and Abraham
himself a hundred seventy five years, and therefore this hundred and twenty
years cannot refer to the ordinary term of man's life, but to the continuance
of God's patience with that wicked World, before he would bring the Flood upon
them to destroy that corrupt Generation of Men; that is, that he would bear
with them a hundred and twenty years, before he would send the Flood to destroy
them. But afterward by degrees life was shortened, insomuch that though Moses
himself lived a great deal longer, yet if the 90 Psalm were composed by him, as
the Title tells us it was, the ordinary term of life in his days, was but
threescore and ten, or fourscore years, 10 v. The days of our years are
threescore years and ten; and if by reason of strength they be fourscore years,
yet is their strength labor and sorrow; so soon passes it away, and it is
gone. And this has continued the ordinary measure of life ever since; which is
so very short, that David might well say, Behold, thou have made my days as an
hand-breadth, and mine age is as nothing before thee: verily every man at his
best estate is altogether vanity, 39 Psalm. 5.

I shall not scrupulously inquire into the reason of this great change, why our
lives are reduced into so narrow a compass: Some will not believe that it was
so, but think that there is a mistake in the manner of the account; that when
they are said to live eight or nine hundred years, they computed their years by
the Moon, not by the Sun; that is, their years were months, twelve of which
make but one of our years; and then indeed the longest livers of them did not
live so long as many men do at this day, for Methusalah himself, who lived nine
hundred sixty nine years, according to this computation of months for years,
lived but fourscore years and five months. But it is very absurd to imagine,
that Moses should use two such different accounts of time, that sometimes by a
year he should mean no more than a month, and sometimes twelve months, without
giving the least notice of it, which is unpardonable in any Historian: And
therefore others complain much that they were not born in those days, when the
life of man was prolonged for so many hundred years: There had been some
comfort in living then, when they enjoyed all the vigor and gaiety of youth,
and could relish the pleasure of life for seven, eight or nine hundred years. A
blessing which men would purchase at any rate in our days: but now we can
scarce turn ourselves about in the World, but we are admonished by gray Hairs,
or the sensible decays of Nature, to prepare for our Winding Sheet. And
therefore, for the farther improvement of this argument, I shall, 1. show you,
what little reason we have to complain of the Shortness of Life. 2. What wise
use we are to make of it.

SECT. II. What little reason we have to complain of the Shortness of Humane
Life.
1. WHat little reason we have to complain of the Shortness of Life, and the
too hasty Approaches of Death to us: For, 1. such a long Life is not
reconcilable with the present State of the World. And, 2ly, our Lives are long
enough for all the wise purposes of living.

1. Such a long Life is not reconcilable with the present state of the World.
What the state of the World was before the Flood, in what manner they lived,
and how they employed their time, we cannot tell, for Moses has given no
account of it; but taking the World as it is, and as we find it, I dare
undertake to convince those men, who are most apt to complain of the shortness
of Life, that it would not be for the general Happiness of Mankind, to have it
much longer: For, 1. the World is at present very unequally divided; some have
a large share and portion of it, others have nothing, but what they earn by
very hard Labor, or extort from other men's Charity by their restless
Importunities, or gain by more ungodly Arts: Now, though the Rich and
Prosperous, who have the World at command, and live in ease and pleasure, would
be very well contented to spend some hundred years in this World, yet I should
think, fifty or threescore years abundantly enough for Slaves and Beggars;
enough to spend in Hunger and Want, in a Jaol and a Prison. And those who are
so foolish as not to think this enough, owe a great deal to the wisdom and
goodness of God, that he does: So that the greatest part of Mankind have great
reason to be contented with the shortness of Life, because they have no
temptation to wish it longer.

2ly, The present state of this World requires a more quick Succession: the
World is pretty well peopled, and is divided among its present Inhabitants; and
but very few, in comparison, as I observed before, have any considerable share
in the division: Now let us but suppose, that all our Ancestors, who lived an
hundred, or two hundred years ago, were alive still, and possessed their old
Estates and Honors, what had become of this present Generation of Men, who
have now taken their places, and make as great a show and busle in the World as
they did? And if you look back three, or four, or five hundred years, the case
is still so much the worse; the World would be over-peopl'd, and where there is
one poor miserable man now, there must have been five hundred, or the World
must have been common, and all men reduced to the same level; which I believe
the rich and happy People, who are so fond of long Life, would not like very
well. This would utterly undo our young prodigal Heirs, were their hopes of
Succession three or four hundred years off, who, as short as life is now, think
their Fathers make very little have to their Graves: this would spoil their
trade of spending their Estates before they have them, and make them live a
dull sober life, whether they would or no; and such a life, I know, they don't
think worth having: And therefore, I hope, at least they will not make the
shortness of their Fathers lives an argument against Providence; and yet such
kind of Sparks as these, are commonly the Wits, that set up for Atheism, and,
when it is put into their heads, quarrel with every thing which they fondly
conceive will weaken the belief of a God, and a Providence, and among other
things, with the shortness of Life, which they have little reason to do, when
they so often outlive their Estates.

3ly, The World is very bad as it is, so bad, that good men scarce know how to
spend fifty or threescore years in it; but consider how bad it would probably
be, were the life of man extended to six, seven or eight hundred years. If so
near a prospect of the other World, as forty or fifty years, cannot restrain
men from the greatest Villainies, what would they do, if they could as
reasonably suppose Death to be three or four hundred years off? If men make
such improvements in Wickedness in twenty or thirty years, what would they do
in hundreds? And what a blessed place then would this World be to live in? We
see in the old World, when the life of man was drawn out to so great a length,
the wickedness of Mankind grew so insufferable, that it repented God he had
made man, and he resolved to destroy that whole Generation excepting Noah and
his Family: and the most probable account that can be given, how they came to
grow so universally wicked, is the long and prosperous lives of such wicked
men, who by degrees corrupted others, and they others, till there was but one
righteous Family left, and no other remedy left, but to destroy them all,
leaving only that righteous Family as the seed and future hopes of the new
World.

And when God had determined in himself, and promised to Noah, never to destroy
the World again by such an universal Destruction, till the last and final
Judgment, it was necessary by degrees to shorten the lives of men, which was
the most effectual means to make them more governable, and to remove bad
examples out of the World; which would hinder the spreading of the infection,
and people and reform the World again by new examples of Piety and Virtue: for
when there are such quick successions of men, there are few Ages but have some
great and brave examples, which give a new and better Spirit to the World.

Many other things might be added, to convince those who complain of the
shortness of humane Life, that it would be no desirable thing, as the state of
the World now is, to live seven or eight hundred years in it; but this I
suppose is enough, if I can make good the second thing I proposed, That our
lives are long enough for all the wise purposes of living.

Now I will not promise myself to satisfy all men in this matter; for those
who think it the only end of living, to eat and drink, and enjoy the more
impure delights of flesh and sense, will never be satisfied, that threescore
and ten years are as good as eight or nine hundred for this purpose; for the
longer they enjoy these pleasures, and the oftener they repeat them, the better
it is: But these men ought to be convinced, that this is not the true end of
living, that these are only means to preserve life, which God has sweetened with
such proper satisfactions, or made the neglect of them so uneasy and painful,
that no man might forget to take care to preserve himself; but man was made at
first for higher and nobler ends, and since by the sin of Adam we are all
become mortal, this life is not for itself, but in order to a better life.

We come into this World, not to stay here, or to take up our abode and rest,
for then indeed the longer we lived the better; but this World is only a state
of trial and discipline, to exercise our Virtues, to perfect our minds, to
prepare and qualify ourselves for the more pure and refined and spiritual
enjoyments of the other World: We come into this World, not so much to enjoy,
as to conquer it, and to triumph over it, to baffle its temptations, to despise
its flatteries, and to endure its terrors; and if we live long enough to do
this, we live long enough, and ought to thank God, that our work, and labor,
and temptations are at an end; For what laboring man is not glad that his work
is over, and he may go to rest? What Mariner is not glad that he has weathered
all storms, and steered a safe course to his desired Haven?

There are two things necessary to the improvement of our Minds, Knowledge and
Virtue: And as God has shortened our Lives, so he has shortened our Work too, and
given us a more easy and compendious way to both.

Knowledge indeed is an infinite and endless thing, and it is impossible
thoroughly to satisfy that appetite in great and genorous Minds, in this blind
and obscure state of life; but the comfort is, all the knowledge that is
necessary to carry us to Heaven, is now plain and easy, and will not take up
many years to learn it, for, This is life eternal to know God, and Jesus Christ
whom he has sent; which is plainly revealed to us in the Gospel: And when we
get to Heaven, we shall quickly understand all the difficulties of Nature and
Providence in another manner, then the greatest Philosophers do now, or can do,
though they should live many hundred years.

And as for Virtue, we have as short and easy a way to it: The plainest and
most perfect Precepts, the most admirable Examples, the most encouraging and
inviting Promises, and which is more than all, the most powerful Assistances of
the Divine Spirit to renew and sanctify us; and he who is not reformed by
these divine and supernatural Methods of Grace, in forty or fifty years, is not
likely to be the better for them, though he should live to Methusalah's age.

As for doing good, I confess, the longer a good man lives, the more good he
will do, and make himself the more useful to the World; but this is God's care,
and whenever he calls him out of the World, he excuses him from doing any more
good in it.

The truth is, nothing could be more improper, under the state of the Gospel,
then such a long Life, as worldly men are very fond of; for our Savior has
taught us to expect Persecutions and Sufferings for his Name; and this is very
often the portion of true and sincere Christians, that St. Paul could say, If
in this life only we had hope, we were of all men the most miserable. Thanks be
to God, it is not always so, but when it is, it would be too great a temptation
for humane Nature, to live some hundred years in a state of Persecution, as
they might, if they and the persecuting Prince should live so long.

Nay, such a long life as these men talk of, would greatly weaken the Promises
and Threatenings of the Gospel, which are all absent and unseen things, to be
expected in the other World; but if the next World were so many hundred years
off, both the Promises and Threatenings of it, would lose their effect upon the
generality of Mankind:

Nay, it might be thought very hard upon good men, who are taught by the Gospel
of Christ to live above this World, and to have a very mean opinion of, and a
great indifferency to all the delights of it, to live so many hundred years in
it; not so much to enjoy it, as to despise it, and to contend with it. And it
is not less hard for men, who are transported with the ravishing hopes and
expectations of a better life, whose hearts and conversations are already in
Heaven, to be kept so long out of it: This is a severe trial of their patience,
for hope when it is so long delayed, is a very troublesome and uneasy passion;
and though few men long to die, yet a great many good men do very impatiently
long to be in Heaven, and can be contented, whenever God pleases, to submit to
dying, though with some natural reluctance, that they may get to Heaven.

In short, this life is long enough for a Race, for a Warfare, for a
Pilgrimage; it is long enough to fight and contend with this World, and all the
Temptations of it; it is long enough to know this World, to discover the Vanity
of it, and to live above it; it is long enough, by the Grace of God, to purge
and refine our minds, and to prepare ourselves to live for ever in God's
presence; and when we are in any measure prepared for Heaven, and possessed
with great and passionate desires of it, we shall think it a great deal too
long to be kept out of it.

SECT. III. What use to make of the fixed Term of Humane Life.
2. LEt us consider what wise use is to be made of this; and here are two
things distinctly to be considered: 1. That the general Term of humane Life is
fixed and determined by God. 2. That this common Term and Period of Life, at the
utmost extent of it, is but very short.

1. That the general Term of humane Life is fixed and determined by God; and
this is capable of very wise improvements: For,

1. When we know that we cannot live above threescore or fourscore years, or
some few years over or under, we should not extend our hopes and expectations
and designs beyond this term. 2. We should frequently count our days, and
observe how our lives wast, and draw near to Eternity. 3. When this Period
draws nigh, and Death comes within view, it more especially concerns us to
apply ourselves to a more serious and solemn preparation for Death.

1. We should not extend our hopes and expectations and designs beyond this
term, which God has fixed for the conclusion of our lives: We should not live as
if we were immortal Creatures, who are never to die; for if God have set bounds
to our lives, it is absurd for us to expect to live any longer, unless we hope
to alter the Decrees of Heaven.

And yet it is more absurd, if it be possible, to extend our hopes and desires,
our projects and designs for this World, beyond the term of our living here;
for how unreasonable is it for us to trouble ourselves about this World longer
then we are like to continue in it? and yet if this were observed, it would
ease us of a great deal of labor and care, and deliver the World from those
great troubles and disorders, which the designs and projects for future Ages
create.

Men might see some end of their Labors, and of their Cares, of increasing
Riches, and adding House to House, and Field to Field, did they stint their
desires with their lives; did they consider how long they were to live, and
what is a sufficient and necessary provision for their continuance here:
whereas now the generality of Mankind drudge on to the last moment they have to
live, and still heap up riches till they know no end of them, as if their lives
and their enjoyment of them, were to have no end neither.

The only tolerable Excuse, that can be made for this, is the care of
Posterity, to leave a liberal provision for Children, that they may live
happily after us: But this indeed is rather an Excuse than a Reason, for thus
we see it is, when there is no such reason for it; when men have no Children to
provide for, nor it may be any Relations, for whom they are much concerned; on
when they have a sufficient provision for all their Children, to encourage
their Industry and Virtue, though not to maintain them in Idleness and Vice,
which no wise and good Father would desire; nay, it may be, when they have no
other Heir to an overgrown Estate, but either a Daughter, whose fortune may
make her a rich Prey, as is too often seen, or a prodigal Son, who is ruined
already by the expectation of so great a Fortune, and will quickly be even with
his Fortune, and ruin that, when he has it.

A competent provision for Children, is a just reason to continue our industry,
though we have enough for our selves, as long as we live, but to make them rich
and great, is not. The Piety and Charity of Parents, which entails a Blessing
upon their Posterity, and an industrious and virtuous Education of Children, is
a better Inheritance for them, than a great Estate: But men who are so intent
to the very last upon increasing their Estates, seldom do it for any other
reason, but to satisfy their own insatiable thirst, which is to hoard up
riches for a time when they cannot enjoy them, to provide for their living in
this World a much longer time, than they know they can possibly live in it.
This is much greater folly than the man in the Parable was guilty of, whose
Ground brought forth plentifully, and he pulled down his Barns, and built
greater, and said to his soul, Soul thou have much goods laid up for many
years, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. He was so wise as to know
when he had enough, and when it was fit to retire and take his ease: Yet God
said unto him, Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be required of thee; and
then whose shall all these things be, which thou have provided? 12 Luke 16, etc.

Thus how big are most men with projects and designs, which there is little
hope should ever take effect, while they live? especially aspiring Monarchs,
and busy Politicians, who draw the scheme, and frame their design of an
universal Empire, through a long series of Events, or meditate changes and
alterations of Government, of the Laws and Religion of a Nation, by insensible
steps and methods; which, though it were never so hopeful a project, they cannot
hope to live to see effected, and therefore exceed their own bounds, and
trouble the World at present, with what no body now living may ever be
concerned in; they undertake to govern the World, when they are dead and gone,
whereas every Age brings forth new Projects and Counsels, as it does a new
generation of Men, and new scenes of Affairs, and a new set of Politicians:
Would but men confine their cares and projects within the bounds of their own
lives, and mind only what concerns themselves, and their own times, and they
would live more at ease, and the World enjoy more peace and quiet, than now it
is ever likely to do: And yet one would think this very reasonable, not to
concern our selves about the World any longer than we are like to live in it;
to do no injury to Posterity as near as we can, and to do what good we can for
them, without disturbing the present Peace and good Government of the World,
but to leave the care of the next Age to those who shall succeed, and to that
good Providence which governs and takes care of all Ages and Generations of Men.

2. Since we know the common Period of humane Life, we should frequently count
our days, and observe how our lives wast, and draw near to Eternity. Our time
slides away insensibly, and fow men take notice how it goes; they find their
strength and vigor continues without any decay; and they reckon upon living
threescore and ten, or fourscore years, but seldom consider that it may be
thirty or forty years are already gone, that is, the best half of their lives;
they put a cheat upon themselves by computing the whole duration of their
lives, without considering how much of this is already past, and how little of
it is to come; which if men would seriously think of, they would not be so apt
to flatter themselves with a long life; for no man accounts twenty or thirty
years a long life, and that is the most they have to live now, though they
should attain to the longest period of humane life, much less could they
flatter themselves with a long life, when they could not probably reckon above
fifteen or ten years to come. And would men observe how their life shortens
every day, this, if any thing, would make them grow chary of their time, and
begin to think of living, that is, of minding the true ends and purposes of
life, of doing the work for which they came into the World, and which they must
do before they die, or they are miserable for ever.

3. When men draw near the end of their reckoning, nay, it may be are past the
common reckoning of Mankind, it more especially concerns them to apply
themselves to a more serious and solemn preparation for Death: for how vigorous
soever their age is, Death cannot be far off; it will be unpardonable in them,
to be deceived with the hopes of living much longer, who have already attained
to the common period of humane Life, and are in the borders and confines, nay
in the very quarters of Death, and have already, if I may so speak, borrowed
some years from the other World.

Now when I speak of such men's preparing for Death, I do not mean, that they
should then begin to think of dying, that is a great deal of the latest to
begin such a work; though if they have not done it before, it is without doubt
high time to begin it then, in the last minute of their lives, and to do what
they can in that little time that remains, to obtain their Pardon of God for
spending a long life in Sin and Vanity, and in a Forgetfulness of their Maker
and Redeemer.

But that which I now intend, concerns those who have thought of dying long
before, and governed their lives under the conduct and influence of such
thoughts, and therefore are not wholly unprepared for Death, but are ready to
welcome it, whenever it comes; but there is a decent way of meeting Death,
which becomes such men, which I call a more solemn Preparation for it; that is,
when their condition and circumstances of life will permit it, to take a timely
leave of the World, and to withdraw from the noise and business of it; when
they are placed just in the confines of both Worlds, to direct their face
wholly to that World whither they are a going, to spend the little remains of
their lives in conversing with themselves, with God, and with the other World.

1. In conversing with themselves, which God knows very few men do, while they
are engaged in the business of this World; the cares of Life, or the pleasures
of it, our Families, or our Friends, or Strangers themselves, take us from
ourselves, and therefore it is fit, before men go out of this World, that they
should recover the possession of themselves, and grow a little more acquainted
and intimate with themselves; retire from the World to take a more thorough
review of their lives and actions, what they have still to do, to make their
peace with God, and their own Consciences; whether there be any sin which they
have not thoroughly repented of, and heartily begged God's pardon for; any
injury they have done their Neighbor, for which they have not made sufficient
restitution and reparation; whether they have any quarrel with any man, which
is not composed and reconciled; whether there is any part of their Duty, which
they have formerly too much neglected, as Charity to the Poor, the wise
Education and Instruction of their Children and Families, and to apply
themselves to a more diligent discharge of it; what distempers there are in
their minds, which still need to be rectified, what Graces are weakest, what
Passions are most disorderly and unmortified, and to apply proper remedies to
them.

This is an excellent preparation for Death, because it will give us great hope
and assurance in dying; it gives us peace and satisfaction in our own minds, by
a thorough knowledge of our own state, and by rectifying whatever was amiss; it
delivers our Consciences from guilty fears, and so disarms Death of its sting
and terrors, for the sting of Death is Sin, and when this sting is pulled out,
we have nothing else to contend with, but some little natural aversions to
dying, which are more easily conquered.

2. Thus in this preparatory Retirement from the World, we should spend great
portions of our time in the Worship of God, in our public or private
Devotions; for commonly men of business are very much in Arrears with God upon
this account: in their active Age they had little time to spare, or little mind
to spare it for the uses of Religion; and therefore we may well retire some
time before we die, to make up that defect, and when we have done with the
World, to give up ourselves wholly to the service of God: We should now be very
importunate in our Prayers to God, that for the Merits and Intercession of
Christ, he would freely pardon all the Sins, and Frailties, and Errors of our
past life, and give us such a comfortable hope and sense of his love to us, as
may support us in the hour of Death, and sweeten the terrors and agonies of it:
We should meditate on the great love of God in sending Christ into the World to
save Sinners; and contemplate the height and depth and length and breadth of
that love of God, which passes all humane Understanding: We should represent
to ourselves the wonderful condescension of the Son of God in becoming Man, his
amazing goodness in dying for Sinners, the Just for the Unjust, to reconcile us
to God: And when we have warmed our Souls with such thoughts as these, we
should break forth into raptures and ecstasies of Devotion in the praise of our
Maker and Redeemer: Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive power, and
riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing.
Blessing, and honor, and glory, and power be unto him that sits on the
throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever, 5 Revel. 12, 13.

And besides other reasons, which makes this a very proper Preparation for
Death, this accustoms us to the work and employment of the next World, for
Heaven is a life of Devotion and Praise; there we shall see God and admire and
adore him, and sing eternal Halelujahs to him: and therefore nothing can so
dispose and prepare us for Heaven, as to have our hearts ready tuned to the
praises of God, ravished with his love, transported with his glory and
perfections, and swallowed up in the most profound and humble adorations of him.

3. Thus when we are going into another World, it becomes us most to have our
thoughts there; to consider what a blessed place that is, where we shall be
delivered from all the fears and sorrows and temptations of this World, where
we shall see God and the Blessed Jesus, and converse with Angels and glorified
Spirits, and live an endless life without fear of dying; where there is nothing
but perfect love and peace, no cross interests and factions to contend with, no
storms to ruffle or discompose our joy and rest to Eternity; where there is no
pain, no sickness, no labor, no care to refresh the weariness, or to repair
the decays of a mortal Body, not so much as the image of Death to interrupt our
constant enjoyments; where there is a perpetual day, and an eternal calm, where
our Souls shall attain their utmost perfection of Knowledge and Virtue; where
we shall serve God not with dull, and sleepy, and unaffecting Devotion, but
with piercing thoughts, with life and vigor, with ravishment and transport; in
a word, where there are such things, as neither eye has seen, nor ear heard,
neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive.

These are proper thoughts for a man who is to compose himself for Death, not
to think of the pale and ghastly looks of Death, when he shall be wrapped up in
his Winding Sheet; not to think of the dark and melancholy retirements of the
Grave, where his Body must rot and putrify, till it be raised up again
immortal and glorious, but to lift up his eyes to Heaven, to view that lightsom
and happy Country, with Moses to ascend up into the Mount, and take a prospect
of the heavenly Canaan, whither he is going: This will conquer even the natural
aversions to Death, and make us with St. Paul, desirous to be dissolved, and to
be with Christ, which is best of all; make it as easy to us to leave this
World for Heaven, as it is to remove into a more pleasant and wholesome Air, or
into a more convenient and beautiful House; so easy, so pleasant will it be to
die with such thoughts as these about us.

This indeed ought to be the constant Exercise of the Christian Life; it is fit
for all times and for all persons, and without some degree of it, it is
impossible to conquer the Temptations of the World, or to live in the practice
of divine and heavenly Virtues: But this ought to be the constant business, or
entertainment rather, of those happy men who have lived long enough in the
World, to take a fair leave of it, who have run through all the Scenes and
Stages of Humane Life, and have now Death and another World in view and
prospect.

And it is this makes a Retirement from the World so necessary or very useful,
not merely to ease our bodily labors, and to get a little rest from business,
to dissolve in sloth and idleness, or to wander about to seek a Companion, or
to hear News, or to talk Politics, or to find out some way to spend time,
which now lies upon their hands, and is more uneasy and troublesome to them than
business was: This is a more dangerous state, and does more indispose them for
a happy Death, than all the cares and troubles of an active Life; but we must
retire from this World to have more leisure and greater opportunities to
prepare for the next, to adorn and cultivate our Minds, and dress our Souls
like a Bride, who is adorned to meet her Bridegroom.

When men converse much in this World, and are distracted with the cares and
business of it, when they live in a crowd of Customers or Clients, and are
hurried from their Shops to the Exchange or Custom-house, or from their
Chambers to the Bar, and when they have discharged one obligation, are pressed
hard by another, that at night they have hardly Spirits left to say their
Prayers, nor any time for them in the morning, and the Lord's Day itself is
thought more proper for Rest and Refreshment, than Devotion; I say, what dull
cold apprehensions must such men have of another World? And after all the care
we can take, how will this World insinuate itself into our affections, when it
imploys our time and thoughts, when our whole business is buying and selling,
and driving good Bargains, and making Conveyances and Settlements of Estates?
How will this disorder our Passions, occasion Feuds and Quarrels, give us a
tincture of Pride, Ambition, Covetuousness; that there is work enough after a
busy life, even for very good men, to wash out these stains and pollutions,
and to get the taste and relish of this World out of their mouths, and to revive
and quicken the sense of GOD and of another World.

This is a sufficient reason for such men, as I observed before, to think when
it is time to leave off, and if not wholly to withdraw from the World, yet to
contract their business, and to have the command of it, that they may have more
leisure to take care of their Souls, before they have so near a call and
summons to Death; but much more necessary is it, when Death is even at the
door, and by the course of Nature we know that it is so.

It is very proper to leave the World, before we are removed out of it, that we
may know how to live without it, that we may not carry any hanckerings after
this World with us into the next; and therefore it is very fitting, that there
should be a kind of a middle state between this World and the next; that is,
that we should withdraw from this World, to wean ourselves from it, even while
we are in it; which will make it more easy to part with this World, and make
us more fit to go to the next. But it seems strangely undecent, unless the
necessities of their Families, or the necessities of the Public call for it,
and exact it, to see men who are just a going out of the World, who it may be
bow as much under their Riches, as under their Age, plunging themselves over
head and ears in this World, courting new Honors and Preferments with as much
zeal, as those who are but entering into the World. It is to be feared, such men
think very little of another World, and will never be satisfied with Earth,
till they are buried in it.

SECT. IV. What use to make of the Shortness of Humane Life.
2. AS the general Period of Humane Life is fixed and determined by God, so this
term of life at the utmost extent of it, is but very short: For what are
threescore and ten, or fourscore years? how soon do they pass away like a
Dream, and when they are gone, how few and empty do they appear? The best way
to be sensible of this, is not to look forward, for we fancy time to come, to
be much longer than we find it, but to look backward upon the time which is
past, and as long as we can remember; and how suddenly are thirty or forty
years gone? how little do we remember, how they past? but gone they are, and
the rest are a going apace, while we eat, and drink, and sleep, and when they
are gone too, we shall be sensible, that all together was but very short. Now
from hence I shall observe several things of very great use for the government
of our Lives.

1. If our lives be so very short, it concerns us to lose none of our time; for
does it become us to be prodigal of our time, when we have so little of it? We
either ought to make as much of our lives as we can, or not complain, that they
are short, for that is a greater reproach to ourselves, than to the order of
Nature, and the Providence of God: for it seems we have more time than we care
to live in, more than we think necessary to improve to the true ends and
purposes of living; and if we can spare so much of our lives, it seems they are
too long for us, how short soever they are in themselves: and when our lives
are too long already for the generallity of Mankind to improve wisely, why
should God give us more time to play with, and to squander away? And yet let us
all reflect upon ourselves, and consider, how much of our lives we have
perfectly lost, how careless we have been of our time, which is the most
precious thing in the World; how we have given it to every body that will take
it, and given away so much of ourselves, and our own being with it.

Should men set down, and take a review of their lives, and draw up a
particular account of the expense of their time, after they came to years of
discretion and understanding, what a shameful Bill would it be? what
unreasonable abatements of life? how little time would there be at the foot of
the account, which might be called living?

So much extraordinary for eating, and drinking, and sleeping, beyond what the
support and refreshment of Nature required; so much in Courtship, Wantonness
and Lust; so much in Drinking and Revelling; so much for the recovery of the
last Night's Debauch; so much in Gaming and Mascarades; so much in paying and
receiving formal and impertinent Visits, in idle and extravagant Discourses, in
censuring and reviling our Neighbors or our Governors; so much in dressing
and adorning our Bodies; so many blanck and long Parentheses of Life, wasted in
doing nothing, or in counting the slow and tedious Minutes, or chiding the Sun
for making no more haste down, and delaying their evening Assignations: But how
little would there appear in most men's account, spent to the true ends of
living?

The very naming of these things is sufficient to convince any considering man,
that this is really a mispending of time, and a flinging away great part of a
very short life to no purpose; but to make you all sensible of this, consider
with me, when we may be said to lose our time; for time passes away very
swiftly, and we can no more hold it, than we can stop the Chariot Wheels of
the Sun, but all time that is past, is not lost; indeed no time is our own, but
what is past or present, and its being past makes it never the less our own, if
ever it was so; but then we lose our time.

1. When it turns to no account to us, when it is gone; when we are never the
better for it in Body or Soul: this is the true way of judging, by our own
sense and feeling, whether we have spent our time well or ill, by observing
what relish it leaves upon our minds, and what the effects of it are, when it
is past; how vainly soever men spend their time, they find some pleasure and
diversion and entertainment in it, while it lasts, but the next morning it is
all vanished, as their night Dreams are; and if they are not the worse for it,
they find themselves never the better: And this is a certain sign, that our
time was vainly and foolishly spent, that when it is gone, it can be brought
into no account of our lives, but that of idle Expenses. Whatever is good,
whatever is in any degree useful, leaves some satisfaction when it is gone, and
time so spent, we can place to our account, and all such time is not lost; but
men who spend one day after another in Mirth, and Jollity, and Entertainments,
in Visits or Gaming, etc. can give no other account of it, but that it is a
pleasant way of spending time: And that is the true name for it, not living,
but spending time, which they know not how otherwise to pass away; when their
time is spent, they have all they intended, and their enjoyments pass away with
their time, and there is an end of both; and it were somewhat more tolerable,
if they themselves could end with their time too: but when men must outlive
time, and the effects of time must last to Eternity, that time, which if it
have no ill, yet has no good effects more lasting than itself, is utterly lost.

2dly, To be sure that time is doubly lost, which we cannot review without
amazement and horror; I mean, in which we have contracted some great guilt,
which we have not only spent vainly, but wickedly, which we ourselves wish had
never been, which we desire to forget, and could be glad, that both God and men
would forget it too: For is not that lost time, which loses us, which undoes
us, which distracts us with guilty fears, which we would give all the World we
could lose out of the account of our lives, and could lose the very remembrance
of it? I think that somewhat worse than lost time, which forfeits a blessed
Eternity, and for which men must lose their Souls for ever.

3dly, That is lost time too, which men must live over again, and tread back
their steps like him who has mistaken his way: not that we can recall our past
time, and those minutes that are fled from us, but we must substitute some of
our remaining time in its room, and begin our lives again, and undo what we had
formerly done. This is the case of those who have spent great part of their
lives ill, whenever they are convinced of their folly and danger; they must
give all their past lives for lost, and it may be, when half or two thirds, or
more of their lives are spent, they must then begin to live, and to undo, by
Repentance and Reformation, the Errors, and Follies, and Impieties of their
former lives: Now I suppose all men will confess that time to be lost, which
they must unlive again; to be sure Penitents are very sensible it is, and I
wish all those would consider it, who resolve to spend their youthful and
vigorous age in Sin, and to repent hereafter; that is, they resolve to fling
away the greatest and best part of their lives, and to begin to live when they
see themselves a dying: This I am sure is no remedy against a short life, to
resolve not to live one third of it.

2dly, Since our life is so very short, it becomes us to live as much as we can
in so short a time; for we must not measure the length or shortness of our
lives by days or months or years, that is the measure of our duration or being,
but to live and to be, are two things, and of a distinct consideration and
account.

To live, when we speak of a man, signifies to act like a reasonable Creature,
to exercise his understanding and will upon such objects as answer the dignity
and perfection of humane Nature, to be employed in such actions as are proper
to his nature, and distinguish a Man from all other Creatures: and therefore
though a man must eat and drink, and perform the other offices of a natural
Life, which are common to him with Beasts; yet this is not to live like a Man,
any otherwise than as these common actions are governed by Reason and rules of
Virtue, but he who minds nothing higher than this, lives like a Beast, not like
a Man: A life of Reason, Religion, and Virtue, is properly the life of a Man,
because it is peculiar to him, and distinguishes him from all other Creatures
in this World; and therefore he who improves his knowledge and understanding
most, who has his passions and appetites under the best government, who does
most good, and makes himself most useful to the World, though he does not
continue longer, yet he lives more and longer than other men; that is, he
exerts more frequent and more perfect acts of a rational Life.

But besides this, this life is only in order to a better life; it is not for
it self, but only a passage to, a state of trial and probation for Immortality;
and it were hardly worth the while to come into the World upon any meaner
design: and therefore he lives most, who improves the Grace of God to make
himself most fit for Heaven, and qualified for the greatest rewards, for the
richest and the brightest Crown: Who knows God most, and worships him in the
most perfect manner, with the greatest ravishments and transports of Spirit,
who lives most above this World in the exercise of the most Divine Virtues, who
does most service to God in the World, and improves all his talents to the best
advantage; in a word, who most adorns and perfects his own mind, brings most
glory to God, and does most good to men: such a man at thirty years old, has
lived more, nay, indeed may properly be said to have lived longer, than an old
decrepit Sinner; for he has not lived at all to the purposes of a man, or to
the ends of the other World. That man has lived a great while, how short soever
the time be, who is old enough for Heaven, and for Eternity, who has laid up
rich and glorious treasures for himself in the other World; who has answered
the ends of this Life, and is fit to remove out of it: this is the true way of
measuring our lives by acts of Piety and Virtue, by our improvements in
Knowledge, and Grace, and Wisdom, by our Ripeness for another World; and
therefore if we would live a great while in this World, We must 1. begin to
live betimes. 2. We must have a care of all interruptions and intermissions of
Life. 3. We must live apace.

1. We must begin to live betimes; that is, must begin betimes to live like
men, and like Christians, to live to God, and to another World, that is in a
word, to be good betimes: for those who begin to live with the first bloomings
of Reason and understanding, and give early and youthful specimens of Piety and
Virtue, if they reach to old Age, they live three times as long as those who
count indeed as many years as they do, but it may be have not lived a third of
their time, but have lost it in Sin and Folly. The first can look back to the
very beginning of his life, and enjoy all his past years still, review them
with pleasure and satisfaction, and bring them all to account: but a late
Penitent must date his life from his repentance and reformation; he dares look
no farther back, for all beyond is lost, or worse than lost: it is like looking
back upon the rude Chaos, which was nothing but confusion and darkness before
God formed the World, such is the life of a Sinner before this new birth and
new creation; and therefore he has but a very little way to look back, can give
but a very short account of his life, has but a very few years of his life
which he dares own, and carry into the other World with him.

2. We must have a care of all interruptions and intermissions of life; that is
of falling back into sin again, after some hopeful beginnings: This is too
often seen, that those, who by the care, and good government, and wise
instructions of Parents and Tutors, have had the principles of Virtue and Piety
early instilled into them, and have had a good relish of it themselves, yet
when they are got loose from these Restraints, and fall into ill Company, and
into the way of Temptations, have a mind to try another kind of life, and to
taste those pleasures which they see Mankind so fond of, and too often try so
long till they grow as great Strangers to Piety and Virtue, as they were
ignorant of Vice before. Now if such men ever be reclaimed again, yet all their
early beginnings of life are lost, for here is a long interruption and
intermission of life, which sets them back in the account of Eternity; and thus
it is proportionably in every wilful sin we commit, it makes a break in our
lives, does not only stop our progress for a while, but sets us backward. But
he who begins betimes to live, without any or very few, and very short
interruptions, will be able to reckon a very long life, by that time he attains
to the common period of humane life:

3. Especially if he live apace: There is a living apace, as some call it, not
to lengthen but to shorten life; when men by minding their business well, can
in ten or twenty years destroy such a constitution of body, and exhaust that
vital heat and vigor, which would have lasted another man sixty or eighty
years: this is to live much in a little time, and to make an end of their lives
quickly; and the living apace, I mean* is to live much also in a little time,
but to double and treble our lives, not to shorten them: that is, to do all the
good that ever we can, for the more good we do, the more we live; life is not
mere duration, but action; time is not life, but we live, that is, we act in
time; and he who does two days work in one, lives as much in one day, as other
men do in two: He who in one year does as much improve his mind in knowledge
and wisdom, and all Christian graces and virtues, worships God as much and more
devoutly, does as much good to the World in all capacities and relations of
life, as another man does in two or three or four, he lives so much
proportionably longer than those other men; he does the work of so much time,
and this is equivalent to, nay much better than being so much time; for he who
can have the reward of two hundred years in the next World, and not live above
threescore or fourscore here, I take to be a much happier man, than he who
spends two hundred years in this World: This is the best way of lengthening our
lives by living doubly and trebly, which will make a vast addition to our lives
in fifty or sixty years; and then there will be no reason to complain of the
shortness of them.

3dly, If our lives are so very short as most men complain they are, surely we
have little reason to complain of spending the whole of these short lives in
the service of God, for an eternal reward: What are threescore or fourscore
years, when compared to eternity? And therefore setting aside all the present
advantages and pleasures of a life of Religion, that this only is to live to
improve and perfect our own Natures, to serve God, and to do good in the World:
Suppose there were nothing in Religion, but hardships and difficulties, a
perpetual force and violence to Nature, a constant War with the World and the
Flesh; cannot we endure all this so short a time, for an endless reward? Men
think their day's work very well spent, when they receive their wages at night,
and can go home and sup cheerfully with their Family, and sleep sweetly, as
laboring men use to do, all night; and yet our Savior compares all the work
and industry of our lives, to Day-Labourers, in the Parable of the Householder,
who at several hours of the day, hired Laborers to work in his Vineyard, and
paid them their wages at night, 20 Matthew. 1, etc.

We all confess, that threescore and ten years, if we live so long, is but a
very short time in itself, and quickly passes away; I am sure we all think so,
when it is gone; and yet consider, how much of this time is cut off by Infancy,
Childhood, and Youth, while we are under the care and conduct of Parents and
Governors, and are not our own men; how much is spent in sleeping, in eating
and drinking, and necessary diversions, for the support and repair of these
mortal bodies; in our necessary business to provide for our Families, or to
serve the Public, which God allows and requires of us, and accounts it serving
himself; while we live like men, are sober and temperate, and just and faithful
to our trust, which we should do for our own sakes, and which all well governed
Societies require of us, without any consideration of another World; so that
there is but very little of this very short life spent purely in the service of
God, and in the care of our Souls, and the concernments of a future State; and
is this too much for an Eternity of Bliss and Happiness? To complain of
Sobriety and Temperance and Moral Honesty, as such unsufferable burdens, that a
man had better be damned than submit to them, is not so much to complain of the
Laws of God, as of all the wise Governments in the World, even in the Heathen
World, which branded all these Vices with Infamy, and restrained and corrected
them with condign Punishments; it is to complain of humane Nature, which has
made all these Vices infamous, and to think it better to be damned than to live
like men; and yet above two thirds of our time require the exercise of few
other Virtues but these; and whatever difficulties men may imagine in other
acts of Religion, if they can possibly think it so intolerable to love the
greatest and the best Being, to praise and adore Him to whom we owe ourselves
and all we have, to ask the supply of our wants from him who will be sure to
give, if we faithfully ask; to raise our hearts above this World, which is a
Scene of Vanity, Emptiness, or Misery, and to delight ourselves in the hope and
expectations of great and eternal Happiness, wherein the very life of Religion
consists: I say, if these be such very difficult and uneasy things, which one
would wonder how they came to be difficult, or why they should be thought so;
yet they employ very little of our time, and methinks a man might bear it to be
happy for ever: I am sure men take a great deal more pains for this World, than
Heaven would cost them, and when they have it* don't live to enjoy it; and if
this be thought worth their while, surely to spend a short life in the service
of God, to obtain an endless and eternal Happiness, is the best and most
advantageous spending our time; and we must have a very mean opinion of Heaven
and Eternal Happiness, if we think it not worth the obedience and service of a
few years, how difficult soever that were?

4hly, If our lives are so very short at their utmost extent, the sinful
pleasures of this World can be no great temptation, when compared with an
Eternity of Happiness or Misery? Those sensual pleasures, which men are so fond
of, and for the sake of which they break the Laws of God, and provoke his
Justice, forfeit immortal Life, and expose themselves to all the Miseries and
Sufferings of an eternal Death, can last no longer than we live in this World;
and how little a while is that? When we put off these Bodies, all bodily
pleasures perish with them; nay, indeed as our bodies die and decay by degrees,
before they tumble into the Grave, so do our pleasures sensibly decay too: As
short as our lives are, men may outlive some of their most beloved Vices, and
therefore how luscious soever they may be, such short and dying Pleasures ought
not to come in competition with eternal Happiness or Mifery; what ever things
are in their own nature, the value of them increases or diminishes according to
the length or shortness of their enjoyment; that which will last our lives, and
make them easy and comfortable, is to be prefered, by wise men, before the most
ravishing enjoyments of a day; and a happiness which will out-last our lives,
and reach to eternity, is to be preferred before the perishing enjoyments of a
short life; unless men can think it better to be happy for threescore years,
than for ever; nay, unless men think the enjoyments of threescore years a
sufficient recompense for eternal want and misery.

5hly, The shortness of our lives are a sufficient answer to all these
arguments against Providence, taken from the Prosperity of bad Men, and the
Miseries and Afflictions of the good; for both of them are so short, that they
are nothing in the account of Eternity. Were this life to be considered by it
self, without any relation to a future State, the difficulty would be greater,
but not v^ry great; because a short happiness, or a short misery, chequered and
intermixed as all the happiness and miseries of this life are, is not very
considerable; nor were it worth the while either to make objections against
Providence, or to answer them, if Death put an end to us.

Bad men who make these Objections against Providence, are very well contented
to take the World as they find it, so they may have it without a Providence,
which is a sign that it is not their dislike of this World (though many times
they suffer as much in it, as good men do) which makes them quarrel at
Providence, but the dread and fear of another World: and this proves, that they
think this World a very tolerable place, whether there be a Providence or not.
And if so short a life as this is, be but tolerable, it is a sufficient
justification of Providence, that this life is well enough for its continuance,
a very mixed and imperfect state indeed, but very short too; such a state as bad
men themselves would like very well without another World after it, and such a
state as good men like very well with another Life to follow: It is not a
spite at humane life, which makes them reject a Providence, as any one would
guess, who hears them object their own Prosperity, and the Calamities of good
men, as arguments against Providence, both which they like very well; and
whatever there may be in these Objections, supposing there were no other life
after this, yet when they all vanish at the very naming of another life, where
good Men shall be rewarded, and the Wicked punished, it is ridiculous to prove,
that there is no other life after this, because rewards and punishments are not
dispensed with that exact Justice in this life, as we might suppose God would
observe, if there were no other life. To prove that there is no other life
after this, because good and bad men do not receive their just rewards in this
life, is an Argument which becomes the wit and understanding of an Atheist; for
they must first take it for granted, that there is no Providence, before this
argument can prove any thing; for if there be a Providence, then the prosperity
of bad Men, and the sufferings of the good, is a much better argument, that
there is another life after this, where rewards and punishments shall be more
equally distributed: Thus when they dispute against Providence from the
Prosperity of bad men, and the Calamities of the good, before this can prove
any thing, they must take it for granted, that there is no other life after
this, where good Men shall be rewarded, and the wicked punished; for if there
be, it is easy enough to justify the Providence of God, as to the present
prosperity of bad men, and the sufferings of the good: So that they must of
necessity dispute in a circle, as the Papists do between the Church and the
Scriptures, when they either prove, that there is no Providence, or no Life
after this, from the unequal rewards and punishments of bad and good Men in
this World: For in effect they prove that there is no Providence, because there
is no life after this, or that there is no life after this, because there is no
Providence; for the prosperity of bad Men, and the sufferings of the good,
proves ne^^her of them, unless you take the other for granted; and if you will
prove them both by this Medium, you must take them both for granted by turns;
and that is the easier and safer way to take them for granted, without exposing
themselves to the scorn of wise men by such kind of proofs. But yet though this
were no Objection against the being of another World, and a Providence, yet had
the prosperity of bad Men, and the calamities of the good continued some
hundred years, it had been a greater difficulty, and a greater temptation, than
now it is: The prosperity of the Wicked is a much less objection, when it is so
easily answered, as the Psalmist does, Yet a little while, and the wicked shall
not be; yea, thou shall diligently consider his place, and it shall not be, 37
Psalm. 10. When the very same persons, who have been the Spectators and
Witnesses of his prosperous Villainies, live to see a quick and sudden end of
him: I have seen the wicked in great power, and spreading himself like a green
bay tree; yet he passed away, and lo he was not; yea, I sought him, but he
could not be found, 35, 36* And this is enough also to support the spirits of
good men: For this cause we faint not, but though our outward man perish, yet
the inward man is renewed day by day; for our light affliction, which is but
for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory,
2 Cor. 4. 16, 17.

SECT. V. The time, and manner, and circumstances of every particular Man's
Death, is not determined by an absolute and unconditional Decree.
II. THough God, who knows all things, does know also the time and manner and
circumstances of every particular Man's Death, yet it does not appear, that he
has by an absolute and unconditional Decree, fixed and determined the
particular time of every Man's Death. This is that famous Question, which
Beverovicius, a learned Physician, was so much concerned to have resolved, and
consulted so many learned men about, as supposing it would be a great injury to
his Profession, did men believe, that the time of their Death was so absolutely
determined by God, that they could neither die sooner, nor live longer then
that fatal Period, whether they took the Advice and Prescriptions of the
Physicians or not. But this was a vain fear, for there are some Speculations,
which men never live by, how vehemently soever they contend for them: A
Sceptick, who pretends that there is nothing certain, and will dispute with you
as long as you please about it, yet will not venture his own arguments so far
as to leap into Fire or Water, nor to stand before the mouth of a loaded Canon,
when you give fire to it. Thus men who talk most about fatal Necessity, and
absolute Decrees, yet they will eat and drink to preserve themselves in health,
and take Physic when they are sick, and as heartily repent of their sins, and
vow amendment and reformation, when they think themselves a dying, as if they
did not believe one word of such absolute Decrees, and fatal Necessity, as they
talk of at other times.

I do not intend to engage in this Dispute of Necessity and Fate, of Prescience
and absolute Decrees, which will be Disputes as long as the World lasts, unless
men grow wiser than to trouble themselves with such Questions as are above
their reach, and which they can never have a clear notion and perception of;
but all that I intend is to show you, according to the Scripture account of it,
that the Period of our Lives is not so peremptorily determined by God, but that
we may lengthen or shorten them, live longer or die sooner, according as we
behave ourselves in this World.

Now this is very plain from all those places of Scripture, where God promises
long life to good Men, and threatens to shorten the lives of the Wicked, 91
Psalm. 16. With long life will I satisfy him, and show him my salvation.
Solomon tells us of Wisdom, Length of days is in her right hand, and in her
left riches and honors, 3 Prove. 16. The fear of the Lord prolongeth days, but
the years of the wicked shall be shortened, 10 Prove. 27. Thus God has promised
long life to those who honor their Parents, in the fifth Commandment; and the
same promise is made in more general terms to those who observe the Statutes
and Commandments of God, 4 Deuteronomy. 40. Upon the same condition God promised long
life to King Solomon, 1 Kings 3. 14. And if thou will walk in my ways, to keep
my statutes and commandments; as thy father David did walk, then will I
lengthen thy days. The same is supposed in David's Prayer to God, not to take
him away in the midst of his days, 102 Psalm. 24. And in 55 Psalm. 23. he tells
us, That bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days. Now one
would reasonably conclude from hence, that God has not absolutely and
unconditionally determined the fatal period of every Man's life, because he has
conditionally promised to prolong Men's lives, or threatened to shorten them; for
what place can there be for conditional Promises, where an absolute Decree is
past? How can any man be said not to live out half his days, if he lives as
long as God has decreed he shall live? for if the period of every particular
Man's life be determined by God, none are his days, but what God has decreed
for him.

As for matter of fact, it is plain and evident, both that men shorten their
own lives, and that God shortens them for them, and that in such a manner as
will not admit of an absolute and unconditional Decree: Thus some men destroy a
healthful and vigorous constitution of body by intemperance and lust, and do as
manifestly kill themselves, as those who hang, or poison, or drown themselves;
and both these sorts of men, I suppose, may be said to shorten their own lives;
and so do those who rob or murder, or commit any oother villainy, which forfeits
their lives to public Justice, or quarrel and fall in a Duel, and the like;
and yet you will no more say, that God decreed and determined the death of
these men, then he did their sin.

Thus God himself very often shortens the lives of men, by Plague, and Famine,
and Sword, and such other Judgments, as he executes upon a wicked World; and
this must be confessed to be the effect of God's counsel and decrees, as a Judge
decrees and pronounces the death of a Malefactor; but this is not an absolute
and unconditional decree, but is occasioned by their sins and provocations, as
all Judgments are; they might have lived longer, and escaped these Judgments,
had they been virtuous, and obedient to God: for if they should have lived no
longer, whether they had sinned or not, their death, by what judgments soever
they are cut off, is not so properly the execution of Justice, as of a
peremtory Decree; their lives are not shortened, but their fatal period is come.

Indeed, unless we make the Providence of God, not the government of a wise and
free Agent, who acts pro re nata, and rewards and punishes as men deserve, as
the Scripture represents it, but an unavoidable execution of a long series of
fatal and necessary Events from the beginning to the end of the World, as the
Stoics thought; we must acknowledge, that in the government of free Agents,
God has reserved to himself a free liberty of lengthning or shortning men's
lives, as will best serve the ends of Providence: for if we will allow Man to
be a free Agent, and that he is not under a necessity of sinning, and deserving
to be cut off at such a time, or in such a manner, the application of rewards
and punishments to him must be free also, or else they may be ill applied: he
may be punished when he deserves to be rewarded; the fatal period of life may
fall out at such a time when he most of all deserves long life, and when the
lengthning his life would be a public Blessing to the World. Fatal and
necessary Events can never be fitted to the government of free Agents, no more
than you can make a Clock, which shall strike exactly for time and number, when
such a man speaks, let him speak when, or name what number he pleases: And yet
there is nothing of greater moment in the government of the World, than a free
power and liberty of lengthning or shortning men's lives; for nothing more
over-aws Mankind, and keeps them more in dependence on God; nothing gives a
more signal demonstration of a divine Power, or Vengeance, or Protection;
nothing is a greater blessing to Families or Kingdoms, or a greater punishment
to them, than the life or death of a Parent, of a Child, of a Prince, and
therefore it is as necessary to reserve this Power to God, as to assert a
Providence. There are two or three places of Scripture, which are urged in
favor of the contrary opinion, 14 Job 5. Seeing his days are determined, the
number of his months are with thee, thou have appointed his bounds that he
cannot pass. 7 Job 1. Is there not an appointed time to man upon earth? are not
his days also like the days of an hireling? Which refer not to the particular
period of every Man's life, but as I observed before, to the general period of
humane Life, which is fixed and determined, which is therefore called the days
or the years of Man, because God has appointed this the ordinary time of Man's
life; as when God threatens, that the Wicked shall not live out half their
days, that is, half that time which is allotted for men to live on Earth; for
they have no other interest in these days, but that they are the days of a man,
and therefore might be their days too.

From what I have now discoursed, there are two things very plainly to be
observed: 1. That men may contribute very much to the lengthening or shortning
their own lives. 2. That the Providence of God does peculiarly overrule and
determine this matter.

1. As for the first, there is no need to prove it, for we see men destroy
their own lives every day, either by intemperance and lust, or more open
violence; by forfeiting their lives to public Justice, or by provoking the
Divine Vengeance; and therefore who ever desires a long life, to fill up the
number of his days, which God has allotted us in this World, must keep himself
from such destructive Vices, must practice the most healthful Virtues, must
make God his Friend, and engage his Providence for his defense: Can any thing
be more absurd, than to hear men promise themselves long life, and reckon upon
forty or fifty years to come, when they run into those Excesses, which will
make a quick and speedy end of them? which will either inflame and corrupt
their Blood, and let a Feavour or a Dropsy into their Veins, or bring
Rottenness into their Bones, or engage them in some fatal Quarrel, or ruin
their Estates, and send them to seek their fortune upon the Road, which
commonly brings them to the Gallows; What a fatal Cheat is this, which men put
upon themselves? especially when they sin in hope of time to repent, and commit
such sins as will give them no time to repent in.

The advice of the Psalmist is much better, What man is he, that desires life,
and loves many days, that he may see good? Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy
lips from speaking guile, depart from evil, and do good, seek peace and pursue
it: These are natural and moral causes of a long life; but that is not all, For
the eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto their
cry; the face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to cut off the
remembrance of them from the earth: That is, God will prolong the lives of good
Men, and cut off the Wicked; not that this is a general rule without exception,
but it is the ordinary method of Providence, 34 Psalm. 12, 13, etc.

2. For though God has not determined how long every man shall live, by an
absolute and unconditional Decree, yet if a Sparrow does not fall to the ground
without our Father, much less does Man: No man can go out of this World, no
more than he can come into it, but by a special Providence; no man can destroy
himself, but by God's leave; no Disease can kill, but when God pleases; no
mortal Accident can befall us, but by God's appointment; who is therefore said
to deliver the Man into the hands of his Neighbor, who is killed by any evil
Accident, 19 Deuteronomy. 4, 5. Those wasting Judgments of Plague and Pestilence,
Famine and Sword, are appointed by God, and have their particular Commissions
where to strike; as we may see 26 Lev. 47. Ier. 6. 7. 65 Isai. 12. 15 Ierem. 2.
91 Psalm. and several other places. All the rage and fury of Men cannot take
away our lives, but by God's particular permission, 10 Matthew. 28, 29, 30, 31.

And this lays as great an obligation on us, as the love of life can, which is
the dearest thing in this World, to serve and please God; this will make us
secure from all fears and dangers: My times, says David, are in thy hand,
deliver me from the hand of mine enemies, and from them that persecute me, 31
Psalm. 15. This encourages us to pray to God for ourselves, or our Friends,
whatever danger our lives are in, either from sickness or from men: There is no
case wherein he cannot help us, when he sees fit; he can rectify the disorders
of Nature, and correct an ill habit of Body, and rebuke the most raging
Distempers which mock at all the Arts of Physic, and powers of Drugs, and many
times does so by insensible methods: To conclude, this is a great satisfaction
to good men, that our lives are in the hands of God; that though there be not
such a fixed and immovable Period set to them, yet Death cannot come but by
God's appointment.

SECT. VI. The particular Time, when we are to Die is unknown and uncertain to
us.
III. THe particular time when any of us are to Die, is unknown and uncertain
to us; and this is that which we properly call the uncertainty of our lives;
that we know not when we shall Die, whether this night or to morrow, or twenty
years hence. There is no need to prove this, but only to mind you of it, and to
acquaint you, what wise use you are to make of it:

1. This shows how unreasonable it is to flatter ourselves with the hope of
long life; I mean of prolonging our lives near the utmost term and period of
humane life, which though it be but short in itself, is yet the longest that
any man can hope to live: No wise man will promise himself that which he can
have no reason to expect, but what has very often failed others: for let us
seriously consider, what reason any of us have to expect a long life; is it
because we are young and healthful and vigorous? And do we not daily see young
men die? can youth or beauty or strength secure us from the arrests of Death?
is it because we see some men live to a great age? But this was no security to
those, who died young, and left a great many men behind them, who had lived
twice or thrice their age, and therefore we also may see a great many old men,
and die young ourselves. It is possible, we may live to old age, because some
do; but it is more likely we shall not, because there are more that die young.
The truth is, the time of dying is so uncertain, the ways of dying so infinite,
so unseen, so casual and fortuitous to us, that instead of promising ourselves
long life, no wise man will promise himself a week, nor venture any thing of
great moment and consequence upon it: The hope of long life is nothing else but
self-flattery; the fondness men have for life, and that partiality they have
for themselves, persuades them, that they shall live as long as any man can
live, and shall escape those Diseases and fatal Accidents, with which our Bills
of Mortality are filled every week: but then you should consider, that other
men are as dear to themselves, as you are, and flatter themselves as much with
long life, as you do, but their hopes very often deceive them, and so may yours.

But you will say, To what purpose is all this? why so much pains to put us out
of conceit with the hopes of living long? for what hurt is it, if we do flatter
ourselves a little more in this matter, than we have reason for? If it should
prove only a deceitful Dream, yet it makes life cheerful and comfortable, and
gives us a true relish of it; and why should we disturb ourselves, and make
life uneasy, by the perpetual thoughts of dying?

Now, I confess, were there no hurt and danger in it, this were as ill-natured
and spightful a thing, as could be done; and the least recompense I could make,
would be to ask your pardon for it, and leave you to enjoy the comforts of life
securely for the future, to live on as long as you can, and let Death come when
it will, without being looked for; but I apprehend a great deal of danger in
such deceitful and flattering hopes, and that is the reason why I dissuade you
from it. For,

1. The hope of long life is apt to make us fond of this World, which is as
great a mischief to us, as to expose us to all the temptations and flatteries
of it: That we must die, and leave this World, is a good reason indeed, why we
ought not to be fond of it, why we should live like Pilgrims and Strangers
here, as I observed before: But few men, who hope to live threescore or
fourscore years, think much of this; though it be comparatively short in
respect of Eternity, yet it is a great while to live, and a great while to
enjoy this World in, and that is thought a very valuable happiness, which can
be enjoyed so long; and then men let loose their desires and affections,
endeavor to get as much of this World as they can, and to enjoy as much of it
as they can, and not only to taste, but to take full and plentiful draughts of
the intoxicating Pleasures of it: And how dangerous this is, I need not tell
any man, who considers, that all the wickedness of Mankind, is owing to too
great a fondness and passion for this World.

And therefore if we would live like Pilgrims, and set loose from all the
enjoyments of this World, we must remember, that our stay is uncertain here;
that we have no lease of our lives, but may be turned out of our earthly
Tenements at pleasure: For what man would be fond of laying up great treasures
on Earth, who remembers, That this night his soul may be taken from him, and
then, whose shall all these things be? What man would place his happiness in
such enjoyments, which for ought he knows, he may be taken from to morrow?
These are indeed melancholy and mortifying considerations, and that is the true
use of them; for it is necessary, we should be mortified to this World, to cure
the love of it, and conquer its temptations; For if any man love the world, the
love of the Father is not in him: For all that is in the world, the lusts of
the flesh, the lusts of the eye, and the pride of life, is not of the Father,
but of the world.

2. As the hopes of long life give great advantage to the temptations of this
World, so they weaken the hopes and fears of the other World; they strengthen
our temptations, and weaken us, which must needs be of very fatal consequence
to us in our spiritual Warfare. All that we have to oppose against the
flattering Temptations of this World, are the Hopes and Fears of the World to
come; but the hope of long life sets the next World at too great a distance to
conquer this: what is present, works more powerfully upon our minds, than what
is abfent, and the farther any thing is off, the less powerful it is.

To make you sensible of this, I shall only desire you to remember, what
thoughts you have had of another World, when the present fears of dying have
given you a nearer view of it: Good Lord, what Agonies have I seen dying
Sinners in! how penitent, how devout, how resolved upon a new course of life,
which too often vanish like a Dream, when the fear of Death is over; What is
the reason of this difference? Heaven and Hell is the very same, when we are in
health, as when we are sick; and I will suppose, that you do as firmly believe
a Heaven and a Hell in health, as in sickness; the only thing then, that makes
the thoughts of the other World so strong and powerful and affecting, when we
are sick, is that we see the other World near us, that we are just a stepping
into it, and this makes it our present concernment; but in health, we see the
other World a great way off, and therefore do not think it of such near and
present concernment; and what we do not think ourselves at present concerned
in, or not much concerned in, how great and valuable soever it be in itself,
will either not affect us at all, or very little. Thus while bad men place the
other World at a great distance from them, and out of sight, they have no
restraint at all upon their lusts and passions; and good men themselves at the
greater distance they see the other World, are so much the less affected by it,
which damps their zeal and their devotion, and makes them less active and
vigorous in doing good.

And there is so much the more danger in this, because men look upon the other
World as farthest off, and so are least concerned about it, when the thoughts
of the other World are most useful and most necessary to them: in the heat and
vigor of youth, men are most exposed to the temptations of flesh and sense,
and have most need to think of another World, and a future Judgment; but those
who promise themselves a long life, see Death and another World so far off,
while they are young, that it moves them as little, as if there were no other
World.

And though one would think, that as our lives wast, and the other World grows
near, so we should recover a more lively sense of it, yet we find it quite
otherwise: When men have been used to think the next World a great way off,
they will never think it near, till it comes; and when they have been used to
think of the other World without any passion or concernment for it, it is
almost an impossible thing, to give any quickness and passion to such thoughts;
for when any thoughts, and the passion that properly belongs to such thoughts,
have been a great while separated, it is a hard thing to unite them again; to
begin to think of that with passion and concern, which we have been used for
thirty or forty years to think of without any concernment.

3. Another dangerous effect of flattering ourselves with long life, is, that
it encourages men to sin with the vain hopes and resolutions of repenting
before they die: When men are convinced, that if they live and die in sin, they
must be miserable for ever; as I believe most professed Christians are, as I am
sure all must be, who believe the Gospel of our Savior; there is no other
possible way to ward off this blow, and to sin securely under such Convictions,
but by resolving to repent, and to make their peace with God before they die:
They flatter themselves, they have a great while yet to live, Judgment is a
great way off, and therefore they may indulge themselves a while, and enjoy the
sweets of sin, and gratify their youthful inclinations, and learn the Vanity
of the World by experience, as their Forefathers have done before them, and
then they will grow as wise and grave, and declaim against the Follies and
Vanities of Youth, and be as penitent, and as devout and religious, as any of
them all.

Whoever considers the uncertainty of Humane Life, if he should hear men talk
at this rate, would either conclude, that they were mad, or merrily disposed,
but could never guess, that they were in their wits, and in good earnest too:
but if he will allow men to be in their wits, who can promise themselves long
life, when they see every day, how uncertain life is; (and if we will not allow
such men to be in their wits, above two thirds of the World are mad) this gives
a plain account, how men may resolve to sin, while they are young, and to
repent when they are old: for it is only the flattering hopes of long life,
that can encourage men in a course of sin: Men, indeed, who do not promise
themselves long life, may commit a particular sin, and resolve to repent of it,
as soon as they have done, which are a more modest sort of Sinners, of which
more presently; but I speak now of those (and too many such there are) who
resolve to take their fill of this World, while youth and strength and health
last, and to grow sober and religious, when they grow old; the consequent of
which is, that they resolve to be damned, unless they live till they are old,
or till they grow weary of their sins, and learn more wisdom by age and
experience.

Now I shall not insist at present upon the hazard such men run, of not living
till the time comes, which they have allotted for their repentance, which
belongs to another Argument, but only what a dangerous thing it is to be
tempted to a custom and habit of sinning, by the hope of long life, and of time
enough to repent in; for there is not a greater Cheat in the World, that men
put upon themselves, than to indulge themselves in all manner of Wickednesses,
to contract strong and powerful habits of Vice, with a resolution to repent of
their sins, and to forsake them before they die.

The experience of the World sufficiently proves, how vain this is; for though
some such men may live while they are old, how seldom is it seen, that they
repent of their youthful Debaucheries, when they grow old? They still retain
their love and affection for those sins, which they can commit no longer; and
repent of nothing, but that they are grown old, and cannot be so wicked as they
were, when they were young.

And is there any reason in the World to expect it should be otherwise? Do we
not know, what the power of habit and custom is? how the love of sin increases,
with the repeated commission of it? and is the spending our youthful strength
and vigor in sin, likely to dispose and prepare us to be sincere Penitents,
when we grow old? Do we not see, that a custom of sinning, in some men,
destroys the modesty of humane Nature, in others all sense of God and of
Religion, or of the natural differences of good and evil? Some men sin on till
they despise repentance, others till they think repentance is too late; so that
though men were sure, that they should live long enough to grow wiser, and to
repent and reform the sins and extravagances of youth, yet no man, who enters
upon a wicked course of life, has any reason to expect, that he shall ever
repent: and therefore it is extremely dangerous to flatter ourselves into a
habit and custom of sinning, with the hopes and expectations that we shall live
to repent of our sins; and if this be dangerous, it must be very dangerous to
flatter ourselves with the hopes of long life, which is the great temptation to
men to sin on, and to delay their repentance till old age.

2. Since the time of our Death is so unknown and uncertain to us, we ought
always to live in expectation of it; to be so far from promising ourselves long
life, that we should not promise ourselves a day: And the reason for it is
plain and necessary, because we are not sure of a day.

This you will say is hard indeed, to live always in expectation of dying, which
is no better then dying every day, or enduring the repeated fears and terrors
of Death every day, which is the most uncomfortable part of dying; at this rate
we never live, but instead of dying once, as God has appointed, we are always a
dying: nay, this indeed is a fine saying, but signifies nothing; for no man
does it, nor can do it; though we may die every day, we see that men live on
forty, fifty, threescore years; and therefore though we know, that our lives
are uncertain, yet no man can think every day, that he shall die to day.

This is very true, and therefore to live always in expectation of dying, does
not signify a belief that we shall die to day, but only that we may; which
answers the objection against the uncomfortableness of it; for such an
expectation as this, has nothing of dread and terror in it, but only prudence
and caution. Men may live very comfortably, and enjoy all the innocent
pleasures of life, with these thoughts about them: to expect Death every day,
is like expecting Thieves every night, which does not disturb our rest, but
only makes us lock and bar our Doors, and provide for our own defense: thus to
expect Death, is not to live under the perpetual fears of dying, but to live as
a wise man would do, who knows, not that he must, but that he may die to day.

That is, to be always prepared for Death, not to defer our repentance, and
return to God one moment; not to commit any wilful sin, least Death should
surprise us in it; not to be slothful and negligent, but to be always employed
in our Master's business, according to our Savior's counsel, 12 Luke 35, etc.
Let your loins be girded about, and your lamps burning; and ye yourselves like
unto men, that wait for their Lord, when he will return from the wedding, that
when he comes and knocks, they may open unto him immediately. Blessed are
those servants, whom the Lord when he comes shall find watching. And this
know, that if the good man of the house had known what hour the thief would
come, he would have watched, and not suffered his house to be broken through.
Be ye therefore ready also; for the Son of man comes at an hour when ye think
not. This our Savior also warns us of in the Parable of the wise and foolish
Virgins, 25 Mat. while the Bridegroom tarried they all slept; but the wise
Virgins they presently arose and trimmed their Lamps, and went in with him to
the Marriage, and the door was shut: the foolish Virgins had no Oil, and their
Lamps were gone out, and while they went to buy Oil, they were shut out, and
could afterward procure no admission, Watch therefore, for ye know neither the
day nor the hour, when the Son of man comes.

This is the danger of a sudden Death, and the reason why our Church prays
against it; for were we always in a preparation to die, with our Lamps trimmed
and burning, like Virgins, who expect the Bridegroom, to die then without
notice, without fear and apprehension, without the melancholy solemnities of
dying, were a true (...), the most desirable way of dying; but the danger of a
sudden Death is, that men are surprised in their sins, and hurried away to
Judgment, before their accounts are ready, that they are snatched out of this
World before they have made any provision for the next; and the only way to
prevent this, is to be always upon our watch, always in expectation of Death,
and always prepared for it.

Some men think themselves very safe, if after an age of Sin and Vanity, they
have but so much notice of Death, as to ask God's pardon upon a sick Bed, to
confess and bewail the wickedness of their past lives, to die in horrors and
agonies of mind, which they call repentance, but indeed are nothing else, but
the sad presages of an awakened Conscience, distracted with its own guilt, and
the terrible expectations of vengeance: But though this be a very comfortless
way of dying, and I fear generally very hopeless too; yet no man can promise
himself so much as this, who does not live in a constant expectation of Death.
We may be cut off by a sudden stroke, or seized with distraction or stupidness,
that if only asking God pardon before we die, would save our Souls, we could
not do it: And this is the case of so many Sinners, that it should be a warning
to all: men, who know not when, nor how, or in what manner they must die, ought
to be ready prepared against all accidents and surprising events.

3. Since the time of our Death is so very uncertain, it concerns us to improve
our present time, because no time is ours, but what is present: I observed
before, that the shortness of our lives, though we were to live to the utmost
extent of them, threescore and ten, or fourscore years, was a sufficient reason
to lose none of our time, but to improve it to the best and wisest purposes;
and the surest way to lose none of our time, is to improve the present time;
and there is a plain necessary reason, why we should do that, because our lives
are uncertain, and therefore no time is ours, but what is present. The time
past was ours, but that is gone, and we can never recall it, nor live it over
again; if we have spent it well, we shall find it ours still in our account,
but it is no longer our time to live and act in; the time to come may be ours,
and it may not, because we know not whether we shall live to it, and therefore
we cannot reckon upon it; the time present is ours, and that is the only time
that is ours; and therefore if we will improve our time, we must improve our
present time, we must live to day, and not put off living till to morrow.

All Mankind are sensible of the necessity and prudence of this in all other
matters, excepting the concernments of their Souls: An Epicurean Sensualist is
for the present gratification of his lusts; Vive hodie, is his Motto, Let us
eat and drink, for to morrow we die. Men who are intent upon increasing Riches,
and advancing their Fortune and Honors, are for taking the present time and
opportunity to do it: Indeed, setting aside the consideration of the
uncertainty of our lives, there are some things which a wise man will not
delay, or put off to another time, when he has opportunity to do it at present.

What is necessary to be done, he will do as soon as he can, the very first
moment, that it becomes necessary, if opportunity serves.

What is necessary every day, he will not put off from one day to another, but
will do it every day; as eating and drinking and sleeping are.

What he resolves to do, and may as well do at present, and is as fit to be
done at present, as at any other time, he will do at present.

What may suffer by delays, he will do the first time he can do it.

What is proper for some peculiar times and seasons, he will do, when those
times and seasons come: as the Husbandman observes the seasons for sowing and
reaping; the Tradesman his Markets and Fairs.

What is of present use and convenience to him, what he takes great pleasure
in, or what he mightily longs for and desires, he will by no means delay, but
is for doing it present.

Now all these are very weighty reasons, why we should take care of our Souls,
repent of our Sins, live in the practice of all Christian Graces and Virtues,
and do all the good we can at present, but much more, when we consider, that
our lives are so uncertain, that we may have no other time to do any thing of
this in, but what is present.

For, 1. is any thing of more absolute necessity, than the Salvation of our
Souls? This is that one thing needful; the Salvation of our Souls is needful as
a necessary end; and the practice of true Religion needful as subservient to
that end: If to escape eternal Misery, and to obtain eternal Happiness, be not
necessary, I know not what can make any thing necessary? And if this cannot be
done without the knowledge and practice of true Religion, that is as necessary
as the Salvation of our Souls is: And can any present time, how early soever it
be, be too soon to do that, which is necessary to be done? especially when we
are not sure of any other time to do it in: No time is too soon to do that
which is absolutely necessary; and no wise man will neglect doing that at
present, which unless it be done, he must be miserable for ever; and yet it may
never be done, if it be not done at present.

2. Is not Religion, and the care of our Souls, the work of every day, as much
as eating and drinking to preserve our bodily health and strength is? Must we
not pray to God every day, and make his Laws the rule of our actions every day,
and repent of our sins, and do what good we can every day? And what is the work
of every day, we ought to do every day, though we were secure of living till to
morrow, much more when we know that we may die before another day comes?

3. Do ye not all resolve to repent of your sins, and reform your lives, before
ye die? And is it not as necessary to repent of your sins to day, as ever it
will be? is not to day as proper a time to repent in, as ever you are likely to
have? are you sure of having another day to repent in, if you neglect this?
This may convince any considering man, that no resolutions of repenting
hereafter, can be sincere, because such men resolve indeed to repent, but do
not resolve to do it at such a time when they can do it; that is, the present
time, which alone they are sure of, but put it off till another time, which may
never be theirs:

I grant, men may sincerely resolve to do that hereafter, a month, or half a
year, or a year hence, which they do not think so fitting and convenient to do
at present; but then this is not an absolute resolution to do such a thing; but
a conditional resolution, that they will do it, if they live till such a time,
when it will be convenient to be done.

Consider then, which of these you mean, when you resolve to repent; is it
only a conditional resolution, that you will repent, if you live till such a
time? I grant, there is some sense in this resolution; but I wish you would
consider, what danger there is in it too; for are you contented to be eternally
miserable, if you do not live, till your time of repentance comes? No, this you
tremble at the thoughts of, and resolve to repent, because you resolve not to
be miserable for ever; that is, you absolutely resolve to repent; you are
convinced this is absolutely necessary; it is a work that must be done, and you
are resolved to do it: Consider then, how vain and contradictory this
resolution is, to resolve to repent hereafter; which is an absolute resolution,
with a condition annexed to it, and a very uncertain one too; a resolution
certainly to repent, but not in a certain, but uncertain time; and yet those
who repent, must repent in some time; and Repentance can never be certain, when
the time to repent in, is uncertain. Indeed no resolution is good, which is not
for the present time, when there are no exceptions against doing it at present,
especially when there is such manifest danger in deferring it. To resolve to
repent hereafter, when the present time is the only certain time to repent in,
only signifies, that men are convinced of the necessity of Repentance; but love
their sins so well, that they cannot part with them yet, and therefore, that
they may sin on securely, without the perpetual fears and terrors of another
World, they resolve to repent hereafter. Now though there were no such manifest
danger in a delay, from the uncertainty of our lives, yet let any man judge,
whether such resolutions as these, are ever like to take effect; a resolution
which is owing to a great love to sin, and is intended only to silence men's
guilty fears, and give them a present security in sinning: For this reason they
resolve not to repent now, but to repent hereafter; and if they keep this
resolution, they will never repent, for their hereafter will never come, which
does not signify any set and determined time, but any time which is not
present: The reason why they resolve not to repent to day, will extend to every
day, when it comes; that is, that they love their sins, and are unwilling to
part with them; and the reason why they resolve to repent hereafter, will serve
for all hereafters, but will never serve for any time present, viz. because
they will not repent yet, and yet will flatter themselves into security with
the vain hopes of Repentance: flatter not yourselves then with vain hopes; he
who resolves to repent, but does not resolve to repent presently, though he
knows he is sure of no other time but the present to repent in, does not
sincerely resolve to repent, but only resolves to delay his Repentance.

The like may be said concerning the danger of delays, concerning missing the
proper times and seasons of action, and neglecting that which is of present use
to us, and which we ought above all things to desire, viz. to secure the
happiness of our immortal Souls; but I shall only add this one thing to make
you sensible, what it is to let slip the present time, without improving it to
any wise purposes; that he who loses his present time, loses all the time he
has, all the time that he can call his own; which is the sum of all other
Arguments; that the present time is the only time he has to live in, to repent
in, to serve God, and to do good to men in, to improve his knowledge, and to
exercise his graces, and to prepare himself for a blessed Immortality; which
are the most necessary, the most useful, the most desirable things in the
World; and that which gives the value to time itself, which is valuable only
for the sake of what may be done, and what may be enjoyed in it.

But you will say, at this rate we must spend our whole lives in the Duties of
Religion, in thinking of God, and another World, in acts of Repentance and
Mortification, in Prayer and Fasting, and such like Exercises of Devotion: here
will be no time left for the ordinary Affairs of Life, scarce to eat or drink,
or sleep in, but that they will have some of our time, whether we will or no;
but here is no allowance made for Recreations and Diversions, for the
Conversation of Friends, and innocent Mirth and Pastime, to refresh our wearied
Bodies and Minds; for if we must be so careful to improve our present time to
the best purposes, our present time is our whole time, for we have no time, but
what is present, and as one minute succeeds another, still we must improve it
to the best purposes; that is, we can do but one thing all our lives, and the
best way then would be to turn Hermits, and sequester ourselves from the World
and Humane Conversation.

The answer to this objection will teach us, what it is to improve our present
time, and how it must be done:

Now, 1. I allow the objection so far, that if a man have misspent great part
of his life, have contracted great guilt, and powerful habits of Vice, the
chief, and almost the only thing such a man can do, is to bewail his sins
before God, and with earnest and repeated importunities to beg his Pardon; to
live in a state of Penance and Mortification, to deny himself the pleasures and
comforts of Life, till he has in some measure subdued his love to Sin, and
regained the command and government of his Passions, and has recovered the
peace of his Mind, and some good hopes, that God has forgiven him, and received
him into favor for the sake of Christ: thus he ought to do, and when he is
made thoroughly sensible of his sins, and the danger he is in, he can do no
otherwise: while he is terrified with the fears of Hell, he has little stomach
to the necessary affairs and business of Life, much less to the mirth and
pleasures of it; but this is such an interruption to the ordinary and regular
course of life, as a fit of sickness is, which confines us to our Bed, or to
our Chamber, and makes us incapable of minding any thing, but the recovery of
our health: and when this is the case, then indeed the care of our Souls is the
only necessary business and employment of our time.

2. But when this is not the case, the wise improvement of our present time
does not confine us always to be upon our knees, or doing something which has a
direct and immediate aspect upon God and another World, for the state of this
World will not admit of that: but he imploys his time well, who divides it
among all the affairs and and offices of life, between this World and the next,
and imploys the several portions of his time in things fit and proper for such
a season; who begins and ends the day with adoring his Maker and Redeemer,
blessing him for all his mercies both temporal and spiritual, begging the
pardon of all his sins, the protection of his Providence, the assistance of his
Grace, and then minds his secular affairs, with Justice and Righteousness, eats
and drinks with Sobriety and Temperance, does all good offices for men, as
occasion serves, and if he have any spare time, improves it for the increase of
his knowledge, by reading and meditating on the Scriptures, or other useful
Books, or refreshes himself with the innocent and cheerful conversation of his
Friends, or such other Diversions as are not so much a loss and expense of
time, as a necessary relaxation of the Mind, to recruit our Spirits, and to
make us more fit either for Business or Devotion; but then on days set apart
for the more public and solemn acts of Worship, Religion is his chief
Employment, for that is the proper work of the day, to worship God, and to
examine the state of his own Soul, to learn his Duty more perfectly, and to
affect his mind with such a powerful sense of God and another World, as may arm
him against all Temptations, when he returns to this World again. This is to
improve our present time well, to observe the proper times and seasons of
action, and to do, what is fit and proper for such seasons; never to do any
thing which is evil, and as for the several kinds of good actions, to do what
particular times and seasons require. Thus we may give a good account of our
whole time, even of our most loose and vacant hours; which it becomes us to do,
though we were certain to live many years, but does more nearly concern us,
when our time is so uncertain.

4. Since our lives are so very uncertain, this ought to cure an anxious care
and solicitude for times to come: we may live many years, though our lives are
uncertain; and therefore a provident care becomes us; but we may die also very
quickly, and why then should we disturb ourselves with Tomorrow's cares, much
less with some remoter possibilities? Have thou at any time an ill prospect
before thee of private or public Calamities? Do the Storms gather? are the
Clouds black and lowering, and charged with Thunder, and ready to break over thy
head? Shelter thy self as well as thou can, make all prudent provisions for a
Storm, because thou may live to see it; but be not too much dismayed and
terrified with a Storm at a distance, for thy head may be laid low enough, and
out of its reach, before it breaks; and then all this trouble and perplexity is
in vain. Many such examples have I seen, of men disturbed with ill Presages of
what was coming, which besides that these things did not happen, which they
expected, or were not so black and dismal as their affrighted fancy painted
them, if they had come, they were very safe first, and got out of their way.

I do not intend by this to comfort men against foreseen Evils, that they may
die, before they come; which is a small comfort to most men, when it may be,
Death is the most formidable thing in the Evils they fear; but since our lives
are uncertain, and we may die, and never see the Evils we fear, it is
unreasonable to be as much distracted with them, as if they were present and
certain: The uncertainty of future Events, is one reason why we ought not to be
anxious and solicitous about them, and the uncertainty of our lives is another;
and what is so very uncertain, ought not to be the object of any great concern
or passion.

5. For the same reason we ought not to be greatly afraid of men, nor to put
our trust and confidence in them, because their lives are very uncertain, they
may not be able to hurt us, when we are most apprehensive of danger from them,
nor to help us, when we need them most: This is the Psalmist's argument, 146
Psalm. 3, 4. Put not your trust in princes, nor in the son of man, in whom there
is no help: His breath goes forth, he returns to his earth; in that very day
his thoughts perish. 2 Isai. 22. Cease ye from man whose breath is in his
nostrils; for wherein is he to be accounted of? Men, especially great and
powerful men, may do us a great deal of hurt, and may do us a great deal of
good; and therefore common prudence will teach us by all wise and honest arts
to gain their favor, and to avoid all unreasonable and needless provocations;
but yet at best they are such brittle Creatures, that they can be the objects
only of a subordinate fear or hope; when the fear of man comes in competition
with the fear of God, it is wise counsel which the Prophet Isaiah gives, Say ye
not, A confederacy, to all them to whom this people shall say, A confederacy;
neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid. Sanctify the Lord God of Hosts
himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread: and he shall be
for a sanctuary, 8 Isai. 12, 13, 14. There is a vast difference between the
power of God and men, which is our Savior's reason, why we should fear God
more than men: Be not afraid of them who can kill the body, and after that,
have no more that they can do; but I will forewarn ye, whom ye shall fear, Fear
him which after he has killed, has power to cast into hell; yea, I say unto
you, fear him, 12 Luke 4, 5. But whatever power men may have to hurt, while
they live, they can do us no hurt when they are dead, and their lives are so
very uncertain, that we may be quickly eased of those fears. The same may be
said with respect to hope and confidence in men; though their word and promise
were always sacred, yet their lives are uncertain; Their breath goes forth,
they return to the earth; in that very day their thoughts perish; all the good
and all the evil they intended to do: But happy is he, that has the God of
Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God, which made heaven and
earth, the sea, and all that therein is, who keeps truth for ever, 146 Psalm.
5. 6.

6. For a conclusion of this Argument, I shall briefly vindicate the wisdom and
goodness of God, in concealing from us the time of our Death: This we are very
apt to complain of, that our lives are so very uncertain, that we know not to
day, but that we may die to morrow; and we would be mighty glad to meet with
any one who could certainly inform us in this matter, how long we are to live:
but if we think a little better of it, we shall be of another mind.

For, 1. though I presume many of you would be glad to know, that you shall
certainly live twenty or thirty or forty years longer, yet would it be any
comfort to know, that you must die to morrow, or some few months, or a year or
two hence? which may be your case for ought you know; and this I believe you
are not very desirous to know; for how would this chill your blood and spirits?
how would it overcast all the pleasures and comforts of life? You would spend
your days like men under the sentence of Death, while the execution is
suspended.

Did all men, who must die young, certainly know it, it would destroy the
industry and improvements of half Mankind, which would half destroy the World,
or be an insupportable mischief to Humane Societies: For what man who knows
that he must die at twenty or five and twenty, a little sooner or later, would
trouble himself with ingenious or gainful Arts, or concern himself any more
with this World, than just to live so long in it? and yet how necessary is the
service of such men in the World? what great things do they many times do? and
what great improvements do they make? how pleasant and diverting is their
conversation, while it is innocent? how do they enjoy themselves, and give life
and spirit to the graver Age? how thin would our Schools, our Shops, our
Universities, and all places of Education be, did they know how little time
many of them were to live in the World? for would such men concern themselves
to learn the Arts of living, who must die as soon as they have learnt them?
Would any Father be at a great expense in educating his Child, only that he
might die with a little Latin and Greek, Logic and Philosophy? No: half the
World must be divided into Cloisters, and Nunneries, and Nurseries for the
Grave.

Well, you will say, suppose that; and is not this an advantage above all the
inconveniences, you can think of, to secure the salvation of so many
thousands, who are now eternally ruined by youthful Lusts and Vanities, but
would spend their days in Piety and Devotion, and make the next World their
only care, if they knew, how little while they were to live here?

Right! I grant, this might be a good way to correct the heat and
extravagancies of Youth; and so it would be to show them Heaven and Hell; but
God does not think fit to do either, because it offers too much force and
violence to men's minds; it is no trial of their virtue, of their reverence for
God, of their conquests and victory over this World by the power of Faith, but
makes Religion a matter of necessity, not of choice; now God will force and
drive no man to Heaven; the Gospel Dispensation is the trial and discipline of
ingenuous Spirits; and if the certain hopes and fears of another World, and the
uncertainty of our living here, will not conquer these flattering temptations,
and make men seriously religious, as those who must certainly die, and go into
another World, and they know not how soon, God will not try, whether the
certain knowledge of the time of their death, will make them religious: That
they may die young, and that thousands do so, is reason enough to engage young
men to expect death, and prepare for it; if they will venture, they must take
their chance, and not say they had no warning of dying young, if they eternally
miscarry by their wilful delays.

And besides this, God expects our youthful service and obedience, though we
were to live on till old Age: that we may die young, is not the proper, much
less the only reason, why we should remember our Creator in the days of our
youth, but because God has a right to our youthful strength and vigor; and if
this will not oblige us to an early Piety, we must not expect that God will set
death in our view, to fright and terrify us; as if the only design God had in
requiring our obedience, was not that we might live like reasonable Creatures,
to the glory of their Maker and Redeemer, but that we might repent of our sins
time enough to escape Hell. God is so merciful, as to accept of returning
Prodigals, but does not think fit to encourage us in Sin, by giving us notice,
when we shall die, and when it is time to think of repentance.

2dly, Though I doubt not, but that it would be a great pleasure to you to
know, that you shall live till old Age; yet consider a little with yourselves,
and then tell me, whether you yourselves can judge it wise and fitting for God
to let you know this.

I observed to you before, what danger there is in flattering ourselves with
the hopes of long life, that it is apt to make us too fond of this World, when
we expect to live so long in it; that it weakens the hopes and fears of the
next World, by removing it at too great a distance from us; that it encourages
men to live in sin, because they have time enough before them to indulge their
Lusts, and to repent of their Sins, and make their Peace with God before they
die; and if the uncertain hopes of this undoes so many men, what would the
certain knowledge of it do? Those who are too wise and considerate to be
imposed on by such uncertain hopes, might be conquered by the certain knowledge
of a long life:

This would take off all restraints from men, and give free scope to their
vicious inclinations, when they know, that how wicked soever they were, they
should not die before their time was come, and could never be surpiz'd by
Death, since they certainly knew when it will come; which destroys one great
motive to Obedience, that Sin shall shorten Men's lives, and that Virtue and
Piety shall prolong them; That the wicked shall not live out half their days;
that the fear of the Lord prolongeth days, but the years of the wicked shall be
shortened, 10 Prove. 27. Such promises and threatenings as these, must be struck
out of the Bible, should God let all men know the time of their death:

Nay, this would frustrate the methods and designs of Providence for the
reclaiming Sinners: some times public Calamities, Plague, and Famine, and
Sword, alarm a wicked World, and summon Men to repentance; sometimes a
dangerous fit of Sickness awakens Men into a sense of their sins, and works in
them a true and lasting repentance; but all this would be ineffectual, did Men
know the time of their death, and that such public Judgments, or threatening
Sickness, should not kill them.

The uncertainty of our Lives, is a great motive to constant Watchfulness, to
an early and persevering Piety; but to know when we shall die, could serve no
good end, but would increase the wickedness of Mankind, which is too great
already; which is a sufficient Vindication of the Wisdom of God, in leaving the
time of Death unknown and uncertain to us.

SECT. VII. That we must Die but once, or that Death translates us to an
unchangable State, with the Improvement of it.
THe last thing to be considered is, That we must die but once; It is appointed
for men once to die: There are some exceptions from this Rule, as there are
from dying; that as Enoch and Elias did not die, so some have been raised again
from the Dead, to live in this World, and such men died twice: But this is a
certain Rule in general, That as all men must die once, so they must die but
once; which needs no other proof, but the daily experience and observation of
Mankind.

But that which I intend by it is this: That once dying, determines our state
and condition for ever; when we put off these mortal Bodies, we must not return
into them again, to act over a new part in this World, and to correct the
errors and miscarriages of our former lives; Death translates us to an
immutable and unchangeable state; that in this sense, what the wise man tells
us is true, If the tree fall toward the south, or toward the north, in the
place where the tree falls, there it shall be, 11 Eccles. 3. This is a
consideration of very great moment, and deserves to be more particularly
explained, which I shall do in these following Propositions:

1. That this life is the only state of trial and probation for Eternity: And
therefore, 2. Death when ever it comes, as it puts a final period to this life,
that we die once for all, and must never live again, as we do now in this
World, so it puts a final end to our work too, that our day of grace, and time
of working for another World ends with this life: And 3dly, As a necessary
consequence of both these, once dying puts us into an immutable and
unchangeable state.

1. That this life only is our state of trial and probation for Eternity;
whatever is to be done by us, to obtain the favor of God, and a blessed
Immortality, must be done in this life.

I observed before, that this life is wholly in order to the next; that the
great, the only necessary, business we have to do in this World, is to fit and
prepare ourselves to live for ever in GOD's presence; To finish the work GOD
has given us to do, that we may receive the reward of good and faithful
Servants, to enter into our Master's rest; I now add, that the only time we
have to do this in, is while we live in this World: This is evident from what
S. Paul tells us, That we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ,
that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he
has done, whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5. 10. Now if we must be judged,
and receive our final sentence according to what we have done in the body, then
our only time of trial and working is, while we live in these Bodies; for the
future Judgment relates only to what is done in the Body.

The Gospel of Christ is the Rule, whereby we must be judged, even that Gospel
which St. Paul preached, 2 Romans 16. and all the Laws and Precepts of the Gospel
concern the government of our Conversation in this World; and therefore if we
be judged by the Gospel, we must be judged only for what we have done in this
World.

This life, throughout the Scripture, is represented as the time of working; as
a Race, a Warfare, a laboring in the Vineyard; the other World, as a place of
Recompense, of Rewards, or punishments: and if there be such a relation between
this World and the next, as between fighting and conquering, and receiving the
Crown, as between running a race and obtaining a prize, as between the work and
the reward; then we must fight and conquer, run our race, and finish our work
in this World, if we expect the Rewards of the next.

Many of those Graces and Virtues, which our Savior has promised to reward
with eternal Life, can be exercised only in this World: Faith and Hope are
peculiar only to this Life, while the other World is absent and unseen: And
these are the great Principles and Graces of the Christian Life, to believe
what we do not see, and to live and act upon the hopes of future Rewards; the
government of our bodily appetites and passions, by the rules of Temperance,
Sobriety, and Chastity, necessarily supposes, that we have Bodies, and bodily
Appetites and Passions to govern; and therefore these Virtues can be exercised
only while we live in these Bodies, which solicit and tempt us to sensual
Excesses. To live above this World, to despise the tempting Glories of it, is a
Virtue only while we live in it, and are tempted by it; to have our
Conversation in Heaven, which is the most divine temper of Mind, is a
Gospel Grace, only while we live in this World, at a great distance from
Heaven; to be contented in all Conditions, to trust God in the greatest
Dangers, to suffer patiently for Righteousness sake, etc. I need not tell you,
are Virtues proper only for this World, for there can be no exercise for them
in Heaven, unless we can think it a Virtue to be patient and contented with the
Happiness and glory of that blessed Place.

Thus most of the Sins, which the Gospel forbids under the penalty of eternal
Damnation, can be committed by us only in this World, and in these Bodies, such
as Fornication, Adultery, Uncleanness, Rioting, Drunkenness, Injustice, Murder,
Theft, Oppression of the Poor and Fatherless, Earthly Pride and Ambition,
Covetuousness, a fond Idolatry of this World, Disobedience to Parents and
Governors, etc. now if these be the things, for which men shall be saved or
damned, it is certain, that men must be saved or damned only for what they do
in this Life.

Bad men, who are fond of this World, and of bodily Pleasures, which makes them
impatient of the severe restraints of Religion, complain very much of this,
that their eternal Happiness or Misery depends upon such a short and uncertain
Life; that they must spend this Life under the awe and terror of the next;
that some few momentary Pleasures must be punished with endless Misery; and
that if they out-slip their time of Repentance, if they venture to sin on too
long, or die a little too soon, there is no remedy for them for ever.

But let bad men look to this, and consider the folly of their Choice; I am
sure, how hard soever it may be thought, to be eternally damned for the short
pleasures of Sin, no man can reasonably think it a hard condition of eternal
Salvation, to spend a short Life in the Service of God: And if we will allow,
that God may justly require our Service and Obedience for so great a Reward as
Heaven is, where can we do him this Service, but on Earth? If a corrupt Nature
must be cleansed and purified, if an earthly Nature must be spiritualized and
refined, before it can be fit to live in Heaven, where can this be done, but on
Earth, while we live in these Bodies of flesh, and are encompassed with
sensible Objects? This is the time for a Divine Soul, which aspires after
Immortality, to raise itself above the Body, to conquer this present World, by
the belief and hope of unseen things, to awaken and exercise its spiritual
Powers and Faculties, and to adorn itself with those Graces and Virtues, which
come down from Heaven, and by the Mercies of God, and the Merits of our
Savior, will carry us up thither. There is no middle State, between living in
this Body, and out of it, and therefore whatever habits and dispositions of
Mind are necessary to make a Spirit happy, when it goes out of this Body, must
be formed and exercised while it is in it; Earth and Heaven are two extremes,
and opposite states of Life, and therefore it is impossible immediately to pass
from one to the other; a Soul, which is wholly sensualiz'd by living in the Body,
if it be turned out of the Body without any change, cannot ascend into Heaven,
which is a state of perfect Purity; for in all reason, the place and state of
life must be fitted to the nature of things; and therefore a life of Holiness,
while we live in these Bodies, is a kind of a middle State, between Earth and
Heaven; such a man belongs to both Worlds; he is united to this World by his
Body, which is made of Earth, and feels the impression of sensible Objects, but
his Heart and Affections are in Heaven; by Faith he contemplates those
invisible Glories, and feels and relishes the pleasures of a heavenly Life; and
he who has his conversation in Heaven, while he lives in this body, is ready
prepared and fitted to ascend thither, when he goes out of it: he passes from
Earth to Heaven, through the middle region (if I may so speak) of a holy and
divine Life.

Besides this, it was necessary to the happiness and good Government of this
present World, that future Rewards or Punishments should have relation to the
good or evil, which we do in this Life. This in many cases lays restraints upon
the lusts and passions of men, when the Rods and Axes of Princes cannot reach
them; it over-awes them with invisible terrors, and makes a guilty Conscience
its own Judge and Tormenter; it sowers all the pleasures of sin, stuffs the
Adulterer's Pillow with Thorns, and mingles Gall and Wormwood with the
Drunkard's Cups; it governs those, who are under no other government, whose
boundless and uncontrollable power gives them opportunity of doing what
mischief they please, and gives them impunity in doing it: but the most lawless
Tyrants, who fear no other Power, yet feel the invisible restraints of
Conscience, and those secret and severe rebukes, which make them tremble: Nay,
many times the fear of the other World governs those, whom no present Evils or
Punishments could govern: men who would venture whatever they could suffer in
this life by their sins, are yet afraid of Hell, and dare not venture that:
those who would venture being sick after a Debauch, who would venture to
sacrifice their Bodies, their Estates, their Reputation, in the service of
their Lusts, who are contented to take their fortune at the Gallows, or at the
Whipping-post, yet dare not venture Lakes of Fire and Brimstone, the Worm that
never dies, and the Fire that never goes out.

Thus on the other hand, How much is it for the present Happiness of the World,
that Men should live in the practice of those Christian Graces and Virtues,
which no Humane Laws command, and the neglect of which no Humane Laws will
punish? As to instance only in the love of Enemies, and forgiveness of
Injuries, and such an universal Charity, as does all the good it can to all
Men. I need not prove, that the exercise of these Virtues is for the good of
the World, or that no Humane Laws require the exercise of them, in such noble
measures and degrees, as the Gospel does.

The Laws of the Land allow scope enough, to satisfy the most revengful Man,
who will use all the extremities, and all the vexatious arts of Prosecution,
unless nothing will satisfy his revenge, but blood, and a speedy execution;
for the Laws ought to punish those Injuries which a good Christian ought to
forgive; and then some Men may be undone by legal Revenge, and others damned
for taking it. If no Man should do any good Offices* for others, but what the
Law commands, there would be very little good done in the World; for Laws are
principally intended for the preservation of Justice, but the acts of a
generous and bountiful Charity, are free: and Men may be as charitable, as the
Law requires, without any degree of that divine Charity, which will carry them
to Heaven. Nothing, but the hopes and fears of the next World, can enforce
these Duties on us; and this justifies the wisdom and goodness of God, in
making the present exercise of these Virtues necessary to our future Rewards. I
shall only add, that whatever complaints bad Men may make, that their future
Happiness or Misery depends upon the government and conduct of their Lives, in
this World, I am sure, all Mankind would have had great reason to complain, if
it had been otherwise: For how miserable must it have made us, to have
certainly known, that we must be eternally happy, or eternally miserable in the
next World, and not to have as certainly known how to escape the Miseries and
obtain the Hap^iness of it? And how could that be possibly known, if the trial
of it had been reserved for an unknown state? What a terrible thing had it been
to die, could no Man have been sure, what would have become of him in the next
World, as no Man could have been upon this supposal; for how can any Man know
what his reward shall be, when he is so far from having done his work, that he
knows not what he is to do, till he comes into the next World.

But now since we shall be rewarded according to what we have done in this
Body, every Man certainly knows, what will make him happy or miserable in the
next World, and it is his own fault, if he do not live so as to secure immortal
Life; and what a blessed state is this, to have so joyful a prospect beyond the
Grave, and to put off these Bodies with the certain hopes of a glorious
Resurrection! This, I think, is sufficient to vindicate the wisdom and goodness
of God, in making this present Life a state of trial and probation for the
happiness of the next. But to proceed:

2. If this Life only be our state of trial and probation for Eternity, then
Death, as it puts a final period to this Life, so it puts a final end to our
work too; our day of Grace, and time of Working for another World, ends with
this Life.

We shall easily apprehend the necessity of this, if we remember, that Death,
which is the punishment of Sin, is not merely the death of the Body, but that
state of Misery, to which Death translates Sinners: and therefore if we die,
while we are in a state of Sin, under the Curse, and under the power of Death,
there is no Redemption for us, because the Justice of God has already seized
us; the Sentence is already executed, and that is too late to obtain a Pardon:
for in this case Death answers to our casting into Prison, from whence we shall
never come forth, till we have paid the uttermost Farthing, as our Savior
represents it, 5 Matt. 25, 26: for indeed Sin is the death of the Soul; and
those who are under the power of Sin, are in a state of Death, and if they die,
before they have a principle of a new Life in them, they fall under the power
of Death, that is, into that state of Misery and Punishment, which is appointed
for such dead Souls: and therefore our redemption from Death, by Christ is
begun in our dying to Sin, and walking in newness of Life, which is our
conformity to the Death, and the Resurrection of Christ, 6 Romans 4. This is to
be dead to sin, and to be alive to GOD, as Christ is; and if we die with
Christ, we shall rise with him also into immortal Life, which is begun in this
World, and will be perfected in the next, which is the sum of St. Paul's
argument, v. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. thus he tells us, 8 Romans 10, 11. If Christ be
in you, the body is dead, because of sin, but the spirit is life, because of
righteousness; That is, our Bodies are mortal, and must die, by an irreversible
Sentence, which God pronounced against Adam, when he had sinned; but the Soul
and Spirit has a new principle of Life, a principle of Righteousness and
Holiness, by which it lives to God, and therefore cannot fall into a state of
Death, when the Body dies; But if the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from
the dead, dwell in you; he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also
quicken your mortal bodies, by his spirit that dwells in you: That is, when
the divine Spirit has quickened our Souls, and raised them into a new Life,
though our Bodies must die, yet the same divine Spirit will raise them up also
into immortal Life.

This is the plain account of the matter: If Death arrests us while we are in a
state of Sin and Death, we must die for ever; but if our Souls are alive to
God, by a principle of Grace and Holiness, before our Bodies die, they must
live for ever: A dead Soul must die with its Body; that is, sink into a state
of Misery, which is the death, and the loss of the Soul: a living Soul survives
the Body in a state of Bliss and Happiness, and shall receive its Body again,
glorious and immortal, at the Resurrection of the Just: but this change of
state must be made while we live in these Bodies; a dead Soul cannot revive in
the other World, nor a living Soul die there; and therefore this Life is the
day of God's Grace and Patience, the next World is the place of Judgment. And
the reason St. Peter gives, why God is not hasty in executing judgment, but is
long suffering to us ward, is because he is not willing, that any should
perish, but that all should come to repentance, 2 Pet. 3. 5. Hence the Apostle
to the Hebrews exhorts them, Wherefore as the Holy Ghost says, To day if ye
will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, in the day
of temptation in the wilderness, when your fathers tempted me, proved me, and
saw my works forty years: Wherefore I was grieved with that generation, and
said, They do always err in their hearts; and they have not known my ways. So I
swear in my wrath, they shall not enter into my rest.

There is some dispute, what is meant by to day, whether it be the day of this
Life, or such a fixed and determined day and season of Grace, as may end long
before this Life: The example of the Israelites, of whom God swear in his
wrath, that they should die in the Wilderness, and never enter into his Rest,
that is, into the Land of Canaan, seems to incline it to the latter sense; for
this sentence, That they should not enter into his Rest, was pronounced against
them long before they died; for which reason they wandered forty Years in the
Wilderness, till all that Generation of Men were dead: and if we are concerned
in this example, then we also may provoke God to such a degree, that he may
pronounce the final sentence on us, That we shall never enter into Heaven, long
before we leave this World: Our day of Grace may have a shorter period than our
Lives, and we may wander about in this World, as the Israelites did in the
Wilderness, under an irreversible doom and sentence. And the scope of the
Apostle's argument seems to require this sense, which is to engage them to a
speedy repentance, To day if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts:
But why to day? is it because our Lives are uncertain, and we may die before to
morrow? No; but lest we provoke GOD to swear in his wrath, that we shall not
enter into his rest.

All Men know, that if they die in a state of Sin, they must be miserable for
ever; and this is a reason to repent before they die: But the Apostle seems to
argue farther, that by their delays, and repeated provocations, they may tempt
God to shorten their day of Grace, and pronounce an irrevocable Sentence on
them, which leaves no place for Repentance; which else - where he inforces from
the example of Esau, who sold his Birthright, 12 Heb. 15, 16, 17. v. Looking
diligently, lest any man fail of the grace of God; lest any root of bitterness
springing up, trouble you, and thereby many be desiled: Lest there be any
fornicator, or profane person, as Esau, who for one morsel of meat sold his
birthright. For ye know how that afterward when he would have inherited the
blessing, he was rejected: for he found no place of repentance, though he
sought it carefully with tears?

The stating of this matter may be thought a Digression from my present Design,
but indeed it is not; for if by to day, be meant the whole time of this Life,
that proves, that Death puts a final period to our day of Grace; and if any
shorter period than this Life be meant by it, it proves it much stronger; for
if our sentence be passed before we die, it will not be revoked after death.
But the stating this Question, is a matter of so great consequence to us, that
if it were a Digression, it were very pardonable: for many devout Minds, when
they are disturbed and clouded with melancholy, are afflied with such thoughts
as these, That their day of Grace is past, that God has sworn in his wrath,
that they shall not enter into his Rest; and therefore their repentance and
tears will be as fruitless as Esau's were, which could not obtain the Blessing.

Now for the resolving this Question, I shall say these three things: 1. That
the Day of Grace, according to the terms of the Gospel, is commensurate with
our Lives. 2. That notwithstanding this, Men may shorten their own Day of
Grace, and God may in wrath and justice confirm the Sentence. 3. That the
reasons for lengthning the Day of Grace, together with our Lives, do not extend
to the other World, and therefore Death must put a final period to it.

1. That the Day of Grace, according to the Terms of the Gospel, is
commensurate with our Lives; and there needs no other proof of this, but that
the promise of Pardon and Forgiveness is made to all true Penitents, without
any limitation of time: Whoever believes in Christ, and repents of his sins, he
shall be saved; this is the Doctrine of the Gospel: And if this be true, then
it is certain, that at what time soever a Sinner sincerely repents of his
sins, he shall be saved; for otherwise some true and sincere Penitents, if they
repent too late, after the day of Grace is expired, shall be damned, and then
it is not true, that all sincere Penitents shall be saved.

I know but one Objection against this, from the example of Esau, who having
sold his Birthright, when afterward he would have inherited the blessing, was
rejected; for he found no place for repentance, though he sought it carefully
with tears. It seems then, that Esau repented too late, and so may we; his
repentance would not be accepted: And if we are concerned in this example, as
the Apostle intimates we are, then we may repent of our sins when it is too
late, and lose the Blessing as Esau did.

But this Objection is founded on a mistake of Esau's case; the Repentance here
mentioned, is not Esau's Repentance, but Isaac's; that is, when Isaac had
blessed Jacob, Esau with all his tears and importunity, could not make him
recall it; i. e. Isaac would not repent of the blessing he had given to Jacob, I
have blessed him, yea and he shall be blessed, 27 Genesis 33.

Esau's case then was not, that his Repentance came too late to be accepted,
but that he could not obtain the Blessing, after he had sold his Birthright,
to which the Blessing was annexed. Now to apply this to the state of
Christians, that which answers to Esau's Birthright, is their right and title
to future Glory, being made the Sons of God by baptismal Regeneration, and
Faith in Christ; to sell this Birthright, is to part with our hopes of Heaven,
for the pleasures, or riches, or honors of this World, as Esau sold his
Birthright for one morsel of Meat; that is, as the Apostle speaks, to fail of
the grace of God, either through Unbelief, which he calls the root of
bitterness, a renouncing the Faith of Christ, and returning to Judaism, or
Pagan Idolatries, or by an impure and wicked Life, Lest there be any
fornicater, or profane person, as Esau, who for one morsel of meat sold his
birthright; i. e. who despises the hopes of Heaven, for the sinful pleasures
and transient enjoyments of this World: Men, who thus fail of the grace of God,
and finally do so, as Esau finally sold his Birthright, when our heavenly
Father comes to give his Blessing, those great rewards he has promised in his
Gospel, how importunate soever they shall then be for a Blessing, as Esau was,
who sought it carefully with tears, they shall find no place for repentance;
God will not alter his purposes and decrees for their sakes. Our Savior has
given us a plain Comment on this, 7 Mat. 21, 22, 23. Not every one that says
unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven: but he that does
the will of my Father which is in heaven. Many will say unto me at that day,
that is, the Day of Judgment, when the Blessing is to be given, Lord, Lord,
have we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy name cast out devils? and in thy
name done many wonderful works? Here is Esau's Importunity for the Blessing.
And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you: depart from me ye that
work iniquity. They were profane Esau's, who had sold their Birthright for a
morsel of Meat, and now they found no place for Repentance: our Lord will not
be persuaded by all their importunities to alter his Sentence, But depart from
me ye that work iniquity.

This example then of Esau does not concern our present case; it does not
prove, that a wicked Man, who has spent the greatest part of his Life in sin
and folly, shall not be accepted and rewarded by God, if he sincerely repent of
his sins, and reform his life; but it only proves, that a wicked and ungodly
Christian who prefers the pleasures and enjoyments of this World, before the
hopes of Heaven, and defiles his Soul with impure and worldly Lusts, what
pretenses soever he may make to the Blessing, or how importunate soever he may
be for it, shall receive no Blessing from God; that is, that without holiness
no man shall see God, which is the very thing the Apostle intended to prove by
this example, as you may see, v. 14.

I grant the case is different, as to Churches and Nations; sometimes their day
of Grace is fixed and determined, beyond which without Repentance, they shall no
longer enjoy the light of the Gospel. Thus the appearance of Christ in the
Flesh, and his preaching the Gospel to them, was the last trial of Jerusalem,
and determined the fate of that beloved City: and therefore when Christ rode
into Jerusalem, in order to his Crucifixion, When he was come near, he beheld
the city, and wept over it, Saying, if thou had known, even thou, at least in
this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace! but now they are hid from
thine eyes. For the days shall come upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast a
trench about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side; and
shall lay thee even with the ground, and thy children within thee; and they
shall not leave in thee one stone upon another: because thou knew not the
time of thy visitation, 19 Luke 41, etc. And this our Savior warned them of
before, 12 Joh. 35, 36. Yet a little is the light with you: walk while ye have
the light, lest darkness come upon you: for he that walks in darkness,
knows not whither he goes. While ye have light, believe in the light, that
ye may be the children of light: Which signifies, that unless they believed on
him, while he was with them, they must be utterly destroyed, The kingdom of God
should be taken from them, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits
thereof; as he proves by the Parable of the Householder who planted a Vineyard,
21 Mat. 33, etc.

And this was in some measure the case of the seven Churches of Asia, to whom
St. John directed his Epistles, to summon them to repentance, and to threaten
them with the removal of the Candlestick, if they did not repent. The judgments
of God in the overthrow of some flourishing Churches, and in transplanting the
Gospel from one Nation to another, are very mysterious and unsearchable; but as
for particular persons, who enjoy the light of the Gospel, unless they shorten
their day of Grace themselves, God does not shorten it: as long as they live in
this World, they are capable of Grace and Mercy, if they truly repent.

2. Men may shorten their own Day of Grace; not by shortning the time of Grace
and Mercy, for that lasts as long as this Life does; but by out-living the
possibility of Repentance, and when they are past Repentance, their Day of
Grace is at an end, and this may be much shorter than their lives: that is, Men
may so harden themselves in sin, as to make their Repentance morally
impossible, and God in his just and righteous Judgments may give up such Men to
a state of Hardness and Impenitence.

Every degree of love to Sin, proportionably enslaves Men to the practice of
it; makes repentance as uneasy and difficult, as it is to pluck out a right
eye, and cut off a right hand, 5 Mat. 29, 30; as painful as dying, as
crucifying the flesh with its affections and lusts, which few Men will submit
to, 8 Romans 13. 3 Col. 5.

An habit and custom of sin turns into nature, and is as difficultly altered as
nature is; Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his spots? then
may you also do good, who are accustomed to do evil, 13 Jer. 23.

Some sins are of such a hardening nature, that few men, who are once entangled
by them, can ever break the snare; such as Adultery, or the love of strange
Women; of whom Solomon tells us, Her house inclines unto death, and her paths
unto the dead; none that go unto her return again, neither take they See 5
Prove. 22, 23. 7. 22, 23, 26, 27.
hold of the paths of life, 2 Prove. 18, 19.

Covetuousness is such another hardening sin, that our Savior tells us, It is
easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to
enter into heaven; those who love, and those who trust in their riches, 10
Matthew. 23, 24, 25.

Those who have been once enlightened, and fall back again into Infidelity; who
have been instructed in the reasons of Faith, and the motives of Obedience; who
have had the heavenly Seed of God's Word sown in their hearts, but have not
brought forth the Fruits of it, are near the Curse of barren Ground, which
drinks in the Dews and Rain of Heaven, and brings forth briars and thorns,
which is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burnt, 6 Heb.
4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

When Men obstinately resist the perpetual motions and solicitations of the
holy Spirit, he withdraws from them, and gives them up to their own counsels,
as we leave off persuading those who will not be persuaded.

And when the spirit of God forsakes such Men, the evil Spirit seizes them,
that Spirit which rules in the Children of Disobedience, 2 Ephesians. 3. for the
World is divided into the Kingdom of Darkness and the Kingdom of Light, 1 Col.
13; and those who are not under the government of the Divine Spirit, are led
captive by the Devil at his will, 2 Timothy 2. 6: and therefore our Savior has
taught us to pray to be delivered from Evil, (...), from the Evil One, that is,
from the Devil: for that is a hopeless state, when God gives us up to the
government of evil Spirits: Nay, when Men harden themselves in sin, they are
rejected by the good Providence of God, which secures good Men from, or
delivers them out of Temptations, as our Savior has taught us to pray, Lead us
not into temptation; as a Father keeps a watchful eye over a dutiful Child, to
preserve him from any harm, and to choose the most proper condition and
circumstances of life for him, but suffers a Prodigal to go where he pleases,
and undo himself as fast as he can. And whoever considers the weakness and
folly of humane Nature, and the power of Temptations, must needs conclude that
Man given up to ruin, who is rejected by the good Spirit of God, and cast out
of the care of his Providence.

Into this miserable state Men may bring themselves by sin, which though it
does not make them incapable of Mercy, if they do repent, yet it makes it
morally impossible, that they should repent. It is this the Apostle to the
Hebrews warns them against, from the example of the Hardness and Infidelity of
the Israelites in the Wilderness, of whom God swear, that they should not enter
into his rest; as appears from the application he himself makes of it, 3 Heb.
12, 13. Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief, in departing from the living God: But exhort one another daily, while
it is called, To day; lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of
sin.

This is a plain account of that great Question, concerning the length of the
Day of Grace: Men may outlive the time of Repentance, may so harden themselves
in sin, as to make their Repentance morally impossible; but they cannot
outlive the Mercies of God to true Penitents: This is reason enough to
discourage Men from delaying their Repentance, and indulging themselves in a
vicious course of Life, Lest they should be hardened by the deceitfulness of
sin, and should be forsaken by God; but it is no reason to discourage true
Penitents from trusting in the Mercy of God, how late soever their Repentance
be; for while we live in this World, the door of Grace and Mercy is not shut
against true Penitents.

3. But yet the reasons of lengthning the Day of Grace and Mercy, do not reach
beyond this Life: This sufficiently appears from what I have already said; and
for a further confirmation of it, I shall add but this one comprehensive
Reason, viz. That the Grace of the Gospel is confined to the Church on Earth;
and therefore this Life is the only time to obtain the remission of our Sins,
and a title to future Glory: We shall be finally absolved from all our Sins,
and rewarded with eternal Life at the Day of Judgment; but we must sue out our
Pardon, and make our Calling and Election sure in this World.

The Gospel of Christ, which is the Gospel of Grace, and contains the promises
of Pardon and immortal Life, is preached only to Men on Earth, and concerns
none else.

For this reason Christ became Man, clothed with flesh and blood as we are,
that he might be the Savior of Mankind; which he need not have done, had not
their Salvation been to be wrought in this World; for could they have been
saved in the next, his Grace might have met them soon enough there: and
therefore, at the birth of our Savior, the Angels sang, Glory be to God in the
highest, on earth peace, good will toward men, 2 Luke 14.

The Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, (as all Jewish Sacrifices, which were
Types of the Sacrifice of the Cross, were) was offered for the expiation of the
Sins of living Men, or at least considered as living, not of the dead.

He carried his blood into Heaven, as the High Priest did the blood of the
Sacrifice into the Holy of Holies) there to make expiation, and to interceed
for us; but this Intercession, though made in Heaven, relates only to Men on
Earth, as his Sacrifice did: The earthly Tabernacle was a Type of the Church on
Earth, and that only, and the Worshippers in it, was expiated by Sacrifices.

There are two Sacraments whereby the Grace of the Gospel is applied to us, and
which are the ordinary means of Salvation, Baptism and the Lord's Supper, and
they are confined to the Church on Earth, and if they have not their effect
here, they cannot have it in the next World: These unite us to Christ, as
Members of his Body, and then the holy Spirit, which animates the Body of
Christ, takes possession of us, renews and sanctifies us; but if we prove dead
and barren Branches in this spiritual Vine, if the Censures of the Church do
not cut us off from the Body of Christ, Death will, and then we can never be
reunited to him, nor saved by him in the next World. Faith in Christ, and
Repentance from dead Works, are the great Gospel-terms of Pardon and Salvation,
and these are confined to this World: there may be something like them in the
next World; such a Faith as makes the Devils tremble; such a Repentance as is
nothing else but despairing Agonies, and a hopeless and tormenting Remorse; but
such a Faith as purifies the heart, as conquers this present World, as brings
forth the fruits of Righteousness; such a Repentance as reforms our Lives, as
undoes all our past Sins, as redresses the Injuries we have done to our
Neighbors, and the Scandal we have given to the World; such a Faith, and such
a Repentance, which alone are the true Christian Graces of Faith and
Repentance, are proper only for this Life, and can be exercised only in this
Life, while we have this World to conquer, and the Flesh to subdue to the
Spirit, while we can restore our ill-gotten Riches, and set a visible Example
of Piety and Virtue.

From hence it is very evident, that no Man, who dies in a state of Sin and
Impenitence, can be saved by Christ, and by the Grace of the Gospel in the next
World, for the whole ministration of Gospel Grace is confined to this Life, and
if they cannot be saved by Christ, I know no other Name, whereby they can be
saved: And thus Death puts an end to all the flattering hopes of Sinners.

3. Now if this Life be our only state of trial and probation for Eternity; if
Death puts a final end to our Day of Grace and time of Working, then Death must
translate us to an immutable and unchangeable state. By this I do not mean,
that as soon as we go out of these Bodies, our Souls will immediately be as
happy or miserable, as ever they shall be; the perfect rewards of good Men are
reserved for the Day of Judgment, as the final punishments of bad Men are; when
our Lord shall say to those on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world: And to
them on the left hand, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the
Devil and his angels, 25 Mat. 34, 41.

But though the Happiness or Miseries of the next World may increase, yet the
state can never alter; that is, if we die in a state of Grace and Favor with
God, we shall always continue so; if we die in a state of Sin, under the wrath
and displeasure of God, there is no altering our state in the other World; we
must abide under his wrath for ever. This is the necessary consequence of what
I have already said, which all aimed at this point, that once dying puts us
into an immutable and unchangeable state: and therefore I shall wave any
further proof of this, and only desire you seriously to consider of it.

1. Now first, since Death puts an end to our Day of Grace, and determines our
final State for ever, and this Death comes but once, all Men must confess of
what mighty consequence it is to die well, that Death find us well disposed and
well prepared for another World. Men use their utmost prudence and caution in
doing that, which can be done but once for their whole lives, especially if the
happiness of their whole lives depends on it; for no error can be corrected in
what is to be done but once; and certainly we have much more reason to prepare
to die once, which translates us to an immutable state of Happiness or Misery.
This ought to be the work and business of our whole lives, to prepare for
Death, which comes but once, but that once is for Eternity: What unpardonable
folly is it, for any Man to be surprised by Death! to fall into the Grave
without thinking of it! To commit a mistake, which may be retrieved again, to
be guilty of some neglect and inadvertency, when the hurt we suffer by it, may
be repaired by future diligence and caution, is much more excusable, because it
is not so fatal and irreparable a folly: In this case experience may teach
wisdom, and wisdom is a good purchase, though we may pay dear for it: but a
wise Man will use great caution in making an experiment, which if it fail, will
cost him his life, because that can never be tried a second time; and
experience is of no use in such things, as can be done but once.

And this is the case of dying; we can die but once, and if we miscarry that
once, we are undone for ever: And what considering Man would make such
dangerous experiments, as Sinnres do every day, when their Souls are the price
of the experiment! Who would try, how long Death will delay its coming? how
long he may sin on safely, without thinking of Death or Judgment? whether Death
will give him timely notice to repent? or whether God will give him grace to
repent, if it does? Who would venture the infinite hazards of a
Deathbed-repentance? whether after a long life of sin and wickedness, a few
distracted, confused, and almost despairing sighs and groans will carry him to
Heaven? If such bold Adventurers as these, when they have discovered their
mistake and folly, could return back into this World, and live over their lives
again, the hazard were not so great; but this is an experiment not to be twice
made: If they sin on, till they harden themselves in sin, and are forsaken of
the Grace of God; if Death comes long before they expected, and cut them off by
surprise, and without warning; if their dying and despairing Agonies and
Horrors should not prove a true godly Sorrow, not that repentance to salvation
never to be repented of, they are lost to Eternity: And what wise Man would
expose his Soul to such a hazard as this? Who would not take care to make his
Calling and Election sure, before Death comes, and in a matter of such infinite
concernment, wherein one miscarriage is irreparable, to prevent danger at a
distance?

2dly, We hence learn, how necessary it is for those who begin well, to
persevere unto the end: It is the conclusion of our lives, which determines our
future state; as God expressly tells us by his Prophet Ezekiel, 18 Ezekiel. 21, 24.
If the wicked will turn from all his sins, that he has committed, and keep my
statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall
not die: all his transgressions that he has committed, they shall not be
mentioned unto him; in his righteousness that he has done, he shall live. --
But when the righteous turns away from his righteousness, and commits
iniquity, and does according to all the abominations that the wicked man does,
shall he live? all the righteousness that he has done shall not be mentioned;
in his trespass that he has trespassed, and in his sin that he has sinned, in
them shall he die. And throughout the New Testament the reward is promised only
to those who continue to the end. And what I have now discoursed, gives a plain
account of this; for our whole life is a state of trial and probation, and if
we leave off before our work be done, if we stop or run backwards, before we
come to the end of our race, we must lose our reward, our crown: the Christian
Life is a state of Warfare, and we know the last Battle gives the final
Conquest: and this cannot be otherwise, because what comes last, undoes what
went before; when a wicked Man turns from his wickedness, and does good, God in
infinite Mercy, through the Merits and Mediation of Christ, will forgive his
sins, because he has put them away from him, and undone them by repentance and
a new life; when a righteous Man turns from his righteousness, and does
wickedly, his righteousness shall be forgotten, because he has renounced it,
and parted with it, and is a righteous Man no longer: Now when God comes to
judge the World, he will judge Men as he then finds them; he will not inquire
what they have been, but what they are; he will not condemn a righteous Man,
because he has been wicked, nor justify a wicked Man, because he has been
righteous; for this would be to punish the Righteous, and to reward the Wicked:
Such as we are, when we die, such we shall continue for ever; and therefore it
is the last scene of our lives, which determines our future state.

And should not this make us very jealous and watchful over ourselves? To take
heed, lest there be in any of us an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from
the living GOD. Looking diligently, 3 Heb. 12.
lest any man fail of the grace of GOD; lest any root of bitterness springing
up, trouble you, and thereby many be defiled: lest after we have escaped the
pollutions 12 Heb. 15.
of the world, through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, we
are again entangled therein, and overcome, and it happen to us according to the
true proverb, The dog is turned to his vomit again; and the sow that was
washed, to 2 Pet. 2. 20, 21, 22.
her wallowing in the mire. This, as the same Apostle tells us, makes our
latter end worse than the beginning; for it had been better for us not to have
known the way of righteousness, than after we have known it, to turn from the
holy commandment delivered to us.

Let those consider this, who have been blessed with a religious Education, and
trained up in the exercises of Piety and Virtue; who have preserved themselves
from the pollutions of youthful Lusts, and spent their vigorous age in the
service of God; Can you be contented to lose all these hopeful beginnings? to
lose all your triumphs and victories over the World and the Flesh? When you
have out-rid all the storms and hurricanes of a tempting World for so many
Years, will you suffer yourselves to be shipwracked in the Haven? When you are
come within view of the promised Land, will you suffer your hearts then to fail
you? will you then murmur and rebel against God, and die in the Wilderness?

There has been a very warm Dispute about the Perseverance of Saints, Whether
those who are once in a state of Grace, shall always continue so? I will not
undertake to decide this Controversy; but thus much I will say, (and that I
think is all that is needful for a Christian to know about it) That to be in a
state of Grace, is to have an inward principle of Holiness, which brings forth
the fruits of a holy Life; that to persevere in a state of Grace, is to
persevere in the practice of Holiness and Virtue; that many who have begun
well, and have thought themselves, and have been thought by others, to be truly
good Men, have afterward been overcome by the Temptations of the World, and
defiled themselves with the impure Lusts of it; that if such Men ever were good
Men, and in a state of Grace, they fall from Grace when they forsake the paths
of Holiness; and that those who do thus fall away, who after promising
beginnings, do all the abominations of the Wicked, and live and die in such a
state, shall never enter into Heaven: We shall receive our final Doom and
Sentence according to that state and condition in which Death finds us: What is
said upon another account, that we must call no Man happy before death, is true
in this sense; no Man is a Conqueror, but he who dies so: Those Men deceive
themselves, who confidently pretend to be still in a state of Grace and Favor
with God, because formerly they were good Men, though now they are grown very
bad: this is to persevere in a state of Favor with God, without persevering in
Holiness, which overthrows the Gospel of our Savior, and will miserably
deceive those Men, who have no better foundation for their hopes.

3. We hence learn, how dangerous it is to die in the actual commission of any
known and wilful sin: Such Men go into the other World, and go to Judgment
with actual guilt upon them, they die in their sins; for they could not repent
of them before they died, because they died in the commission of them, and
there is no repentance, and therefore no pardon in the next World. This has
been, and very often is, the miserable, and I fear the hopeless state of a
great many Sinners: How many are there, who not only drink themselves into a
Feavour, which takes some time to kill them, and gives them some time to repent
of their sins, and to ask God's pardon, but drink themselves dead, or which is
much at one, as to this case, drink away their reason and senses, and then fall
from their Horses, or down a Precipiece, and perish by some evil accident; or
when they are inflamed with Wine, forget their old friendships, and fall by
each others hands? How many others have perished in the very act of Adultery,
or which is much the same, in quarrelling for a Strumpet, in the rage and fury
of Lust? How many die in the very act of Theft and Robbery? All such Men
receive the present punishment of their sins in this World, and carry the
unrepented guilt of them into the next; and if Men shall be damned, who die in
their sins without repentance, such Men's condition is desperate. And this may
be the case of any Man who ventures upon a wilful sin; he may die in the very
act of it, and then his repentance will come too late in the next World: and
this so often happens, that no wise Man would venture his Soul upon it.

But there are two Sins especially, which this consideration should deter Men
from, viz. Duelling and Self-murder.

When Men have such a resentment of Affronts and Injuries, as to revenge
themselves with their Swords, and either to thirst after each others blood, or
at least to stake their lives, and to venture killing or being killed, to
decide the Quarrel: these Men have the hearts of Murderers, who would kill if
they could; or at least will venture killing their Brother to appease their
resentments or revenge, which is a mortal and a murdering revenge, whether it
murder or not; and therefore if such Men fall in the quarrel, as many do,
without time to ask God's pardon with their last breath, they die under the
guilt of Murder unrepented of; though they do not kill, but are killed, yet
they die with murderous intentions, with a mortal hatred and revenge, for they
would have killed, if they could: and St. John tells us, He that hates his
brother, is a murderer; and we know that no murderer has eternal life abiding
in him, 1 John 3. 15. So that these Duellers do not only venture their Lives,
but their Souls too, if they fall in the quarrel: and how little soever they
value their Lives, it is a little too much to pawn their Souls upon a point of
Honor.

As for Self-murder, if we will allow it to be a Sin, it is certain that no Man
who commits it, can repent of it in this World, and there is no pardon for sins
in the next World, which are not repented of in this. And yet why we should not
think it as great a sin to murder ourselves, as to murder our Brother, I cannot
imagine, for it has all the marks of a very great sin upon it.

It is as much Murder to kill ourselves, as it is to kill another Man; and
therefore it is a breach of the sixth Commandment, Thou shall not kill: The
reason against Murder is the same, For in the image of GOD made he man, 9 Genesis
6; and he who kills himself destroys God's Image, as much as he who kills
another Man. The more unnatural the sin is, or the greater obligations we have
to preserve the life of the person whom we kill, the greater the sin is: to
murder a kind Friend, and a Benefactor, is a greater evil than to murder a
Stranger; to murder a Parent or a Child, a Wife or a Husband, is still a
greater evil, because they are so much nearer ourselves; and if the nearness of
the relation increases the sin, no body is so near to us as our selves, and
therefore there is no such unnatural Murder as this.

The excuses which are made for Selfmurder, will not justify the Murder of any
other Man in the World: Though we should see a Friend whom we love like
ourselves, laboring under intolerable pains, or insupportable misfortunes and
calamities of life, though he should importune and beseech us to put an end to
his sufferings, by putting an end to a miserable life; though out of great
kindness and compassion we heartily desire to follow him to his Grave, yet we
must not kill him; neither the Laws of God nor Man will allow this: And yet if
Selflove be the measure of our love to other Men, and will justify
Self-murder, when we are grown weary of life, when we either despise the World,
or think it best to make our escape out of it, I cannot imagine, why we may not
do the same kindness for a Friend or a Brother, when he desires it, as we may
do for ourselves; the reason is the same in both, and if it will not justify
both, it can justify neither.

For there is no foundation, that I know of, for what some pretend, that God
has given us greater power over our own lives, than over other Men's: We find no
such power given us in Scripture, which is the only revelation of God's will;
and I am sure Nature teaches us no such thing; nay, Nature teaches the quite
contrary; the natural aversions to Death, and the natural principle of
Self-preservation, were not only intended to make us cautious of any hurt or
mischief, which other Men may do us, but to make us careful to do no hurt to,
much less to destroy ourselves; and therefore the voice of Nature is, That we
must preserve our own lives and being.

When God made us, he did not make us the absolute Lords and Masters of our
selves; we cannot dispose of ourselves as we please, but are his Creatures and
Subjects, and must receive Laws from him, and that in such instances, wherein
the injury is done only to ourselves: We must not abuse our own Bodies by
Intemperance and Luxury, or Lust, though neither the Public, nor any private
persons are injured by it; and if we have not power over our own Bodies in
lesser instances, much less to kill them.

And if it be a sin to destroy our own lives, it is the most mortal and damning
sin, for it destroys Soul and Body together, because it makes our repentance
impossible, unless Men can repent of their sin, and obtain God's pardon for it,
before they have committed it, or can repent and obtain their pardon in the
next World. Did Men seriously consider this, it is impossible, that the
greatest shame and infamy, want or suffering, or whatever it is, that makes
them weary of life, should be thought so intolerable, as to make them force
their passage into the other World, to escape it, when such a violent and
unnatural escape will cost them their Souls: Men may be in such evil
circumstances as make death desirable; but no considering Man will exchange the
sufferings of this life, for the endless miseries of the next: If we cannot
destroy our Lives, and put an end to our present sufferings, without destroying
our Souls too, we must be contented to live on, and bear our lot patiently in
this World, which, whatever it is, is much more easy and tolerable than to be
eternally miserable.

And yet God forbid, that I should pronounce a final and peremptory Sentence
upon all those unfortunate persons who have died by their own hands: We know
not what allowances God may make for some Men's opinion of the lawfulness of it;
and for the distraction of other Men's thoughts and passions through a settled
melancholy, or some violent temptation: My business is not to limit the
Sovereign and Prerogative Grace of God, but to declare the nature of the thing
according to the Terms of the Gospel: To Murder ourselves, is the most
unnatural Murder; it is a damning Sin, and such a sin as no Man can repent of
in this World, and therefore unless God forgive it without repentance, it can
never be forgiven; and the Gospel of Christ gives us no commission to preach
Forgiveness of Sin, without Repentance; the Gospel Grace, which only forgives
Penitents, cannot save such Men; and he is a very bold Man, and ventures very
far upon unpromised and uncovenanted Mercy, who will commit a sin, which the
Grace of the Gospel cannot pardon.

All that I have to add under this Head, is the case of those who die in
despair of God's Mercy: This is commonly thought a very hopeless state; for to
despair of the mercy of God, is a great sin, and therefore such Men die in the
actual commission of sin unrepented of; and Bystanders are apt to suspect
their despair to be little better than their final doom and sentence; and yet
many times we see Men laboring under despair in their last Agonies, who have
to all outward appearance lived very innocent and virtuous lives; and it is
hard to judge so severely of them, as to think they were secret Hypocrites, and
that God has finally rejected them, because they pass such a severe judgment
upon themselves.

Now I confess, despair is as uncomfortable a state as any Man can die in; but
I cannot think it so fatal and dangerous as some imagine; for let us consider,
what the nature of Despair is, and wherein the sinfulness of it consists.

To disbelieve the Promises of Grace and Mercy, made to true penitent Sinners
by Jesus Christ, is Infidelity, not Despair: and this indeed is a great and
unpardonable sin, for it is to renounce the Faith of Christ, and the Grace of
the Gospel; but this is not what we commonly call Despair: Such men believe the
Gospel of Christ, and all the Promises of it, as firmly as others do; they do
not doubt but God will forgive all true Penitents, through the Merits and
Mediation of Jesus Christ; and therefore are as true and sincere Believers, as
those who do not despair; but their despair is in the application of these
Promises to themselves; that is, they fear that they are not within the Terms
and Conditions of Gospel Grace; that they are not true Penitents; that their
Day of Grace is expired, and now they shall not receive the Blessing, though,
as Esau did, they seek it earnestly with tears; or it may be, that they are
Reprobates who have no right to the Promises of the Gospel.

Now if these Men may upon all other accounts be very good Christians, but are
either oppressed with melancholy, or disturbed with false and mistaken notions
of Religion, can we think that their melancholy or mistakes, which make them
pass so false a judgment upon themselves, shall make God condemn them too, who
knows them better than they know themselves? Should a Man, who has a delirous
fancy, accuse himself of Theft, or Murder, or Treason, which he was never
guilty of; would a just and righteous Judge, who certainly knows, that he is
not gulty of these crimes, condemn him, only because he condemns himself?
Suppose a Man, who is in the right way to Heaven, should be persuaded by some
Travelers he meets, that he has mistaken his way; and upon this he should fall
into great horrors and agonies, and give himself for lost; is this Man ever the
further off of Heaven, because he is persuaded that he has mistaken the way?

The false judgments dying Men make of themselves, either through Enthusiasm,
Presumption, or Despair, shall not determine their final State: Men may go to
Hell with all the triumphs of a deluded fancy, which promises nothing less than
eternal Glories; and those who go trembling out of this World, may find
themselves happily mistaken in the next. It is a wrong notion of justifying
Faith, which makes Men conclude Despair to be so damning and unpardonable a
Sin: if justifying Faith were nothing else but a strong belief and persuasion,
that we are justified, there were good reason to conclude Despair to be a
mortal Sin, because it is a direct contradiction to justifying Faith: nay, if
the justifying act of Faith were an actual reliance and recumbency on Christ
for Salvation, Despair must be very mortal, because while Men are under these
Agonies, they do not, they cannot rely on Christ for Salvation; for they
believe, that Christ has cast them off, and will not save them: but if to
believe in Christ, that he is the Savior of the World, that he has made
expiation for our Sins, and intercedes for us at the right hand of God, and is
able to save to the uttermost all those that come unto God by him; that he will
save all true penitent Sinners, and will save us, if we be true Penitents; I
say, if such a Faith as this, when it brings forth the genuine fruits of
Repentance, and a holy Life, be a true justifing Faith, this is consistent with
the blackest Despair; and then Men may be in a justified state, though they are
never so strongly persuaded, that they are Reprobates: A very good Man may have
his fancy disturbed, and may pass a false judgment upon himself; but this is no
reason for God to condemn him, no more than God will justify a presuming and
enthusiastic Hypocrite, because he justifies himself.

4. If Death put a final end to our Work and Labor, and shuts up our Accounts,
then it concerns us to do all the good that we can, while we live: What ever
our hand finds to do, we should do it with all our might, seeing there is no
wisdom, nor knowledge, nor working in the grave, whither we are hasting. Not
that the next World is an idle and unactive State, where we shall know nothing,
and have nothing to do; but Death puts an end to our working for the other
World: nothing can be brought to our account at the Day of Judgment, but the
good we do while we live here; for this only we shall receive our reward,
proportionable to the increase and wise improvement of our Talents.

And is not this a good reason why we should begin to serve God betimes, and to
take all opportunities of doing good, since we have only a short life to work
in for Eternity. There are great and glorious rewards prepared for good Men,
but those shall have the brightest Crown, who do the most good in the World;
who are rich in good works, and lay up for themselves treasures in heaven.

Indeed the meanest place in Heaven is a happiness too great for us to
conceive, I Am sure much greater than our greatest deserts; but since our
bountiful Lord will reward all the good service we do, why should we neglect
doing any good, when such neglects will lessen our reward? why should we be
contented to lose any degrees of Glory? This is a holy Ambition, to be as good,
and to be as happy as God can make us.

This is never thought of by those Men who have no greater designs than to
escape Hell; but as for the Glories of Heaven, they can be contented with the
least share of them. No Man will ever get to Heaven, who so despises the
Glories of it: and if a late repentance should open our eyes, not only to see
our sins, but to alter our opinions of this World and of the next, yet we can
never recall our past time, and that little time that remains, which is the very
dregs and sediment of our lives, the dead and unactive Scene, will minister
very few opportunities of doing good, and if it did, we are capable of doing
very little, and if we get to Heaven, that will be all; but the bright and
triumphant Crowns shall be bestowed upon those who have improved their time and
their talents better.

It is the good we do, while we live, that shall be rewarded; and therefore we
must take care to do good while we live: It is well when Men who do no good
while they live, will remember to do some good when they die. But if God should
accept such presents as these, yet it will make great abatements in the
account, that they kept their Riches themselves as long as they could, and
would part with nothing to God, till they could keep it no longer: it is not
the Gift, but the mind of the Giver that is accepted. Under the Gospel God is
pleased with a living Sacrifice; but the Offerings of the Dead (and such these
Testimentary Charities are, which are intended to have no effect as long as we
live,) are no better than dead Sacrifices; and it may be questioned, whether
they will be brought into the account of our lives, if we did no good while we
lived: The case is different as to those who did all the good they could, while
they lived, and when they saw they could live no longer, took care to do good
after death; such surviving Charities as these prolong our lives, and add daily
to our account; when such Men are removed into the other World, they are doing
good in this would still; they have a Stock a going below, the increase and
improvements of which will follow them into the other World: Men who have been
charitable all their lives, may prolong their Charity after death, and this
will be brought to the Account of their Lives; but I cannot see, how a Charity,
which commences after death, can be called doing good while we live; and then
it cannot belong to the Account of our Lives: all that can be said for it is
this: That they make their Wills, whereby they bequeath these Charities, while
they live, and therefore their bequeathing these Charities is an act of their
Lives; but they never intend they shall take place while they live, but after
their death: and when they never intend their Charity to be an act of their
Lives, I know not why God should account it so. These Deathbed Charities are
too like a Deathbed Repentance; Men seem to give their Estates to God and the
Poor, just as they part with their Sins, when they can keep them no longer:
This is much such a Charity, as it is Devotion to bequeath our dead Bodies to
the Church or Chancel, which we would never visit while we lived.

But yet, as I have already intimated, this is the only way to prolong our
Lives, and to have an increasing Account after death, to lay the foundations of
some great good to the World, which shall out live us; which like Seed sown in
the Earth, shall spring up, and yield a plentiful Harvest, while we sleep
sweetly in the dust; such as, the religious Education of our Children and
Families, which may propagate itself in the World, and last many* Ages after we
are dead; the Endowment of Public Schools and Hospitals; in a word, whatever
is for the Relief of the Necessities, or for the Instruction and good
Government of Mankind, when we are gone: To do good while we live, and to lay
designs of great good to future Generations, will both come into our Account;
and this may extend the Account of our Lives, much beyond the short Period of
them in this World.

5. If Death puts an end to our Account, methinks a Dying-bed is a little of
the latest to begin it; for this is to begin just where we must end. The
Account of our Lives, is the Account of the Good or Evil we have done while we
lived: And what account can a dying Man give of this, who has spent his whole
life in sin and wickedness? If he must be judged according to what he has done
in the Body, how sad is his account, and how impossible is it for him to mend
it now? For when he is just a dying, it is too late for him to begin to live:
If without holiness no man shall see God, how hopeless is his condition, who
has lived a wicked and profligate life all his days, and is now past living,
and therefore past living a holy life? A Man who is confined to a sick and
dying Bed, is incapable of exercising the virtues of life; his time of work is
over, almost as perfectly over as if he were dead; and therefore his account is
finished, and he must expect his reward according to what he has already done.

No, you will say, he may still repent of his sins, and a true Penitent shall
find mercy even at his last gasp. Now I readily grant, that all true Penitents
shall be saved, whenever they truly repent; but it is hard to think, that any
dying sorrows, or the dying vows and resolutions of Sinners, shall be accepted
by GOD for true repentance: The mistakes of this matter are very fatal, and
therefore I shall briefly explain it.

In expounding the Promises of the Gospel, we must take care to reconcile the
Gospel to itself, and not make one part of it contradict or overthrow another:
now as the Gospel promises pardon of sin to true Repentance, so it makes
Holiness of life as necessary a condition of Salvation, as true Repentance:
Without holiness no man shall see GOD. 12 Heb. 14.
GOD will render to every man according to his deeds: To them who by patient
continuance in well doing, seek for glory, and honor, and immortality, eternal
life: but unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey
unrighteousness, 2 Romans 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man, that
does evil; -- but glory, honor, and peace, to every man that works good. Be
not deceived, GOD is not mocked; for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he
also reap: for he that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption;
but he that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit 6 Gal. 7, 8.
reap life everlasting. The Promises of forgiveness to Repentance, are not more
express than these Texts are, which declare, that we shall be rewarded
according to our works; and we have as much reason to believe the one as the
other; and if we believe the Gospel, we must believe them both; and then
Repentance and a holy Life are both necessary to Salvation: and then the dying
sorrows of Sinners, who have lived very wicked lives, and are past mending them
now, cannot be true saving Repentance. If sorrow for sin, without a holy life,
can carry Men to Heaven, then I Am sure Holiness is not necessary, then Men may
see God without Holiness; and then the promises of pardon to Repentance (if
this dying Sorrow be true Repentance) overthrows the necessity of a holy Life;
the necessity of a holy Life, contradicts the promises of pardon to such
Penitents, and then either one or both of them must be false.

To state this Matter plainly, and in a few words, we must distinguish between
two kinds of Repentance: 1. The Baptismal Repentance. 2. Repentance upon a
Relapse, or falling into any known and wilful Sin.

I. By Baptismal Repentance I mean, that Repentance which is necessary in adult
persons, in order to their receiving Christian Baptism: this is the Repentance
which is most frequently mentioned in the New Testament, and to which the
promise of Remission and Forgiveness is annexed; this our Savior preached,
Repent for the kingdom of heaven is at hand, 4 Matthew. 17. This he gave
authority to his Apostles to preach, That repentance and remission of sins,
should be preached in his Name among all nations, 24 Luke 47. Now this
Repentance, both as to Jews and Heathens, who embraced the Faith of Christ, was
a renouncing all their former Sins, and false, superstitious, or idolatrous
Worship; and this qualified them for Baptism, in which they obtained the
remission of all their Sins in the Name of Christ; and for this reason
remission of Sins is promised to Repentance, because all such Penitents are
received to Baptism, which is the washing of Regeneration, which washes away
all their Sins, and puts them into a state of Grace and Favor with God; as St.
Peter tells the Jews, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the Name of
Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, 2 Acts 38. And much to the same
purpose Ananias told St. Paul, Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins,
calling on the Name of the Lord, 22 Acts 16. And I know not any one. Text in
the New Testament, wherein the remission of Sins is absolutely promised to
Repentance, but what must be understood of this Baptismal Repentance; and then
Repentance and Remission of Sin are inseparably annexed, because such Penitents
wash away all their Sins in Baptism; and come pure and undefiled out of that
mystical Fountain, which is set open for Sin and for Uncleanness to wash in,
and to be clean.

Now I grant, should any person who comes to Baptism rightly qualified and
disposed, with a sincere Repentance and steadfast Faith in Christ, die soon
after he is baptized, before he has time and opportunity to exercise any of the
Graces of the Christian Life, such a Man shall go to Heaven without actual
Holiness; the remission of his Sins in Baptism, upon his Repentance, will save
him, though he have not time to bring forth the fruits of Repentance in a holy
Life; and this is the only case I know of, wherein a Penitent can be saved
without actual Holiness, viz. by Baptismal Grace and Regeneration. Only the
Primitive Church, and I think with very good reason, allowed the same to
Martyrdom, when it prevented the Baptism of young Converts, as we know under
the Pagan Persecutions, young Converts who made bold confessions of their Faith
in Christ, were hurried away to Martyrdom, before they had opportunity of being
baptized; but such Men were baptized in their own Blood, and that supplied the
want of Water Baptism, which they could not have: Now in this case also, if
Martyrdom be instead of Baptism, as the Primitive Church thought it, then had
any Heathen been converted from a lewd and profligate life, to the Faith of
Christ, and been immediately apprehended, and halled to Martyrdom, before he
could either be baptized, or give any other testimony of the reformation of his
Life and Manners, but by dying a Martyr, this Man also would go to Heaven
without actual Holiness of Life, as a baptized Penitent, who dies immediately
after his Baptism, shall.

And this seems to me, to give the best account of the case of the Penitent
Thief upon the Cross, which one example has encouraged so many Sinners to delay
their Repentance to the last minute, and has destroyed so many Souls by such
delays. His case seems to be this: It is probable, he had heard of Christ, and
the fame of his great Miracles before, and that opinion some had of him, that
he was that Messiah whom God had promised to send into the World; for we can
hardly think, that any Man, who lived in those days, should never have heard of
Christ, whose fame went through the whole Nation: but yet the course of life
this Thief lead, gave him no great curiosity to inquire into such matters, till
he was apprehended for Robbery, and condemned to die at the same time with
Christ; this extraordinary accident made him more curiously inquire after him,
and learn all the circumstances of his apprehension, and trial, and usage, and
behavior, and answers, especially when he saw him, and was to die with him;
and in short, he observed so much as convinced him, that he was the true
Messiah, though he saw him nailed in so shameful a manner to the Cross.

Now if this was his case, (and we must suppose this, or something like it,
unless we will say, that he was miraculously inspired upon the Cross, with the
Faith of Christ, without knowing any thing of him before, which has no
foundation in the Story, and is without any president or example; I say, if
this was his case,) according to the principles laid down, we must grant, that
if this Thief had renounced his wicked course of Life, and professed his Faith
in Christ, and been baptized in his Name, though he had immediately suffered
upon the Cross, he must have gone directly to Heaven or Paradise, as Christ
promised him he should, by virtue of the remission of all his sins in Baptism:
Nay, we must grant farther, that if instead of Baptism, he had at that time
died a Martyr for the profession of his Faith in Christ; this would have
supplied the place of Baptism, and translated him to Paradise: All then that we
have to enquire is, whether his Confession of Christ upon the Cross, might not
as well supply the want of Waterbaptism, as Martyrdom; nay, whether it were not
equivalent to Martyrdom it self, and might not reasonably be accepted by our
Savior as such. Water Baptism he could not have, a Martyr he could not die,
for he died a Malefactor, but he confessed his Faith in Christ, when he saw him
hanging upon the Cross, which was a more glorious Act of Faith, than to have
died upon the Cross for him: He confessed Christ when his own Disciples fled
from him, and when Peter himself denied him, and discovered his glory through
the meanest disguise, that ever it was concealed under even in this World; And
why should not this pass for the Faith and Confession of Martyrdom? And then
the Thief upon the Cross was saved as by Baptism; which is, No tthe putting
away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward
GOD, 1 Pet. 3. 21. Which description of Baptism, gives us a plain reason, why
Martyrdom should supply the place of Baptism; and is as good a reason, why the
Thief's Confession of Christ upon the Cross, should do so.

This example then of the Thief upon the Cross, is no reasonable encouragement
to any baptized Christian, to live a wicked Life, and delay his Repentance till
the hour of Death, in hopes of being saved at last, as he was; for he was
saved, as new repenting Converts are, by Baptism, not as baptized Sinners hope
to be, by a Deathbed Sorrow, and Remorse of Concience.

And yet this is the only example, which with any show of reason is alleged to
prove the sufficiency of a Deathbed Repentance; for the Parable of the
Laborers, who were called to work in the Vineyard at different hours, some
early in the morning, others at the 20 Mat. 1, etc.
third, the sixth, the eleventh hour of the day, is nothing at all to this
purpose: The several hours of the day in that Parable, do not signify the
several hours of Men's lives, but the different ages of the World; and therefore
those Laborers, who are called into the Vineyard about the eleventh hour of
the World, that is, toward the end, or in the last age of the World, might be
called at the beginning of their lives, and work on to the end of them: for the
design of that Parable is to show, that the Gentiles, who were called into the
Vineyard, or received into the Church of Christ toward the conclusion of the
World, should be admitted to equal Privileges and Rewards with the Jews, who
were God's ancient People, and had been called into the Vineyard early in the
morning, which occasioned their murmuring against the good Man of the House; as
we know the Jews murmured upon this account; and nothing more prejudiced them
against the Gospel of our Savior, than that the Gentiles were received into
the Church without Circumcision. The same thing our Savior represents in the
Parable of the Prodigal: the return of the Prodigal to his Father's House, is
15 Luke 11, etc.
the Conversion of the Gentiles, who were the younger Brother, and had been a
great Prodigal for many Ages: the elder Brother, who always lived at home with
his Father, was the Jewish Church; but when this young Prodigal was received by
his Father with Feasting, and Music, and all the expressions of Joy; the elder
Brother grew jealous of it, and thought himself much injured by his Father's
fondness for the returning Prodigal, and refused to come in, and bear his part
in the Solemnity; as the Jews rejected the Gospel, because the Gentiles were
received into the Church.

And that this must be the true meaning of the Parable of the Laborers,
appears from this, that those who were called into the Vineyard at the
eleventh hour, received a reward equal to those who had born the heat and
burden of the day; which is agreeable enough, if we expound it of different
Ages of the Church, for there is great reason, why the Gentiles, though they
came later into the Vineyard, should be made at least equal with the Jews, who
were God's ancient People: but if we expound this of entering into the Vineyard
at different ages of our life, it seems very unequal, that those who begin a
life of Virtue just at the conclusion of their lives, should be equally
rewarded with those who have spent their whole lives in the service of God;
that is, that these who do very little good, shall receive as great a reward as
those who do a hundred times as much; which is a direct contradiction to the
scope and design of our Savior's Parables about the Pounds and Talents, 25
Matt. 14, etc. 19 Luke 12* etc.

But suppose it were to be understood, not of the Jewish and Christian Church,
but of particular Christians, yet their being called to work in the Vineyard,
at what hour soever it was, though the eleventh hour, was their first admission
into the Christian Church, their first conversion to the Faith of Christ, and
from this time they labored in the Vineyard, lived a holy and religious life;
and I readily grant, should a Jew, a Turk, or a Pagan, be converted to
Christianity in the eleventh hour, in his declining Age, and from that time
live in obedience to the Gospel of Christ, there is no doubt but he shall be
greatly rewarded: But what is this to any of us, who were born of Christian
Parents, baptized in our very Infancy, instructed in the Christian Religion
from the very beginning, and have always professed the Faith of Christ, but
lived like Pagans and Infidels! We were not called into the Vineyard at the
eleventh hour, but early in the morning; and though Men who were called at the
last hour, shall be rewarded for that hours work; this does not prove, that
Men, who enter into the Vineyard in the morning, and play or riot away their
time till the eleventh hour, shall receive a day's wages for an hour's work.

But suppose this too, yet it will not answer the case of a Deathbed
Repentance; such Men delay not till the eleventh hour, but till night comes,
when they can do no work at all; whereas those who came last into the Vineyard,
wrought an hour; now that God in infinite grace and goodness will reward Men
for one hour's work, does not prove, that he will reward those who do no work,
but spend their whole day idly or wickedly, and only ask his pardon for not
working at night.

II. But what a fatal Cheat these Men put upon themselves, will better appear,
if we consider the second kind of Repentance, which is Repentance after
Baptism, when Men have relapsed into the commission of new Sins, after they
have washed away all their old Sins in the laver of Regeneration; which is the
only Notion of Repentance concerned in this Question; for such Sinners, when
they come to die, are to repent of a whole Life spent in wickedness, after
Baptism; and this extremely alters the Case, for though Faith and Repentance,
(as that Repentance signifies a sorrow for past Sins, and the purposes and
resolutions of a new life) be the only Conditions of Baptismal Remission and
Justification; yet when we are baptized, we then Covenant with God for an
actual obedience and holiness of Life; To deny all ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world: and
therefore mere Repentance, or a sorrow for Sin, with the most solemn
Resolutions and Vows of a new life (which is all the Repentance dying Men can
have) cannot according to the Terms of the Gospel be accepted instead of the
obedience and holiness of our lives. Had the Gospel said, you shall either
abstain from all sin, and do good while you live, or repent of all your sins,
when you die; this had been a sufficient encouragement for a Deathbed
Repentance; but when holiness of life is made the necessary condition of seeing
God, and the wrath of God 1 Romans 18.
is revealed from heaven against all unrighteousness and ungodliness of men;
when we are so expressly forewarned, That the unrighteous shall not inherit the
kingdom of GOD: be not deceived, neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor
aduliers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with 1 Cor. 6, 9, 10.
mankind, nor thieves, nor covetuous, nor drunkards, nor extortioners, shall
inherit the kingdom of GOD: When our Savior expressly tells us, That it is only
the doers of the word are blessed; that not every one that says Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my Father,
which is in heaven; that as for all others, what 7 Mat. 21.
pretenses soever they make, he will profess to them, I never knew you, depart
from me ye that work iniquity: I say, whoever after such express Declarations
as these, can persuade himself, that sorrow for Sin, and some good resolutions
and fair promises upon a Deathbed, shall carry him to Heaven, though he has
done no good in his life, and has been guilty of all, or many of those sins
which the Gospel has threatened with Damnation, makes void the whole Gospel of
our Savior.

But you will say, Is there no place then for Repentance under the Gospel? no
remission of Sins committed after Baptism? God forbid! for who then could be
saved? Our Savior has taught us to pray every day, Forgive us our trespasses,
as we forgive them, that trespass against us; and has taught us to forgive our
Brother, though he offend against us seventy times seven, in imitation of God's
goodness in forgiving us; and if 18 Mat. 21, 22.
we must forgive so often, surely God will forgive more than once.

But then Repentance after Baptism requires not only a sorrow for sin, and some
good purposes and resolutions of a new life for the future, but the actual
forsaking of sin, and amendment of our lives: In Baptism God justifies the
ungodly, 4 Romans 5; that is, how wicked soever Men have been, whenever they
repent of their sins, renounce their former wicked practices, and believe in
Christ, and enter into Covenant with him by Baptism; all their former sins are
immediately forgiven and washed away, without expecting the actual reformation
of their lives: this was plainly the case both of Jewish and Heathen Converts,
wh^^ upon the profession of Faith in Christ, and renouncing their former wicked
lives, whatever they had been, were immediately received to Baptism; as St.
Peter exhorted the Jews, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the Name
of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of
the 2 Acts 38, 41.
Holy Ghost. And the same day there were three thousand baptized: This is
Gospel Grace, which is the purchase of Christ's blood, that the greatest
Sinners, upon their Repentance and Faith in Christ, are received to Mercy, and
wash away all their sins in Baptism; but when they are in Covenant, they shall
then be judged according to the terms and conditions of that Covenant, which
requires the practice of an universal Righteousness; such persons must not
expect, as St Paul reasons, that if they continue still in sin, grace will
abound; the very Covenant of Grace, which we enter into at Baptism, confutes
all such ungodly hopes; For how shall we that are dead to sin live any longer
therein: Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ,
were baptized into his death; therefore we are buried with him by baptism into
death, that like as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father,
so we also should walk in newness of life, 6 Romans 1, 2, 3, 4. This is the
difference St. Paul makes between the Grace of the Gospel in receiving the
greatest Sinners to Baptism, and justifying them by the Blood of Christ; and
what the Gospel requires of baptized Christians to continue in this justified
State: In the first case nothing is required but Faith and Repentance, upon
which account we are so frequently said to be justified by faith, not by the
deeds 3 Romans 20, 21, 22, 24. 5 Romans 1. 2 Ephesians. 8, 9.
of the law; to be justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that
is in Christ Jesus: to be saved by grace through faith; not of works least any
man should boast. And I believe upon inquiry it will be found, that
Justification by Faith always relates to this Baptismal Justification, when by
Baptism we are received into Covenant with God, and into a justified State,
only for the sake of Christ, and through Faith in his Blood; which one thing
well considered, would put an end to most of the Disputes about Justification,
and about Faith and Works, which I cannot explain now; but shall only observe,
that the constant opposition between Justification by the Faith of Christ, and
Justification by Circumcision, and the Works of the Law, to the 5 Gal. 2, 3.
observation of which they were obliged by Circumcision, is a manifest proof,
that Justification by Faith, is our Justification by the Faith of Christ in
Baptism, which is our admission into the Christian Church, makes us the Members
of Christ, and the Children of God, which is a state of Grace and
Justification; as Circumcision formerly made them God's peculiar People in
Covenant with him, which is the Justification of Circumcision: and
Justification by Faith, and Justification by Circumcision, would not be duly
opposed, if they did not relate to the same kind of Justification, that is,
that Justification which is the immediate effect of our being in Covenant with
God.

But now, when we are justified by a general Repentance and Faith in Christ at
Baptism, we also vow a conformity to the Death of Christ, by dying to sin, and
walking in newness of life; that is, we vow an universal Obedience to all the
Laws of Righteousness, which the Gospel requires of us, as Circumcision made
them debtors to the whole law; which is Ibid.
the reason why the Works of the Law, and that Evangelical Righteousness, which
the Faith of Christ requires of us, are so often opposed in this Dispute, the
one the Righteousness of the Law, or of Works, the other the Righteousness of
Faith; and therefore as Circumcision could not justify those who transgressed
the Law, no more will Faith justify those who disobey the Gospel; but the
righteousness 2 Romans 13, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. 8 Romans 4.
of the law must be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after
the spirit.

Now the necessary consequence of this is, that mere Sorrow for Sin, and the
mere Vows and Resolutions of Obedience, without actual Holiness and Obedience
of Life, according to the terms and conditions of the Gospel, will not save a
baptized Christian; for mere Sorrow for Sin, and Vows of Obedience, will be
accepted only in Baptism; but when we are baptized we must put our Vows in
execution, or we fall from our Baptismal Grace and Justification: and therefore
when we relapse into Sin after Baptism, no Repentance will be accepted but that
which actually reforms our lives; for Baptismal Grace is not ordinarily
repeated, no more than we can repeat our Baptism.

This I take to be the true meaning of that very difficult place, 6 Heb. 4, 5,
6. For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of
the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted
the good word of GOD, and the powers of the world to come; if they shall fall
away to renew them again unto repentance, seeing they crucify to themselves the
Son of GOD afresh, and put him to open shame. This severe passage occasioned
some dispute about the Canonical Authority of this Epistle; for it was thought,
that the Apostle here excluded all Men from the benefit of Repentance, who fell
into sin again after Baptism: but it is certain this is not the Apostle's
meaning, nor do the words import any such Doctrine; but his meaning is, either
that Men who have been baptized, and thoroughly instructed in the Christian
Religion, may sin themselves into an impossibility of Repentance, (which is the
most ordinary interpretation of the words, and which sense I gave before of
them, and is in part the true sense, though I think not the whole) or that Men
after Baptism may fall into such a state, as nothing can deliver them out of,
but Baptismal Grace and Regeneration; and since Baptism cannot be repeated, the
state of such Men is hopeless and desperate, according to the terms of the
Gospel, however God may deal with them by a Sovereign and Prerogative Grace;
for though we can expect and rely on no other Grace, but what God has promised in
his Gospel, yet God does not absolutely confine himself, nor must we confine
his Grace: and this he tells us is the case of all Apostates from the Christian
Faith: The understanding of this is necessary to my present purpose, and
therefore I shall briefly explain it:

1. That the Apostle here speaks of persons who were baptized, is plain from
the words, Those who were once enlightened, the (...) are those who have been
once baptized; for so (...) and (...) in the ancient Writers signifies Baptism;
as Justin Martyr himself tells us in his second Apology, that Baptism is called
(...), or Illumination, because their minds are enlightened by it; and being
once enlightened, plainly refers it to Baptism, which can be administered but
once; and what follows proves this to be the meaning of it, and have tasted of
the heavenly gift; that is, says St. Chrysostom, received remission of Sins in
Baptism; and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, the Holy Spirit being given
at Baptism; and have tasted of the good word of GOD, been instructed in the
Doctrines of the Gospel, which in the Apostolic Age immediately followed
Baptism; for Men were then admitted to Baptism immediately upon their
profession of Repentance and Faith in Christ, and were afterward instructed in
the Christian Religion; and the powers of the world to come; that is, those
miraculous Gifts and Powers which were bestowed on the Apostles for a
confirmation of the Faith of Christ, and which most Christians did in some
degree or other partake of in Baptism. This is a plain Description of Baptism,
with the effects and consequents of it.

2. That he speaks of such as after Baptism totally Apostatize from the Faith
of Christ, is as plain; for they are (...), those who fall away; From what?
from their Christian Profession, which they made at their Baptism; that is, who
renounce the Faith of Christ, and turn Jews or Heathens again; for these Men
crucify to themselves the Son of GOD afresh, and put him to open shame: that
is, they declare him to be an Impostor, as the Jews did when they crucified
him, which is as much crucifying him again, and exposing him to public shame
and infamy, as they can possibly do: But now this Description can relate only
to total Apostates; for whatever sins professed Christians are guilty of,
though thereby they reproach their Lord and Savior, yet they do not declare
him to be an Impostor, who justly suffered on the Cross, and whom they would
condemn to the same ignominious Death again, if they could; nay, those who are
conquered by some powerful and surprising fears to deny Christ, as Peter did,
or to offer Sacrifice to Idols, as many Christians did under the Heathen
Persecutions, and recover themselves again by Repentance, are not included in
this severe Sentence; for such Men do really believe in Christ still, do not
heartily renounce their Baptismal Faith, and therefore do not lose their
Baptism, though in word and deed at present they deny Christ; the case of such
Men is very dangerous, for our Savior tells us, Whosoever shall deny me before
men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in heaven, 10 Mat. 33.
Those who through fear of Men persist in such a denial, shall not be saved by a
secret and dissembled Faith; for we must not only believe in Christ, but we
must openly profess our Faith in him: but such Men may be recovered by
Repentance, and by a bold Confession of Christ in new Dangers and Temptations;
these are lapsed Christians, but not Apostates, as Julian was, who hated the
Name and Religion of Christ; and therefore they were admitted to Repentance in
the Christian Church, as not having lost their Baptismal Faith, though through
fear they denied it.

3. Of these total Apostates, the Apostle tells us, That it is impossible to
renew them again unto repentance, (...), or (...) as St. Chrysostom renders it,
to make them new Creatures again by Baptismal Repentance; for so he tells us,
that (...), is (...), that to be renewed is to be made new, which can be done
only by Baptism, (...); Baptism only can make us new Creatures.

The danger then of these Men's case, as the Apostle represents it, is this:
That they having totally Apostatized from the Faith of Christ, together with
their Faith have lost their Baptism, and are become Jews and Pagans again; now
Jews and Pagans can never be made Christians without Baptism, wherein they are
regenerated and new made; and by the same reason these Apostatized Christians,
who are become Jews and Pagans, can never become Christians again, unless they
be rebaptized; and that they cannot be, because there is but one Baptism in the
Christian Church: and therefore, though we could suppose, that they should
believe again, and repent of their sins, they could never recover a legal Right
and Title to Mercy and the Promises of the Gospel Covenant; Faith and
Repentance will not justify a Heathen without Baptism, for he that believes
and is baptized shall be saved, are the express terms of the Covenant; and
therefore the condition of Apostates is very hopeless, who are relapsed into
such a state, that nothing but Baptismal Grace and Regeneration, nothing but
being new made, and new born, can save them; and that they cannot have, for
they must not be baptized again. A Christian must be but once born, no more
than a Man is; which possibly is the reason why St. Peter tells us of such
Apostates, That their later end is worse with them than their beginning, 2 Pet.
2. 20. for Jews and Heathens, how wicked soever they were, might wash away all
their sins in Baptism; but such Apostates are like a sow that was washed, that
returns again to her wallowing in the mire: When they had washed away their
Sins and Infidelity in Baptism, they return to their forsaken Paganism again,
and lose the effect of their first Washing, and there is no second Baptismal
Washing to be had.

The Apostle does not say, that it is impossible these Men should be saved, but
it is impossible they should be regenerated again by Baptism, which is the only
Gospel-state of Salvation: If any such Men be saved, they must be saved, as I
observed before, by Uncovenanted Grace and Mercy; they are in the state of
Unbaptized Jews and Heathens, not of Christians, who have a Covenant-right to
God's Promises: and I would desire the baptized Atheists and Infidels of our
Age to consider of this, whose case is so very like this, if it be not the
same, that it should make them afraid of setting up for Wits, at such infinite
peril of their Souls.

To apply this then to our present purpose: What I have now discoursed plainly
shows, that a baptized Christian must not always expect to be saved by such
Grace, as saves and justifies in Baptism; Baptismal Grace is inseparably
annexed to Baptism, and can be no more repeated than Baptism. This makes the
case of Apostates so desparate, that Infidelity can be washed away only in
Baptism, and those who Apostatize after Baptism can never be rebaptized again;
and therefore can never have any Covenant-title to Pardon and Forgiveness.

And this proportionably holds good in our present case; the Grace of Baptism
washes away all the Sins of our past lives, how many, how great soever they
have been, only upon our profession of our Faith in Christ, and Repentance of
all our Sins, and Vows of Obedience to the Laws of Christ for the future; but
whoever after Baptism lives a wicked and profligate life, and hopes to be saved
at last only by Faith in Christ, and sorrow for his Sins, and vows of living
better, when he is just a dying, will be miserably mistaken; for this is only
the Grace of Baptism, which can never be repeated, not the rule and measure
whereby God will judge baptized Christians, who have had time and opportunity
of exercising those Christian Graces which they vowed at their Baptism.

A Man who retains the Faith of Christ, though he lives wickedly, does not
forfeit his Baptism, but shall be forgiven whenever he repents, and forsakes
his sins, and lives a holy life; but if he delays this so long, that he has no
time to amend his life, that he can do nothing, but be sorry for his sins, and
vow a new life, I cannot promise him, that this shall be accepted at the hour
of death, because the Gospel requires a Holy Life, not merely a Deathbed
sorrow and remorse for Sin: Sorrow for Sin, and Vows of a new Life, will be
accepted at Baptism, as the beginnings of a new Life, but that is no reason why
they should be accepted at our Death, when they are only the forrowful
conclusion of a wicked Life: God will receive us to Grace and Mercy at Baptism
upon our solemn Vows of living to him; but he has no where promised to accept
of our dying Vows, instead of Holiness and Obedience, as a recompense for a
whole life spent in Wickedness and Folly. It is very seldom that such dying
Sorrows, or dying Vows are sincere and hearty, but were they never so sincere,
(as sometimes though very rarely we see that Men who recover from a dangerous
Sickness keep the vows and promises they then made, and that is a good proof,
that they were very sincere in making them) yet I do not know any one promise
in Scripture to a dying Repentance; the Gospel requires actual holiness of
life; and when God cuts off such Men in their sins, without allowing them any
time to reform their lives, it is very suspicious, that he rejects their
sorrows and their vows; as Wisdom threatens, 1 Prove. 24, etc. Because I have
called and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded -- I
also will laugh at your calamity, and mock when your fear comes: -- Then shall
they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they
shall not find me. I will not pre-judge the final state of these Men, but if
God accept of such a Deathbed Repentance, which cannot produce the actual
Fruits, of Righteousness, it is more than he has promised, and more than he has
given us authority to preach: and we should consider, what infinite hazard we
run by such delays of Repentance, that we cannot be saved by the express terms
of the Gospel, but if we be saved, we must be saved by an unpromised and
uncovenanted Grace and Mercy; which, how good soever God be, we have no reason
to rely on. This, I know, will be thought very severe, but I cannot help it: it
may terrify dying Sinners, but there is less danger in that, than in nursing
Men up in the deluding hopes of a Deathbed Repentance, which renders all the
arguments and motives to a holy Life ineffectual, and I fear, eternally
destroys as many as trust in it.

If you ask, why Faith and Repentance, without the actual obedience of our
Lives, should not as well be accepted by God on our Deathbed, as it is at our
Baptism? I shall ask another very plain question, Why a Husbandman who hires
Laborers into his Vineyard in the morning, receives them into his service,
protection, and pay, only upon their promise to be faithful and diligent in his
work, before they have done any thing; I say, when these Men have loitered away
the day without working, why should not he reward them at night, because they
then also profess themselves very sorry, that they did not work, and make a
great many promises and vows, that if they were to begin the day again, they
would? A promise of faithfulness and diligence was reason enough why he should
take them into his service, but their sorrow for not working, and their
resolutions of working, when the time of working is past, is no reason why they
should be rewarded, or escape the punishment of Loiterers.

This is the very case here; we are saved by the Mercies of God, and the Merits
of Christ, which we partake of by our union to him; this union is made in
Baptism, which incorporates us into the Body of Christ, and from the very first
moment of our union, we are in a state of Grace and Justification; our sins are
washed away in his Blood, as Water purges all bodily defilements, and the
Spirit of Christ dwells in us to renew and sanctify us: now all that is
required by God, or that seems in the nature of the thing necessary to this
Union, is a general Repentance of all our Sins, renouncing our former wicked
course of Life, professing our Faith in Christ, as the Son of God, and Savior
of the World, and vowing Obedience to his Laws, for this qualifies us to be his
Disciples, and to be received into his Service, and into the Communion of his
Body and Church; and therefore this Faith and Repentance justifies in Baptism,
because those who thus repent of their Sins, and believe in Christ, are
received to Baptism, and in Baptism have all their Sins forgiven, and are put
into a state of Grace and Favor with God.

But now though Faith and Repentance, and the Vows of Obedience, are sufficient
to make us the Disciples of Christ, and to put us into a state of
Justification, yet they are not sufficient to save those who are the Disciples
of Christ, without actual Holiness and Obedience of Life; for to be a Disciple
of Christ, does not signify merely to believe in him, and to vow obedience to
him, but to obey him: it is reasonable enough, that upon our Vows of Obedience,
we should be received into his service, but it is not reasonable that we should
be rewarded without performing our Vows; for it is as ridiculous a thing to
think, that our repeated sorows for not obeying, and our repeated and fruitless
resolutions of obeying our Savior, should pass for Obedience, as that that Son
should be thought to do his Father's will, who said, I go Sir, but went not;
especially when after our Vow of Baptism we live a very ungodly life, and never
think it time to repent, and to renew our Vows again till we come to die: If we
consider the difference between what is necessary to make us the Disciples of
Christ, and what is required of us when we are Disciples, we shall see a plain
reason why Faith and Repentance, as that signifies sorrow for sin, and Vows of
Obedience, will justify us in Baptism, but will not be accepted upon a
Deathbed, after a life spent in wickedness; for when a baptized Christian
comes to die, he is not then to be made a Disciple of Christ, and to be
baptized again, but to give an account of his life, since he has been Christ's
Disciple, and mere Faith in Christ, sorrow for Sin, and vows of Obedience,
without actual Holiness of Life, though with the Sacrament of Baptism it will
make a Disciple, yet it will not pass in a Disciple's account, especially when
the sum total of his Life, is nothing but sin, and sorrow, and fruitless vows,
for this is not that holiness of life, which Christ requires of his Disciples.

The ancient Discipline of the Church was a plain proof of this, that they
thought a great deal more necessary for a baptized Christian, than was required
to qualify Men for Baptism: In the Apostles days, they baptized both Jews and
Heathens immediately upon their profession of Faith in Christ, and renouncing
their former wicked lives; but in case they fell into any gross and scandalous
sin after Baptism, they were cast out of the Communion of the Church, and the
profession of sorrow and repentance for their sins, and the most solemn vows of
a new life, was not thought sufficient to restore them to the Peace of the
Church, but they were kept under the severities of Repentance, till they had
made satisfaction for the Scandal they had given to the Church, and given
sufficient testimonies of the actual reformation of their Lives; and in the
Ages succeeding the Apostles, this state of Penitence in some cases was
continued many years, in other cases such Sinners were never reconciled till
the hour of death: Now if they had thought, as many among us now do, that
sorrow for Sin, and the vows of Obedience do immediately obtain our Pardon from
God, for sins committed after Baptism, it is not imaginable, why they should
have imposed such a long and severe Discipline on Penitents: If they believed
God had forgiven them, why should not the Church forgive them, and receive them
them to her Communion again, upon their promises of amendment, without such a
long trial of their reformation? But it is evident, they thought sins after
Baptism not forgiven without actual reformation, and therefore would not
receive them to Communion again without a tried and visible reformation of
their Lives. We know what Disputes there were about this matter in the
Primitive Church; the ancient Discipline allowed but of one Repentance after
Baptism; and some would not allow of that in the case of Adultery, Murder, and
Idolatry, but denied the Authority of the Church to receive such Sinners to
Communion again: this was the pretense of Novatus's Schism; and Tertullian,
after he turned Montanist, said many bitter things against the Catholics upon
this argument, which seemed to question the validity of Repentance it self
after Baptism, though it did reform Men's lives: but though this was a great
deal too much, and did both lessen the Grace of the Gospel, and the Authority
which Christ had given to his Church, yet it is evident that all this time,
they were very far from thinking, that some dying Sorrows, or dying Vows after
a wicked Life, would carry Men to Heaven: and the Judgment of those first and
purest Ages of the Church, ought at least to make Men afraid of relying on such
a Deathbed Repentance, as they thought very ineffectual to save Sinners.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the Fear of Death, and the Remedies against it.
DEath is commonly and very truly called the King of Terrors, as being the most
formidable thing to Humane Nature; the love of Life, and the natural principle
of Self-preservation, begets in all Men a natural Aversion against Death, and
this is the natural Fear of Dying; this is very much increased by a great
fondness and passion for this World, which makes such Men, especially while
they are happy and prosperous, very unwilling to leave it; and this is still
increased by a sense of Guilt, and the fear of Punishment in the next World:
All these are of a distinct nature, and require suitable Remedies, and therefore
I shall distinctly consider them:

I. The natural Fear of Death results from Self-preservation, and the love of
our own being; for light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is, for the eyes to
behold the sun, 11 Eccles. 7. All Men love Life, and the necessary consequence
of that is to fear Death; though this is rather a natural Instinct, than the
effect of Reason and Discourse.

There are great and wise Reasons why God should imprint this Aversion to Death
on Humane Nature, because it obliges us to take care of ourselves, and to avoid
every thing which will destroy or shorten our lives; this in many cases is a
great principle of Virtue, as it preserves us from all fatal and destructive
Vices; it is a great Instrument of Government, and makes Men afraid of
committing such Villainies, as the Laws of their Country have made capital; and
therefore since the natural Fear of Death is of such great advantage to us, we
must be contented with it, though it makes the thoughts of dying a little
uneasy; especially if we consider, that when this natural Fear of Death is not
increased by other causes, (of which more presently) it may be conquered or
allayed by Reason and wise Consideration: for this is not so strong an
Aversion, but it may be conquered; the miseries and calamities of this Life
very often reconcile Men to Death, and make them passionately desire it:
Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery, and life to the bitter in
soul? which long for death, but it comes not, and digg for it more then for
hid treasures: which rejoice exceedingly, and are glad when they can find the
grave, 3 Job 20, 21, 22. My soul chooses strangling, and death rather than
life: I loath it, I would not live always; let me alone, for my days are vanity,
7 Job 15, 16. And if the sense of present Sufferings can conquer the fears of
Death, there is no doubt but the hope of immortal Life may do it also: for the
fear of Death is not an original and primitive Passion, but results from the
love of ourselves, from the love of life, and our own being; and therefore when
we can separate the fear of Death from Selflove, it is easily conquered: when
Men are sensible, that life is no kindness to them, but only serves to prolong
their misery, they are so far from being afraid of Death, that they court it;
and were they as thoroughly convinced, that when they die, Death will translate
them to a more happy Life, it would be as easy a thing to put off these
Bodies, as to change their Clothes, or to leave an old and ruinous House for a
more beautiful and convenient Habitation.

If we set aside the natural Aversion, and inquire into the reasons of this
natural Fear of Death, we can think of but these two; Either Men are afraid,
that when they die they shall cease to be, or at least they know not what they
shall be, and are unwilling to exchange this present life, which they like very
well, for they know not what. But now both these reasons of Fear are taken away
by the Revelation of the Gospel, which has brought Life and Immortality to
light; and when the reasons of our Fear are gone, such an unaccountable
Aversion and Reluctance to Death, signifies little more than to make us patient
of living, rather than unwilling to die; for a Man who has such a new glorious
World, such a happy immortal Life in his view, could not very contentedly delay
his removal thither, were not Death in the way, which he naturally startles at,
and draws back from, though his reason sees nothing frightful or terrible in it.

The plain and short account then of this matter is this: We must not expect
wholly to conquer our natural Aversion to Death; St. Paul himself did not
desire to be uncloathed, but clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed
up of life, 2 Cor. 3, 4. Were there not some remaining aversions to Death mixed
with our hopes and desires of Immortality, Martyrdom itself, excepting the
patient enduring the shame and the torments of it, would be no Virtue; but
though this natural aversion to Death cannot be wholly conquered, it may be
extremely lessened, and brought next to nothing, by the certain belief and
expectation of a glorious Immortality; and therefore the only way to arm
ourselves against these natural fears of dying, is to confirm our selves in
this belief, that Death does not put an end to us, that our Souls shall survive
in a state of Bliss and Happiness, when our Bodies shall rot in their Graves,
and that these mortal Bodies themselves shall at the sound of the last Trump
rise again out of the dust immortal and glorious. A Man who believes and
expects this, can have no reason to be afraid of Death; nay he has great reason
not to fear Death, and that will reconcile him to the thoughts of it, though he
trembles a little under the weaknesses and aversions of Nature.

II. Besides the natural Aversions to Death, most Men have contracted a great
fondness and passion for this World, and that makes them so unwilling to leave
it, whatever glorious things they hear of another World, they see what is to be
had in this, and they like it so well, that they do not expect to mend
themselves, but if they were at their choice, would stay where they are: and
this is a double death to them to be snatched away from their admired
enjoyments, and to leave whatever they love and delight in behind them: and
there is no remedy, that I know of, for these Men to cure their fears of Death,
but only to rectify their mistaken opinions of things, to open their eyes to
see the Vanity of this World, and the brighter and more dazzling Glories of the
next.

There are different degrees of this, and therefore this remedy must be
differently applied: some Men are wholly sunk into flesh and sense, and have no
taste at all of rational and manly Pleasures, much less of those which are
purely intellectual and divine: they are Slaves to their lusts, lay no
restraints on their brutish appetites, the World is their God, and they dote
on the riches, and pleasures, and honors of it, as the only real and
substantial goods: Now these Men have great reason to be afraid of Death; for
when they go out of this World, they will find nothing that belongs to this
World in the next; and thus their happiness and their lives must end together:
It is fitting they should fear Death, for if the fear of Death will not cure
their fondness for this World, nothing else can; you must not expect to
persuade them, that the next World is a happier place than this; but the best
way is to set before them the terrors of the next World; those Lakes of Fire
and Brimstone prepared for the Devil and his Angels; to ask them our Savior's
question, What shall it profit a man to gain the whole world, and to lose his
own soul: or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? These Men ought to
fear on, till the fear of Death cures their vicious passion and fondness for
this World, and then the fear of Death will by degrees cure itself.

Others there are, who have a true reverence for God, and govern their
inclinations and passions to the things of this World with regard to his Laws;
they will not raise an Estate by Injustice, Oppression, or Perjury; they will
not transgress the Rules of Sobriety and Modesty in the use of sensual
Pleasures; they will not purchase the honors and preferments of this World at
the price of their Souls; but yet they love this World very well, and are
extremely delighted in the enjoyments of it; they have a plentiful Fortune, or
a thriving Trade, or the Favor of their Prince; they live at ease, and think
this World a very pleasant place, and are ready to cry, It is good for us to be
here: Now it cannot be avoided, but that in proportion to Men's love of this
World, though it be not an immoral and irregular passion, they will be more
afraid, and more unwilling to leave it: when we are in the full enjoyment of an
earthly Felicity, it is difficult for very good Men to have such a strong and
vigorous sense of the next World, as to make them willing and contented to
leave this: they desire to go to Heaven, but they are not overhasty in their
desires; they can be better pleased, if God sees fit, to stay here a little
longer, and when they find themselves a going, are apt to cast back their eyes
upon this World, as those who are loath to part. This makes it so necessary for
God to exercise even good Men with afflictions and sufferings, to wean them
from this World, which is a Scene of Misery, and to raise their hearts to
Heaven, where true and unmixt Happiness dwells.

The only way then to cure this fear of Death, is to mortify all remains of
love and affection for this World; to withdraw ourselves as much as may be from
the conversation of it, to use it very sparingly, and with great indifferency,
to supply the wants of Nature, rather than to enjoy the pleasures of it; to
have our conversation in Heaven, to meditate on the glories of that blessed
Place, to live in this World upon the hopes of unseen things; to accustom our
selves to the work and to the pleasures of Heaven, to praise and adore the
Great Maker and Redeemer of the World, to mingle ourselves with the heavenly
Quire, and possess our very fancies and imaginations with the glory and
happiness of seeing GOD and the Blessed JESUS, of dwelling in his immediate
Presence, of conversing with Saints and Angels; this is to live like Strangers
in this World, and like Citizens of Heaven; and then it will be as easy to us
to leave this World for Heaven, as it is for a Traveller to leave a foreign
Country to return home. This is the height and perfection of Christian Virtue;
it is our mortifying the Flesh with its affections and lusts, it is our dying
to this World, and living to God; and when we are dead to this World, the fear
of dying and leaving this World is over; For what should a Man do in this
World, who is dead to it? When we are alive to God, nothing can be so desirable
as to go to him; for here we live to God only by Faith and Hope, but that is
the proper place for this divine Life, where God dwells: So that in short, a
life of Faith, as it is our Victory over this World, so it is our Victory over
Death too; it disarms it of all its fears and terrors, it raises our hearts so
much above this World, that we are very well pleased to get rid of these
Bodies, which keep us here, and to leave them in the Grave in hopes of a
blessed Resurrection.

III. The most tormenting Fears of Death are owing to a sense of Guilt, which
indeed are rather a fear of Judgment than of Death, or a fear of Death as it
sends us to Judgment; and here we must distinguish between three sorts of Men,
whose Case is very different: 1. Those who are very good Men, who have made it
the care of their lives to please GOD, and to save their Souls. 2. Those who
have lived very ungodly Lives, and are now awakened by the approaches of Death,
to see an angry and provoked Judge, an injured Savior, a righteous Tribunal,
and think they hear that fatal Doom and Sentence pronounced on them by their
own Consciences, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and
his angels. 3. Those who are doubtful of their own condition, and are apt to
fear the worst.

1. As for the first sort of these Men, who have sincerely endeavored to
please GOD, and have the testimony of their Consciences, that in simplicity and
godly sincerity they have had their conversation in this World, Christ has
delivered them from all their fears by his death upon the Cross, and his
Intercession for them at the right hand of God: The best Men dare not stand the
trial of strict and impartial Justice; they are conscious to themselves of so
many sins, or such great imperfections and defects, that their only hope is in
the Mercy of GOD, through the Merits and Mediation of CHRIST; and in this hope
they can triumph over Death, as St. Paul does; O death! where is thy sting? O
grave! where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin
is the law; but thanks be 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56, 57.
to GOD, who has given us the victory by our Lord Jesus Christ; who destroyed
Sin, and plucked out the sting of Death by his Death upon the Cross, who
triumphed over Death by his Resurrection from the Dead, and is invested with
Power to raise all his true Disciples from the Dead; Is able to save to the
uttermost all those that come unto 7 Heb. 25.
GOD by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them.

This is the happy state of good Men, when they come to die, they can look into
the other World without terror, where they see, not a Court of Justice, but, a
Throne of Grace; where they see a Father, not a Judge; a Savior who died for
them, and has redeemed them with his own Blood: What a blessed Calm and
Serenity possesses their Souls! nay, what Joy and Triumph transports them! How
do their souls magnify the Lord, and their spirits rejoice in GOD their
Savior! when they see him ready to pronounce them blessed, and to set the
Crown upon their heads? Who would not die the death of the righteous, and
desire that his latter end may be like his! What wise Man would not live the
life of the Righteous, that his latter end may be like his; that in the agonies
of Death, and in the very jaws of the Grave, no disturbed thoughts may
discompose him; no guilty fears distract him, but he may go out of the World
with all the joyful presages of eternal Rest and Peace.

2. As for wicked Men, who never concerned themselves with the thoughts of God
and another World, while they were in health, many times a dangerous Sickness,
which gives them a nearer view of Death and Judgment, awakens their
Consciences, and overwhelms them with the unsupportable terrors of future
Vengeance; then they begin to lament their ill-spent lives, to tremble before
that just and righteous Judge, whom they have provoked by repeated Villainies;
whose Being they formerly denied, or whose Power and Justice they desied; now
they cry passionately to Christ for Mercy, and will needs have him to be their
Savior, though they would not own him for their Lord, nor submit to his Laws
and Government; now these Men are mighty earnest for comfort, the Minister, who
was the subject of their Drollery before, is sent for in great have, and it is
expected from him, that he should lull their Consciences asleep, and send them
quietly into another World, to receive their doom there.

Now it is very fitting to let these Men know, while they are well, that there
is no comfort to be had, when they come to die: For there is no peace says my
GOD to the wicked; and no Man who knows them, can speak Peace to them, without
making a new Gospel, or corrupting the old one.

What I have already discourst concerning a Deathbed Repentance, is a plain
proof of this; but though we set aside all that, and proceed upon the common
principle, That a true Penitent, whenever he sincerely repents, tho it be upon
his Deathbed, after a long life of wickedness, shall be pardoned and rewarded
by God; yet upon these principles it is impossible that a wicked Man, when he
comes to die, should have any Comfort without a vain and Enthusiastic
Presumption, and the reason is very plain, because it is impossible, either for
himself or others to judge, whether his Repentance be true and sincere; such a
Repentance as, if he were to live longer, would reform his Life, and bring
forth the fruits of an universal Righteousness; and it is agreed on all hands,
that no other Repentance but this can be accepted by God.

Now it is absolutely impossible, without a Revelation, for any Man to know
this, who begins his Repentance upon a Deathbed: he may feel indeed the bitter
pangs and agonies of Sorrow, and may be sincerely and heartily sorry that he
has sinned: And this every dying Sinner is, who is sorrowful, he is sincerely
sorrowful, that is, he does not counterfeit a Sorrow, but really feels it: and
I know nothing else to make Sorrow sincere, but that it is real and not
counterfeited; and therefore to be sorrowful, and to be sincerely sorrowful, is
the same thing; And will any Man say, that whoever is sorry for his sins when
he comes to die, shall be saved? Then no Sinner can be damned, who does not die
an Atheist, or stupid and distracted, or suddenly, without any warning; for it
is impossible for a Sinner, who is in his wits, and believes that wicked Men
shall be eternally punished in the next World, not to feel an amazing remorse
and sorrow of mind, when he sees himself just a falling into Hell.

A dying Sorrow then, though it may be sharp and severe, almost to the degree
of Amazement and Distraction (and it is hard, if such a Sorrow be not real and
sincere) is not saving Repentance; and therefore though Sinners may feel
themselves very heartily sorrowful, this does not prove them to be true
Penitents; and yet this is the only evidence they can have of their Repentance,
and the only thing they rely on, that they are sure their Sorrow is very
sincere; and I doubt not but it is, for all true Sorrow is sincere; but Sinners
who are very sorry for their sins may be damned.

Since then sorrow for Sin is the only evidence such Men can have of the
sincerity of their Repentance, let us consider, whether the mere dying sorrows
of Sinners be any evidence at all of this, or what kind of evidence it is:

True Repentance does at least include a change of Mind, a turning from our
sins to God, a deep sense of the evil of Sin, and an abhorrance of ourselves
for it, a great reverence for God and for his Laws, as well as a dread of his
Judgments, and deliberate and serious resolutions of changing our course of
Life, and for the time to come, of living to God, and to the purposes of his
Glory, never to return to our old Sins again, but diligently to exercise
ourselves in all the Duties and Offices of a Christian Life.

Now suppose a Man, who has lived wickedly all his life, should be thus changed
in a moment, and prove such a true Penitent, as I have now described, and that
God, who knows the hearts of Men, sees that his promises and vows are sincere,
and that if he were to live any longer, he would be a good Man, and therefore
will pardon and reward him, not according to what he has done, but according to
what he foresees he would have done, had he lived any longer, (which is to
judge Men not according to their Works, but according to his own
Foreknowledge, which the Scripture never makes the Rule of future Judgment;) I
say, suppose such Men may be true Penitents, and pardoned by God, who knows
that they are so? yet they can never have the comfort of it before they die,
because it is impossible for them to know it.

When Men see themselves a dying, they are very sorrowful for their sins so
they say, but the most likely account of it is, That they are very sorry they
are a going to Hell, as a Malefactor is very sorrowful, when he is going to the
Gibbet: This may be the whole of his Sorrow, and it is impossible to prove that
there should be any thing more in it, and extremely improbable that there is;
for what likelihood is there, that Men who yesterday were very much in love
with their sins, and as little thought of falling out with them, as they did of
their dying day, should to day, as soon as ever they are arrested with a
threatening Sickness, be Penitents in good earnest, and abhor their Sins in a
minute, and be quite other Men upon the view of the other World: This is the
case of all Sinners, when they come to die, which makes it very suspicious,
that there is nothing extraordinary in it, no miraculous power of the divine
Spirit to change their hearts in a moment, and make them new Men, but only the
common effect of a great Fear, which makes Men sorry for their sins, when they
come to suffer for them.

Now if such dying Sinners can never be sure that their sorrow for Sin is any
thing more than a great Fright, they can be sure of nothing else; for such a
sorrow as this, will counterfeit all the other acts of Repentance: Men who are
terribly afraid of Punishment, are not only sorry for their Sins, but this very
sorrow makes them ashamed of them, gives them a great indignation against
themselves for them, makes them flatter their Judge, and vow and promise
reformation, if they could escape this one time; and this is so very common and
familiar, that in all other cases no Man regards it; a Judge, a Father, or a
Master, will not spare upon such promises as these; and why should this be
thought any thing more in a dying Sinner, than in other Malefactors? Why should
that be thought a sufficient reason for God to pardon, which we ourselves think
no reason, in all other cases? All this may be no more than the fear of Hell;
and I doubt the mere fear of Hell, when Men are a dying, though it may imitate
all the scenes of Repentance, will not keep them out of Hell. It is so very
probable, that this is the whole of a Deathbed Repentance, that no such dying
Sinner can have any reasonable hope, that he does truly repent; and therefore,
unless he flatters himself, when he dies with a false and counterfeit
Repentance, as he did, while he lived, with the hopes of repenting before he
died, he must expire in all the terrors and agonies of guilty Fears. This is so
miserable a condition, that though we should suppose such a Sinner may be a true
Penitent, and go to Heaven at last, yet no wise Man would endure these dying
Agonies for all the false and deceitful Pleasures of Sin: and yet there is no
possible way of avoiding this, but by such a timely Repentance, while we are
well, and Death at a distance, as may bring forth the actual fruits of
Holiness, that when we come to die, we may have some better evidence of the
sincerity of our Repentance, than mere dying sorrows.

3. Let us now consider the Case of those who are doubtful, what their
condition is; who are neither so good, as to be out of all danger and fear, nor
so bad, as to be out of hope; and I need not tell any Man, that this is a state
between Hope and Fear, which is a very uneasy state, when eternal Happiness or
Misery is the matter of the doubt: This is the case of those Men, who after all
their good resolution, are ever and anon conquered by temptations; who as soon
as their tears are dried up for their last fall, fall again, and then lament
their sins, and resolve again; and while they are thus interchangeably sinning,
repenting, and resolving, before they have got a lasting Victory, or are
arrived to a steady Virtue, are summoned by Death to Judgment; or those who
have a reverence for God, but are not so constant and frequent in their
Devotions, or if they abstain from gross and scandalous Vices, yet they have
not a due government of their Passions, or do very little good in the World,
etc. Here is such a mixture of Good and Evil, that it is hard to know which is
predominant; while such Men are in health, they are very uneasy, and know not
what to judge of themselves; but they fall into much greater perplexities when
they are alarmed with the near aproaches of Death and Judgment: And what a
deplorable state is this, when we are a dying, to be uncertain and anxious,
what will become of us to Eternity!

Now there is no possible way to prevent these fears, when we come to die, but
by giving all diligence to make our Calling and Election sure; by living such
holy and innocent Lives, that our Consciences may not condemn us; and then we
shall have confidence toward God. 1 John 3. 20, 21.


But this is such a remedy, as few of these Men like: they would be glad to be
sure of Heaven, but yet would go as near Hell as they can without danger of
falling into it; they will serve God, but must reserve a little favor and
indulgence to their Lusts; though they dare not take full draughts of sensual
Pleasures, yet they must be sipping now and then, as often as they can pacify
their Consciences, and get rid of the Fear of God, and of another World; and
therefore they are very inquisitive after other Cures for an accusing and
condemning Conscience: are mighty fond of such marks and signs of Grace as will
secure them of Heaven without the severities of Mortification, or the constant
and uniform practice of an universal Righteousness: And a great many such Signs
have been invented, which like strong Opiates assuage their pain and smart,
till their Consciences awake, when it is too late, in the next World.

For all this is Cheat and Delusion, as St. John assures us: Little children,
Let no man deceive you: he that does righteousness is righteous, even as he is
righteous. He that commits sin, is of the devil, for the devil sins from
the beginning: for this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might
destroy the works of the devil. Whosoever is born of GOD, does not commit sin;
for his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin, 1 John 3. 7, 8, 9, 10.
because he is born of GOD. In this the children of GOD are manifest, and the
children of the devil: whosoever does not righteousness, is not of GOD, neither
he that loves not his brother. This is the only sure Evidence for Heaven; and
therefore every Sin Men commit, makes their state doubtful, and this must fill
them with perplexities and fears: Men may cheat themselves with vain hopes and
imaginations, when they come to die; but nothing can be a solid foundation for
Peace and Security, but an Universal Righteousness.

The CONCLUSION.
FOr the Conclusion of this Discourse, I shall only observe in a few words,
that it must be the business of our whole Lives to prepare for Death: Our
Accounts must be always ready, because we know not how soon we may be called to
give an account of our Stewardship; we must be always upon our Watch, as not
knowing at what hour our Lord will come. A good Man, who has taken care all his
life to please God, has little more to do, when he sees Death approaching, than
to take leave of his Friends, to bless his Children; to support and comfort
himself with the hopes of immortal Life, and a glorious Resurrection, and to
resign up his Spirit into the hands of God, and of his Savior: His Lamp is
full of Oil, and always burning, though it may need a little trimming, when the
Bridegroom comes; some new acts of Faith and Hope, and such devout Passions 25
Mat. 1, etc.
as are proper to be exercised at our leaving the World, and going to God: but
when the Bridegroom is at the Door, it is too late with the foolish Virgins to
buy Oil for our Lamps: unless we be ready, when the Bridegroom comes, to enter
in with him to the Marriage, the Door will be shut against us: Watch therefore
for ye know neither the day, nor the hour, wherein the Son of man comes.

Some Men talk of preparing for Death, as if it were a thing that could be done
in two or three days, and that the proper time of doing it, were a little
before they die: but I know no other Preparation for Death, but living well;
and thus we must every day prepare for Death, and then we shall be well
prepared, when Death comes; that is, we shall be able to give a good account of
our Lives, and of the improvement of our Talents; and he who can do this, is
well prepared to die, and to go to Judgment: but he who has spent all his days
wickedly, whatever care he may take when he comes to die, to prepare himself
for it, it is certain he can never prepare a good Account of his past Life; and
all his other Preparations are little worth.

The END.
ADVERTISEMENT.
A Preservative against Popery, in two Parts: With a Vindication, in Answer to
the Cavils of Lewis Sabran a Jesuit. By William Sherlock, D. D. Master of the
Temple. Printed for W. Rogers.


