The Second Part OF THE Preservative AGAINST POPERY: Showing how Contrary
POPERY is to the True Ends OF THE Christian Religion. Fitted for the
INSTRUCTION OF Unlearned PROTESTANTS.

By WILLIAM SHERLOCK, D. D. Master of the Temple.

The Second Edition.

LONDON: Printed for William Rogers, at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleet Street. M DC LXXXVIII.

THE Second Part OF THE PRESERVATIVE AGAINST POPERY.

Imprimatur Liber cui Titulus, The Second Part of the Preservative against
Popery.

May 3. 1688. Guil. Needham, R. R. in Christo P. ac D. D. Wilhelmo Archiepisc.
Cant. a Sacr. Domest.

The Second Part OF THE PRESERVATIVE AGAINST POPERY.
CHAP. IV. Some Directions relating to particular Controversies.
THose who would understand the particular Disputes between Us and the Church
of Rome, must of necessity read such Books as give the true State of the
Controversy between us, and fairly represent the Arguments on both sides; and
where such Books are to be met with, he may learn from a late Letter,
Entitled, The Present State of the Controversy between the Church of England
and the Church of Rome: Or, an Account of Books written on both sides. But my
present Design is of another nature, to give some plain and easy Marks and
Characters of true Gospel-Doctrines; whereby a man, who has any relish of the
true Spirit of Christianity, may as certainly know Truth from Error in many
cases, as the Palate can distinguish Tastes. There are some things so proper to
the Gospel, and so primarily intended in it, that they may fitly serve for
distinguishing marks of true Evangelical Doctrine: I shall name some of the
chief, and examine some Popish Doctrines by them.

SECT. I. Concerning IDOLATRY.
1. ONe principal intention of the Gospel, was more perfectly to extirpate all
Idolatry; 1 John 3.8.
For this purpose the Son of God was manifested to destroy the works of the
devil: That is, not only all Sin and Wickedness, but the very Kingdom of
Darkness; that Kingdom the Devil had erected in the World, the very Foundation
of which was laid in Idolatrous Worship.

To this purpose Christ has expressly taught us, that there is but one God, and
has more perfectly instructed us in the nature of God: 1. Joh. 18.
For no man has seen God at any time, but the only begotten Son, who is in the
bosom of the Father, he has declared him. Ignorance was the Mother of Pagan
Idolatry, because they did not know the true God, they Worshipped any thing,
every thing, for a God; and therefore the most effectual course to cure
Idolatry, was to make known the true God to the World: for those men are
inexcusable, who know the true God, and Worship any thing else. Though indeed
according to some men's Divinity, the knowledge of the true God cures Idolatry,
not by rooting out Idolatrous Worship, but by excusing it; by making that to be
no Idolatry in a Christian, who knows God, which was Idolatry in a Heathen, who
did not know him: for if (as some say) none can be guilty of Idolatry, who
acknowledge one Supreme Being; then the Heathens, when once they were
instructed in the knowledge of the one true God, might have Worshipped all
their Country Gods, which they did before, without being guilty of Idolatry;
which is, as if I should say, that man is a Rebel, who through mistake and
ignorance owns any man for his Prince, who is not his Prince; but he, is no
Rebel, who knows his lawful Prince, and pays Homage to another, whom he knows
not to be his Prince.

And therefore our Savior confines all Religious Worship to God alone: Mat. 10.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy GOD, and him only shall thou serve. It is his
Answer to the Devil, when he tempted him to fall down and worship him; but he
gives such an Answer as excludes all Creatures, not only bad but good Spirits,
from any share in Religious Worship: Our Savior does not deny to worship him
merely because he was the Devil, (though that a man may do without the guilt of
Idolatry, who knows him to be the Devil, if those men are in the right, who
allow nothing to be Idolatry, but to worship some Being for the Supreme God,
who is not Supreme; for then you may worship the Devil without the guilt of
Idolatry, if you do not believe him to be the Supreme God) but our Savior's
reason for not worshipping him was, because we must worship none but God. Which
is as good a reason against the worship of the most glorious Angel, as of the
Devil himself: Nay, our Savior denies to worship him, though the Devil made no
terms with him, about the kind or degrees of Worship: He does not require him
to offer Sacrifice to him, (which is the only Act of Worship the Church of Rome
appropriates to the Supreme God) but only to bow down before him, as an
expression of Religious Devotion; he did not demand that degree of Worship,
which the Church of Rome calls Latria, and appropriates to the Supreme God:
nay, he confesses that he was not the Supreme God, for he does not pretend to
dispose of the Kingdoms of the World in his own right, but says, they were
given to him, and he had power to give them to whom he pleased; in which he
acknowledges, that he had a Superior, and therefore could not in the same
breath desire to be owned and worshipped as the Supreme. But our Savior denies
to give him this inferior degree of Worship, and thereby teaches us, that no
degree of Religious Worship must be given to any Being, but the Supreme God.

And because Mankind were very apt to worship inferior Demons, as believing
them to have the care of this lower World, and that it was in their power to do
great good to them, to answer their Prayers, and to mediate for them with the
Superior Deities, or with the Supreme God, if they believed one Supreme, which
appears to be a received Notion among them: to prevent this kind of Idolatry,
God advances his own Son to be the universal Mediator, and the Supreme and
Sovereign Lord of the World; that all Mankind should make their Addresses and
Applications to him, and offer up their Prayers only in his Name; that in him
they should find acceptance, and in no other Name. Which was the most effectual
way to put an end to the Worship of all inferior Deities, and Creature-Patrons
and Advocates; for when we are assured, that no other Being can mediate for us
with effect and power, but only Christ, it is natural to Worship no other
Mediator but him, who being the eternal Son of God, may be worshipped without
danger of Idolatry. Thus St. Paul tells us, That though the Heathen World had
Gods many, and Lords many, 1 Cor. 8.5, 6.
yet to us there is but one God the Father, and one Lord Jesus Christ: One
Supreme and Sovereign Deity, and one Mediator between God and Men.

Now this being so apparently one end of Christ's coming into the World to
suppress the Idolatry of Creature-worship, and to confine all Religious Worship
to one Supreme Being, in opposition to the many Gods of the Heathens, and to
teach us to make our Applications to this one God by one Mediator, in
opposition to the worship of inferior Deities; can any man imagine, that the
Worship of Saints and Angels, and the Virgin Mary, can be any part of the
Christian Religion? For how dear soever they are to God, they are but his
Creatures, and if Sovereign Princes will not receive their greatest Favorites
into their Throne, much less will God.

If God under the Gospel Dispensation has taken care to prevent the Worship of
inferior Beings, by appointing his own Son to be our only Mediator and
Advocate, can we imagine, that he ever intended we should offer up our Prayers
to other Mediators? If he had liked the Mediation of Creatures, would he have
given his own Son to be our Priest and our Mediator? Whatever fair pretenses
may be made for this, it apparently contradicts the Gospel Dispensation; for if
we must own but one God, he alone must be worshipped; if we have but one
Mediator, we must offer up our Prayers only in his Name and Intercession. The
Religious Worship of Creatures is Idolatry, and if God intended to root
Idolatry out of the World, by the Gospel of Christ, he could never intend to
set up the Worship of Saints, and the Virgin Mary, which tho it have not all
the aggravations of Pagan Idolatry, yet is Creature-worship.

Thus we know, how fond the Heathens were of material Images and Pictures, to
represent their Gods as visibly present with them; and to receive Religious
Worship in their stead: not that they did believe their Gods to be Corporeal,
or that their Corporeal Images were proper Likenesses of their Gods, in which a
late Author places the whole of Idolatry, which I confess was agreeable enough
to his design, to find out such a Notion of Idolatry, as it may be no Persons
in the World were ever guilty of, and then he might excuse, whom he pleased
from Idolatry: But the Heathens were not such great Sots, as this account makes
them, as the Learned Founder of all Anti-Catholick, Dr. Stillin. Defense of the
Discourse concerning Idolatry.
and Antichristian Principles (as this Author is pleased to style a very great
Man, whose Name will be Venerable to future Ages) has abundantly proved. But
they wanted some material Representations of their Gods, in which they might as
it were see them present, and offer up their Petitions to them, and court them
with some visible and sensible Honors. Now to cure this Idolatry, tho God
would not allow any Images or Pictures for Worship, yet by the Law of Moses he
appoints them to build an House or Temple for himself, where he would dwell
among them, and place the Symbols of his Presence; there was the Mercy-seat,
and the Cherubims covering the Mercy-seat, and there God promised Moses to meet
with him, 25 Exodus 22.
and to commune with him from between the two Cherubims, which are upon the ark
of the testimony. Now this was a Symbolical Representation of God's Throne in
Heaven, where he is surrounded with Angels, as we know the Holy of Holies
itself was a Figure of Heaven; and therefore the Jews, when they were absent
from the Temple, prayed toward it, and in the Temple (as is thought) toward
the Mercy-seat, as the place of God's peculiar Residence; as now when we pray,
we lift up our eyes and hands to Heaven, where God dwells: So that under the
Law God had a peculiar place for Worship, and peculiar Symbols of his Presence,
but no Images to represent his Person, or to be the Objects of Worship: I know
some Roman Doctors would fain prove the Cherubims to have been the Objects of
Worship, and which is more wonderful, a late Bishop of the Church of England
has taken some pains to prove the same, and thereby to justify the Worship of
Images in the Church of Rome; Reasons for abrogating the Test, p. 124, etc.
and before I proceed, I shall briefly Examine what he has said in this Cause.

One would a little wonder, who reads the Second Commandment, which so severely
forbids the Worship of Images, that God himself should set up Images in his own
Temple as the Objects of Worship; and a modest man would have been a little
cautious, how he had imputed such a thing to God, which is so direct a
contradiction to his own Laws. That the Cherubims were Statues or Images,
whatever their particular Form was, I agree with our Author, and that is the
only thing I agree with him in: For,

1. That they were Sacred Images set up by God himself, Ib. p. 127.
in the place of his own Worship, I deny. For the Holy of Holies, where the Ark
was placed, and the Mercy-seat over the Ark, and the Cherubims at the two ends
spreading their Wings, and covering the Mercy seat, was not the place of
Worship, but the place of God's Presence. The place of Worship is the place
wherein men worship God; now it is sufficiently known, that none of the Jews
were permitted to go into the Holy of Holies, nor so much as to look into it,
and therefore it could not be the place of their Worship: the Holy of Holies
was the Figure of Heaven, and therefore could be no more the place of Worship
to the Jews, than Heaven now is to us, while we dwell on Earth. The High Priest
indeed entered in the Holy of Holies once a Year, with the Blood of the
Sacrifice, 9 Heb. 11, 12.
which was a Type of Christ's entering into Heaven with his own Blood, and yet
the Priest went thither not to Worship, but to make an Atonement; which I take
to be two very different things; however if you will call this Worship, it has
no relation to any Worship on Earth, but to what is done by Christ in Heaven,
of whom the High Priest was a Type. And this, I think, is a demonstration, that
the placing of Cherubims to cover the Mercy-seat in the Holy of Holies, does
not prove the lawful use of Images in Temples or Churches, or in the Worship of
God on Earth; if it proves any thing, it must prove the Worship of God by
Images in Heaven, of which the Holy of Holies was a Figure; and if any man can
be so foolish as to imagine that, let them make what they please of it, so they
do but excuse us from worshipping God by Images on Earth.

2. That these Cherubims were the most solemn and sacred part of the Jewish
Religion; that nothing is more remarkable in all the old Testament, than the
honor done to the Cherubims, that an outward worship was given to these
Images, as Symbols of the Divine presence, that the High Priest adored these
Cherubims once a year, as this Author asserts, I utterly deny; and he has not
given us one word to prove it.

For the Cherubims were so far from being the most solemn and sacred part of
the Jewish Religion, that they were no part at all of it, if by Religion he
means Worship; for there was no regard at all had to the Cherubims in the
Jewish Worship; and it is so far from being remarkable in the Old Testament,
that there is not the least footstep or intimation of any honor at all done to
the Cherubims: There is nothing in Scripture concerning them, but the command
to make them, and place them at the two ends of the Mercy-seat; and that God is
said to dwell between the Cherubims, and to give forth his Oracles and
Responses from that place: but I desire to learn where the Jews are commanded
to direct their Worship to or toward the Cherubims? where the High Priest is
commanded to adore the Cherubims once a year? or what Protestant grants he did
so, as this Author insinuates?

He supposes the Cherubims to have been the Symbols of God's presence, and his
representations, P. 130.
and that the Jews directed their Worship to them as such, and that is to
worship God by Images, or to give the same Signs of Reverence to his
Representations, as to himself: but how does it appear that the Cherubims were
the Symbols of God's Presence? God indeed is said to sit between the Cherubims,
and he promised Moses to commune with him from between the Cherubims, but the
Cherubims were no Symbols of God's presence, much less a representation of him:
if any thing was the Symbolical presence of God, it was the Mercy-seat, which
was a kind of Figurative Throne, or Chair of State; but the Cherubims were only
Symbolical representations of those Angels who attend and encompass God's
Throne in Heaven, and were no more representations of God, or Symbols of his
presence, than some great Ministers of State are of the King; as this Author
himself acknowledges, when he makes the four beasts in the Revelations ( Rev.
4.6, Page 127.
7.) which stood round about the Throne, to be an allusion to the
representation of the immediate Divine Presence in the Ark by the Cherubims; if
he had said to the Cherubims covering the Mercy-seat, which was his Figurative
Throne, and where he was invisibly present, without any visible Figures or
Symbols of his presence, he had said right: for the Cherubims which covered the
Mercy-seat, were no more Symbols of God's Presence, than the four Beasts, which
stood before the Throne, are the presence of God; or than some great Courtiers
or Ministers of State, who attend the King, are the presence of the King: They
attend the King, wherever he is, and so may be some sign of his presence, but
are not a symbolical presence, as a Chair of State is. But it seems our Author
imagined, that the Cherubims were such Symbols of God's presence, and such
representations of him, as Images were of the Pagan Gods, and therefore might
be worshipped with the same signs of reverence, as God himself was; according
to Thomas Aquinas's Rule, that the Image must be worshipped with the same
Worship, which is due to the Proto-type, or that Being whose Image it is, which
is such old Popery, as Monsieur De Meaux, and the Representer cry shame of;
well, But how does he prove, that any Worship was directed to these Cherubims?
I can find no proof he offers for it, but David's Exhortation (as he calls it)
to the People, Page 130.
to honor the Ark (he should have said worship) (...), how down to, or worship
his Footstool, for it, or he, is holy. Now suppose this did relate to the Ark,
what is that to the Cherubims? When but four Pages before, he tells us, that
the Ark is called God's Footstool, and the Cherubims his Throne: How then does
David's Exhortation to worship the Ark, which is God's Footstool, prove that
all their Worship must be directed to the Cherubims, which are his Throne? It
is pity, that great Wits have but short Memories.

And yet I fancy our Author would have been much troubled to prove the Ark to
be meant by God's Footstool; for the Ark was in the Holy of Holies, which was a
Figure of Heaven; and neither the Heaven, nor any thing in it, but the Earth,
is in Scripture called God's Footstool; and the Psalmist expressly applies it to
Zion, and to the Holy Hill, which, I will not prove, 99 Psalm 2, 9.
was not the Ark.

And this I suppose is a sufficient confutation of his Exposition of the words,
To bow down to, or worship his footstool; for I believe he did not think that
Mount Zion, or the Holy Hill, was the object of Worship, or the symbol of God's
presence; but there God was present, and that was reason enough to worship at
his footstool, and at his holy hill; as our English Translation reads it.

But now suppose the Jews were to direct their Worship toward the Mercy-seat,
which was covered with the Cherubims, where God had promised to be present; how
are the Cherubims concerned in this Worship? The Worship was paid only to God,
though directed to God, as peculiarly present at that place; which is no more,
than to lift up our Eyes and Hands to Heaven, where the Throne of God is, when
we pray to him: I grant, that bowing to, and bowing toward any thing, as the
Object of Worship, is the very same, as this Author observes; and therefore had
the Jews either bowed to or toward the Cherubims, as the Objects of their
Worship, as the Papists bow to or toward their Images, they had been equally
guilty of Idolatry, and the breach of the second Commandment; but when bowing
To signifies bowing to an Object of Worship, and bowing toward signifies
bowing to this Object of Worship, only toward such a place where he is
peculiarly present, this makes a great difference; and this was all the Jews
did at most, if they did that; they bowed to God toward the Mercy-seat, where
he dwelt, without any regard to the Cherubims or Mercy-seat, as the Object of
Worship, which was as invisible to the Jews then, as the Throne of God and the
Angels in Heaven are now to us; and we may as well say, that those who lift up
their eyes and their hands to Heaven, when they pray to God, worship the
Angels, who incircle his Throne, because they know not the Angels are there; as
say, that the Jews worshipped their invisible Cherubims, because they knew that
the Cherubims were there: For is there any necessity that the Jews must worship
whatever they knew was in the Holy of Holies, because they worshipped God
toward that place, any more than there is, that we must worship whatever we
know to be in Heaven, when we direct our Worship to God in Heaven?

Men, I grant, may worship an unseen Object, for so we all worship God, whom we
do not and cannot see; but is a good Argument still, that the Cherubims were
not intended by God for the Objects of Worship, because they were concealed
from the Peoples sight; for I believe the World never heard before of
worshipping invisible Images: The original intention of Images, is to have a
visible Object of Worship; for an invisible Image can affect us no more than an
invisible God; and if our Author had consulted all the Patrons of Image
Worship, whether Pagan or Popish, he would have found most of the Reasons they
allege for this Worship to depend on sight, and therefore whatever he thought,
are all lost when a man shuts his eyes. A man who directs his Worship to an
Image, may be an Idolater in the dark, and with his eyes shut; but as blind as
Idolaters are, there never had been any Image Worship, had their Images been as
invisible as their Gods; and therefore sight has more to do in this matter,
than our Author was aware of.

But it seems the High Priest once a year did see these Cherubims, and adore
and worship them. But this is another mistake: for the Jews did believe that
the High Priest never saw the Cherubims or Mercy-seat, even when he went once a
Year into the Holy of Holies; and they have great reason for what they say,
since God expressly commanded, That when he went into the Holy of Holies, he
should take a censer full of burning coals of fire from off the altar before
the Lord, and his hands full of sweet incense beaten small, and bring it within
the veil: And he shall put the incense upon the fire before the Lord, that the
cloud of the incense may cover the mercy-seat, that is upon the testimony, that
he die not, 16 Lev. 12, 13. which shows that the Cherubims and Mercy-seat were
to be covered with a Cloud of Incense, and to become as invisible to the
High Priest within the Veil, as to the People without it.

But suppose the High Priest did see the Cherubims, when he entered within the
Veil, I have one plain Argument to prove that he did not worship them, not only
because no act of Worship was commanded him when he went into the Holy Place,
but because as the Holy of Holies was the figure of Heaven, and the Cherubims
the types of Angels, who stand about the Throne of God; so the High Priest
entering into the Holy of Holies, was the type of Christ ascending into Heaven
with his own Blood; and therefore the High Priest must do nothing in the Holy
of Holies, but what was a proper figure and type of what Christ does in Heaven:
and then he must no more worship the Cherubims, which covered the Mercy-seat,
or the Typical Throne of God, than Christ himself, when he ascended to Heaven,
was to worship the Angels, who stand about the Throne.

So that notwithstanding God's command to make two Cherubims, and to place them
at the two ends of the Mercy-seat in the Holy of Holies, all Image Worship was
strictly forbid by the Law of Moses; and God has provided the most effectual
remedy against it by the Incarnation of his Son: Mankind have been always fond
of some visible Deity, and because God cannot be seen, they have gratified
their Superstition by making some visible Images and Representations of an
invisible God: now to take them off from mean corporeal Images and
Representations, which are both a dishonor to the Divine Nature, and debase
the minds of men, God has given us a visible Image of Himself, has clothed his
own eternal Son with Humane Nature, who is the brightness of his Father's
glory, and the express image of his person, 1. Hebr. 3. And therefore St. John
tells us, That the word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his
glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and
truth, 1 John 14. And for this reason when Philip was desirous to see the
Father, Show us the Father and it suffices; Christ tells him, that the Father
is to be seen only in the Son, who is his visible Image and Glory; Jesus says
unto him, Have I been so long time with you, and yet have thou not seen me
Philip? He that has seen me, has seen the Father, and how say thou then,
Show us the Father? 14 John 8, 9. This was one end of Christ's Incarnation,
that we might have a visible Deity, a God Incarnate to represent the Father to
us, who is the living and visible Image of God; and there could not be a more
effectual way to make men despise all dead material Representations of God,
than to have God visibly represented to us in our own Nature.

It is true, Christ is not visible to us now on Earth, but he is visible in
Heaven, and we know, he is the only visible Image of God, and that is enough to
teach us, that we must make and adore no other. He is as visible to us in
Heaven, as the Mercy-Seat in the Holy of Holies was to the Jews, and is that
true Propitiatory of which the Mercy-Seat was a Type and Figure, 3 Romans 25. Him
has God set forth to be a propitiation through Faith in his blood (...) the
Mercy-seat, as that word is used, 9 Heb. 5. He is the natural Image of God, and
his Mercy-Seat, or Presence and Throne of Grace, he is his visible Image, though
he cannot be seen by us, for the Typical Mercy-Seat in the Holy of Holies, did
prefigure, that his residence should be in Heaven, and therefore invisible to
us on earth, but there we may see him by Faith, and there he will receive our
Prayers, and present them to his Father.

Now then to sum up this Argument: since it was one main design of Christ's
appearance, to root all the remains of Idolatrous Worship out of the World, is
it credible, that the. Worship of Saints and Angels, and the Virgin Mary, the
Worship of Images and Relics, as it is practiced in the Church of Rome,
should be any part of Christian-Worship, or allowed by the Gospel of our
Savior? If Creature Worship, and Image Worship were so offensive to God, here
is the Worship of Creatures, and Images still, and therefore all the visible
Idolatry, that ever was practiced in the world before: All that they can
pretend is, that they have better Notions of the Worship of Saints, and Angels,
and Images, than the Heathens had; but whether they have or no, will be hard to
prove: The Pagan Philosophers made the same Apologies for their Worship of
Angels, and Demons, and Images, which the Learned Papists now make, and
whether unlearned Papists have not as gross Notions about their Worship of
Saints and Images, as the unlearned Heathens had, is very doubtful, and has
been very much suspected by learned Romanists themselves: But suppose there
were some difference upon this account, can we think, that Christ, who came to
root out all Idolatrous Worship, intended to set up a new kind of
Creature-Worship and Image Worship, in greater pomp and glory than ever, and
only to rectify men's Opinions about it? Suppose the Idolatry of
Creature-Worship and Image Worship, does consist only in men's gross Notions
about it; yet we see under the Law to prevent and cure this, God did not go
about to rectify their Opinions of these things, but absolutely forbids the
Worship of all Images, and of any other Being but himself, which methinks he
would not have done, had there been such great advantages in the Worship of
Saints, and Angels, and Images, as the Romanists pretend: and when God in the
Law of Moses forbad all Creature and Image Worship, can we think, that Christ
who came to make a more perfect Reformation, should only change their
Country-Gods into Saints and Angels, and the Virgin Mary, and give new names to
their Statues and Images? Which whatever he had taught about it, instead of
curing Idolatry, had been to set up that same kind of Worship, which the Law of
Moses absolutely forbad, and condemned as Idolatry.

When God, to cure the Idolatrous Worship of inferior Demons, as their
Mediators and Advocates with the Supreme God, sent his own Son into the World
to be our Mediator, can we think, that he intended after this, that we should
worship Angels, and Saints, and the Virgin Mary, as our Mediators? When God has
given us a visible Image of himself, his Eternal and Incarnate Son, whom we may
worship and Adore, did he still intend that we should worship material and
sensible Images of Wood or Stone? By the Incarnation of his own Son, God did
indeed take care to rectify men's mistakes about Creature-Worship, and to cut
off all pretenses for it: Those who pleaded that vast distance between God and
men, and how unfit it was, that Sinners should make their immediate approaches
to the Supreme God, and therefore worshipped inferior Demons as middle Beings
between God and man, have now no pretense for this, since God has appointed his
own Son to be our Mediator: Those who worshipped Images as the visible
Representations of an invisible God, have now a visible Object of Worship, a
God Incarnate, a God in the nature and likeness of a Man; and though we do not
now see him, yet we have the notion of a visible God and Mediator to whom we
can direct our Prayers in Heaven, which is satisfaction enough even to men of
more gross and material Imaginations, without any artificial and senseless
Representations of the Deity: And was all this done, that men might worship
Creatures and Images without Idolatry? or rather was it not done to cure men's
inclinations to commit Idolatry with Creatures and Images? Whoever believes
that the Gospel of our Savior was intended as a Remedy against Idolatry, can
never be persuaded, that it allows the Worship of Saints and Images; which if
it be not Idolatry, is so exactly like it in all external appearance, that the
allowance of it does not look like a proper cure for Idolatry.

SECT. II. Concerning the great Love of GOD to Mankind, and the Assurances of
Pardon and Forgiveness which the Gospel gives to all Penitent Sinners; which
are much weakened by some Popish Doctrines.
2. THE Gospel of Christ was intended to give the highest demonstration of
God's Love to Mankind, and the greatest possible Security to all humble
penitent Sinners, of the Forgiveness of their Sins: Hence the Gospel is called
the Grace of God, and the Gospel of Grace, as being a Dispensation of Love and
Goodness; and therefore whatever lessens and disparages the Gospel Grace, can
be no Gospel-Doctrine. As to consider this particularly.

The Gospel magnifies the Grace of God in giving his own Son for us: God so
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes
in him should not perish, but have everlasting life, 3 John 16. In this was
manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten
Son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein is love, not that we
loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for
our sins, 1 John 4.9, 10. And St. Paul assures us, that this is such a glorious
manifestation of God's love, as will not suffer us to doubt of any other
expressions of his goodness: He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him
up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? 8 Romans
32. So that the Gospel of our Savior gives us much higher demonstrations of
God's love and goodness, than either the Light of Nature, or the Law of Moses
did. Love is the prevailing Attribute of God under the Gospel Dispensation, For
God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him, 1
John 4.16.

Thus the Gospel of Christ gives a humble Penitent as great assurance of
Pardon, as his own guilty Fears can desire; for Repentance and Remission of
Sins is preached in the Name of Christ: He has expiated our Sins by the
Sacrifice of his Death, God commends his love toward us, in that while we
were yet sinners, Christ died for us, much more then being justified by his
blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him; for if when we were enemies we
were reconciled unto God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled we
shall be saved by his life, 5 Romans 8, 9, 10. For as he was delivered for our
Offenses, so he was raised again for our Justification; And him has God
exalted to be a Prince and a Savior to give repentance unto Israel, and
remission of sins. 1 John 2.1, 2.
So that if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, who is able to save all them to the uttermost, that come unto God by
him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them, 7 Heb. 25. These are
the fundamental Doctrines of Christianity, and therefore nothing can be a
Gospel-Doctrine, which weakens or overthrows them. Let us then examine the
Popish Doctrine of Purgatory, and the Invocation of Saints and Angels as our
Mediators with God, and see how they are reconcilable with the Gospel notion
of God's love, and that security it gives us of Pardon through the Merits and
Intercession of Christ.

1. Let us consider the Doctrine of Purgatory, which is but the outward Court
or Region of Hell, where the Punishments are as severe as in Hell itself, only
of a less continuance; and yet as short as they are, they may last many
hundred, nay thousand Years, unless their Friends and the Priests be more
merciful to them, or they themselves have taken care before Death to pay the
Price of their Redemption. This is a barbarous Doctrine, and so inconsistent
with that mighty Love of God to penitent Sinners, as it is represented in the
Gospel of Christ, that it is not reconcilable with any notion of Love and
Goodness at all; you may call it Justice, you may call it Vengeance, if you
please, but Love it is not, or if it be, it is such a Love as no man can
distinguish from Hatred: for my part I declare, I do not desire to be thus
loved; I should rather choose to fall into nothing, when I die, than to endure a
thousand Years torments to be happy for ever; for Humane Nature cannot bear the
Thoughts of that: And is this, that wonderful Love of God to Sinners, which is
so magnified in the Gospel, to torment those, who are Redeemed by the Blood of
Christ, some hundred or thousand Years in the Fire of Purgatory, which is not
cooler than the Fire of Hell?

The Light of Nature, I confess, never taught this, for Mankind never had any
Notion of such an outrageous Love; they always thought, that the Love of God
consisted in doing good, not in damning those, whom he loves, for so many Ages:
And if this be all the Discovery, the Gospel has made of the Love of God, we
have no great reason to glory in it. He who can believe, that God, who so loved
the World, as to give his only begotten Son for the Redemption of Sinners, will
torment a penitent Sinner so many Years in Purgatory, till he has either
endured the punishment of his Sins himself, or is released by the Charity of
his Friends, or the Masses of some Mercenary Priests, deserves to lie in
Purgatory, till he thinks more honorably of the divine goodness, and be
convinced, that it is no such extravagant commendation of the love of God, to
send penitent Sinners to Purgatory.

There are two extravagant Notions whereon the Doctrine of Purgatory is
founded, which overthrow all the natural Notions men have of goodness, and
destroy all the hope and confidence of the most penitent sinners in the
goodness of God. As,

1. That God may forgive Sins, and yet punish us for them; for no man can go
into Purgatory according to the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, whose Sins are
not already forgiven: but though his Sins are forgiven, he must make
satisfaction for that temporal punishment, which is due to them, either in this
World, or in Purgatory: Now how reconcilable these two are, to forgive, and to
punish, let all mankind judge. I believe, very few men think, they are
forgiven, when they are punished; for that which all men desire should be
forgiven them, is the punishment, they have deserved. What is it, men are
afraid of, when they have sinned? is it not, that they shall be punished for
it? What is it men desire, when they desire Pardon? is it not, that they may
not be punished? And is it any comfort to a Malefactor to be pardoned, and to
be hanged? Does any man boast of his love and kindness, or take any comfort in
it, who freely forgives him, but exacts the payment of the Debt, or the
punishment of his fault? And if this be so contrary to the very notion of
goodness and forgiveness among men, how comes it to be the notion of goodness
and forgiveness in God? How comes that to be love and goodness, which the
Sinner receives no benefit by? for love and goodness, I think, signifies to do
good; or if this be goodness, let those take comfort in it that can.

If it be said, that it is an Act of goodness to exchange the Eternal
Punishment of Hell, which is due to Sin, into the Temporal Punishment of
Purgatory, I grant, this is something, but only ask, whether it would not have
been a more perfect expression of love and goodness, to have remitted the
Temporal Punishment also of, it may be, some thousand years Torment in
Purgatory? whether this might not have been expected under a dispensation of
the most perfect Love? and from that God, who sent his only begotten Son into
the World to save Sinners? Whether those sins are perfectly forgiven, which
shall be avenged, though not with Eternal, yet with long Temporal Punishments in
the next World? Whether any man thinks himself perfectly forgiven, who is
punished very severely, though not absolutely according to his deserts? And
consequently, whether the Doctrine of Purgatory be not a very great diminution
of the Love of God, and the Grace of the Gospel? And whether that can be a true
Gospel-Doctrine, which represents the Love of God, much less then the Love of a
kind and good man, who when he forgives the Injury, forgives the whole
Punishment of it? Nay, Whether that can be a Gospel-Doctrine, which represents
the Love of God less than infinite? and I suppose an infinite Love may forgive
true Penitents the whole Punishment of their Sins; and then there is no need of
Purgatory.

2ly. In Purgatory, God does not only punish those whom he has pardoned, but he
punishes for no other reason, but punishment-sake. For thus the Roman Doctors
tell us, that the Souls in Purgatory are in a state of Pardon, and in a state
of Perfect Grace; and they suffer the pains of Purgatory, not to purge away any
remains of Sin, or to purify and refine them, and make them more fit for
Heaven, but only to bear the punishment due to Sin, for which they had made no
satisfaction, while they lived. Now I dare boldly affirm, this is
irreconcilable with any degree of Love and Goodness; to make any Punishment
just, it must have respect to the guilt of sin; to make it an act of goodness,
it must be intended for the reformation of the sinner; but when sin is
pardoned, the guilt at least is taken away, and therefore such punishments can
have no relation to guilt: and when the sinner is in a perfect state of Grace,
and needs no amendment, such punishments can have no respect to the good and
reformation of the sinner, and therefore such punishments are neither just nor
good, and this is the exact Notion of Purgatory; and methinks we should
consider, whether this agrees with that account the Gospel gives us of the love
and goodness of God: should a Prince have a Jayl of the same nature with
Purgatory, where for several years he torments those whom he pretends to have
pardoned, and who are grown very good men, and good Subjects, and need no
correction, or discipline, I believe all the World would laugh at those, who
should call this, love and goodness, pardon and mercy. Hell is very
reconcilable with the goodness of God, because it is prepared only for those
who are the Objects of a just, a righteous Vengeance, and a very good God may
be very just; but Purgatory can never be reconciled with the superabundant
goodness of God to sinners, through Jesus Christ, unless men think it a great
kindness to suffer the pains of Hell for several Months, Years, or Ages, for no
reason, which makes it either just or good to suffer them. So that a Popish
Purgatory is inconsistent with the belief of God's great Love and Goodness to
sinners, in Jesus Christ, and destroys the hope and confidence of sinners: for
if they may lie in Purgatory for some thousand years, as they may do,
notwithstanding the Love of God, and the Merits of Christ, if the Pope, or the
Priests, or their Money be not more merciful unto them, they have no great
reason to glory much in the Goodness of God, though they should go to Heaven at
last: so that our Protestant need not dispute much about Purgatory: Let him
only ask a Popish Priest, How the Doctrine of Purgatory can be reconciled with
that stupendous Love of God declared to penitent sinners, in his Son Jesus
Christ? for it is a contradiction to the Notion of Goodness among men, to
inflict such terrible Punishments in mere Grace and Love, even when the sin is
pardoned, and the sinner reconciled, and no longer in a state of Discipline and
Trial.

Secondly, The Doctrine of Purgatory destroys or weakens that Security the
Gospel has given Sinners of their Redemption from the Wrath of God, and the
just Punishment of their Sins. One great Security, is the Love of God declared
to the World by our Lord Jesus Christ, but if the Love of God to penitent
Sinners, who are Redeemed by the Blood of Christ, be consistent with his
tormenting them in Purgatory so many thousand years, as you have already heard,
it will be a very hard thing to distinguish such Love from Wrath; and a Sinner,
who is afraid of so many thousand years punishment, can take no great comfort
in it: but besides this, the Doctrine of Purgatory destroys men's hope and
considence in the Merits and Intercession of Christ, and in the express
promises of Pardon and Remission of Sins in his Name.

1. It destroys men's hopes in the Merits of Christ, and the Atonement and
Expiation of his Blood: For if the Blood of Christ does not deliver us from the
punishment of Sin, what security is this to a Sinner? Yes, you will say, Christ
has Redeemed us from Eternal, though not from Temporal Punishments, and therefore
penitent Sinners have this security by the Expiation of Christ's Death, that
they shall not be eternally Damned: This I know the Church of Rome teaches; but
I desire to know, How any man can be satisfied from Scripture, that Christ by
his Death has delivered us from Eternal Punishments, if he have not delivered
us from Temporal Punishments of Sin in the next World? I thankfully
acknowledge, and it is the only hope I have, that the Gospel has given us
abundant assurance of the Expiation and Atonement made for Sin by the Blood of
Christ; but what I say is this, that if these Texts which prove our Redemption
by the Death of Christ, do not prove, that Christ has redeemed us from the
whole punishment due to Sin in the next World, they prove nothing, and then we
have not one place of Scripture to prove, that Christ by his Death has redeemed
us from Eternal Punishments; which is enough to make all Christians abhor the
Doctrine of Purgatory, if it destroy the Doctrine of Salvation by Jesus Christ.
As to show this briefly:

The hope and security of Sinners depends upon such Scripture-expressions as
these: that Christ has died for our sins, that he has made atonement for sin,
that he is a propitiation through faith in his blood, that he has redeemed us
from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us: that remission and
forgiveness of sins is preached in his name; that by him we are justified from
all those things, from which we could not be justified by the Law of Moses,
that being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus
Christ; that we are reconciled unto God, and saved from wrath by him. Now I
desire to know, Whether all these expressions signify, that for Christ's sake,
and through the atonement and expiation of his Blood, a penitent Sinner shall
be delivered from the punishment due to his sins? If they do not signify this,
how is a Sinner secured, that though his sins are pardoned, and he is
justified, and reconciled to God, and redeemed from the Curse of the Law, and
saved from Wrath, he shall not after all this be damned for his sins, since
that is the punishment of sin, which it seems is not removed, when the sin is
pardoned, and the Sinner justified and reconciled to God? If these expressions
do not signify taking away the punishment of sin, I desire one Text of
Scripture to prove, that a Sinner, who is pardoned and justified, shall not
undergo the eternal punishment of his sins. If to be pardoned and justified,
etc. does signify to be delivered from the punishment of sin, I desire to
know, How a sinner, who is pardoned and justified, can be punished for his
sins? that is, How a sinner, who is released from the Punishment of his sins,
should be bound to suffer the punishment of his sins in Purgatory?

Our Roman Adversaries do indeed distinguish between the Temporal and Eternal
Punishment of Sin; the Eternal Punishment of Sin, they say, Christ has made
satisfaction for, and that is removed by his Death, that no penitent Sinner
shall be eternally damned; but a Sinner must make satisfaction for the temporal
punishment of Sin himself, either in this World, or in Purgatory: and
consequently that forgiveness of Sins, signifies the remission of the Eternal
Punishment of Sin, but not of the Temporal: now I shall not put them to prove
this distinction from Scripture, which is a very unreasonable Task, because
there is nothing in Scripture about it; but yet I would gladly be secured, that
I shall be saved from Eternal Punishments; and therefore I would gladly know,
how Forgiveness of Sins, and our Redemption from the Curse of the Law,
signifies our deliverance from Eternal Punishments, if they do not signify our
deliverance from the Punishment of our Sins? And how they can signify our
deliverance from the Punishment of our Sins, if notwithstanding this we must
suffer the punishment of our sins in Purgatory? If they signify, that we shall
not be punished for our sins, then indeed they may signify, that we shall not
be Eternally Punished; but they cannot signify, that we shall not be Eternally
Punished, unless they signify, that we shall not be punished, and therefore
not in Purgatory neither; if that be the Punishment of sin. The truth is, this
is a very senceless distinction between the Temporal and Eternal Punishment of
sin: for I desire to know, Whether the Temporal Punishment be not the
Punishment of sin? be not the Curse of the Law? if it be, then forgiveness of
sin, if it remits the Punishment, remits the Temporal Punishment, for that is
the Punishment of sin; then our Redemption from the Curse of the Law, redeems
us from Purgatory, for that is the Curse of the Law too, if you add, and from
Death, for that is the Curse of the Law too, and yet those who are redeemed and
justified, die still; which shows the fallacy of this Argument, for it seems
Redemption from the Curse of the Law, does not signify our Redemption from the
whole Curse, for then a justified Person must not die, since bare dying is part
of the Curse. I answer, this had certainly been true, had not the necessity of
dying been expressly excepted out of this Redemption; for in Adam all die, and
it is appointed (by a Divine Decree) for all men once to die, and could they
show, where Purgatory is excepted too, then I would grant, that those who are
redeemed from the Curse of the Law might fall into Purgatory, if that be any
comfort to them: and yet the case is vastly different between Death and
Purgatory: for though Death be the Curse of the Law, yet we may be delivered
from Death as a Curse and Punishment, without being delivered from the
necessity of dying: and thus good men are redeemed from Death: for their Sins
are expiated and pardoned, and then the Sting of Death is gone; for the sting
of death is sin, and therefore when our Sins are pardoned, Death cannot sting
us, can do us no hurt; because it does not deliver us over to Punishment, but
transplants us into a more happy state. The fears of Death are conquered by the
promises of Immortal Life, and Death itself shall at the last day be swallowed
up in Victory, when our dead Bodies shall be raised immortal and glorious, so
that tho good men still die, yet they are redeemed from the Curse of the Law,
from Death itself as a Curse and a Punishment. But the Popish Purgatory is a
place of Punishment, and nothing but Punishment; and therefore is not
reconcilable with the remission and forgiveness of sin.

Again I ask, Whether there are two kinds of Punishments due to sin, Temporal
and Eternal, of such a distinct nature and consideration, that the Promise of
forgiveness does not include both? Nay, that God cannot forgive both; that only
the Eternal Punishment can be forgiven, but the Temporal Punishment must be
satisfied for, or endured by the Sinner: if this were the case indeed, then I
would grant, the Promise of forgiveness could extend only to Eternal
Punishments, because God can forgive no other; and the forgiveness of Eternal
Punishment, does not include the forgiveness of the Temporal Punishment. But if
the Curse of the Law be Eternal Death, and all other Punishments, which can
properly be called the punishment of sin, (for Correction and Discipline is not
the Wrath of God, and the Curse of the Law) are only parts of the Curse, and a
partial execution of it; if the only thing, that makes Sinners obnoxious to
Temporal Punishments is, that they are under the Sentence of Eternal Death,
which God may execute by what degrees he pleases; then to forgive Eternal
Punishment must include the forgiveness of Temporal Punishments, as parts or
branches of it. As suppose there were a Law, that no man should suffer any
Bodily Punishments, but such a Malefactor as is condemned to die, but when the
Sentence of Death is past upon him, it should be at the Prince's pleasure to
defer the Execution of this Sentence, as long as he pleased, and in the mean
time to inflict all other Punishments on him, whatever he pleased; in this Case
to pardon the Sentence of Death, would deliver such a man from all other
Punishments too, which by the Law are due only to that man, who is under the
Sentence of Death: and in such a Constitution for any man to say, that the
Prince's Pardon extends only to Life, but does not excuse from Whipping, and
Pilloring, and perpetual Imprisonment, would be to make the Pardon void, since
no man by the Law can suffer those other Punishments but he who is Condemned to
Die, and therefore he who is pardoned the Sentence of Death, in consequence of
that is pardoned all other Punishments too.

Thus it is here, the original Curse against sin was, In the day, that thou
eatest thereof, thou shall surely die, which by the Gospel of Christ is
expounded of Eternal Death, and there is no other threatening in all the Gospel
against sin, but Eternal Death; and therefore all other Punishments are
inflicted by Virtue of this Law, and consequently he who is delivered from this
Curse of the Law, from Eternal Punishments, is delivered from the whole
Punshment due to sin; unless they can find some other Law in the Gospel,
besides that which threatens Eternal Death, which obliges a sinner to
punishment.

Again, since they acknowledge, that Christ by his Death has delivered us from
Eternal Punishments, I do not think it worth the while to Dispute with them,
whether those Sufferings and Calamities, which good men are exposed to in this
World, may properly be called Punishments, or only Correction and Discipline;
but I desire to know, Why they call Purgatory, which is a place of Punishment
in the other World, a Temporal Punishment? for this is an abuse of the Language
of Scripture, which makes this World Temporal, and the next World Eternal, as
St. Paul expressly tells us; The things, which are seen, are temporal, but the
things, which are not seen, are eternal, 2 Cor. 4.18. And therefore Temporal
Punishments signify the Punishments in this World, but the unseen Punishments,
as well as the unseen Rewards, of the next World are eternal: which is a
demonstration, that there is no Purgatory, unless it be Eternal, and then it is
but another Name for Hell, and therefore the state of the next World is called
either Life or Death, Eternal Life, or Eternal Death: those who believe in
Christ shall never die, 11 Joh. 25, 26. Now I desire to know the difference
between Living; and Dying, and Perishing in the next World; for bad men do not
cease to be, nor lose all sense in the next World, no more than good men; and
therefore Life can only signify a state of Happiness, and Death a state of
Misery, which is much worse than not being: now if good men must not perish,
must not die, but live, in the next World, they must not go to Purgatory, which
is as much perishing, as much dying, as Hell, though not so long: but if they
must never die, never perish, they must never suffer the pains of Purgatory,
which is a dying and perishing, that is, a state of Torment and Misery, while
they continue there.

Let us then see how a Papist, who believes a Purgatory-sire in the next World,
wherein he shall be tormented (God knows how long!) for his Sins, can prove
that a penitent Sinner shall not be eternally damned: Oh! says he, Christ has
died for our Sins, and made atonement for them, and we are pardoned and
justified through Faith in his Blood; and what then, may we not still be
punished for our Sins? If not, what becomes of Purgatory? If we may, prove,
that we shall not be eternally damned for Sin, which is the proper punishment
of it: For if to be pardoned and justified, signify to be delivered from
punishment, it signifies our deliverance from the whole punishment of Sin,
since the Scripture does not limit it: if they do not signify our deliverance
from punishment, then we may be eternally punished for Sin, though we are
pardoned and justified.

But we are redeemed from the curse of the Law, and saved from wrath. But if
such a man may go to Purgatory, why not to Hell? Or if the Curse of the Law,
and the Wrath of God be in Hell, but not in Purgatory, though the torments are
equally great, why may not he lie for ever in Purgatory, as well as a thousand
Years, with this comfort, that though he be infinitely tormented, yet it is not
the curse of the Law, nor the wrath of God?

Well, but Christ has promised, That those who believe in him, shall not
perish, but have everlasting life: And that proves, that the pains of Purgatory
cannot be for ever, for then Christ could not make good his promise of
bestowing everlasting Life on them: so I consess one would think, and so I
should have thought also, that when Christ promised, that such Believers should
not perish, and should never die, that he meant, such men should not go to
Purgatory in the next World; but if falling into Purgatory be not perishing,
and not dying, it may be everlasting life too, for ought I know, and then the
pains of Purgatory may be eternal.

Whoever would not forfeit all the assurance the Gospel has given us, of our
Redemption from Hell, and a glorious Immortality, must reject the Popish
Doctrine of Purgatory, as a flat contradiction to all the gracious Promises of
the Gospel: for Hell, or an Eternal Purgatory, is as reconcilable with the
Promises of Forgiveness and Immortal Life, as the Popish Purgatory is.

2. This Doctrine of Purgatory destroys our Hope and Confidence in the
Mediation and Intercession of Christ, and that for these two plain reasons: 1.
As it represents him less merciful and compassionate; And 2. less powerful,
than the wants and necessities of Sinners require him to be. For,

I. After all that is said in Scripture of his being so merciful and
compassionate an High Priest, a Sinner who hears what is told him of Purgatory,
could wish him a great deal more compassionate than he is: for it is no great
sign of tenderness and compassion to leave his Members in Purgatory-fire, which
burns as hot as Hell. Could I believe this of our Savior, I should have very
mean thoughts of his kindness, and not much rely on him for any thing: We
should think him far enough from being a merciful and compassionate Prince, who
can be contented to torture his Subjects for a year together; and it is a
wonderful thing to me, that when a merciful Man cannot see a Beast in torment
without relieving it, it should be thought consistent with the mercy and
compassion of our Savior, to see us burn in Purgatory for Years and Ages. To
be sure this destroys all our hope in him in this World; for why should we
think, he will be concerned what we suffer here, who can contentedly let us lie
in Purgatory, to which all the calamities and sufferings of this life are mere
trifles? O Blessed and Merciful JESU! pardon such Blaspemies as these. For,

II. If he be compassionate, he must want Power to help us; and that destroys
the hope of Sinners as much as want of Compassion. It must be want of Will of
Power in him, that he does not deliver us from Purgatory as well as Hell: and
if he want Power to deliver us from Purgatory, for my part I should more
question his Power to deliver from Hell, for that is the harder of the two: if
his Blood could not expiate for the Temporal Punishment of Sin, which the
Merits of some supererogating Saints, or the Pope's Indulgence, or the Priests
Masses can redeem us from, how could it make expiation for Eternal Punishment?
If his Interest in the Court of Heaven will not do the less, how can it do the
greater? There is no Doctrine more irreconcilable with the perfect Love and
Goodness of God, and the Merits and Intercession of our Savior, which are the
Fundamental Doctrines of the Gospel, which is a Dispensation of Love and Grace,
than this of Purgatory, and therefore we may safely conclude, that this is no
Gospel-Doctrine.

2. Let us now examine the Doctrine of Invocation of Saints and Angels as our
Mediators with God, and see whether it does not disparage the Grace of the
Gospel, the Love of God, and of our Mediator and Advocate Jesus Christ, to
penitent sinners. Now a very few words will decide this matter.

1. With respect to God; now can that man believe, that God is so very gracious
to Sinners for the sake of Christ, who seeks to so many Advocates and Mediators
to intercede for him with God. To imagine that we want any Mediator to God, but
only our High Priest, who mediates in Virtue of his Sacrifice, is a reproach to
the Divine Goodness. The Wisdom and Justice of God may require a Sacifice, and
a High Priest to make Atonement for Sin, but Infinite Goodness needs not any
Entreaties, and mere Intercessions to move him. A truly good man, who knows a
proper Object of his kindness, needs not to be asked to do good. The use of
such Advocates and Mediators among men, is either to recommend an unknown
Person to the favor of the Prince, or fairly to represent his cause to him,
which has been misrepresented by others, or to procure favor for an
undeserving person, or among equal Competitors, to procure some one to be
preferred; this is all the use of Intercession among men; for a good, and wise,
and just Prince, will do what is wise, and just, and good, not only without
Intercessors, but against all Intercessions to the contrary. Now I suppose no
man will say, that God wants Mediators and Advocates upon any of these
accounts; for he knows every man, understands perfectly his cause, will never
be persuaded by any Intercessions to show kindness to unfit Objects, that is,
to impenitent Sinners; and his Goodness is so unconfined, and so extensive to
all, that there can never be any competition for his Favor; and therefore to
multiply Advocates and Mediators to God, must argue a great distrust of his
Mercy and Goodness, which a kind and good Prince would take very ill of us.

God indeed has commanded us to Pray for one another in this World, as he has
to pray for our selves; but this is not by way of Interest and Merit, as the
Church of Rome pretends, the Saints in Heaven pray for us, but by humble
Supplications, which is very reconcilable with the goodness of God, to make
Prayer a necessary condition of granting Pardon and other Blessings we want:
but as the use of Prayer for our selves, is not to move God merely by our
importunities to do good to us, for we must pray in Faith, that is, with a
humble assurance and confidence that God will hear us, which includes a firm
Belief of his readiness to grant, what we pray for; so neither are our Prayers
for others to move God by our interest in him, that is, they are not the
Intercessions of Favorites, but of humble Supplicants.

There was great reason why God should make Prayer the condition of our
receiving, though he wants not our importunities to move him, because there are
a great many excellent Virtues exercised in Prayer; such as great sorrow for
Sin, great humility of Mind, faith in God's Promises, the acts of Love, and
affiance and trust in God, and a constant dependence on his Grace and
Providence for all spiritual and temporal Blessings: and there was great reason
why he should command us to pray for others, tho he wants none of our
Intercessions for them; because it is a mutual exercise of Charity, of Love to
our Brethren, and Forgiveness to our Enemies, and is a mighty obligation to do
all other acts of kindness; for those who know it to be their Duty to pray for
one another, will think themselves bound to do good to one another also: This
becomes those who live and converse together in this World, because it is a
great Instrument of Virtue, and that is a reason why God should encourage the
exercise of it by promising to hear our Prayers for each other.

But as far as mere goodness is concerned, the Gospel represents God as so very
good to Sinners, that there is no need of any Intercessor for them: For God so
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in
him should not perish, but have everlasting life, 3 John 16. This was an act of
goodness antecedent to the Incarnation and Death of Christ, and the highest act
of goodness that God could manifest to the World, and therefore secures us of
God's love and goodness to Sinners, without a Mediator and Advocate; for that
love which provided a Mediator for us, was without one, and proves, that it was
not for want of goodness, or that he needed entreaties, that he gave his Son to
be our Mediator. And therefore hence S. Paul proves, how ready God is to bestow
all good things on us: He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for
us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things, 8 Romans 32.
And our Savior himself represents the goodness of God, by the tenderness and
compassion of an earthly Parent: If ye then being evil (that is, less good than
God is) know how to give good things to your children, how much more shall your
heavenly Father give good things to them that ask him, 7 Matthew. 11. especially
in the Parable of the Prodigal, where our Savior describes the goodness of God
to sinners, by that passion and joy wherewith the Father received his returning
Prodigal; nay, he assures his Disciples, that there was no need of his own
Intercession to incline God to be good and kind to them: At that day ye shall
ask in my name, and I say not unto you, that I will pray the Father for you,
for the Father-himself loves you, because ye have loved me, and believed that
I came out from God, 16 John 26, 27. God is so infinitely good, that he needs
no Mediators or Intercessors to incline him to all acts of goodness; but as he
is the wise and just Governor of the World, he requires a Sacrifice for Sin,
and a High Priest to make Atonement for it, and to intercede in virtue of the
Sacrifice. Such a Mediator Christ is, who alone is both our Sacrifice and our
Priest, and therefore our only Mediator; not to incline God to be good; for
that he was before, infinitely good, or else he had not given his Son to be our
Sacrifice and our High Priest, but to make Atonement for our Sins, and thereby
to reconcile the exercise of God's goodness with his wisdom and justice in
governing the World. Such a Mediator and High Priest does not lessen the Divine
goodness, for the intention of his Mediation is not to make God good and kind,
but to make it wise and just in God to do good to Sinners; but all other
Mediators in Heaven, whose business it is by Prayers, and Entreaties, and
Interest, and Favor to incline God to be good to such particular persons as
they intercede for, is a real disparagement to the Divine goodness; as if he
would not be good unless he were conquered by Entreaties, and overruled by the
prevailing Intercessions of some great Favorites: and yet such Mediators as
these the Saints, and Angels, and Virgin Mary are, if they be Mediators at all;
and therefore to pray to them as to our Mediators, argues such a diffidence and
distrust of God's goodness, as does not become the Gospel of our Savior; this
can be no Gospel-Doctrine, because it is irreconcilable with that account the
Gospel gives us of the Love of God.

2. Nor is it less injurious to the Love of our Savior, to fly to the Prayers
and Aids of Saints, and Angels, and the Virgin Mary her self. I shall not now
dispute, what encroachment this is upon the Mediatorship of Christ, to make our
Addresses and Applications to other Mediators; but whoever does so, must either
think that Christ wants Interest with God, without the joint Intercession of
Saints and Angels, or that he wants Kindness to us, and either will not
intercede for us at all, or will not do it unless he be prevailed with by the
Intercession of Saints, or the Entreaties or the Commands of his Mother. I
suppose they will not pretend, that he wants power to do what we ask of him,
when he himself has assured us, That whatsoever we ask of the Father in his
name, he will give it us, 15 John 16.16 John 23, 24. Does our Mediator then
need other Mediators to intercede with him for us? What! he who became man for
us? who lived a laborious and afflicted life for us? who loved us so, as to
give himself for us? who is a merciful and compassionate High Priest, and
touched with a feeling of our infirmities, being in all things tempted like as
we are, yet without sin?

What a change does this make in the whole Gospel; Had not the Church of Rome
found out some better security for Sinners, in the Mediation of Saints, and
Angels, and the Blessed Virgin, what a hopeless state had we been in? For all
that the Gospel tells us is, That God in great love and goodness to Sinners,
sent his Son to be our Savior; and that we might have the greater assurance of
his pity and compassion for us, he became Man, Flesh of our Flesh, and Bone of
our Bone; and not only so, but submitted to all the weaknesses and infirmities
of our Natures, to the greatest shame and reproach, to the sharpest pains, and
the most infamous Death, that he might the better know what our temptations and
sufferings are in this World, and might be more sensibly affected with our
condition in all our sufferings: This one would have thought, should have given
the greatest security to Sinners of his readiness to help them, who did and
suffered all this for them; and this is the only security which the Gospel of
our Savior gives us. But it seems Christ is not merciful and pitiful enough;
his Virgin Mother has softer and tenderer passions, and such an interest in
him, or authority over him, in the right of a Mother, as some of them have not
without Blasphemy represented it, that she can have any thing of him; and thus
they suppose the other Saints to be much more pitiful than Christ is, and to
have interest enough to protect their Supplicants, or else it is not imaginable
why they should need or desire any other Advocates. Now let any man, who
understands the Gospel, and finds there how the love of Christ is magnified,
not only in dying for us, but in his being a merciful and compassionate
High Priest, that this is the only hope of Sinners. That if any man sin, we
have an advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous, who is also a
propitiation for our sins, think the Invocation of Saints, as our Patrons and
Advocates, to be a Gospel-Doctrine, if he can.

SECT. III. Concerning the Nature of Christian Worship.
3. ANother manifest design of the Gospel, was to reform the Worship of God,
not only by extirpating Idolatry, but by purging it from all Pagan and Jewish
Superstitions, and to appoint such a Worship as is more agreeable to the Nature
both of Gad and Man. And whoever will take the pains to compare the Worship of
the Church of Rome, with that Worship which our Savior has prescribed in the
Gospel, will easily discover how unlike they are. Let us then consider what
Christ has reformed in the Worship of God, and what kind of Worship he has
prescribed to his Disciples.

I. What he has reformed in the Worship of God; and that may be comprehended in
one word, he has taken away all that was merely External in Religion. By which
I do not mean that our Savior has forbid all External Acts of Worship, or such
External Circumstances as are necessary to the decent and orderly performance
of Religious Worship, which the nature and reason of things requires under all
Dispensations of Religion; but that he has laid aside all such External Rites
as either were, or were thought to be in themselves Acts of Religion, and to
render such Worshippers very acceptable to God. A great many such Rites there
were in the Pagan Religion, and a great many in the Jewish Worship of God's own
Institution, and a great many more which the Tradition of the Elders, and the
Superstition of the Scribes and Pharisees had introduced.

We know the Jewish Worship consisted of External Rites; in their Temple, and
Altars, and Sacrifices, and Washings, and Purifications, in New Moons and
Sabbaths, and Festival Solemnities, in consecrated Garments and Vessels for the
Service of the Temple, in distinction of Meats, etc. the very external
observance of these Rites, were Acts of Religion, and necessary to make their
Worship acceptable to God; and the wilful and presumptuous neglect or contempt
of them, was punished with Death.

Now our Savior has abrogated all these Jewish Rites, and has instituted
nothing in the room of them, excepting the two Sacraments, Baptism, and the
Lord's Supper, which are of a very different Nature and Use, as we shall see
presently: He did not indeed, while he was on Earth, blame the Observation of
the Law of Moses, which till that time was in full force, and which he observed
himself, but he blamed the External Superstitions of the Pharisees, in washing
Cups and Platters, and making broad their Phylacteries, and thinking themselves
very righteous persons, for their scrupulous observation even of the Law of
Moses, in paying Tithe of Mint and Cummin, etc. while they neglected the
weightier matters of the Law, judgment, mercy, and faith, 23 Mat. 23. But when
our Savior was Risen from the Dead, and had accomplished all the Types and
Shadows of the Law, then the Apostles with greater freedom opposed a Legal and
External Righteousness; and though they did for a time indulge the Jews in the
Observation of the Rites of Moses, yet they asserted the Liberty of the Gentile
Converts from that Yoke, as we may see in the first Council at Antioch, and in
St. Paul's Disputes with the Jews in his Epistles to the Romans and Galatians,
and elsewhere. And indeed whoever considers the Nature of the Christian
Religion, will easily see, that all those ends which such External Rites served
either in the Jewish or Pagan Religion, have no place here, and therefore
nothing that is merely External can be of any use or value in the Christian
Worship. As to show this particularly.

1st, There is no expiation or satisfaction for sin under the Gospel, but only
the Blood of Christ, and therefore all External Rites are useless to this
purpose. Him, 3 Romans 25.
and him only God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his
blood. Death was the punishment of sin, and Death is the only expiation of it;
and none else has died for our sins but Christ alone, and therefore he only is
a propitiation for our sins; and yet we know how great a part both of the Pagan
and Jewish Religion was taken up in the expiation of sin; all their Sacrafices
to be sure were designed for this purpose, and so were their Washings and
Purifications in some degree, and many other voluntary Severities and
Superstitions, this being the principal thing they intended in their Religious
Rites, to appease God, and make him propitious to them; since then Christ has
made a full and complete satisfaction and atonement for sin, and there is no
expiation or satisfaction required of us, all external Rites for expiation and
atonement can have no place in the Christian Worship, without denying the
atonement of Christ, and this necessarily strips Christian Religion of a vast
number of external Rites practiced both by Jews and Heathens.

2ly, Nor does the Gospel admit of any legal Uncleanness and Pollutions,
distinction between clean and unclean Meats, which occasioned so many Laws and
Observances both among Jews and Heathens; so many ways of contracting legal
Uncleanness, and so many ways to expiate it, and so many Laws about Eating and
Drinking, and such Superstition in Washing Hands, and Cups, and Platters, but
our Savior told his Disciples, Not that which goes into the mouth defiles
the man, but that which comes out of the mouth, 15 Matthew. 11, 17, 18, 19, 20.
this defiles the man. For whatsoever enters into the mouth, goes into the
belly, and is cast out into the draught, but those things, which proceed out of
the mouth, come forth from the heart, and they defile the man. For out of the
heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false
witnesses, blasphemies, these are the things which defile a man; but to eat
with unwashen hands, defiles not a man. And this also delivers Christian
Religion from all those Rites and Observances, which concerned legal cleanness,
which were very numerous.

3ly, Nor is there any Symbolical Presence of God under the Gospel, which puts
an end to the legal Holiness of Places and Things. God dwelt among the Jews in
the Temple of Jerusalem, where were the Symbols and Figures of his Presence: it
was God's House, and therefore a holy place, and every thing that belonged to
it had a legal Holiness: for the Holiness of Things and Places under the Law,
was derived from their relation to God, and his Presence: this was the only
place for their Typical and Ceremonial Worship, whither all the Males of the
Children of Israel were to resort three times a year, and where alone they were
to offer their Sacrifices and Oblations to God: the very place gave Virtue to
their Worship and Sacrifices, which were not so acceptable in other places;
nay, which could not be offered in other places without sin, as is evident from
Jeroboam's sin, in setting up the Calves at Dan and Bethel for places of
Worship, and the frequent Complaints of the Prophets against those who offered
Sacrifices in the High Places; and therefore the Dispute between the Jews and
Samaritans was, which was the place of Worship, whether the Temple at Jerusalem
or Samaria: but Christ tells the Woman of Samaria, that there should be no such
distinction of places in the Christian Worship: Woman believe me, the hour
comes, when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem worship
the father. -- But the hour comes and now is, 4 John 21, 23.
when the true worshippers shall worship the father in spirit and in truth. Not
as if the Father should not be worshipped, neither at Jerusalem nor Samaria;
but that neither the Temple at Jerusalem nor Samaria, should be the peculiar
and appropriate place of Worship; that God's Presence and Worship should no
longer be confined to any one place; that the Holiness of the place should no
longer give any value to the Worship; but those who worshipped God in spirit
and in truth, should be accepted by him, wherever they worshipped him. Such
Spiritual Worship and Worshippers, shall be as acceptable to God at Samaria as
at Jernsalem, and as much in the remotest Corners of the Earth, as at either of
them: for God's Presence should no longer be confined to any one place, but he
would hear our devout Prayers from all parts of the World, wherever they were
put up to him, and consequently the Holiness of places is lost, which consists
only in some peculiar Divine Presence, and with the Holiness of places, the
external and legal Holiness of things ceases also: for all other things were
Holy only with relation to the Temple, and the Temple-Worship. For indeed God's
Typical Presence in the Temple, was only a Figure of the Incarnation: Christ's
Body was the true Temple where God dwelt: for which reason he calls his Body
the Temple, Destroy this Temple, and I will raise it up in three days: And the
Apostles assure us, that the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in Christ bodily,
(...), really and substantially, in opposition to God's Typical Presence in the
material Temple: and therefore when Christ was come, who was the true Emmanuel
or God dwelling among us, and had by his Incarnation accomplished the Type and
Figure of the Temple, God would no longer have a Typical and Figurative
Presence.

I will not quarrel with any man, who shall call the Christian Churches, and
the Utensils of it, holy things; for being employed in the Worship of God, they
ought to be separated from common uses; and Reason teaches us to have such
places and things in some kind of religious Respect, upon the account of their
relation, not to God, but to his Worship; but this is a very different thing
from the Typical Holiness of the Temple and Altar, and other things belonging
to the Temple, and there are two plain differences between them, the first with
respect to the cause, the second with respect to the effect: the cause of this
legal Holiness, was God's peculiar Presence in the Temple, where God chose to
dwell as in his own House, which Sanctified the Temple, and all things
belonging to it: the effect was that this Holiness of the Place Sanctified the
Worship and gave value and acceptance to it: the first needs no proof, and the
second we learn from what our Savior tells the Scribes and Pharisees. Woe unto
you ye blind guides, which say, whosoever shall swear by the temple it is
nothing, but whosoever shall swear by the gold of the temple, 23 Matthew. 16, 17,
18, 19.
he is a debtor; ye fools and blind, for whether is greater, the gold, or the
temple, that sanctifies the gold? And whosoever shall swear by the altar, it
is nothing, but whosoever swears by the gift, that lies upon it, he is
guilty: ye fools and blind, for whether is greater, the gift, or the Altar that
sanctifies the gift? So that it seems, there was such a Holiness in the Temple
and Altar, as conveyed a Holiness and Sanctity to other things, even to the
Oblations and Sacrifices, which were offered there. But now whatever Holiness
there is in Christian Churches and Oratories, they are sanctified by the
Worship that is performed there, not the Worship sanctified by them. It is the
Assembly of Christians themselves, that is the Church, the House, the holy and
living Temple of God, not the building of Wood or Stone wherein they meet: God
and Christ is peculiarly present in the Assemblies of Christians, though not by
a figurative and symbolical Presence, and thus he is present in the places
where Christians meet, and which are consecrated and separated to Religious
Uses, and there is a natural Decency in the thing, to show some peculiar
Respects to the places, where we solemnly Worship God; but the Presence of God
is not peculiar to the place as it was appropriated to the Temple of Jerusalem,
but it goes along with the Company and the Worship; and therefore the place may
be called Holy, not upon account of its immediate relation to God, as God's
House, wherein he dwells, but its relation to Christians, and that Holy Worship
which is performed there; and I suppose every one sees the vast difference
between these two: and thus all that vast number of Ceremonies, which related
to this external and legal Holiness of Places, Vessels, Instruments, Garments,
etc. have no place in the Christian Worship, because there is no typical and
symbolical Presence of God, and consequently no such legal Holiness of places
and things, under the Gospel.

4ly, Nor are material and inanimate things made the Receptacles of Divine
Graces and Virtues under the Gospel, to convey them to us merely by Contact and
external Applications; like some Amulets or Charms to wear in our Pockets, or
hang about our Necks. There was nothing like this in the Jewish Religion,
though there was in the Pagan Worship, but under the Gospel Christ bestows his
holy Spirit on us, as the principle of a new divine Life, and from him alone we
must immediately receive all Divine Influences and Virtue, and not seek for
these heavenly Powers in senceless things, which can no more receive, nor
communicate Divine Graces to us, than they do Wit and Understanding to those
who expect Grace from them; For can Grace be lodged in a rotten Bone, or a
piece of Wood? or conveyed to our Souls by perspiration in a kiss or touch?

5ly, The Christian Religion admits of no external or ceremonial Righteousness:
In Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, 5 Mat. 20.
nor uncircumcision, but a new creature, and obedience to the commandments of
GOD, and faith which works by love. The great design of the Gospel, and of
all our Savior's Sermons, being to make us truly Holy, that we may be
Partakers of the Divine Nature, having escaped the Corruption, which is in the
World through Lust. There is nothing our Lord does more severely condemn, than an
External and Pharisaical Righteousness, which consisted either in observing the
External Rites of the Law of Moses, or their own Superstitions received by
Tradition from their Forefathers, and expressly tells his Disciples, Except your
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall
in no wise enter into the kingdom of heaven. Now this cuts off every thing,
which is External in Religion at a blow, because it cuts off all hopes and
reliances on an External Righteousness; and I believe men will not be fond of
such Superstitions, when they know, they will do them no good.

6ly, And hence it appears, that there can be no place for any thing, that is
External, in the Christian Religion, but only for some Foederal Rites, such as
the two Sacraments of the Gospel are, Baptism and the Lord's Supper; the first
of which is our admission into the new Covenant, the second the exercise of
Communion with Christ in his Gospel Covenant. And such Rites as these are
necessary in all Instituted Religions, which depend upon free and voluntary
Covenants: for since Mankind has by Sin forfeited their natural Right to God's
favor, they can challenge nothing from him now, but by Promise and Covenant;
and since such Covenants require a mutual Stipulation on both sides, they must
be transacted by some visible and sensible Rites, whereby God obliges himself
to us, and we to him; but these being only the Signs and Seals of a Covenant,
are very proper for a Religion which rejects all External and Ceremonial
Righteousness and Worship: for it is not our being in Covenant with God, nor
the Sacraments of it, that can avail us, without performing the Conditions of
the Covenant, and therefore this does not introduce an External Righteousness.

Now whoever has such a Notion and Idea of the Christian Worship as this, (and
let the Church of Rome confute it if she can) will easily see, without much
Disputing, how unlike the Worship of the Church of Rome is to true Christian
Worship.

For whoever only considers the vast number of Rites and Ceremonies in the
Church of Rome, must conclude it as Ritual and Ceremonial a Religion as Judaism
itself; the Ceremonies are as many, more obscure, unintelligible, and useless;
more severe and intolerable than the Jewish Yoke itself; which St. Peter tells
the Jews, neither they, nor their Fathers were able to bear: it is indeed
almost all Outside and Pageantry, as unlike the Plainness and Simplicity of the
Gospel Worship, as Show and Ceremony can make it!

It is true, external and visible Worship must consist of external Actions; and
must be performed with such grave and decent circumstances of time and place,
and posture and habit, as become the Solemnity of Religious Worship; this
Reason and Nature teaches, and this the Church of England prudently observes,
whose Ceremonies are not Religious Rites, but decent Circumstances of Worship,
few in number (as the necessary Circumstances of Action are but few) and grave
and solemn in their use: but this is not to place Religion in any thing that is
external, but only to pay an external Homage and Worship to God, which differ
as worshipping God in a decent Habit, differs from the Religion of consecrated
Habits and Vestments; or as praying to God with an audible Voice, differs from
placing Religion in Words and Sounds which we do not understand, or as Kneeling
at receiving the Sacrament, differs from a Bodily Worship of the Host in bowing
the Knee.

But though the bear number of external Ceremonies, which are always the seat
of Superstition, be a great Corruption of the Christian Worship, yet the number
of them is the least fault of the Ceremonies of the Church of Rome, as will
appear, if we consider a little their Nature.

For 1st, Most of their external Rites are professedly intended as Expiations
and Satisfactions for their Sins. This is the Doctrine and Practice of the
Church of Rome, that notwithstanding the Satisfaction made by Christ, every
Sinner must satisfy for his own Sins, or have the satisfaction of other men's
applied to him, out of the Treasury of the Church, by the Pope's Indulgences:
this is the meaning of all external Penances in Whippings, Fastings,
Pilgrimages, and other superstitious Severities; their Backs, or their Feet, or
their Bellies must pay for their Sins, unless they can redeem them out of their
Pockets too: now it is plain, that these are such external Superstitions, as
can have no place in the Christian Religion, which allows of no other Expiation
or Satisfaction for Sin, but the Blood of Christ.

2ly, Those distinctions between Meats, which the Church of Rome calls Fasting,
(for a Canonical Fast is not to abstain from Food, but only from such Meats as
are forbid on Fasting-Days) can be no part of Christian Worship, because the
Gospel allows of no distinction between clean and unclean things, and therefore
of no distinction of Meats neither: for meat commends us not to God, 1 Cor.
8.8. The Church of Rome indeed does not make such a distinction between clean
and unclean Beasts, as the Law of Moses did, and therefore is the more absurd
in forbidding the eating of Flesh, or any thing that comes of Flesh, as Eggs,
or Milk, or Cheese, or Butter, on their Fasting-Days, which is to impose a new
kind of Jewish Yoke upon us, when the reason of it is ceased. For there is no
imaginable reason why it should be an Act of Religion merely to abstain from
Flesh, if Flesh have no legal uncleanness; and if it had we must all turn
Carthusians, and never eat Flesh; for how it should be clean one day, and
unclean another, is not easy to understand. I am sure St. Paul makes this part
of the Character of the Apostasy of the latter days, That they shall Command to
abstain from meats, which God has created to be received with thanksgiving of
them, which believe and know the truth. 1 Timothy 4.3, 4, 5.
For every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be
received with thanksgiving. For it is sanctified by the word of God, and
prayer. And let no man judge you in meat or drink, -- wherefore if ye be dead
with Christ from the rudiments of the world, why as though living in the world,
are ye subject to ordinances: touch not, taste not, handle not, which all are to
perish with the using, 2 Col. 16.20.21, 22.
after the Commandments and Doctrines of men?

And yet, though they do not own the legal distinctions between clean and
unclean things, their Consecrations would persuade one, that there were
something more than a mere legal uncleanness in all Creatures, viz that they
are all possessed by the Devil and wicked Spirits; for when they Consecrate
Salt and Water to make their Holy Water, they first exorcise both the Salt and
Water to cast the Devil out of them; and if such innocent Creatures are
possessed, I doubt none can escape; which has made me sometimes wonder, that
they durst eat any thing before it was first exorcised, for fear the Devil
should take possession of them with their meat. It is certain, if the Christian
Religion takes away all such distinctions between Meat and Drinks, the mere
abstaining from Flesh can be no part of Christian Worship, much less so
satisfactory and meritorious as the Church of Rome pretends, when such
Abstinence is appointed as a satisfactory Penance.

3ly, As for the Religion of Holy Places, Altars, Vestments, Utensils, the
Church of Rome has infinitely outdone the Jewish Laws: instead of one Temple
at Jerusalem, they have thousands to the full as Holy and Sacred as that, as
may appear from their Rites of Consecration. Though herein, I consess, they
differ, that the Temple of Jerusalem was only God's House, and that alone made
it a Holy Place, because God was there peculiarly present; but the Popish
Churches derive their Sanctity, not so much from the Presence of God, (for then
they would be all equally Holy) as from some great and eminent Saint, who is
peculiarly Worshipped there. It is a great argument of the opinion men have of
the Holiness of any Place, to go in Pilgrimage to it, not merely in Curiosity,
but Devotion; as if either going so far to see the place, were in itself an act
of Religion, or their Prayers would be better heard there, than if they prayed
at home: Thus they Travel to Jerusalem to visit the Holy Land, and the
Sepulcher, and this may be thought in honor of our Savior who Lived, and
Died, and was Buried there; but otherwise I know not any Church or Chapel,
which the most devout Pilgrims think worth visiting merely upon the account of
God or Christ: The several Churches or Chapels of the Virgin, especially those
which are the most famed for Miracles, or the Churches where the Relics of
some great and adored Saints are lodged, have their frequent Visits, for the
sake of the Virgin, or of the Saints; but without some Saint Churches lose
their Sacredness and Veneration, which I suppose is the reason why they always
take care of some Relics to give a Sacredness to them, without which no
Church can be Consecrated; that is, its Dedication to the Worship of God,
cannot make it Holy, unless some Saint take possession of it by his or her
Relics.

This, I confess, is not Judaism, for under the Jewish Law, all Holiness of
things or places was derived from their relation to God; now the Names, and
Relics, and wonder-working Images of Saints and the Blessed Virgin, give the
most peculiar and celebrated Holiness; and whether this be not at least to
ascribe such a Divinity to them, as the Pagans did to their Deified Men and
Women, to whom they erected Temples and Altars, let any impartial Reader judge.
Those must have a good share of Divinity, who can give Holiness to any thing
else.

But since they must have Holy Places, and something to answer the Jewish
Superstition, who cried, The Temple of the LORD, the Temple of the LORD, I
cannot blame them for making choice of Saints to inhabitate their Churches, and
sanctify them with their presence, since under the Gospel God is no more
present in one place than in another: He dwelt indeed in the Temple of
Jerusalem by Types and Figures, but that was but a Type of God's dwelling in
Humane Nature: the Body of Christ was the true Temple, as he told the Jews,
Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up; which he spoke of
the Temple of his Body: And now Christ is ascended into Heaven, there is no
Temple on Earth; and therefore if they will have Temples, they must have the
Temples of Saints, for the Presence of God is now no more confined to a House,
than his Providence is to the Land of Judaea, as it was in a very peculiar
manner, while the Temple stood there. God dwells not on Earth now, as he did
among the Jews, but his Presence, viz. our Lord Jesus Christ, is removed into
Heaven, and therefore he has no House on Earth to answer to the Jewish Temple,
as the Ancient Fathers asserted that the Christians had neither Temples nor
Alters: The Christian Church indeed is a holy and living Temple, wherein the
Holy Spirit dwells, but that is built not with Stones or Brick, but of living
Saints; and therefore the Holiness of Places, and Altars, and Garments, etc.
which makes up so great a part of the Roman Religion, is a manifest Corruption
of the Smplicity of the Christian Worship. The Jewish Temple made that Worship
most acceptable to God, which was offered there, because it was a Type of
Christ, and signified the acceptance of all our Prayers and Religious Services,
as offered up to God only in the Name of Christ; but to think that any place is
so Holy now, that the bear visiting it, or praying in it, should bestow a
greater holiness upon us, and all we do, should expiate our Sins, or merit a
Reward, is no better than Jewish or Pagan Superstition.

4ly, That the Church of Rome does attribute Divine Virtues and Powers to
senseless and inanimate Things, is so evident from that great Veneration they
pay to the Relics, and those great Virtues they ascribe to them, from their
Consecrations of their Agnus Dei, their Wax-candles, Oil, Bells, Crosses,
Images, Ashes, Holy Water, for the Health of Soul and Body, to drive away evil
Spirits, to allay Storms, to heal Diseases, to pardon Venial, and sometimes
Mortal Sins, merely by kissing or touching them, carrying them in their hands,
wearing them about their necks, etc. that no man can doubt of it who can
believe his own eyes, and read their Offices, and see what the daily Practice
of their Church is. Whoever has a mind to be satisfied about it, needs only
read Dr. Brevint's Saul and Samuel at Endor, Chap. 15. These things look more
like Charms than Christian Worship, and are a great Profanation of the Divine
Grace and Spirit; indeed they argue that such men do not understand what Grace
and Sanctification means, who think that little Images of Wax, that Candles,
that Oil, that Water and Salt, that Bells, that Crosses, can be sanctified by
the Spirit of God, and convey Grace and Sanctification by the sight, or sound,
or touch, or such external applications. Christ has given his Holy Spirit to
dwell in us, which works immediately upon our minds and rational powers, and
requires our concurrence to make his Grace effectual to cleanse and purify our
Souls, and to transform us into the Divine Image; the grace of the Spirit is to
enlighten our Minds, to change our Wills, to govern and regulate our Passions,
to instruct, to persuade, to admonish, to awaken our Consciences, to imprint
and fix good thoughts in us, to inspire us with holy desires, with great hopes,
with divine consolations, which may set us above the fears of the World, and
the allurements of it, and give greater fervor to our Devotions, greater
strength to our Resolutions, greater courage and constancy in serving God, than
the bare powers of Reason, though enforced with supernatural Motives, could do.
This is all the Sanctification the Gospel knows, and he who thinks that
inanimate Things are capable of this Sanctification of the Spirit, or can
convey such Sanctification to us by some Divine and Invisible Effluviums of
Grace, may as well lodge Reason, and Understanding, and Will, and Passions in
senseless matter, and receive it from them again by a kiss or touch. To be sure
men who know what the Sanctification of the Spirit means, must despise such
Fooleries as these.

5ly, That all this encourages men to trust in an external Righteousness, is
too plain to need a proof; and therefore I shall not need to insist long on it.

For 1. such external Rites are naturally apt to degenerate into Superstition,
especially when they are very numerous: The Jewish Ceremonies themselves, their
Circumcision, Sacrifices, Washings, Purifications, Temples, Altars, New Moons
and Sabbaths, and other Festival Solemnities, were the Righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, and a cloak for their Hypocrisy and great Immoralities,
though they were never intended by God for the justification of a Sinner. For
such external Rites are so much easier to carnal men, than to subdue their
Lusts, and live a holy and virtuous Life, that they are willing to abound in
such external Observances, and hope that these will make Expiation for their
other sins; and therefore when the Typical use of these Ceremonies was
fulfilled by Christ, the External Rites were abrogated, that men might no
longer place any hope or confidence in any thing which is merely External: And
therefore that Church which fills up Religion with External Rites and
Ceremonies, were there no other hurt in it, lays a Snare for Men's Souls, and
tempts them to put their trust in an External Righteousness, without any regard
to the Internal Purity of Heart and Mind.

Especially 2. when such External Rites are recommended as very acceptable to
God, as satisfactions for our sins, and meritorious of great Rewards; and this
is the use they serve in the Church of Rome, as you have already heard. They
assert the necessity of Humane Satisfactions: And what are these satisfactory
Works wherewith men must expiate their sins? The principal of them are
Fastings, that is, abstaining from Flesh, and other Acts of Penance, as
Whippings, Pilgrimages, and some Bodily severities, or Prayers, that is, saying
over such a number of Ave-Maries; or Alms, that is, to pay for Indulgences, or
to purchase Masses for themselves, or their Friends in Purgatory, or to found
some Religious Houses, or to enrich those that are; which are much more
satisfactory and meritorious than common acts of Charity to the Poor: All which
men may do, without the least sorrow for sin, without any true devotion to God,
without mortifying any one Lust. They mightily contend for the Merit of Works;
but what are their meritorious Works? Whoever reads the Lives of their
Canonized Saints, will easily see what it was that made them Saints: their
Characters are usually made up of some Romish Superstitions, of their Devotions
to the Virgin Mary, and their familiar Conversations with her, the severities
of their Fasts, and other external Mortifications, their frequenting the Mass,
the great numbers of their Ave-Maries, pretenses to Raptures and Visions, and
such wild Extravagancies as made them suspected of Madness, while they lived,
and Canonized them for Saints, when they were dead: Other things may be added
to fill up their Stories, but these are the glorious Accomplishments,
especially of the more Modern Saints: for no man must be a Saint at Rome, who
is not a famous Example of Popish Superstitions.

Monkery is thought the most perfect State of Religion among them, and has even
Monopolized the Name, for no other persons are called the Religious, but those
who belong to one Order or other: And wherein does the Perfection of Monkery
consist? 1. In the Vows of Caelibacy, Poverty, and Obedience to the Superiors
of their Order, which are all External things, no Virtues in themselves, and
very often the occasion of great Wickedness. 2. In the strictest Observance of
the External Rites and Ceremonies of their Religion; of Masses, and Ave-Maries,
and Fastings, and Penances, and many of them would be glad, if they could go
Pilgrimages too. These things are in perfection in their Monasteries and
Nunneries, with such additional Superstitions as are peculiar to particular
Orders. As for other true Christian Virtues, they may as soon be found without
the Walls of the Monastery, as within.

Now when such External Rites and Observances shall be judged Satisfactions and
Expiations for Sin, shall be thought the most highly meritorious, shall be made
the Characters of their greatest Saints, and the most perfect state of
Religion; I cannot see how any true thorough-paced Romanist, can aim at any
thing but a Ceremonial Righteousness.

Indeed the true reason why any thinking men are so fond of an External and
Ceremonial Righteousness, is to excuse them from true and real Holiness of
Life: all men know that if they mortify their Lusts, they need not afflict
their Bodies with Fastings, and other severities: that if they have their
Conversation in Heaven, they need not travel in Pilgrimages to Jerusalem or
Loretto; that if they take care to obey the Laws of the Gospel, they need no
satisfactions for their Sins, nor no works of Merit or Supererogation, which
are nothing else but meritorious and supererogating satisfactions; for all men
know that in the Offices of Piety and Virtue, they can never do more than is
their Duty; and therefore as nothing can be matter of Merit, which is our Duty,
so the true intention of all Merits and Works of Supererogation, are to supply
the place of Duty, and to satisfy for their Sins, or to purchase a Reward,
which they have no title to, by doing their Duty; but a good man, who by
believing in Christ, and obeying him, has an interest in his Merits, and a
title to the Gospel-Promises of Pardon and Eternal Life, needs none of these
Satisfactions, Merits, or Supererogations. Now would any man who believes that
he cannot be saved without mortifying his Lusts, be at the trouble of Whippings
and Fastings, etc. not to mortify his Lusts, but to keep them, and to make
satisfaction for them? Would any man travel to Jerusalem, or the Shrine of any
Saint, who believes he shall not be forgiven, unless he leaves his Sins behind
him, which he might as well have parted with at home? The true notion of
Superstition is, when men think to make satisfaction for neglecting or
transgressing their Duty, by doing something which is not their Duty, but which
they believe to be highly pleasing to God, and to merit much of him: Now no man
who believes that he cannot please God without doing his Duty, would be so fond
of doing his Duty, and doing that which is not his Duty, nor pleasing to God,
into the bargain.

3. And yet these meritorious and satisfactory Superstitions are very
troublesome to most men, and though they are willing to be at some pains rather
than part with their Lusts, yet they would be at as little trouble as possibly
they can; and herein the Church of Rome, like a very indulgent Mother, has
consulted their ease; for one man may satisfy for another, and communicate his
Merits to him? and therefore those who, by their Friends or Money, can procure
a vicarious Back, need not Whip themselves; they may Fast, and say over their
Beads, and perform their Penances and Satisfactions by another, as well as if
they did it themselves; or they may purchase Satisfactions and Merits out of
the Treasury of the Church, that is, they may buy Indulgencies and Pardons; or
it is but entering into some Confraternity, and then you shall share in their
Merits and Satisfactions. This is an imputed Righteousness with a witness, and
I think very External too, when men can satisfy and merit by Proxies.

4. And I think it may pass for an External Righteousness too, when men are
sanctified and pardoned by Relics, Holy Water, Consecrated Beads, Bells,
Candles, Agnus Dei's, etc. And how unlike is all this to the Religion of our
Savior, to that purity of Heart and Mind the Gospel exacts, and to those means
of Sanctification, and methods of Piety and Virtue it prescribes? Whoever
considers what Christian Religion is, can no more think these Observances
Christian Worship, than he can mistake Popish Legends for the Acts of the
Apostles.

II. Let us now consider what kind of Worship Christ has prescribed to his
Disciples: And the general account we have of it 4 John 23, 24. But the hour
comes, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in
spirit and in truth, for the Father seeks such to worship him: God is a
spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth. Now
there are three things included in this description of Gospel Worship: 1. That
we must worship God under the Notion of a Pure and Infinite Spirit. 2. That we
must worship him under the Character of a Father. 3. That we must worship him
with the Mind and Spirit.

First, We must worship God under the Notion of a Pure and Infinite Spirit, who
has now confined his peculiar Presence to no place, as he formerly did to the
Temple at Jerusalem; for this was the present Dispute, Whether God would be
worshipped at the Temple at Jerusalem, or Samaria; as I observed above: In
opposition to which, our Savior tells the Woman, that God is a Spirit, and
therefore not confined to any place; he is everywhere, and present with us
everywhere, and may be worshipped everywhere by devout and pious Souls: that
though for Typical Reasons he had a Typical and Symbolical Presence under the
Jewish Dispensation, yet this was not so agreeable to his Nature, who is a
Spirit, and therefore he must not now be sought for in Houses of Wood and Stone.

And indeed the Reformation of the Divine Worship must begin in rectifying our
Notions and Apprehensions of God; for such as we apprehend God to be, such a
kind of Worship we shall pay him; as is evident from the Rites and Ceremonies
of the Pagan Worship, which was fitted to the Nature and History of their Gods;
for where there are no instituted Rites of Worship, all Mankind conclude, that
the Nature of God is the best Rule of his Worship; for all Beings are best
pleased with such Honors as are suitable to their Natures, and no Being can
think himself honored by such Actions as are a contradiction to his own Nature
and Perfections.

Now if God will be worshipped more like a pure and infinite Spirit under the
Gospel, than he was under the Law; if this be the fundamental Principle of
Gospel Worship, that God is a Spirit, and must be worshipped as a Spirit, I
think it is plain, that nothing is more unlike a pure Spirit, than a material
Image; nothing more unlike an infinite Spirit, which can have no shape or
figure, than a finite and figured Image, made in the likeness of a man, or of a
thing in Heaven and Earth; nothing more unlike an infinite Spirit, which is
Life, and Mind, and Wisdom, than a dead and senceless Image; and if under the
Law, where God suited his Worship more to a Typical Dispensation than to his
own Nature, he would not allow of the Worship of Images, much less is this an
acceptable Worship to him under the Gospel, where he will be worshipped as a
pure Spirit, for there is nothing in the World more unlike a Living, Infinite,
Omnipotent, Omniscient Spirit, than a little piece of dead senceless figured
Gold or Silver, Wood or Stone, whatever shape the Carver or Engraver please to
give it, since God has none. Now would any man, who understands this, that God
is a Spirit, and will under the Gospel be worshipped as a Spirit, should he go
into many Popish Churches and Chapels, and see a vast number of Images and
Pictures there, and People devoutly kneeling before them, suspect that these
were Christian Oratories, or this Christian Worship, unless he knew something
of the matter before? For there you shall find the Pictures of God the Father,
and the ever Blessed Trinity, in different forms and representations; the
Pictures of the Blessed Virgin, and other Saints and Martyrs devoutly adored
and worshipped, and would any man guess, that this were to worship God as a
pure and infinite Spirit? A Spirit cannot be painted, and then to worship God
as a Spirit, cannot signify to look upon any Representation of God, when we
pray to him, which to be sure cannot give us the Idea of an infinite Spirit. He
who worships God as a Spirit, can have no regard to Matter and Sense, but must
apply himself to God as to an infinite Mind, which no man can do, who gazes
upon an Image, or contemplates God in the art and skill of a Painter; for to
pray to God in an Image, and in the fame thought to consider him as a pure and
infinite mind, is a contradiction; for though a man, who believes God to be a
Spirit, may be so absurd as to worship him in an Image, yet an Image cannot
represent a Spirit to him, and therefore either he must not think at all of the
Image, and then methinks he should not look on an Image, when he worships God,
for that is apt to make him think of it; or if he does think of the Image,
while his mind is filled with such gross and sensible representations, it is
impossible in the same act to address to God, as to a pure invisible and
infinite Spirit. Which shows how unfit and improper Images are in the Worship
of God; for they must either be wholly useless, and such as a man must not so
much as look or think on, (which is very irreconcilable with that Worship
which is paid to them in the Church of Rome) or while he is intent upon a
Picture or Image, his mind is diverted from the contemplation of a pure and
infinite Spirit, and therefore cannot, and does not worship God as a Spirit.

And the same is true of the Images of Saints and the Blessed Virgin: for
though to make Pictures of Men or Women, is no reproach to the Divine Nature,
since they are not the Pictures or Images of God, who is a Spirit, but of those
Saints whom they are intended to represent, yet if all Christian Worship be the
Worship of God, it is evident, that the Worship of Images, though they be not
the Images of God, but of the Saints, can be no part of Christian Worship,
because God must be worshipped as a Spirit, and therefore not by any Image
whatsoever.

Now the Church of Rome will not pretend, that the Worship of Saints and their
Images, is a distinct and separate Worship from the Worship of God, but to
justify themselves, they constantly affirm, that they worship God in that
Worship which they pay to the Saints and their Images; for they know, that to
do otherwise, would be to terminate their Worship upon Creatures, which they
confess to be Idolatry, since all Religious Worship must terminate on God; and
therefore should they give any Religious Worship to Creatures distinct and
separate from that Worship they give to God, it were Idolatry upon their own
Principles.

Now if they worship God in the Worship of Saints and their Images, then they
worship God in the Images of Saints, and that I think is to worship him by
Images, the Worship of a pure infinite and invisible Spirit, will admit of no
Images, whether of God or Creatures, as the Objects or Mediums of Worship.

But it may be said, that this is to graft our own Fancies and Imaginations
upon Scripture; for though Christ does say, that God is a Spirit, and must be
worshipped in Spirit, he does not say, that to worship God in Spirit, is not to
worship him by an Image; but to worship God in Spirit, in our Savior's
Discourse with the Woman of Samaria, is not opposed to Image Worship, but to
confining the Worship of God to a particular place, such as the Temple at
Jerusalem and Samaria was; as I observed above. Now to this I answer:

1. To worship God as a Spirit, does in the nature of the thing signify this;
for to worship God by any material or sensible Representations, is not to
worship God as a Spirit; for an infinite Spirit cannot be represented by
Matter, nor by any Shape and Figure, because it neither is material, nor has
any figure.

2. If God will not have his peculiar Presence confined to any place under the
Gospel, much less will he be worshipped by Images and Pictures, for it is not
such a contradiction to the nature of an infinite Spirit, to show himself more
peculiarly present in one place than in another, as it is to be worshipped by
sensible Images and Pictures. Though God fills all places, there may be wise
Reasons, why he should confine the Acts of Worship to some peculiar place, and
such typical Reasons there were for it under the Law, but there never can be
any Reason, why a Spirit should be represented and worshipped by an Image,
which is such a contradiction and dishonor to the nature of the Spirit; and
therefore when God confined his symbolical Presence to the Temple at Jerusalem,
yet he strictly forbad the Worship of Images, and much less then will he allow
of Image Worship, when he will not so much as have a Temple.

3. For we must observe farther, that what our Savior here says, God is a
Spirit, and will be worshipped in Spirit, is not a particular Direction how to
Worship God, but a general Rule to which the nature of our Worship must be
conformed; and therefore it is our Rule, as far as the plain reason of it
extends. Under the Law they were not left to general Rules, but God determined
the particular Rites and Ceremonies of his Worship himself; for under the Law
God had not so plainly discovered his own Nature to them, as he has done by
his Son in the Gospel: For no man has seen God at any time, but the only
begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him. And
therefore the Nature of God was never made the Rule of Worship before. Tho God
was as much a Spirit under the Law, as he is under the Gospel, yet this was
never assigned as a reason against Image Worship, that God is a Spirit: but
either that they saw no Likeness or Similitude in the Mountain, when GOD spoke
to them, 4 Deuteronomy. 15, 16. or that he is so great and glorious a Being, that
nothing in the World is a fit Representation of him: To whom then will ye liken
GOD? 40 Isa. 18, etc.
or what likeness will ye compare unto him? -- It is he that sits upon the
circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers, that
stretches out the heavens as a curtain, and spreads them out as a tent to
dwell in, etc. But that God is a Spirit, who has no shape and figure, is a much
better Argument against Image Worship, than all this; but this God had not so
plainly declared to them; and if God forbad the Worship of Images, when he
thought fit to give no other reason for it, But that he had never appeared to
them in any Likeness or Similitude, or that he was too great to be Represented;
we our selves may now judge, how unfit it is to Worship God by an Image, since
our Savior has declared, that he is a Spirit, who has no Likeness or Figure,
and that now he expects to be Worshipped by us as a Spirit, and therefore
without any Image or sensible Representation.

4. And yet some learned men think, that our Savior in these Words, had as
well respect to the Worship of God by Images, as to his Worship in the Temple:
for that he had respect to the Object as well as Place of Worship, is evident
from what he adds, Ye worship ye know not what, we know what we worship, 4 Joh.
20.
for salvation is of the Jews; wherein he informs the Woman, that though she
inquired only of the place of Worship, the Samaritans were guilty of a greater
sault than setting up the Temple at Samaria, in opposition to the Temple at
Jerusalem, viz. in a false Object, or an Idolatrous manner of Worship, they
Worshipping a Dove as the Symbol and Representation of God: and thus to Worship
God in Spirit, is expressly opposed to Worshipping God by Images.

5ly. However this comes much to one; for if God being a Spirit his Worship
must not be confined to any Place or Symbolical Presence; then he must not be
Worshipped by an Image, for an Image is a Representative Presence of God, or of
the Saints; for the use of Images is to represent that Being whom we Worship as
present to us: and therefore if men consider what they do, they go to Images,
as to Divine Presences, to Worship. Images, which as set up in Churches and
Chapels for the Worship of God, or of the Saints, are confined to places, and
make those places as much appropriate and peculiar places of Worship, as the
Jewish Temple was, excepting that the Temple was but one, and they are many.
Heathen Temples were the Houses of their Gods, or of their Images, which were
the Presence of their Gods; and if we must not appropriate the Presence of God
to any place, then we must not Worship him by Images, which are of no use but
to represent God as sensibly present, with the Image, or in the place, where
the Image is. If God be better Worshipped before an Image, than without one,
then the Worship of God is more confined to that place, where an Image is, than
to those places, which have no Images. I cannot see how to avoid this, that if
God must be Worshipped by Images, then there must be appropriate places of
Worship, viz. where the Image is, if there be no appropriate places of Worship
under the Gospel, like the Temple at Jerusalem, then God must not be Worshipped
by Images; for an Image must be in some place, and if God must be Worshipped
at, or before his Image, then that is the proper and peculiar place of Worship,
where his Image is; nay, though the Image be not fixed to any place, but be
carried about with us, yet if we must Worship God by Images, the Image is not
only the Object, but makes the place of Worship, for there we must Worship God,
where his Image is, if we must Worship him before his Image. It is impossible
to separate the Notion of Image Worship, from the Notion of a peculiar and
appropriate place of Worship; for the Image determines the place, as the
presence of the Object does, and as under the Gospel we may Worship God any
where, because he is an infinite Spirit, and fills all places, and is equally
present with all devout Worshippers, wherever they Worship him: So where the
Image is Consecrated for a Divine Presence, it is not only the Object, but the
peculiar place of Worship, because God is peculiarly present there, or more
acceptably worshipped there, than where there is no Image. So that if a
peculiar and appropriate place of Worship be contrary to the Notion of an
Infinite Spirit, the Worship of Images is much more so, for besides that they
are gross and corporeal representations of a Spirit, they are Divine Presences
too, and appropriate places of Worship.

Secondly, As God must be worshipped under the notion of a Spirit, so under the
character of a Father: as our Savior expresty tells us; The hour comes and
now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and Truth,
4 Joh. 23.
for the Father seeks such to worship him, and therefore he taught his
Disciples to pray, Our Father which art in heaven. Under the Law God was
worshipped as a King, and that not so much as the King of the whole World, but
as in a peculiar manner the King of Israel. The Lord reigns, let the people
tremble, he sits between the Cherubims (in his Temple at Jerusalem) let the
earth be moved. 99 Ps. 1, 2.
The Lord is great in Zion, and he is high above all people. But under the
Gospel the peculiar character of God is a Father, and that not only as he is
the maker of all men, and so the Father of all, but as he is the Father of
Christ, and in him the Father of all Christians. Now this makes a vast
difference in our Worship, from what is daily practiced in the Church of Rome.
For,

1. When we pray to God as our Father, we must pray to him as dwelling in
Heaven: as our Savior teaches us to say, Our Father, which art in Heaven. For
as a Father, Heaven is his House and Habitation; In my Fathers House are many
mansions, that is, 14 John 2.
in in Heaven, which is his House as a Father, as the Temple at Jerusalem, was
his Palace considered as the King of Israel; and this is one reason our Savior
intimates, why the presence of God shall no longer be confined to any
particular Place or Temple, because he shall be worshipped as the universal
Father, not as the King of Jury; Now when he is to be worshipped as a Father
from all Parts of the World, he must have such a Throne and Presence to which
all the World may equally resort, and that can be no other then his Throne in
Heaven, whither we may send up our Prayers from all Corners of the Earth; but
had he confined his Presence to any place on Earth, as he did to the Temple of
Jerusalem, the rest of the World must have been without God's peculiar
Presence, could have had no Temple nor Place of Worship, but at such a distance
that they could never have come at it: for though God fills all places, it is a
great absurdity to talk of more Symbolical Presences of God than one: for a
Symbolical Presence confines, the unlimited Presence of God to a certain place
in order to certain ends, as to receive the Worship, that is paid him, and to
answer the Prayers, that are made to him; and to have more than One such
Presence as this, is like having more Gods than One.

So that all our Worship under the Gospel, must be directed to God in Heaven;
and that is a plain argument, that we must not Worship God in Images on Earth,
for they neither can represent to us the Majesty of God in Heaven, nor is God
present with the Image to receive our Worship there: if God must now be
Worshipped as dwelling in Heaven, it is certain there can be no Object of our
Worship on Earth; for though God fill all places with his Presence, yet he will
be Worshipped only as sitting on his Throne in Heaven; and then I am sure he
must not be Worshipped in an Image on Earth, for that is not his Throne in
Heaven. This the Mercy-seat in the Holy of Holies was an Emblem of; for the
Holy of Holies in the Jewish Temple, did signify Heaven, and the Mercy-seat
covered with Cherubims, signified the Throne of God in Heaven, whither we must
lift up our Eyes and Hearts when we Pray to him: for though it is indifferent
from what Place we put up our Prayers to God, while we have regard to the
External Decency of Religious Worship, yet it is not indifferent whither we
direct our Prayers; for we must direct our Prayers to the throne of grace, 4
Heb. 16.
if we would obtain mercy, and find grace to help him in time of need. Now the
Throne of Grace is only in Heaven, whither Christ is ascended to make Atonement
for us; for he is the true Propitiatory or Mercy-seat: And therefore if to
direct our Prayers to God, to his Picture or Image, or to the Images of the
Virgin Mary, or any other Saints, did not provoke God to jealousy, yet it
would do us no good, unless such Images are God's Throne of Grace, for all
other Prayers are lost, which are not directed to God on his Throne of Grace,
where alone he will receive our Petitions. If a Prince would receive no
Petitions but what were presented to him sitting on such a Throne, all men
would be sensible how vain a thing it were to offer any Petition to him
elsewhere. And yet thus it is here: A Sinner dare not, must not approach the
Presence of God, but only on his Mercy-seat and Throne of Grace; for any where
else our God is a Consuming Fire, a Just and a Terrible Judge: now God has but
one Throne of Grace, and that is in Heaven, as the Mercy-seat was in the Holy
of Holies, which was a Type of Heaven; thither Christ ascended with his Blood
to sprinkle the Mercy-seat, and to cover it with a Cloud of Incense, which are
the Prayers of the Saints, as the High Priest did once a Year in the Typical
Holy Place. Which is a plain proof, that all our Prayers must be immediately
directed to God in Heaven, where Christ dwells, who is our true Propitiatory
and Mercy-seat, who has sprinkled the Throne of God with his own Blood, and has
made it a Throne of Grace, and where he offers up our Prayers as Incense to God.

2. To Worship God as our Father, signifies to Worship him only in the Name and
Mediation of his Son Jesus Christ: for he is our Father only in Jesus Christ,
and we can call him Father in no other Name. By the right of Creation he is our
Lord, and our Judge, but he is the Father of Sinners only by Adoption and
Grace, and we are Adopted only in Christ: so that if Christian Worship be the
Worship of God as a Father, then we must Pray to God in no other Name, but of
his own Eternal Son: The Virgin Mary, though she were the Mother of Christ, yet
does not make God our Father; and then no other Saint, I presume, will pretend
to it: which shows what a contradiction the Invocation of Saints is to the
Nature of Christian Worship, and how unavailable to obtain our requests of God.
If we must Worship God only as our Father, then we must Worship him only in the
Name of his Son, for he owns himself our Father in no other Name; and if he
will hear our Prayers, and answer our humble Petitions only as a Father, then
he will hear only those Prayers which are made to him in the Name of his Son:
How great Favorites soever the Blessed Virgin and other Saints may be, if God
hear Prayers only as a Father, it is to no purpose to Pray to God in their
Names, for he hears us not.

3. To Worship God as a Father, signifies to Pray to him with the humble
assurance and confidence of Children: 8 Romans 15.
This is the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father. For because ye are
sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his Son into your hearts, 4 Gal. 6.
crying Abba Father. A dutiful Son does not question his Father's good will to
him, nor readiness to hear and answer all his just requests, he depends upon
the kindness of his Father, and his interest and relation to him, and seeks for
no other Friends and Favorites to recommend him: And upon this account also
the Invocation of Saints is a contradiction to the Gospel Spirit of Prayer, to
that Spirit of Adoption, which teaches us to cry Abba Father; for surely those
have not the hope, and assurance, and (...) of Children, who dare not go to
their Father themselves, but must send their Petitions to him by the hands of
Favorites and Intercessors. To pray to God in the Name of Christ, is only to
pray to him as Sons, for it is in his Name only that he owns us for Sons; and
this is the true Spirit of Adoption, in the Name and Mediation of Christ, to go
to God, as Children to a Father; but to pray to him in any other Name, how
powerful soever, is not to go to him as a Father, but as to our Lord and King,
who must be Addressed to by the Mediation of some great Favorites. To pray to
God in any other Name, which does not make us his Sons, is to distrust our
Relation to him, as our Father in Christ; and this is contrary to the Spirit of
Adoption, which teaches us to call God, Father, and gives us that assurance of
his Fatherly goodness to us in Christ, that we need and desire no other
Advocates.

Thirdly, To Worship God in Spirit, is to Worship him with our Mind and Spirit;
for that is most agreeable to the Nature of God, who is a Spirit. God cannot be
Worshipped but by a reasonable Creature, and yet a Beast may Worship God as
well as a Man, who Worships without any act of Reason and Understanding, or
devout Affections. To pray to God without knowing what we say, when neither our
Understandings nor Affections can join in our Prayers, is so absurd a Worship
of a pure Mind, that Transubstantiation it self is not more contrary to Sense,
than Prayers in an unknown Tongue are to the Essential Reason and Nature of
Worship. I suppose no man will say, that to pray to God, or praise him in words
which we do not understand; is to Worship God in Spirit, unless he thinks that
a Parrot may be taught to pray in the Spirit: What difference is there between
a man's not speaking, and speaking what he does not understand? Just so much
difference there is between not praying, and praying what we do not understand:
and he honors God to the full as much, who does not pray at all, as he who
prays he knows not what, and, I am sure, he affronts him a great deal less:
However, if Christian Worship be to worship God in Spirit, Prayers in an
unknown Tongue, in which the Mind and Spirit cannot be concerned, is no
Christian Worship.

SECT. IV. Concerning the Reformation and Improvement of Humane Nature, by the
Gospel of CHRIST.
4. ANother principal end and intention of the Gospel, was to cure the
Degeneracy of Mankind, and to advance Humane Nature to its utmost Perfection:
for as Man fell from his original Happiness, by falling from the purity and
integrity of his Nature, so there was no restoring him to his lost Happiness,
much less no advancing him to a more perfect state of Happiness, not to an
earthly, but to an heavenly Paradise, without changing and transforming his
Nature, and renewing him after the Image of God. And therefore our very
entrance into Christianity, is a new Birth: Except a man be born of water, 3 John 5, 6.
and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God: That which is born
of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the spirit is spirit. And such
a man is called a new Creature; and a Christian Life is a newness of Life, and
living after the Spirit, 8 Romans 1.
and walking after the Spirit: and this new Nature is the Divine Nature, the
Image of God, the new man, 4 Ephesians. 24. 3 Col. 10.
which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness, which is
renewed in knowledge after the Image of him that created him.

So that there are two things, wherein this new Nature consists, Knowledge, and
Righteousness, or true Holiness, and I doubt it will appear, that the Church of
Rome is no great Friend to either.

I. Knowledge: Now I suppose neither the Church of Rome, nor any one for her,
will pretend that she is any great Friend to Knowledge: She is so horribly
afraid of Heresy, that she endeavors to nurse men up in Ignorance of their
Religion, for fear they should prove Heretics; and indeed she has some reason
for it: for the Church of Rome was never so Triumphant as in the most ignorant
and barbarous Ages; but as Knowledge broke in upon the World, so men turned
Heretics apace.

If there be any knowing Papists (and it would be very hard, if there should be
none) they are not beholding to their Church for it, which deprives them of all
the means of Knowledge: for she will not allow them to believe their Senses,
which is one way of knowing things, and the most certain we have: and yet she
commands us to believe Transubstantiation, which no man can do who believes his
Senses: and if I must not believe my Senses in so plain a matter, as what is
Bread and Wine, I know no reason I have to believe them in any thing, and then
there is an end of all Knowledge, that depends on Sense; as the proof of the
Christian Religion itself does: for Miracles are a sensible proof, and if I
must not trust my Senses, I cannot rely on Miracles, because I cannot know,
whether there be any such thing as a real Miracle.

The Church of Rome also forbids men the use of Reason in matters of Religion,
will not allow men to judge for themselves, nor to examine the Reasons of their
Faith, and what knowledge any man can have without exercising his Reason and
Understanding, I cannot guess; for to know without understanding, sounds to me
like a contradiction.

She also denies Christians the use of the Bible, which is the only means to
know the revealed Will of God: and when men must neither believe their Senses,
nor trust their Reason, nor read the Scripture, it is easy to guess what
knowing and understanding Christians, they must needs be.

But it may be said, that notwithstanding this, the Church of Rome does
Instruct her Children in the true Catholic Faith, though she will not venture
them to judge for themselves, nor to read the Scriptures, which is the effect
of her great care of them, to keep them Orthodox: for when men trust to their
own fallible Reasons, and private Interpretations of Scripture, it is a great
hazard that they do not fall into one Heresy or other: but when men are taught
the pure Catholic Faith without any danger of Error and Heresy, is not this
much better, than to suffer them to reason and judge for themselves, when it is
great odds, but they will judge wrong.

Now this would be something indeed, did the Church of Rome take care to
Instruct them in all necessary Doctrines, and to teach nothing, but what is
true, and could such men, who thus tamely receive the dictates of the Church,
be said to know and to understand their Religion. How far the Church of Rome is
from doing the first, all Christians in the world are sensible but themselves,
but that is not our present dispute; for though the Church of Rome did instruct
her people into the true Christian Faith, yet such men cannot be said to know
and understand their Religion; and to secure the Faith by destroying knowledge,
is a direct contradiction to the design of the Gospel, which is to make men
wise and understanding Christians. For no man understands his Religion, who
does not in some measure know the reasons of his Faith, and judge whether they
be sufficient or not; who knows not how to distinguish between Truth and Error,
who has no Rule to go by, but must take all upon trust, and the credit of his
Teachers; who believes whatever he is told, and learns his Creed, as School
boys do their Grammar, without understanding it: This is not an active, but a
kind of passive knowledge; such men receive the impression, that is made on
them, as wax does, and understand no more of the matter; now will any one call
this the knowledge and understanding of a man, or the Discipline of a Child?

But suppose there were some men so dull and stupid, that they could never rise
higher; that they are not capable of inquiring into the reasons of things, but
must take up their Religion upon trust; yet will any man say, that this is the
utmost perfection of knowledge, that any Christian must aim at? is this the
meaning of the word of God dwelling in us richly in all wisdom? 3 Col. 16.
is this the way to give an answer to any one, who asks a reason of the hope
that is in us? the perfection of Christian knowledge is a great and glorious
attainment; to understand the secrets of God's Laws, those depths and mysteries
of wisdom and goodness in the economy of Man's Salvation; to see the Analogy
between the Law and the Gospel, how the Legal Types and ancient Prophecies
received their accomplishment in Christ, how far the Gospel has advanced us
above the state of Nature, and the Law of Moses; what an admirable design it
was to redeem the world by the Incarnation and Death and Sufferings and
Intercession of the Son of God; what mysteries of Wisdom and Goodness the
Gospel contains; the knowledge of which is not only the perfection of our
Understandings, but raises and ennobles our Minds, and transforms us into the
Divine Image: These things were revealed, that they might be known, not that
they should be concealed from the World, or neglected and despised; but this is
a knowledge which cannot be attained without diligent and laborious inquiries,
without using all the reason and understanding we have, in searching the
Scriptures, and all other helps which God has afforded us.

Now if Christian Knowledge be something more than to be able to repeat our
Creed, and to believe it upon the authority of our Teachers; if the Gospel of
our Savior was intended to advance us to a true manly Knowledge, Christ and
the Church of Rome seem to have two very different designs, our Lord in causing
the Gospel to be wrote and published to the World, the other in concealing it,
as much as she can, and suffering no body to read it without her leave, as a
dangerous Book, which is apt to make men Heretics; for it is hard to conceive,
that the Gospel was written, that it might not be read, and then one would
guess, that He by whose Authority and Inspiration the Gospel was written, and
those by whose Authority it is forbid to be read, are not of a mind in this
matter.

1. This I think in the first place is an evident proof, that to forbid
Christian People to read and study and meditate on the Word of God, is no
Gospel-Doctrine, unless not to read the Bible, be a better way to improve in
all true Christian Knowledge and Wisdom, than to read it: for that is the Duty
of Christians, to grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ; this was one great end of publishing the Gospel to the World, to
enlighten and improve men's Understandings, as well as to govern their Lives;
and though we grant, Men may be taught the Principles of Christian Religion, as
Children are, without reading the Bible, yet if they will but grant, that
studying and meditating on the Holy Scriptures, is the best and only way to
improve in all true Christian knowledge, this shows how contrary this
prohibition of reading the Scriptures is to the great design of the Gospel, to
perfect our knowledge in the mysteries of Christ.

2ly, This is a mighty presumption also against Transubstantiation, that it is
no Gospel-Doctrine, because it overthrows the very Fundamental Principles of
Knowledge, which is a direct contradiction to the design of the Gospel, to
advance Divine Knowledge to the utmost perfection it can attain in this World.

Whoever has his eyes in his head must confess, that the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation is contrary to Sense; for were our Senses to be Judges of
this matter, they would pronounce the Bread and Wine after Consecration, to be
Bread and Wine still; and therefore whatever Reason there may be to believe it
not to be Bread and Wine, but Flesh and Blood, yet it must be confessed, that
our Faith in this matter contradicts our Sense; for even Roman Catholic Eyes
and Noses and Hands, can see and feel and smell nothing but Bread and Wine: and
if to our Senses it appears to be nothing but Bread and Wine, those who believe
it to be the Natural Body and Blood of Christ, believe contrary to what they
see.

Thus there is nothing more contrary to the natural notions we have of things,
than the Doctrine of Transubstantiation: for if this Doctrine be true, then the
same individual body of Christ is in Heaven at the right hand of God, and on
ten thousand Altars, at a great distance from each other on earth, at the same
time. Then a humane Body is contracted into the compass of a Wafer, or rather
subsists without any dimensions, without extension of parts, and independent on
place.

Now not to dispute, whether this be true or false, my only inquiry at present
is, whether this do not contradict those natural notions all men have of the
properties of a humane Body: let a man search his own mind, and try, whether he
find any such notion of a Body, as can be present at more places than one at
the same time: a Body that is without Extension, nay that has parts without
Extension, and therefore without any distinction too: for the parts of an
Organical Body must be distinguished by place and situation, which cannot be,
if they have no Extension; a Body, which is present without occupying a place,
or being in a place: if we have no such natural notion of a Body, as I am sure
I have not, and I believe no man else has, then let Transubstantiation be true
or false, it is contrary to the natural notions of our minds, which is all I am
at present concerned for: Thus let any man try, if he have any notion of an
accident subsisting without any substance, of a white and soft and nard
nothing; of the same body, which is extended and not extended, which is in a
place, and not in a place at the same time: for in Heaven, I suppose, they will
grant, the Body of Christ fills a place, and has the just dimensions and
proportions of a Humane Body, and at the same time in the Host the very same
body is present, without any extension; and independent on place; that is, the
same body at the same time is extended and not extended, fills a place and
fills no place, which, I suppose, they mean by being Independent on place; now
is and is not, is a contradiction to natural Reason, and I have no other
natural notion of it, but as of a contradiction, both parts of which cannot be
true. Let us then briefly examine, whether it be likely, that
Transubstantiation, which contradicts the evidence of sense, and the natural
notions of our Minds, should be a Gospel Doctrine, considering the Gospel as
the most Divine and excellent Knowledge, and most perfective of Humane
understandings. For,

1. This Doctrine of Transubstantiation, is so far from perfecting our
Knowledge, that it destroys the very Principles of all Humane Knowledge: All
natural knowledge is owing either to Sense or Reason, and Transubstantiation
contradicts both, and whoever believes it, must believe contrary to his Senses
and Reason, which if it be to believe like a Catholic, I am sure, is not to
believe like a man; if the perfection of knowledge consist in contradicting our
own Faculties, Transubstantiation is the most perfect knowledge in the world;
but however, I suppose no man will say, that this is the natural perfection of
knowledge, which overthrows the most natural notions we have of things: and yet

2. All supernatural Knowledge must of necessity be grafted upon that which is
natural; for we are capable of revealed and supernatural Knowledge, only as we
are by nature reasonable Creatures, and destroy Reason, and Beasts are as fit
to be preached too as Men: And yet to contradict the plain and most natural
notions of our minds, is to destroy Humane Reason, and to leave Mankind no Rule
or Principle to know and judge by. No man can know any thing, which contradicts
the Principles of Natural Knowledge, because he has only these natural
Principles to know by; and therefore however his Faith may be improved by it,
he forfeits his natural Knowledge, and has no supernatural Knowledge in the
room of it: For how can a man know and understand that which is contrary to all
the natural Knowledge and Understanding he has? There may be some revealed
Principles of Knowledge super-added to natural Principles, and these things we
may know to be so, though we have no natural Notion of them, and this perfects,
because it enlarges our Knowledge; as the Knowledge of three Divine Persons
super-added to the natural Belief of one Supreme God; which does not overthrow
the belief of one God, but only acquaints us, that there are three Divine
Persons in the Unity of the Godhead, which, whatever difficulty there may be in
apprehending it, yet overthrows no natural Notion: this is an improvement of
Knowledge, because we know all we did before, and we know something more, that
as there is one God, so there are three Persons, who are this one God; and
though we have no natural Notion of this, how three Persons are one God,
because we know no distinction between Person and Essence in Finite Beings, yet
we have no natural Notion, that there cannot be more Persons than one in an
Infinite Essence; and therefore this may be known by Revelation, because there
is no natural Notion against it. But now I can never know that which is
contrary to all the Principles of Knowledge I have; such men may believe it,
who think it a Virtue to believe against Knowledge: Who can believe that to be
true, which they know to be false? For whatever is contrary to the plain and
necessary Principles of Reason, which all Mankind agree in, I know must be
false, if my Faculties be true, and if my Faculties be not true, then I can
know nothing at all, neither by Reason nor Revelation, because I have no true
Faculties to know with: Revelation is a Principle of Knowledge as well as
Faith, when it does not contradict our natural Knowledge of things, for God may
teach us that which Nature does not teach; and thus Revelation improves,
enlarges, and perfects Knowledge: in such cases Faith serves instead of natural
Knowledge, the Authority of the Revelation instead of the natural Notions and
Idea's of our Minds; but I can never know that by Revelation which contradicts
my natural Knowledge; which would be not only to know that, which I have no
natural Knowledge of, which is the Knowledge of Faith, but to know that by
Revelation, which by Reason and Nature I know cannot be; which is to know that,
which I know cannot be known, because I know it cannot be:

So that Transubstantiation, which contradicts all the evidence of Sense and
Reason, is not the Object of any humane Knowledge, and therefore cannot be a
Gospel-Revelation, which is to improve and perfect, not to destroy humane
Knowledge: I can never know it, because it contradicts all the Notions of my
Mind; and I can never believe it without denying the truth of my Faculties, and
no Revelation can prove my Faculties to be false; for I can never be so certain
of the truth of any Revelation, as I am; that my Faculties are true; and could
I be persuaded, that my Faculties are not true, but deceive me in such things,
as I judge most certain and evident, then I can no more believe them as to any
Revelation, then I can as to their natural Reasonings, for the same Faculties
must judge of both, and if the Faculty be false, I can trust its judgment in
neither.

3ly, The Doctrine of Transubstantiation destroys all possible certainty, what
the true sense and interpretation of Scripture is, and thereby overthrows all
supernatural Knowledge. The Scripture we know is Expounded to very different
and contrary Senses, and made to countenance the most monstrous and absurd
Doctrines; Witness all the ancient Heresies which have been Fathered on the
Scriptures. Now what way have we to confute these Heresies, but to show, either
that the words of Scripture will not bare such a Sense, or at least do not
necessarily require it; that such an Interpretation is contrary to Sense, to
Reason, to the natural Notions we have of God, and therefore is in itself
absurd and impossible? But if Transubstantiation be a Gospel-Doctrine, I desire
any Papist, among all the ancient Heresies, to pick out any Doctrine more
absurd and impossible, more contrary to Sense and Reason, than the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation is; and then it is no Argument against any Doctrine, or any
Exposition of Scripture, that it is absurd and impossible, contrary to Sense
and Reason, for so Transubstantiation is; and if we may believe one absurd
Doctrine, we may believe five hundred, how absurd soever they be: And then what
defense has any man against the most monstrous Corruptions of the Christian
Faith? Is this the way to improve Knowledge, to destroy all the certain Marks
and Characters of Truth and Error, and to leave no Rule to judge by? If the
design of the Gospel was to improve our Minds by a knowing and understanding
Faith, Transubstantiation, which overthrows the certainty both of natural and
revealed Knowledge, can be no Gospel-Doctrine.

3. The Authority of an infallible Judge, whom we must believe in every thing,
without examining the reasons of what he affirms, nay, though he teaches such
Doctrines as appear to us most expressly contrary to Sense and Reason, and
Scripture, is no Gospel-Doctrine, because it is not the way to make men wise
and understanding Christians, which is the great design of the Gospel, for to
suspend the exercise of Reason and Judgment, is not the way to improve men's
Knowledge: an infallible Teacher, and an infallible Rule, do indeed mightily
contribute to the improvement of Knowledge; but such an infallible Judge, as
the Church of Rome boasts of, can only make men ignorant and stupid Believers:
For there is a vast difference between an infallible Teacher, and an infallible
Judge, which few men observe, at least have not well explained; for an
infallible Teacher is only an external Proponent, and while men only teach and
instruct, how infallible soever they are, every man is at liberty to use his
own Reason and Judgment; for though the Teacher be infallible, he that learns
must use his own Reason and Judgment, unless a man can learn without it: But
now an infallible Judge is not contented to teach and instruct, which is an
appeal to the Reason of Mankind, but he usurps the office of every man's private
Reason and Judgment, and will needs judge for all Mankind, as if he were an
Universal Soul, an Universal Reason and Judgment, that no man had any Soul, any
Reason or Judgment but himself: for if every man has a private Reason and
Judgment of his own, surely every man must have a right to the private exercise
of it; that is, to judge for himself; and then there can be no such universal
Judge, who must be that to every man, which in other cases his own private
Reason and Judgment is, which is to un-Soul all Mankind in matters of Religion.
And therefore though there have been a great many infallible Teachers, as Moses
and the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, yet none ever pretended to be
infallible Judges, but the Church of Rome; that is, none ever pretended to deny
People a liberty of judging for themselves, or ever exacted from them an
universal submission to their infallible Judgment without exercising any act of
Reason and Judgment themselves. I am sure Christ and his Apostles left People
to the exercise of their own Reason and Judgment, and require it of them; they
were infallible Teachers, but they did not judge for all Mankind, but left
every man to judge for himself, as every man must and ought, and as every man
will do, who has any Reason and Judgment of his own: but an infallible Judge,
who pretends to judge for all men, treats Mankind like Bruits, who have no
reasonable Souls of their own.

But you will say, this distinction between an infallible Teacher and an
infallible Judge, is very nice and curious, but seems to have nothing in it;
for does not he who teaches infallibly, judge infallibly too? And must I not
submit my private Judgment, which all men allow to be fallible, to a public
infallible Judgment, which I know to be infallible? If I know that I may be
deceived, and that such a man cannot be deceived, is it not reasonable for me
to be governed by his Judgment, rather than my own? I answer, All this is
certainly true as any demonstration, but then it is to be considered, that I
cannot be so certain of any man's Infallibility, as to make him my Infallible
Judge, in whose Judgment I must acquiesce, without exercising any Reason or
Judgment of my own: and the reason is plain, because I cannot know that any man
teaches infallibly, unless I am sure that he teaches nothing that is contrary
to any natural or revealed Law. Whoever does so, is so far from being
Infallible, that he actually errs; and whether he does so, I cannot know,
unless I may judge of his Doctrine by the Light of Nature, and by Revelation:
and therefore though there may be an Infallible Teacher, there never can be any
Infallible Judge, to whom I must submit my own Reason and Judgment, because I
must judge of his Doctrine my self, before I can know that he is Infallible.

As for instance, when Moses appeared as a Prophet and a Lawgiver to the
Children of Israel, there was no written Law, but only the Law of Nature; and
therefore those great Miracles he wrought, gave authority to his Laws, because
he contradicted no necessary Law of Nature: but had any other person at that
time wrought as many Miracles as Moses did, and withal taught the Worship of
many Gods, either such as the Egyptians, or any other Nations worshipped at
that time, this had been reason enough to have rejected him as a false Prophet,
because it is contrary to the natural Worship of one Supreme God, which the
Light of Nature teaches.

When Christ appeared, there was a written Law, the Writings of Moses and the
Prophets, and all the Miracles he wrought could not have proved him a true
Prophet, had he contradicted the Scriptures of the Old Testament; and therefore
his Doctrine was to be examined by them, and accordingly he appeals to Moses
and the Prophets to bear testimony to his Person and Doctrine, and exhorts them
to search the Scriptures, which gave testimony to him: and how the Miracles he
wrought gave authority to any new Revelations he made of God's Will to the
World, since he did not contradict the old. The Law of Nature, and the Laws of
Moses, were the Laws of God; and God cannot contradict himself: and therefore
the Doctrine of all new Prophets, even of Christ himself, was to be examined,
and is to be examined to this day, by the Law and the Prophets; and therefore
though he was certainly an Infallible Teacher, yet men were to judge of his
Doctrine, before they believed him; and he did not require them to lay aside
their Reason and Judgment, and submit to his Infallible Authority, without
Examination.

So that all this while, there could be no Infallible Judge to whom all men
were bound to submit their own private Reason and Judgment, and to receive all
their Dictates as divine Oracles, without Examination; because they could not
know them to be such Infallible Teachers, till they had examined their Doctrine
by the Light of Nature and the Law of Moses: and we cannot to this day know
that Moses and Christ were true Prophets, but in the same way.

Since the writing of the New Testament, there is a farther Test of an
Infallible Teacher, if there be any such in the world; that he neither
contradicts the Light of Nature, nor the true intent of the Law of Moses, nor
alter or add to the Gospel of Christ; and therefore there can be no Infallible
Judge, because be he never so Infallible, we can never know that he is so, but
by the agreement of his Doctrine with the Principles of Reason, with the Law
and the Prophets, and with the Gospel of Christ; and therefore must examine his
Doctrine by these Rules, and therefore must judge for our selves, and not
suffer any man to judge for us, upon a pretense of his Infallibility.

Could I know that any man were Infallible, without judging of his Doctrine,
then indeed there were some reason to believe all that he says, without any
inquiry or examination; but this never was, never can be: and therefore though
there may be an Infallible Teacher, there can be no Infallible Judge to whom I
must submit my own Reason and Judgment, without asking any Questions Which by
the way shows, how ridiculous that Sophism is, The Church has not erred,
because she is Infallible, when it is impossible for me to know she is
Infallible, till by examining her Doctrine by an Infallible Rule I know, that
she has not erred.

And the truth is, it is well there can be no Infallible Judge; for if there
were, it would suspend and silence the Reason and Judgment of all Mankind: and
what a knowing Creature would Man be in matters of Religion, when he must not
reason, and must not judge? just as knowing as a man can be without exercising
any Reason and Judgment. And therefore not only the reason and nature of the
thing proves, that there can be no Infallible Judge, but the design of Christ
to advance humane Nature to the utmost perfection of Reason and Understanding
in this World, proves that he never intended there should be any: for to take
away the exercise of Reason and private Judgment, is not the way to make men
wise and knowing Christians; and if Christ allows us to judge for our selves,
there can be no Infallible Judge, whose Office it shall be to judge for us all.

4ly. To pretend the Scripture to be an obscure or imperfect Rule, is a direct
contradiction to the design of the Gospel to improve and perfect Knowledge: for
if the Scripture be so obscure in the essential matters of Faith and Christian
knowledge, that we cannot have any certainty what the true sense and
interpretation of it is, without an Infallible Judge, then the Scriptures
cannot improve our knowledge, because we cannot know what they are, we cannot
understand their meaning, and therefore can learn nothing from them.

Yes you will say, we may know their meaning, when they are expounded to us by an
Infallible Judge: though the Scriptures are so obscure, that we cannot
understand them without an Infallible Judge, yet we may certainly learn what
the sense of Scripture is from such a Judge.

Now in answer to this, I observe, that though such an Infallible Judge should
determine the sense of all obscure Texts of Scripture, (which neither the Pope
nor Church of Rome have ever done) yet this would not be to understand the
Scriptures, or to learn from the Scriptures, but only to rely on this
Infallible Judge for the sense of Scripture: To understand the Scriptures, is
to be able to give a reason, why I expound Scripture to such a sense, as that
the words signify so, that the circumstances of the place, and the context and
coherence of the words require it; that the analogy of Faith, and the reason
and nature of things, will either justify such an interpretation, or admit no
other: and an Expositor, who can thus open our Understandings, and not only
tell us what the sense of Scripture is, but make us see, that this is the true
sense and interpretation of it, does indeed make us understand the Scripture.
Thus Christ himself did, when he was risen from the dead, He opened their
understandings, that they might understand the Scriptures, 24 Luke 45. But to
be told that this is the true sense of Scripture, and that we must believe this
is the sense, though we can see no reason why it should be thus expounded, nay,
though all the Reason we have tells us, that it ought not to be thus expounded,
no man will say, that this is to understand the Scriptures, but to believe the
Judge: No man can learn any thing from a Book, which he does not and cannot
understand; and if men neither do nor can understand the Scriptures, it is
certain, they can learn nothing from them: an Infallible Judge would teach as
well without the Scriptures as with them, and indeed somewhat better, because
then no man could have a pretense to contradict him; and therefore if this be
true, the holy Scripture deserves all those contemptible Characters which the
Romanists have given it; for it is so far from improving and perfecting our
knowledge, that it self cannot be known, and therefore is good for nothing. So
that the obscurity of the Scripture makes it wholly useless to the great ends
and purposes of the Christian Religion, viz. to improve and perfect the
knowledge of Mankind in the necessary and essential Doctrines of Faith, and
therefore this can be no Gospel-Doctrine, because it makes the Gospel it self,
considered as written, of no use.

Thus if the Scripture be an imperfect Rule, as the Romanists affirm, that it
does not teach us the whole mind and will of God, but that we must learn even
some necessary Doctrines of Faith from unwritten Traditions, which no body has
the keeping of but the Church of Rome: This I say contradicts the great design
of the Gospel, which is to improve and perfect knowledge; for an imperfect Rule
of Faith is, I think, as bad as no Rule at all, because we can never trust it.

If you say, that though the Scripture in it self be an imperfect Rule, yet we
have a perfect Rule, because the defects of the Scripture are supplied by
unwritten Traditions; and therefore we have the whole Gospel and all the
Christian knowledge delivered down to us, either in the written or unwritten
Rule. I answer,

1. If the Scriptures be an imperfect Rule, then all Christians have not a
perfect Rule, because they have not the keeping of unwritten Traditions, and
know not what they are, and never can know what they are, till the Church is
pleased to tell them; and it seems, it was a very great while, before the
Church thought fit to do it. For suppose that all the new Articles of the
Council of Trent, which are not contained in Scripture, were unwritten
Traditions, fifteen hundred years was somewhat of the longest to have so
considerable a part of the Rule of Faith concealed from the World; and who
knows how much of it is concealed still, for the Church has not told us, that
she has published all her unwritten Traditions; there may be a Nest-egg left
still, which in time may add twelve new Articles to the Trent-Creed, as that
has done to the Apostles Creed.

So that if the Scripture be an imperfect Rule of Faith, the Church never had a
perfect Rule, till the Council of Trent; for a Rule which is not known, is none
at all, and no body can tell whether our Rule be perfect yet: whether some more
unwritten Traditions may not start up in the next Age to make our Faith more
perfect, than the Council of Trent it self has made it. Now if the design of
the Gospel was to instruct men in all divine knowledge, can we think that our
Savior has given us such an imperfect Rule, as needs to be supplied by
unwritten Traditions in every Age? especially when we consider that some of the
greatest Mysteries and most useful Doctrines of the Christian Religion, (if the
Church of Rome be in the right) were not written, or so obscurely, that no body
could find them in the Scriptures, till they were discovered by the help of
unwritten Traditions; such as the Supremacy of the Pope, the Infallibility of
Popes and General Councils, the Worship of Images, the Invocation of Saints,
and the great Glory and Prerogatives of the Virgin Mary, the Doctrine of
Purgatory, Indulgences, the Sacrament of Penance, etc. as necessary Doctrines
as any that are recorded in Scripture, and the denial of which makes us all
Heretics and Schismatics, as the Church of Rome says. Though thanks be to
God, as far as appears, we are no greater Heretics and Schismatics, than the
Apostles were, unless they are excused for not knowing these necessary Articles
of Faith, and we are Heretics for denying them, since the Church of Rome in
the Council of Tyent has decreed and published them.

2. These unwritten Traditions cannot supply the defects of a written Rule,
because they are of uncertain Authority, and therefore not the Objects, much
less the Rule, of a certain Faith and Knowledge. What is not written, but said
to be delivered down from Age to Age by oral Tradition, and kept so privately,
that the Church of God never heard of it for several hundred years, can never
be proved but by Miracles, and they must be more credible Miracles too, than
the School of the Eucharist, and the Legends of the Saints furnish us with; and
yet I know of no better the Church of Rome has. It is impossible to prove, that
a private Tradition cannot be corrupted; it is unreasonable to think that any
thing which concerns the necessary Articles of Faith or Rules of Worship,
should be a private and secret Tradition for several Ages. Miracles themselves
cannot prove any Tradition which is contrary to the written Rule, and the
Catholic Faith of Christians for several Ages, as several of the
Trent-Doctrines are; nay, no Miracles can prove any new Article of Faith, which
was never known before, without proving that Christ and his Apostles did not
teach all things necessary to salvation; which will go a great way to overthrow
the truth and certainty of the Christian Faith: for Miracles themselves can
never prove, that Christ and his Apostles taught that which the Christian
Church never heard of before; which is either to prove that the whole World had
forgot what they had been once taught, which I doubt is not much for the credit
of Tradition, or that the Church for several Ages did not teach all that Christ
taught, which is no great reason to rely on the teachings of the Church; or to
prove against matter of fact, that Christ and his Apostles taught that, which
no body ever heard of, and I do not think a Miracle sufficient to prove that
true, which every body knows to be false, or at least do not know it to be
true, though they must have known it, if it had been true.

And does not every body now see, how improper unwritten Traditions are, to
supply the Defects and Imperfections of the written Rule? for they can never
make one Rule, because they are not of equal Authority. A Writing may be proved
Authentic, an obscure unwritten Tradition cannot: and can any man think, that
Christ would have one half of his Gospel written, the other half unwritten, if
he intended to perfect the knowledge of Christians: for they cannot have so
perfect a knowledge, because they cannot have so great certainty, of the
unwritten, as they have of the written Gospel. Writing is the most certain Way
to perpetuate Knowledge, and if Christ intended, that his Church in all Ages
should have a perfect Rule of Faith, we must acknowledge the perfection of the
written Rule. The truth is, I cannot but admire the great artifice of the
Church of Rome, in preaching up the Obscurity and Imperfection of the
Scriptures, for she has hereby put it into her own power, to make Christian
Religion, what she pleases; for if the Scriptures be obscure, and she alone can
infallibly interpret them; if the Scriptures be imperfect, and she alone can
supply their defects by unwritten Traditions, it is plain, that Christian
Religion must be, what she says it is, and it shall be, what her interest
requires it to be. But whether this be consistent with our Savior's design in
publishing the Gospel, or whether it be the best way of improving the knowledge
of Mankind, let any impartial man judge.

5ly. An Implicit Faith, or believing as the Church believes, without knowing
what it is we believe, can be no Gospel-Doctrine, because this to be sure
cannot be for the improvement of knowledge. Some of the Roman Doctors think it
sufficient, that a man believes as the Church believes, without an explicit
knowledge of any thing they believe; but the general opinion is, that a man
must have an explicit belief of the Apostles Creed, but as for every thing
else it suffices, if he believes as the Church believes, without knowing, what
the faith of the Church is: that is, it is not necessary men should so much as
know, what the new Articles of the Trent Faith are, if they believe the
Apostles Creed, and resign up their Faith implicitly to the Church.

Now this is a plain confession, that all the Doctrines in dispute between us
and the Church of Rome, are of no use, much less necessary to salvation; for if
they were, they would be as necessary to be known, and explicitly believed, as
the Apostles Creed: and I cannot imagine, why we Heretics, who believe the
Apostles Creed, and understand it as orthodoxly as they, may not be saved
without believing the new Trent Creed; for if we need not know what it is,
there seems to be no need of believing it; for I always thought, that no man
can, and therefore to be sure no man need, believe, what he does not know. So
that it seems, we know and believe all things, the explicit knowledge, and
belief of which, by their own confession, is necessary to salvation, except
that one single Point of the Infallibility of the Church of Rome: believe but
that, and ye need believe or know nothing more but the Apostles Creed, and yet
go to Heaven as a good Catholic: which makes an implicit Faith in the Church
of Rome, as necessary as Faith in Christ is.

But if the intent of the Gospel was to improve our Knowledge, then Christ
never taught an implicit Faith, for that does not improve Knowledge: and if
the Faith of the Church of Rome, excepting the Apostles Creed, which is the
common Faith of all Christians, need not be known, then they are no
Gospel-Doctrines, much less necessary Articles of Faith, for Christ caught
nothing, but what he would have known; and though the knowledge of all things,
which Christ taught, is not equally necessary to salvation, yet it tends to the
perfecting our knowledge, and Christ taught nothing which a man need not know;
which I think is a reproach to meaner Masters, and much more to the eternal and
incarnate Wisdom.

Secondly, The improvement and perfection of Humane Nature consists in true
Holiness and Virtue, in a likeness and conformity to God, and a participation
of the Divine Nature: and this is the great end of the Gospel to advance us to
as perfect Holiness as is attainable in this life: Christ indeed has made
expiation for our sins by his own Blood, but then this very Blood of Atonement
does not only expiate the guilt of sin, but purges the Conscience from dead
works, that we may serve the living God: for no Sacrifice, not of the Son of
God himself, can reconcile an impenitent and unreformed Sinner to God, that is,
can move God to love a Sinner, who still loves and continues in his sins; which
an infinitely holy and pure being cannot do: Indeed the expiation of sin is but
one part of the work of our Redemption; for a sinner cannot be saved, that is,
cannot be advanced to immortal life in the Kingdom of Heaven, without being
born again, without being renewed and sanctified by the holy Spirit, after the
Image and likeness of God. For this new Nature is the only Principle of a new
immortal life in us; an earthly sensual mind is no more capable of living in
Heaven, than an earthly mortal body. In both senses flesh and blood cannot
inherit the Kingdom of God, neither can corruption inherit incorruption.

The Church of Rome indeed has taken great care about the first of these, and
has found out more ways of expiating (...) making satisfaction for it, than the
Gospel ever taught us (...) there they are so effectual to this purpose, let
those look to (...) trust in them: but there is not that care taken to
inculc^^^ (...) necessity of internal holiness and purity of mind, and one
(...) easily guess there can be no great need of it in that Church, (...) has
so many easy ways of expiating sin.

The true character of Gospel-Doctrines is, a Doctrine (...) ding to Godliness,
the principal design of which is to (...) true goodness; all the Articles of
the Christian Faith (...) end, to lay great and irresistible obligations on us
to abs^^ every sin, and to exercise our selves in every thing that is good, as
we have ability and opportunity to do it: and therefore all Doctrines which
secretly undermine a good life, and make it unnecessary for men to be truly and
sincerely virtuous, can be no Gospel-Doctrines. That there are such Doctrines
in the Church of Rome, has been abundantly proved by the late Learned and
Reverend Bishop Tailor in his Disswasive from Popery; which is so very useful a
Book, that I had rather direct my Readers to it, than transcribe out of it: My
design leads me to another method; for if I can prove that the Doctrines and
Practices of the Church of Rome naturally tend to evacuate the force of the
Gospel it self, to make men good and holy; every one will easily see that that
can be no Gospel-Faith and Worship, which sets aside the Gospel it self.

The whole Doctrine of the Gospel either consists of the Rules of Holiness, or
of the Motives and Instruments of it; for the Articles of the Christian Faith
are all of them so many Motives to a good life: let us then consider how the
Faith and Worship of the Church of Rome has made void the Gospel of our
Savior, as the Pharisees made void the Law of Moses by their Traditions.

First, Let us begin then with the Gospel-Rules of Holiness. It would be an
endless thing here to take notice of the loose Determinations of their famed
and approved Casuists, of their Doctrine of probable Opinions, of the direction
of the intention, by which means the very Laws and Boundaries of Virtue and
Vice are in a great measure quite altered; and it may be this would only make
work for the Representer, and furnish out a fourth part of the Papist
Misrepresented, if we venture to tell the World what has been the avowed
Doctrines of their great Divines and Casuists. But whether such Definitions be
the Doctrine of their Church or not, I am sure they are equally mischievous, if
they be the Doctrines of their Confessors who have the immediate direction of
men's Conscience. Those who have a mind to be satisfied in this matter, may find
enough of it in the Provincial Letters, the Jesuits Morals, and Bishop Taylor's
Disswasive. It sufficiently answers my present design to take notice of some
few plain things, which will admit of no dispute

I have already shown what a great value the Church of Rome sets upon an
external Righteousness, which is much more meritorious than a real and
substantial Piety and Virtue. Now let any man judge whether this be not apt to
corrupt men's notions of what is good; to persuade them that such external
observances are much more pleasing to God, and therefore certainly much better
in themselves, than true Gospel-Obedience, than Moral and Evangelical Virtues;
for that which will merit of God the pardon of the greatest immoralities, and a
great reward, that which supplies the want of true Virtue, which compensates
for sin, and makes men great Saints, must needs be more pleasing to God, than
Virtue it self is: and if men can believe this, all the Laws of Holiness
signify nothing, but to let men know, when they break them, that they may make
satisfaction by some meritorious Superstitions.

Thus the Doctrine of venial sins, which are hardly any sins at all, to be sure
how numerous soever they are, or how frequently soever repeated, cannot deserve
eternal punishments, is apt to give men very slight thoughts of very great
Evils: For very great Evils may come under the notion of venial sins, when they
are the effects of Passion and Surprise, and the like. Indeed this very
Doctrine of venial sins is so perplexed and undetermined, that the Priest and
the Penitent may serve themselves of it to good purpose: I am sure this
distinction is apt to make men careless of what they think little faults, which
are generally the seeds and dispositions to much greater; such as the sudden
eruptions of Passion, some wanton thoughts, an indecorum and undecency in words
and actions, and what men will please to call little venial sins, for there is
no certain Rule to know them by: so that while this distinction lasts, men have
an excuse at hand for a great many sins, which they need take no care of; they
are not obliged to aim at those perfections of Virtue, which the Gospel
requires; if they keep clear of mortal sins, they are safe, and that men may
do, without any great seize in Virtue; which does not look very like a
Gospel-Doctrine, which gives us such admirable Laws, which requires such great
circumspection in our Lives, such a command over our Passions, such
inoffensiveness in our Words and Actions, as no Institution in the World ever
did before. Whatever corrupts men's Notions of Good and Evil, as External
Superstitions, and the distinction between Venial and Mortal Sins is apt to do,
is a contradiction to the design of the Gospel, to give us the plain Rules and
Precepts of a perfect Virtue.

Secondly, Let us consider some of the principal Motives of the Gospel to a
Holy Life, and see, whether the Church of Rome does not evacuate them also, and
destroy their force and power.

Now 1. The Fundamental Motive of all, is the absolute necessity of a Holy
Life; that without holiness no man shall see God, for no other Argument has any
necessary force without this. But the absolute necessity of a holy life to
please God, and to go to Heaven, is many ways overthrown by the Church of Rome,
and nothing would more effectually overthrow the Church of Rome, than to
re-establish this Doctrine of the absolute necessity of a good life. For were
men once convinced of this, that there is no way to get to Heaven, but by being
truly and sincerely good; they would keep their Money in their Pockets, and not
fling it so lavishly away upon Indulgencies, or Masses; they would stay at
home, and not tire themselves with fruitless Pilgrimages, and prodigal
Offerings at the Shrines of some powerful Saints, all external, troublesome and
costly Superstitions would fall into contempt; good men would feel, that they
need them not, and if bad men were convinced, that they would do them no good,
there were an end of them, for the only use of them is to excuse men from the
necessity of being good.

But this is most evident in their Doctrine about the Sacrament of Penance,
that bare Contrition with the Absolution of the Priest, puts a man into a state
of Salvation; I do not lay it upon Attrition, which is somewhat less than
Contrition, though the Council of Trent, if I can understand plain words, makes
that sufficient with the Absolution of the Priest; but because some men will
unreasonably wrangle about this, I shall insist only on what is acknowledged by
themselves, that Contrition, which is only a sorrow for sin, if we confess our
sins to a Priest, and receive absolution, puts us into a state of Grace: now
contrition, or sorrow for sin, is not a holy life, and therefore this Doctrine
overthrows the necessity of a holy life, because men may be saved by the
Sacrament of Penance without it, and then I know no necessity there is of
mortifying their Lusts: for if they sin again, it is only repeating the same
remedy, confessing their sins; and being sorry for them, and receiving
absolution, and they are restored to the favor of God, and to a state of
salvation again. Nay, some of their Casuists tell us, that God has not
commanded men to repent, but only at the time of death, and then contrition
with absolution will secure their salvation, after a whole life spent in
wickedness, without any other good action, but only sorrow for sin: and if men
are not bound by the Laws of God so much as to be contrite for their sins, till
they find themselves dying, and incapable of doing any good, all men must
grant, that a holy life is not necessary to salvation.

2. More particularly. The love of God in giving his own Son to die for us, and
the love of Christ in giving himself for us, are great Gospel Motives to
Obedience and a Holy Life; but these can only work upon ingenuous minds, who
have already in some measure conquered the love of sin; for where the love of
sin prevails, it is too powerful for the love of God; but the holiness and
purity and inflexible justice of the Divine Nature is a very good argument,
because it enforces the necessity of a holy life; for a holy God cannot be
reconciled to wicked Men; will not forgive our sins, unless we repent of them,
and reform them: which must engage all men, who hope for pardon and forgiveness
from God, to forsake their sins, and reform their lives: but the force of this
Argument is lost in the Church of Rome by the judicial absolution of the
Priest: for they see daily the Priest does absolve them without forsaking their
sins, and God must confirm the sentence of his Ministers, and therefore they
are absolved, and need not fear, that God will not absolve them, when the
Priest has; which must either destroy all sense of God's essential holiness and
purity, and persuade them, that God can be reconciled to sinners, while they
continue in their sins, or else, they must believe, that God has given power to
his Priests, to absolve those, whom he could not have absolved himself: To be
sure it is in vain to tell men, that God will not forgive sinners, while they
continue in their sins, if they believe the judicial authority of the Priest to
forgive sins; for they every day absolve men, who do not forsake their sins,
and if their absolution be good, God must forgive them too; and thus the
holiness and inflexible justice of God loses its force upon good Catholics to
reform their lives; and therefore were there no other arguments against it, it
is not likely that the judicial absolution of the Priest, as it is taught and
practiced in the Church of Rome, should be a Gospel-Doctrine.

3. The Death and Sacrifice of Christ is another Gospel-Motive to Holiness of
Life; not only because he has now bought us with his own Blood, and therefore
we must no longer live unto our selves, but to him, who died for us; but
because his Blood is the Blood of the Covenant, and the efficacy of his
Sacrifice extends no farther than the Gospel Covenant, which teaches us to deny
all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly
in this present world. That is, no man can be saved by the Blood of Christ, but
those who obey the Gospel, which obliges all men, who hope to be saved by
Christ, to the practice of an universal righteousness.

This the Church of Rome seems very sensible of, that none but sincere
Penitents, and truly good men can be saved by the Sacrifice of Christ upon the
Cross; which gives no hope to Sinners, who do not repent of their sins and
amend their lives; and therefore she has found out a great many other ways of
expiating Sin, which give more comfort to Sinners. The Sacrifice of the Mass
has a distinct virtue and merit from the Sacrifice upon the Cross; it is a
propitiatory Sacrifice for the living and the dead, to expiate especially the
sins of those, for whom it is particularly offered; and thus those sins which
are not expiated by the Death of Christ upon the Cross, are expiated by the
Sacrifice of the Mass, and that by the bear opus operatum, by the offering this
Sacrifice of the Mass itself, without any good motion in the person for whom it
is offered: and thus the Sacrifice of the Mass destroys the virtue of Christ's
Sacrifice upon the Cross, to oblige men to holiness of life; for though none
but sincere and reformed Penitents are pardoned by the Sacrifice of the Cross,
the Sacrifice of the Mass will expiate the sins of unreformed Sinners, and then
there is no need to reform our lives. Thus I am sure all men understand it, or
they would never put their confidence in the Mass-Sacrifice; for if it does no
more for us than Christ's Death upon the Cross, it might be spared, for it
gives no new comforts to impenitent Sinners.

They are very sensible, that holiness of life is necessary to entitle us to
the Pardon and Forgiveness purchased by the Death of Christ; but then the
Sacrifice of the Mass, Humane Penances, and Satisfactions, and Merits, and
Indulgences, seem on purpose contrived to supply the place of Holiness of Life;
for no body can imagine else what they are good for. Christ has by his Death
upon the Cross, made a perfect Atonement for the sins of all true penitent and
reformed Sinners; and therefore a true Penitent, who according to the terms of
the Gospel, denies all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and lives soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world, needs no Expiation but the Death
of Christ: Will they deny this? by no means! They grant, that all our sins are
done away in Baptism, merely by the application of Christ's Death and Passion
to us; and therefore the Death of Christ is a complete and perfect satisfaction
for all Sin, or else Baptism, which derives its whole virtue from the Death of
Christ, could not wash away all sin: What use can there be then of the new
propitiatory Sacrifice of the Mass, of humane Satisfactions, and Merits, and
Indulgences? Truly none but this, that when our sins are expiated by the Death
of Christ, and the pardon of all our sins applied to us in Baptism, the Gospel
exacts a holy life from us, and therefore men forfeit the baptismal Pardon of
their sins by the Blood of Christ, unless they either live very holy lives, or
make some other satisfaction for their not doing so: And for this purpose the
Sacrifice of the Mass, humane Penances, and Satisfactions serve. It will not be
unuseful, nor unpleasant to draw a short Scheme of this whole matter, which
will explain this great Mystery, and make it intelligible, which now appears to
be nothing but nonsense and confusion.

Christ then has made a perfect Atonement and Expiation for sin; this is
applied to us at Baptism, wherein all our sins are forgiven; and while we
continue in this state of Grace, we cannot be eternally damned, though we may
be punished for our sins, both in this World and Purgatory. But every mortal
sin puts us out of the state of Grace, which we were in by Baptism, and till we
be restored to the state of Grace again, we must be eternally damned, because
we have no right to the Sacrifice and Expiation of Christ's Death: the only way
in the Church of Rome, to restore us to this state of Grace, is by the
Sacrament of Penance, and the Absolution of the Priest, which restores us to
the same state which Baptism at first put us into, and therefore very well
deserves to be thought a Sacrament: And thus we recover our interest in the
Merits of Christ's Death, and therefore cannot be eternally damned for our
sins; but still it is our duty to live well, for the Death of Christ does not
excuse us from Holiness of Life, which is the condition of the Gospel; and
therefore if we are in a state of Grace, and thereby secured from eternal
damnation, yet if we live in sin we must be punished for it, unless we can find
some other expiation for sin, than the Death of Christ upon the Cross, which
still leaves us under the obligations of a holy life, and therefore cannot make
such an Expiation for sin, as shall serve instead of a holy life: Now here
comes in the Sacrifice of the Mas, Humane Penance, Satisfactions, Indulgencies;

For the sacrifice of the Mass, as I observed before, does not serve the same
end, that the Sacrifice of the Cross does: the Sacrifice of the Mass is a
propitiatory Sacrifice for the living and the dead; But what sins is it a
Propitiation for? For such sins for which men are to satisfy themselves; that
is, for all sins the eternal punishment of which is remitted for the Sacrifice
of the Cross. This is evident from their making the Sacrifice of the Mass a
propitiatory Sacrifice for the dead; that is, for the Souls in Purgatory, who
suffer there the temporal punishments of sin, when the eternal punishment is
forgiven: the Souls in Hell are capable of no Expiation, and therefore an
expiatory Sacrifice for the dead, can be only for the Souls in Purgatory, and
that is for the temporal punishment of sin, for which the Sacrifice of the
Cross is no Expiation; and the Mass is in no other sense made a Sacrifice for
the living than for the dead; and therefore is not to expiate the eternal, but
the temporal punishments of sin, as appears from hence, that the saying Masses,
or hearing Masses, or purchasing Masses, is reckoned among those Penances men
must do for the Expiation of their sins, and yet they can, by all they do, only
expiate for the temporal punishment of sin; and therefore Masses for the living
are only for the Expiation of those temporal punishments of sin, for which the
Sacrifice of the Cross made no Expiation. And I shall be so civil at present,
as not to inquire, how the Sacrifice of the Cross, and the Sacrifice of the
Mass, which are the very same Sacrifice of the Natural Body and Blood of
Christ, come to serve such very different ends: that when Christ was Sacrificed
upon the Cross he expiated only for the eternal punishment of sin; when
Sacrificed in the Mass, only for the temporal. I need add nothing to prove,
that Humane Penances, Satisfactions, Merits, Indulgencies, are only to expiate
temporal punishment of sin, because it is universally acknowledged. Now if
these temporal punishments be only in lieu of Holiness and Obedience which the
Gospel requires to entitle us to the Expiation of Christ's Death upon the
Cross, as I have already shown; then it is evident to a demonstration, that the
Church of Rome has overthrown the Death and Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross,
considered as an argument of a holy life, by setting up the Sacrifice of the
Mass, Humane Penances, Satisfactions, Merits, Indulgencies, instead of the
Gospel-terms of obedience and holiness of life.

4. The Intercession of Christ for us, at the right hand of God, is another
powerful motive to Holiness of Life: It gives all the encouragement to true
penitent Sinners, that can be desired; For if any man sin, 1 John 2.2.
we have an advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous, who is also a
propitiation for our sins. But then Christ mediates only in virtue of his
Blood, that is, only upon the terms and conditions of the Covenant of Grace
which was sealed by his Blood; that is, he mediates and intercedes only for
true penitent sinners; which obliges us, as we hope to be heard by God, when we
pray in the Name of Christ, truly and heartily to repent of all our sins, and
to live a new life.

This the Church of Rome also seems very sensible of, that Christ of his own
accord will not intercede for impenitent and unreformed sinners; that he who is
the great Example and the great Preacher of Righteousness, will not espouse the
Cause of incorrigible sinners, who are very desirous of pardon, but hate to be
reformed; and therefore they seem to think it as hopeless a thing to go
immediately to a holy Jesus, as to appear before the Tribunal of a just and
righteous God, without a powerful Advocate.

For this reason they have found out a great many other Advocates and Mediators
a great deal more pitiful and compassionate than Christ is, who by their
interest in him, or their great favor with God, may obtain that pardon which
otherwise they could not hope for; such as the Virgin Mary, who is the Mother
of Christ, and therefore, as they presume, has as great interest in and
authority over him, as a Mother has over her Son; besides those vast numbers of
meritorious Saints, whose Intercessions cannot but prevail for those sinners
whose Cause they undertake.

And that this is the true reason of their Addresses to Saints and the Virgin
Mary, though they will not speak out, is evident to any considering man: For
will they say, that Christ, who became man for us, who suffered and died for
us, who was in all things tempted like as we are, yet without sin; who did and
suffered all this on purpose that he might be a merciful and compassionate High
Priest, and might give us the highest assurance of his tenderness and
compassion for us. I say, can they suspect that such a High Priest will not
undertake to plead our Cause, if we be such as according to the terms of the
Gospel, it is his Office to interceed for? No Christian dare say this, which is
such a reproach to our common Savior, who has bought us with his own Blood;
and therefore no Christian who thinks himself within the reach and compass of
Christ's Intercession, can need or desire any other Advocate: but those who are
conscious to themselves of so much wickedness, that they cannot hope the holy
Jesus will intercede for them for their own sakes, have reason to procure some
other Favorites to intercede for them with their Intercessor; and to
countenance the matter they must recommend it to the practice of all
Christians, and more than so, make it Heresy to deny it. There is but one
Argument I know of against this, that any man should be so stupid as to think
that the Intercession of the Virgin Mary, or the most powerful Saints, can
prevail with our Savior to do that, which according to the Laws of his own
Mediation, they know he cannot and will not do: and this I confess I cannot
answer, but yet so it is. And thus the Intercession of Christ is made a very
ineffectual Argument to make men good; for though Christ will intercede for
none but true Penitents, the Church of Rome has a great many other Advocates
that will, or at least she persuades people that they will.

5. Another great Gospel-Motive to a holy life, is the hope of Heaven, and the
fear of Hell. As for the hope of Heaven, that is no otherwise a Motive to
holiness of life, but upon a supposition of the necessity of Holiness, that
without holiness no man shall see God; but this you have already heard, is
overthrown by the Church of Rome: and if men may go to Heaven without holiness,
I know no need of it for that purpose in this World.

But Hell is a very terrible thing, to be condemned to endless and eternal
torments with the Devil and his Angels; but then the Doctrine of Purgatory does
mightily abate and take off this terror: for though Purgatory be a terrible
place too, not cooler than Hell it self, yet it is not eternal; and men, who
are mightily in love with their sins, will venture temporal punishments, though
somewhat of the longest, to enjoy their present satisfactions: especially
considering how many easy ways there are for rich men to get out of Purgatory;
those who have money enough to buy Indulgences while they live, and Masses for
their Souls when they die, need not lie long there, if the Priests are not out
in their reckoning: and yet it is so easy a thing for a good Catholic to get
into Purgatory; especially if he take care frequently to confess himself, and
receive absolution, or do not die so suddenly as to be surprised in any mortal
sin, that Hell seems to be very little thought of; or feared in the Church of
Rome. Now I desire no better Argument, that all these are not Gospel-Doctrines,
than that they destroy the force of all those Arguments the Gospel uses to make
men good; that is, they are a direct contradiction to the Gospel of Christ.

6. I shall name but one Motive more, and that is the Examples of good men; 12
Heb. 1.
To be followers of them, who through faith and patience inherit the promises;
that being encompassed with such a cloud of witnesses, we should lay aside
every weight, and the sin which does so easily beset us, and run with patience
the race which is set before us. Now this is a powerful Argument, because they
were men as we are, subject to the same temptations and infirmities; and
therefore their Examples prove, that Holiness is a practicable thing; that it
is possible for men to conquer all the difficulties of Religion, and all the
temptations in this life; and many times in them we see the visible rewards of
Virtue in great peace of mind, great assurances of the divine favor, great
supports under all adversities, and such a triumphant death, as is a blessed
presage of a glorious Resurrection.

But now in the Church of Rome, if there be any great and meritorious Saints,
as they call them, their extraordinary Virtues are not so much for Imitation as
for a stock of Merits. The more Saints they have, the less reason other men
have to be Saints, if they have no mind to it, because there is a greater
treasury of Merits in the Church to relieve those who have none of their own.
The extraordinary Devotion of their Monasteries and Nunneries, (for so they
would persuade the World, that there is nothing but Devotion there) is not for
Imitation, and it is unreasonable it should, because no body sees it; and it is
impossible to imitate that recluse life, without turning the whole World into a
Monastery: but these Religious Societies furnish the Church with a stock of
Merits, out of which she grants Indulgencies to those, who are not very
religious; and it is plain, that if one man can merit for twenty, there is no
need, there should be above one in twenty good. Herein indeed the Members of
the Church of Rome, have the advantage of all other Churches, (especially if
they enter themselves into any religious Confraternity, to partake in the
Merits of the Society) that others can merit for them; and then if we can share
in the Merits of the Saints, we need not imitate them: a Church which has
Saints to merit for them on Earth, and to intercede for them in Heaven, if she
can but maintain and propagate a Race of such meriting Saints, (which is taken
care of in the Institution and Encouragement of Monastic Orders and
Fraternities) may be very indulgent to the rest of her Members, who do not like
meriting themselves. So that the principal Motives of the Gospel to Holy Life,
as appears in these Six Particulars, lose their force and efficacy in the
Church of Rome, and certainly those cannot be Gospel-Doctrines, which destroy
the great end of the Gospel to make men Good.

3ly, Nor do the Gospel-means and Instruments of Holiness and Virtue escape
better in the Church of Rome: as will appear in a very few words.

Reading and Meditating on the Holy Scriptures, is one excellent means of
Grace, not only as it informs us of our Duty, but as it keeps a constant warm
sense of it upon our Minds, which nothing can so effectually do, as a daily
reading of the Scripture, which strikes the mind with a more sacred authority,
than any Humane Discourses can do: but this is denied to the People of the
Church of Rome, who are not allowed to read the Scriptures in the Vulgar
Tongue, for fear of Heresy, which, it seems, is more plain and obvious in the
Scripture than Catholic Doctrines: but they should also have considered,
whether the danger of Heresy or Sin be the greater; whether an orthodox faith
or a good life be more valuable; and if denying the people the use of the Bible
be the way to keep them orthodox, I am sure it is not the way to make them
good; True Piety will lose more by this, than the Faith will get by it.

Thus constant and servent Prayer, besides that supernatural grace and
assistance it obtains for us, is an excellent moral instrument of holiness: for
when men confess their sins to God with shame and sorrow, when with inflamed
Devotions, they beg the assistances of the Divine Grace, when their souls are
every day possessed with such a great sense awe and reverence for God, as he
must have, who prays devoutly to him every day; I say, it is impossible such
men should easily return to those sins, which they have so lately confessed,
with such shame and confusion and bitter remorse; that those who so
importunately beg the assistance of the Divine Grace, should not use their best
endeavors to resist Temptations, and to improve in Grace and Virtue, which is
a profane mockery of God, to beg his assistance, that he will work in us, and
with us, when we will not work: that those who have a constant sense and
reverence of God, should do such things, as argue, that men have no fear of God
before their eyes.

But this is all lost in the Church of Rome, where men are taught to Pray they
know not what, and when men do not understand their Prayers, it is certain such
Prayers cannot affect their minds, what other good soever Latin Prayers may do
them; and thus one of the most powerful Instruments of Piety and Virtue is
quite spoiled by Prayers in an unknown Tongue, which can no more improve their
Virtue than their Knowledge.

Sorrow for Sin is an excellent Instrument of true Repentance, as that
signifies the reformation of our Lives; for the natural effect of Sorrow is,
not to do that again, which we are sorry for doing; but in the Church of Rome,
this contrition, or sorrow for sin, serves only to qualify men for absolution,
and that puts them into a state of grace, and then they may expiate their sins
by Penances, but are under no necessity of forsaking them.

The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, besides those supernatural conveyances of
Grace, which are annexed to it, by our Savior's Institution, is a great Moral
Instrument of Holiness; it representing to us the Love of our crucified Lord,
the Merit and Desert of Sin, the Virtue of his Sacrifice to expiate our Sins,
and to purge our Consciences from Dead Works, and requiring the exercise of a
great many Virtues; an abhorrence and detestation of our Sins, great and ardent
Passions of Love and Devotion, firm Resolutions of Living to him, who Died for
us, Forgiveness of Enemies, and an Universal Love and Charity to all Men,
especially to the Members of the same Body with us; but in the Church of Rome
this admirable Sacrament is turned into a dumb show, which no body can be
edified with, or into a Sacrifice for the living and the dead, which expiates
Sin, and serves us instead of a Holy Life, as I observed above.

External Mortifications, and Severities to the Body, Fastings, Watchings, hard
Lodging, etc. are very useful Instruments of Virtue, when they are intended to
subdue the Flesh to the Spirit, and to wean our Minds from Sensual Enjoyments;
but when they are intended to satisfy for our Sins, not to kill them; to
punish our selves for our sins, that we may commit them more securely again,
this is not a means to break vicious Habits, and to conquer the love of Sin,
but only to conquer the fear of committing it.

This is enough to show, how far Popery is from promoting the great design of
the Gospel to improve and perfect Humane Nature in Knowledge and Holiness, and
were there no other Argument against it, this were sufficient to me to prove,
That it cannot be the Religion of the Gospel of Christ.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for W. Rogers.
THE Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome, truly Represented; in
Answer to a Book, entitled, A Papist Misrepresented, and Represented, etc.
Quarto.

An Answer to a Discourse, entitled, Papists protesting against Protestant
Popery. Quarto.

An Answer to the Amicable Accommodation. Quarto.

A View of the whole Controversy, between the Representer and the Answeter.
Quarto.

The Doctrine of the Trinity, and Transubstantiation, compared as to Scripture,
Reason, and Tradition; 1st and 2d Part. In two Dialogues, between a Protestant
and a Papist. Quarto.

An Answer to the Eighth Chapter of the Representer's Second Part.

Of the Authority of Councils, and the Rule of Faith. By a Person of Quality:
With an Answer to the Eight Theses, laid down for the Trial of the English
Reformation.

Sermons and Discourses: The Third Volume. By Dr. Tillotson, Dean of
Canterbury. 8o.

A Manual for a Christian Soldier, Written by Erasmus.

A new and easy Method to learn to Sing by Book.

A Book of Ciphers, or Letters Reverst: Price bound 5 s.

A Persuasive to frequent Communion in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. By
Dr. Tillotson, Dean of Canterbury. In Octavo. Price 3 d.

A Discourse against Transubstantiation. In Octavo. Price 3 d.

The State of the Church of Rome when the Reformation began.

A Letter to a Friend, Reflecting on some Passages in a Letter to the D. of P.
in Answer to the Arguing Part of his first Letter to Mr. G.

The Reflecter's Defense of his Letter to a Friend: In Four Dialogues.

A Discourse concerning the Nature of Idolatry: in which the Bishop of Oxford's
true and only Notion of Idolatry is Considered and Confuted.

The Protestant Resolved: or, a Discourse, showing the Unreasonableness of his
Turning Roman Catholic for Salvation. Second Edition.

The Absolute Impossibility of Transubstantiation Demonstrated.

A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of the Reverend Benj, Calamy, D.D.

A Vindication of some Protestant Principles of Church Unity and
Catholick-Communion, from the Charge of Agreement with the Church of Rome. In
Answer to a late Pamphlet, Entitled, An Agreement between the Church of
England and the Church of Rome, evinced from the Concertation of some of her
Sons with their Brethren the Dissenters.

A Preservative against Popery; being some Plain Directions to Unlearned
Protestants, how to Dispute with Romish Priests. The First Part. The Fourth
Edition.

These three last by William Sherlock, D.D. Master of the Temple.


