A LETTER TO A Member of the Convention.
SIR,
I Hear you are elected a Member of this next Convention, and therefore expect
to see you very suddenly in Town, but I can tell you my mind more freely in
Writing, and you may think better of it when you see it before you, and
therefore I have rather chose to give you the trouble of this Paper, than to
leave all to a personal Conference at our next meeting.

I will not dispute with you about what is past or what is to come; it is too
late to do the first, and as for the second, whatever becomes of other
Arguments, Interest is most apt to prevail, and therefore all that I beg of
you, is to take care that you do not mistake your own and the Nations Interest
in a matter of such high Concernment.

There is no less Affair before you than the Fate of Princes, and of three
Kingdoms, which requires the most calm, mature, and deliberate Advice; and yet
when you come to London, you will find such Distractions and Divisions in Men's
Counsels, that all the threatening Dangers of Popery were not a more formidable
prospect to considering Men, all old Animosities are revived, and new ones
fomented every day; some are visibly acted by Ambition, others by Revenge; the
Dissenter is very busy to undermine the Church, and the Commonwealths Man to
subvert Monarchy, and the Lord have Mercy upon us all. I doubt not, but you
will readily confess, that it is the common Interest to have things settled upon
such a bottom, as is most like to last, and then, I am sure, you must consult
both Law and Conscience in the matter, and keep to your old establishment as
near as you can; for when there are so many Distempers in Men's Minds, and such
contrary Interests, it is no time to innovate, it is no time to lay new
Foundations, when there are frequent Earthquakes, which will not give them time
to settle: The Revolutions of State have been so quick and sudden of late, that
all prudent Men will be cautious how they try Experiments, which are commonly
dangerous and uncertain, but especially in matters of Government, which depend
on the good liking of free and moral Agents, and when se many Hundred Thousand
are to be satisfied, you can never guess at the prevailing Opinion, by the
major Vote of a Convention.

Let us then consider, what is most likely to give the most general
satisfaction to the Nation, for that, I am sure, is most likely to be lasting,
and because you may be a Stranger to these matters yet, I will give you an
Account of the different Projects now on foot, as well as I can learn them.

Some are for sending to the King, and treating with him to return to his
Government, under such legal restraints, as shall give security to the most
jealous Persons, for the preservation of their Liberties, Laws, and Religion;
and if he will not consent to this, to make the next Heir Regent: Others are
for declaring the Crown forfeited or demised, and proclaiming the Princess of
Orange: Others will have the Government dissolved, and begin all de novo, and
make the Prince of Orange King, or crown him and the Princess together, and
Postpone the Title of the Princess Anne, till after the Prince's Death, if he
survive the Princess. I shall not pretend to tell you, which of these I should
prefer, were it res integra; for the question is not, which you and I should
like best, but which will be the firmest Foundation for the Peace and
Settlement of these Kingdoms.

1. As for the first, though it be horribly decried, and such Men foolishly
exposed as Friends to Popery and Arbitrary Power; yet I could never meet with
any Man yet, who had the face to reject all Treaty with the King upon any other
pretense, but that it was in vain, that it is impossible he should give any
Security to the Nation, that he would govern by Law; which is so ridiculous a
pretense, that it will satisfy no body, but those who are resolved, that he
shall never return. For, as little as I am versed in this matter, I could frame
such Laws, as should put it utterly out of the King's power to invade our
Liberties or Religion: However, I am sure, we should have thought our selves
very secure, would the King have called a Free Parliament, and given them
liberty to have made what Laws they Pleased, and that which would have given
such general satisfaction before, had it been granted, I suspect, should it be
now granted, and refused, that would give as general dissatisfaction; nay the
very refusal to treat, will be thought such a scandalous neglect of our Duty to
a Sovereign Prince, and give such Jealousies to People, that those who oppose
it, are only afraid, that the King should comply, as will be the foundation of
universal Discontents, which will show themselves upon the first occasion. It
is certain, would the Convention treat with the King, either they would agree,
or they would not agree; if they could not agree upon the proposal of
reasonable Securities; this would satisfy multitudes of People, that they had
tried if they did agree, this would give universal satisfaction, and there were
an happy end of all our Troubles.

But now let us suppose, that Part of the Convention should prevail, which is
against treating with the King, and for deposing or setting him aside without
more ado; let us consider what is like to be the most probable consequence of
this.

It is certain, this fundamental Change in the Government cannot be made by any
legal Authority; for the Convention will not pretend to any such legal Power,
and there can be no Parliament without a King; and a King, whose whole
Authority depends upon a Convention, that has no such Authority, is but in a
weak state, as to Civil Right: No Man will think himself bound in Conscience to
obey him, and when every Man's Conscience is free, let such a Prince beware of
Epidemical Discontents. And let you and I calmly consider, what Discontents may
probably arise upon such a juncture.

1. First then, all those who think themselves bound by their Oath of
Allegiance to defend the Kings Person, his Crown, and Dignity, who wonder at
Men of Law, who talk of a Forfeiture or Demise of the Crown, while the King
lives, and flies out of his Kingdoms, only for the safety of his Person, and
because he will not trust himself in the power of his Enemies; I say, all such
Persons will be greatly discontented at deposing the King, and will never own
any other King, while their own King, to whom they have sworn Allegiance,
lives; and tho you should suppose such conscientious Men to be very few, yet if
these few should happen to be Persons of Character, of known Prudence and
Abilities, Integrity and Honesty, in Church or State, their Examples, would
give a terrible shock to such a new tottering Government, tho they were never
so tame and peaceable, void of Faction and Sedition themselves.

And yet let me tell you, you must not judge of the Numbers of these Men by the
late general defection. The whole Nation, I confess, was very unanimous for the
Prince, great numbers of Gentlemen, nay of the Kings own Soldiers, went over to
him, very few, but Papists offered their Service to the King; but the reason of
this was very evident, not that they were willing to part with the King, and
set up another in his room, but because they were horribly afraid of Popery,
and very desirous to see the Laws and Religion of the Nation settled upon the
old Foundations by a Free Parliament, which was all the Prince declared for;
but many who were well-wishers to this Design, will not renounce their
Allegiance to their King; and now they see what is like to come of it, are
ashamed of what they have done, and ask God's Pardon for it, and are ready to
undo it as far as they can.

2. Besides a thousand occasions of Discontent which may happen in such a
Change of Government as this, which no body can possibly foresee, and yet may
have very fatal Consequences, there are some very visible occasions for it
besides the sense of Loyalty and Conscience.

How many Discontents, think you, may arise between the Nobility and Gentry,
who attend the new Court? Every Man will think he has some Merit, and expect
some marks of Favor, to have his share of Honor, and Power, and Profit, and yet
a great many more must miss, than those who speed, and many of those, who are
rewarded, may think they have not their Deserts, and be discontented to see
others preferred before them; and those whose expectations are disappointed,
are disobliged too, and that is a dangerous thing, when there is another, and a
rightful King to oblige; for Duty and Discontent together, to be revenged if a
new King, and to be reconciled to an old One, will shake a Throne which has so
sandy a Foundation; the like may be said of the Soldiery, who are generally Men
of Honor and Resentment, and have the greater and sharper Resentments now,
because they are sensible of their mistake, when it is too late; yet as they
ought not to have fought for Popery, nor against the Laws and Liberties of
their Country, so neither ought they to have deserted the defense of the King's
Person and Crown, but have brought the Prince to Terms, as well as the King.

Thus you easily foresee, what a heavy Tax must be laid upon the Nation, to
defray the Charge of this Expedition, and I believe the Country would have paid
it very cheerfully and thankfully, had the Prince restored to them their Laws,
and Liberties, and Religion, together with their King; but you know Men are apt
to complain of every thing, when Money is to be paid, and it may be it will be
thought hard to lose their King, and to pay so dear for it too: And tho what
the Convention does is none of the Prince's fault, no more than it was his
design, yet angry People don't use to distinguish so nicely.

But there is a greater difficulty still than all this: There are no
Contentions so fierce as those about Religion; this gave Life and Spirit to the
Prince's Design, and had the main stroke in this late Revolution: And though
Popery were a hated Religion, yet most Men are as zealous for their own
Religion, as they are against Popery. Those of the Church of England are very
glad to get rid of Popery, but they will not be contented to part with their
Church into the bargain, for this would be as bad, as they could have suffered
under Popery. The several Sects of Dissenters are glad to get rid of Popery
also; but now they expect glorious days for themselves, and what they expect
God Almighty knows, for I am confident they don't know themselves. Now consider
how difficult it will be, for any Prince, who has but a crazy Title to the
immediate possession of the Crown, to adjust this matter so, as neither to
disgust the Church of England, nor the Dissenters, and if either of them be
disobliged, there is a formidable Party made against them.

This being the Case, should the King be deposed, and any other ascend the
Throne, it will be necessary for them to keep up a standing Army to quell such
Discontents; for where there are and will be Discontents without any tie of
Conscience to restrain Men, there can be no defense but only in Power; and this
will raise and increase new Discontents; for it alters the frame of our
Constitution, from a Civil to a Military Government, which is one of the great
Grievances we have complained of, and I believe English People will not be
better pleased with Dutch, or German, or any foreign Soldiers, than they were
with their own Countrymen; and I believe English Soldiers will not be
extremely pleased to see themselves disbanded, or sent into other Countries to
hazard their Lives, while their Places are taken up by Foreigners, who live in
ease, plenty, and safety: And when things are come to this pass, which is so
likely, that I cannot see how all the Wit of Man can prevent it; I will suppose
but one thing more, which you will say is not unlikely, that the King return
with a foreign Force to recover his Kingdoms, how ready will the Men of
Conscience, and the Men of Discontent be to join him, nay to invite him home
again; and if he returns as a Conqueror, you will wish, when it is too late,
that you had treated with him, and brought him back upon safe and honorable
Terms.

Secondly, Let us suppose now, that all this should be over-voted (for I am
sure it can never be answered) and the Convention should resolve to proclaim
the next Heir.

1. You must be sure to examine well who is the next Heir, that is, you must
thoroughly examine the Pretenses of the Prince of Wales; and yet if you have not
good Proofs of the Imposture, you had better let it alone. For tho the Nation
has had general presumptions of it, yet a Male Heir of the Crown is mightily
desired, and People would be very fond of him, if they had one, and seem to
expect some better Proofs than mere Presumptions against him, because common
Fame has promised a great deal more, and if you should either say nothing to
it, or not what is expected, it would be a very plausible pretense for
discontented People ^o quarrel.

2. Suppose the Princess of Orange should appear to be the next Heir, what if a
Lady of her eminent Virtue should scruple to sit upon her Father's Throne,
while he lives? Or what if she should scruple it hereafter, and place her
Father in his Throne again? This is not impossible, for Virtue is greater than
a Throne. For my part, I think you will put a very hard thing upon so excellent
a Lady, and I pray God give her Grace to resist the Temptation. A Regency is
more tolerable, because a Nation must be governed, and none so proper to govern
it as the next Heir; but I should think, none who expect to wear a Crown,
should countenance Subjects in deposing their King, nor accept of a Crown upon
such Terms, as to take it off of a Fathers Head: It is a dangerous thing for a
Prince who has a Title to the Crown, to own that the Crown may be forfeited or
demised by such a withdrawing; if this be not so, the Princess has no Right to
the possession of the Crown yet, and if it be so, her Crown is worth a great
deal less than formerly it was, especially if she own this Secret by accepting
the Crown, which her Ancestors always concealed, and which the best Subjects of
England would not believe before; what they may do after this, I know not.

Thirdly, The next Design (I verily believe without the knowledge or thought of
the Prince, who has too great a mind to think of any thing, which in the
opinion of any wise Man could stain and fully his Glory) is to give the Crown
to the Prince of Orange, for it must be a Gift, if any thing; for he has no
immediate Title to it, that I know of: This is upon a pretense, that the
Government is dissolved, and therefore we must begin de novo, which is very
ridiculous, when the King is still alive, and the Laws in as full force as
ever, only the Regular Administration of Government at present interrupted by
the King's absence; but this is not the worst of it, for it is a dangerous
pretense too, especially to Men of Quality and Estates, as you are; for if the
Government be dissolved, our Laws are dissolved, and Honor and Property
dissolved with them, and then I doubt the Mobile will come in for their share
in the new Division of the Lands, and set up for Men of as good Quality as any;
for if our Laws are gone, we return to a state of Nature, in which all Men are
equal, and all things common; this I believe you will not be for, for the
Reason abovementioned.

If then the Laws continue, the Government is not dissolved, and the Crown is
not a Gift, but an Inheritance still, as much as your Estate is; and then the
Prince of Orange cannot have it in his own Right, because his own Princess, and
the Princess Anne are befoe him; consider then what the consequence of this
Pro^ect would be.

1. This alters the essential Constitution of the English Government, by
changing an Hereditary into an Elective Monarchy, a thing which I know some Men
are very fond of: for then the next occasion they can find to quarrel with
their Prince, they may with as much ease turn it into a Commonwealth; for when
the Crown is at the Peoples disposal, they may if they please keep it to
themselves.

2. This will entangle all Men of Conscience in new Difficulties; for the Oath
of Allegiance does not only bind us to the King, but to his Heirs and
Successors, which must be understood of the next lineal Heir, where there is no
Authority to alter it; and whatever a Parliament may be thought to have with
the Authority and Consent of the King, no Man pretends, that a Convention of
the Estates has any Legal Authority to do it. I should be as heartily glad as
any Man, to see the Prince of Orange legally seated on the English Throne; but
these are Difficulties I cannot break through. Thus I have given you my hasty
Thoughts, and pray God to direct you.

I am Yours.

POSTSCRIPT.
There is one thing more, I would beg of you, that the Story of the French
League to cut Protestants Throats in England, may be well examined; for this
did more to drive the King out of the Nation, than the Prince's Army; and if
this should prove a Sham, as some, who pretend to know, say it is, it seems at
least to be half an Argument to invite the King back again. In short, remember
you are a Convention not a Parliament, and therefore nothing can give Authority
to what you do, but the good liking of the People; and as Necessity only can
justify your meeting without the King's Writs, so I hope you will take care to
do nothing but what will justify it self to God, the King, and your Country.


