THE PROTESTANT RESOLUTION OF FAITH, Being an Answer to Three Questions.

I. How far we must depend on the Authority of the Church for the true sense of
Scripture?

II. Whether a visible Succession from Christ to this day makes a Church, which
has this Succession an infallible Interpreter of Scripture; and whether no
Church, which has not this Succession, can teach the true sense of Scripture?

III. Whether the Church of England can make out such a visible Succession?

LONDON, Printed for F. Gardener, at the White-horse in Ludgatestreet, 1683.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THese Papers, which are here presented to thee, were writ for the use of a
private Person, and by the Advice of some Friends, are now made Public. We
find how busy the Romish Emissaries are to corrupt our People, and think our
selves equally concerned to Antidote them against Popery and Fanaticism: Two
extremes equally dangerous to the Government of Church and State in these
Kingdoms, both in their Principles and Practices; and both of them very great
Corruptions of the Christian Religion, and very dangerous to men's Souls. Some
of our Clergy have already been so charitable to our Dissenters, as to warn
them of their danger, and by the Strength and Evidence of Scripture and Reason,
to Convince them of their mistakes; and I pray God forgive those men, and turn
their Hearts, who will not contribute so much to their own Conviction and
Satisfaction, as diligently and impartially to read and consider what is so
charitably offered to them. Ignorance and mistake may excuse men, who have no
opportunities of knowing better, but such willful and resolved Ignorance, which
bars up men's minds against all means of better Information, will as soon damn
them, as sins against knowledge.

And now it might justly be thought want of Charity to those of the Roman
Communion, should we take no care at all of them; nay, want of Charity to those
of our own Communion, and to Dissenters themselves, who are daily assaulted by
the busy Factors for Rome. For the Disputes against the Church of Rome, as
well as against Dissenters, are for the most part too Learned, and too
Voluminous for the instruction of ordinary People, and therefore some short and
plain Discourses about the principal Matters in dispute between us, is the most
effectual way we can take to confirm men in their Religion, and preserve them
from the crafty Insinuations of such as lie in wait to deceive.

Some few Attempts, which have been already made of that kind, give me some
hope, that several other Tracts will follow, that the ruin of the Church of
England (if God shall please ever to permit such a thing) whether by Popery, or
Fanaticism, may not be charged upon our neglect to instruct People better.

Some Persons, it seems, whose Talent lies more in censuring what others do,
than in doing any good themselves, are pleased to put some sinister
Constructions on this Design; as it is impossible to design any thing so well,
but men of ill minds, who know not what it means to do good for goods sake,
shall be able to find some bad name for it. Some guess that we now write
against Popery only to play an after-Game, and to regain the Favor and good
Opinion of Dissenters, which we have lost by writing against them: But I know
not that any man has lost their Favor by it, nor that any man values their
Favor for any other reason, than to have the greater advantage of doing them
good. If so good a work, as confuting the Errors of the Church of Rome, will
give the Dissenters such a good Opinion of us, as to make them more impartially
consider what has been writ to persuade them to Communion with the Church of
England, I know no reason any man has to be ashamed to own it, though it were
part of his design; but whether it is or not, is more than I know; I dare
undertake for those Persons I am acquainted with, that they neither value the
favor, nor fear the displeasure either of Fanatics or Papists, but yet
heartily desire to do good to them both.

But there is a more mischievous suggestion than this, that the design of such
Papers is only to raise a new cry and noise about Popery, and to alarm the
People, and disturb the Government with new Fears and Jealousies: Truly, if I
thought this would be the effect of it, I would burn my Papers presently; for I
am sure the Church of England will get nothing by a Tumultuary and Clamorous
Zeal against the Church of Rome, and I had much rather suffer under Popery,
than contribute any thing toward raising a Popular Fury to keep it out. We
profess our selves as irreconcilable Enemies to Popery, as we are to
Fanaticism, and desire that all the World may know it; but we will never
Rebel, nor countenance any Rebellion against our lawful Sovereign, to keep out
either, we leave such Principles and Practices to Papists and Fanatics. But
when we find our People Assaulted by the Agents of Rome, and do not think our
selves secure from Popish Designs, we think it our Duty to give them the best
instructions we can to preserve them from such Errors, as we believe will
destroy their Souls; and cannot but wonder, that any men, who are as much
concerned to take care of Souls as we are, should think this a needless or a
scandalous undertaking. I wish such men would speak out, and tell us plainly,
what they think of Popery themselves. If they think this Design not well
managed, by those who undertake it, it would more become them to commend the
Design, and do it better themselves; I know no man, but would very gladly be
excused, as having other work enough to employ his time, but yet I had rather
spend my vacant minutes this way, than in censuring the good that other men do,
while I do none my self.

The Words of the Paper, which was sent to me, are these.
IT is my Opinion that the infinite Goodness of our Legislator, has left to us
a means of knowing the true sense and meaning of the Holy Scriptures, which is
the Church: Now I judge this Church must be known to be the true Church, by its
continual visible Succession from Christ till our Days. But I doubt whether or
no the Protestant Church can make out this continual visible Succession, and
desire to be informed.

ANSWER.
THAT Christ has left a means of knowing the true sense and meaning of the Holy
Scriptures, I readily grant; or else it had been to no purpose to have left us
the Scriptures. But the latter Clause is very ambiguous, for the meaning may
either be, that we may understand by the Scriptures, which is the Church; or
that the Church is the means whereby we must understand the true sense and
meaning of the Scripture.

The first is a true Protestant Principle, and therefore I presume not intended
by this Objector. For how we should know that there is any Church without the
Information we receive by the Scripture, I cannot Divine; and yet we may as
easily know that there is a Church, as we can know which is the true Church
without the Scripture. For there is no other means of knowing, either that
there is a Church, or what this Church is, or what are the Properties of a True
and Sound and Orthodox Church, but by Revelation, and we have no other
Revelation of this but what is contained in the Holy Scriptures.

As for the Second, That the Church is the means of knowing the true sense and
meaning of the Scriptures, it is in some sense very true, in some sense very
false.

1. It is in some sense true, and acknowledged by all sober Protestants. As, 1.
If by the Church we understand the Universal Church of all Ages, as we receive
the Scriptures themselves handed down by them to our time, so whatever
Doctrines of Faith have been universally received by them, is one of the best
means to find out the true sense of Scripture. For the nearer they were to the
times of the Apostles, the more likely they were to understand the true sense
of their Writings, being instructed by the Apostles themselves in the meaning
of them. And thus we have a certain Rule to secure us from all dangerous Errors
in expounding Scripture. For the great and fundamental Doctrines of the
Christian Religion, are as plainly contained in the Writings of the first
Fathers of the Church, and as unanimously asserted by them, as the Authority of
the Scriptures themselves: and therefore though we have not a Traditionary
Exposition of every particular Text of Scripture; yet we have of the great and
fundamental Doctrines of Faith, and therefore must never expound Scripture so
as to contradict the known and avowed sense of the Catholic Church. And this
course the Church of England takes; she receives the Definitions of the four
first General Councils, and requires her Bishops and Clergy to Expound the
Scriptures according to the professed Doctrines of those first and purest Ages of
the Church.

2. We ought to pay great deference to, and not lightly and wantonly oppose the
Judgment and Authority of the particular Church, wherein we live, when her
Expositions of Scripture do not evidently and notoriously contradict the sense
of the Catholic Church, especially of the first and best Ages of it. For it
does not become private men to oppose their Sentiments and Opinions to the
Judgment of the Church, unless in such plain Cases, as every honest man may be
presumed a very Competent Judge in the matter; and no Church, nor all the
Churches in the World have such Authority, that we must renounce our Senses,
and deny the first principles of Reason, to follow them with a blind and
implicit Faith.

And thus the Church, that is, the Sense and Judgment of the Catholic Church,
is a means for the finding out the true sense of Scripture; and though we may
mistake the sense of some particular Texts, (which the Romanists themselves
will not deny, but that even infallible Councils may do, who though they are
infallible in their Conclusions, yet are not always so in the Arguments or
Mediums, whether drawn from Scripture or Reason, whereby they prove them) yet
it is Morally impossible we should be guilty of any dangerous mistake, while we
make the Catholic Doctrine of the Church our Rule; and in other matters follow
the Judgment, and submit to the Authority of the Church, wherein we live; which
is as absolutely necessary, as Peace and Order and good Government in the
Church.

2. But then this is very false, if we mean that the Church is the only means
of finding out the true sense of the Scriptures; or if by the Church we
understand any particular Church, as I suppose this Person does, the Roman
Catholic, that is, the particular universal Church of Rome; or if we mean the
Church of the present Age, or by Means understand, such a Decretory Sentence,
as must determine our Faith, and command our Assent; that we must seek for no
other Reason of our Faith, but the Authority of the Church in expounding
Scriptures. I shall discourse something briefly of each of these.

1. To say that the Church is the only Means to find out the true sense of
Scripture, is very false and absurd. For, 1. This supposes the Holy Scriptures
to be a very unintelligible Book, which is a great reproach to the Holy Spirit,
by which it was Indicted, that he either could not, or would not speak
intelligibly to the World.

2. This is a direct Contradiction to those Exhortations of Christ and his
Apostles to study the Scriptures, which were made to private men, and therefore
necessarily supposes, that the Holy Scriptures are to be understood as other
Writings are, by considering the Propriety of the Words and Language wherein
they are written, the Scope and Design of the place, and such other means, as
honest and studious Inquirers use to find out the meaning of any other Book.

3. If the Scriptures are so unintelligible, that an honest man cannot find out
the meaning of them, without the infallible interpretation of the Church. I
would desire to know whether Christ and his Apostles Preached intelligibly to
their Hearers? If they did not, to what purpose did they Preach at all? By what
means were men Converted to the Faith? If they did, how come these Sermons to
be so unintelligible now they are written, which were so intelligible when they
were spoken? For the Gospels contain a plain History of what Christ did, and of
what he said; and the Apostles wrote the same things to the Churches when they
were absent, which they Preached to them when they were present; and we
reasonably suppose, that they as much designed that the Churches should
understand what they Wrote, as what they Preached, and therefore that they
generally used the same form of words in their writing and in their Preaching:
And this makes it a great Riddle, how one should be very plain and easy to be
understood, and the other signify nothing without an infallible Interpreter.

4. If the Scriptures be in themselves unintelligible, I would desire to know
how the Church comes to understand them? If by any humane means, together with
the ordinary Assistances of the Divine Spirit, then they are to be understood,
and then why may not every Christian in proportion to his Skill in Languages,
and in the Rules of Reason and Discourse, understand them also?

If the Church cannot understand the Scriptures by any humane means, but only
by Inspiration, (for there is no Medium between these two) to what purpose were
the Scriptures written? For we might as well have learnt the will of God from
the Church, without the Scriptures, as with them. God could have immediately
revealed his will to the Church without a written Rule, as well as reveal the
meaning of that written Rule, which it seems has no signification at all, till
the Church, by Inspiration, gives an Orthodox meaning to it.

5. And if we cannot understand the Scriptures, till the Church Expounds them
to us, how shall we know, which is the Church, and that this Church is such an
infallible Interpreter of Scriptures? The Church is to be known only by the
Scriptures, and the Scriptures are to be understood only by the Church; if we
will know the Church, we must first understand the Scriptures, and if we will
understand the Scriptures, we must first know the Church, and when both must be
known first, or we can know neither, it is impossible in this way, either to
understand the Scriptures, or find out the Church.

For, suppose the Church does expound Scripture by Inspiration, how shall we be
assured that it does so? Must we believe every Man, or every Church, which
pretends to Inspiration? This is a contradiction to the Apostles Rule, not to
believe every Spirit, but to try the Spirits. How then shall they be tried? I
know but two ways, either by Miracles, or by Scripture. Miracles are now
ceased, unless we will believe some fabulous Legends, which all wise men in the
Church of Rome are ashamed of; and if there were real Miracles wrought, they
are of no Authority against a standing Rule of Faith, which the Apostle calls a
more sure word of Prophecy. If then we must judge of these pretenses to
Revelation by the Scriptures, which is the only way now left, then there is a
way of understanding the Scriptures without this Revelation; for if we must
understand the Scriptures by Revelation, and Revelation by the Scriptures, we
are got into a new Circle and can understand neither.

Obj. But do we not see how many Schisms and Heresies have been occasioned, by
suffering every one to Expound Scripture for himself? How many Divisions and
Sub-divisions are there among Protestants, who agree in little else, besides
their opposition to Popery? And is it possible to cure this without an
infallible Interpreter of Scriptures? Is it not a Contradiction to common
Experience, to say, that the sense of Scripture is plain and certain, when so
few men can agree what it is?

Ans. 1. Yes, we do see this, and lament it, and are beholden to the Church of
Rome, and her Emissaries in a great measure for it. But yet we know, thus it
has been in all Ages of the Christian Church, as well as now; and we take the
same way to confute these Heresies, and to preserve the Purity of the Faith,
and the Unity of the Church, which the Primitive Fathers did, by appealing to
Scripture, and the Doctrine and Practice of the Catholic Church, which is the
best way any Church can take, when there is no infallible Judge of
Controversies: And if the Primitive Church had known any such infallible Judge,
they would certainly have appealed to him, at one time or other; and it had
been impossible, that any Errors or Heresies should for any long time together
have disturbed the Church; but we hear nothing of him for many hundred years
after Christ; but the ancient Fathers took the same way to confute the Heresies
of their days, which we do now, which is a good probable Argument, that they
knew no better. And the present Divisions of the Christian Church, are no
greater Argument against us, than the Ancient Heresies were against the
Primitive Church, or than the Protestant Heresies (as they are pleased to call
them) are against the Church of Rome? For what advantage has the Church of Rome
upon this account above any other profession of Christians. Those who are of
the same Communion are of the same Mind. Thus it is among us, and it is no
better among them; for we are no more of their mind, than they are of ours; nay
notwithstanding all their pretenses to infallibility, most of the Disputes,
which divide the Protestant Churches, are as fairly disputed among themselves,
witness the famous Controversy between the Jansenists, and Molinists; which
their infallible Judge never thought fit to determine to this day: They live
indeed in the Communion of the same Church, notwithstanding these Disputes,
because it is a very dangerous thing to leave it; but they are more beholden to
the Inquisition, than to infallibility for this Unity.

2. How do these Divisions and Heresies, which disturb the Church, prove, that
no man can be certain of his Religion? If we can certainly know what the sense
of Scripture is, notwithstanding there are many different Opinions about it,
then the diversity of Opinions is no Argument against us; if we cannot be
certain of any thing, which others deny, dispute, or doubt of, then how can any
Papist be certain that his Church is infallible? For all the rest of the
Christian Church deny this, and scorn their Pretensions to it. I may indeed
safely acquiesce in the Determinations of an infallible Judge, whom I am
infallibly assured to be infallible, how many contrary Opinions soever there
are in the World; But when infallibility it self is the matter of the dispute,
and I have no infallible way to know whether there be any such thing, or where
this infallibility is seated, if diversity of Opinions be an Argument against
the certainty of any thing, which I am not, and cannot be infallibly assured
of, then it is a certain demonstration against infallibility it self.

Unless we will take the Church of Romes word for her own infallibility, we
cannot have the Decision of an infallible Judge in this matter, for she will
allow no other infallible Judge, but her self; and yet this is so absurd a way,
that it supposes, that we believe, and that we dis-believe the same thing at
the same time. For unless we beforehand believe the Church to be infallible,
her saying so is no infallible proof that she is infallible; and yet the very
demand of a proof supposes that we are not certain of it, that we doubt of it,
or dis-believe it. When we ask the Church whether she be infallible, it
supposes that we are not certain of it, otherwise we should need no proof; and
when we believe the Church to be infallible, because she says so, it supposes,
that we did beforehand believe that she is infallible, otherwise, her saying
so is no proof.

The greatest Champions for the Church of Rome, never pretended that they could
produce any infallible proofs, which is the true Church. Cardinal Bellarmine
attempts no more, than to allege some Motives of Credibility, to make the
thing probable, and to incline men to believe it; and yet it is impossible we
can be more certain of the Infallibility of the Church, than we are, that it is
a true Church; and if a Papist have only some motives of Credibility, to
believe the Church of Rome to be a true Church, he can have no greater
probabilities, that it is an infallible Church.

Now not to take notice, what a tottering Foundation some high probabilities,
though they amounted to a moral assurance, is for the belief of Infallibility,
which is to put more in the Conclusion than there is in the Premises. The only
use I shall make of it at present is this, That we can at least be as certain
of the meaning of Scripture, as the Papists are that their Church is
infallible, for they can be no more infallibly assured of this, than we are of
our interpretations of Scripture; and therefore, if the diversity of Opinions
about the sense of Scriptures, proves that we cannot be certain what the true
Sense of it it is, the same Argument proves, that they cannot be certain that
their Church is infallible, because this is not only doubted, but absolutely
denied by the greatest part of the Christian World, and was never thought of by
the best and purest Ages of it. So that this Argument proves too much, and
recoils upon themselves, like a Gun which is overcharged; and if, for their
own sakes, they will grant that we may be certain of some things, which are as
confidently denied, and disputed by others; then the diversity of Opinions in
the Church, is no Argument, that we cannot be certain of our Religion, but only
teaches us greater Caution, and Diligence, and Honesty, in our inquiries after
Truth.

3. These Divisions and Heresies that are in the Christian Church, are no
better Argument against the truth and certainty of our Religion, than the
diversities of Religions that are in the World, are against the truth of
Christianity. The whole World is far enough from being Christian; great part of
it are Jews, or Pagans, or Mahumetanes still; and this is as good an Argument,
to prove the uncertainty of all Religions, as the different Parties and
Professions of Christians are to prove, that we cannot be certain, what the
true Christian Church, nor what true Christianity is. The Gospel of our Savior
was not designed to offer any force or violence to men's Faith or Understanding,
no more than to their Wills. Were there such an irresistible and compulsory
Evidence in the Gospel, that wherever it were Preached, it should be impossible
for any man, though never so wicked and ill disposed, to continue an Infidel,
or to prove a Heretic, Faith would be no greater a Virtue, than forced
Obedience and Compliance is. The Gospel has Evidence enough to Convince honest
Minds, and is plain enough to be understood, by those who are honest and
teachable; and therefore has its Effects upon those who are Curable, which is
all that it was designed for. Those, who will not believe, may continue
Infidels, and those, who will not understand, may fall into Errors, and believe
a Lie; and yet there is Evidence enough to Convince, and Plainness enough to
Instruct well disposed minds, and certainty enough in each to be the foundation
of a Divine Faith.

The sum is this, Though the Instructions of the Church are a very good means
for the understanding of the sense of Scripture, yet they are not the only
means; the Holy Scripture is a very intelligible Book, in such matters as are
absolutely necessary to Salvation; and could we suppose, that a man, who had
never heard of a Church, should have the use of the Bible, in a Language which
he understood, by a diligent reading of it he might understand enough to be
saved.

2. If by Church is meant any particular Church; as suppose the Roman Catholic
Church, or the Church of the present Age, it is absolutely false to say, that
the Church, in this sense, is always a sure and safe means of understanding the
Scripture. What has been Unversally believed by all Christian Churches, in all
Ages, or at least, by all Churches of the first and purest Ages of
Christianity, which were nearest the times of the Apostles, and might be
presumed best to understand the sense of the Apostles in the great Articles of
our Faith, is a very safe Rule for the interpretation of Scripture; and the
general Practice of those Primitive Apostolic Churches, in matters of
Government and Discipline, before they were corrupted by worldly Ambition, and
secular Interest, is a very safe Rule for our Practice also, and this is the
Rule whereby our Church is reformed, and to which we appeal.

There are but three things necessary to be understood by Christians, either
the Articles of Faith or the Rules of Life, or the external Order and
Discipline of the Church, and Administration of Religious Offices.

1. As for the Rules of Life, all those Duties which we owe to God and Men,
they are so plainly contained in the Holy Scriptures, that no honest man can
mistake them; I suppose the Church of Rome her self, will not pretend, that
there is any need of an infallible Interpreter to teach men what is meant by
Loving God with all our Heart, and our Neighbor as our selves.

2. As for the Articles of Faith, those which are fundamental to the Christian
Religion, and which every Christian ought to believe, are so plain in
Scripture, that every honest and unprejudiced man may understand them; but
however, as I observed before, we govern our selves in these things by the
received Doctrine of the Catholic Church of the first and purest Ages, and if
this be not a safe Rule, we can be certain of nothing. And what the Catholic
Faith was, we learn from those short summaries of Faith, which were universally
owned by all Catholic Churches. For what we now call the Apostles Creed, was
very anciently received in all Churches, with some little variety indeed of
Words and Phrase, but without any difference of sense; and the Catholic Faith
was not only preserved in such short Summaries and Creeds, which were as liable
to be perverted by Heretics, as the Scriptures themselves, but was more
largely explained in the Writings of the ancient Fathers; and though this will
not enable us to understand every Phrase and Expression of Scripture, but we
must use other means to do that, as Skill in the Original Languages, a
knowledge of ancient Customs, and ancient Disputes, to which the Apostles
frequently allude, a consideration of the Scope and Design of the place, etc.
Yet the Catholic Faith received and owned by the Primitive Church, is so far a
Rule, as it directs us to Expound Scripture to a true Catholic sense. As St.
Paul commands the Romans, that those who prophecy, should Prophecy according
to the proportion of Faith, Romans 12. 6. (...), according to the Analogy of
Faith: That is, that in the interpreting the Scriptures of the Old Testament
they should expound them to a Christian sense, according to those Doctrines of
the Christian Faith, which he had taught them; and this was a safe Rule for
expounding the Old Testament, which contained the Types, and Figures, and
Prophesies of the Gospel-State. And thus in expounding the new Testament, now
it is committed to writing, we must Prophecy according to the Analogy of
Faith, or as he commands Timothy in his Preaching. Hold fast the form of sound
words, which thou have heard from me. 2 Timothy 1. 13. It seems the Apostle had
given him a form of sound words, according to which he was to direct his
Preaching; whether this refers to a short summary of Faith, such as our Creed
is, I cannot say, though it is not improbable it may; but it is plain, we have
a form of sound words delivered to us by the Catholic Church, which contains
the true Catholic Faith, and therefore ought to be so far a Rule to us in
expounding Scripture, as never to contradict any thing which is contained in
it, for that is to contradict the Faith of the Catholic Church.

And when one great Article of this Faith, concerning the Eternal Godhead of
Christ the Son of God, was corrupted by Arius, a Presbyter of the Church of
Alexandria, it gave an occasion for a more full Declaration of the sense of the
Catholic Church about it. And though the effects of that Controversy were
very fatal to the Church, yet it was very happy that it broke out in such an
Age, when it could be determined with greater certainty and greater Authority,
than it could have been in any succeeding Age of the Church; by men, who were
venerable for their Age, for their Wisdom, for their Piety, for their undaunted
Confessions under Heathen and Persecuting Emperors, who knew what the sense of
the Catholic Church was, before this Controversy broke out, and before
External Prosperity had, through ease and wantonness, corrupted the Faith, as
well as the Manners of Christians.

3. As for matters of External Order, Discipline, and Government, the Universal
Practice of the Catholic Church is the best and safest Comment on those
general Rules and Directions we have laid down in Scripture. There is no doubt
at all, but the Apostles did appoint Governors, and Rules of Order and
Discipline, in the Churches planted by them; what these were, the Christians of
those days saw with their Eyes, in the daily practice of the Church; and
therefore the Apostles, in those Epistles which they wrote to their several
Churches, did not give them so punctual, and particular an account of those
matters, which they so-well knew before, but, as occasion served, make only
some accidental mention of these things, and that in such general terms, as
were well enough understood by them, who knew the practice of the Church in
that Age, but it may be, cannot merely by the force of the words, which may be
capable of several Senses, be so certainly and demonstratively determined to
any one sense (by us, who did not see what was done in those days) as to avoid
all possible Cavils of contentious men.

This has occasioned those disputes concerning Infant Baptism, the several
Orders and Degrees of Church Governors, the Rites and Ceremonies of Religious
Worship, and the like. Those who lived in those days, and saw what the Apostles
did in these matters, could not doubt of these things, though it were not in
express words said, that Infants should be baptized with their Parents, or that
Bishops are a Superior Order to Presbyters, and Presbyters to Deacons, or that
it is lawful for the Governors of the Church to institute and appoint some
significant Rites and Ceremonies, for the more decent and orderly
Administration of Religious Offices. But because there is not a precise and
punctual account given of these matters, in the Writings of the Apostles, which
there was no need of then, when these things were obvious to their very Senses,
some perverse and unreasonable Disputers, who obstinately reject all other
Evidence, will judge of these things just as they please themselves, and alter
their Opinions and Fancies, as often as they please.

But now if there be any certain way to know, what the practice of the Apostles
was in these Cases, this is the best Comment we can possibly have on such
Texts, as are not sufficiently plain and express without it. Now methinks any
reasonable man must acknowledge, that the best way to understand the Practice
of the Apostles, is from the Practice of the Catholic Church in succeeding
Ages, especially while the memory of the Apostles was fresh, and the Church
Governed by Apostolical men; when we cannot reasonably suspect any Deviation
from the Primitive Practice; and this is the Rule which the Church of England
owns in such matters, and by which she rejects and confutes both the
Innovations and Corruptions of the Church of Rome, and the wild pretenses of
Fanaticism.

So that we do in the most proper sense own the Belief and Practice of the
Primitive Church, to be the best means for Expounding Scripture. We do not
leave every man to Expound Scripture by a private Spirit, as our Adversaries of
the Church of Rome reproach us; we adhere to the ancient Catholic Church,
which the Church of Rome on one side, and the Fanatics on the other, have
forsaken: And though we reject the new invention of an infallible Judge, yet we
are no Friends at all to Skepticism, but can give a more Rational account of
our Faith, than the Church of Rome can.

Had we no other way of understanding the sense of Scripture, but by Propriety
of the Language, and the Grammatical Construction of the Words, and the scope
and design of the Texts, their Connection and Dependence on what goes before,
and what follows, and such like means as we use for the understanding any other
Books of humane Composition; I doubt not, but honest and diligent Inquirers
might discover the true meaning of Scripture, in all the great Articles of our
Faith; but yet this alone is a more uncertain way, and liable to the Abuses of
Heretics and Impostors. The Socinians are a famous Example, what Wit and
Criticism will do to pervert the plainest Texts; and some other Sectaries are
as plain a demonstration, what work Dullness and Stupidity, and Enthusiasm will
make with Scripture; but when we have the practice of the Catholic Church, and
an ancient and venerable summary of the Christian Faith, which has been the
common Faith of Christians in all Ages, to be our Rule in Expounding Scripture,
though we may after all mistake the sense of some particular Texts, yet we
cannot be guilty of any great and dangerous mistakes.

This use the Church of England makes of the Catholic Church, in Expounding
Scripture, that she Religiously maintains the ancient Catholic Faith, and will
not suffer any man to Expound Scriptures in opposition to the ancient Faith and
Practice of the Catholic Church.

But though the Belief and Practice of the Catholic Church be the best means
of understanding the true sense of Scripture, yet we cannot affirm this of any
particular Church, or of the Church of any particular Age, excepting the
Apostolic Age, or those Ages which immediately succeeded the Apostles.
Notwithstanding this, the Church of Rome may be no good Expositor of
Scriptures, for the Church of Rome, though she usurp the name of the Catholic
Church, as presuming her self to be the Head and Fountain of Catholic Unity,
yet she is but a part of the Catholic Church, as the Church of England, and
the Churches of France and Holland are; and has no more right to impose her
Expositions of Scripture upon other Churches, than they have to impose upon
her. If there happen any Controversy between them, it is not the Authority of
either Church can decide it, but this must be done by an appeal to Scripture,
and the sense of the Catholic Church, in the first and purest Ages of it.

For when we say, that the belief and Practice of the Catholic Church is the
best means to find out the true sense of Scripture, we do not mean that the
Church is the Sovereign and absolute Judge of the sense of Scripture, but the
meaning is, that those Churches, which were founded by the Apostles, and
received the Faith immediately from them, and were afterward, for some Ages,
governed by Apostolical men, or those who were taught by them, and conversed
with them, are the best Witnesses what the Doctrine of the Apostles was, and
therefore as far as we can be certain, what the Faith of these Primitive
Churches was, they are the best Guides for the Expounding Scripture.

So that the Authority of the Church in Expounding Scripture being only the
Authority of Witnesses, it can reach no farther than those Ages, which may
reasonably be presumed to be Authentic and Credible Witnesses of the Doctrine
of the Apostles, and therefore if we extend it to the four first general
Councils, it is as far as we can do it with any pretense of Reason; and thus
far the Church of England owns the Authority of the Church, and commands her
Ministers to Expound the Scriptures according to the Catholic Faith, owned and
professed in those days; but as for the later Ages of the Church, which were
removed too far from the Apostles days, to be Witnesses of their Doctrine, they
have no more Authority in this matter, than we have at this day, nor has one
Church any more Authority than another.

3. And therefore, if by the Church being the means of knowing the sense and
meaning of the Holy Scriptures, be understood the Judgment and Sentence, and
Decree of the Church, that we must seek no farther for the reason of our Faith,
than the insallible Authority of the Church, in Expounding Scripture, this also
is absolutely false and absurd.

This is more than Christ and his Apostles assumed to themselves, while they
were on Earth; they were indeed infallible Interpreters of Scripture, but yet
they never bore down their Hearers merely with their Authority, but Expounded
the Scriptures, and applied ancient Prophesies to their Events, and took the
Vail off of Moses's Face, and showed them the Gospel-state concealed under
those Types and Figures; they confirmed their Expositions of Scripture by the
force of Reason, and appealed to the Judgments and Consciences of their
Hearers, whether these things were not so; Christ commands the Jews not merely
to take his own word, and to rely on his Authority for the truth of what he
said, but to study the Scriptures themselves; and the Bereans are commended for
this generous temper of mind, that they were more noble than those of
Thessalonica, for they daily searched the Scriptures, to see whether the
Doctrine the Apostles Preached were to be found there or not? Now I think no
Church can pretend to be more infallible than Christ and his Apostles, and
therefore, certainly ought not to assume more to themselves than they did; and
if the Church of Rome, or any other Church, will convince us of the truth of
their Expositions of Scripture, as Christ and his Apostles convinced their
Hearers, that is by inlightning our Understandings, and convincing our
Judgments by proper Arguments, we will gladly learn of them.

This course the Primitive Christians took, as is evident in all the Writings
of the ancient Fathers against Jews and Heretics; they argue from the
Scriptures themselves to prove what the sense of Scripture is; they appeal
indeed sometimes to the sense of the Catholic Church, not as an infallible
Judge of Scripture, but as the best Witnesses of the Apostolical Doctrine: Thus
Tertullian argues against Heretics, in his Book De Praescriptionibus; but when
they reason about the sense of Scripture, they never direct us to any
infallible Judge, but use such Arguments, as they think proper to convince
Gainsayers.

Nay, this is the way, which was observed in all the ancient Councils; the
Bishops of the Church met together for Common Counsel and Advice, and in
matters of Discipline and Government, which were subject to their Authority,
they considered what was most for the public benefit of the Church, and
determined them by their Authority, not as infallible Judges, but as Supreme
Governors of the Church. In the disputes of Faith, they reason from Scripture,
and the sense of the Catholic Church, not from their own Authority; and what
upon a serious debate and inquiry they found to be most agreeable to the sense
of Scripture, and the Doctrine of the Church of former Ages, that they
determined, and decreed to be received in all Churches, as the Catholic Faith.
That this is so, is evident from all the Histories of the most Ancient, and
celebrated Councils, which any man may consult, who pleases.

Now I would ask some few Questions about this matter. 1. Whether these
Councils took a sure and safe way to find out Truth? If they did not, what
reason have we to believe that they determined right? If they did, then we may
use the same way, which they did; for that which is a good way in one Age, is
so another, and then there is no necessity of an Infallible Judge, to find out
the sense of Scripture, because we have other certain ways of doing this; the
same which all the ancient Councils observed.

2. I would know, whether it be not sufficient for every Christian to receive
the Decrees and Determinations of these Councils, upon the same Reason and
Authority which moved the Fathers assembled in Council to make these Decrees?
Whether, for Instance, we must not believe the Eternal Godhead of Christ, and
that he is of the same substance with his Father, for the same Reasons for
which the Nicene Fathers believed this, and required all Christians to believe
it? If we must, then Scripture, and the sense of the Catholic Church, not the
Authority of a general Council, or any Infallible Judge, is the Reason of our
Faith: For the Nicene Fathers, who were the first that met in a General
Council, could not believe this, upon the Authority of any other General
Council, much less upon their own Authority; unless we will say, that they
first Decreed this, then believed it, because they themselves Decreed it. If
Scripture, and the sense of the Catholic Church, antecedently to the
determinations of a General Council, or any other pretended Infallible Judge,
be not a sufficient foundation for our Faith, then the whole Christian World,
before the Council of Nice, which was the first general Council, had no
sufficient Foundation for their Faith, for there was no particular Bishop, or
Church in those days, which pretended to be the Infallible Interpreter of
Scriptures. We Protestants have the same way to understand the Scriptures, have
the same Reason and Foundation of our Faith, which the Nicene Fathers
themselves had, or which any Christian could have, before there was any general
Council, and if the Church of Rome do not think this enough, we cannot help
that, we are abundantly satisfied with it.

The Authority of a general Council in those days, was deservedly sacred and
venerable, not as an Infallible Judge, which they never pretended to, but as
the most certain means they could possibly have to understand, what was, and in
all Ages had been the received Doctrine of the Catholic Church. They met
together not to make new Articles of Faith, which no Council in the World ever
had any Authority to do, but to declare what was the truly ancient and
Apostolic Faith; and to put it into such Words, as might plainly express the
Catholic sense, and meet with the Distempers of that Age.

For this end Grave and Reverend Bishops assembled from all parts of the
Christian World, not merely to give their private Opinions of things, but to
Declare what was the received Doctrine of those Churches, over which they
presided; and I know no better Argument of an Apostolic Tradition, than the
consent of all Churches, as remote from each other as East and West, which were
planted by several Apostles, and differed very much from each other, in some
External Rites and Usages, but yet all agreed in the same Faith. And this is
the true Authority of those ancient Councils, that they were most likely to
understand the true sense of Scripture, and of the Catholic Church. This is
the Protestant Resolution of Faith, and the Nicene Fathers themselves had no
other way, nor pretended to any other.

Nay, the Church of Rome her self, as much as she talks of Infallibility, makes
very little use of it. She has never given us an infallible Comment on
Scripture, but suffers her Doctors to write as fallible Comments, and in many
things as contrary to each other, as any Protestant Divines do: And I cannot
imagine what good Infallibility does, if an infallible Church has no better
means of understanding Scripture, than the Comments of fallible men; that is,
no better means than every fallible Church has; for no man can understand the
Scripture ever the better for the Churches being infallible, unless this
infallible Church improve this glorious Talent of Infallibility in Expounding
Scripture; which she has not done to this day, and I believe never will.

Indeed it is apparent, that Infallibility, as it is pretended to by the Church
of Rome, can be of no use, either in the Resolution of Faith, or in Confuting
Heretics, who deny this Infallibility, and then I cannot imagine what it is
good for, but to multiply Disputes, instead of ending them.

As for the Resolution of Faith; suppose I ask a Papist, why he believes such
Articles, as the Divinity of Christ, or the Resurrection of the dead, to be
contained in Scripture? if he answer, as he must do, Because he is taught so by
the Church, which is infallible; my next Question is, How he knows the Church
to be infallible? If he says he learns this from Scripture; I ask him how he
comes to understand the Scripture, and how he knows that this is the sense of
it? If he know this by the infallible interpretation of the Church, then he
runs round in a Circle, and knows the Scripture by the Church, and the Church
by the Scripture, as I observed before; if he can find out the Churches
infallibility by the Scripture, without the help of an infallible Judge, then
it seems the Scripture is to be understood without the infallible
interpretation of the Church; and if men can find out infallibility in
Scripture without the Church, I am confident they may find out any thing else
in Scripture as well, without the Churches infallibility; For there is no
Article of our Creed so hard to be found there, as the Churches infallibility
is. But however that be, after all this boast of infallibility, a Papist has no
more infallible Foundation for his Faith, than a Protestant has, nor half so
much. We believe the Articles of the Christian Faith, because we find them
plainly taught in Scripture, and universally received as the sense of Scripture
by the Catholic Church in the best and purest Ages of it: A Papist believes
the Church to be infallible, because he thinks he finds it in Scripture, though
the Catholic Church for many Ages never found it there, and the greatest part
of the Christian Church to this day cannot find it there: Now if they will but
allow, that a Protestant (though a poor fallible Creature) may reason about the
sense of Scripture, as well as a Papist, and that the Evidence of reason is the
^^me to both, then we Protestants stand upon as firm ground as the Papists
here, and are at least as certain of all those Doctrines of Faith, which we
find in the Scripture, and are ready to prove by it, as they are of their
Churches infallibility; but then we have an additional Security, that we
Expound the Scriptures right, which they want, and that is the Doctrine and
Practice of the Primitive Church, which confirms all the Articles of our Faith,
and Rules of Worship and Discipline, but gives not the least intimation, that
the Pope or Church of Rome, was thought infallible by them, and if the
Primitive Church was ignorant of this, which is the best witness of Apostolical
Tradition, it is most probable, that no such thing is contained in Scripture,
though some mercenary Flatterers of the Pope have endeavored to persuade the
World, that they found it there.

So that we have a greater assurance of all the Articles of our Religion, from
Scripture and Catholic Tradition, than a Papist can have of the Churches
Infallibility, and yet he can have no greater assurance of any other Doctrines
of Religion, which he believes upon the Churches Infallibility, than he has of
Infallibility it self. So that in the last Resolution of Faith, the Protestant
has much the advantage of the Papist, for the Protestant resolves his Faith
into the Authority of the Scriptures, Expounded by the Doctrine and Practice of
the Primitive Church, the Papist resolves his into the Infallibility of the
Church, which he finds out only by Expounding Scripture by a private Spirit,
without the Authority of any Church, but that whose Authority is under dispute.

And as the Doctrine of Infallibility is of no use in the last Resolution of
Faith, so it is wholly useless in disputing with such Heretics as we are; who
deny Infallibility: for it is a vain thing to attempt to impose any absurd, or
groundless, and uncatholick Doctrines upon us, by the Churches infallible
Authority, who believe there is no such infallible Judge; but are resolved to
trust our own Eyes, and to adhere to Scripture and the Catholic Faith of the
Primitive Church in these matters.

And therefore the great Advocates for the Church of Rome, are forced to take
the same course in confuting Heresies, as they call them, that we do: They
allege the Authority of Scripture, the Authority of Fathers and Councils, to
justify their Innovations, and here we willingly join issue with them, and are
ready to prove, that Scripture and all true Antiquity is on our side; and this
has been often and unanswerably proved by the Learned Patrons of the
Reformation.

But there are some very material things to be observed from hence, for our
present purpose. For either they think this a good way to prove what they
intend, and to convince Gainsayers by the Authority of Scripture, and
Primitive Antiquity, or they do not. If they do not think this a good way, to
what purpose are there so many Volumes of Controversy written? Why do they
produce Scripture, and Fathers, and Councils, to justify the Usurpations of
their Church, and those new Additions they have made to the Christian Faith and
Worship? If this be not a good way to Convince a Heretic, why do they give
themselves and us such an impertinent trouble?

If this be a good way, then we are in a good way already; we take that very
way for our satisfaction, which by their own Confession and Practice, is a very
proper means for the Conviction of Heretics, and to discover the Truth, and
after the most diligent inquiries we can make, we are satisfied that the Truth
is on our side.

If the Authority of Scripture signify any thing in this matter, then it seems
Heretics, who reject the Authority of an Infallible Judge, may understand
Scripture without an Infallible Interpreter, by the Exercise of Reason and
Judgment in studying of them, otherwise why do they pretend to expound
Scripture to us, and to Convince us by Reason and Argument, what the true sense
of Scripture is.

If the Authority of the Primitive Church, and first Christian Writers, be
considerable, (as they acknowledge it is, by their appeals to them) then, at
least, the present Pope or Church, is not the sole infallible Judge of
Controversies, unless they will say, that we must not judge of the Doctrine or
Practice of the Primitive Church, by ancient Records, (and then Baronius his
Annals are worth nothing) but by the Judgment and Practice of the present
Church.

The sum is this, There is great reason to suspect, that the Church of Rome her
self, does not believe her own Infallibility, no more than we Protestants do;
for if she does, she ought not to suffer her Doctors to dispute with Heretics,
from any other Topic, but her own Authority; when they vie Reasons and
Arguments with us, and dispute from Scripture and Antiquity: they appeal from
the infallibility of the present Church, to every man's private Reason and
Judgment, as much as any Protestant does: and if the Articles of the Christian
Faith may be established by Scripture and Antiquity, without an infallible
Judge, as they suppose they may be, by their frequent attempts to do it; this
plainly overthrows the necessity of an infallible Judge. In a word, not to take
notice now, how weak and groundless this pretense of Infallibility is, it is
evident, that it is a very useless Doctrine; for those who believe the Churches
Infallibility, have no greater assurance of their Faith, than we have, who do
not believe it; and those who do not believe the Churches Infallibility, can
never be Confuted by it. So that it can neither establish any man's Faith, nor
confute any Heresies; that is, it is of no use at all.

The Church of England Reverences the Authority of the Primitive Church, as the
best witness of the Apostolical Faith and Practice, but yet resolves her Faith
at last into the Authority of the Scriptures. She receives nothing for an
Article of Faith, which she does not find plainly enough taught in Scripture,
but it is a great confirmation of her interpretation of Scripture, that the
Primitive Church owned the same Doctrines, which she does; and she looks upon
it as a just prejudice against any Expositions of Scripture, if they contradict
the common Faith of the first Christians; and therefore when the words of
Scripture are fairly capable of different senses, she chooses that sense which
is most agreeable with the Catholic Faith, and practice of the Primitive
Church; but should any Doctrines be imposed upon her, as Articles of Faith,
which are no where to be found in Scripture, or which are plainly contrary to
it, (as the new Trent Creed is) whatever pretense there be for the Antiquity of
such Doctrines, she utterly rejects them; she will not put out her own Eyes to
follow any other Guide; and thanks be to God, she needs not reject any truly
Catholic Doctrine in this way. We still retain the Faith of the Primitive
Church, and are greatly confirmed in it, from that admirable consent there is
between the Scriptures, as Expounded by us, and that Faith which was anciently
owned and received by all Christians.

Having thus shown in what sense the Church is the Interpreter of Scripture: I
proceed now to the Second thing contained in this Paper, That this Church must
be known to be the true Church, by its continual visible Succession from Christ
till our days. Now these few words contain a great many, and very great
mistakes. The subject of the Inquiry is, how we may find out such a Church,
whose word we may safely take for the true sense and meaning of Scripture.

Now, 1. The Author of this Paper, whether ignorantly, or designedly, I know
not, alters the state of the Question, and instead of a Church, which is an
unerring and infallible Interpreter of Scripture, which would be very well
worth finding, he tells us how we may know a true Church; now I take a true
Church, and an infallible Interpreter of Scripture, to be very different
things. A Church may be guilty of Schism and Heresy, and yet may be a true
Church, though not a sound, Orthodox, and Catholic Church; for a true Church
is such a Church, as has all things necessary, and essential to the Being and
Constitution of a Church; this a Church may have, and superadd other things,
which are destructive of the Christian Faith, and very dangerous and fatal
mistakes; as we believe, and are able to prove the Church of Rome has done; and
yet we acknowledge her a true Church, because she retains the true Christian
Faith, though miserably Corrupted by Additions of her own; as a man is a true
man, though he be sick of a mortal Disease. Now if a true Church may corrupt
the Christian Faith, we have no reason to rely on the Authority of every true
Church, for the true sense and meaning of Scripture.

2. Let us suppose, that by a true Church, he means an Infallible Church, whose
Authority we may safely rely on in Expounding Scriptures; this Church, he says,
is to be known by a continual visible Succession from Christ, till our days:
Now if this visible uninterrupted Succession be the mark of such a true Church,
as is an infallible Interpreter of Scripture, then, 1. The Greek Church is an
infallible Interpreter of Scripture; for she has as visible and uninterrupted a
Succession, from Christ and his Apostles to this day, as the Church of Rome
has; and so we have two infallible Churches (not to instance in any more at
present, who have as good a Succession as either of them) which are directly
opposite to each other; and what shall we do in this Case? Must we believe
Contradictions, or must we dis-believe infallible Churches?

2. If a visible Succession from Christ and his Apostles makes any Church an
infallible Interpreter of Scripture, then all the Churches, which were planted
by the Apostles, were infallible. All the Churches which were planted by the
Apostles, have an equally visible Succession from Christ; those Churches which
were planted by the Apostles, may be presumed as infallible while the Apostles
were present with them, as they were afterward; and those Churches which
succeeded these Apostolical Churches, at the distance of an Age or two, may be
supposed as infallible as any Church of this Age is; for if a visible
Succession from Christ makes a Church infallible, why should not a Succession
of a hundred, or two hundred years make them as infallible as a Succession of
sixteen hundred years, unless they think that Infallibility increases with the
Age of the Church, which I could wish true, but we see very little sign of it.
Now according to these Principles all the Churches which were planted by the
Apostles, and have a continual visible Succession from Apostolical Churches,
through all Ages, since the time of the Apostles, must be infallible; for if a
continual visible Succession confers Infallibility, and is the mark whereby we
must know it, then every Church, which ever had, or has to this day this
vissible Succession, must have Infallibility also, which, it seems, is entailed
on Succession. And thus we have found out a World of infallibility, and it is
wonderful, how any Apostolical Church came to be oover-run with so many Errors
and Heresies, and to grow so corrupt and degenerate, as to provoke God to root
them up; if every Apostolical Church was infallible, I cannot imagine how whole
Churches, which visibly succeeded the Apostles, should be infected with
Heresy; for if Infallibility it self will not secure a Church from Heresy,
the Lord have mercy upon us.

3. This mark he gives how to find out such a true Church as is an infallible
Interpreter of Scripture, viz. A continual visible Succession from Christ till
this day, includes another great mistake; for it supposes, that there is some
Church now in being, on whose Authority we must rely for the sense of
Scripture; for otherwise there can be no use of a visible Succession to this
day, in this Controversy: if, as I have already proved at large, we must rely
only on the Authority of the Primitive Church, not of the Church of this
present Age, for the sense of Scripture, and that not as an infallible Judge,
but as the most Authentic Witness of the Apostolical Doctrine and Practice,
then we cannot find out this Church by a visible Succession to this day, but by
examining the ancient Records of the Primitive Church, where we shall find what
the Faith and Practice of the Church in those days was, which is the safest
Rule to guide us in the Exposition of Scripture. Though there were no Church in
the World at this day, which could prove a continual visible Succession from
Christ and his Apostles, yet while we have the Scriptures, and the Records of
the Primitive Church, we have very sufficient means for the understanding the
true meaning of Scripture: So that of whatever use this talk of a continual
visible Succession may be in other Cases, it is wholly impertinent in this. A
Church which cannot prove such a continual visible Succession, which was not
founded by any Apostle, or Apostolical men, or has lost the Memory or Records
of its first Plantation, may yet have very certain means of knowing the true
sense of Scripture, from the Scripture it self, and the Doctrine and Practice
of Apostolical and Primitive Churches, and a Church which has the most visible
uninterrupted Succession from Christ and his Apostles, may be so far from being
an infallible Interpreter of Scripture, that she may be very corrupt and
erroneous her self, if she forsake the Apostolical Tradition, contained in the
Writings of the new Testament, and Expounded by the Catholic Faith and
Practice of the first Churches; as we know the Church of Rome has done, which
is so far from being an infallible Church, that we believe her to be the most
corrupt Church in the World.

And thus I think we are prepared to venture upon the last Clause of this
Paper, wherein the whole force of the Argument, such as it is, is turned upon
the poor Protestant Churches. But I doubt (says the Author of this Paper)
whether or no the Protestant Church can make out this continual visible
Succession, and desire to be informed. The sting of which Argument lies in
this, that we Protestants have no certain way of knowing the true sense and
meaning of Scripture, because we cannot prove the continual visible Succession
of our Church, from Christ unto this day; and therefore we ought to go over to
the Church of Rome, who has this visible Succession, and receive all her
Dictates as infallible Oracles. But, for Answer to this, consider,

1. That suppose the Protestant Church could not make out such a continual
visible Succession, yet we may understand the Scriptures very well without it,
and need not go to the Church of Rome to Expound Scripture for us, as I have
already shown at large. Had he proved that we had been no Church, for want of a
visible Succession of Church Officers, or that our Religion were a Novelty,
which was never heard of in the World before Luther, this had been something
more to the purpose; but to pretend that we cannot understand the Scriptures,
for want of a visible Succession, is such a loose and inconsequent way of
reasoning, as a poor fallible Protestant would be ashamed of.

2. But pray, why cannot the Protestant Church of England prove her continual
visible Succession from Christ till this day, as well as the Church of Rome?
Here was a Christian Church planted in this Nation, as very good Historians
say, as early as at Rome, and it has continued here ever since, to this day:
when Austin the Monk came over to England, he found here a company of resolute
British Bishops and Monks, who would not submit to the Usurpations of Rome,
and the English and British Churches under several Changes and Alterations,
have continued to this day, with a visible Succession of Christian Bishops, and
what better Succession can Rome show than this?

I suppose no Roman Catholic will disown the Succession of the Church of
England, till the Reformation, and I pray, how came we to lose our Succession
then? Did the Reformation of those Abuses and Corruptions, which had crept into
the Church, unchurch us? Just as much as a man ceases to be the same man, when
he is cured of some mortal Disease: Did not the Church of England consist of
the same Persons, before the Reformation and after? A great many indeed
disowned the Reformation; but were not at all those Persons, who were so active
and zealous in the Reformation, formerly of the Roman Communion? And did they
lose their Succession too, when they became Reformers? When a Church consists
of the same Bishops, Priests, and People, which she had before, though she have
not all the same that she had; when she retains the same ancient Catholic and
Apostolic Faith, which she did before, only renounces some Errors and
Innovations, which she owned before, how does this forfeit her Succession? The
Church of England is the very same Church now, since the Reformation, which she
was before, and therefore has the very same Succession, though not the same
Errors, to this day, that ever she had; and that, I think, is as good a
Succession as the Church of Rome has.

There are but two things to be considered in the case of Succession: Either a
Succession of Church Officers, or a Succession of the Faith and Doctrines of
the Church.

1. As for a Succession of Church Officers, we have the same that the Church of
Rome has. Those English Bishops who embraced the Reformation, received their
Orders in the Communion of the Church of Rome, and therefore they had as good
Orders, as any are in the Church of Rome; and these were the Persons, who
Consecrated other Bishops, and so in Succession to this day. For as for the
story of the Nags-head Ordination, that is so transparent a Forgery, invented
many years after to reproach the Reformation, that I presume no sober Roman
Catholic will insist on it.

But we are Heretics and Schismatics, and this forseits our Orders, and our
Succession together. But, 1. This charge ought first to be proved against us,
that we are Heretics and Schismatics, we deny and abhor both the name and
thing, and if we be not Heretics, and Schismatics, as we are sure we are not,
and as the Church of Rome can never prove us to be, then according to their own
Confession, our Orders must be good.

2. However be we Heretics, or Schismatics, or whatever they please to call
us, how does this destroy our Orders and Succession? The Catholic Church would
not allow in former Ages, that Heresy or Schism destroyed the validity of
Orders. St. Jerome disputes against this at large, in his Book Contra
Luciferianos. And St. Austin allows the Donatists Bishops to have valid Orders,
though they were Schismaticsk, and therefore that the Sacraments administered by
them were valid. And indeed, if Heresy will destroy Orders and Succession, the
Church of Rome will be as much to seek for their Orders and Succession, as we
are, which, by their own Confession, have had several Heretical Popes, and no
body knows how many Bishops Ordained by them.

2. As for Succession of Doctrine, which is as considerable to the full, as
Succession of Orders, the great Articles of our Faith are not only plainly
contained in Scripture, but have been delivered down to us, through all ages of
the Church by an uninterrupted Succession.

The Church of Rome her self, in her greatest Degeneracy, did own all that we
do in pure matters of Faith: When we reformed the Church we did not make a new
Religion, but only separated the old Faith from new and corrupt Additions; and
therefore the quarrel of the Church of Rome with us, is not that we believe any
thing which they do not believe, but that we do not believe all that they would
have us.

The Doctrine of the Church of England is truly Primitive and Catholic, taught
by Christ and his Apostles, owned by the Primitive Church, and excepting the
Dispute between the Latin and Greek Church, about the Filioque, or the Holy
Spirits proceeding from the Father and the Son, received by all Catholic
Churches to this day; which is as complete and perfect Succession, as any
Doctrine can have; therefore when the Church of Rome asks us, Where was our
Religion before Luther? we tell them it was all the World over, all Catholic
Churches believed what we do, though we do not believe all that they do, they
themselves did, and do to this Day, own our Creeds, and Articles of Faith,
excepting such of them as are directly opposed to their Innovations.

So that we are on a sure Foundation, our Faith has been received in the
Catholic Church in all Ages. But now the Church of Rome cannot show such a
Succession for her new Doctrines and Articles of Faith, which were unknown to
the Primitive Church for many Ages, which were rejected by many flourishing
Churches, since the first appearance of them, which never had a quiet
possession in her own Communion, and were never formed into Articles of Faith,
till the packt Conventicle of Trent.

This I think is a sufficient Answer to this Paper, and it pities me to see so
many well-meaning Persons abused with such transparent Sophistry.

FINIS.
Books Printed for FINCHAM GARDENER.
A Continuation and Vindication of the Defense of Dr. Stilling fleet's
Unreasonableness of Separation, in Answer to Mr. Baxter, and Mr. L^b, etc.

Considerations of present use, considering the Danger Resulting from the
Change of our Church Government.

1. A Persuasive to Communion with the Church of England. 2. A Resolution of
some Cases of Conscience, which Respect Church Communion. 3. The Case of
Indifferent things, used in the Worship of God, Proposed and Stated, by
considering these Questions, etc. 4. A Discourse about Edification. 5. The
Resolution of this Case of Conscience, Whether the Church of England's
Symbolizing so far as it does with the Church of Rome, makes it unlawful to
hold Communion with the Church of England? 6. A Letter to Anonymus, in Answer
to his Three Letters to Dr. Sherlock about Church Communion. 7. Certain Cases
of Conscience Resolved, concerning the Lawfulness of joining with Forms of
Prayer in Public Worship. In two Parts. 8. The Case of mixed Communion. Whether
it be Lawful to separate from a Church upon the Account of promiscuous
Congregations, and Mixed Communions? 9. An Answer to the Dissenters Objections
against the Common Prayers, and some other parts of Divine Service Prescribed
in the Liturgy of the Church of England. 10. The Case of Kneeling at the Holy
Sacrament, Stated and Resolved, etc. The first Part. 11. Certain Cases of
Conscience, etc. The Second Part. 12. A Discourse of Profiting by Sermons, and
of going to hear where men think they can profit most. 13. A serious
Exhortation, with some Important Advices, Relating to the late Cases about
Conformity, Recommended to the Present Dissenters from the Church of England.
14. An Argument for Union, etc. 15. The Case of Kneeling, etc. The Second Part.
1. A Discourse about the charge of Novelty upon the Reformed Church of England,
made by the Papists asking of us the Question, Where was our Religion before
Luther? 2. A Discourse about Tradition, showing what is meant by it, and what
Tradition is to be Received, and what Tradition is to be Rejected. 3. The
Difference of the Case between the Separation of Protestants from the Church of
Rome, and the Separation of Dissenters from the Church of England.


