A LETTER to a Friend, Concerning a French Invasion, To Restore the Late King
JAMES to his Throne. AND What may be Expected from him, should he be Successful
in it.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Randall Tailor, near Amen-Corner,
MDCXCII.

A LETTER TO A Friend, etc.
SIR,
IN your last you seem much concerned about the French Invasion, and desirous
to know what I think may probably be expected from the Late King, should he
prove so successful, as to recover his Throne; and what English Subjects are
bound in Conscience to do, should he Land in England and demand his Right.

The last is a material Question, but I wonder how you came to ask the First,
as if it could be any Question what the Late King will do, if he were restored
by Power to his Crown; For I think it past all doubt, that he will do as he did
before, only in all probability a great deal worse: And you remember how that
was; for Arbitrary Power and Popery are of too great Concernment, and have left
too frightful an impression behind them, to be so soon forgot; and this will go
a great way toward an answer to your second Question, unless you think we are
bound to take King James, and a French Government, and a French Popery with
him; which I shall not easily be persuaded to; and, I believe, there are not
many English Protestants will.

But to Answer your Questions distinctly. As to the First, When we see what the
late King James has done, what reason have we to expect, that should he return
with Power, he would ever do otherwise? Is he more obliged now by his
Protestant Subjects, than he was before? Can he make fairer Promises, than he
did before? Is he less Zealous for Popery* or grown more out of Conceit with
Arbitra^y Power? O^ wi^^ he be less able to make himself Arbitrary, and set up
Popery when he returns a Conqueror? For I take it for granted he must conquer
first, because King William will not abdicate nor steal away, and the Power that
Conquers, will give Laws and Religion to the Conquered.

I know there are two Things pretended, as a Foundation for better hopes.
First, That the late King is ^ow sensible that the English Nation will never
bear Popery, nor Arbitrary Power, and that he has suffered so much by these
Attempts already, that he will never venture the like again. Secondly, The
great Merits of the Nonswearing Clergy and Gentry, which will atone for the
Church of England, and make him their sure and fast Friend, Patron and
Defender, especially if those who have been too forward in complying with the
late Revolution, shall expiate that Crime by an early Repentance, and a
vigorous Assistance to restore him to his Throne.

First, As for the first, there are too many Answers to be given to it, to
hinder it from being the least probable ground of Hope* though Hope it self is,
Res incertae nomen, so very uncertain, especially when we guess only at the
Inclinations of Princes, that Lives, and Fortunes, and Liberties, and Religion,
are not to be ventured on it, against former Experience.

But to let that pass, pray consider what the true Import of this Argument is;
for it amounts to this, that all Men will learn by Experience; that Men will
not venture on those things a second time, which have proved fatal to them
once; that Princes will certainly for ever after dislike such Counsels and
Measures, as have already shaken their Thrones, and made their Crowns fall from
their Heads.

Now we may Flatter our selves with such Hopes as these, which may upon some
account be called reasonable Hopes, because there is great Reason it should be
so; but yet they so often fail, that there is no Reason to rely upon them. The
Repentance of dying Sinners and of undone Prodigals, who return to their old
Sins again, if they recover their Health, or find new Treasures to waste,
confutes such Expectations. Sufferings rarely cure a vehement Love and fond
Passion for any thing, which is the Case of old habitual Sinners; and no Man
can be fonder of any Vice, than some Princes are of Unlimited and Arbitrary
Power.

And when this is joined with a resolved and inflexible Temper, which scorns to
yield, and had rather be undone a Thousand Times, than own, retract, or amend a
Fault: Such M^sfortunes do but whet Revenge, and make them swell as a River
does when its Current is stopped, which flows with a more rapid and foaming
Stream, when it has once forced its way.

Especially when Superstition is the prevailing Ingredient, which fires the
Spirits, and raises imaginary Scenes of Glory out of the Loss of Crowns and
Kingdoms: And what will such a Prince, if he ever recover his Throne and Power,
forfei^ the Glory of losing his Kingdoms again, by deserting the Cause for
which he lost them before? No Man can certainly tell, how Superstition will
Act, no^ how it will Reason: Especially when the Consciences of Princes are
under such Directors, as will venture their Crowns for them over and over, to
carry on their own Designs, and know how to Expound Providence to Flatter
Superstition. And then the Recovery of his Thro^e may be made a better
Argument, and a stronger Obligation to revive and prosecute his old Designs,
than the fear of losing it again can be to make him desist.

And to make this yet more demonstrative, with reference to the Late King, we
ought to consider, That this is not the first Trial he has had, and that this
Consideration has done him no good.

He saw before what his Father King Charles the First suffered, only for some
Attempts toward Arbitrary Power, and for mere Jealousies and Suspicions of his
favoring Popery: He lost his Kngdoms and his Life, and his Sons suffered a
long and hard Exile. Charles the Second indeed took warning by this, and though
possibly he might be big with the same Designs, yet would he not venture too
far, nor discover himself too openly, for fear of Traveling again, as he used
to speak: But King James had not Patience to conceal his Inclinations, till he
came to the Crown; and that had like to have cost him his Crown, before he had
it; and yet this was not sufficient to caution him against those violent
Methods he afterward used to advance Popery, which were so seasonably defeated
by the happy arrival of our present Sovereign, whom God long preserve: And
those who are so desirous to try him again in England, as they have lately done
in Ireland, to their full Satisfaction, if they could try only for themselves,
should have my free Consent to make the Experiment.

Have not the poor Irish Protestants made it to their Cost, even since this
very Revolution, from whence, and from the Wisdom he must needs have Learned by
it, this miraculous Change in Him is now expected? And did they find any such
Change in him, unless for the worse? And yet, if ever, then he was upon his
good Behavior, when he wanted their Assistance to secure his Possession of
that Kingdom, and to Recover his other Dominions. And when, in Reason, it might
have been expected, that, whatever Resentments he had, he would have thought it
his Interest to have treated Protestants with greater Tenderness and Respects.
But if the Necessity of his own Affairs could not obtain this from him, what
must Protestants expect, if he return with Power? And though some Protestants
here in England, seem not to be at all affected with this Experiment, yet it
has made such an impression upon the Protestants in Ireland, that they are for
ever cured of their Fondness, and have not the least Curiosity left to make any
further Trials.

It is pretended indeed, in Excuse of this, that he was then under the
Government of French Ministers and Counsels, and under the Power of Irish
Priests and Papists, and so was not at Liberty to follow his own Inclinations:
I should be very glad of a good Argument to prove, that he had better
Inclinations. But however, what Comfort is this to Protestants, that he has
better Inclinations, but is not his own Master? For if he must never show any
Kindness to Protestants, it is no matter what his Inclinations are: And can any
Man imagine, That if the French King by Force and Power place him on the
Throne, he will be less under his Government than he was in Ireland? The French
King, among many other wise Maxims, has this, I am sure, for one, Never to make
a King, without making him his own Vassal; and the Power that can make a King,
can make him his Slave: So that it is to no purpose to enquire what King James
will do, but what King Lewis will do, if King James returns?

Secondly, As for the great Merits of the Nonswearing Clergy and Laity, I
greatly suspect, that neither the Late King James nor King Lewis will think
them so great as they themselves do. Their Merit must consist either in their
Principles, or in their Practices. And we will briefly consider both.

Their meritorious Principle is this, That the Rights of Princes, especially of
Hereditary Princes, to their Thrones, are so Sacred and Inviolable, that as
they cannot forfeit them to their own Subjects by any Maladministration, so
neither can they by any Provocations, or by any success of War, forfeit them to
any other Princes: That while such a Prince, or any Legal Heir is living, no
other Prince can have any Right to his Throne, nor must his Subjects own and
submit to any other Prince, as their Sovereign Lord.

Now as much as this Principle seems to Flatter Princes, and to make their
Thrones Eternal, I am apt to suspect, that no Prince, who considers the just
Consequence of Things, can think it so very meritorious; for it is a very
dangerous Principle to Weak and Unfortunate ^rinces, and an intolerable
Restraint upon the Aspiring and Ambitious. It is Dangerous to the Unfortunate,
because it lays a Necessity upon the Conqueror to take away his Life, if he
can, as well as his Throne, since he cannot lose his Throne, without losing his
Life, though most Princes would rather choose to have them parted, than lose
both together; And how do they think King Lewis will like this Principle, which
stands in the way of his Glory, and preaches Restitution to him of all those
Dominions, whose legal Heirs are living; which teaches the Subjects of other
Princes to deny him Fealty and Obedience, and to Conspire with their Legal
Princes against him. I doubt not but he likes the Principle as little as he
would like the Practice, and that our Nonswearers would quickly understand,
were they the Subjects of his New Conquests, which God grant England may never
be.

Indeed, how great a Complement soever this Principle may be thought to
Princes, it can have no Merit, because, though it may in some junctures do them
hurt, it never did, and never can do them any service. It never yet hindered a
Revolution, and never can make one; and the Reason is plain, because no
Princes, and very few Subjects, do believe it, and practice upon it. If a
Prince have a just Cause of War against another Prince, he makes no Scruple, if
he Conquers, to take his Crown; and the Subjects of such a conquered Prince
make no Scruple of Conscience to submit to the Conqueror; though sometimes a
personal Kindness for a Just and Indulgent Prince, and a Concernment for their
own Liberties and Fortunes, may make them uneasy under it, and glad of the
first Opportunity to do themselves and their Prince Right.

The Truth, is Princes have no Reason to like this Principle; for, were it
true, they could have no Remedies against the Injuries of Neighbor Princes;
they might indeed Fight and Conquer, but they had better let it alone, if they
must not take the Throne, which their Sword has won; for it is only the Fear of
Conquest, and losing their Crowns, when they are Conquered, that can keep
Princes in Awe, and bring them to Just and Equal Terms; and if no Prince must
lose his Crown, because no Prince must take it, it will be impossible to beat
an Injurious and Obstinate Prince into good Terms; and, I believe, Princes will
as soon be persuaded, That it is Unlawful to make War, as that it is Unlawful
to seize a conquered Crown, and will think one as meritorious a Principle as
the other.

And it is certain, Subjects have less Reason to like this Principle, because
it makes them Slaves and Sacrifices even to the Misfortunes of their Prince. A
Prince, when he is Conquered, or sees that he must be Conquered, may escape by
Flight, but a whole Nation cannot run away; and if they could, have no Reason
to leave their Country, and their Fortunes behind them: And yet, according to
this Principle, they must not submit nor swear Allegiance to the Conqueror,
while the Prince who has forsaken them lives, though they cannot Secure their
Lives and Fortunes without it. But Nature and Common Sense is too powerful for
the Sophistry of such Principles, and those who cannot Reason, can feel what
they are to do in such Cases. The Loyalest Subjects, when no personal
Obligations, or secret Interests determine them otherwise, will save themselves
by Submission, when they cannot defend their Prince by their Arms; and do not
think they do ill in it: And I suppose Princes do not think so neither, because
they expect the same from the Subjects of other Princes in the like
Circumstances; and such an Universal Consent both of Princes and Subjects, when
there is no Law of God or Nature against it, makes it a standing Law in all
Revolutions, which both Princes and Subjects must submit to. So that this
Principle, were it never so true, can do no Service, and therefore can have no
Merit in this World, because there are so few that believe it; that they are
not hands enough either to keep a Prince on his Throne, or to restore him to
it. All our Nonswearers could not hinder the late Revolution, nor can they make
another: They are enough to make a noise, especially if the Loud and Zealous
Ladies of that Side be reckoned in; but other Hands and other Pretenses must do
their Work, if ever they hope to see it done; and then no thanks to their
Principles for it. Whatever Reward their future Services may deserve, Princes
themselves will not think that their Principles deserve any.

Let us then now consider the Merit of their Actions, and what Opinion the Late
King is like to have of that, if he should return.

I suppose, they will be contented he should forget their Merits toward him,
while he was on the Throne; especially about reading his Declaration; as
likewise their Tower and their Westminster Hall Merits; which were indeed very
great, and did deserve and would have had a better Reward from a better Hand,
had they not rendered themselves incapable of it. But sure they don't expect
the Late King should Reward them for such Services. He knew that this raised
that general discontent, which occasioned that General Revolt, which cost him
Three Crowns. And if all their Merits can Expiate this Guilt, they come off
well; and those had need be very Extraordinary Merits, which have first so
great a Guilt to Expiate, before they can pretend to Merit. Could their
Nonswearing restore him to his Throne again, it would but just undo^ what they
had done, which is no more than their Duty, and therefore cannot merit, no, not
so much as a Pardon, though it may make them capable of it, if they fall into
merciful Hands. But still there are Four Years Exile, and the loss of Three
Crowns, and the Expense of so much Blood and Treasure; the Dishonor of so many
Defeats, and the Ruin of Ireland to be accounted for; and how can they make
Restitution for all this? Which yet they must do before they can lay Claim to
Merit.

Let all this then be forgot, for it is their Interest it should; but they are
very sanguine Men, if they hope it will. Whence then will they date their
Merits?

When it was certainly known, that the Prince of Orange, now our Gracious
Sovereign, was ready to Land, they seemed as well pleased with it as other Men;
and refused, when they were pressed to it by the Late King, to declare their
Abhorrence of it; but, instead of that, took upon them to give him Advice, and
to publish it when they had done: In which Advice they recommended almost every
Particular of the Prince's Declaration, complained of the same Abuses, and
advised the Calling of a Parliament to redress them; as if the Prince's
Declaration, and their Advise had been drawn by the same Pen, and the Advice
had been published on purpose to second the Declaration. This, I suppose, they
will not reckon among their Merits neither: And if they can excuse what was so
hastily done at Guildhall, before the Late King was gone out of the Land, they
may very well be contented no more should be said of that.

The only Merit then they have to pretend, is their Refusing the Oath of
Allegiance to King William and Queen Mary, and forfeiting their Ecclesiastical,
Civil, or Military Preferments for it: But what is this to the Late King? Is
this done out of Kindness to him or his Government? Would they not have been
contented to have lived Peaceably and Quietly, as they themselves professed,
could they have kept their Preferments, and have been excused from the New
Oaths? And how do they merit of him, by refusing the Oaths with the Loss of
their Preferments, if they did it not for his sake, but for another and better
Reason, for fear of being Damned? God may Reward this, but King James is not
beholden to them. Will they be better Subjects hereafter? Will they read his
Declaration, when he Returns? Will they make his Will their Law? Will they
submit to his next Ecclesiastical Commission, and give up their Colleges and
Churches to Priests and Jesuits? Will they be content to take him the very same
Man that he went away, and to serve him in his own way? Will they no more fill
the Nation with the noise and fears of Popery and Arbitrary Power? Will they
turn Papists themselves, or stand by patiently, and give leave to his Priests
to pervert Protestants as fast as they can? Will they promise to demean
themselves with more respect toward the King's Religion, and to leave off
their old fawciness of Printing and Preaching against Popery? This indeed would
bid fair for Merit, but if they oppose his Methods of Government, and his
Glorious Designs, as much as they do King William's Right; if it be only a
Title they boggle at, if this be all that makes them uneasy at the Change,
their not Swearing does him no Service; He could have kept his Kingdoms upon
these terms before, but he scorned it, and so he will those, who to salve their
Consciences or their Honors, and to recover their Preferments, would have him
upon these terms again.

As much as some Men glory in their steddiness to Principles, which is
certainly a very Honorable thing, and an excellent degree of Virtue, when the
Principles are plain and certain, yet few Princes (to be sure, not the late
King) like such a steddiness to Principles, as opposes their Designs; a
stubborn, inflexible Conscience, is a very unruly thing, and Kings do not like
such Subjects as dare oppose a King upon the Throne, whatever the Cause be. So
that I suspect, their very Boldness and Resolution in opposing their present
Majesty's upon a mere point of Law, will be thought no Virtue fit to be
rewarded by a Prince; who would make his Will Superior to all Laws.

And if the Merit of the Non-Swearers is likely to vanish into nothing,
especially when there is no occasion any longer to court and flatter them, and
Priests and Jesuits have free liberty to comment on their Merits; what Merit
will those Men have to plead, who were forward and zealous in the Revolution,
have Sworn Allegiance to their present Majesty's, have served them in their
Armies and Navies, at home and abroad? There is no doubt, but they shall have
fair Promises and good words at present, and shall be remembered hereafter, when
there is occasion.

But suppose the Merits of the Non Swearing or For-Swearing Clergy and Laiety,
who will help forwards another Revolution, should be acknowledged to be very
great; what probability is there, that the Church of England should fare ever
the better for it, when Popery and Arbitrary Power stand in the way? past
Experience gives no great Encouragement to hope this. King Lewis was as much
obliged to his Protestant Subjects of France, as it is possible for any King to
be; for they set the Crown upon his Head; and how he has rewarded them, all the
world rings of it. The late King was not much less beholden to the Church of
England, when they so vigorously opposed the Bill of Exclusion; and how he also
rewarded them, we all lately saw and felt. And shall Protestants after this,
think of obliging such Princes by their Merits? They understand better, that
Merit is no Protestant Doctrine, and that there can be none out of the Church
of Rome. And why should any body expect that which cannot be. Nay, should the
late King return again, and be as much at the Devotion of his Nonswearing
Friends, as they promise themselves he will be; I very much doubt what the
Church of England will gain by this. If we may guess at the Spirit of the Party
by the bitter Zeal, which inspires all their Writings, I can expect nothing
from them, but as fierce a Persecution of the Church of England, as ever it
suffered from Papists or Fanatics, excepting Smithfield Fires, which possibly
may be exchanged for Tyburn. All who live in the Communion of the Church of
England, as now Established, are in their account and constant Language, no
better than Heretics and Schismatics, and Perjured Apostates, much greater
Crimes than the Traditores were guilty of, which was the only pretense for the
Donatist Schism and Persecution. They seem to comfort themselves under their
present Sufferings, more with the sweet hopes of Revenge, than any great
expectations of future Rewards; that they shall live to see the Swearing
Bishops and Priests, the contempt of Princes and People; Apol. for the new
Seperat.
for if the A. B. of York, who is particularly named cannot escape them, I
doubt they will make but very few exceptions. And is not this a great
encouragement to any who have complied with the present Government, to help
these Men to Power again? Must not the Nobility and Gentry expect their share
of Vengeance, as well as the Clergy? And is not the Church of England then in
a hopeful state, which must be purged and reformed into Jacobite Principles,
and by a Jacobite Spirit?

These are all very sensible Proofs (as far as we can reason about such
matters) how little good is to be expected from the return of the late King
with a French Power: He must return the same Man he went, and then Popery and
Arbitrary Power must return with him; nay, he must return much worse than he
went, because he must return more a Vassal to France, which I suppose will not
mend the Condition of English Subjects, during his Reign.

These things ought to be well considered; for if his Government was so uneasy
before, and gave us such a frightful prospect, as made the Nation very willing
to part with him, when he thought fit to leave them; it would seem very strange
to bystanders, should they now grow fond of his return, when it is certain if
he does return, and returns by the Methods now intended, Popery and Arbitrary
Power must be more Triumphant then ever.

He wanted nothing but Power to make himself Absolute, and to make us all
Papists, or Martyrs, or Refugees; and that he will ^ow have: For if a French
Power can Conquer us, it will make him as Absolute as the Fr^nch King will ^et
him be; or to speak properly, it will make him, though not an Absolute Prince,
yet an Absolute Viceroy, and Minister of Fr^nc^: He will Administer an Absolute
Power and ^overn^ent, under the influence and direction of French Councels: and
then we know what will become of the Liberties and Religion of England. And
have we so long disdained the thoughts of ^ubjection to France? Has a French
League been thought such a N^tional ^rievance? Has the pretense of a War with
France been found such an excellent expedient to get Money of English
Parliaments? Has the ex^e^tation o^ it fired English spirits, and upon occasion
filled our Armies and Navies, without need of Pressing or beat of Drum? Have we
so detested the French Cruelties to Protestants? And shall we now so willingly
stoop to the yoke, and think it a great favor that they will vouchsafe to
Conquer us? Let us never complain hereafter, that our Chains pinch and gall us,
when we our selves are ready with so much joy and thankfulness to put them on.
And whatever some fancy they will find it a very easy and natural thing, for
the late King, if he return by Force and Power, to make himself Absolute by
^aw: Princes always gain new Powers by the ineffectual opposition of Subjects:
If they lose their Crowns and recover them again, they receive them with an
addition of some brighter Jew^ls, and turn dispu^ed Prerogatives into Legal and
undoubted Rights. ^hus we know it was when King Chapter 2 d. Returned from a long
Exile, all the New Acts and D^clarations were made in favor of the Crown, and
Subjects bound to their good Behavior, as fast as Laws could bind them; for in
all such Revolutions, those who suffered with, or for their Prince, return with
zeal and resentment; and take care in the first place to establish all such
Prerogatives of the Crown, as were disputed before, and to grant such new
Powers as they think are wanting. And others there are, always forward to make
their fortunes by Complementing the returning Prince; and to expiate t^eir
^ormer crimes by a forward and flaming Loyalty; and the rest are overawed and
frighted into a compliance; th^s it is commonly seen, that between zeal, and
and fl^ttery, and fear, the King increases in Power, and the People forfeit
their Liberties; and we must not expect that it should be otherwise now, should
the late King return.

The first Complement that must be made to him, is a Jacobite Parliament, and
God knows what such a Parliament will do! Will they deny him a Toleration for
Papists, the repeal of the Test, the forfeitures, or surrenders of Charters,
and a new Regulation of Corporations? Will they dispute, nay, will they not
declare his Dispensing Power, and approve his Eccl^siastical Commissions? Will
they make any scruple to declare the Legitimacy of the Prince of Wales, or to
leave the manner of his Education to those who will certainly Breed him up in
Popery? Will they not take care for new Jacobite Tests to renounce and abhor
all the several Hypotheses and Principles of Government, which have been urged
to justify our Submission and Allegiance to their present Majesty's? And when
they have done this, How easy will it be for a downright Popish Parliament,
which will be the next step that will be made, to do all the rest?

It is very evident what advantages the Priests and Jesuits will have in such a
juncture to make Proselytes while the People are in a fright, and grown giddy
with such frequent Revolutions; and those, who in the late Reign, were the
great Advocate^ of the Protestant Cause, are disgra^'d at Court, threatened into
silence, their Authority weakened, and their Persons reproached both by Papists
and Jacobites. Numbers of Conv^rts was their great want before, and the Press
and the Pulpit their great hindrance; but Jacobites will by natural instin^t
learn more Loyalty, and others will be taught it, as Gid^on once taught the men
of Succ^th with Briars and Thorns. And there never was such an opportunity
since the Reformation for a plentiful Harvest of Converts, as this would be
like to prove. And who can bear the thoughts of this, who has any compassion
for the Souls of Men, any Zeal for the Church of England, or any concern to
p^eserve and propagate the true Faith and Worship of Christ to posterity?

All this is upon a supposition of the late King's return, which I declare to
you I am not afraid of, though it is fit to mind those men who are so fond of
it, what they may reasonably expect, if he should return; which possibly may
abate their zeal in this cause, and that may prevent the mischiefs of an
attempt; for without a hopeful Conspiracy in England, the French King is to^
wary to make such an Attempt.

But if they have any love to their Country, any pity left in them for the
lives and fortunes of English Protestants, I beseech them to consider what the
Calamities and Desolations of Civil War will be; for that it must end in, if
there be an Invasion from abroad strengthened with a powerful Conspiracy at
home: King William, as I said before, will not Desert or Abdicate; for I never
heard of a Prince who had ventured so much to rescue a Kingdom out of so great
a danger, that would so easily expose it again to the same, or a greater
danger. And surely the late King does not expect he should, for he knows him
too well: So that if they look for such another Revolution, to turn King
William out, as brought him in, they will, in a^l probability, be mistaken.
There are too many Persons of Honor and Fortune engaged in this Cause, who
know the late King too well to take his Word; and were it possible to wheedle
men of Fortune and Sense, the genius and spirit of the Nation is against them:
And that which could ma^e the late Revolution, will probably be able to prevent
this.

It must then come to Blows, if an attempt be made; and the fortune of one
Battle may not decide it; and those who are too young to remember the
desolations which the late Civil Wars in England made, let them look into
Ireland, and see to what a heap of rubbish a flourishing and fruit^ul Country
is reduced by being the scene of a Three Ye^rs War.

It is made a popu^ar pretense to raise discontents, and to make people
disaffected to the present Government, that the Taxes for maintaining this War
are grown so into^erable, and there is no prospect of an end of them: Now I
must confess, that the Taxes fall very heavy upon some, and am sorry that the
present posture of our Affairs does require it, and that there can be no easier
ways found to supply the plain and pressing necessities of the State: ^ut ^e
ought to consider, that still a^l this is infinite^y easier than Popery and
French Slavery, if we regard only our Estates. The Annual exactions of the
Church of Rome, (besides all the cheating ways their Priests had to get Money),
while Popery was the Religion of England, used to be complained of as a
National Grievance, and a heavier Tax upon the Subject, than all the King's
Revenues: And if those who complain of our Taxes, were but one month in France,
to s^e the Poverty and Misery which the French Government has brought upon
them, they would come home very well contented to pay Taxes, and to fight
against the French too. We are Free Subjects, not Slaves; we are taxed by our
own Representatives, who tax themselves as well as us; and this not by the
Arbitrary Will of the Prince. We pay for our own Defense and Pr^servation as
all people ought to do; and while we do not pay near so much as our Religion,
and Lives, and Liberties are worth, and have left wherewithal to maintain our
selves, we have no such great reason to complain.

But how heavy soever Taxes are, are they like a Civil War? Like the dread and
terrors of an Enemies Army, or of our own? Are they like having our Houses
filled with Soldiers; or which is worse, burnt or plundered? Are they like
losing our Friends, our Fathers, Husbands* or Children; by whose kindness or
labors we subsisted? In a word, Are they like the Spoils of Harvest, or the
Desolation of a whole Country?

And can we be contented to see England again the Seat of War? It is certain in
our present circumstances it cannot be made so, unless we our selves please:
France has too many Enemies, to think of Conquering England without factions at
home; and were it not for them, we need not fear its united Force; and I hope
considering men, of what Persuasion soever they be, will not think it worth the
while to ruin their Country by a Civil War, to purchase a French Slavery and
Popery; two very dear things, could we purchase them never so cheap.

What I have said hitherto, only concerns England; but it becomes us to look a
little abroad, and consider, what a fatal Influence a French Conquest of
England will have upon the Affairs of all Europe. That it is not mere Justice
and Honor that makes the French King espouse the Cause of the late King James,
his Encroachments and Usurpations on his Neighbors, will witness. He has no
scruples of Conscience about the Rights of other Princes; all he can get is his
own. But England was formerly a Friend and Confederate, at least, not an Enemy;
and now the Power of England, (which the French have never had reason to
despise) is in the hands of a King who owes the French King a good turn, and
will not, I hope, dye in his debt. This checks his ambitious designs; gives
life and spirit to the Confederacy; threatens to make him restore what he has
taken, and what he keeps by mere force and violence, and to reduce him within
his Ancient Bounds, and to the Ancient Consti^ution of the French Government;
and he knows while King William possesses the English Throne, and keeps up the
Confederacy, he must not expect to get much more, and may be in constant danger
of losing what he has gotten.

This makes the French King so concerned to restore the late King James to the
Throne of England, to get rid of a Formidable Enemy, and to strengthen himself
with the Alliance of a Powerful Friend; for England will probably turn the
scales, on which side soever it happens to be: And there is no doubt, but the
Arms of England must be devoted to the service of France, if a French Power
should place the late King in his Throne again; and let any English Protestant
who can think coolly of things, consider what a malignant aspect this would
h^ve upon the Liberties of Europe, and on the whole Protestant Interest.

The Arms or the Money of France, has hitherto been an equal Match, at least
for all the Confederates; while he has found other employment for the Imp^rial
and English Forces; but thanks be to God, the King of England, and the English
Force^ are now at leisure to attend his Motions; those Forces which beat him at
the Boyn, at Athlone, at Agrins, at Lymerick; in a word, which beat him out of
Ireland, and have now got a habit of beating the French: And it is no wonder
that he is not fond of such company in Fland^rs, but endeavors to find some
new work for them at home. And if he can but send them home again, and embroil
us in a Civil War, that is one great point gained; but if he proves successful
in his Attempt, he makes England his own, and will turn their Arms upon the
Confederates; and what can then stand in his way? What should hinder him from
being the sole and absolute Monarch of the West? And then it is easy to read
the Fate of Protestants.

Thus, Sir, I have freely told you, what I apprehend will be the necessary and
unavoidable effects of a French Conquest. I pretend not to prophecy, nor to
demonstration in such cases; but what I have said, has all the appearances of
probabi^ity, all the degrees of moral certainty that any thing of this nature
can have; and that is the only Rule in these matters by which wise men are to
judge and act.

And this has prepared a plain and easy Answer to your Second Question, What
English Subjects are bound in Conscience to do, in case the late King should
land in England with French Forces to demand his Crown.

Now there are two sorts of persons concerned in this question: 1. Those who
have not sworn Allegiance to King William and Queen Mary, but account the late
King James as much their King, as he was when he sat upon the Throne; and that
their obligations to him are the same now that ever they were. 2. Those who
have sworn Allegiance to King William and Queen Mary. And there are two parts
of this Question; 1. Whether they are bound in conscience to assist the late
King if he return? 2. Whether it be lawful for them to oppose him, and fight
against him?

As for the first part of this Question, and as far as it concerns the
Non-swearers, I shall ask them two or three Questions, and leave them to answer
them themselves.

1. The first question is, Whether they can think themselves bound in
conscience, upon any pretense whatever, to fight for Popery against the
Protestant Faith and Worship; that is, (as they must confess, if they are
Protestants) to fight for Heresy and Idolatry against the true Faith and
Worship of Christ; or to fight for Antichrist, and against Christ? Can any
consideration make this lawful? If nothing can (as I will venture to take it
for granted, that nothing can) then whatever duty they may fancy they still owe
to their Abdicated Prince, it cannot be their Duty to fight for him, when they
cannot fight for him, without fighting against Christ and his Religion; though
they must not fight against their Prince for Christ, because Christ in such
cases requires his Disciples to suffer, not to fight for him; yet it does not
follow, that they must fight for their Prince against Christ, to bring a
Persecution upon his faithful Disciples, and to contribute what they can to
extirpate the Name and the Religion of Protestan^s out of Europe.

Do they think themselves bound in Conscience to fight for their Prince,
against the Laws and Libe^ties of their Country, as well as against the Faith
and Worship of Christ? Let the Rights of Princes be nev^r so Sacred, have the
rest of mankind no Rights, but only Princes? Is there no such thing as Justice
due to our selves, nor to our Fellow Subjects? Have the Free born Subjects of
England, no Natural, no Legal Rights? And is there any Law of God or man, to
fight for our Prince, against the Laws and Liberties of our Country, which are
the measu^es and boundaries of that Duty which we owe to Princes? that is, to
fight for our Prince, against the rule of our duty and obedience to Princes;
when our Prince, and the Laws and Liberties of our Country are on contrary
sides, tho we should grant them, (according to their own Principles) that we
must not fight against our Prince for our Laws and Liberties, yet no more must
we fight for our Prince against o^r ^aws and Liberties: It is abundantly
e^ough, to be Passive in such cases; but a Nation which fights against its own
Laws and Liberties, is Fe^o de se, gui^ty of the worst kind of Self-Murder. Can
any ^nglish-man, whatever opini^n he has of the late King^s Right, think
himself bound in consci^nce to maintain his Right, by giving up his Country to
France? To make him King, and all his Subjects French Slaves? For can any
Prince have more Right to be King of England, than the Kingdom of England has
to be England?

Is it not an unaccountable tenderness and scrupulosity of Conscience, to be so
concerned for any one Prince's Right, as to sacrifice the Rights and Liberties
of all the Princes in Europe, to his? To set him upon the Throne, to drive all
other Princes from theirs? We are Citizens of the World, as well as Subjects of
England, and have our Obligations to Mankind, and to other Princes, as well as
to our own; and though our obligation to no one other Prince is so great, as to
our own, yet the publ^ck good of mankind, or of a great part of the world, is a
more sacred obligation, than the particular Interest of our own Prince or
Country; much less then can the Right of any particular Prince, be it what it
will, stand in competition with the Rights and Liberties of our own Country,
and of all Europe besides.

It is to no more purpose to dispute with men who do not feel the Force of this
Argument at the first hearing, than to reason with blind men about Colors;
they have no sense left, nothing but a stupid and slavish Loyalty; all things,
tho never so sacred, must give place to this; the care of Religion, the love of
their Country, their Justice and Charity to all mankind, must vail to their
senseless mistake of the true meaning of this word Loyalty; by which they will
needs understand an ^bsolute Obedience, without Limitation or Rese^ve; when
most certainly, it signifies no more than Obedience according to Law.

2. I would ask them, What they would think themselves bound to do in such
cases, were the late King upon the Throne again? Unless they have changed their
minds (and then they are not so steady to Principles, as they pretend to be) we
may very reasonably guess, what they would do, by what they did while he was
upon the Throne. It is certain they so much disliked his open designs of Popery
and Arbitrary Power, that they opposed him as far as they dur^t, and would not
Fight for him to keep him on the Throne; nay, by their Examples and Counsels,
they had so influenced the Army, that they would not Fight for him neither; and
so possessed the Country, that the Nobility and Gentry took Arms, and declared
for the Prince of Orange, which they thought they might very well do, when the
Bishops would not declare against him. This was then thought consistent enough
with the High-Tory-Loyalty; and yet if they were not then bound to Fight for
him to keep him on his Throne, I am at a great loss to know, how it comes to be
their duty now to Fight for him to restore him to it: He was certainly their
King then, and yet they would not Fight for him, no not to defend his Person,
Crown and Dignity. And tho they call him their King still, it is certain he is
not King of England, whatever right they may think he has to be so; and
therefore to fight for him now, is not to fight for the King, but to fight to
make him King again. But to let that pass, suppose him to be their King, since
they will have him so, How do they come to be more obliged to fight for him now
he is out of the Throne, than they were to fight for him while he was in it? If
they think it their duty to fight for their King against the Religion the Laws,
and the Liberties of their Country, it was their duty to have fought for him
then; if they do not think this, it cannot be their duty to fight for him now.

But they did not expect what followed; they desired to have their Laws and
Liberties secured, but not that he should lose his Crown: I believe very few
did then expect what followed, no more than they do now consider what will
follow: But since he would leave his Crown, Who could help it? For no body took
it from him.

3. Let me then ask them another question; Whether they would think themselves
bound in Conscience to fight for him, did they verily believe, that if he
recovered his Throne, he would as zealously promote Popery and Arbitrary Power,
as he did before? If they say they would not, they have been at their non
putaram once already; a second oversight in the same kind, would be worse than
the first. If they say they would, I give them over, as professed Enemies to
the true Religion, and the Liberties of Mankind.

This I hope may satisfy the non-swearers, if they will coolly and seriously
consider it, that they are not bound in Conscience to fight for the late King;
nay, that they are as much bound in Conscience not to fight for him, as they
are bound not to fight against the Protestant Religion, and Civil Li^erties not
only of England, but of all Europe.

2. As for those who have Sworn Allegiance to King William and Queen Mary;
besides all the former considerations, they are under the obligations of an
Oath, not to fight against their present Majesty's, whose Sworn Subjects and
Leigemen they are. ^or let them expound Faith and True Allegiance, to as low a
sense as possibly they can, the least that they ever could make of it, s to
live quietly and peaceably under their Government; not to attempt any thing
against their Persons, or Crowns, not to hold any Correspondence with, nor to
give any Assistance to their Enemies; and therefore to countenance a French
Invasion, or to assist the late King in recovering the Throne, which Their
Majesty's so well fill, and which they have Sworn not to dispossess them of,
must be downright Perjury. If they be sure that their Oaths to the late King
still oblige them, that indeed would make void the obligation of this Second
Oath; but then they must be guilty of Perjury in taking it, and by the breaking
of it will declare to all the world, that they deliberately, and wilfully
Perjured themselves when they took it; and let them remember this, when they
take Arms against Their Majesty's, and let them expect that recompense which
they deserve.

Those who took this, only as a Temporary Oath, which obliged them no longer
than till the late King should return into England again to demand his Crown,
are guilty of Perjury, if they keep it no longer than till they have a
promising opportunity to break it: For this is to mock God, and to deceive the
Government by their Oaths: For no man can think that the meaning of the Oath
was no more but this, I do Promise and Swear to bear Faith and true Allegiance
to King William and Queen Mary, till I have Power and Opportunity by the return
of King James with a French Army, to join his Forces, and to Assist him to
recover his Throne. Those who will take and keep Oaths at this rate, we must
leave to God: But nothing is more plain and certain, than that the New Oath of
Allegiance obliges all, who have taken it, under the guilt of Perjury, at least
not to fight for the late King against King William and Queen Mary.

And here I may very fairly conclude, without entering into a longer dispute
about the lawfulness of fighting against a Foreign Army, though the late King
were at the Head of it; for were those, who scruple this, satisfied that they
ought not to fight for him, their present Majesty's have Friends enough, who are
very well satisfied to fight against him; especially bringing along with him
the greatest Enemies both to the Protestant Religion, and to the Civil
Liberties, not only of the English Nation, but of all the Kingdoms and States
of Europe, France it self not excepted.

However, this Letter is large enough already, and if I find you desire farther
satisfaction in this matter, especially about the late King James's
Declaration, which is lately come to my hands, you may expect a speedy account
of it in a Second Letter from

Sir, Yours.

FINIS.

