The True Impartial HlSTORY and WARS OF THE Kingdom of IRELAND, DESCRIBING Its
Situation, Division into Provinces, Shires, etc. Its ancient Inhabitants,
Manners, Customs, and the state it was in at its being first Invaded and
Conquered by the English, in the Reign of K. Henry II.

WITH THE Several Revolts and Rebellions of the Natives, and by what means they
have been re^uced to Obedience in the Reign of our several Kings and Queens.

BUT More particularly relating to all the Memorable Skirm^shes, Battles,
Sieges, and other Extraordinary Transactions, since the Grand Revolution under
the Reign of their present Majesty's K. William and Q. Mary, to the Siege and
Surrender of Lymerick, and that has since happened to June 1692. Being a
History full of Variety, and worthy the perusal of the Ingenious Reader.

The Second Edition with Additions.

LONDON: Printed for Nicholas Boddington at the Golden Ball in Duck-Lane. 1692.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Reader,
IN this small Book you are presented with a long Prospect of an Opulent
Kingdom, not only in its Dimension and Description, but Historically treated of
from the time it was first known to be peopled, to this present Year 1691. as
well before the English had any knowledge of it, or so much as navigated the
rough Hibernian Seas, as after it allured them to its Conquest in the Reign of
Henry II, since which time it has been a dependant Kingdom by Right of
Conquest, and now inseparably annexed to the Imperial Crown of England. To
shake off which Sovereignty it has often strugled in vain, and smarted under
the many Wars and Rebellions that have been raised on that Account; yet, as if
infatuated, those Warnings have been little available to the Natives, as will
appear in the Relation we give you of what has happened worthy of Notice, in
the Reigns of our Kings and Queens since its Subjection, but more particular in
the Transactions for Three Years past, as relating to Councils, Policies,
Skirmishes, Sieges, and what else materially happened. A History so full of
variety, that we cannot conceive but it will give ample satisfaction beyond
what has been published of this kind: And so not doubting but upon that score
it will find Acceptance and Approbation in the hands of the Impartial and
Vnprejudic'd Perusers, I make bold to subscribe my self the Candid Reader's
Well wisher, and

Most humble Servant, I.S.

THE INTRODUCTION*
THat Ireland has been very anciently inhabited, it appears not only by their
own, but many other Historians, to whom a greater Credit is to be given; and
though (the Natives being little given to Navigation) its Fame has not much
spread into the remoter parts of the World; yet for its Situation and
Fertility, if the provident Care and Frugality of the Irish would but have
helped the Soil in any reasonable degree, it might be compared with most
Islands in producing things necessary not only for the supplying its
Inhabitants, but such as could command the most valuable Commodities of Europe;
yet the People of the ancient Stock not accustoming themselves to Labor, but
rather to Spoil and War, desirous to live idly upon the Product of the Country,
and Manufacture of the industrious English, by such unlawful ways as
opportunity has put into their hands, have in a great measure neglected their
own Patrimonies, and suffered them in many places to become of no considerable
value, as being eaten up by the encroachment of Boggs, and overgrown with such
Excrements of Nature as hinder Fertility; and this mainly out of not altogether
so much sloth and neglect, as their irreconcilable hatred to those of the
British Nation that inhabit amongst them, that they should get nothing by
their Lands, though by their friendly Instruction and Conversation they might
have been exceedingly bettered in their Fortunes and Manners, and such
Manufactures of sundry kinds improved, as might have redounded, not only to
their particular Interests, but to the Inhansment of the value of the Island
among the neighboring Nations; for it not only abounds in Iron, but other
useful Minerals, and many other things that might, if well improved, set the
poorer sort on work, and not only put an end to that Poverty that too much
pinches the Natives, but likewise make their Traffic abroad considerable
enough to be taken Notice of, and bring them a Trade, that in a short time
would much contribut to the increase of a greater Plenty, and prove a
comfortable Maintenance to some thousands, who for several yearts past have
been destitute of such a Livelihood as might render them capable of subsisting,
and for want of which they have been forced to travel abroad and serve other
Nations, where they are for the most part treated little better than Slaves, as
well in War as other Employments, many of them, if we impartially consider
their Merits, as to Education, Natural Endowments, deserving better usage; for
it must be confessed by all unbiafied Persons, that the Irish Gentry are
qualified sufficiently (at least the greatest number of them) for great
Undertakings, if they would, according to what they understand, labor to
improve their own advantage, by putting themselves forward in the World to
acquire those Preferments and Undertakings they are capable of, and might be
very serviceable to the Government, but that most of them being Roman
Catholics, and so superstitiously zealous in their way, that they are
absolutely swayed and guided in all their Undertakings by their Priests, who
labor all that in them lies to keep up their Idolatrous Traditions, and
themselves in esteem to their great advantage, in gathering the Wealth of the
Kingdom, and as they see their opportunity, stir them up to a disesteem of the
Government, which has been the occasion of much Bloodshed, and brought Misery
and Desolation upon the Land, that at sundry times has made it uneasy for many
years; and we are not insensible that in the last Revolt, which has been a
smarting one to the Irish, the Priests hurried them, especially the meaner
sort, into a fruitless Rebellion by Threats of Excommunication, and all the
bugbear Fulminations of the Romish Church. Though at last it is hoped, seeing the
Stream of Blood is now so kindly stopped in the Kingdom, that the Natives will
see their former Errors, and stick to their Obedience, notwithstanding any
Insinuations or underhand Dealings that may hereafter be inculcated, or
cladestinely carried on.

Never had the Irish Nation a better opportunity to lay hold on, for settling a
lasting happiness to themselves and their Posterities, under the Auspicious
Reign of a King and Queen, who make it their utmost Endeavors, and think it
their greatest Felicity, to do their Subjects good, sparing no Charge, nor
shunning any Hazard or Danger that may conduce to the Settlement of a glorious
Peace, not only in their own Dominions, but in all Europe, and restore thereby,
as far as lies in Human possibility, the Golden Age, wherein all appeared
serene and calm, whilst universal Joy spread her downy Wings to shelter the
delighted Nations from the Storms of Discontent and Trouble. From all which we
may conclude, That if Ireland ever was desirous to be in a prosperous state,
the time is come that puts that Opportunity into the hands of her Inhabitants
to become a happy People. When on the other hand, had things succeeded, as too
many of them unadvisedly wished some few Months since, they might, instead of
being at perfect Liberty, been the Sons and Daughters of Slavery, and the most
severest of Bondages, under the French Tyranny; which how easy that Yoke is to
bear, the Subjects of France have fatally experienced in the Reigns of many of
their former Kings, but more especially under Lewis XIV. to avoid which, the
more discerning part have undergone a voluntary Exile, and become a scattered
People over the Face of the Earth, finding better usage in barbarous Nations.

This, I hope, may suffice to warn the Irish, to consider where their Interest
lies, and to embrace their Majesty's Protection, as their true Asylum.

A TRUE and IMPARTIAL HISTORY OF THE Kingdom of Ireland, DESCRIBING Its
Situation, Ancient Inhabitants, Manners, Customs, and the State it was found in
at the Time it was Invaded and Conquered by the English, in the Reign of King
Henry II. etc.
THE Kingdom of Ireland is of no mean Extent, but rather very large and
considerable; It is an Island, it is bounded on the East with England and
Scotland, on the West with the main Ocean, on the South with part of France and
Normandy, and on the North with the Ducalidonian Sea. It is, as all other
Islands, sur^ounded with Water, containing in Length 40^ and in Breadth 200
Miles, and is especially parted or divided into four Provinces* viz. Munster,
which is again divided into the Counties of Limerick, Kerrey, Waterford, Cork,
Desmon, and the Holy Cross in Tipperary. 2. The Province of Leinster, divided
into the Counties of the East and West Meaths, Kilkenney, Caterlough, King's
County, Kildare, Wexford, Dublin and Wicklow. 3. The Province of Conno^^^^,
divided into the Counties of Clare, Thumond, Majo, Sligo, Letarim, and
Roscomon. 4. The Province of Vlster, divided into the Counties of Tyrconnel,
Tyrone, Cavan, Coleraine, Monaghan, Antrim, Down, Armah, and Lough; and these
are for the most part at this day replenished with many considerable Cities and
Towns, of which I shall have occasion to speak in the Series of this History,
as they shall fall in their proper places. The Country is naturally very
fruitful, and seems by the Soil always to have been so, though the Natives have
not appeared very active in improving it, as being naturally given up to
floath, or to live by War and Rapine. As for the first Peopling it after Noah's
Flood, it remains very much, if not altogether in the dark, the Natives having
been imposed on by Monks and Bards, a sort of Rimers and Fortune Tellers, with
Fables for Reality, though it is conjectured by the Learned, that this Island
was Peopled upon the Confusion of Tongues at Babel, soon after the Flood; and
the Irish Historians of the best account, tell us, That one Bastolenus,
encouraged by the Example of Nim^od in Syria, settled his Monarchy in the
Western Islands, and amongst others peopled this; yet where he kept his head
Residence no mention is made, but that his three Sons ruling there, had War
with Giants that grew up in the Land and rebelled against them; and that
afterward diverse Scythians roving to seek Adventures, got footing there; and so
they go on in the doubtful Paths of Uncertainty a great way farther: But true
it is, that according to our own Histories, and those of other Nations, the
Irish began very early to rove abroad, and in their Boats, and such kind of
Ships as they had, coming frequently ashore in England and Scotland, and other
Places* did great Mischief by Burning and Plundering, but were frequently met
withal, and a great many of them killed. Nor do we find that the Romans, when
they conquered Britain, extended their Arms to Ireland.

It is held they were Converted to the Christian Religion by St. James the
Apostle; and some give large grounds for it: but their Authors will have it
done by one Pala^inus, sent thither to that purpose by Pope Celestine, but more
especially perfected by St. Patrick, to whom they ascribe a thousand
Incredibilities: But to leave these Conjectures that are not greatly pertinent
to our Matter, we now come nearer to that for which we have more Warrant and
Certainty.

The first Acquaintance that the English had with the Irish, as to any thing
that is remarkable, was in the Reign of Henry the Second of England, their
chief Communication being with France, whether they sent several Bands of
Soldiers to help them against the English, who were Waring there under their
King for the Recovery of his Right in the Provinces that were his
Grand-father's, which he having pretty well settled, turned his Thoughts upon
Ireland, where he heard they were at Variance among themselves, the whole Land
being divided under many Petty Princes, when it luckily happened a business
fell out that gave him an easy Inlet to the Conquest of it; for in the Year
1167. the Eastern Part of the Island along the Sea being possessed by Dormat
Mac-mur, King of Leinster, his Cruelties had highly incensed his Subjects
against him, and what more raised their Fury, was, the Injury he did to Morice
King of Mead, by wheedling away his Queen, and living with her in Adultery; so
that the enraged Husband seeking Reparation and Revenge, invaded his Countries,
by the Assistance of Roderick O Conor, King of Connaught, at the Terror of
whose Approach, Dormat being detested by, and forsaken of his Subjects, was
forced to fly to England, and there implored Protection; which upon taking an
Oath of Fidelity and Obedience to the King, was freely given him; and Henry,
with a Sum of Money, procured leave of Pope Adrian, an Englishman, promoted to
St. Peter's Chair, that he might Conquer Ireland, promising moreover, thoroughly
to establish the Christian Religion, and bring it to an Acknowledgment of the Sea of Rome; but whilst he was preparing to pass the Seas, new Troubles arose
in his French Territories, that required his Presence; yet by his Letters
Patents he gave Leave, with Encouragement to his Nobles, and such others as
were willing to go for Ireland.

Dormat impatient of his Exile, mainly upon this Concession, solicited Richard
the King's Son, promising not only his Daughter, a very beautiful young Lady in
Marriage, but great Possessions in the Country, when he should be restored, and
all his Territories after his Death. The young Prince being of a Warlike
Temper, and thirsting after Glory, resolved, though his Father was absent, to
undertake this Expedition; and early the next Spring sailed from Bristol with
diverse Ships, on Board which were thirty Knights, sixty Esquires, and three
hundred Archers, the first Englishmen ever known to land in a Hostile-manner
in Ireland* and being met by Dormat with such Forces as he, going over a little
before, had raised, they seized upon the Town of Wexford, which was given to
one Fitz-Stevens, a Welsh Gentleman, according to Agreement upon his raising
part of the Forces; so that News of this, and other Successes flying to
England, many Adventurers came over; and although the Petty Kings joined their
Forces, yet were they beat in diverse bloody Battles: and Dormat being restored,
had Dublin submitted to him, inflicting grievous Punishments upon such of his
Capital Enemies as he found there.

The Prince being now in Ireland, greatly increasing in Strength, that came
over to him, carried all before him; which made King Henry, who feared the
Prince's aspiring upon such Successes, and willing to have the honor of
Conquering so large a Kingdom himself, sent his Mandate to recall the English
out of Ireland, so that but a few being left with the Prince in Dublin, and
they reduced to a great straight by the Irish that had taken heart, they
nevertheless Sallied upon an Army of 30000 with not above 1500 Men, and utterly
routed them, taking great Spoil; and then coming for England, he surrendered
all the Cities and Forts he had taken into his Father's Hands, for Dormat by
this time was dead; and in the Year 1172. King Henry landed with a Royal Army,
which brought such a Terror upon Ireland, that Roderick, and most of the Petty
Princes that were Independent, or his Tributaries, came witn their humble
Supplications to entreat him, That he would take the Government upon him, as
their Supreme Prince and Lord: So that at Christmas he made them a Noble Feast
in Dublin; and settled the Kingdom in Civil and Ecclesiastical Matters,
Reforming Abuses and Barbarities: And soon after those that held out in Vlster
were brought to submit, from which time we may Date the Conquest of Ireland by
the English, under which Sovereignty it has ever since remained as a conquered
Kingdom, and now annexed to the Crown: yet the Natives who are generally hot
spirited, uneasy, and restless under Restraint, have often strugled to break
this Chain, though to the Loss and Disadvantage mostly of themselves.

King Richard the First, by reason of his Wars in the Holy Land, his
Imprisonment upon his Return in Austria and the Empire, and other
Disappointments he met with at home, had no War with the Irish, nor happened
there any thing extraordinary, but care and industry to settle the Government;
which was done with such tenderness, that the Natives being more civilized,
began to think themselves happy in the change, and that they were redeemed from
perpetual War, which when so many Princes governed as Absolute in their
Dominions, could not be avoided among so rough and stubborn a People. But
because King Edward the First had sent for Forces out of Ireland, to help him
against the Scots, with whom he had mortal Wars, the wilder sort of the Irish
in Edward the Second's time invited them over, and many of the leading Men of
the Natives revolting, ruining the Country; but upon the English joining Battle
with them they were routed, and about 11000 slain, among whom was a King of
Connought, and one Okly a Lord of great Possessions: but soon after the Lord
Roger Mortimer being sent over as Lord Justice of Ireland, he managed Matters
so ill, that the Scots were again called in under Edward Bruce, Brother to the
Scots King, who taking several places by the Revolt of the Irish from the
English Obedience, caused himself to be Crowned King of Ireland; But in a great
Battle his Forces being routed, and he laboring to restrain their flight, was
killed by one Morepass whom he likewise requited with Death before his Fall,
and the dead Bodies fell by that means on each other, which happened in the
Year 1320.

However, they were rather dispersed than broken, doing considerable Mischief
where they found an opportunity to fall upon the English, that had settled
themselves in the Towns and Villages near the Sea, etc.

In the Year 1329. during the Reign of King Edward the Third, the Irish in
Leinster and Mead rebelled; against whom the Earl of Ormond drew out what
Forces he could, but being over-poured in number, was defeated, and the Irish
made great Spoils of the English Possessions, and amongst other Barbarities,
burnt eighty of them in a Church where they had fled for Refuge; but at last
the English fortified themselves in Wexford, and upon their approach to besiege
it, sallied out upon them with such Courage, that Success crowned it, and 4000
of the Irish were killed, most of them that fled being hotly pursued, were
drowned in the River Slane; which with some other Encounters, where Victory
declared on our side, so quelled them, that in this King's Reign they rebelled
no more.

Anno 1398. in the Reign of King Richard the Second, the Irish fell again into
Rebellion, and by Surprise fall upon the King's Lieutenant, and diverse Persons
of Quality, whom they slew; which made the King with considerable Forces haste
thither, and Landing, he put them in all parts to the Rout, killing a great
many, and taking several of their Ringleaders, and keeping his Court of State
at Dublin, to him resorted the Nobility and chief of the Irish, submitting and
paying him Homage, promising to keep the Country in quiet for the future: but
Troubles arising in England, the King hastily left Ireland, and was no sooner
arrived in Wales, but finding himself deserted, he betook him to a Castle,
where he was seized by Henry Duke of Lancaster, to whom he resigned his Crown,
and was afterward inhumanly murdered. Upon whose Death many Troubles and
Contentions arose; so that the English being embroyled at home, Ireland was
little minded, the People there doing, in a manner, what they pleased. But in
the Reign of Henry the Fifth, we being settled at home, more care was taken to
prevent the Outrages and Depradations of the Irish; insomuch, that several who
had been formerly Offenders were punished, and others fled, amongst whom were
diverse of their great 0nes, who notwithstanding the care of the Earl of Ormond,
then Lieu^enant of the Kingdom, to repress them, drew a great multitude of
People into Rebellion: but the Earl gave Battle at Redmore-Athy, where the
Irish under the Leading of O Moor, stood stoutly to it, as Men in despair; but
after a bloody Fight, that colored all the Ditches of the Fens with Blood, the
Battle swerved, and the Irish were defeated with great slaughter. Which quelled
them in so terrible a manner, that for a long time after they seemed out of
Love with War: So that nothing memorably occurs in History, till the Reign of
Henry the Seventh, when the Earl of Kildare being Deputy, one Richard Symons a
Priest, wheedled him into a belief, that one Lambert a Youth, whom he had
brought up as his Scholar, was really the Earl of Warwick Son to George Duke of
Clarence, Brother to King Edward the Fourth, that had escaped out of the Tower,
and was come thither for protection; and the young Spark having been well
tutored; and of a graceful Carriage, so well acted his part, that not only the
Lieutenant, but a great many of the Irish Nobility sided with him, raising
considerable Forces to espouse his Quarrel, Crowning him King in Dublin, and
not content to keep him there, they brought him with a considerable Army into
England, landing in Lancashire, and Proclaiming him. But the King's Forces
advancing, they were in a Set-battel over-thrown, and the Imposter taken
Prisoner, the Priest hanged, etc.

They likewise in the King's Reign aided another called Perkin, or Peter
Warbeck, who styled himself Duke of York, younger Son to Edward the Fourth; but
in this they had no better success than in the former, a great many being
killed, the Impostor taken, after several Attempts, and bloody Encounters,
having engaged the Scots as well as Irish, on his part, marrying the Lady
Catharine Gourdon, Niece to that King; he was first obliged to confess his
Impostor, how he was set on, maintained and encouraged by the Duchess of
Burgundy, Sister to Edward the Fourth, and then being publicly punished, was
sent to the Tower, from whence endeavoring to escape, he was executed, and
with him the real Earl of Warwick, who had been kept a Prisoner there a
considerable time: all that was alleged against him was, that he attempted to
make his Escape with Perkin, to raise new Commotions.

In the Reign of Henry the Eighth, great Commotions were stirred up, which were
at first suddenly appeased, but the Earl of Kildare being Deputy, the People
exhibited their Complaints against him to the Court of England, as the cause of
many Disturbances by his severe using them, and amongst other Articles they had
this, viz. All Ireland is not able to Rule this Earl. Then, said the King, this
Earl is the fittest Man to Rule all Ireland: and thereupon he continued him
Deputy; it appeared this hatred against him proceeded only from the strict hand
he had over them to keep them from rebelling. And another was, That he had
caused to be burned the Cathedral Church of Cashal. The Archbishop of that
place being his chief Accuser, and when every one would have denied it, he
humbly replied, By Chreest I would never have done it, had I not byen told the
Archbishop was in it. Which plain dealing made the King smile, and the
Archbishop storm and fret: however, the Earl was ordered to rebuild it at his
own charge, and so continued in his Deputyship; but often fell into displeasure
by reason of his plain downright dealing; and Cardinal Wolsey now ruling all at
Court, for speaking too plain to him upon his Examination at the Council Board,
where Wolsey sat as President, he sent him to the Tower, and ordered a Warrant
for his Execution without the King's Knowledge; of which the King having Notice
by the Lieutenant, was mightily incensed at Wolsey, and that great Favorite
soon after falling into Disgrace, the Earl was released and sent to Ireland,
with one Sir William Sheington, who was made Deputy: however the O Moors fell
into Rebellion, but being opposed by Forces drawn out of Dublin, they were
dispersed, and many of them killed, and for that time the Tempest blown over;
however it lasted not long, for the Earl of Kildare's Enemies, having again
upon many grievous Complaints prevailed to have him sent for to England, he was
committed to the Tower; whereupon his Son, the Lord Thomas, notwithstanding the
Persuasions of the Chancellor to avert him from it, fell into Rebellion, and
drew great Forces after him; yet driven at last to extreme Necessities, he was
persuaded by the Lord Gray, then Deputy of the Kingdom, to submit himself to
King Henry's Mercy, without hope of Pardon; but some of his Followers having
killed Alen Archbishop of Dublin, he was upon his Arrival committed to the
Tower; and King Henry being informed, That the Geraldine Family had vowed never
to have Peace with him, he sent for the Earl's five Brothers in Custody; when
one of them during their crossing the Seas, demanded of the Master, what the
Name of the Ship was? who replied, The Cow: Nay then, said he, looking on the
rest with a dejected Countenance, we are all lost Men; for now a Prophecy comes
into my head, that says, Five Brethren of an Earl should be carried into
England in the Belly of a Cow, and never come back again: and I doubt not, but
all things hitting so pat, we are they. And indeed so it happened; for being
Accused of the late Rebellion, though two of them were ignorant of it; the Lord
Thomas, Son to the Earl, was beheaded on Tower Hill, and the five Brethren
hanged drawn, and quartered at Tyburn, and the Earl soon after died in the
Tower of Grief, which destroyed the Center of that Noble Family; for although
one Brother escaped, yet traveling through many Countries, he at last came to
Naples, and there died Childless. Nor did the Lord Gray escape, for being
countermanded, and accused of holding Correspondency with this Family, though
without any notable Proof, he was Condemned for High Treason, and beheaded on
Tower Hill.

The Kings of England, the better to please the Natives of Ireland, having been
all this while only called Lords of Ireland, the Parliament sitting at
Westminster in the 33d year of Henry's Reign, invested with the Title of King
of Ireland: whereupon the Earl of Tyrone, and diverse others rebelled; but in
some bloody Encounters being defeated, the Earl was at last subdued, and
brought Prisoner for England; yet upon his humble Submission released and sent
over, upon promise of keeping the Country in quiet; which he pretty well
observed during the short Reigns of King Edward the Sixth, and Queen Mary, only
some petty Commotions happened that were soon quieted.

In the Year 1566. being the Seventh year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, one of
the chief Lords of Ireland, named Donald Mac Carti More, upon some little stirs
that happened, came over, and not only cleared himself to the Queen, but
delivered up to her all his Territories, vowing perpetual Fealty; but she in
gratitude restored them again, and made him Earl of Glencare, giving him a
considerable Sum to bear his Expenses; so that by his great Authority amongst
the Natives, it was thought the Kingdom would be kept quiet; but it proved
otherwise: for after some private Conspiracies, that never broke out, were
defeated, the Earl of Desmond, the Eleventh Earl of that Title, who had great
Territories and abundance of Followers broke into open Rebellion, and did great
damage to the English, driving them out of many places, killing diverse
Gentlemen in Revenge, as he said, of the Earl of Kildare and his Family being
put to death; and amongst others, one with whom he had contracted a strict
Friendship, and usually called Father, who when he saw him with his drawn Sword
breaking into his Chamber, and relying upon his former Friendship, cried out,
What is the matter, Desmon, my Son? to whom the bloody Earl sternly replied, I
am no longer thy Son, nor thou my Father; but thou shall surely die: and
thereupon they put him, and all they found in the House to the Sword.

These Outrages allarmed the Lord Deputy, who drawing out his Forces, after
diverse Skirmishes put the Earl to the Rout, who being forsaken of his
Followers, lurked for sometime in the Bogs and Mountains; but miserable want
driving him thence among the Cottages, he was there found and slain by a
private Soldier, when his Head being conveyed to England, was set upon
London Bridge; and so fell this Eleventh Earl of Desm^nd. But in his Grave the
restless Spirits of the Irish were not buried, for casting their Eyes on the
Family of the Bourks, they gave out they would have an eminent Person of that
Family to be their King, or Governor; and many Tumults were raised: but this
prudent Queen, notwithstanding some intestine Troubles at home, took such care,
that she a long time by Policy and Force reduced the unruly Natives to their
Obedience; the former of which was particularly effected by driving away their
Cattle, and making them submit through extreme necessity, after they had been
got together in the Woods, about forty Days. The Second was by the timely
Notice the Deputy had of Two thousand Scotch Highlanders landing to join with
the Irish, and knowing nothing that they had laid down their Arms, as to their
greatest number, they came on with such as fell in with them by the way, in
hopes to join the rest, breaking into the Province of Connaught, where indeed a
great many of the Country Peasants took Arms on their part; but the Lord-Deputy
by speedy Marches toward them, and finding they were got into Bogs and
Fastnesses, after he had encamped within sight awhile, feigned a Retreat, and
they, by reason of their over-numbring him, supposing he had fled, immediately
followed; but were no sooner trained on the firm ground, e're the English faced
about, charged their Front and Flanks, piercing the Array of their Battle, and
put them to utter rout and confusion, so that not above eighteen of them
escaped of upwards of Three thousand, which crushed the Scots attempting to
help them in their Rebellion.

These bad Successes showing plainly, the Hand of Heaven against them, did not
however make them sensible of their Misfortune, in taking up Arms against a
powerful Nation; for perceiving themselves too weak to struggle in the Lions
Paws, they began to tamper with other Nations, alleging after the Reformation,
Religion, as a ground to justify their Rebellions, though they were ever
starting from their Allegiance, when both Nations professed that of the Roman
Catholic Communion; but now taking this for a plausible pretext, the Earl of
Tyrone began under hand to deal with Philip the Second of Spain, for Succors
of Men and Ammunition, promising to hold the Kingdom at his Devotion: but this
being about to be discovered by Hugh O Neale, Tyrone in a rage clapped a Cord
about his Neck, and strangled him with his own hands. Notwithstanding this, it
was known, and he summoned to answe^ it in the English Court; and upon some
assurance of Pardon he went, submitting himself, and making such plausible
Protestations of Innocence, that times running high by reason that the
Spaniards were about to Invade England, he was pardoned, and sent over again,
but afterward proved Ungrateful, and a very dangerous Enemy.

Much about this time one Mac Malcoon, a leading Man among the Irish, stirred
up Commotions about paying Taxes, for which he was taken, tried, and executed,
his Estate being given partly to his Family, and partly to the English, that
living upon it they might curb and overawe the rest: Whereupon one Brian O
Roch, who had sided with him, to prevent a present Punishment, fell into an
open Rebellion; but upon the Rout that immediately was given him, he fled into
Scotland for Protection; but the Queen's Influence was so great upon that
Kingdom, that she had him delivered up; and being tried at Westminster, he was
there found Guilty, and being carried to Tyburn, he was there executed without
being concerned at Death.

These things having been buzzed in the ears of the Multitude, to have been
done in an Arbitrary Way, the Earl of Tyrone thought it a fit time to lay hold
on their Discontents, and raised all the Forces he could, calling in the
Spaniard, and imploring the other Roman Catholic Nations to assist him, as he
pretended, to prevent Heresies overrunning that Kingdom; nor was the Pope, to
whom he had sent one Ste^^ley, an English Renagado, as his Agent, wanting to
further his Design, causing 600 Harquibussers to be levied in the Territories
of the Church, for the Service of Tyrone^ But S^ewkley, who commanded them,
coming into the Port of Lisbon with them, at what time King Don Sebastian was
going to invade Africa, he retained them for his Service, when at the fatal
Battle of Alcazaz against the Moors, they were all cut to pieces: However,
Tyrone being very much strengthened, gave the English a great Overthrow, and put
all Connaught, Vlster and Munster in Arms; and the War after that went on with
doubtful Success, sometimes one Party prevailed, and sometimes another. Here
the famous Earl of Essex, the great Favorite of Queen Elizabeth, commanded;
but whilst he was fighting in Ireland, he was undermined by his Foes at the
English Court, and being called home, and some Misdemeanors in this War, and
other things charged against him, he was confined to his House, where falling
into Discontent, he after having imprisoned the Privy Counselors that were
sent to him from the Queen, he broke out into open Violence, for which he lost
his Head on Tower Hill. The Fall of so brave a Soldier proving afterward to
small cause of Grief to the Queen; and his Loss was greatly regretted by the
People, whose Darling he was.

The Lord Norrice being Deputy of Ireland in the stead of the Earl of Essex, he
followed his business so close, that giving Tyron^ several Overthrows, and
beating out the Spaniards that came to his Assistance, he at last was left by
his Followers, who cursing him for bringing them into such Troubles, shifted as
they could; so that after he had lurked up and down some Months, suffering
extreme Necessity, he came and surrendered himself to the Lord-Deputy, upon
promise he should be sent over to England, there to throw himself at the
Queen's Feet for Mercy; and according he was sent over and committed to the
Tower; but the Queen dying before he could be brought to Trial, King James the
Sixth of Scotland, and First of England, coming to the Crown, he was by an Act
of Indemnity pardoned, and set at Liberty, he and all his Adherents, promising
exact Obedience for the future; and that wise King knowing how to settle a
troublesome Nation, as having been brought up in one himself, he knew it was
best to prevent and lay aside Animosities, and therefore by his Proclamation of
Pardon, he utterly extinguished all Offenses, not only against the Crown, but
between Subject and Subject, as to particular Trespasses; and the like to every
one that at a set day would appear and claim the Benefit of his Pardon before
the Justice of Assize, and Public Justice for that purpose being settled in
every Country, it abated much of the Tyranny their Petty Lords had over them,
and made the Vulgar sort of them sensible of the Goodness of the English Laws,
of which before they had purposely been kept in Ignorance: Being now for the
most part freed from their Servitude, and in the King's immediate Protection,
so that if their Lords had a mind to Rebel, they could not compel their Tenants
to Rise as they had formerly done: and Ireland being now divided into Shires,
the Circuits were erected in every Province; and the English had their Lands
allotted, and more particular Colonies established, so that Trade began to
flourish; and several Corporations of the City of London having purchased large
Proportions of Land, built a strong Town for their Securi^y, against the
Incursions of the Irish that might happen, very advantageously situate on the
Bank of a River and Lough, which made a wonderful Change, to all appearance, in
the face of Things; but what can hinder a People from being miserable that will
make themselves so, as may not improperly say, in spite of Providence: the
chief of the Irish were displeased at these Proceedings, finding the English
Improvement rendered such Plenty in the Kingdom, as made their Land of little
value; and therefore many of them spightfully let them lie neglected to be
overrun with Thistles and Briars, cursing their Posterity if ever they had any
Communication with the English, or so much as Ploughed or Sowed; by which their
irreconcilable Hatred to us may be measured.

The ordinary sort of People notwithstanding their Lords Di^^wasions, finding
they had not their former Power to compel, perceiving Advantage to arise by
this new Settlement, inhabited very friendly with the English, and by their
Examples began to improve themselves in Industry, and seemed averse to be
stirred up as formerly upon every slight Occasion to Rebel, insomuch that a
long Peace ensued, and that brought with it extraordinary Plenty; but as
nothing is certain or permanent upon Earth, so in process of Time this golden
Cord of Union between the two Nations was violently cut in sunder.

Troubles arising in the Year 1641. through a Misunderstanding, and fomented
Heats blown by secret Enemies, and War being in prospect between England and
Scotland, several of the Native Irish Chiefs, not finding the People prone to
hearken to them, incited the Popish Priests, who by promising them Heaven for
Obedience to their Commands, and Damnation on the contrary, with many other
strange Stories and Things, pushed them headlong on to one of the blackest
Iniquities ^he Sun has for many Ages beheld, and was too late discovered to be
prevented, for it happened, that on the 23d of October, the Irish headed by a
great many of their Nobility and Gentry, rose generally in Arms, seizing upon
diverse strong Places, Arms, Ammunition, and all that came to hand, vowing the
utter Destruction of all the English in Ireland, to Extirpate them from the
face of the Irish Earth, both Root and Branch; and this was discovered but one
Night before it was to be executed; by which Providence however Dublin and some
other Places, by the Imprisoning the Conspirators, and Fortifying them with
good Garrisons, were secured, and became a Refuge to the Lives of many; so that
now one might every where behold Houses flaming, the miserable People fly every
where for their Lives, whilst the Blood of many were mingled with Flames, and
the Earth made red by the Blood of those that were slaughtered in the Fields
and Ways; thousands were drowned in Rivers and Lakes till the Stream was
glutted with the dead Bodies, and they Bridged over the Waters; many were
ripped up alive, and others tortured in a more cruel manner; some were turned
out into Snows and Frost and starved to death; the Priests and Friars going
along with the Murderers, and beating them on to it with their Crucifixes,
telling them, They were Heretics, and no longer to be suffered alive on the
Earth; and that it was so far from a sin to kill them, that it was Meritorious,
and even Damnation it self to spare them; giving the Sacrament to the more
scrupulous of Conscience to confirm them in the Bloody Enterprise; so that in a
short space, before any Succor could come from England, they destroyed by
sundry barbarous ways 20000 Men, Women, and Children, burnt most of their
Houses and Villages, killing their Cattle, and suffering them to rot upon the
Ground, roo^ing up likewise their newly sprouted Corn, as maliciously bent not
only to destroy the People, but in Hatred and utter Detestation all that
appertained to them; flattering themselves by the Inducement of old lying
Prophesies, to shake off the English Yoke, and choose them a King from among
their Countrymen, but Fate consented no^.

The King was at the beginning of this fatal Mischief in Ireland, upon the
Borders of Scotland, laboring to compose the Differences; recommending the
Care of Ireland to his Parliament then sitting at Westminster, who promised a
speedy Relief and Assistance to the Protestants that were got together in Arms,
and stood upon their Defense; Voting 50000 pound for to raise Forces; and the
Earl of Ormond was made Lieutenant General of the Royal Forces in that Kingdom;
to join whom Sir Simon Harcourt was sent out of England with a Regiment. So
that the poor Remnant of the Protestants getting together, made the Irish
Papist that was so good at base and unmanly Murders, fly the Face of War. But
Troubles growing fast on in England, by the Misunderstanding between King
Charles the First and his Parliament, and sprouting up into a miserable Civil
War, most of the guilty Persons at this time escaped unpunished: But the small
Force of the Prote^^ants that were left, being once united, forced the Irish
out of their strong Hold, and restored the Face of Government; yet about eigh^
Years after a Bloody Scene was acted, for King Charles the First loosing his
Kingdoms with his Life, his Eldest Son Charles, as his undoubted Right, taking
upon him the Kingly Dignity, though in Exile, England being cast, as they
termed it, into a Model of a Free State or Republic, the Marquess of Ormond,
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, was commissioned to Labor the Securing that
Country to the behoof of his Master King Charles the Second; and finding no
other Means to do it in that Imergency, he closed his Interest with the Chief
of the leading Irish, concluding a Peace in the King's Name, with the most
considerable of them, upon Submission and Obedience to his Majesty, there being
a Concession of certain Articles on the part of the Marquess to be performed,
when being joined by the Marquess of Clanricard, and the Lord Inchequeen, the
Earl of Castlehaven, etc. Trim and Tredah or Drogheda, upon a Defeat they gave
the Forces that came from England, surrendered: and now Dublin, wherein was a
strong Garrison commanded by Colonel Jones, being the only place of strength
that held out, the Marquess laid Siege to it, with a brave Army to appearance,
but it seems there were too many Irish in it, for the Besieged taking the
advantage of the carelessness of the Camp, made at first very slender Sallies,
but finding the advantage, they sallied with their whole strength, and beating
the Besiegers out of their Works, followed them into their Camp, which
occasioned such Terror and Confusion, that the Irish fled, and left the
English and some few French to stand to it, but being over^owered by the
vigorous Attacks, they at ^ength, after a sharp and bloody Dispute, gave ^way,
and were forced to raise the Siege, whilst ^he Besieged became Masters of their
Camp, and an extraordinary rich Booty; and more Forces arriving from England,
Fortune went against them almost every where. And now Londonderry being
besieged, that Siege was ^aised by Sir Charles Coot; but what yet was a greater
Terror, Cromwell, a vowed and mor^al Enemy to the Irish, landed with seven
Regiments of Foot, four Regiments of Horse, and one of Dragoons, bringing along
with him ^he Title of Lord Governor, or Lieute^ant of Ireland, and had to
bring over ^hese Forces forty Sail of Ships, with ^attering Pieces, Mortars,
Ammunition, and all other Warlike Stores and Materials.

He staid a while to visit Dublin, and ^hen marched with a complete Army to
^esiege Drogheda, wherein was a strong Gar^ison of English and Irish, it being
upon ^he Rumor of his Approach reinforced with Two thousand five hundred Foot,
and Three ^undred Hor^e; and although it was stoutly ^efended, yet it was
carried by Force, and by the too cruel Order of the General, all were put to
the Sword, not respecting Age ^or Sex, except a very few who hid themselves for
many Days, till the Fury was over: And here it is the more to be lamented,
because this Brunt fell mostly upon many brave English Gentlemen, who were got
into the Place to Defend it for their King. Other Towns were likewise taken by
Storm, an^ treated at the like rate; so that a bloody Vengeance seemed to fall
heavy upon a great many that were Innocent for the Sins of the Guilty, who had
so lately polluted the Land wit^ Innocent Blood, and now kept mostly out o^ the
way in the Mountains, Bogs, and Fastne^ses; however, being at last hunted from
plac^ to place, a great number fell by the Swor^, Famine, and Pestilence,
insomuch that the Lan^ was greatly Depopulated, a third part of the People
being wasted, and had severe Task Masters over them that made them Groan under
their Burdens, till Charles the Secon^ came to lighten their Sholders, and
resto^^ them again their Peace and Ea^e, by Accessio^ to the Crown upon the
Happy Restoration so that the People wearied with their forme^ Miseries, began
to be out of love with Wa^ and Insurrections, and seemed mightily inclin^ble to
Peace. And indeed the King too care to place such Ministers of State among
them, especially the Lords Lieutenants an^ Lords Justices, that they had no
reasonabl^ cause to complain of their Usage, either i^ Affairs Civil or
Military; and indeed the Tranquillity the Kingdom enjoyed, made the People in a
great measure forget what the^ had suffered: They traded to France an^ Spain
with the product of their Native Soil the Rivers and Lakes likewise affording
the^ plenty of Fish, which they transported for Wine and other Commodities. Nor
did the^^ Thoughts appear to be elevated above what was reasonable, till the
Death of the King. But when King James the Second ascended his Brother's
Throne, and declared himself a Roman Catholic, then it was the Irish Papists
began to prick up their Ears, and to expect Advantages beyond their Abilities,
publicly declaring, The Day was their own, and that the Protestant Religion
must go down. But it seems in this, as in their other Aims, they took such
Measures as made them shoot wide of their Mark.

The Earl of Tyrconnel, who had been raised by King James, when Duke of York,
from a mean to a considerable Figure, was looked upon as a fit Instrument to
carry on the Design in that Kingdom; and therefore upon the re-calling of the
Right Honorable the Earl of Clarendon, he was made Lord Lieutenant, and soon
gave the Irish great Hopes of Superiority over the English in that Kingdom, by
first Cashiering the Protestant Soldiers and Officers that were in Arms, and
then the Officers and Ministers of Justice: And though there were Complaints
made against him at the English Court, yet they were not regarded, but he the
rather encouraged in his Enterprises; insomuch, that things run so high that
many feared a fatal Event, and diverse left thereupon the Kingdom; some going
for Holland, others for Scotland and England: and in such a method Matters
continued to be pushed violently on, till News came of a purposed Invasion of
the Kingdom of England by the Prince of Orange, now our Sovereign, then
Tyrconnel be^tir'd himself to secure Ireland, Imprisoning such as he suspected,
and Disarming others; draining the Garrisons of the most expert Irish Soldiers
that were Papists* and sending them over to the number of Three thousand, or
thereabout, to the Assistance of his Master; but they did him far more hurt
than good by increasing the Peoples Fears that were but before suggested. And
indeed, the whole English Nation Revolting in a manner from King James, and
what was more remarkable, a great part of the Army he had been so long Training
up at a vast Expense. Upon the Landing of the Prince with his Forces, the Irish
Forces that had been sent over in expectation of Mountains, found that they
were not only dwindled into less than Mole-hills, but themselves in a miserable
Condition, not only at the point of starving when Disbanded with the rest of
the Forces, by the Earl of Feversham, but almost exposed to the Fury and
violent Resentment of the People, who had conceived a Hatred against them; so
that at last, submitting, they were taken care of, and most of them shipped for
the Emperor's Service against the Turks.

Tyrconnel was not idle in Ireland upon the News he had from England of King
James his Flight to France; but calling a Council mostly of his Creatures, told
them, That now it was their time to stand up for their Country, and secure it
against all Opposers; and that for his part, if even his Master should command
him to deliver up the Sword, he should think it, in such ^ Iuncture, his Duty
to Refuse it. And immediately not only spread the News throughout the Country,
but caused the Irish every where to take Arms, such as they could get; ^o ^ha^
the Tumultuous Rabble getting together, plundered the Protestant Houses, drove
away their Cattle, fired their Stacks of Corn and Hay, murdered some, and
barbarously used others, insomuch that the Terror working in all, such as
could fled for their Lives, leaving their Substance behind them, and happy they
thought themselves in that Condition, if they could pass the Seas* either to
England or Scotland; for although several of the Protestant N^bility and Gentry
made Head in the North, yet the Enemy having in their Posse^sion all the strong
Towns, they found themselves too weak to make any extraordinary Resistance
against so mighty a Torrent as came roaring on; however, they gave several o^
their Parties notable Overthrows, fortifying Londonderry, Slego, and the ^^le
of Inniskilling, and such other Places and Difficulties of Access as they found
Opportunity; for by this time Tyrconnel had given Orders for s^opping the
Ports, and made many large and plausible Offers to bring them over to his
Party, but they prevailed on a very few.

The Prince and Princess being proclaimed King and Queen of England, France and
Ireland, on the 14th of February, 1688. upon the Humble Address of both Houses
of Parliament, great care was taken for the speedy succouring the oppressed
Protestants of Ireland; and that the Papists in Arms against them, might be
left without Excuse, a Proclamation was sent over, offering, among other
things, a Pardon and Indemnity for all that should in Obedience to it lay down
their Arms and retire to their respective places of Abode, and there peaceably
behave themselves as obedient Subjects ought to do, upon which Condition they
should in full Freedom enjoy their Estates according to Law, and that the Roman
Catholics upon such a Consideration should have all the Favor that the Law
allows for the private Exercise of their Religion; with a further Promise, That
a Parliament should be speedily called in that Kingdom: But upon refusing to
comply with the Royal Mandate, to be esteemed as Rebels and Traitors to the
Crown of England, etc. their Lands and Possessions to be Forfeited, and
disposed of by way of Distribution among those that should be Aiding and
Assisting in the Reducing the Kingdom to its Obedience.

This Royal Concession, though Tyrconnel labored what in him lay to hinder its
being dispersed, wrought some good Effects, notwithstanding that Earl, to
counter-ballance it, put forth a Paper which he termed his Declaration, not
only therein insinuating what great Advantage the Kingdom would reap by ^anding
out. But that their Fears might be dissipated, he promised speedy Aids and
Succors from France, and that they should not want for either Money or
Provision; and moreover, the better to encourage them, gave hopes of King
James's speedy landing there with a numerous Army. And the better to secure
himself, and keep up the Courage of his Party he sent out Detachments to secure
diverse Protestant Gentlemen in the Country, and make Garrisons of their Houses.
But the greatest part of them having timely notice, made their Escapes; by
which the Protestants grew stronger in the North; however their Goods and
Possessions were destroyed and harassed. The Priests being the greatest
Incendiaries to stir up those that were actually in Arms to Spoil and Rapine,
as being sure of a share, as likewise to Arm the madding Multitude; so that one
might see Droves of the latter, some half naked, others tattered, and all in
miserable Rags, armed with Pitchforks, Bills, Staves, and what other merciless
Weapons they could get on the sudden, running like so many Furies to spoil and
plunder, and in their greediness of Prey, not many times distinguishing Papists
from Protestants. And it was strongly reported, That there was a great Debate
in the Council, to which some Popish Bishops were admitted, about a General
Massacre, as the best Expedient to clear the Country of Heretics: But
Tyrconnel (let it be to his praise) had the Generosity to oppose and detest it,
and put a stop in some measure to the mischievous progress of the Rabble, yet
when some of the Chiefs who had got Protections from him, made their
Complaints: That they were notwithstanding plundered: He only shook his Head,
and told them, It was Necessity that made his Men to do it; and he could no
ways help or restrain it.

These violent proceedings made those that thought upon the Earl's Protection,
they might have some confidence in their continuance as to safety, begin to
make away for the Seacoast; and although the Masters of Ships were commanded
on pain of Death to transport none, yet many escaped to England and Scotland,
where they were well received, and Provision made for them by way of Public
Brief and Collection, etc.

About the latter end of March the Abdicated King landed in Ireland, with a
great Train of Officers, but very few Forces, and was received at Dublin with a
mixture of Joy and Sorrow, bringing with him as his Supervisor Monsieur
D'Avaux, with some French Generals. The Recorder of Dublin made a long Speech
to him upon his Arrival, extolling him for Courage, Conduct, and all the
Heroic Virtues imaginable, above the Skies; and a general Joy spread in the
faces of the Roman Catholics, thinking now the day was all their own, and not
doubting to carry every thing by force or submission; and more Soldiers were
Listed and Regimented under the French Officers that came over, and care taken
to lay up Stores. Money was every where extorted, and the plundered Cattle,
Corn and Hay brought in, and sold at inconsiderable Rates; insomuch that they
soon gathered an Army of between Forty and Fifty Thousand Men.

Whilst these things were doing at Land, the English Navy being out at Sea with
a strict Charge to hinder Correspondence between France and Ireland, the
Squadron under the Command of Admiral Herbert, had Notice by their Scout Ships,
that part of the French Fleet was abroad, and stood away to the Irish Coast:
Whereupon he made all the Sail he could after them, and the next Day found they
stood into Bantry Bay, a very spacious bearing in of the Sea, and though for
fear of the Shallows, and other Difficulties that might offer, it proved a work
of Difficulty to enter upon them, for they seemed no ways willing to come out
to an Engagement; notwithstanding they were much superior in number; yet the
Admiral drawing his Ships into a Line, and lying upon the stretch, battered
them extremely from Ten in the Morning, till Five in the Afternoon, at what
time the French Admiral tacked from us, and stood farther into the Bay. We
killed them a great many Men; and some of our Men declare^, they saw one of
their great Ships go to the bottom. On our side we lost Captain Aylmer of the
Portland, with a Lieutenant, and about Three hundred Seamen killed and wounded,
and could our Fireships have entered upon them, most of their Ships, which were
Forty four in number, to about Twenty eight of ours, might have been destroyed.

Our Fleet after this Engagement came back to Portsmouth, and there refitted,
whether the King of England went to take a view of them, and Dining aboard the
Admiral, created him Earl of Torrington, etc. and distributed about Six
thousand pound among the Seamen.

And now the French having violated the Peace, and undeniably begun the War in
invading Ireland, the King delayed not to denounce the War against them by a
Declaration to that purport, bearing Date the Seventh of May, 1689. and great
Preparations were made for passing over to Ireland, Forces were Levied in all
parts of England, and Money prepared for defraying the Charge of the
Expedition; which was the more facilitated, upon the Estates of Scotland
submitting their Crown to King William and Queen Mary, and taking of them upon
their being owned and invested King and Queen of that Kingdom, which they did
by their Commissioners, who waited upon Their Majesty's to that purpose, in the
Banqueting House at Whitehall. And the Viscount of Dundee, who had headed the
Rebel Highlanders, and others in that Kingdom, being killed in a fatal Battle
near St. Iohnstown, things began to go better, and the Success of the Scotch
Affairs gave way to a more speedy prosecuting those in Ireland, where the
Inniskilling-men being abroad, pierced the Enemies Quarters, and got great
Booties, defeating diverse Parties, and making themselves terrible to the Enemy.

Upon News brought that Maccarty was in those Parts with a strong Party,
plundering and ravaging the Country. Lieutenant Colonel Berry, with three
Companies of Foot, eight Troops of Horse, and three of Dragoons, marched
toward them; but upon their approach, found they were made stronger than they
were reported, by another Party that had joined them, and were much superior
to him in number; which obliged him before he found himself sufficiently strong
to attack them, to send to Colonel Woolsey at Inniskilling, for a
Re-inforcement; which he no sooner obtained, but he charged them with much
bravery, killing a considerable Number, taking some Prisoners, and putting the
rest to flight; but the Flyers in their way being greatly reinforced, rallied,
and came to second Encounter, which for a time continued bloody and doubtful,
they by reason of their advantageous Post, much galling our Horse with their
Cannon; but the Defiles, or dirty narrow Passages being resolutely passed by
our Foot and Dragoons, they made themselves Masters of the Cannon, which gave
our Horse the advantage to charge the Enemies Horse, who thereupon deserted the
Foot and fled, and the Foot after them, a great many being killed, and some
taken Prisoners, by which Defeat the Country was freed from great Encumbrances.
This part of the Enemies Army that had a long time lain heavy upon it, being by
this means, and in this Battle, fell of the Enemy by the Sword, and those that
were drowned in desperately throwing themselves into the Lough to escape the
Pursuers, about Three thousand.

There happened likewise diverse other Rencounters of lesser note, wherein the
Protestants for the greatest part gained the advantage.

Whilst these things were doing, the Irish Army, with King James at the Head of
it, marched toward Londonderry, promising themselves, the Terror of their
Arms would oblige it to a Surrender upon their first approach; but found they
were extremely mistaken; for although Colonel Lundy the Governor, and the two
Regiments sent from England, under the Colonels Cunningham and Richards, had
withdrawn and slighted it, as a place not tenable against an Army of Forty
thousand Men, with a Train of Artillery and diverse Mortars; Providence so
ordered, it became the Bulwark of the sinking Nation, and gave the Enemy their
first considerable check; for diverse Troops that were abroad, mostly composed
of undisciplined Soldiers, throwing themselves into it, they, together with
those that were found there were Regimented, even the multitude seizing the
Keys, and undertaking with great alacrity to defend it, having chose Mr. George
Walker, Minister of an adjacent Village, their Governor, and Major Baker, his
Co-adjutor, or Assitant-Governour during the Siege. And now those in Arms in
the Town consisted of 117 Companies, and every Company contained sixty Men,
being in all 7020 Common Soldiers, and 341 Officers. The next thing taken in
hand, was to view the Stores, and ordering their better Security from any
Embezling, as resolving to defend the place to the last extremity, having
already rejected the Offers the Enemy made them, in case they would readily
submit, which consisted of much promised Favor and Protection; but the hard
dealings others had met with, who had put themselves into their hands, made
them deaf to all Proposals, and their great Guns being mounted on the Wall,
they fired upon the Advance-Guard of the Enemy, who had been promised to be
received with open Arms, by Hamilton and others, who undertook to bring over
the besieged, which much consternated King James, then within the reach of
their Cannon, and obliged him to remove to a place of more safety.

However, seeing fair Words and Promises could not gain it, they resolved to
reduce it by force, beginning within a day or two after their appearance before
it, to break Ground, and run their Trenches, drawing up a Demi-culverine,
within a Furlong of the Town, with which they battered the Market-House, and
did some damage to other Houses; but the Cannon from the Town playing among
them, did considerable Execution; and to hinder their nearer approach, the
Besieged sallied, and beat them out of their Trenches, killing about Two
hundred Men, amongst whom was the French General Mamow, and others of Note,
with little loss on our side, and of Note, only Lieutenant Mac Phedris was
killed.

The Besiegers finding this way little availed them, drew four Demi-Culverine
into an Orchard adjoining to the Town, and kept continual Firing, which hurt
many People in their Houses, and made some Impressions in the Walls: Nor was
the damage left unrequited from the Cannon of the Town, which killed them a
great many Men, and some considerable Officers, and a sudden shot took off two
Friars in their Habits, as they were exhorting the Besieged to press on the
Siege.

And now to do their Work more effectually, they placed two Mortar-pieces, and
threw in diverse Bombs, which did some damage to the Houses and People,
whereupon the Besieged sallied, and killed several of the Enemy at
Penburn-Hill, losing only two of their own and eighteen wounded. The same day a
Shot from the Town broke and dismounted one of their Pieces on the Battery, and
killed the Gunner, whereupon they drew a Trench across Windmil-hill, from the
Bog to the River, and there raised another Battery, lining the Hedge with
Dragoons; but at the same time the Besieged sallied in a considerable number,
and dividing one part, made them Masters of the Trenches and advantageous
Ground, killing about two hundred; whilst the other Party beat the Dragoons
from the Hedges. Which reiterated Losses so enraged the Enemy, that having
Captain Cunningham, and Lieutenant Douglass upon some Sallies, they, after
Quarter given, put them to the Sword, which served to confirm the Besieged in
the belief of the Mercy they were to expect if they fell into their hands, and
made them more obstinate in a resolute Defense: and alluring the Governor out,
under pretense of Treaty, they fired a hundred Shot at him, yet none of them
had the power to hurt him, by reason upon their first presenting, he sheltred
him behind the ruins of an old House, and retired into the Town, cautious how
he trusted them any more.

The Besiegers by this time grown weary of continual Duty, and the danger they
were exposed to, drew off their main Body, and encamped on a Hill about two
miles from the Town, yet left it entirely besieged.

On the Fourth of June, a Squadron of Voluntier Horsemen, who promised upon Oath
to do great things, supported by a Detachment of Foot, made an Attack upon the
Windmil-work, resolving to force the Line, coming on with loud Shouts and
Huzza's; but were frustrated in their Enterprise, being beat off with
considerable loss, Four hundred of them were accounted to be killed; and to
secure their Retreat, the Foot carried Faggots at their Backs, and those that
had none, hoised the dead Bodies, and carried them away on their Backs to dead
the shot.

On the part of the Besieged, the loss was very inconsiderable, only Captain
Butler pressing too eagerly after the Enemy, was taken Prisoner, and a few
killed by a great shot coming over the River.

These sev^^al Defeats and Disappointments of taking a place they before had
thought so easy, that the French General upon the first view, swore he would
beat down the Walls with Pot-Guns, so enraged the Enemy, that they were
resolved to make all the effort imaginable, and the next night played Bombs,
some of them 273 pounds, which broke up the Streats, beat down several Houses,
and killed diverse Persons; which occasioned some consternation, and the more
when their Stores of Provision began to fail, and Famine to increase, so that
they needs must have been disheartened, had they not been encouraged by the
discovery of Thirty Sail of Ships in the Lough, which were sent to their
Succor from England, under the Command of Major General Kirk, with Provision,
Men, and Ammunition: But the River being chained up with a floating Boom
across it, and Batteries of the Enemy on the Bank, he could not only for
several days get up, but had much ado to have Communication by Letter; yet the
hope of Relief so near at hand, kept up the Spirits of the Besieged, and
encouraged them to a vigorous Defense, though many died daily for want.

Monsieur de Rosen the French Marshal, by this time arrived in the Enemies
Camp, and understanding the little progress they had made in carrying on the
Siege, fell a swearing, By the Belly of God, he would not only demolish the
Town, but bury the Besieged in their own Ruins. But upon the Attacks he made,
found no better Success than the rest: and the Lord Clancar^y, who they said
was destined by an old Prophecy to take the Town, making an Attack, and being
beat off with great loss, Lieutenant General Hamilton, who had falsified his
Trust to King William, and revolted to the Enemy, upon his being sent from
England to pacify Matters in the beginning, came to make large Offers, but was
rejected by the Besieged with Indignation; nor was Rosen's Promises and Threats
regarded. Whereupon he pitched upon a French Politic, imagining that would
inf^de^^ly do, viz. he caused all the miserable Protestants to be gathered out
of the Countries round about, and driven half naked and starved there to
perish, if the Besieged refused to succor them, whose Wants, though they
pierced their Hearts, having very slender Provision in the Town, they could not
relieve, and therefore kept the Gates shut against them, yet fired among the
Enemies Party that drove them, four or five of them fell dead with the Shot.
And now there being several Prisoners in the Town, who had several Relations of
Note and Command in the Enemies Camp, the Governor, and the rest, caused a
Gallows to be set up in the sight of the Enemy, threatening to hang the
Prisoners thereon, if those miserable People were not suffered to return to
their Habitations, yet leave given them to write to their Friends, to know what
they would do on their behalf. Rosen returned them no Answer; but Hamilton
returned them a slight one. However, this Stratagem prevailed, and the People
were permitted to return; which proved advantageous to the Garrison; for
amongst them five or six hundred poor Starvlings were shuffled out, and some
able Bodies taken in.

Another Stratagem they had to shoot Letters into the Town in the dead Shell of
a Bomb, viz. not filled with Powder, as imagining the Governor, and other
Superior Officers kept their Proposals from the Soldiers; but this enraged
them the more, and it was ma(...)th so much as to discourse of a Surrender.
About the Thirtieth of June, Major Baker died; yet the Defense continued as
vigorous as ever, and diverse Sallies were made, though the Garrison through
Famine, Diseases and Loss was lessened near one half, and the Famine increased
so fast, that Horseflesh was fold for Eighteen pence the pound, and but little
of that to be had: A Quarter of a Dog, that fead upon the dead Irish, at Five
shillings and six pence, his Head at half a crown, a Cat at four shillings and
six pence; Rats, Mice, Tallow, Greves, and all noisome things that could be
possibly eaten, proportionably; so that in the whole Town there was but nine
lean Horses left, and a pint of Meal, and a little Tallow to each Man, when
Providence so ordered, whilst they were at their Devotions, News came that
Ships were making their way up the River; which to their great Joy and Comfort
proved true: for Major General Kirk having notice that the Town could hold out
no longer, ordered the Mountjoy and Phoenix, and Mountjoy guarded by the
Dartmouth, to force their way at any hazard, which they did through the Showers
of the Enemies Shot, and found the Boom broke; one of them however struck upon
a shelve, yet the Stock of her Guns set her free again, and they came safe to
the Town, bringing Life to a dying People: which the Enemy perceiving, thought
it to no purpose of staying longer before it, least they should receive worse
disgrace, but in some confusion raised their Camp, firing Culmore, and diverse
other Places in their Retreat, breaking for haste some of their great Guns; and
had a Party of the Inniskilling-Men, and some of the Garrison upon their Rear,
who cut off, or took Prisoners the S^raglers, with some Booty, the former
having before defeated Lieutenant General Maccarty, they likewise threw about
twelve Care load of Arms into the River for want of Carriages to bear them off;
and lost before the Town in a Siege of one hundred and five Days, for so long
it lasted, between 18 and 19000 Men, and among them 100 of their best Officers.

And now pardon me, Reader, for insisting so long upon this particular, which I
could not slightly pass over, since (if we consider the Weakness of the Place,
few of the Men that defended trained up in War, and Scarcity it endured, and
the time it held out against a powerful Army, backed by almost a whole Kingdom)
it may very well compare with the most famous Siege that ever was mentioned in
History.

Major General Kirk soon after these Succors got in, came to Londonderry, and
was received with all the Demonstrations of Joy a People in so ruinous a
Condition, could bestow; and having viewed the Walls and Fortifications,
blessed himself to think that such slight Works could ever have been defended
so long against such an Army.

Things in Londonderry being settled as well as the shortness of time would
permit, it was agreed that Mr. Walker should go for England, and present his
Majesty with an Address in his own, and the Names of the principal Persons that
had been in the Town during the Siege; where he was very graciously received,
and his Majesty, as a Mark of his Favor, for the signal Services he had done
him, ordered him 5000 pound, and a Promise of his further Regard. Whilst this
Siege lasted, the Inniskilling-Men and others of the Protestant Party abroad
were not idle, but a Detachment of 600 Men were sent under the Cammand of
Colonel Stewart, got into the Isle of Inch; and hearing the Irish had fortified
themselves in Tully, he sent a commanded Party of sixty Musketeers, and beat
them out, when more Forces coming to him, he and other Commanders raised some
small Fortifications in the Island, and there succored a great many
Protestants who fled from the Enemy with their Cattle and Substance, and others
that had been stripped of all, and came naked; beating diverse Parties of the
Irish that attempted to force him from his strength; and the Duke of Berwick
being sent this way with 1500 Horse, attempted to force Ralfamulin, where a
small Party of our Men quartered; but having timely notice, getting to their
Arms, and Barrocading the Street, the Enemy, after a sharp Dispute, drew off
with the Loss of 240 Men; and on our part only Lieutenant Coningham, and a few
private Soldiers, and a Lieutenant wounded: However, very desirous to bring
these Parts into Subjection, nothing was omitted that Threats or Alurements
could effect; but neither of them prevailed against the steadfast Loyalty of the
Protestants; they too sadly remembered how often they had broke their words, and
how little they esteemed keeping it with those they termed Heretics. One fatal
Instance of which take for many:

It happened that the Lord Galmoy being abroad with a Party, took Captain Dixie
prisoner by surprise in his Father's House, which House he set on fire, and
with him brought away Cornet Charlton: but hearing one Brian Mac King^or Mac
Gurrie, a Captain of the Irish Army, had been taken by our Men, and was
Prisoner at Cran, he sent to the Governor of the Castle, to offer Captain Dixie
in Exchange, vowing upon his Honor, so soon as Gurrie came, Dixie should be
sent them. This was well accepted, and Guerrie was sent, but Galmoy thereupon
ordered the two Young Gentlemen to be tried by a Council of War, for receiving
a Commission from England; and being sentenced, had orders to prepare to die
the next day, but in the mean time great Endeavors were used, and Promises
made them of Life and Preferment, if they would turn Papists, and adhere to
King James. But they generously rejected the Offer, and preferred their
Religion before the saving their Lives; and although Mac Gurrie interceded
mainly for them, and reproached the Lord Galmoy with the Stain of his Honor
after his solemn Promise in Writing; yet he would hear nothing on their behalf,
but caused them to be hanged upon one Russel's Sign Post; whilst he made merry
there; and not content with their Lives, he ordered their Heads to be cut off,
and tossed to the Soldiers to play at Football with, which when they had
misused for a time, he caused to be set up on the Market-Cross at Belturbet.

This made, I say, the rest more cautious to trust their Mercy; whereupon the
French General Rosne, resolute to subdue them, came within the shot of their
Cannon to encourage the Soldiers that were gathering in those parts against
them, but a shot had spoiled his Undertaking, had it not fallen a little too
short, yet it beat up the Stones, which wounded him in the Leg, and his Horse
in the Body, and killed two Troopers, insomuch, that frighted with this
Disaster, he gave over the Attempt: But greater Actions than these attended the
Fate of Ireland; the English Army so long expected was embarked, and came on
with a fair Wind, being discovered some Leagues at Sea, by the longing People
who watched for it on the shore, and proclaimed its arrival by their loud
Shouts and Acclamations of Joy: and on the Thirteenth of August, 1689. Duke
Schombergh, who commanded the Forces, landed at Carickfurgus; and after a short
Enquiry into the state of the Kingdom, he sent two Regiments to Belfast; and
having refreshed himself, and that part of the Army that landed with him, he
directed his March to find out the Enemy, being every where received by the
Protestants with the greatest Expressions of joy imaginable: At the Terror of
whose approach the Castle and Town of Antrim was deserted, and our Men took
possession of it, leaving there a Garrison of fif^y Soldiers, under the Command
of Captain Ormsby; and many other Places and Passes were secured: But
Carickfurgus refusing upon Summons to Surrender, a part of the Army sat down
before it; and the next day the Cannon and Mortars were planted against it
whilst the Trenches were opened, and no sooner they heard the English speak to
them in a Dialect of War, from the mouths of their Cannon, but they beat a
Parley; but the main import of their Request being to send to King James to
have his leave to Surrender: it was rejected, and the Mortars and Cannon began
to play against the Town very furiously, they answering us with their Cannon in
like manner, especially anoying our Men with two Pieces advantageously planted
in the Lord Dungale's House; yet our Bombs did great Execution, beating down
and setting many Houses on fire. Several of our Ships that lay in a Line,
played likewise their Cannon on the other side, and no less indamaged the
Besieged; whereupon they again desired a Parley, but insisting to March out
with their Clothes and Baggage, the Duke would not agree to it, only allowing
them to be Prisoners of War; and again the Batteries were renewed; they again
hung out a white Flag to Parley, and upon submitting to a Surrender, were
allowed to be conducted to the next Irish Garrison; whereupon Sir Henry
Ingoldsby marched in with his Regiment, and took posse^sion of the Place.

By this time fifty Sail of Ships came up the Lough, on board which were a
Regiment of Horse, and four of Foot, who joining the Army, the General marched
toward Belfast, and were two miles beyond Lisnoygarney on the 2d of September,
which made the Enemy retreat with much Precipitation; yet they took so much
time as to set diverse Places on fire; whereat the General was so incensed, that
he sent to tell the Commanders of those Parties, That if they desisted not from
using such French Tricks, they must expect no Quarter, if they fell into his
hands; which made them upon quitting Dundalk leave it entire.

The Duke finding the Plains of Dundalk commodious to Encamp on, and the Winter
Season approaching, caused the Tents to be pitched, whilst the Enemy's Army
between 40 and 50000 fortified and entrenched about Ardee.

Slego being still in the hands of the English, a Party of the Enemy consisting
of about 5000 Horse and Foot, advanced that way in hopes by Force or Surprise
to make themselves Masters of it: But Colonel Lloyd, who Commanded the
Inniskilling-Men, having notice of their Design, drew out about a 1000 Horse,
Dragoons, and Foot, and Lining the Hedges of the Lane^ of Boil, where they
were to pass, with his Foot, he drew up his Horse on a rising ground, and
charged the Enemy so suddenly, that after a smart Engagement he put them to
Flight in great Confusion; and taking a nearer way with his Horse and Dragoons,
got into Boil before the Enemy, and charged them again in the Front, whilst
the Food did the like in the Rear; so that 700 were cut off, and about 400
taken Prisoners, with O Kelly their Commander, and forty other Officers of
note; and by this Rout 8000 Head of Cattle were recovered, which the Enemy in
their Ravaging the Country had got together, also a great many Arms, Ammunition
and Provision; so that those Parts continued in quiet a long time after: so
that the Enemy perceiving Force in vain, undertook to ruin our Affairs by
treacherous Policy, bu^ they failed in that, as in all the rest. The Project
was thus: It happened that 4 Regiments of French Protestants were raised in
Englan^ for the Service, and amongst them diverse were listed that came over
just then by the way o^ Holland, which being done in haste, the Colonels had no
time strictly to examine them* so that amongst these there was one Du Plessey*
who had been formerly a Captain in France* and fled thence for a Murder, but
now served as a private Soldier; this Man sent ^^ Monsieur D'Avaux, to let him
know, That if he would get him his Pardon in France, an^ let him have the
Command of such as (...) brought over, he would inveagle the Papists that had
been unwittingly Regimented to the Irish Camp. Which upon his Trial before a
Council of War appearing by his intercepte^ Letter, and Confession, he, with
four others hi^ Accomplices, were found Guilty, and executed; and upon a strict
Scrutiny a great many Papists were found in those Regiments, and sent Prisoners
to England. Providence by thi^ timely Discovery frustrating the Design they
might have to Revolt, and endeavor the turning the Scale of Victory, if it
came to a Battle.

The Plains of Dundalk, by reason of the Fogs and Wetness of the place,
incommoding ^he Camp with Sickness and Inconveniency, about the middle of
November it broke up, and marched away to the Newry Pass; and beat^ng out the
Enemy, possessed themselves of ^he Town, and upon their Attempting to recover
it, were beaten with considerable loss. Brigadier Stewart falling upon them
with 250 Horse and Foot so resolutely, that they fell unto Confusion, thirty
being killed on the place, and about eighteen taken Prisoners, and among the
number five Officers. And Colonel Woolsey took Belturbet upon the first Summons.

Nor did only the Men, but the Women ^affle the Courage of the Irish: for a
strong Party of them attempting to make themselves Masters of the Lady
Newcomens, House, that Heroic fortified it, and garrisoned with her Tenants,
beating off the Enemy, and killing ^everal in the Attacks they made, though she
^ad no great Guns, and but a few small shot; ^hereupon they found themselves
obliged to ^ring some Cannon and a Mortar before it; which caused her to
Surrender, in considera^ion, That dismissing the Garrison to march ^ith their
Baggage to Lisnigarvy, she and her ^omesticks might continue there in quiet.
^ut this was not virtually observed; for get^ing into her House, they took away
many ^^ings of value.

Whilst these things happened at Land, some^hing remarkab1e, and not amiss to
be recited, was done on the Water, in the Bay o^ Dublin, in spite of all the
Power and For^^ of the Irish, that then possessed that Gre^^ City.

Sir Clously Shovel being on that Coast, afte^ cruising thwart the Bay, he
stood into it, an^ could then perceive a Ship a Mile within the Bar, whereupon
resolving to fetch her out if possible, he came to an Anchor, and we^^ on Board
the Monmouth Yatch, and at a litt^^ more than half Flood, the Wind being
No^therly, he with that Yatcht, two Men of Wa^ Hoys, a Catch, and the Pinnace,
got over the Bar; whereupon the Ship being aware of h^^ coming, weighed
Anchor, and moved up (...) Salmon-Pool, about a Mile nearer to Dubl^^ and there
run a-ground, within shot of (...) French Man of War of twelve Guns, and t^^ or
three English Ships that lay a-ground fill^^ with Soldiers, who continually
kept firing (...) our Vessels; however, they followed the A^tack, and after
some dispute, Sir Clously S^^vel made a sign for the Fireship to enter a^^ bear
up; which when the Enemy perceive^ they left their Ships, and got away in the
Boats; whereupon our Men went on Boar^ her, and having somewhat lightened her
brought her off, in turning out the Wind, ^^ring out of the Sea, one of Sir
Clously's Hoys r^^ a-ground, and could not be got off before t^^ Water fell
away from her, so that the (...) were forced to lie by her, and get out her
^^chors, ready to heave off, when the Ty^^^ should return; and the Hoy being
upon (...) ^round, thousands of People came upon the ^trand, among which was
King James with ^is Guards, as Spectators of what might hap^en, and two
Protestants that had escaped from Dublin, got to our armed Boats, and with much
supplication entreated to be taken ^n. However, a French Trooper to show his
Bravado, came riding up within half Musket ^hot, and reviling our Men as well
as he could ^abble English by the Epithets of Rebels, etc. ^e had so much
Courage as to discharge his Pistol at that distance; but a shot from the Boat
that lay next the Shore killed his Horse, whereupon Monsieur pulling off his
Boots, left them to our Men, betaking him to his heels as ^ast as he could run,
for fear an unwelcome Messenger should overtake him, and make him ^ay dear for
his Vainglory.

The Ship thus taken was the Pelican, the ^iggest of the two Scotch Frigots
taken by the ^rench the precedent Summer, carrying a^out twenty Guns. Three or
four of those that were aboard her, were killed by the Fi^ing of our Men, and
found dead upon the Deck, besides those that were carried off, as ^ell killed
as wounded: and our Vessels ha^ing done what they came for, returned in ^riumph
with their Prize, in the sight of a ^umerous People, who thought it for the
most ^art safest to keep at a distance.

This Ship lay here to carry off some of the ^rotestants Goods that had been
seized in Dublin; but the Freighters by this means were ^isappointed of their
expectations.

Colonel Woolsey being still abroad with a Party to observe the Enemies
Motions, having with him a Party of 700 Men, out of the Regiment of Kirk, Earl,
Grover, and the Inniskilling Troops, he ordered half o^ them to make an
Incursion toward Finag^ under the Command of Lieutenant-Colone^ Creichtoune,
he with the rest marched to Kilislia, a strong Castle between Belturbet and
Cavan, where he by secret marching came by break of day, and brought his Men
within Musket shot of the Fortress, under the shelte^ of the Hedges and
Ditches, and immediately fixed his Miners to the Wall, where they soo^ finished
a Mine, and were ready to spring i^ by Ten the next Morning; whereupon the
Colonel sent to Summon the Garrison, upon which they sent out an Officer to
treat, and about two hours after the Conditions were agreed on.

Which were, That the Garrison should march out with their Arms and Baggage*
and accordingly the Castle Gate was delivere^ about Noon, and the Garrison
commanded b^ one Captain Darchy, marched out within a^ hour after, consisting
of 160 Men detache^ out of several Regiments; and according t^ Articles agreed
on, were guarded to Cavan* so that this strong place was reduced with the loss
of three Men on our side, and four or fiv^ wounded; it being of great
Importance t^ their Majesty's Affairs; by reason it opene^ a free passage into
Connaught, and all that part of Leinster that lies on the Shannon; and afte^
having put in a Garrison of One hundred Men, he returned to Belturbet, and was
there reinforced by a Battalion of Danes, to enter upon further Action, as he
found it advantageous to the Service. Insomuch, the Irish Parties were so
frequently met withal, that they came not abroad so often as they were wont; by
which means our Men had the better leisure to get in Hay and Corn to the
Magazines, which they frequently adventured for in the Enemies Quarters, and
for the most part succeeded so well, that they mainly increased the Stores; so
that with that, and what came from England, the Camp, and Out-Quarters were
plentifully supplied; and even the Papists chose rather to bring in their
Provisions to our Camp than the Enemies, so Self-interest, by reason of the
disproportion in the Money, as taking valuable Coin in ours, and only Copper
and mixed Metal at a vast disproportion; in the other promised to be changed
hereafter into better Coin, though they knew not when, nor cared to rely upon
such uncertainties.

About this time the damp Fogs arising in the Country a great many Officers and
Soldiers died in either Camp; but the destruction light mostly on the French,
in comparison of their number, who coming out of a warm dry Country, could not
so well endure the incommoding Vapors and cold Damps, which the frequent Rains
that fall in Ireland, especially when the Season is any thing considerably
advanced toward the Winter Quarter

And now that the Blessing of God might be upon Their Majesty's Arms, and
Judgments averted, the General caused his Proclamation to be published
throughout the Camp, and in other places, strictly prohibiting Swearing,
Cursing, and Profaneness in the Officers and Soldiers on pain of Displeasure,
and such Punishments as might be inflicted, which for a time stopped those
Volleys of Oaths and Curses, that were wont to be heard on every trivial
occasion.

The General went out with a Party to view the Enemies Posts, and Situation of
the Country, and upon his return to Lisburn, where now his Headquarters were,
he received the welcome News, That Colonel Woosley marching from Belturbet with
Seven hundred Foot, and Three hundred Horse, notwithstanding his being
discovered by the Sentinels, who gave the Alarm, and the badness of the
Weather, he got thither half an hour after break of day, and there, contrary to
his expectation, found the Duke of Berwick arrived with Twenty five hundred
Men, which with the Garrison made up about Four thousand, and these were drawn
up in good order near the Fort; yet the Colonel took Courage, resolving to
Charge them, ordering his Men as the ground gave opportunity, and soon they
joined in a fierce Encounter, the Inniskilling-Men standing to it manfully; so
that notwithstanding the great odds, in two hours time they beat the Enemy out
of the Field with considerable slaughter; in which Action the Duke of Berwick
had his Horse shot under him, and Colonel O Rely, Governor of Cavan was
killed, as also two Lieutenant Colonels, and diverse other Officers of Note.

The Enemy beaten out of the Field, our Men too eager of Plunder, entered the
Town before they had gained an entire Victory; which the Irish perceiving,
rallied, and those in the Fort sallied upon them; so that in the scattered
disorder they were in, they had been mostly cut off, had not the Colonel with a
Reserve of Two hundred and fifty Foot, and Eighty Horse hasted to their rescue,
and given them leave to get to their Arms, and although he beat the Salliers
into the Fort, and made the others retire; yet the Town being a Magazine, and
full of Plunder, he could not get his Men out, till he was forced to fire it
about their Ears, whereby great Stores, of Provisions were consumed; for most
of the Houses were filled with Bread, Meal, Oats, and the like, being a Six
Months Provision for the Garrison: and by this Defeat and the Ruin of the
Town, the Duke of Berwick was disappointed of his Design, which by his Orders,
was to Post there with Ten Thousand Men, to be composed of a Detachment of all
the Regiments, and so to keep the Country in awe, and make Incursions as he
perceived it advantageous.

In this Action, on our side were only Twenty Men killed, of which number were
Captain Armstrong, Major Trahern, Captain Mayo, and Captain La Maugere; but the
Enemy lost above Three hundred, and Two hundred taken Prisoners; many that fled
threw away their Arms and Baggage for haste.

Upon this Success, Sir John Lanier being at the Newry with a strong Party,
advanced to Dundalk, and from thence to Bedlow Castle, where was a Company of
Foot, consisting of between Thirty and Forty Men; but the Dragoons soon stormed
it, killed diverse of them, and set the Castle on Fire, and upon their return
attacked Dundalk, wherein the Enemy had a Garrison; but they kept close and
would not venture to sally, and our Men not being strong enough for a formal
Siege, plundered the Houses thereabout, and marched away with a considerable
Booty.

About this time the Prince of Wirtemberg landed with the Danish Forces under
his Command for their Majesty's Service, and in a short time joined the Army.

Col. Callimot attempting to surprise the strong Fort of Charlemont, but being
too soon discovered, he was obliged to Retreat; which he did with the loss but
of one Man.

Spring coming on, Lewis the Fourteenth was not altogether unmindful of his
Promise, but sent Five thousand French, with some Clothes and Ammunition, in
lieu of which Succors, as many Irish were sent to France, under the leading of
Lieutenant General Maccarty, who having been taken Prisoner by the
Inniskilling-Men upon the great Overthrow, had by this time made his escape,
for which Colonel Hamilton, Governor of Inniskilling, where he had been
detained Prisoner, was questioned; but upon Trial, producing a Letter from his
Superior Officer, for what he had done, the matter passed over.

Colonel Woosley about this time had the Castle of Killesandra delivered to him
upon Summons, the Garrison being terrified into a compliance, upon Notice he
was about to spring a Mine under it, the Garrison consisting of 160 Men, were
conducted to Cavan* and many other Castles and advantageous Places were
frighted at the approach of our Forces, or compelled to Surrender; and great
Plenty abounded in the English Camp, by reason those that brought it received
Silver Money: when on the other side King James had caused Brass Money to be
coined, and an Order to pass it at certain Rates, though it was not a Twentieth
part of the value; yet prohibited it in Payments in his Custom-house and
Exchequer: and having called a pretended Irish Parliament, they anulled the Act
of Settlement, and all other Acts favorable to the Protestants, relating to
Matters Civil or Ecclesiastical; so that Protestant Bishops and Ministers were
out, and Popish Bishops and Priests advanced to their Benefices, and great
Oppressions used on all hands: but whilst this was doing, Charlemont, a strong
Fortress of the Enemies, that had been all the Winter blocked up, finding no
Succors of Provision, though some of our Men got in over the Morass, which
hastened the consumption of their Provision, beat a Parley, and after some
debate about Articles they were agreed upon, they being in their Orders as
follows:

That all the Garrison, viz. the Governor, Officers, Soldiers, Gunners, and
all other Inhabitants, the Deserters who run from our Camp, since the first of
September precedent, only excepted; and all other persons in the said Garrison,
shall have their Lives secured, and march out with their Arms, Bag and Baggage,
Drums beating, Colors flying, Match lighted, and Bullet in Mouth, each Officer
and Soldier Twelve Charges of Powder, with Match and Ball proportionable, and
their Horses without any molestation in their Persons and Goods now in their
possession, not belonging to the Stores upon any pretense whatsoever, that the
said Garrison may march the nearest way to Dundalk, and not be compelled to
march above 8 or 9 miles a day.

That all sick and wounded Officers, and all other persons that are not able to
march at present, may remain within the said Garrison, till they are able to
march, and then to have a Pass to go to the next Irish Garrison.

That none of the Army under his Grace the Duke of Schomberg's Command, shall
enter the said Fort, except such as are appointed by him to take possession,
till the Garrison be marched clear out of the Gates.

That there shall be a sufficient Convoy appointed for the said Garrison to
conduct it to the place beforementioned.

That they shall deliver fully and wholly without any Embezelment or
Diminution, all the Stores belonging to the said Fort; and that an Officer
shall be immediately admitted to take an Account of them.

That the Fort shall be put into the possession of such Forces as his Grace
shall think fit at Eight of the Clock on Wednesday the Fourteenth of May, 1690.
and the Garrison shall march out an hour before the outward Gate shall be
delivered to such Forces as the General shall appoint in case a supply of one
Months Provision for 800 men be not brought into the Garrison for Relief
between the signing of these Articles, and the time the place is articled to be
delivered up.

That the abovementioned Articles shall be inviolably performed on both sides,
without any Equivocation, Mental Reservation, or Fraud whatsoever, according to
the true Intent and Meaning thereof.

Lastly, That all Acts of Hostility shall cease between the said Garrison and
Army, so soon as Notice can be given on both sides.

Thus after a long holding out, this strong Place was forced into a compliance,
notwithstanding the Enemy had put such confidence in it, that many of those
abroad proposed it as a last Refuge, if things came to a greater Extremity, its
Situation and Strength giving them Encouragement to hope it was Impregnable;
and indeed, it had baffled our Men in some Attempts they made on it and held
out so long, contrary to expectation; however at last; we find that was agreed
to be Surrendered, and accordingly it was Surrendered, and the Governor Teague O
Regan, and the Garrison, who had near consumed all their Provision, marched out
in number 800; they left 17 Pieces of brass Cannon, 2 Mortars, and a
considerable quantity of Ammunition. And this Place by Nature and Art being
exceeding strong, greatly availed to the keeping all that part of the Country
in awe. And what more exceedingly heartned the Soldiers, was the News that the
King of England had left Whitehall on the fourth of June, and was coming for
Ireland with a considerable Army, great Sums of Money, Stores of Ammunition,
and all things necessary for the vigorous carrying on and expediting the War.
Nor were they deceived in the Report; for on the fourteenth of June he landed
at Carickfergus, and went from thence to Belfast, where he was waited on by
Duke Schomberg, and many of the great Officers, and with him came not only some
of the Irish Nobility, but a great many of that Country, who had fled for
England to avoid the Danger that threatened from the Papists; and great was the
Joy of the Protestants for his Arrival, and as much on the other hand the
Terror and Consternation of the Papists.

His Majesty, soon after his Landing, ordered 200000 1. to be brought on shore,
and fifteen Tun of Halfpence and Farthings of the new Tin coin, and gave
notice to all the Agents of Regiments to bring in their Accounts within three
days, that they might receive the Moneys due to the Soldiers; and care
thereupon was taken to clear their Quarters, and discharge the Country.

The King thus landed, to the great Joy of all the Protestants, every one
labored who should be foremost in showing their humble Gratitude for his
Exposing his Royal Person to so many Dangers for their Safety, whereupon the
Gentlemen of the County of Down, etc. presented this Address.

To the King's most Excellent Majesty.
Great Sir,
WE the Sheriffs and Justices ^f the Peace, and Gentlemen of the County of Down
and Antrim, do most heartily Congratulate your Majesty's safe Arrival into this
Kingdom, and do humbly offer your Majesty our unfeigned Thanks for the great
Pains and Hazard your Majesty does undergo in restoring us to our Religion,
Liberties and Properties, and do not doubt but as God has made your Majesty
miraculously Instrumental in re-establishing those Blessings in the Kingdom of
England, so he will in this distressed Country; which that he may do, and grant
your Majesty a long and prosperous Reign over us, is the hearty wish and prayer
of

Your Majesty's Faithful and most Obedient Subjects and Servants, etc.


On this Occasion likewise the Clergy of the Churches in the Province of Ulster
presented their Address, as did the Presbyterians, and those of their
Persuasion in the North of the Kingdom.

The like from the Mayor, Aldermen, etc. of Londonderry; and another from the
Sovereign Burgesses and Inhabitants of Belfast, which created a high
Satisfaction and more general Rejoicing. And here it was that Mr. Walker, that
so bravely defended Londonderry accompanied with diverse of the Clergy, waited
upon his Majesty, and Congratulated his happy Arrival in the Kingdom. And
Parties were sent out to observe the Motions of the Enemy.

The King, intent upon the great Affair he came about, stayed not for many
Ceremonies and Complements; but being well refreshed, went to Hilsbourgh, and
from thence to Newry, where a great part of the Army that had been under the
General lay, of which he took a view, and ordered all things to the best
Advantage for carrying on the War, nor was the Measures taken slow in
Executing. And now whilst this is doing, let us turn a little toward Dublin,
and see how Affairs stand in the Metropolis of the Kingdom.

It was not to be doubted, but upon the King's landing with an Additional Army,
the Papists would have been more concerned than they were, but I know not upon
what false Topic they grounded their Hopes, their Concern was not so great, as
might have been expected from so eminent a Danger; whether it was to abate the
Courage of the Protestants, and startle them into a Mistake of some private
Design they had against the King; or that they had some old Prophesies, which
they too much relied upon for their Success; or that they trusted to the number
of their Army, remains doubtful; but however they kept up their Courage beyond
expectation. The Protestants in Dublin guessed it proceeded from the false News
that 100000 men were ready to rise in England, and recall King James, or
declare for a Commonwealth, and that the French Fleet being very powerful at
Sea, would not fail to intercept the King of England's Return, and so they
fancied they had him as it were in a Trap. And indeed in this immergency, the
Affronts the Protestants every where received, without any hope of Redress,
made them not know what to think of their Condition; nor was it long e're the
Chief of them were imprisoned; and the rest were told, They would be glad e're
long to go to Mass in a short time. And they were put into frequent frights of
having their Houses fired about their Ears, or at the least to be plundered of
all they had. And it seems it was debated, That if it came to a Battle, and the
Irish were worsted, the City should be set on fire, if not the Protestants
massacred. But it is said King James opposed it; and on the 16th of July
marched out of Dublin, to join with about 5000 Foot sent from France, and one
Regiment of them being Dutch, and mostly Protestants, great care was taken to
keep them from startling, and the whole Irish Army was composed of about 40000
men, besides 15000 that remained in Garrisons, and 6000 of the Militia, under
the Command of Colonel Luttrel and Mac Gillicuddy, who was ordered as his
Assistant in the Government of the City. And hereupon a hasty Order came out,
that all who walked the Streets without Bayonets or Swords, should be seized.
And thereupon a great many Protestants, who could not get such Weapons, were
taken up, and many of them Imprisoned. And another Order, That upon pain of
Death, not above five Protestants, besides the Family, should meet together: So
that the Churches, which had till this time been kept open, were shut up, and
Dr. King Dean of St. Patrick's imprisoned: Yet such was the Zeal of the
Protestants in these dangerous times, that they gathered considerable
Contributions for the Maintenance of the dispos sest Clergy, and for such as
were Prisoners, till they were forced to desist; all the Goals and many of the
Churches, being crowded with Prisoners, not only Citizens, but such as had been
brought from Galloway, Kilmainham, and other places; many of them were stifled
by crowding and wanting of Air, and others almost famished for want of
Sustenance. It would be too tedious to enumerate all the particular Sufferings
of the Protestants, their frequent Allarms, Fears and many other Disturbances.
Therefore let it suffice, that though sorrow lasted for a night, Joy came in
the morning, as by the Sequel will be Evident.

The two Armies being now in the Field, the Irish however declined fighting all
they could; and it was given out, That King James designed to lead them about
the Banks of the River Boyne to weary out the English, as thinking they could
not pass that Stream, if defended on the other side; and after he had so done,
to cross the Country and go for Limerick. However, least the English should
push on, and give him Battle, he resolved to provide for the worst, and
therefore ordered Sir Patrick Trant, the first Commissioner of his Revenue, to
have shipping ready at Waterford to carry him off, if things came to Extremity;
for at last he found, unless he abandoned Dublin, which was proposed to be
defended, he could not avoid fighting above ten days; for the King of England,
impatient of delay, possessed himself of almost all the Passes and Posts that
were advantageous to bring the Enemy to a Battle; and many Skirmishes happened
between Parties abroad, wherein our men gained the advantage.

The Enemy by this time being Encamped near Dundalk, and strongly guarding a
Pass, called Four-mile-Bridge, which was very difficult to force, it was
resolved that our Army should march to Market-hill, and therefore to fall into
the great Road that leads from Armagh to Dundalk; whereupon Major Scravenmore
was sent out with a Detachment of 300 Horse and 20 Dragoons, to view the Road
and Passes, and find a convenient place to En^^mp in, and discover, if
possible, the posture of the Enemy; which was so well performed, that a small
Party of theirs, seeing this Detachment betimes in the Morning marching toward
Market-hill, supposed it to be the Vauntguard of the whole Army, and therefore
gave the Alarm to their Camp that our Army was almost upon them, which, without
sending to know the certainty, put them into such a fear, that they fired their
Camp, and marched away; which being certified to the King, it appeared so
strange, that it could not presently gain credit: But being in a short time
confirmed from all hands, the order of the March was changed, and a Dispatch
sent to the Forces at Armagh and Tenargee, that they should immediately march
by the great Road toward Dundalk. But a Detachment of 200 Foot and 50 Dragoons
going from the Newry toward Dundalk, were encompassed by an Ambush of 500 of
the Enemies Horse; and though our Men fought desperately, yet above 20 of them
were killed and wounded, and the Enemy lost as many, with the Officer that
commanded them, whose Horses our Men in their Retreat brought away with them.

On the 31th of June the King marched early in the Morning from his Camp at
Ardee toward Drogheda, and found the Irish Army Encamped along the Boyne above
the Town; but the Foot not coming up before it was late, and with them the
Artillery; nothing could be done that Night, but visiting the Posture of the
Enemy, and the Fords of the River; which appeared very difficult to pass.
However, the King Encamped within shot of the Enemies Cannon, which had like to
have proved very fatal to these Kingdoms, by sending Death so near a precious
Life that is so dear to them; for as his Majesty was taking a view of their
Posture, a six pound shot brushed his shoulder, and razed the skin, making a
large though not a deep Wound; yet he nothing daunted thereat, only caused it
to be dressed, and mounting again, kept on Horseback for several hours after;
and toward the dusk of the Evening, he commanded Count Schomberg, with the
right Wing of the Horse, two Regiments of Dragoons, and Trelawney's Brigade, to
take five Fieldpieces, and go early in the Morning to try the Fords some Miles
above the Enemies Camp, and if he found an Opportunity to pass over and Attack
them in the Flank, or oblige them to Decamp. And almost beyond expectation, he
passed with good Success, beating off 8 Squadrons that stood ready to oppose
him; and having gained firm ground on the other side the River, drew up his Men
in Battalia, sending to acquaint the King what he had done, and to receive his
further Orders: But the King no sooner received the News, and perceived the
Enemy were drawing up to Charge the right Wing, but he caused an Attack to be
made in three places; the first before a small Village, at a very good Ford; at
the Second the Foot waded the middle; and at the Third the Horse were forced to
swim. The Dutch Foot-Guards that first passed over, sustained the shock of the
Enemies shot, whilst they were in the Water, not firing till they came up
close, and then pouring in their Bullets. Those that were in the Village, and
behind the Ditches gave way; but five of the Enemies Battalions came up to
charge them, before the Third Battalion of that Regiment had passed the River,
yet ours maintained their ground, and made them retreat in disorder, leaving
one of their Colors, and many dead men upon the place; but our men pressing
eagerly on, and advancing beyond the Village, were twice vigorously attacked by
the Enemies Horse, but received no great Damage; whereupon the Danish Forces
advanced to the left and the Brigadiers Melionere and Hanmore came on the
Right, one being attacked by the Dragoons, and the other by the Horse, but
neither did any great matter, by reason they had no Pikes. And now the
thundering of the Guns, clashing of Swords, and the Cries and Shouts made a
confused noise; so that the Irish trembled at the Din of War.

Duke Schomberg having passed the River with a few Forces, at what time about
thirty Officers, and others of the Enemies Lifeguard, had desperately charged
the King's Battalion, and were all killed except Five, and those attempting to
escape through the Village, unhappily met with the Duke, who in the Firings
that were made, received a shot in the Neck, doubtful whether from the Enemy,
or accidentally from his own men, whereupon he fell from his Horse, and died
without speaking in Arms of a French Captain, who alighted to relieve him, and
as he had been trained up in War almost from his Youth, so now he ended his
days in the Bed of Honor. He received in this Action likewise two Cuts over
the Forehead, but not very considerable. And the famous Mr. Walker, who held
out the Siege of Londonderry, passing the River, received a shot in his Belly,
of which he died soon after, much lamented of all that knew his Virtue and
Courage.

The King all this while discharging the part of a great General and a valiant
Soldier, was every where at hand to give Orders, and succor those that stood
in need, marching with Seventeen Battalions of Foot, and the Horse he had about
him, to enforce those Troops that had engaged the Enemy, though they had not
much advanced toward the Right Wing; which he did with Nine Squadrons of
Horse, and Twelve Battalions of Foot, and so marched them against the Enemy;
who upon their approach fled, without staying to be charged, retiring in much
disorder; but our Horse pressed on to overtake them in such haste, that the
Foot could not keep pace with them; they took with them likewise five small
Fieldpieces; and our Dragoons supported by the Horse, charged the Rear of the
flying Enemy, and killed a great many of them; so that for the more speed they
threw away their Arms, and what else was cumbersome; yet finding themselves
hard pressed by so small a part of our Army, some of the French faced about,
and made as if they would stand the Charge; but the King appearing on the Hills
with his Troops, they fled faster than before, many of them scattering and
making their escapes through the Bogs and narrow Passes, our Foot pursued them
but to Duleek, yet our Horse had the chase of them four Miles further, till
Night came on, and then the King sent them Orders to return to the Foot, and
sent for Tents and Baggage from his Camp at Drogheda, that the weary Soldiers
might repose themselves that Night.

The greatest part of the Enemies Baggage fell into the hands of our Army, as
their Chariots, Tents, Arms, Cannon, Ammunition, Provision, and some Money; and
what was more remarkable, a great many Arms were found laid down in Rank and
File, those that owned them being run away, without so much as staying to
Recover them. About Three thousand were slain, and diverse Prisoners of Note
taken, amongst whom was Lieutenant General Hamilton, who deserted the King, the
Trust he reposed in him; yet he was used very kindly, notwithstanding his
former ingratitude: And upon this Defeat the strong Town of Drogheda
surrendered, as did many other Places thereabout.

The late King James, who had stood at a distance to view the Fight, as soon as
he perceived his Army in Rout, fled with all speed toward Dublin, with a very
few Attendants, where he immediately called a Council, and acquainted the
Magistrates of the City with the misfortune that had befallen him, declaring
never to trust himself more at the Head of an Irish Army, who would not stand a
single Charge, and then told those about him, they must shift for themselves as
he intended to do; but strictly commanded the Papists not to fire the City,
saying, Though he left it, he did not quit his Claim to it.

The French Horse under Monsieur Lauzun, having stood the hottest of the Fight
against ours, were extremely broken and shattered; of between Five and Six
thousand, there not remaining above Three thousand five hundred. King James
having slept very ill upon his Loss, was the next Morning alarmed with the News
that King William was on his way to Dublin; which put him into such a fear,
that accompanied with the Duke of Berwick, the Marquess of P^wis, and some
others, scarce giving himself time for Refreshment, he left the City, and
hasted to Waterford, where a Ship lay ready to receive him, and neither slept
nor eat till he got out to Sea, and stood away for France: where it ^eems, he
received no extraordinary welcome when the great Loss and Expense of Treasures
was known.

The Protestants that were Prisoners in Dub^in, having News of what had
happened, got (...) liberty, and possessing themselves of the Militia Arms,
secured the City, and the Bishop of Limerick and Mead being there, got
together the Gentry and chief Citizens, and formed a Committee to regulate and
settle the Affairs, which in the hurry and confusion were put much out of frame
and order, and pursuant thereto, they garrisoned the Castle, and secured the
Stores for the King's use, sending to acquaint the King with what had happened,
and to entreat him to hasten thither, and quiet the Tumult and Disorder some
unruly People had raised. The King upon this Notice immediately sent thither a
Troop of Dragoons, and the next day the Duke of Ormond and Monsieur Overkirk
were sent with Nine Troops of Horse, and joyfully received. Whereupon the
Papists, especially such as had been over-active in oppressing the Protestants,
got away with such things as they could carry either by Land or Water, as
fearing to be called to account for their Misdoings: so that they who had a
little before tyrannized over the Protestants, found the Scene changed, and the
Stream turned against them; some indeed the Rabble had seized, and prevented
from Flight; but such was the Clemency of the King upon his coming to that
City, most of them were not only set at liberty, but that the Kingdom might be
quieted, he published his Declaration in these words:

William R.
AS it has pleased Almighty GOD to bless Our Arms in this Kingdom with a late
Victory over Our Enemies at the Boyne, and with the Possession of Our Capital
City of Dublin, and with a General Dispersion of all that did oppose Us, We are
now in so happy a prospect of our Affairs, and of extinguishing the Rebellion
of the Kingdom, that We hold it reasonable to think of Mercy, and to have
Compassion upon those whom We judge to have been seduced: wherefore we do
hereby declare, We shall take into Our Royal Protection all Laborers, Common
Soldiers, Country Farmers, Plough-men, and Cottiers whatsoever: As also
Citizens, Townsmen, Tradesmen, and Artificers, who either remain at home, or
having fled from their Dwellings, shall by ^he first Day of August next repair
to their usual Places of Abode, surrendering what Arms they have, to such
Justices of ^he Peace as are, or shall be appointed by ^s to Receive them, and
Register such the said Appearance of such of the said Persons ^s shall come and
render themselves to Our Authority: For Our Royal Intention is, and We do
hereby declare, That We will not only ^ardon all those poor seduced People, as
to their Lives and Liberties, as shall come in by the time aforesaid, from all
Violences they have done or committed by the Command of their Leaders during
the War; but We do also promise to secure them in their Goods, their Stocks of
Cattle, and all their Chattels personal whatsoever, Willing and Requiring them
to come in; and where they were Tenants, there to preserve the Harvest of Grass
and Corn for the Winter supply. But forasmuch as many of them had a Legal Right
to the Tenancy of several Lands, some holden from Protestants, and some held
from Popish Proprietors, who have been concerned in the Rebellion against Us,
Our Will and Pleasure is, That all those Tenants that do hold from Our good
Protestant Subjects, do pay their Rents to their respective Landlords; and that
the Tenants of all those who have been concerned in the present Rebellion
against Us, do keep their Rents in their hands, until they have Notice from the
Commissioners of our Revenue, unto whom they are to account for the same: And
We do here strictly forbid all Violence, Rapine, and Molestation to any who
shall thus come in, and remain obedient to Us: So for those of this, or any
other Rank o^ Quality, who are already in our Quarters, o^ within Our Power, or
Obedient to Us, W^ do hereby Charge and Require, that they be not disquiet in
any sort, without Our particular Command. As for the desperate Leaders of the
present Rebellion, who have violated those Laws by which this Kingdom is
united, and inseparably annexed to the Imperial Crown of England; who have
called in the French; who have Authorized all Violences and Depredations
against the Protestants; and who rejected the Gracious Pardon We offered them
in Our Proclamation of the 21st of February, 1688. As We are now by God's great
Favor in a Condition to make them sensible of their Errors, so are We resolved
to leave them to the Event of War, unless by great and manifest Demonstrations
We shall be convinced they deserve Our Mercy, which We shall never refuse to
those that are truly penitent.

Given at our Royal Camp at Finglass near Dublin, the Seventh of July, 1690. in
the Second Year of our Reign.

Upon this offer of Pardon, a great many of the meaner sort of the Irish laid
down their Arms, and complied with the Contents of the Declaration, some going
home to their Habitations, and many of those that were destitute of any, took
the Service; and things began to carry a Face of Settlement, wonderfully
altered from what before it was: So that the People, who a little before were,
as it were, in Slavery, and in danger of their Lives, now found themselves at
Liberty, and utterly freed from those Fears that had so long afflicted them.
And soon after his Majesty came to that City, and heard a Sermon at St.
Patrick's Church, preached by Dr. King, suffering only his Guards, and some of
his great Officers, to enter the City with him, and went that day back to his
Camp to dinner, when he had given the Magistrates such necessary Orders as he
thought conducing to the happiness of the place, and was Addressed by them, and
by the Bishops and Clergy, wherein they expressed their abundant Joy and
Gratitude for his Majesty's having been the Instrument, in the Hand of Heaven,
for their great Deliverance, etc. And the Town and Castle of Wexford being
deserted by the Governor, who fled amongst others to France, it declared for
the King, and a Garrison was put into it.

And now the main Strength of the Irish Army being broken by the last Defeat*
the Popish Priests every where made it their business to stir up the Rabble and
looser sort of People, who plundered and made great Spoil, especially in the
Countries where the King's Forces were not at hand to quell them; however, the
Militia frequently met with them, and many of their Ringleaders being taken,
were hanged up as Thieves and Robbers. And that the Counties might be the
better settled and guarded, his Majesty made his Progress into diverse of them,
and appointed Sheriffs and other Officers, as he passed, conferring upon Count
Menard, the Duke of Schemberg's Son, in respect of the great Affection he bore
his Father, the place of great Master of the Artillery, and soon reduced
Wexford and many other places. Yet the Enemy held by Garrisons many Towns of
Strength, as Cork Galloway, Athlone, Limerick, etc. near to the last of which
Tyrconnel and Lauzun had Rallied the broken Army, so that to dislodge them, the
Siege of that Place was resolved on, though the Season began to advance apace
toward the usual coming on of bad Weather in that Kingdom.

The King having pretty well settled the Affairs of those Counties where his
Army had passed, and those that put themselves under his Protection, took it
into his Princely consideration, That his Subjects had, during this War, been
very much imposed upon, and abused by Moneys coined in the Enemies Quarters,
and by the Order of the late King, of no value, in competition of its Premium
directed by the Exhibitors, for the Relief of such Abuse to the Subject, issued
out his Proclamation for the Suppressing it, or Reducing it to its intrinsic
value, in the following Tenor, viz.

WILLIAM R.
HAving taken into Our Consideration the great Oppression and Abuses committed
by Our Enemies in Our Kingdom of Ireland, by making current Brass-money of
Copper, or mixed Metals, and raising the Value thereof to an extravagant
height, thereby to enable them to continue the War against Us, and to
impoverish Our loving Subjects in our said Kingdom, We have therefore thought
it necessary to put a stop thereto; and to the end that such part of the said
Copper, or mixed Metal Money, which remains in the Hands of Our said Subjects,
may not be wholly lost, we have thought fit to Reduce the former Value of the
said Copper-Money to the Value or Standard of the like Copper-Money formerly
current in this Our Kingdom: And accordingly We do Will and Require hereby all
Our Subjects within Our said Kingdom of Ireland, to take and receive of all
such Copper and mixed-Metal Money, lately coined in the Mint erected in our
City of Dublin, at the several and respective Valuations following, and that
the same do pass current in the exchange of Money, and for all manner of Goods
and Provisions whatsoever, and shall be received by all Officers and Collectors
of our Customs, Excise, or other Branches of our Revenue accordingly; Viz.

The large Half-crown of Copper-Money, together with the Crown-piece of like
Metal and Weight, lately stamped, shall pass at One penny sterling.

The small Half-crown of Copper, lately stamped, shall pass at Three farthings.

The large Copper Shilling shall pass at a Halfpenny sterling.

The small Shilling lately stamped and Six pence, shall pass each at One
farthing.

And Our Will and Pleasure is, That all such Pewter-pence as have been lately
coined in the said Mint, shall pass for Halfpence; and all Halfpence of the
like Metal, stamped in the said Mint, shall pass for Farthings.

Which several sorts of Coin shall be deemed as current Money, at the Rates
beforementioned, in all Payments whatsoever, within this Our Kingdom.

Given at our Camp by Dublin this 10th of July, 1690. and in the second (...)
of our Reign.

By this we may see the great loss People of all qualities sustained, the Money
being as we elsewhere have mentioned, ordered, upon great Penalties in case of
refusal, to pass at the Values mentioned, though extraordinarily superior to
the value of the Metal, as appears by its being reduced to its intrinsic
Value; yet little of this fell to the share of the Protestants, who in their
Extremities thought themselves well to escape with their Lives, having no
considerable opportunities to handle Money, and therefore came off with as
little loss in the Reducement of it.

On the 19th of July the Royal Camp lying at Chappel-Izard, removed thence
toward Waterford, that still held out, when as the King sent a Summons to the
Town, requiring Lieutenant Colonel Hevesey, Governor of the Place, immediately
to Surrender, and that if he obeyed the Royal Mandate, the Garrison should be
permitted to march out quietly, and the Citizens to enjoy their Houses, Goods
and the Benefit of Trade; but upon Refusal to Expect no Quarter. 200 Horse,
under the Command of Col. Comboon and Col. Matthews, went with the Trumpeter,
who delivered his Message: But the Governor making diverse extravagant Demands,
which would have been answered with a sudden Attack, but that his Majesty had
Compassion of about (...) Protestant Families in the Town, that (...) have
suffered in the common Calamity; wherefore in singular Clemency, he commanded
the same Capitulation to be sent them which had been granted to Drogheda the
day after the Battle of the Boyne, with this Addition, That the Garrison might
depart each Man with his own Arms, but not with Drums beating and Colors
flying; which, after some Debate, they thankfully accepted; and on the 25th of
July marched out, to the number of about 1600 Men, being conducted to Mallow, a
small Town, lying in the way to Lymerick; but some of their Officers stayed
behind, and implored his Majesty's Protection; when on the same day the King
viewed the Walls of the Place, but entered not into the Town, and so returned
back to the Camp, sending a Summons to Captain Michael Bourk, Governor of
Duncannon Fort, offering the like Capitulation that had been granted to
Waterford, in case he immediately Surrendered, but upon Refusal to expect no
Mercy. When instead of a positive Answer, he only desired six days to consult
Tyrconnel; which being refused, he declared he would take that time. Whereupon
the Cannon was commanded to be brought and planted against the Place, in order
to a Battery. But on the 26th in the Evening, Sir Clously Shovel appearing with
16 Frigates, mounted with Guns of considerable Force, within shot of the Fort,
it brought such a Terror upon the Garrison, that the Governou^ wrote to
Major General Kirk, that h^ would accept of the Terms offered; which his
Majesty being made acquainted with, he was pleased to order, That they should
still have the benefit of the Articles that were as first proposed; and the
Fort accordingly was Surrendered. After which the King marched toward Dublin.

During these Transactions, diverse Parties were abroad, who hindered the
scattered Irish from getting together, Reducing some Castles, Forts, and other
advantageous Fortresses and Posts, to their Majesty's Obedience.

His Majesty now resolving, as is said, to besiege the strong Town of Lymerick,
situate on the River Shannon, under the shelter of which the greatest part of
the Enemies rallied Forces were retired, being about 25000 strong,
Lieutenant Colonel Douglas, who had for some time blocked up Athlone, was
ordered to draw off, and to join the Royal Army on its way. The Garrison was
composed of a mixture of French and Irish; they had various Disputes about
Surrendering that important Place upon honorable Terms; but at last were
prevailed with by the Earl of Tyrconnel to stand upon their Defense.

Whilst the Army prepared to march toward Lymerick, and his Majesty to be
present at that Siege, had put off his intended passing over from England, 50
of our Dragoons approaching the Town of Youghall, the place surrendered: To
bring it to which, the Contrivance was in this manner; The Garrison that
marched from Waterford, was conducted by those Dragoons under the command of
Captain Pownal to Youghall, who telling the Governor of the Place, who was the
same that Surrendered up Carickfergus the precedent Year, the certain Ruin he
would bring upon himself, if he thought of holding out; and thereupon advising
him to a Surrender: he after some further Debate, only desired him to expect
his Answer till Ten at night, at which time he privately marched out with Three
Companies of Foot, giving the Captain an unexpected possession of the Town,
where he found 14 Guns mounted, and 2 without Carriages, 350 Barrels of Oats,
215 stone of Wool, and several other sorts of Provisions, but neither Powder
nor Ball.

The King being thus far on his March, a Deserter came out of Lymerick to our
Camp, and gave Information, That the French had marched out of the Town with
eight Fieldpieces, and took their way toward Galloway, there, if urgency
required it, to be ready for Imbarcation to France; and not only those in the
Town were unsettled and discontented, and that others, displeased at Tyrconnel
's proceeding, were retired to the Mountains of Kerry; and such Fear the
Approach of our Army brought upon the Enemy, made them break down the Bridges
to retard their March. However, that hindered but little, for where they found
them in that Condition, they forded the Rivers; and that the People might be
still assured of his Majesty's Clemency toward them, another Declaration was
published; and also that a Blessing might attend his Arms, a Fast was
proclaimed to be observed through all the Provinces of the Kingdom under their
Majesty's Obedience on the 15th of August, and to be observed constantly,
during the War, on Friday in every Week; which was Religiously kept, as well
out of a due sense of God's Mercies and Favors already extended toward the
late languishing Kingdom, in a wonderful Deliverance, as what they further
expected.

The Approach of our Forces was no sooner known to Tyrconnel and Lauzun, but
they retired further into the Country, leaving Monsieur Boisteau Governor in
the Town, with a very good Garrison, and store of Provision, the French
retiring under the Walls of Galloway; but the Inhabitants not liking such
unfriendly Guest, who sought their Master's Interest more than the welfare of
Ireland, shut their Gates, and denied them Entrance. However, at last being
received into the Town at the Instance of Tyrconnel and others, they showed
their Resentments by dealing very severely with the Inhabitants; and we had an
account that they hanged up two of those that were most active in opposing
their Admittance.

The Army approaching Lymerick, found the Enemy strongly posted about a Mile
from the Town, and that they had lined the Hedges, from whence they fired upon
our Men, but were soon dislodged, and obliged to fly to their Main-guard; and
the English passed the River Shannon without any considerable Resistance, the
Enemy that guarded the further shore flying at their approach, and for haste
left behind them several Tents and other Materials, and encamping within the
reach of their great Guns, they raised Works to secure them from the shot,
though some were killed by random Bullets. The Army was no sooner Encamped, and
Entrenchers made some Advance, but the King sent to Summon the Governor to
Surrender, withal, offering him very good Conditions, but he utterly refused
it; returning answer, That he was resolved to defend the place to the last
Extremity. Upon which the Trenches were opened, and the great Guns being on
their way to the Camp, Colonel Sarsfield, with a strong Party, taking a great
Compass, set upon those that had them in Charge, and over-powering the Convoy,
killed diverse of the Waggoners, not sparing their Wives, with their Children in
their Arms, burning some of the Wagons and Carriages of the Cannon, Nailing up
part of the great Guns, and breaking others. But upon the approach of Captain
Coningham with a Party of the Inniskilling-men, they made a hasty Retreat; yet
the Captain fell in with their Rear, killed some, took other Prisoners, and
recovered a considerable Booty. So that these, and other great Guns, being
brought to the Camp, Clonmel, a small Fort near Lymerick Surrendered upon
Discretion, and the Garrison made Prisoners of War. And now the Batteries being
raised, the Cannons spoke English Language in Thunder against the Town, and the
Trenches were Advanced within 300 Paces of the Wall, and two Redoubts taken,
the which, and other Successes of the like nature, made them Advance toward
another Redoubt. Whenas Colonel Douglas mounting the Guard, and the sign
appointed given by firing 8 Guns for Attacking it, those that were Detached for
the Service being 150, besides Officers, fell on with extraordinary Bravery,
and Entering the Fort, drove out the Enemy, killing about 40, possessed
themselves of it, though the Enemy from the Town made a vigorous Sally with
Horse and Foot; and the new Batteries being levelled against the high Towers,
soon laid them in Rubbish; also the Bombs and Carcasses thrown in set a great
many Houses on fire: So that under the favor of these Consternations the Enemy
were put unto, our Men made their Advances within Thirty Paces of the Ditch,
and the Cannon still playing, not only widened the Breach, but beat down part
of the Counterscarp and Palisado's; so that an Attack was made on the
Counterscarp, begun by a detached Party of Granadiers, seconded by other
Detachments, who soon gained it; as also a Fort the Enemy had under the Wall;
but instead of lodging themselves as they were commanded, thinking Fortune was
altogether now on their side, they pushed on to enter the Breach in pursuit of
the Irish that ran thither, but the Cannon being turned upon them, charged with
Cartridge-shot, the greater part of those that were Advanced were cut off, and
some blown up by the springing of a Mine in the Ditch; so that by computation
100 Men were killed and wounded, yet they came not off without leaving the
Marks of their Valor upon the Enemy. But by this time, the Army having the
Elements to contend with, as well as the Enemy, by reason of the stormy Winds
and incessant Rains, which not only made the River overflow, but filled the
Trenches knee-deep with Water, and would in a short time, in all probability,
have cut off the Communication, and hindered the Forage from coming in, his
Majesty, upon mature deliberation, thought fit to raise the Siege, and refer it
to a more seasonable opportunity. So that on the 30th of August the heavy
Cannon and Baggage were sent away, and the next day the Army decamped and
marched off in good Order, strong Detachments being sent toward Cork and
Kingsale: And the King having appointed the Lord Viscount Sidney and Sir Thomas
Conningsby Governour^ of the Kingdom, and settled the other Affairs, as
advantageously as might be, sailed for England, and landed at Bristol, where,
as in other places, he was received with a general Joy.

Upon the King's departure, the Irish Garrisons thought themselves safe for the
Winter at least, but found in a short time they were deceived, for other
measures were taken. The English Fleet had orders to stand away to the Coast of
Ireland, and soon arrived in Cork Harbor; and upon notice of their Arrival,
the Land Forces drew down to join them upon their Landing.

Upon which the Duke of Berwick who styled himself Lord General of Ireland,
drew off, Lauzun and Tyrconnel being already gone to France. Lieutenant General
Douglas followed after the Duke with a strong Party, to fall upon his Rear, but
he Encamped so advantagiously behind the Bogs, that it was not thought feasible
to attempt the forcing his Camp.

A Battery of 8 Guns was raised to hinder the Landing of our Men, but two or
three armed Boats forcing ashore those that were to manage and guard the Guns
fled, and our men dismounted them, throwing the Carriages into the Sea; so that
on the 24th of September, 5 or 6000 Seamen, Gunners, and Carpenters were
detached to be employed in raising the Batteries and mounting the Cannon
against the Town of Cork and diverse Boats of arm^^ Men were sent to assist the
taking it by water; so that upon the approach of the Army, the Enemy set fire
to the Suburbs, and the Earl of Marlborough, who commanded the King's Forces in
chief, having taken a view of its Situation, and finding the Enemy had quitted
a Post called Cats-Fort, sent a Detachment to take possession of it, and then
advanced his Camp within Musket shot of the South Side of the Town, which
occasioned the Enemy to set fire to the Suburbs, for fear our Soldiers should
lodge themselves in it; yet our Men advanced to the Ruins, and played upon the
Old Fort from two Batteries they had raised, and the next day made a Breach in
the Wall so wide, that the Besieged fearing our Men would Enter by Storm, and
dreading the consequences of Delay, they beat a Parley, and sent out an Officer
to Capitulate, and Hostages were Exchanged; but the besieged standing high upon
Terms, four Regiments under the Command of Brigadier Churchil, were ordered to
get into the Island near the Wall, where the Breach was made, which they
performed by fording it to the middle, the Granadiers, commanded by the Lord
Colchester, leading the Van, being exposed to all the Fire of the Enemy:
Amongst those that attempted this were a great many noble Volunteers, as the
Duke of Grafton, the Lord O Brian, Colonel Granvil, Captain Leighton, Captain
Cornwall, Captain Nevel, Captain Fairborn, and others; but it proved fatal to
the Duke, for by a shot he received, he soon after died, and his Body being
carried for England, was there honorably interred.

The Besieged finding that our Men would not enter, as not being above 20 Paces
from the Breach, beat another Parley, but could have no other Conditions than
to be Prisoners of War; to which, with some difficulty, they agreed, and the
Capitulation was signed which in the Articles was to this purpose, viz.

That upon the Garrisons being received as Prisoners of War, no prejudice
should be done to the Officers, Soldiers, or Inhabitants, but that the General
should make it his Endeavor to obtain his Majesty's Mercy and Favor toward
them.

That the Old Fort should be delivered up within an hour, and the two Gates the
like, by 8 in the Morning the next day.

That all the Arms of the Garrison and Inhabitants should be put into secure
places, and the Protestant Prisoners immediately released.

That a due Account should be given of the Magazines as well of Provision as
Ammunition.

And the same Night 200 Men took possession of the Old Fort, and the next
Morning of the Town; the Garrison, between 4 and 5000 being made Prisoners of
War; and of note amongst them were the Earls of Clancarty and Tyrone, Colonel
Macgillicot the Governor, and diverse others.

This place thus taken and put into trusty hands, the Army immediately marched
toward Kingsale, and took their Posts about the New Fort, whilst Major General
Teteau was Commanded with 800 Men to make an Attack upon the Old Fort;
whereupon passing the River in Boats, he on the 3d of October, gave an Assault,
and Entered it by Storm, making at the same time, to divert the Enemy, a false
Attaque; and our Men at one and the same time giving the Bastions, some Barrels
of Powder took fire, and destroyed about 50 of the Enemy, and in the heat of
Fury many were killed. Those that Escaped, some fled unto the Old Castle in the
midst of the Fort, and some endeavoring the New Fort, by the help of a Boat,
the Tide being against them, they were mostly killed by the shot of our Men,
from the shore, the Governor and several Officers were killed in defending the
Ramparts, and found dead in the places where they fell, and the Soldiers got
considerable Plunder.

The Old Fort thus Entirely won, the General sent a Summons to the New Fort to
demand its immediate Surrender; but the Governor sent back word, That it would
be time enough to talk of that a Month after. But the General, not to be
dallied, caused the heavy Cannon to be mounted, and two Attacks were ordered to
be made by the English on the right, and the Danes on the left; and the more to
amuse the Enemy, a false Attack was made, and on the 15th of October the Cannon
played all the Morning, and the Galleries were preparing to lay over the Ditch,
when about One of the Clock the Enemy beat a Parley, proposing that Hostages
might be Exchanged in order to a Treaty; which done, Articles were agreed on,
and signed about Midnight; and pursuant thereto the middle Bastion was to be
delivered up the next Morning, and about 1200 men, of which the Garrison
consisted, were to march out the day after. And the principal of the Prisoners
taken here, and at Cork were shipped for England; but some of them met with a
sad Disaster on the Coast; for being put on Board the Breda, by what means is
uncertain, her Powder taking fire, she blew up, and most of those who were on
Board were desteoyed; the rest of the Fleet returned in Safety.

The Irish that yet kept the Field, were not above 10000, yet they promised
themselves great Recruits against the Spring.

In the mean while the Protestants conceived great Joy at this Success, and in
a grateful Acknowledgment to his Majesty, who had been so signally instrumental
in the Hand of Heaven for their Deliverance, his Birthday being the Fourth of
November, Old style, was observed in the reduced Places in an extraordinary
manner, but especially at Dublin, where the Militia, consisting of 2500 Foot,
and two Troops of Horse, and as many of Dragoons were drawn out, and gave
several Vollies; and in the Evening there was very fine Fireworks before the
Lords Justices House on Colledge-Green, and by their Order Claret was
distributed to the People, who drank their Majesty's Healths with all the
Expressions of Duty and Loyalty; and most of the Nobility and Gentry in and
about the City, were invited by the Lords Justices to a splendid Entertainment
and Banquet, the Day concluding with ringing of Bells, and the Night with
Bonefires and Illuminations, as also other Public Demonstrations of Joy and
Triumph.

The Fifth of November, being the Anniversary of the Popish Powder Plot, the
Lords Justices attended by the Nobility, Judges, and other Persons of Quality
in the Town, with the King and Herald at Arms and the Ensigns of Honor
carried before them, went to St. Patrick's Church, and after their Return the
Lords Justices gave the Nobility and Gentry another splendid Entertainment,
their Majesty's Titles being at the second Course proclaimed in Latin, French,
and English, by the King at Arms, the great Guns in the Castle continually
thundering the general Joy in their roaring Language. And that the Common People
might not be wanting in sharing of their Bounty, a whole Ox, and an Hogshead of
strong Bear was dealt out amongst them, and at Night the general Joy was
concluded with Bonefires, and other Demonstrations of Public Satisfaction.

The Soldiers being now mostly in their Winter Quarters, that they might have
good usage, and the Inhabitants of those Towns where they were quartered at the
same time receive no damage, the Lords Justices thought it neccessary to give
their Orders concerning those Matters, and accordingly issued out their
Proclamation for regulating the Quarters of the Army, and ascertaining the
Rates to be allowed for the Soldiers Diet, the Prizes of Provisions, and the
manner how the Inhabitants that trusted them should be paid for what they
delivered out to them.

The Rapparies having already been fairly warned to desist from their Ravages,
and Burnings in the Countries under Obedience; they notwithstanding
enterprizing the like, Captain Archer upon Notice that a Party of them were
abroad, marched against them with about Twenty of the Militia; but upon his
approach finding them much stronger than he had been informed, after a hot
dispute he found himself obliged to retire with the loss of four of his Men;
however, not giving it over, he immediately raised more of the Militia, and the
next Morning by break of day fell upon them a second time with better success
for having put them to rout, he killed about Twelve of them, and took Twenty
Prisoners, enriching his Men with such Booty as those People had scraped
together, in those Countries where they had been for a considerable time doing
much mischief.

And now the Lords Justices and Council having reason to suspect that several
dangerous Persons coming to the City of Dublin, as Spies from the Enemies
Quarters, and upon other wicked Designs, were sheltered in that City by
Papists, Natives, who kept Taverns, and other Public Houses, and there
frequently met to continue as much as in them lay, the Subversion of Their
Majesty's Government, and the Ruin of their good Subjects of the Kingdom of
Ireland, thought fit to put out their Proclamation, to prohibit and forbid all
Papists, Natives of the Kingdom, to sell any Wine, Beer, Ale, or other Liquors
by Retail, after the 25th of December. 1690. upon pain of being proceeded against
as Retailers of Wine and other Liquors without License.

By this time one Mac Finnan having got together about Four hundred Men, being
a mixture of the Irish Army and Rapporees, marched toward Castle-town, to
surprise thirty Dragoons, commanded by a Lieutenant detached thither from their
Quarters at Iniskeen, and although they had all the advantage they could wish,
yet the Lieutenant and his Men behaved themselves so bravely, that they killed
Ten of their Enemies, but having spent their Ammunition, and five of their own
Party being killed, they found themselves constrained to Surrender, and had
Quarter given them, yet the Lieutenant, his Sergeant, and several of his Men
were put to the Sword in cold blood: however the Alarm reaching Iniskeen, Major
Culleford, who commanded there, Advanced with another detached Party, and
falling upon them in the height of their Success, put them to the rout killing
about 12 on the place, took 5 Prisoners, without the loss of a Man on our side.

Nor were the Commanders his Majesty had entrusted less watchful on all parts;
for Major General Tettau marching from Cork to Killcreagh, and on his way being
joined by others, so that he made up a Body of 2200 Men, he entered the County
of Kerry, where the Enemies Troops retired before him, and coming into a
Fortification at Scrovolard, he attacked it, and in two hours took it with
little difficulty; when advancing along the edge of the Mountains, and
sustaining the Rapparees fire, without receiving any considerable damage, they
discovered toward Brewster field, some of the Enemies Scouts, whereupon 70 of
our Dragoons and Horse having the Vanguard, came up with a Party of 160 of the
Enemies Horse, who not enduring the Fire of our Men, upon the first Charge
retreated, and falling by degrees into confusion, at last came to plain
running, though there were several Irish Nobility, and some considerable
Officers amongst them; yet such as our Men had not yet attacked, put, by this
time, the Country round about in a flame, and our Forces not being far from
Killarny, hasted thither with all the speed they could to save that place; and
notwithstanding the Enemy upon their approach left it, yet about twenty Cabbins
were burnt by two Troopers that stayed behind for that purpose, who as a Reward
of their Undertaking, were killed by our Men, and Brewster's Forge saved, and
put diverse of the Enemies Parties, then abroad, to the rout, clearing the
Country in a manner on that side whilst the Irish only bore up the little
Courage they had left, relying much upon the further Aid they expected from
France.

However, though the Season was far advanced, our Men gave it not over as yet,
but for the better securing Winter Quarters, and preventing the Country from
Plunder, they took in several Castles, as the Castles of B^ham and Rea, into
which Baldorick Mac Donnel had put a Garrison of 100 Men, confining by this
means the Irish that were in Arms (...) the Province of V^ster; whereupon the
ground of our Army went into Winter Quarters, leaving some flying Parties
abroad to keep under the Rapparees, who thought it now their time to rob and
steal; and indeed they not only burnt the Lord Orrery's House at Charleville,
but committed many other Outrages, though diverse of them came short home; for
this kind of Black Guard not being looked upon to be Soldiers, plundering
sometimes as well the Papists as the Protestants, were frequently cut off in
their Attempts; and now when Force began to fail, the Enemy had recourse to
Stratagems; but in this they failed, by a timely discovery, by Letters that
were dropped by some Persons as they were flying to the Woods or Mountains; one
of them written by one Mr. Hogen, who had been a Colonel in the Irish Army,
acquainting him, That the Protestants were secure and supine in their Quarters;
and that her Friends had lately done several strange Feats in the places that
were under the English Obedience, and especially in the County of Wicklow, and
that the French in the Kingdom were very industrious to take all advantages;
that Tyrconnel would soon return with Forces from France; that the Soldiers, in
Dublin were poor and miserable, and would do any thing for Bread; so that if
Sarsfield had a mind to come over the Shannon with his Forces, not only the
Army, but the Militia would be drawn out of the City, and then every Papist
firing his own House or Lodging, whilst the Consternation lasted, they might
destroy the Protestants and secure the City, and that which had hitherto
hindered them from putting the Projec^ in Execution, was the Records of the
Kingdom being there, which must needs perish i^ the flames; but however, they
had at last removed that Scruple, and were resolved to go o^ with it, etc.

This Woman was taken and brought before the Privy Council, where she was so
fa^ from denying it, that she with confidence affirmed she writ it; and though
she could no^ be blamed for doing what she had done, upon which she was
committed to Prison. The Lords Justices upon this Discovery put out ^ severe
Proclamation against the Papists, to di^able them from putting such wicked
Desig^ in practice, by banishing some for several mile^ and taking strict
Recognizance of the rest which according to its true Tenor, for the
s^tisfaction of the Curious in so weighty a ma^ter concerning the Safety of the
whole Kin^dom, will not be amiss to be inserted.

The Lords Justices Proclamation, and^.
IT having been observed that diverse P^pists, and others, disaffected to the
G^^ernment, some of whom are lately come (...) of the Enemies Quarters, do
daily reso^^ unto the City of Dublin, and into the L^berties of St. Sepulcher,
Thomas Cou^ and Donore, and do presume not only (...) the Day, but in the Night
time, to meet in Numbers, to the intent, as we have great reason to apprehend
them, to consult how to raise Disturbances, to the prejudice of their Majesty's
Government, and to continue the Rebellion of this Kingdom, as also to destroy
the City of Dublin by fire, which some of them, as we are credibly informed,
have threatened and designed: For Remedy therefore of the Mischi^f that may
happen upon such Resorts and Meeting, we do hereby strictly Charge and Require
all persons whatsoever of the Popish Religion, who have not been noted
Housekeepers within the City or Liberties aforesaid, for the space of three
Months last past, that within 48 hours after the publication of this
Proclamation, they depart out of the said City and Liberties, and repair to
their several Habitations, or other places in the Country, at least Ten miles
distance from this City: which ^f they neglect or refuse to do, they shall be
apprehended, and proceeded against as Spies, and persons designing the
disturbance of the Public Peace. And in order to the more ^ffectual Execution
of this our Proclamation, we hereby require the Lord Mayor of the ^ity of
Dublin, and Seneschals of the said Liberties, to cause diligent search to be
made immediately after the time hereby limited for the departure of such
persons, as aforesaid, into all Houses and Places throughout the City and
Liberties, and a true Account to be taken of the Names and Qualities of such as
shall be found therein not qualified as aforesaid, which is forthwith to be
returned to us, under the Hands of the said Lord Mayor, Sheriffs and Senaschals
of the said City and Liberties, whereupon we will give order to have them
proceeded against with the utmost Rigor of their Majesty's Laws. And we do
hereby further declare, That if any such Papist or other disaffected Person,
after the Fourth of December next, not being Housekeepers, as aforesaid, shall
repair unto the said City or Liberties, and there abide by the space of 24
hours after such Proclamation, without rendering him, or her, or themselves to
the Lord Mayor, or one of the Sheriffs or Aldermen of the said City, or one of
the Seneschals of the said Liberties, to the end it may be known in what House,
he, she or they take up his, her, or their Lodging, or if above the number of
five Papists, or disaffected Persons, as aforesaid, whether Housekeepers or
any others, shall meet within any House within the said City or Liberties, on
any pretense whatsoever, either by Day or Night, or shall be out of his, her,
or their Lodgings after Nine of the Clock at Night; in either of these Cases,
if any Person shall be so hardy, as not to give due obedience to our Direction
aforesaid, they shall be prosecuted as Contemners of their Majesty's Royal
Authority: And because Rewards, as well as Punishments are necessary, conducing
to the Discovery of such as shall offend in the Particulars aforesaid, we do
hereby publish and declare, That as we will severely punish such Offenders as
aforesaid, the Receivers and Harbourers of them, contrary to this our
Proclamation, so we will give a Reward of Twenty shillings to each Person who
shall give Information against any such Offenders, in any of the said
Particulars, to be immediately paid out of their Majesty's Treasury upon proof
of such Offense or Offenses, made before the Lord Mayor of the said City, etc.

This, and the diligent search made after suspected Persons, startled the
Caballars and Conspirators in such a manner, that they either dispersed or
concealed themselves. So the pernicious Design of laying the Metropolis of
Ireland in Ashes, and mixing those Ashes with the Blood of its Inhabitants, was
frustrated. And indeed this appeared not to be grounded upon light Suspicion,
but upon substantial Reason; for the Enemies Troops abroad were about that time
moving nearer toward Dublin, then any other Occasion but such Intelligence or
Correspondence could reasonably require, but upon this discovery retired, and
the City Guards were augmented, and all manner of Caution and Circumspection
used that might prevent, in any probability, the threatened Danger.

D^ring these Transactions, those Troops we had abroad were not idle, but often
marching many Miles into the Enemies Quarters, not only beat them from their
Posts, and killed a great many of them; but gave the Villages opportunity to
rest in quiet under their Majesty's Protection, and freeing them from those
Ravagements wherewith before they were distressed; so that many, who before
stood out for fear of being plundered or destroyed, came in, and joyfully laid
hold of the gracious Pardon offered them; so that the face of things seemed to
put on a Calm, considering the Tempest that a little before had in a manner
disjointed and put them out of Frame.

The Enemies Regular Troops missing of the Advantages they expected, now gave
way to the Outrages of the Rapperees more than ever, having before a little
restrained their Insolences, that the Advantage of Plunder might accrue to
themselves; so that they committed many barbarous Murders in Villages and
Loan-houses, where their Force prevailed, being mainly incited thereto by the
revengeful Priests, who shared with them in their Booty which made our Troops,
though the Season was very incommodious for marching, by reason of the rains
and quagginess of the ground, and incroach upon them, and frequently surprise
them in their Randezvous, beating them out of their Cabins, and firing them
over their Ears.

And now his Majesty providing for the Civil Affairs, the Privy Council were,
the Lord Primate of Ireland, the Lord Chancellor, High Treasurer, and
Archbishop of Dublin for the time being, the Duke of Ormond, Earls of Mead,
Drogheda, Longhford, Ranelagh, Granard, and Viscount Lisburn, the Bishop of
Mead, the Vice-Treasurer, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, the Chief Justices
of the King's Bench, Common Pleas, Chief Baron of the Exchequer, Master of the
Rolls, Principal Secretary of State, and Master of the Ordnance for the time
being, Robert Fitz-Gerrard, Sir Henry, and William Hill Esquires.

The Judges appointed by his Majesty were, for the King's Bench Sir Richard
Raynel, Mr. Justice Lyndon, Sir Richard Stephens; for the Common Pleas, Mr.
Justice Cox, Mr. Justice Ieffersdon; for the Exchequer, Lord Chief Baron Hely,
Mr. Baron Echlin, Sir Standish Harstrong.

Nor was the Civil Settlement alone considered, but likewise the Ecclesiastical
Promotions, for the good and tranquillity of the Protestant Churches of Ireland;
viz. Dr. March Bishop of Feras, was advanced to the Archbishopric of Cashel,
Dr. Tenison Bishop of Killala, to be Bishop of Cloglier, Dr. William King to be
Bishop of Londonderry, Dr. Digly Bishop of Lymirick to be Bishop of Elphin,
Dr. Vigor^ Dean of Armagh, to be Bishop of Ferus, Dr. Wilson Dean of Rapho, to
be Bishop of Lymerick, Dr. Fitz-Gerrald Dean of Cloim, to be Bishop of
Cloufort, Dr. Lloyd Dean of Achonry, to be Bishop of Killala.

So that now the face of things began to look pleasant; however, though it was
in the dead of Winter, our Troops abroad found some Action; for one of our
advanced Parties, setting upon the Enemy near Castle-Town, they killed 22 of
them, and took 5 Prisoners, and Colonel Foulks gave a considerable Defeat to
about 1500 Rapperees and trained Soldiers, killing many of them, and taking
some Prisoners near the Bogg of Allen.

Whilst these Successes were carried on with a high hand, Colonel Brewer
possessed himself of the Forts and Town of Lansborough, and defeated about 3000
of the Enemy. Soon after Major General Tetteau, heightened with his frequent
Success, and the beating some small Parties of the Enemy, he marched his Forces
toward the strong Town of Ross, which had in it a Carrison of 600 Men, under
the Command of Colonel Maccarty, the Lords Coursey and Slane, and others of
Note were also in the place, upon the approach of our Men, but not thinking
themselves secure enough, they poasted away for Lymerick, and thereupon our
Approaches being made, 50 Danes, and 50 of the Detachment out of Kingsale, were
ordered to storm a Fort cut out of a Rock, which they did with so great a
Resolution, that they froze the Enemies Courage, and soon made themselves
Masters of it, putting most they found therein to the Sword, and many of those
that endeavored to swim from thence to another Rock, were killed in the Water;
and marching thence to Tralee, General Sheldon abondoned it with such speed,
that they had no time to set it on fire, and so it fell entire into our hands;
and we having a small Fort at Fermoy-Bridge in the County of Cork, the Enemy
advanced with about 2000 Horse and Foot, under the Command of one Carrol, who
upon his Approach sent to have it Surrendered, Declaring that he knew the
strength of the Place, and that it was not tenable. But upon his approach found
such a warm Reception, that after diverse firings, he being killed upon the
place, his Men took to their heels, and that they might glory of something,
they burnt one House in their return.

Soon after this Defeat, and the routing diverse Parties of the Rapparees,
Colonel Brewer and Major Board went out with a detached Party of 150 Horse, and
about 200 Foot from Mullengar, to relieve Marescourt and Mayvore with
Provision; and that done, they took their way toward Ballymore, and dislodged
the Enemy on those Passes, opening and freeing the Country, and then returned
to their Stations, without the loss of any Men; and soon after this Lieutenant
Tailor defeated 400 of the Irish near Endery.

Lieutenant General Ginkle, upon notice that a great Body of the Enemy was
gathering, and some of them advancing toward Athlone, he and Sir John Lanier
drew out a Party to oppose them; who upon their approach, retired in great
confusion, but being pursued by our Horse and Foot, they were beat from the
Retrenchments they had made, as their last Refuge; and the Chase being
continued, about 200 of them were killed and wounded, and several taken
Prisoners, and our Men got a great Booty of Horses; for the Enemy in their
flight, being hard pressed in the Rear, quitted them, and got into the Woods.

Colonel Hamilton being abroad, meeting with a Party of the Enemy as they were
Ravaging the Country, near a place called Bautrey, set upon them, and at the
first Charge put them into Disorder, and soon after to open flight, killing
about 70 of them, and taking some Prisoners with Booty, etc. And Captain Derby
defeated another Party of them at Birre. And now the Rapparees being more
terrible to the Country People than the Enemies Regular Forces, a Party was
sent out to suppress them; so that being frequently met withal, a great many of
them were killed, and some that were taken Prisoners were Executed; and
lighting on a Party of about 400 Irish, though he had then 100 Foot, and 34
Horse, having lessened his number by Detachments, sent to find out the
Rapparees; he however drew up, and Charged them with such Bravery, that during
the Action some more of his Men coming in, he put them utterly to the Rout,
killed and took Prisoners most of their Officers, and recovered a great Booty.
And indeed the Winter, not fit for the motion of great Bodies, was spent in the
piquering of Parties, and settling the Civil, as well as Military Affairs of
the Kingdom, and so continued till his Majesty went to Head the Conf^derate
Army in Flanders

Sarsfield having a great Command among the Irish, many of the Enemies chief
Officers being gone for France, under pretense of bringing fresh Recruits early
in the Spring, he drew together part of the shattered Army, and some of the
Militia, at Knockany, with a design to attack some of our Troops that were
advantageously posted; but was so warmly, received, that he found his Attempts
very disadvantageous to himself, and thereupon picking the most serviceable Men
out of the Militia Troops, sent them to join the Forces he had ordered to
encamp in the Province of Connaught, and put some of his Troops into Garrison
and Winter Quarters.

Notice being given to Lieutenant Spencer, that a hundred Men of the Enemies
Troops were advanced within a Mile of Copperquin in the County of Waterford,
with a design to surprise and carry off the Recruit Horses sent from England,
for Brigadier's Regiment, he immediately marched with a Corner and 12 Troopers,
most of his Men being gone a Forraging, and finding the Enemy in some disorder,
Charged them with his small Party, and pressed them so hard, that they retired
into a Wood within a Mile of the place, and thereupon 18 more of his Men coming
up, part of them dismounted, entering the Wood, whilst the rest on Horseback
secured the Pass, the Dispute lasted without firing on both sides for several
hours, in which they killed 40 of the Enemy, and took the Captain that
commanded them, with 7 Soldiers Prisoners, also their Arms and Accoutrements,
only one of the Lieutenant's Party being killed, and two or three wounded.

Lieutenant Purcel being abroad with a Party, fell in with the Rapparees, and
in several Encounters with them killed about 100, but attempting to burn their
Cabbins in the County of Longford, was waylaid by Sir Daniel O Neal's Regiment
of Dragoons, part on Horseback, and part on Foot; but 35 of the Royal Regiment
of Dragoons, broke their whole Body upon a furious Charge, killing 10 of them,
and taking 4 Prisoners, with a Lieutenant, and pursued the rest to Newcastle, a
Garrison they held in those parts, yet in the hasty flight many of them quitted
their Horses, and took to the Bogs, where some were lost: These Successes were
followed with others no less advantageous to us, and unfortunate to the Enemy;
for Colonel Lillingstone being gone from Roscreagh, joined by another from a
Neighboring Garrison, marched to Nonagh, where he found the Enemy strongly
posted; yet charging them with great Resolution, he dispossessed them of those
Posts, and beat them into the Castle, burning the Town where they had laid up
great store of Provision, and brought off a Booty of 300 Head of Cattle, with
the loss of 2 Soldiers and a Trooper's Horse, the manner of the Attack being
thus:

The Colonel detached 18 Horse, and as many Foot, and having them on Garrans,
or Irish Horse, made all the haste he could to secure the Bridge of Nenagh,
about half a Mile from the Town, whereupon the whole Garrison came out to make
opposition; but he maintained the Pass till his Foot came up, and then leaving
them at the Bridge, he advanced with his Horse toward the Enemy, who made many
firings, but so soon as our Men came near, began to retreat, and by degrees
disordering themselves, fell to running, but being hotly pursued, about 20 of
them were killed, and a Cornet taken Prisoner; after which he sent a Detachment
to secure the Pass on the other side of the Town toward Lymerick, whilst the
rest of his Men entered with the flying Enemy; however, many of them got into
the Castle, but our Men burnt the Town, and got considerable Plunder.

And now open Force failing the Enemy, they betook them to cruel Stratagems;
for a part of Colonel Foulk's Regiment being in their Quarters, near Yaughal,
about 8 of them were set upon in a private House, and murdered by surprise in
a most despiteful manner, the like treatment being supposed to be intended to
all the rest, had not this timely alarmed them to stand to their Arms, and
defend themselves. Upon suspicion of which Murders diverse; were taken up and
strictly examined at Dublin, amongst which one of them being found Guilty, and
Executed in the Castle-yard, owning at his Execution he buried the murdered
Corpse, but by no means could be induced to discover his Accomplices; and
several other were thereupon missing in other places, supposed to be made away
by them by the same means; insomuch that the Lords Justices found themselves
constrained to publish the following Proclamation to terrify and deter the
protected Irish from such unmanly Enterprises of Barbarism.

The Proclamation of the Lords Justices, etc.
WHereas notwithstanding the great Clemency extended by their Majesty's to the
Popish Irish Inhabitants of this Kingdom; whereby, upon their submission, they
have had equal Protection with their British and Protestant Subjects; yet such
is the inveterate and implacable Malice of many of the Popish Irish, that upon
all occasions they not only relieve Their Majesty's Enemies, but join with them
in the committing and concealing many horrid Murders, one of which of Eight
Soldiers of Their Majesty's Army inhumanly strangled at one time, and in one
place, has by God's Providence been lately discovered near this City, to have
been committed by the Inhabitants of the place where the said Soldiers were
quartered, for which some of the Criminals have received just and deserved
punishment, and the Lords Justices being fully satisfied that such Offenses
cannot be committed within the open and well-planted Counties of this Kingdom,
without the contrivance and help, or at least the connivance of the protected
Inhabitants; and having received full Information that there is a Confederacy
among many of the said protected Irish, to give all Aid and Relief in their
power to Their Majesty's Enemies upon all occasions, and to take all
opportunities to destroy the Officers and Soldiers of Their Majesty's Army, and
other Their good Subjects, their Lordships being resolved to prevent as much as
in them lies such their cruel and malicious Designs, and to punish with all
necessary severity those who shall be guilty, or justly suspected of the same,
do publish and declare, That if any such Murder shall hereafter be committed
in any place within Their Majesty's Quarters, if the Popish Inhabitants of that
Neighborhood shall not use their utmost endeavor and diligence to apprehend
the Malefactors, and immediately discover all they know of such Fact, to some
Magistrate living near the place where the said Offense shall be committed, so
as the said Offenders may be apprehended and brought to punishment, that then
the Popish Irish Inhabitants of the Parish where the said Murder shall be
committed, shall be immediately put out of Their Majesty's Protection, and
Orders shall thereupon be given, that they be proceeded against as Spies and
Enemies, according to the course of Law.

And soon after another Proclamation was published on the occasion of these
Murders, setting forth,

THat whereas by Examination of diverse persons, it does appear that a Romish
Priest, calling himself Father Christopher Brown, who has lived many Months in
several places within his Majesty's Jurisdiction and Power, without being
molested on account of his Orders or Religion, has been, if not the first
Contriver and principal Director and Counselor, yet a main Abettor and
Encourager of the late barbarous Murders of Their Majesty's Soldiers near this
City; and whereas several others have been found to have been guilty of the
said Murders, who are fled from Justice, their Lordships do promise a Reward
of Five pounds to such persons, not guilty of the same, as shall apprehend and
secure the said Christopher Brown, and Ten pounds for every of the other
persons, and a Pardon to such, though privy to the said Murders, as shall
apprehend any of the said Offenders.

This proceeding stopped the Issue of Blood that way, and rendered the Soldiers
more secure in their Quarters and other Places where they came, the Irish for
fear of being taken notice of, giving them every where, in the places subject
to Their Majesty's, better Usage.

About the latter end of April, Lieutenant General Ginkle came from Kilkenny to
Dublin, and many of the General Officers, to consult with the Lords Justices
about the Affairs of the Campaign, and concert Matters advantageous to their
Majesty's Service; and the Monmouth Yatch arrived with Money to that purpose,
as likewise several Ships with Recruits of Horse and Foot. So that the Train of
Artillery being by this time drawn out, the Soldiers began to draw from their
Winter Quarters nearer Dublin, and Wagons and Carriages were provided on all
hands, and Parties were sent out to remove the Enemies Posts, that the Spring
being come, the Forage might not be wastfully destroyed.

Some of Captain Green's Militia Dragoons, marching into the Enemies Quarters,
killed diverse of the Rapparees, and set fire to the place that harbored them:
And Quartermaster Chalagan with a Party, beat the Enemies Party abroad, took
diverse Prisoners, and some of note, with a considerable Booty; and by lying in
the Marish Fields, a great many of the Enemies best Horse died, and their
Provision grew very scanty, which occasioned many to desert, some going to
their Habitations, and others coming over to us, where such as were able were
received.

About the middle of April, 1691. one Captain Fitzgerald, of the Enemies
Party, marched out with about 700 Men of the standing Troops, to attack a
strong Stone-house called Croghan, near Philips-Town, which although it was
guarded only by a Corporal and 8 or 9 Soldiers, made a resolute Defense,
killing about 12 of the Enemy, and had done them greater damage, had not their
Powder failed, at what time they were constrained to Capitulate, and give up
the place. However, we were not long behind-hand with them, for on the Fourth
of the next Month a small Party of our Troops was marched by Major Wood, from
Mountmelick to Castle-Cuff, with 300 Foot, being Detachments of Colonel Lloyd's
and the Lord George Hamilton's Regiments, and 50 Horse of Colonel Bierly's, and
dividing his Foot into several Parties, in order to surprise the Rapparees in
the Bogs and Woods, and with his Horse kept along the skirts of the Bogs, to
hinder their getting off, by which mea^s about 70 of them were killed, and a
Booty recovered, which he sent away, and a Guard of 30 Men, and in the mean
while, with 30 Foot and 34 Horse, beyond the Toger of Mallyhone, when about Ten
in the Morning he discovered two Bodies of Men of the Enemies Army, each about
400, marching silently between the Woods and the Mountains, but when they found
our Men had espied them, they beat up their Drums.

Upon this the Major drew up his Horse and Foot in a ploughed Field, and bid
them Defiance; so that the Enemies Granadiers, thinking that our Men,
discouraged at their number, would have run, came over the Hedge, but finding
they stood firm to expect them, they stood, not advancing any further: In the
mean while, a Detachment of the Enemy charged those Men on the side of the Wood
that were sent away with the Booty; whereupon the Major wheeled off by the
Skirts of the Wood, to succor them, who defended themselves by firing very
briskly on the Enemy, being commanded by Lieutenant Ellis, and having got the
Horse and Foot over the Bog, 80 more of his Men came to him, and thereupon he
ordered the Foot to march in two Divisions on each side the River, he marching
between them with the Horse, when being advanced somewhat near the Enemy, and
thinking the Horse might do most Service, in taking a Compass about, and
falling on the Rear, wheeled about with an Intention to Surround them, which
they perceiving, and at the same time being pressed very hardly by the Foot,
began to make an orderly Retreat; which the Major perceiving, broke in upon
their Flank with the Horse, which put them to rout and disorder, and soon after
to open flight, whilst our Horse and Foot pursued them through the Woods, and
down to the Bogs killing about 150, and among them Captain Charles, and 2
Lieutenants, taking Prisoners Major John Fitz-Patrick, who commanded them, and
5 Captains, 9 Lieutenants, and 2 Ensigns, belonging to the several Regiments of
Colonel Butler, Colonel Robert Grace, Colonel Luttrels Dragoons, Colonel Moor,
and Sir Maurice Eustace, and about 150 private Soldiers, among which were 6
Sergeants, 17 Corporals, an Adjutant-Major, a Chyrurgeon, 3 Drums, and about
150 Muskets. Which Victory is to be accounted the more brave and great,
because the Courage and Resolution of our Men carried it against such odds, we
having only a Corporal killed, and Adjutant Robinson, with two Foot Soldiers
and a Trooper wounded.

Nor was this all the Success about this time, for 110 Foot, commanded by
Captain Clayton, being sent for from Cork to relieve the Garrison of
Ballymaggooly; they were in their march observed by a considerable Body of the
Enemies Horse, but they durst not Attack them; yet those that were relieved,
marched out about Twelve in the Evening, commanded by Captain Thorncroft and
Lieutenant Hays; and about break of Day they were discovered by about 300 of
the Enemies Horse and and Dragoons, who it was thought lay in wait for them; as
also a considerable number of Rapparees: and our Men being all Foot, thought
not the open Fields secure against the Horse, but for their better Defense,
drew into an old Pound, having a Wall about it Breast-high; when by this time
the Enemies advance Party coming up offered them Quarter; but they answered
only by the firing of their Muskets; however, all the Enemies Troops being
come up, they made many Attacks upon our Men, to force them from their
Strength, yet they sustained their firings with little hurt; but in returning
it, killed a great many of the Enemy, who were commanded by Brigadier Carrol
and Sir James Cotton, which so discouraged them, that after they had offered
our Men Quarter upon Surrendering, and it was refused, that they marched off,
carrying away the wounded and most noted of those that were killed; yet they
left behind 3 Captains and 10 Troopers slain, and Major Slingsby desperately
wounded, which they thought were too near our shot to be carried off; and in
all they had between 40 and 50 killed and wounded, and of ours 10 were killed,
and 5 wounded, and Major Slingsby was carried Prisoner to Cork. And much about
this time one Walter Brown, who had been High Constable of the Barrony of
Delwin, being taken as a Spy, was Executed, and Captain Pallasor, being abroad
with a Party of our Men, consisting of about 40 Firelocks of the Army, and 20
of the Militia, was by the subtle Insinuation and Treachery of one Terence
Megral, drawn into an Ambush of two of the Enemies Regiments of Foot, and some
Troops of Horse, which in that Exigency made him betake to the Ruins of an old
Castle, where he caused his Men to fortify and defend themselves, which they
did, continually firing upon the Enemy, till all their Powder was spent, and
then prayed for Quarter; and having it granted them, they were carried
Prisoners to Nenagh; yet the Militia and others under the Command of Col.
Piper, had good success in clearing the Country in dispersing the Rapparees,
and dispossessing the Enemies Regular Troops of such advantageous Posts, from
whence they might annoy By-Inroads, the Countries under Their Majesty's
Obedience, so that they began to shrink together into a narrower Circumference.

Now great Stores coming daily from England, and a Recruit for our Army every
day expected. The time for Action drawing near, the Lords Justices (that
nothing might be wanting that was conducing to Their Majesty's Service) caused
their Proclamation to be published for the Armies better Accommodation, the
Substance being in the following manner, viz.

WHereas the Army is now to draw into the Field, where it will be necessary
that Provisions be brought in from time to time for its supply; and that in
order thereunto, all due Encouragement be given to Sutlers and other Persons
that shall repair thither for that purpose, they do strictly Charge and Command
all Officers Civil and Military, and Soldiers of their Majesty's Army, not to
disturb or molest any Sutler, or other Person that shall have a Warrant from
the Colonel of any Regiment, or leave from the Lords Justices, or the Commander
in chief of their Majesty's Forces, to follow the Camp for this Service, that
they do not presume to take any thing from them, or use any Violence toward
them, upon pain of being proceeded against with the utmost Severities: And all
Colonels, and other Officers in chief, are to take care, that the Officers and
Soldiers ad pay for all such things as they shall be furnished with by the
Sutler, according to the Rates that shall from time to time be settled. And
that the Forces may be more plentifully supplied, and and those unnecessary
Persons prevented from following the Camp, who are only an Encumbrance to it;
and it being found by experience, that the Country has suffered extremely by
them, they have not only robbed and plundered it themselves, but have enticed
the Soldiers to do the same; for the preventing of it for the future, and that
the Quarters may be the better secured, whilst the Army is in the field, from
Rapparees and other disaffected People, the Lords Justices do hereby order and
direct all their Majesty's Protestant Subjects, as well as Papists, to stay at,
or repair to their respective Habitations, for the preservation and improvement
of the same, and that no person or persons whatsoever, except such as come
thither with Provisions for the use of the Army, or upon some lawful occasion
approved of by the Commanders in chief, do follow the Camp upon pain of Death.

And that the People whom this War had scattered into diverse places, leaving
many destitu^^ of Habitations, might again be settled, another Proclamation was
issued out to this effect;

That all the Inhabitants of the Counties of W^terford and Tipperary, do retire
within Three da^ to their respective Houses or Habitations, or to some adjacent
Garrison, if they could not go home wit^ security.

And those belonging to the Counties of Cork, L^^merick and Kerry, are
forthwith to repair either to their own Houses or Habitations, if they have a^^
or else to some of the Garrisons there, to be employ^^ in the Militia for the
defense of the Country wh^ the Army is in the field, according to such (...)
Orders as shall be given them for the Public Se^^vice.

And Lieutenant General Ginkle, Command in chief of their Majesty's Forces in
Ireland, (...) to be behind or wanting in any thing, exhibi^ an Order to this
effect, viz.

That all Officers and Soldiers, and other Pers^^^ whatsoever, were strictly
charged not to press (...) Horse, Carts or Carriages, without License first
(...) from the Lords Justices, or himself in writing. And whereas that the
Militia being to be in Arms for the Defense of the Country, whilst the Army
remained in the field, no Person should press any Horse actually listed in the
said Militia, under any pretense whatsoever.

About this time some other Transport ships arrived from England, and brought a
great quantity of all sorts of Military Provisions, and about Twenty thousand
Arms, also Ordinance and Stores; whilst the Enemies great expecta^ion of the
like supply from France failed them in great measure, that King seeming now ^o
grow weary of a War that proved so expensive to him without profit, and
expecting ^o be sharply pressed this Summer in Flanders, by the Confederate
Army, under the Command of the King of England, send indeed some Officers, and
a few Clothes, and such like mat^ers, but seemed frugal in husbanding his
Troops for a shelter from a Storm he expected ^earer home; which did not a
litte discou^age the Irish, and made them again to desert (...) numbers: and
their falling off had been ^reater, had not their Priests taken them to ^ask,
and insinuated how meritorous it was to ^^ght with and destroy the Heretics.

While these things passed, Captain White of ^^e Lord George Hamilton's
Regiment, detached (...) hundred Men under the Command of Captain Iohnston, who
marched to Belnamona in Tings County, and surprised by break of day ^wo Troops
of Dragoons of Brigadier Clifford's, and three Troops of Horse of the Lord
Merriony's Regiment, killing Lieutenant Archibald, Quartermaster Barnwell, and
15 Dragoons, took 2 Ensigns, and 9 other Prisoners.

The Governor of Clonmel marching from that place with a Detachment of Horse,
and two Troops of the Militia Dragoons came by Night into the Enemies Quarters,
toward Michael's Town; but not finding them there, the Rapparees upon his
Return fired out of the Wood, which he immediately causing to be surrounded, so
ferreted them about, that 30 o^ them, together with Casheen their Ring-Leade^
or Captain, were killed. And 250 Foot, and 20 Horse commanded by
Lieutenant-Colone^ Hodson, marching from Mountmelick, he posted them at
Kilkapog by break of day, where the Foot entered the Woods and Bogs, and the
Horse securing the skirts, they hunted out and killed about 18 of the Enemy
that lay lurking there to surprise such as passed that way; an^ indeed these
sort of Enemies were more dangerous and cruel where they mastered, tha^ the
Regular Troops, but so cowardly witha^ that they would not stand a Charge, if
the^ perceived the Match was but any thing nea^ equal; an Instance of which may
be observe^ in this, viz.

A Party of Colonel Brewer's Men being upon their March toward Ki^negad, a
great Body of Rapparees lay in Ambush, yet durst no^ come out for fear of being
worsted, though ou^ Men were much inferior to them in number but let them
pass; when so it happened, thoug^ very unfortunately, that a Sergeant and 4
Soldiers of this Party lagged behind a considerable way; upon these the
Rapparees seized, and though on their knees they begged for Quarter, yet they
murdered them, and not satisfied with their Deaths, they bored out their Eyes,
and mangled their dead Bodies; but the next day three of the Murderers were
taken and brought to Mullingar, where one of them accused the other two of the
Fact; they were upon such Conviction immediately hanged up: and Captain Poyn
soon after falling upon the whole Knot of them with a Party of 110 Men of the
Garrison of Mullingar, put to the rout, and dispersed throughout the Country,
killing ^etween 40 and 50 of them. And now since ^e have had occasion to speak
so much of these Rapparees in the Series of this History, some ^ay be
inquisitive to know what manner of people they are: To which I answer,

They are a sort of Vagabonds and Thieves, ^ot caring to Work, or take any
Employment upon them; a mixture of Irish with other Na^ions, who herding
together, take all opportu^ities, where they are strongest, to plunder, ^urn
and murder, their hands being against ^ll, and the hands of all against them,
to de^troy as Beasts of Prey. They rejoice at Wars ^od Troubles, because then
they have liberty ^hey think to do what they please. Their Dwel^ings for the
most part are Cabins, or moveable Houses, and their skulking places Bogs, Woods
and Mountains. They are not held as Soldi^rs, nor included in the Articles of
War, but lie at the mercy of those that take them, without their being obliged
to give them any Quarter, though they crave it. Their Apparel, unless they rig
themselves by Plunder, is so misserable, that they go in a manner naked.

Yet these hopeful Sticks, the Commanders of the Irish Army encourage, and put
Weapons into many of their hands, to harress and destroy the Countries under
their Majesty's Obedience.

Yet they have been so often met with upon their Incursions, that about 4000 of
them have come short home since this War begun.

And furthermore to encourage the People to be vigilant, and to discourage such
Rakeshame^ the Lords Justices and Council of Ireland, pu^ forth a Proclamation
in these words or to thi^ effect:

THat to prevent the Robberies, wilf^^ Burnings of Buildings, Corn and Hay^^
Murders and Insurrection, with which the parts of the Kingdom under their
Majestie^ Obedience was threatened by the Rebels an^ their Adherents, during the
time their Majesty's Army should be upon their march t^ the Frontiers, or in
the Quarters then po^sessed by the Rebels, they have thought it n^cessary, and
do thereby publish and declare That the Popish Irish Inhabitants of the
r^spective Baronies under their Majesty's Ob^dience, where any Rebels commonly
call^^ Rapparees, shall commit any such Robberies Burnings or Murders; or
where any such Insurrection shall happen, if they do not immediately give
Notice of such Rapparees and Insurrections respectively to the Justice of
Peace, or chief Officer of the Militia next to their Habitations, and assist
him in the taking and destroying them, and in the suppression of Insurrections;
that then they, where such Fact shall be committed, neglecting their Duties,
shall be deemed Confederates with the said Rebels, and Enemies of their
Majesty's Government: And by Order to be given by the Lords Justices, as
occasion shall require, shall be proceeded against with the utmost severity of
Military Execution. And they do further Order, That no protectted Irish Papist
shall be abroad out of his or their Dewlling Place of Abode, after the hours of
Nine at Night, or before the hours of Four in the Morning, under the Pain and
Penalty of being put out of their Majesty's Protection. And if after the
Thirtieth of May, 1691. any Arms or Ammunition shall be found upon the persons,
or in the possession of any such Irish Papists, he or they shall be looked upon
as Rebels, and punished accordingly: And as they intend severely to punish all
such as shall offend in the particulars abovementioned, so they do assure all
those. Irish Papists who live under their Majesty's protection, that they
behaving themselves as becomes good Subjects, shall have the benefit thereof.

These Proceedings made many of the Papists stir to prevent the mischief, who
before stood laughing in their sleeves at the Damages their Protestant
Neighbors sustained, though to curry favor in a dissembling manner, they
often showed them a fair Countenance, and seemed to pity their Losses. And
Major O Neal and some others, came over from the Enemy, and took the advantage
of their Majesty's Protection.

But whilst these things were transacting, one Mark Baggot apparelling himself
in Women's Clothes, made it his business to spy into our Quarters, and the
manner of Affairs; but his too much inquisitiveness discovering him, he was
seized, and being sentenced by a Court Marshal, he was executed at Dublin on
the 20th of May.

The Season thus far in a forwardness, gave a favorable Invitation to the
Army, for their taking the field, when a Party of the Irish Army, consisting of
150 Men, thinking to be early at it, and do some notable Exploit to be talked
on, came to Castle-Lions, and took thence a few of the poor peoples Cows; but
Colonel Donep with about 20 Danes, and a like number of the Militia Dragoons
pursued, over-taking them at Ballyderdawn, where a Lieutenant with 8 Danes, and
6 Dragoons, beat off 60 of them who had lined the Hedges, in which Action the
Lieutenant was killed; but the Colonel coming up with his Party, and being
reinforced with 50 fresh Men, he still pursued them, killing about 50 of them,
of which 2 were Commission Officers, took 40 Horses, and his Men got
indifferent store of Plunder.

This was followed with other Successes of the like nature, nor could any great
Actions be expected, by reason the Armies were not as yet in the field, our
staying for the arrival of more Ships from England; and the Irish upon the like
account from France.

And about the latter end of May, 8 Ships with 500 Carriage-Horses, and other
Necessaries for the Army came to Dublin, and Lieutenant General Scravenmore,
Major General Mackay, and Major General Ruvigny came likewise on Shore. And now
the Train of Artillery consisted of 39 Pieces of Cannon, 12 Fieldpieces, and 6
Mortars.

And in the mean while the French General St. Ruth proceeded to model the Irish
Army, and give Commissions in his Master's Name, ordering things with an
Absolute Power, where their Troops drew together at Loghera in Connaught.

And in the beginning of June all things on our part was in a manner in a
readiness, the Soldiers by this time being well recruited of the hardships,
found many of them in their Winter Quarters; and being often out in Parties.

The Army indeed lay still longer than the Irish expected, which made them
promise themselves more success than they were like to meet withal, for the
General intending to make a vigorous War, and push on for speedy Victory, and
the reducing all places that yet held out, and had refused to submit to their
Majesty's Obedience, took care so effectually to provide for all things
necessary for enterprizing so great an Undertaking, that nothing might be
wanting to retard in the least the progress of their Majesty's Arms; and
because the Stores laid up the Year before as to Forage, and other things of
that nature, whereby the Army might subsist in its March, it was prudently
taken into Consideration, that Nature should have time to do her part, in
furnishing the Earth with such a sufficiency as might supply what was wanting,
if any delays by cross Accidents should happen, that so every thing that could
be expected might contribute to the sudden and effectual reducing the Kingdom,
and putting an end to so chargeable a War; whereby the Forces upon so happy a
Conclusion, as must be at leisure to oppose the grand Disturber of Europe in a
more sensible manner; seeing it was concluded his main Policy in assisting the
Irish, was only to divert those Troops he otherwise could not without reason
expect, would make him an unwelcome Visit upon his own Frontiers, and jointly
labor to plant the Rightful Monarch in the Field of Golden Lilies.

These Considerations, I say, being of weight, presaged the unparalled
Success in a great measure, that attended and crowned them to our wishes.

The Irish, and the French in Confederacy with them, held several strong Towns;
such as were not thought easily to be reduced; as Bal^ymore, the two Towns of
Athlone, Galloway and Lymerick, besides a numerous Army that had already taken
the field, and promised to themselves great matters from their Valor and
Conduct, as now supporting themselves better disciplined than the Year before;
for they had amongst them a great many French Officers, who labored to
exercise and train them up in the Arts and Methods used in the French Army. And
indeed, had they had to do with any other Nation but the English, they might
have come off better than they did in the oppositions they made; but the
ancient British Valor revived in so short a War, took again its insuperable
vigor, resolving to overcome all Difficulties, and stick at no Danger, but
furiously press on where the least glimmering of Victor presented, and so like
a rapid Torrent forcing the opposing Dams, carrying all before it, and Crown
their Monarchs with sprouting Laurels and Triumphs.

But not longer to detain the Reader from matter of Fact, which is mainly the
intended Scope of this History: The Supplies expected from England being
seasonably arrived, and every thing that was thought necessary in a readiness,
there wanted but Orders to march; which were not delayed; for now, as is said,
the Army being ready to take the field, our Forces were commanded to Decamp,
and accordingly Decamped from Mullingar; and the same day the Army was joined
by Lieutenant General Douglas, with the Northern Troops, and on the Seventh of
June came before Ballymore, seizing upon all the Enemies Out-posts, which they
quitted upon the approach of our Men; but being taken, the Sergeant was hanged
for firing after the Communication was then cut off between him and the Town.

In the Afternoon a Battery of four Fieldpieces was bent against the Fort, and
five Batteries were raised the Night following, from whence our Cannon rent the
Walls and Curtains; and the General sent to the Governor to let him know, That
if he and the Garrison would Surrender within two hours, he would save their
Lives, and make them Prisoners of War; if not, they must expect no Quarter.

To which the Governor made no direct Answer; but replied, He hoped to get
better Terms.

Our Cannon having made two great Breaches, and four Boats brought from
Mullingar, put into the Water, the fear of a present Storm made the Besieged
hang out a white Flag, and Colonel Bourk, with several Officers, came and
submitted to the General at discretion: So that Colonel Earl with 400 Men
marched in and took possession of the place; in which there was a Garrison of
780 Soldiers, besides 259 Rapparees well armed, and about 1000 Women and
Children.

In this Action we had 8 Men killed, and the Enemy above 150.

This important place thus reduced, and the Prince of Wirtemberg having joined
the Army with about 12000 Horse and Foot, the March was directed toward
Athlone.

On the Nineteenth our Men came before the place, where they had put up the
French Colors in four parts of the Town, to make us believe there were a great
many French ingarrisoned in it: but this hindered not; for by Ten in the Morning
a Battery of Ten eighteen Pounders was finished; and playing upon the Great
Bastion, in a short time the Face-flank and Curtain were laid in Rubbish, and
the General ordered the Assault to be made in this order.

First there advanced 300 detached Granadiers.

Then 50 Pioneers with more Faggots.

Then 200 Feusileers, supported by two Regiments of Foot.

After them 200 Pioneers with more Faggots.

Then 20 Men with Axes to cut the Barrocades, if any opposed.

So that about Six in the Evening, on the Twentieth of June, the Signal was
given to fall on, which was the Discharge of all the Cannon in Battery.

At first the Enemy seemed resolved to defend the Breacb; but upon the first
flight of the English Grenades, they scattered and fled in much confusion over
the Bridge to the Irish Town on Connaught side, some leaping into the Shannon
for haste, and there perished in the Waters.

Our Men immediately entered the English Town; but lying somewhat open to the
Enemies shot on the other side the River, some few were killed, and others
wounded; but the Engineers soon raised Blinds to shelter them.

On our part of note, Lieutenant Colonel Goar, and Lieutenant Colonel Kirk of
Villier's Regiment were killed, one entering the Breach, and the other surveying
the Town from a Hill.

The Siege was carried on against the other Town with great Resolution; so that
having battered it till the Walls and Castle were partly beat down, and
perceiving it saultable, order was then given for the storming of the place.

On the 28th of June, about Seven in the Morning, much in the same order as the
former Attack was made, yet the Detachments were greater, as being a stronger
place: but before our Men could be in a readiness, a small part of the Enemy
came and set fire to a close Gallery laid over the Arch of a Stone Bridge, they
had broken down, but were many of them killed in the Attempt; yet it deferred
the Attack till the Thirtieth.

However the Cannon and Bombs ceased not to play, and do terrible Execution,
setting the Houses on fire, and beating down all before them.

About Six in the Afternoon the Signal was given to fall on by ringing the
Church-Bell; whereupon they entered the Ford below the Bridge, and pressed with
such vigor upon the Enemy, that they forced them to quit the Trenches, and
within the space of half an hour made themselves Masters of all their Outworks,
and the Ruins of the Castle where they had fortified themselves with Sconces;
and Major General Maxwell with 200 Soldiers, and diverse Officers of note, were
made Prisoners.

Yet in the Soldiers overrunning the Town in the first fury, a great many were
killed; insomuch, 2000 are computed to be slain from the beginning of the
Siege, till the English were entire Masters of the Town.

The place was taken in the sight of the Irish Army, who, when too late, were
sending a Detachment to their Relief. There were found only 6 Pieces of Brass
Cannon, and 2 Mortars, but little store of Provision and Ammunition.

The Principal Officers killed of the Irish were Brigadier Mackellicuddy.

The Colonels Mac Mahon, O Neal, O Guard, and Grace.

The Lieutenant-Colonels, Mac Genis and Barnwell, also Major Murray.

The Enemy had all the advantage imaginable to Relieve this important Place, as
lying with their whole Army on the other side, but a little distance from it,
where we had no Forces; or if any, none capable of opposing them at that time;
yet so infatuated they were, that relying on its strength, they still had a
confidence that the Town beyond the River would baffle the English Courage,
notwithstanding they saw the other Town was taken with a very little resistance.

Monsieur St. Ruth, and other of their chief Commanders, were reported to be
often in it, viewing its Works and Fortifications, and assured themselves it
would at least be a great part of the Summers Work to reduce it, if they were
not in the end obliged to draw off from before it; and the rather, because some
part of our Army had been before it, and gone off without any considerable
Success, or doing any great matters against the Place.

But their Imaginations answered not, as it has appeared. Their Expectations,
and those Supplies, as is said that they sent, came so unsonably late, that all
the advantage they had, was to put a stop to our Men's pursuing too far such as
got out of the Town, and fled for shelter toward their Army. This sensible
Blow greatly damped the Courage and Resolution of the Enemy, who before had
promised to do great things, and made them bethink themselves of taking new
measures; insomuch that some took the opportunity, as they found occasion, to
desert.

The French seemed discontented with the weak Resistance of the Irish; and
every thing appeared more and more dreadful to this numerous Army.

When several Consultations were held what was best to be done, whether to
remove or expect the English in that Camp; for they could not propose any thing
less to themselves, than that after this Success our Forces would give them a
nearer Visit, and attempt the dislodging them from a place so near a Town newly
taken, now very weak in it self by Battery. And though they talked high, yet in
all their Debates it did not, it seems, appear they had any great mind to come
to a fight; but rather to delay our Army, till the Season should advance to put
a stop to any considerable opportunity, or till they might find some great
advantage to further their purpose.

Whilst the Enemies Considerations run to this purpose, our Men were gathering
the Plunder of the Place; which was not so considerable as in so strong a Town
might have been expected; for besides what had been burnt in the Fires that had
happened by throwing in of Bombs, and destroyed in the beating down of Houses,
some of the chief Inhabitants early apprehending this Siege, had removed what
was valuable, together with themselves, to distant places, where they thought
them more secure; though by the way part fell into the hands of the Rapparees,
who distinguished not between Friend or Foes, where they found opportunity to
get Booty. But to come nearer.

The Enemy, after several Debates, perceiving our Men were absolute Masters of
the Place, which was in a manner laid in Rubbish by the throwing in 600 Bombs,
and the force of 1200 great Shot, they came to a Result; and it was concluded
immediately to raise their Camp, and march some Miles further; which they did:
and to increase their number, drew the Garrisons of Sligo, Iames-Town, and
Lanesborough, quitting them to those that would come and take possession.

As soon as the Walls of Athlone were a little repaired, the General left a
Garrison there under the Command of Colonel Lloyd; and drew out to observe the
Enemies motion.

The Enemy, to amuze us, gave out, they were resolved to come to a Battle; when
for the supply of our Army, diverse Vessels with Ammunition and other Stores,
arrived from England, and bringing over likewise the Earl of Portland's
Regiment of Horse, who soon joined the Army.

It was now resolved to dislodge the Enemy, or oblige them to fight.

Their Majesty's Forces on the Tenth of July passed the River, the Foot over a
Bridge of Boats below the Town, and the Horse over a Stone Bridge that had been
repaired for their more advantageous passage, and marched to Ballinsloe, a
place on the River Sac.

The Enemy lying three Miles distant, very advantagiously encamped at a place
called Aghrim, a small Town, stretching their Left toward Kilconnel-Abbey, and
their Right upon the Hills of Kilcomodon, having two very difficult Bogs before
them, through which the Roads go to Galloway: And on the Left was the Ruins of
an old Castle, where an Intrenchment was made and lined with Musketeers; and
on the Right likewise were several Retrenchments for the Security of their Camp.

The English Army passed the River Sac, the Foot and Artillery over a
Stone Bridge, and the Horse by two Fords, forcing the Out-Guards to retreat,
whilst our Left Wing of Horse advanced beyond the Bog that covered the Enemies
Right, and made way for the Foot to come in, between them and that.

Our Cannon fired upon the Enemies Guards at the end of the Defile or dirty
Lane that leads to Aghrim, dislodged them that defended it, whilst our Horse
and Foot took their Posts, pouring in their Shot.

The Enemy drew down a great Body of Horse toward our Left, and were so
strongly possessed behind the high Banks of the Ditches, that they held our
Foot in dispute for 2 hours, before they could gain any thing considerable upon
them; but at last we prevailed, and forced them to give way, notwithstanding
fresh Recruits of Horse and Foot were sent to sustain them, as they were pushed
back; and although three Battalions of Foot advanced on the Right, over the
Skirts of the Bog, and a small Rivulet that discharged it self into the Sac,
where in a Corn field others of the Enemies Battalions and Squadrons stood firm
to the Charge; yet they notwithstanding maintained their ground, till more of
our Regiments and Squadrons advanced to support them; and then Charging up the
Hills where the Enemies Squadrons were posted, gave them a warm Entertainment.

In the mean time our Left had opportunity to beat the Irish from their Ground;
and at the same time the Right pressing upon them, disordered them to that
degree, that a general Rout of their Horse ensued; and their Foot thereupon
being hotly charged, fell into disorder; and though they had made a resolute
Resistance, they were obliged to quit the field, and were pursued by our Army
four Miles; but then Night coming on, and the difficulty of the ways hindered
the further pursuit, it being 6 in the Evening when the Armies engaged, and
near 9 before they broke and fled.

The Enemies Army was superior to ours, consisting of 20000 Foot, and 8000
Horse, and had by their Encampment all the advantage; yet our Men gained an
entire Victory, 7000 of the Enemy being killed upon the place.

Among the slain of note were the Lord Galloway, Colonel Moor, Colonel Baker,
Colonel Gourdon, a great many Captains, Lieutenants, Ensigns, Cornets, etc. and
more particularly Monsieur St. Ruth, the French General, who received here his
Reward for the many Cruelties he used toward the Protestants in France.

Many of note were wounded, of which many mortally, and soon after died of
their Wounds.

About 100 Officers and 500 Soldiers were made Prisoners; and all the Enemies
Provision, Tents, Baggage and Cannon fell into the hand of our Men, with a
great many Colors and Standards, and most of the Arms of the Foot, which to
help their speed in flight, they threw away.

This great and entire Victory was obtained with the loss of 600 Men on our
side; and of note Major General Holstable, Colonel Mongats, Colonel Charles
Herbert, Major General Petit, Major Davenish, Major Colt, Major Cornwall, Major
Fox, with diverse Subalternate Officers.

The wounded of note were the Prince of Hesse Darmstadt, the Lord Cutts, the
Lord George Hamilton, Colonel Earl, Lieutenant Colonel Burdwell, with several
Subalternates.

The Enemy in this flight and total rout scattered their Arms and Baggage all
the way they fled, thinking as it may be by that means to stay the pursuit: but
it availed them little; for such Trifles were not regarded, in comparison of
the Great Work that was in hand, to subdue and bring the Kingdom under their
Majesty's Obedience by an entire Conquest; insomuch, that urged by the Sword
behind, and not finding way to escape through the press and throng that was
before them, a great many cast themselves into the Bogs and Waterplashes, and
of these not very many escaped.

Others that were more nimble of Foot, and had got the start of the press,
scampered by known ways, and never left running when the pursuit was given
over, till they got to the Woods or Mountains, or into such Bogs where they
thought it was impossible to follow them.

The French, who were not so nimble as the Irish, or if they had, yet but very
little acquainted with the Country, came mostly by the worst on it, where they
were broken and scattered, throwing away their Arms, and crying for Quarter,
which in the heat of the Soldiers fury could not be always obtained.

Some of the Enemies Horse indeed retreated pretty indifferently, keeping
together as well as the Confusion would permit; but thought it not safe to stay
in the Countries thereabout, for fear of being attacked by some of our
Detachments the next day; but being got at a great distance, and those that
were scattered coming to their Rendezvous, they made a small Body under the
Command of Colonel Sheldon, and some other Officers; but the Foot was so
entirely dispersed, that we heard little of them afterward, unless such as got
into the Places that yet held out, and even there many of the Fugitives were
refused, the Garrisons being already filled up and straightened for Provision, so
that for a time lying under the Walls, and hankering about without any thing
wherewith materially to subsist, many disbanded of themselves, and others by
the leave of their Officers, as finding this great Blow had broken their Hopes
and Interests in the Kingdom so far, that they even despaired of piecing it
together again by force; and withal knowing no doubt, that this would be such
unwelcome News to France, that although the late King resided in that Court to
solicit on their behalfs, they could expect but little Succors, seeing all
that had been already sent had turned to so little account; and that the
English heightened by this Success, knew well enough how to take the advantage,
and push on to the Walls of Lymerick, wherein, as their last Refuge, they had
placed some hopes.

Whilst these things were employing the Enemies serious Consideration, care was
taken of our wounded Men; and such Prisoners as had been secured, who received
very good Usage, and what else was requisite, till they should be disposed of
as Prisoners of War.

The Victory thus entirely gained, the Army encamped beyond the place of
Battle, and Brigadier Eppinger going out with a strong Party, possessed himself
of Portumney, whereupon the Fort and Castle of Bavaher surrendered, and many of
the scattered Forces fled to Galloway and Lymerick.

As for the greatest part of the Standards and Colors taken in this Battle,
they were sent to England, and there exposed to the public view of the People,
as eminent Trophies of so signal a Victory.

The English Army upon the former Successes, resolute to push on for the entire
reducing the Kingdom to their Majesty's Obedience, after some refreshment,
marched toward Galloway.

Being before the place, the General sent a Trumpet to the Lord Dillon,
Governor of the Town, to offer him advantageous Terms in case he Surrendered
before the Cannon were planted against the Walls.

But he returned for answer, That Monsieur Ussone the French
Lieutenant General, who commanded, was of the same Opinion with himself, and
the rest of the Officers; and that they were resolved to defend the place to
the last.

Upon which the Approaches were made, and on the 20th of July by break of day,
a Fort or Ravelin on the Hill was attacked, and our Granadiers that were
ordered for that purpose, marched with great silence; insomuch that they were
not discovered till they were at the Foot of the Glacis, where they delivered
their Granado's, and went on to the Pallisado's, entering the Fort.

The Enemy perceiving all was lost, cried for Quarter, leaving our Men Masters
of it; so that they strongly retrenched themselves: but hearing that Baldorick
O Donnel was on his March to throw himself into Galloway, the Water was bridged
over with the Tin Boats, over which passed 6 Regiments of our Foot, and 4
Squadrons of Horse to oppose his Attempt: so that finding he could not effect
his Design, he retreated into the County of Mayo, burning and plundering in his
way.

The taking this Fort so Alarmed the Town, that the Governor desired a Parley,
and leave to send some Persons to the General to treat about Articles of
Surrender; so that three of their Lieutenant-Colonels came out, and as many of
ours-entred the Town, by way of Hostage; and after some debate it was agreed,
That the Town should be delivered to such Officers as the General should
appoint; and in the mean time five Hostages should be sent for the due
performance of the Agreement on the Articles; and all the Outworks of the Town
put into the Generals hands, the Enemy forbearing to fortify any thing in the
mean-time; and to withdraw all their Cannon from the Walls; but that our Men
might be permitted to work and post themselves ^s they saw convenient, provided
they came not within three yards of the Wall, or placed any Cannon on the
Batteries that should be made: And that the Garrison and Townsmen should have
the benefit of the Lords Justices Proclamation of Indemnity, which gives them
their Estates and Liberties. And further, that those who were desirous to
depart, might be conducted to Lymerick, with their Arms, Drums beating, etc and
six pieces of Cannon; and have liberty to send to Tyrconnel, and acquaint him
with what they had done, and invite him to do the same at Lymerick.

That pursuant thereto they sent the Lord Clanrickard, with four Officers of
note as Hostages, and allowed two Persons sent from the General to enter the
Town, and take an Account of the Stores, etc.

The Treaty upon these Considerations coming to a final Conclusion, the
Garrison marched out on the 26th of July, D'Vssone the French
Lieutenant General having leave to be on his way to Lymerick, three hours
before the rest marched out.

On the 28th of July Matters being settled, and the Place garrisoned, the Army
marched away toward Lymerick the only strong Place the Irish held in the
Kingdom.

Whilst these things passed, Sir Teague O Regan delivered up Slego to Colonel
Mickleburn, and diverse other Places of no considerable defense were Surrendered
by others.

Baldarick O Donnel, whose Success an old Prophecy had foretold, fearing by the
ill luck ^he all along had had, it was but a Fable, willing to submit with the
Men under his Command, sent to desire a Cessation on this particular, and that
some place might be assigned him and his followers, till his Majesty was
acquainted with his Proposals for coming over; which was in part allowed him,
and he afterward was received into their Majesty's Protection.

Now our Parties being abroad, entered those Counties that held out, and brought
away great Booties of Cattle, defeating diverse of the Enemies Detachments that
were abroad, plundering the Country.

Upon the approach of the English Army toward Lymerick, the Enemy, who were
encamped near it, no sooner perceived the advanced Parties, but their Foot
entered the Town, and their Horse drew off further into the Country.

And now Tyrconnel finding the Thread he had spun grew too fine, and ready to
break in sunder, vexing at the crosness of Affairs, fell sick and died, as it is
reported, of Grief, being buried in Lymerick, the place where he died.

On the 11th of August our Army marched from Nenagh to Shalley, about two Miles
from the Silver Mines.

The next day to Tusla, where to refresh them they remained one day.

But the next day the General being resolved to push on and prosecute the
Success, they had orders to march to Larrick-en-Lysh, about 4 miles from
Lymerick, the only place wherein the Enemy reposed their last hopes, as having
yet some small glimmering of hope, which they reposed in a continual
expectation of some fresh Succors from France.

From Carrick the next day the General went with 1500 Horse and Dragoons within
sight of Lymerick, beating in their Out-guards, and taking a view of their
Outworks from a Hill that overlooked the City where our Artillery encamped
the last Year; and upon his being there, sev^^al Deserters came over, and
confirmed an Account before received, that the Horse were retired to the other
side of the Shannon, and their Foot drawn within the Retrenchments.

Further informing, That upon Tyrconnel's Death, a Commission was produced
under the late King's hand, which Mr. Plowden (formerly one of the
Commissioners of the Revenue) had brought lately from France, impowering Sir
Alexander Fitton, Sir Richard Neagle, and the said Plowden, Justices of Ireland.

And a further Account was given, That diverse Persons were seized and made
Prisoners in Lymerick, by the order of the French General Vssone, for having
made some Proposals in order to a timely Surrender. Upon which the General sent
them word by a Trumpet, That if they put any Man to death for having a mind to
come over to him, he would retaliate it on the Irish Prisoners that had been
lately taken, and were now in his power. Of which indeed there were a great
many, and some of no mean quality in Titles, besides Officers of considerable
note, upon the account of their late Commands ^n the Irish Garrisons or Army.

On the 16th Sir John Hanmore joined the General with five Regiments of Foot
from Cork, and the Neighboring Garrisons; as also some other Re-inforcements
from diverse adjacent places, as well Horse as Foot.

The same day Major General La-Forest was sent out with a strong Detachment to
meet the Cannon, but with some impatience had been expected from Athlone, under
the Convoy of Colonel Loyd's Regiment; and though in the mean time a great deal
of Rain fell, yet it nothing abated the Courage of the Officers and Soldiers,
to go on in prosecuting the intended Siege of Lymerick.

To further whose purpose, a Squadron of English Ships were in the Shannon, who
made themselves Masters of a French Ship of considerable Burden, which had
taken in St. Ruth's Horse and Equipage, in order to carry it for France; after
which they braved the City of Lymerick, by coming almost within Cannon shot of
it.

Whilst these things were doing and the Lord Justice Coningsby, who had been to
concert Matters in the Army, was returning from Dublin, the Militia were in a
readiness to keep those Parts in quiet, consisting of 1000 Foot, and 500 Horse
and Dragoons, having with them 3 Fieldpieces; whilst others of the Militia of
the neighboring Counties were advancing to augment their Number, and make them
up 3000 effectual Men, under the Command of the Earl of Granard, their business
being likewise to secure such Places as might fall into their hands by force,
or being abandoned by the Enemy.

The English Army having been some time retarded at Carrick-en-Lesh, in
expectation of the heavy Cannon, upon its arrival in the Camp, marched on the
25th of August nearer to Lymerick, and took in diverse places by the way, and
especially those near Lymerick.

In one Fort new built, and Garrisoned with 600 Men, made great show of
Resistance, yet upon an Attack made by 8 of our Granadiers, after they had
fired upon them, killing one of our Men, they made a running Retreat, and ^y a
Covert-way got within their Flank-lines ^rawn about the Town.

W^ilst the Army was preparing for a for^al Siege, a considerable Detachment of
Foot and Horse, with some Cannon, was sent under ^he Command of the Prince
Hesse Darmstadt, ^o take in Castle Conel, where the Enemy had Garrison.

Another Party was sent to take in three o^^er Castles which the Enemy had
garrisoned ^n the River below the Town, and enterprized ^^em with good Success;
yet at the first co^ing on of our Army before Lymerick, several ^ield-pieces
and Cannon were planted so ad^antagious to the Enemy, that playing upon a
^egiment of Dragoons, and another of Horse, ^^ey obliged them to draw off to a
further di^^ance; yet our Men advanced to Cromwell's ^ort, which was quitted, as
also was the Line ^^ Communication they had made to the church, retiring within
the Retrenchments ^^at were better secured by the Cannon of the ^own. However,
to come into Action, a Detachment of 80 Granadiers were commanded to attack one
of their Outworks, which was a new Fort guarded by 600 Men, notwithstanding
upon the approach of our Granadiers, having discharged their Pieces, they fled
by a Covered-way into the Town, and left us Masters of the Fort; yet our Men
pushing on, pursued the Fliers, killing some, and taking about 20 Prisoners,
losing but one Man in the Action; and the same Night Colonel D^nep, a Commander
of the Danish Horse, was killed by a random shot.

On the 26th of August the heavy Cannon and Mortars came up, and our Men began
to work on the Lines of Communication, and the next day the Batteries were
raised against Thomond-Bridge, whilst the Prince Hesse Darmstadt marched with a
Detachment of Horse, Foot and Drrgoons, and 3 Pieces of Cannon to attack Castle
Connel; and Lieutenant General Scravenmore, with another detached Party,
marched to Carrick Gunnel, which Surrendered upon the first Summons, ^^e
Garrison consisting of 250 Men, being made Prisoners of War. And our light
Frigates with Ammunition and Provision came to an Anchor within sight of
Lymerick; which the Besieged taking for Succors from France, were mainly
heightened with Joy; but upon being undeceived, were as much dejected.

Castle Connel, a very strong Fortress, was surrendered to the Prince, and
several other small Castles at diverse times, in all which were taken about 900
Prisoners.

The Siege began by this time very much to streighten Lymerick, insomuch that
the Besieged could not without great difficulty have any considerable
Communication with their Parties abroad; for their Horse had been removed by
our shot from their Camp that was under the Cannon of the Town, and obliged to
march a great way further; yet they appeared very vigilent in guarding the
Passes of the Shannon, posting their Troops upon many of the Fords, and
frequently sent their Scouts along the further Bank, to observe the motion of
our Men, and to give notice to their Main-Guards, if they perceived them about
to make an Attempt for passing it. However, that little a^ail^^, as will by and
by appear.

The reducing of Lymerick b^ing firmly resolved, our Men went on vigorously
with the Works, making a Line of Contravallation with 4 Forts, for the better
defending it from any Attack the Enemy might make upon it in their Sallies, and
raised new Batteries on the Right, almost in the same place where the Attack
was made upon the place the last year, the largest of them being within
Carbine-shot of the Wall, in a place where it was held not to be extraordinary
strong; and indeed the Cannon being mounted, and playing furiously against it,
made the Stones shiver, and with a few Balls rent it in several places, that
the Breaches began to appear at a great distance, whilst the Bombs thrown into
the Town made great havoc, so that the Flames of the fired Houses frequently
ascending very dreadful, especially when it happened in the Night time, so that
it might be discerned for many Miles round the Country, and diverse were killed
by the breaking of the Shell, blowing up and beating down of Houses, and
amongst those that had their lot to fall this way, was the Lady Dillon, and a
great many were wounded and disabled from the Service; so that according ^^ the
report of some Deserters, they began greatly to murmur, especially the Militia,
who ^ad been forced thither after the Battle o^ Aghrim, complaining that their
Wives and Children in their absence, were many of them in very great distress;
and unless they might have liberty speedily to go and take care of them, they
must perish for want: some of them urged the danger the place was in, and not
likely to make a long Resistance against for powerful an Army, that had all
manner of Recruits and Supplies at hand, as occasion should require it; when on
the contrary, they were shut up within Stone Walls, and could reasonably expect
none.

However, to di^^ipate these Discontents, i^ was caused to be rumored abroad
among^^ the Citizens and Soldiers, that the French were speedily expected with
large Succors; but when it appeared very difficult to gain Credit that they
could be that way effectually relieved, by reason we had several Frigates
carrying a considerable strength of Guns, and Men up^on on the River to hinder
their coming up tha^ way; likewise a prevailing and victoriou^ Army in the
Field, to obstruct their putting in Succors by Land; it was then to quiet the
Clamor, promised by Monsieur D'Vsson, the French Governor, That the Militia
should be dismissed if Succors did not come from France within 12 days.

But he failed them: or had he intended to have sent them home, the difficulty
of getting away would have been very great, if not impossible, had they not
first had leave from the General; for it was apprehended they would have thrust
out a great many useless People to save their Provision, which occasioned a
watchful eye upon the Passes, that few could get away without permission; yet
some they thrust into an Island in the River, being mostly Protestants, where
they must have starved, had not our Men in compassion fetched them off.

During this care, and the vigorous carrying on of the Siege, further care was
likewise taken for the suppressing the Parties abroad; whereupon 300 Horse and
Dragoons were sent to re^inforce those that were abroad, and bring into
subjection the small Garrisons the Enemy yet h^ld out against their Majesty's
in Kerry, and the neighboring parts; and six Pieces of Cannon were likewise
ordered for that Servic^; so that upon the approach of our Forces, m^st of them
Surrendered without opposition, and all the Country round about b^came free and
open, so that the Country People brought in their Provisions, and other
Necessaries, to the great refreshment of our Army; and measures were taken for
settling those parts in their Obedience, the People appeared every where to be
highly pleased, as now being under a better assurance of safety from Plunder,
and the future Inconveniences of a War, that had wasted almost all they had;
so that contrary to the usual manner in this case frequently used, they were so
far from flying, for the most part, with the little substance they had left,
that the Villagers, and others that had taken Refuge there, met their
Conquerours with Tears of Joy, and welcomed them as their Deliverers; Peace and
Rest being ever most sweet and pleasant to those, who precipitating themselves
unadvisedly into Misfortunes, have had leisure to consider their Error; and by
the sharp convincing Arguments of Suffering, have known what it is to be rash,
in undertaking what they could not reasonably expect to go through with against
the prevailing Arms of a powerful Nation, contending with which Ireland has
always been succesless.

Things being thus ordered, the Out-Parties, unless so many as could keep the
places taken in Obedience, returned to the Camp, carrying thither some
Prisoners of note; and amongst others, the Lord Castle Connel was brought
thither; where, notwithstanding the advancing of the Season, the Soldiers
showed much resolution and cheerfulness in their Undertaking to carry on their
Works, and manage all other Matters for the Accomplishment of the main End of
so brave an Undertaking; and though the Enemies great Guns from the Walls,
Castles and Towers of the Town, kept a continual thundering; yet the great shot
did not obstruct the progress they made in their advances.

On the 30th of August 9 Mortars played against Lymerick, whose Bombs set fire
to several Houses; but the flame was soon extinguished.

The next day 9 Pieces of Cannon were bent upon the Bridge to ruin it, and
hinder thereby the Enemies Communication with their Camp: And that Night 2
Mortars more of 18 Inches Diameter, were placed in Battery; and two Batteries,
one of fourteen, and the other of ten Pieces, all Twenty four Pounders, were
finished, and some Deserters came over, who gave but a melancholy Account of
the posture of Affairs in the Town, as to their being badly armed, and worse
provisioned.

Now whilst the Siege went successfully on, upon Advice that a great Party of
Rapparees were drawn together in the County of Kerry, mixed with some of the
Enemies Horse, the General ordered Brigadier Levison, with 1500 Horse and
Dragoons to march against them, of which they had no sooner notice, but they
divided into two Parties for their better Retreat; and the Brigadier did the
like, and with part of his Detachment pursued one of the Parties, whil^t
Colonel Nieuenhuys did the like by the other; the Brigadier soon overtook his
Party, which consi^ted of two Regiments of Hors^, and a great number of
Rapparees, which our Men charged so desperately, they making no cons^derable
resistance, that they were soon broken and in rout, most of them being killed
or taken Prisoners, and a great Booty recovered which they had got in ravaging
the Country. The Colonel did the like by the Party he pursued; which gave the
Villages rest from their fears of burning and plundering, etc.

Our Cannon and Bombs continuing to play against Lymerick, the former beat down
thirty Yards of the Wall of the English Town on the North-east side,
dismounting the Enemies Cannon, and laying them in Rubbish, whilst the latter
set fire to three of their Magazines, one of Brandy, and two of Biskets; the
Fire lasting till Morning, and doing great damage, so that to save their other
Provisions, they hastily removed them to more distant places; and their Horse
that Encamped along the River, being removed by the Guns of our Frigates,
encamped between the Town and Killaloo, that they might be at hand to defend
the Passages of the Shannon. And now the General resolving the Army should pass
the Shannon, in order to attack the Irish Horse in the County of Clare, and to
streighten the Town on that side, the better to conceal the Design, a show was
made, as if he intended to ship away the heavy Cannon, and quit the small
Castles and outward Fortifications; which the Enemy taking for his being about
to raise the Siege gave a great shout for Joy. But that Night our Men laid the
Pontons over the River, about a Mile above the Town, and early the next Morning
the Royal Regiment of Dragoons, with a Detachment of Horse and Foot, had passed
over undiscovered by the Enemy; but as soon as Brigadier Clifford, who lay with
4 Regiments of Dragoons to guard the Passage, perceived our Troops had gained
the Banks, he brought down his Men on Foot, their Horses being at Grass; but at
the first Charge they fell into disorder, and from that to open flight.

Being pursued by our Men, a great many of them were killed, some taken
Prisoners in the flight, most of them flung away their Arms, and left their
Tents, Baggage, Saddles, Bridles, and other Accoutrements to be divided amongst
our Men, with 2 Pieces of Cannon, and the Standard of Maxwel.

The Enemies Horse that encamped higher near Killaloo taking the Alarm, drew
out; but it was only to get time to take down their Tents, and cover their
Baggage; for as soon as our Troops advanced toward them, and had passed the
first Defile, they hastily marched away in some disorder toward the Mountains.

On the 15th of September the Lord Lisburn, as he was quitting the Trenches,
was killed with a Cannon Bullet; and the next day Capt. Taaf came over from the
Enemy, giving an Account, That the Town was almost ruined with our Bombs and
great Guns; and that they had not above ten days Bread for Subsistence, the
Garrison not consisting of above 600 able Men.

Whilst these things were doing, Col. Michelburn marched with a Detachment of
his Regiment, 500 of the Militia, 2 Troops of Dragoons, and 6 Fieldpieces,
encamping at Drumchiefle, and then advancing toward Slego, which again was in
the Enemies hands, beat in their Out-guards, and being joined by the Lord
Granard, who a little before had reduced the Castle of Balymont, that Garrisom
apprehensive of the danger they were in, capitulated almost upon the same
Articles that were allowed to Galloway, including in the Capitulation the
Castles of Bellaby, New-Town, and Castle-Bourk, which were to be taken care of,
provided they Surrendered within 4 hours after Summons. And hereupon the Fort on
the 15th of September was delivered up, and 600 Men marched out under the
Command of Sir Teague O Regan, and left in the place 16 pieces of Cannon, and
Col. Michelburn was constituted Governor: And now to return again to Lymerick.

Whilst the Siege was yet carried vigorously on, the General, with
Lieutenant General Scravenmore, being an the other side of the Shannon with
5000 Horse and Dragoons, and a proportionable Detachment of Foot marched into
the County of Clare with 12 Fieldpieces and 7 or 8 days Provision, to oblige
the Enemies Horse to fight, or drive them further from Lymerick; whereupon they
not only avoided coming to Action, but many of them dispersed and disbanded, so
that their number daily lessened.

Brigadier Levison with 250 Horse and Dragoons had fallen upon the Enemy in
Kerry, where they were about 3000 strong, and routed them, killing a great
many, and taking diverse Officers Prisoners; by which means their Majesty's
Forces were entire Ma^ters of the County: So that the General being now on
Clare side of Lymerick with a strong Body of Horse, 10 Regiments of Foot, and
14 Pieces of Cannon; the rest of the Army remaining under the Duke of
Wirtemberg for the Security of the Works on the other side, on the 22d of
September about Noon, our Troops drew up before the English Town, though the
Enemies Cannon played upon them all the while from the Cas^le and several
Towers, as also the small shot from the Flankers and Outworks.

About four in the Afternoon the General ordered a Detachment to attack the
Fort near Thomond Bridge. Whereupon the Enemy sent two great Detachments out of
the Town, to support and defend those that were in the Fort: but our Men
marched on with such Courage and Bravery, that notwithstanding this
Reinforcement, they bore down all before them, pursuing with hot Execution the
flying Enemy over the Bridge, and brought such a Terror upon the City, that
Monsieur D Vsson, the French Governor of Lymerick, durst not lower the
Drawbridge to let in his own Men, dreading least ours should enter with them;
so that crouding on the Bridge in great numbers, our Men by perpetually pouring
their Vollies of shot amongst them made a miserable slaughter; insomuch, that
from the foot of the Bridge to the Drawbridge, nothing was to be seen but
heaps of dead Bodies discoloring the River with Blood, and 600 were computed
to be killed in this Action, and about 130 taken Prisoners; amongst whom was
Col. Skeleton, who being very much hurt, died soon after of of his wounds; and
our Men during this hot dispute, being very much exposed to the fire of the
Town, were about 300 of them killed and wounded, but none of note.

This resolute Enterprise of our Men brought such a Terror upon the Garrison,
that in the Afternoon a Parley was beaten round the Town, and notice was given,
that the People were very much enraged against the French Governor for
suffering so many Men to be cut off, by keeping them out of the City, that they
had insulted, and could hardly be kept from using violence.

The beating this Parley was to desire a Cessation of Firing and casting in
Bombs; which was allowed till 9. the next Morning, when the Colonels Sarsfield
and Wahop came out, and desired the Truce might continue a day longer, and that
they might send to the 1500 Horse commanded by Sheldon in the County of Clare,
to know whether they would be included in the Capitulation; which was allowed:
And on September. 25. Col. Sheldon, and some of his Officers (...) to our Camp,
and had leave given him to go into Lymerick, and consult with the Officers in
Garrison; and the next day Sarsfield and Wahop came out again, and dined with
the General, and Hostages were proposed to be exchanged, which being concluded
on, the L. Cutts, Sir David Collier, Col. P^per, and Col. Tiffany were sent by
the General; and the Town sent out the Lords Westmeath, Trimelstown, Lowth, and
Evagh; so that the Cessation was continued, and the Garrison sent out their
Proposals; but they were such as the General could not approve of; and
therefore instead of answering them, he sent in twelve Articles which he would
allow; and not to be unready to speak his mind in another Language, in case the
Truce should be broken by their refusal, he ordered the Cannon and Mortars to
remain charged on their Batteries, ready to fire upon the first Command; which
made the Besieged more reasonable in their Demands: so that the Commissioners
for the Treaty coming forth again the same day, had a long Conference with
those appointed to treat with them by the General, and became more moderate.

A very good prospect of Accommodation presented at this time; for we had of
their Prisoners taken in the last Action, 2 Lieutenant-Colonels, 2 Majors, 9
Captains, 7 Lieutenants, and 6 Ensigns. And this being likely to be a general
Treaty for the Settlement of the Kingdom, the Lords Justices set forward from
Dublin to be assisting at it, and arrived in the Camp the first of October, and
after some Conferences with the Commissioners on the part of the Garrison, and
their Troops in the County of Clare, the Articles of Surrender of the City of
Lymerick, and the Castles of Clare and Ross, with all other Places and Castles
that were at that time in the hands of the Irish, were on the Third of October
concluded and agreed on, and signed by the General and Lords Justices on the
one side, and by the French Governor, and the Persons deputed by the Garrison
on the other; and thereupon a Stone-Fort, and one of the Gates was put into the
General's hands the same Evening; and the next day five of our Regiments
marched into the Irish Town, it being among other things agreed, That the
French, and such as are willing to go beyond the Seas, may continue in the
English Town and the Island, till they can be Transported, and Shipping are to
be got ready for that purpose.

And seeing upon the Articles of this Capitulation, the quiet and settlement of
the Country consisted, and upon signing which, (...) entirely returned to its
Obedience, it is requisite the Reader should not be ignorant at least of the
Substance or Chief Matters contained in them: They consisting in two Parts,
Civil and Military.

As for the Civil Part, it gave the Roman Catholics the Exercise of their
Religion, as far as was consistent with the Laws of Ireland, and as they
enjoyed it in the Reign of King Charles the Second, etc. and to all Persons in
general that had been in Arms, or otherwise under King James, except forfeiting
Persons out of the Kingdom, should be repossesed of what they could justly
Claim, or were lawfully Entitled to in the Reign of King Charles the Second,
and at any time since, by any Law or Laws that were in force in his Reign. And
those of Trades or Callings to return to them, and Exercise them as in the
Reign of King James the Second, on condition they took the Oath of Allegiance
made by the English Parliament the First Year of their Majesty's Reign.

Merchants, and reputed Merchants, that were beyond the Seas, and had not born
Arms since their Majesty's Declaration of February 1689. were included, and to
have the same benefit if they returned within the space of Eight Months after
the Date of the Articles. As also were several Officers, viz. Colonel Simon
Lutterel, Captain Rowland White, Morice Eustace, and others who were gone
beyond the Seas, upon the account of their Regiments remaining in Ireland, upon
their returning in the space of Eighth Months, and taking the Oath
abovementioned; and those comprised and so submitting to the Government, to
have General Pardons of all Attainders, Treasons, and other Crimes and Offenses
against the Government, committed since the beginning of the Reign of King
James the Second. And that all things that have happened since the War, whereby
Troubles, Suits, or Vexations may arise, should be passed over and indempnified
to those comprised in the Articles to the Date thereof, to be mutual and
reciprocal on both sides.

Every Nobleman and Gentleman comprised is allowed to ride with a Sword and
Case of Pistols, and to have a Gun for the Defense of his House, or for
Recreation; and that inhabited the City of Lymerick, or other Garrisons, might
depart with their Goods, Chattels and Provisions out of it, without being
sear^hed, or paying any Duties; and moreover, not to be compelled to leave
their Lodgings in six Weeks ensuing the Date of the Articles. The Roman
Catholics that submit, to take the Oath of Allegiance, and no other. And if
any Person or Persons, at any time break any of these Premises, he shall shall
not cause any other, not concerned in such Breach, to forfeit the benefit of
them; and that such Persons as are included, shall have the favor of the Lords
Justices and General, to use their Endeavors to have them protected from
Arrests, Execution, Debts and Damages for the space of Eight Months. That
Provision be made to enable Colonel John Brown, by restoring so much of his
Estate and Effects as were taken away, to pay his Debts: The Matter to be
stated, and agreed, etc.

Thus things proceeded of this kind advantageous for the quieting of the Minds
of the People, and settling in Peace and Tranquillity.

As for the Military Articles, the Substance of them were:

That any Persons willing to leave the Kingdom, might pass with their Goods and
Families, except into England, Scotland; and for the Officers and Soldiers, and
those called Rapparees, that are minded to go, Ships should be prepared to
transport them, and days and places appointed for those that were willing to go
to declare their Minds to that purpose, and be reduced under their Officers
that are to conduct them: And the English and Scotch Officers that serve in
Ireland, to be included in the Capitulation, for the Security of their Estates
and Effects in the Three Kingdoms, if they are content to remain here, or for
passing freely into France, or any other Country to serve, and Land-carriage
and Shipping to be furnished for those of all Conditions that are not Prisoners
of War, that have a mind to be Transported, and they to be protected from all
Wrongs and Injuries: And the Ships that are to Transport them, to be furnished
with Neccesaries for Horse and Men, to be paid for by those Transported upon
their safe arrival in France, and Hostages were to be left for the safe return
of the Ships, the danger of the Sea excepted; and till their Embarkation
Quarters to be assigned them, they having Liberty to transport Gratis,
including those of their Officers Nine hundred Horse; and for the Troops
remaining behind, to dispose of themselves as they thought convenient,
delivering up their Horse and Arms to such as the Generals should nominate to
receive them. Horse-Provender for those that were to be Transported, to be
bought at the King's Rate, and all Necessaries to be had without molestation.
And all those Prisoners of War on both sides, that were in the Kingdom of
Ireland on the 28th of September, to be set at Liberty; the General promising
his Endeavor for the Release of those likewise in England and Flanders: And
Medicines and other Necessaries be furnished for the sick and wounded. And that
Notice of these things upon signing, be sent to France, and those that are to
pass thither not to be stopped upon the account of Debt, or any other pretense:
And that French Ships for Transportation shall freely resort to any Parts, and
have Passports; and upon the arrival of such Ships a free Communication shall
be between it and the said Troops, more especially for those who have Passes
from the Fleet, and Monsieur de Tumeron the Intendant; in consideration of
which the Town of Lymerick was to be put into the Hands of the General, or whom
he shall appoint; viz. the Irish Town, except the Magazine and Hospital, upon
the Day of signing: But the English Town, with the Island and free Passage to
Thomond-Bridge, to be in the Hands of the Irish Garrison, or those that shall
come from Clare, Cork, Kerry, etc. till a Convenience offer to Transport them.
And that no Disorders might happen between the Garrisons, the Irish Troopers
were to remain in the English Town and Island, until they should Embarque on
the Fifty ships that should first go to France, and to keep from any Injury on
either side, under pain of Punishment. And when they are to march, they may
march out together, or at sundry times, as opportunity of Embarking requires,
with Arms, Baggage, Beat of Drum, Lighted Match, Bullet in Mouth, Colors
flying, Six Brass Guns and Two Mortars, with some Ammunition and other Stores,
and that an Inventory of the Ammunition shall be given to that end, the Day
after the signing.

The Magazines and Provisions to remain in the Hands of those appointed for
their care, for the subsistence of the Irish that are to pass for France, and
they to be further furnished, if occasion required. And a Cessation of Arms at
Land and Sea to be had, in respect to the Ships, either English, Dutch or
French, to be used in the Transportation, until they are returned to their
Harbors; and that sufficient Passports shall be on both sides as to Ships and
Men; and that any violating the Cessation shall be punished, and Satisfaction
made for the wrong; and that Persons should be sent to give the English and
French Ships notice of this Cessation of Arms for the time; and Hostages be
given on both sides: And if there happen any Change in the Government, or
Command of the Army; before the Capitulation be fully Executed, it shall yet
stand in force.

This being briefly the Heads and Substance of these famous Articles, I shall
now proceed to what ensued upon so happy a Juncture, in which the Nation had so
great a Promise of Peace and Tranquillity; which has since raised its drooping
Head from the Dust.

About the time of this Agreement, News came that diverse French Men of War,
with Transport-Ships, were on the Coast, and endeavored to put into some
places, though very distant from Lymerick; but either not well knowing the
Harbors, or being fearful, as having no certainty of what had happened, they
continued cruizing, being seen sometimes off one place, and at other times off
another, as being doubtful and uncertain of their enterprizing any thing to the
end for which they came; as perhaps, having intelligence that a Squadron of our
Men of War, under the Command of Sir Ralph Delaval, was making toward Ireland,
to prevent any evil design they might have, notwithstanding the Capitulation,
considering on our part, that the French Maxim is much the same with that of
the Ottomon Port, viz. To consider nothing against their Interest; but in the
firmest Peace to take all the advantages of open Hostility, where any thing
offers that may render their Attempts successful. But whether they sooner or
latter had an account of what had happened at Lymerick, and that with the
rendering up that important place, all their Measures had been broken,
considering in those Articles, the few places of no considerable strength were
included, we determine not; but certainly so it happened, they attempted
nothing worthy of note on the Coast of that Kingdom, but kept out at Sea as
well as they could.

During the cruizing of the French, we had at length certain knowledge that
they had notice of what had happened, viz. that Lymerick had submitted, and
with it all those Places that yet held out, if in the time limited, they, by
Surrendering, took the benefit of the Articles agreed on, which occasioned a
greater Security in them, as to the fear of being attacked by our Men of War;
because in one of the Articles it was agreed, that such of the Irish and French
as had a mind to leave the Kingdom, and go for France, might stay to expect a
free Passage thither, without interruption, and then they more boldly appeared
upon the Coast of Kerry, being discerned from the Hills and Cliffs, to be about
25 Sail of Men of War, with some Fireships, and 25 Transport-ships, and that
it might be taken, that their design in coming at first, was no other than to
carry off ^he French and Irish that were unwilling to ^tay, Monsieur D'Vsson,
the late French Go^ernour, took his first opportunity to give notice of their
being there to Major General Tal^ash, who had been appointed by the Gene^al to
Command at Lymerick; and upon ma^ure deliberation, it being thought more
con^enient to suffer such as would transport themselves in French Ships, than
trust any of ^urs in the Enemies Port on that Account, ^t last it was agreed,
that the Transport^^ips might come into the River Shannon; ^ut the Men of War
and Fireships to keep ^^t at Sea; and that those Transport-ships should have
liberty to take on Board such as would freely imbark.

In the mean while diverse Irish Gentlemen, and Persons of Quality, who it was
by some supposed, would have embraced this voluntary Exile; considering,
perhaps, how the French had insulted them in their own Country, and expecting
worse Treatment when they should be more ablosutely under their Jurisdiction,
resolved not to trust their kindness by leaving their Native Country, but
rather chose to rely upon the kindness of a Generous Prince, whose Word in all
things is inviolate, and thereupon spontaniously came in, and took the Oath of
Fidelity to their Majesty's: Nor were the Rapparees, who are accounted the most
obstinate of the Irish, behind hand in this: For diverse of their Chiefs
considering their Safety depended upon a speedy Submission, thought it their
best way to lay hold of the Grace offered, least such a favorable opportunity
might for ever be out of their power; and thereupon resolving to lay hold on
it, laid down their Arms, and submitted to Mercy, causing many others of their
Subalternates to do the like, and bring in their Arms; insomuch that Roads that
a little before lay unfrequented by Travelers for fear of this rapacious sort
of People, were again frequented, and those that had been so terrible to them,
now proved their Guards in many places, to protect them against such as yet
held out, by which means the face of things seemed won^erfully changed, and a
Country that a little before had been so bloody a Scene of War, ^ow promised,
and gave a large prospect of durable Peace, attended with Plenty, and (...)
greater Advancement by Trade than ever, in consideration of a greater assurance
^f Security given, especially to the Prote^^ants, by the glorious Success of
their Majesty's Arms, than has been in the form^r Reigns.

Although Sarsfield, Sheldon, and others, ^ho centered their Fortunes and
Interest in ^^e late King, who had mainly raised them (...) his Favors,
expected to draw after the ^reater part of the Discplined Soldiers to be
^^sposed of in the Service of the French King, (...) also some of the Gentry
and Nobility; yet ^^ey missed of their aim.

Matters being thus brought to a Conclusion (...) the Kingdom of Ireland, care
was taken to (...) our Troops into Winter Quarters, who (...) such
extraordinary Enterprises so (...) succeeding each other, were somewhat (...),
and required for the recovery of ^^^ir Strength and Health, more Refresh(...)nt
and Ease than the Field could any ways (...) them.

And in this such order and care was taken that none should be endamaged in the
Quarters; but if any such thing happened by any Oppression or Unruliness of the
Officer or Soldiers, the Party grieved, upon Complaint to those appointed to
inspect and regulate these Affairs, should have speedy redress,

That the fears of the Countries about Lymerick might be at an end, the French
an^ Irish that resolved for France, were furthere by the English, by way of
Friendly assistanc^ for their Embarkment on such Ships as we^^ ordered or
allowed to carry them to the^^ desired Ports.

The Lords Justices received an Accou^^ on the first of November, from
Major General Talmash, That the French and Iri^^ marched out of the English
Town on the fir^^ of the said Month, and part of them embarked on the French
Ships that were permitted to enter the River Shannon, in order (...) transport
them.

The General, after the many glorio^^ Succeses that Crowned their Majesty's
Ar^^ under his Command in so short a tim^ arriving at Dublin, was received
sever^^^ Miles from that City, by a great Body (...) the Gentry on Horseback;
and approachi^^ through the loud Shouts and Acclamations (...) the crouding
People, was received at (...) Gates by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen in their
Formalities, and highly welcomed, and ^he Ceremony performed upon the occasion
^^ his coming to that Capital City, ended with a general Joy, and the highest
Marks ^^ Respect to a Person who had been so ser^iceable to the Kingdom.

His Majesty's Birthday and the Anniversary of the Powder Plot, were likewise
ob^erved with all imaginable Demonstrations of ^oyalty, and Marks of Firmness
to the Pro^e^tant Religion.

Nor were some of the Papists wanting to express their Satisfaction to see the
Hero, ^^o had been so mainly Instrumental in re^^oring them that Peace they had
so ra^^ly ^orfeited; and had leisure during almost a ^ree Years, to repent of
the trouble they had ^^ven the Kingdom, and of the Losses them^^lves sustained.

Whilst this Joy lasted, care was taken to ^^der the Garrisons, and provide
them with ^^ch Necessaries where they were wanting, as ^ight serve for the
Winter Stores, and put the ^oldiers in a good plight. Nor was the Joy (...)
these Successes bounded in this Island, but ^read into remote Countries; so
that in the ^amps of the Allies the Cannon was fired, and all other
Demonstrations of a high satis^^ction for the Success of their Majesty's ^^ms
were set on foot: though the French Commanders, especially in their Camps,
labored to extenuate these brave and vigorous Undertakings, crowned with such
ample Success, least it could dishearten and abate the Courage of their Men,
who already by their frequent deserting, seemed to grow weary of a War, wherein
they too plainly found, that instead of what they formerly gained by
Plundering, and laying defenseless Places waste, they must expect nothing but
Blows, and severe Treatment.

On the First of November following these Transactions, the Irish Entirely left
the English Town of Lymerick, Embarking o^ the Transport-ships in the Shannon;
when Sailing for France, one of those Ships having on Board Four hundred Men,
beside^ Stores and Furnitures of diverse kinds, running foul on a Rock overset,
and about On^ hundred Men were drowned, though n^ diligence was wanting to
endeavor their preservation.

Upon the marching out of the Irish, ou^ Soldiers marched in, and Garrisoned
the English Town, and now Sir David Collie^ was made Governor of the City of
Lymerick, and the Lord O Brian of the County of the said City. And on the Six^^
of this Month the French Squadron, consisting of Eighteen Men of War, Six
Fireships, and Twenty Transport-ships, who brought about Ten thousand Arms,
Wine and Brandy for Sale, and much Provision, fell down about Two Leagues below
Scaltery, viz. the Men of War, but their Transport-ships were suffered to
remain nearer, to take in Provisions and other Necessaries for Transportation
of the People they were to take on Board. And Major General Talmash having
settled and ordered things to the best Advantage in the City, gave place to the
new Governor, and departed for Dublin, where he was received with many
Expressions of Joy, according to the true merit of his Courage and Conduct in
this War.

Upon this great turn of Fortune, many of their Ringleaders going away in the
French Ships, the Rapparees found themselves abandoned, and in great Distress,
so that they were constrained to come in and submit; so that the face of things
appeared to be strangely changed, Uproar and Confusion being turned into a calm
Peace; so that most of the English and Dutch Regiments, etc. - prepared to
Embark for England, where they soon after Arrived, and passed for Flanders,
where they were for the Winter Season quartered advantagiou^ly in diverse Towns,
to hinder the Incursi^ons of the French.

The General having put an end to the War of Ireland, being highly caressed and
treated in Dublin, Embarked for England on the Monmouth Yatch, where he
received the Applause and high Commendations of the People in all places where
he passed. The King received him very graciously, and Created him Earl of
Athlone, etc. The Parliament likewise sent their Thanks to him for the good
Service he had done, desiring him to Communicate the same to all the Officers
that had served under him in this Expedition: And he, together with them, was
highly Entertained at a Noble Treat by the City of London.

The Soldiers now returning, a Proclamation was Issued forth for their well
abearing and behaving themselves in their March, Quarters, and making due
Payment. And so great was the Joy of the Irish Nobility and Gentry for
restoring that Kingdom to Peace and Tranquillity, that in humble Gratitude they
made the following Address to his Majesty, viz.

WE Your Majesty's Most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, crave leave in the first
place to offer our most humble Thanks to the Divine Majesty, by whom you Reign,
for having Raised and Inspired your Majesty for the Deliverance of these
Oppressed Nations, and for preserving Your Royal Person, so frequently exposed
to danger, but never in greater than in the Kingdom and Cause of the
Protestants in IRELAND: What was then so graciously undertaken by Your Majesty
in Person, is now so happily finished by the Success of Your Arms, that we owe
to Your Majesty's Courage and Conduct, next to the Divine Providence, the
Restoration of our Religion and Civil Rights and Liberties.

We beseech Your Majesty to Accept this Recognition as the first Fruits of our
Redemption, till we are able to make a more Solemn and Parliamentary
Acknowledgment to Your Majesty's Just Title to our Allegiance, not only in
Right of this Crown, but in Gratitude to our great Deliverer and Conqueror of
Your Majesty's Enemies. We are sure Your Majesty will effectually preserve
those You have so generously Delivered; and we hope Your Majesty shall never
have occasion to doubt the steady and united Affections of the Protestants of
IRELAND in the Service of your Crown and Dignity, from Principles of
Inclination, Duty and Interest; all which makes us unanimously and heartily to
pray for the Sacred Person, Victorious Arms, and Just and Gentle Government of
King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, with Peace and Continuance over us.

On the Two and twentieth of December, Sarsfield having got together Two
thousand six hundred Men, Women and Children, set Sail from Cork for France: he
thought to have carried a greater Number, but was deceived by their Deserting
him; as did the whole Regiments of Mac Dermo, Brian O Neal, and Colonel Felix O
Neal, upon the Advice they received of the ill Treatment of the Irish that were
already Landed in France, where the Officers were generally displaced, or made
to serve in lower Stations, even to Common Soldiers, and French Men set over
them.

Ireland being now in a fair way to a Settlement, Colonel Foulk, Governor of
Dublin, had Orders to Disband the Irish Regiments that came over to us upon the
Surrender of Lymerick, except Fourteen hundred which were appointed for the
Emperor's Service; the which, though they prosessed a great willingness to
serve their Majesty's, they submitted to, and had Two Cobs a Man given them
Gratis, most of them going to their Habitations or Employments.

On the Three and twentieth of January, being the first day of the Term, the
Right Honorable Sir Charles Porter, Lord Chancellor, and Thomas Conningsby
Esquire, Lords Justices of the Kingdom, came to the Court of Kings Bench,
accompanied by diverse of the Privy Council, and other Persons of Quality; where
they took the Oaths, and Subscribed the Declaration required by the late Act of
Parliament made in England: After which the Judges of other Courts, and Persons
of different Quality and Employments did the like.

About this time there happened an Extraordinary Storm, which did much Damage
at Land, but more by Sea: The Adventure of London was cast away on the Coast
and all her Men drowned. A Vessel laden with Corn was driven from her Anchor in
the Road, and beaten to pieces, but her Men saved, and diverse other Shipwracks
were driven on shore in the Ports of this Kingdom.

And now the Poor being very numerous, by reason of Losses in the War, care was
ordered every where to be taken of them till they could better provide for
themselves having conveni^^^^ Houses appointed for their shelter. And the
Militia of the Country was reviewed, to know in what Condition it stood. And
the Lords Justices issued out a Declaration, Prohibiting any Officer, Clark, or
other Person or Persons whatsoever, depending upon their Majesty's Treasury,
either by himself or any other, to use in part, or in whole, directly or
indirectly, to buy any Arrears or Debenture ^ue to any Officer, Soldier, or any
Person or Persons that have been Employed in their Majesty's Service the
preceding War, upon pain of forfeiting the benefit of every Contract or
Agreement for such Arrears which shall be paid to the Party to whom they are
due, when the same shall come to be paid; as also upon communication of such a
Fault, be dismissed from his or their Employment, and declared being incapable
of serving in the Treasury for the future.

This saved a great many Officers and Soldiers much Money, who to supply
presant need, would have taken a small matter for what was after paid them to
the full. And now though it had been stipulated and agreed by several Articles
made with the Garrison of Lymerick, Galloway, etc. That all Arms were to be
delivered up, unless such of the Nobility and Gentry as were allowed them for
Defense of their Houses, etc.

And this not being punctually observed, a Proclamation was issued out by the
Lords Justices, to command all Persons who had any to Surrender, or cause to be
Surrendered to the Sheriff of the City, Town, or County, or to the next Justice
of the Peace, all their Firearms, Swords, Pikes, Half-Pikes, Halbards,
Partisans, Skenns, Bayonets, and all other Arms, Offensive and Defensive. And
upon failure or contempt, to be prosecuted to the utmost Severity of the Law: a
Reward of Ten shillings was likewise proposed to any Person who should, after
the Tenth of March, discover any Arms; and the Concealer to be prosecuted at
the next Assizes as a Contemner of their Majesty's Royal Authority, to be
looked upon as Disturbers of the Peace, and to forfeit the Benefit of the said
Articles.

This made a great many of the Papists bring in their Arms, for fear of a
Discovery, which they had kept till now perhaps to so sinister an end: so that
by this means the Peace being better assured, the Protestants found themselves
out of danger; the Husbandmen manured their Ground with cheerfulness, as not
doubting to reap the benefit of their Labors, which they had been long
debarred, to the undoing of many Thousands. The Artificers fell again to their
respective Crafts with courage. So that the Land casting off its bloody stain,
labored to forget its sorrow; and though the usual Trade with France was
prohibited, yet from England, Scotland and Spain, (...) Necessaries were
brought tha^ u^ually supplied the Kingdom from abroad. And that they might yet
be more easy, some illegal Proceedings being represented to the Lords
Justices, they put forth a Proclamation for suppressing them, running to this
Tennor; viz.

THAT the Lords Justices being informed that several Justices of the Peace,
Sheri^ffs, and other Magistrates, presuming on their Power in the Countries,
have by color of their Authority, in a most Illegal and Arbitrary Manner,
contrary to the known Laws of the Kingdom, dispossessed several of Their
Majesty's Subjects, not only of their Goods and Chattels, but of their Lands
and Tenements; They therefore Command and Require all Justices of the Peace,
Mayors, Sheriffs, and other Magistrates, to forbear such Illegal Proceedings,
and not to Intermeddle with the Right, Property, Title, or Possession of the
Estates, Goods, or Chattels of any of Their Majesty's Subjects, other than by
due Course of Law they are required, and as they shall be able to justify.

This was thrice proclaimed in all the Market Towns that every one might take
notice of it, and have Redress of their Grievances, if any should afterward be
committed upon them, or their Possessions; yet it extented not to the
prohibiting the searching for, and taking away of Arms.

And the better to Confirm and Inform all sorts of People, being Dutiful and
Loyal, in their Majesty's good Intentions toward them, their Majesty's
Proclamation was published in the following words, viz.

WHereas by an Act made in Our Parliament at Westminster, in the first Year of
our Reign, Entitled, An Act for the better Security and Relief of their
Majesty's Protestant Subjects of Ireland, it was amongst other things Enacted,
That all and every Person and Persons whatsoever, should be absolutely
Discharged and Acquitted of any from the payment of all the Quit-Rents,
Composition-Rents, Heart-money, Twenti^th-parts Payments, and other chief
Rents, arising or payable out of any Houses, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments,
Rectores, Tithes or Church Livings, incurring or becoming due to us at any time
after the Five and twentieth Day of December, 1688. until the said Kingdom of
Ireland should by Us be declared to be Reduced, and the War and Rebellion there
ended: We have now, pursuant to the said Act of Parliament thought fit, by and
with the Advice of our Privy Council, to issue out this Our Royal Proclamation,
hereby declaring, That the said Kingdom of Ireland is reduced to Our Obedience,
and the War and Rebellion there ended. And We do hereby Will and Require, that
all and singular such Rents and Payments, and all other Duties payable to the
Crown, which shall henceforth grow, incur, or become due, be duly answered and
paid unto Us, in such manner, and under such Penalties and Forfeitures as if
the said Act had not been made.

Dated the 3d of March, 1691/2.

And to the end that none of the Irish might be ignorant of what was intended
for the good of the Nation, another Proclamation was published in all the chief
Towns of the Kingdom, To Ascertain a Day to those that should be distinguished
to be comprehended within the Articles of Lymerick etc., To show their said
Rights and Claims to the said Articles; the Lands and other Matters they desire
Restitution of, with the Place of their Being and Situation; and that they
should have fair Hearings and favorable Constructions made on their Claims and
Petitions: The Days and Places of Hearing to that purpose be set and appointed,
that none might pretend any mistake on that account, not to come provided with
sufficient Proof and Testimony of such their Rights and Claims, according to
the Tennor of the Articles of Lymerick and Galloway etc., And that seeing
several Protestants did inhabit Galloway and Lymerick, during the Sieges of
those Places, it was required that three Witnesses should give Testimony as to
the Premises, one of them to be a Protestant, in every particular matter for
proof of each Persons qualification, as to the Articles, who claims to have
been within the said City or Town, and thereby to be comprised within the said
Articles, or either of them.

And on the Sixth of April the Lord's Justices of the Council and Kingdom sat
to hear and examine the Claims exhibited before them, by such Persons as made
their Application to them, sitting M^nday, Wednesday and Friday weekly for that
purpose. And that nothing might be wanting to encourage and promote the Trade
of the Kingdom, Ships daily arrived in the Ports with Provision and other
Necessaries, insomuch, that after a long Scarcity, Plenty began again to be
restored to a prospect of a greater height than ever, by which the Calamities
and Sufferings appeared to vanish, and the Joy of the People, the Protestants
especially, to be restored more than ever, especially under the Conduct and
Government of Affairs of those prudent Persons that are put into Power and
Trust.

The Kingdom of Ireland thus settled, and in a fair way to Happiness, his
Majesty was in Flanders, drawing his Forces together to prosecute his Victories
on that side, and complete the Felicity of his Kingdoms, when in the mean while
some ill Men of restless Spirits at home, were laboring under hand to disquiet
us by endeavoring to hold Correspondence with the Common Enemy, and
Encouraging him to invade their Native Kingdoms; but Providence, as at all
times, so now more particularly, timely discovered their dark Projects and
sinister Designs, whereupon many were apprehended and imprisoned in diverse
places, in order to be brought to Justice and Condign Punishment; yet this did
not so much discourage the French King, but that he got his Fleet very early in
a readiness, as it is generally supposed to Invade England; but the Winds
appeared to stand on our side, and kept them in their Harbors, contrary to
their Expectations, though he had drawn down his Forces on the Coast of
Normandy etc., to Embark on his Men of War and Transport-ships, as occasion
should offer.

Our Fleet in the mean while was hastened out to oppose them, and the Dutch
Squadrons with much Celerity joined us, so that on the 19th of May they stood
away to the South-west in search of the French Fleet, and about six Leagues
from Cape Barsleur got sight of them, who with much presumption bore down upon
us, having the Weathergage, the Wind at South-west; and about Eleven in the
Morning they Engaged Admiral Russel, who commanded our Red Squadron. The sight
continued hot on both sides till about Three in the Afternoon, Turville the
French Admiral being very much worsted, and fearing to be hemmed in by our Blue
Squadron; and the Dutch, who labored to get the Wind of the Enemy, bore away,
but not so speedily but that the Blew Squadron had time enough to come in and
Engage him about Six, so that another hot Dispute continued till about Ten at
night, the French making a Retreating fight, in which some of their Ships were
blown up, and others sunk: All Night it was very calm, and foggy the next
Morning; and ab^ut Eight it began to clear up, the Wind at East-North-East,
when the French Fleet appeared about Two Leagues to the Leeward of ours, much
less in number than the day before, being but Thirty six Men of War, standing
away to their own Coast, whilst ours pursued them; and both Fleets, upon a
great Calm, came to an Anchor, the Dutch, who now had the Van, being within a
League of them; and on the One and twentieth they weighed and stood away, and
we after them, Admiral Russel taking his Course toward Barsleur, having sight
of several Ships under the shore; but by this time many of them were got into
the first Harbors they came to; so that fear and too much haste, caused
several of them to run aground to prevent our Coming up with them. But it
availed little, for Vice Admiral Delaval hotly pursuing Fliers who put in,
made, under Cape de Wick, their Squadrons, being now broken and separated, with
much difficulty got in with light Frigates, Fireships, and Armed-Boats, and in
spite of the Fire the French made from their Ships, and from their Platform on
shore. Captain Heath laid the Royal Sun of France on Board with his Fireship,
and burnt her, being the French Admiral of 104 Guns; and Captain Green burnt
the Conquerdant, of 102 Guns; and another Ship of 80 Guns was burnt by the
Boats that were sent out after the Men were taken from it, and some other
Vessels, with little loss of Men on our side.

Captain Fowlis attempted to burn the Royal Sun, but was set on fire by an
accidental shot from the Enemy, supposed to be made red hot for that purpose.
Monsieur Gaberet's Ship, Admiral of the French Blew Squadron, perished in the
fight amongst the rest.

Whilst these things were doing, Admiral Russel, with the Red Squadron, stood
with the Enemies Ships, who were got into the Bay of La Hogue, and sent
Vice Admiral Rook, with a Squadron of Light Frigates and Fireships, and all the
Boats he had with him, well armed, to burn the Ships he had there penned up;
which succeeded so well, that Six were burnt that Night, and with the same
Resolution Six more were burnt the next Morning, Three of them being
Three-deck'd Ships, carrying a great Force of Men and Guns, and the other Three
from sixty to seventy Guns: and one of Fifty six Guns was overset, and utterly
lost: So that the whole number in that Bay was destroyed; the Men in the Boats
on this occasion behaving themselves with much Bravery and Resolution, insomuch
that they took possession of several of the French Ships; and turned the Guns
upon the Platform that fired upon them from the Land, in the sight of the
French and Irish Camp that lay near the shore. Many of the French Seamen
perished with their Ships, those on shore refusing to fetch them off; and a
great many were taken Prisoners. So that in the main we destroyed about One and
twenty of their biggest Ships, and of other Frigates, Crafts, and
Transport-ships, to the number of Thirty; and this without the loss of any Ship
on our side, unless Fireships that were spent on the Enemy.

For this Signal Victory the Admiral caused a Solemn Thanksgiving to Almighty
God to be held on Board the Fleet; and had the Wind been more timely
favorably, few of the French that engaged had escaped. This happy News caused
great Rejoicing in all their Majesty's Dominions, and in the Courts of the
Confederate Princes.

And now to show God's more signal Favor and Mercy toward us, a Hellish
Conspiracy was discovered, that had been carried on to destroy his Majesty
beyond the Seas by Assassination, influenced by the greatest Persons in the
French Court, to their Eternal Infamy, as it was deposed upon Oath; and this
was undertaken by one de Grandual, a Captain of Dragoons in the French Service,
and one Dumot a Walloon, who had the last Year agreed together to kill the
King; and for that purpose went to Loo, whilst his Majesty was there, but
missing of their wicked purpose, they went back to Paris, and there remaining
during the Winter, they engaged one Leefdale in the same pernicious Design,
agreeing to Attack the King, either upon a March, or when he should ride out to
see the Troops; but an Almighty Hand held them from their Executing what they
so wickedly intended, and saved his Anointed to be a Joy and Comfort to his
People, and a Scourge to the Common Enemy, who, though good at close Villainies,
and purchasing of Towns, yet not to stand in Competition at fair Valor and
Heroic Bravery, as has all along appeared by Retreats and strong Encampments,
when urged to Battle in a fair Field; yet, no doubt, a short time will let us
see the difference between true Manhood and Politic D^lays and Precautions.

Ireland is now waiting to Receive her Right Honorable Lord Deputy with all
the Demonstrations of Joy that a willing Nation can express, suitable to the
great Expectations she has to be yet more happy under the Auspicious Conduct of
so worthy a Hero, and wise Dispencer of Justice; and an Encourager and
Propagator of the Protestant Religion, etc.

Thus we see, through God's Blessing upon their Majesty's Arms, this Kingdom is
once again in a happy way to be prosperous, and more entirely happy than ever.

FINIS.

