A Familiar Discourse OR DIALOGUE Concerning the Mine-Adventure.

Regium est, cum been feceris, male andire.
Optimum vincendi genus est patientia.
LONDON, Printed in the Year 1700.

THE PREFACE.
THE various and different Reports and Opinions of Men concerning the
Mine-Adventure, are not unknown in this part of the World, Some Persons
affirming that the Mines are not worth the working; that the Stock is all
spent; and that the Undertaking is totally disappointed: Others again, knowing
the Falsity of these Allegations run into another Extreme, and please
themselves with expectations of a speedy return of Mountains of Treasure beyond
all reason or possibility of obtaining in so short a time.

And therefore it is considered, that though the Mines themselves, when brought
to perfection, would be the best and most proper Argument to convince the
former of their Error, yet the publishing of this Discourse may be most useful
and convenient for the latter, whose Interest ought not to be neglected, as
being true Friends to the Undertaking.

And indeed, it is pity the fair Adventurer should be imposed upon by
Stock-jobbing or designing Persons on one side, and so sell out to loss; or
that he should deceive himself with too great and speedy Expectations of
bringing the Mines to the highest Valuation on the other side, and so (at any
time) buy in too dear.

A prudent Moderation between two Extremes is always best; and to bring Men to
this Temper is the Aim and Intent of Communicating this following Discourse to
the World, whereby the meanest Capacities or Persons least acquainted with
Mineral Works will better understand the Nature of this Undertaking, together
with the present State and Condition of the Mines, and consequently make a
better Judgment of the Value of them.

And that this is the proper Time of giving an Account thereof, will plainly
appear when it is also considered, that there is good Reasons given to induce
any rational Man to believe, that it will not be very long before the
Cross-Drifts from the Levels will be carried home to the great Vein, as well as
to all the rest; and then, as it will be too late to save those Partners who
shall be inveigled to sell out to Disadvantage for want of a true Information;
so it may not be so well taken at that Time to lessen the high Expectations of
others, as it may be now, by preparing them for it.

But besides all this, it must be confessed, That it is not without some
Concern for the Honor of our Native Country, as well as Admiration at the
Thing it self, observed, that any part of Mankind can read over the List of the
Subscribers to the Mine-Adventure, and yet at the same time believe, that all
those Noble Lords and Gentlemen, all those Reverend and Learned Bishops and
Divines, so many ingenious and industrious Merchants and Lawyers, (and many of
them particularly acquainted with Mineral Works) should all engage in one Body,
and with one Mind, in such an Adventure, without a good Foundation for it.

And therefore if any thing can be said to open the Eyes of the World, and to
make this Undertaking better understood, it ought not to be delayed on any
account whatsoever, though there were no other reason for it, but to vindicate
the Honor and Reputation of the Adventurers therein at home, and the Judgment
and Understanding of the Generality of the EnglishNation abroad.

In short, it is humbly hoped that when this familiar Discourse is read over,
the best part of Mankind will entertain a favorable Opinion of the
Mine-Adventure, and whatever the Success shall be, will be able to justify
both the Prudence and good Intention of all their Friends who have engaged in
this Undertaking, with as good or better Reasons then ever any Company of
Merchants could give for freighting a Ship to Sea, or expecting its safe Return
home. And as for all the rest of our degenerate Race, that the honest
Adventurer will be pleased to pass by the Common Failing of every one of those
useless Critics, with only this, or some such Remark.

Didicit ille maledicere and ego, contemnere.
Postscript to the Preface.
IF any Persons shall object against the publishing so long a Discourse on this
Subject, they are answered by the Intent thereof, which is sincerely to do good
to others, not to gain the least Applause for the thing it self, and to inform
such as are unacquainted with Matters of this Nature, and not the Learned and
Experienced Artist. And for this Reason 'twas not thought convenient to omit
any thing on this occasion that might be serviceable to the meanest Adventurer,
though it put the Publisher to the trouble of an INDEX on that Account, that any
Person may readily turn to such particular Matters as he conceives to be of
greatest Moment, without reading over the whole Discourse.

INDEX.
A Short Abstract of the present state of the Mines, by order of the Committee,
and therein (amongst other things) that Mr. Waller had given a fair and just
Account of the Mines. That four Veins did appear to bear Oar at the Surface of
the Ground, some nine Inches, and some a foot thick, and that the rest were
left quick and rich in Oar, as Mr. Waller had described: That they had a good
prospect of a rich Copper Vein: That Curtis Drift was carried home to the
Bogg-Veine, which is four foot wide, and did set well, and widen downwards, and
that Mr. Waller was raising Oar there. That great Smelting and Refining-Houses,
a Key, a Canal of Three hundred yards in length, a Crane, and other
Conveniences were erected, and made at Neath, without any present Charge to
the Company. That they had found by Experience, in large quantities, that the
present Profit above all Charges from every Tun of Oar, was Five pounds and
upwards: That the principal Stock was not lessened above Two thousand three
hundred pounds twelve shillings and four pence: That the Committee did believe
they were engaged in a very profitable Undertaking; and that they had
demonstrated their Opinion by their Actions, having purchased, since the
Drawing, to the value of Eight thousand seven hundred and fifty five pounds in
Blank Tickets, and also Two hundred forty two shares. See the Abstract.

The Introduction. Page 1, 2, 3, 4 How a Reverend Doctor and several Learned
Bishops and Divines came to be concerned in this Undertaking. Page 4, etc. 10,
11, 26 Concerning the lawfulness of Drawing of Lots: That the best things may
be abused to ill purposes; and when so, ought to be regulated or suppressed;
but without the least Reflection on the Million Lottery, or any other, that
were made use of to good purposes. Page 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 That the Mine-Adventure
was drawn with great exactness. Page 6 That drawing of Lots in this particular
Case was absolutely necessary, and also contrived with a good Design, thereby
to carve out a Charity to the Poor. Page 7, 10 A pleasant Story of a Grand
Marshal of France, who was made Judge of a great Province. Page 8 An Account of
the Gift to Charitable Uses, its Value, in whose Diposition it now lies; and
how it stands in Relation to the Poor of Corporations. Page 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
24, 25 The Reasons why this Undertaking is cried down by some Persons. Page 15,
16, 17, 20, 21 The General Rule of Buying and Selling of Stocks upon the
Exchange. Page 17, 18, 19 A safe Rule to walk by (in buying and selling) in the
Mine Adventure. Page 19, 20 That this Company subsists upon a substantial
Foundation. Page 20 Objections against the Oar and Lead answered Page 27 to 30
Of the Nature and Use of Lytharge. Page 30, 31, 32, 34, 35 Of Red Lead. Page 35
Of the Profit in Silver, and how much may thereby be added every year to the
National Stock in good Bullion. Page 36, 37, 38, 39, 129, 131 A Secret in
smelting of Lead Our. Page 37 That the Committee are great Purchasors since the
drawing. Page 39 Of the method of keeping the Books of Accounts, and other
Books relating to this Undertaking. Page 41 to 50 Reasons to prove the
Sincerity of Mr. Waller. Page 41, 42, 43 How the principal Stock stands upon
the Books. Page 47 The Reasons why the Committee have not yet employed any
Water Engine in these Works. Page 49, 50, 51, 53, 54, 55 That Capt. Savory's
Fire-Engine, is a very ingenious Invention, and deserves to be encouraged. Page
50 Of Levels, Adits, and Soughs, the Nature and Use of them explained to common
Capacities. Page 50, 51 Of the manner of boring through hard Rocks. Page 52
What is the longest time proposed to carry the Levels to the great Vein. Page
56, 57 The Notion of Forty pounds per Annum for every Share explained and set
right. Page 58, 59 What Profit may probably be expected from this Undertaking,
and in what time. Page 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67 That the Gains will be
greater or less in proportion to the hands that shall be employed. Page 65 How
many Men are, and may be employed. Page 65, 66, 67, 80, 81 How the Profit will
increase every year, and to what proportion. Page 63, 64 That 'twas never known
in the County of Cardigan, that any Vein which bore Oar at the Surface, did
ever fail at any deepness; but on the contrary, the deeper the Vein, the richer
the Oar. Page 71 How some Persons might go down to the Mines, and be
disappointed of seeing the Oar at the Surface. Page 72 Of the Bogg-Vein, and of
the richness and full discovery thereof. Page 72 Of the Copper Veins, and fair
prospect thereof. Page 73 How much Oar may be raised the first year after the
Levels are carried home to the Veins, and how much in five years. Page 74, 75
In what time every Adventurer may probably be paid his Principal and Interest.
Page 76, 77, 78 Of Twitches and Faults in the Veins. Page 81 Whether the Mines
will hold out to the end of the term. Page 83, 84, 85, 86 What is likely to be
the Issue of this Undertaking when the present term is expired. Page 86, 87,
91, 92 Whether it is better to buy Blanks or Shares. Page 88 to 91 Of the Act
of Royal Mines, and the Advantage thereby to the King and People. Page 93, 94,
95 That Undertakings of this Nature ought to be encouraged by all good Men.
Page 93, 95, 97, 98, 99, 131, 132 The Recital of a Patent from his Majesty for
the Encouragement of an Undertaking of this Nature. Page 104, 105 How these
Mines (amongst other things) may conduce very much to make England gainer in
the Balance of Trade, with the Opinion of the Author of the Essay on Ways and
Means upon these Mines, that the highest valuation is not improbable. Page 101,
102, 103, etc. That the Stock is kept in Bank sealed Bills at Interest. Page
110 That the Tickets are now of no use. Page 114 How the Mines are managed
below. Page 118, 119, etc. How the Smelting and Refining is managed at Neath.
Page 124 That it is the Interest of England to encourage the Mine-Adventureers
in the Art of separating Silver from Lead, and to Export as little Silver or
Bullion, and as much of our own Commodities as we can. Page 132, etc. Of the
Advantages to this Nation by this Undertaking. Page 93, 95, 98, 99, 129, 130,
131, 132, 133 Of the hardness of the Rocks. Page 134, 135, 136, to 140 That the
printed Constitution for the management of the Mies is composed of all the best
Charters and Constitutions of the Bank of England, and other Companies about
Town, with the Form thereof at large. Page 106, etc. Reasons humbly offered for
altering the punishment of Criminals condemned to die for lesser Offenses, and
showing how it may be so ordered as to be a greater Terror to all Offenders,
and conduce both to the Honor and Interest of the King and Kingdom. Page 142,
etc. Conclusion. Page 156
ERRATA.
THis Book being printed off in haste, the Reader is desired to amend these
following particulars; Page Page. 63. read Four Millions five hundred seventy
three thousand, nine hundred twenty four pounds five shillings three pence
three farthings: p. 90. read a considerable Dividend every year, and Forty
pounds per Annum for every share.

A Familiar Discourse, OR DIALOGUE, BETWEEN Two Noble Lords, a Learned Doctor
of Divinity, and an Eminent Merchant of London, concerning the Mine-Adventure.
Lord A. WHat Paper is this? An Abstract of the present state of the Mines! I
thought that Undertaking had been given for lost.


Lord B. Really so did I, my Lord -- Pray what account does that Paper pretend
to give of it?


Ld. A. If your Lordship pleases I Will run it over.


Ld. B. If it be not too much trouble to your Lordship.


Ld. A. No, my Lord.


[Ld. A. Reads over the Abstract.] Ld. B. On my word, this is a very material
Paper. I know several of the Gentlemen of that Committee very well, they are
Men of undoubted Credit and Reputation; Certainly they would not print and
publish any thing that was not really true. I am surprised to see such a Paper.
-- I protest I have heard this Undertaking so ridiculed by the Wits of the
Town, that I could not imagine there was any thing in it.


Ld. A. Truly, my Lord, I should not have credited, even this Paper, but that
your Lordship gives so good a Character of the Committee. But though your
Lordship knows them to be honest Gentlemen, are they Men of Skill and Judgment
in Mineral Works?


Ld. B. They are not only Persons of great Honesty, and not to be biased by
any manner of Influence, but some of them have a considerable Estate in Mineral
Works, which they do manage to good Profit and Advantage. And therefore I don't
know any Persons more capable in every respect to make a right Judgment of
these Mines than they. And then I am sure, they are as careful of their
Reputation, and as cautious and wary of disposing their Money in any
unprofitable Adventure as any Persons whatsoever.


Ld. A. Then some Men are strangely mistaken about this Undertaking. Really my
Lord, this Paper, and your Lordships Character of the Committee, makes me
desirous to be fully informed of the Nature of this Adventure; perhaps it may
be worth our Enquiry at this time, before it is better understood.


Ld. B. It may so. -- O here is a Gentleman coming in, who is an Eminent
Merchant, and ten to one but he knows more of the matter.


Merchant. Of what my Lord?


Ld. A. Of the Mine-Adventure.


Merch. I know so much of it, my Lord, that I am in Five hundred pounds; and
here is a Reverend Divine who never was engaged in any thing of this nature
before, who has also ventured his Money as well as I.


Ld. B. Nay, if the Merchants and Clergy agree together in a Venture, it must
needs be successful. But I cannot well conceive how this Reverend Doctor came
to be engaged in such a Venture on Mines.


Doctor. My Lord, if I have erred in this Particular, I am sorry for it; but I
must beg leave to assure your Lordship, that it was not out of greedy Lucre of
Gain, or of a Fortunate Lot, but some other Reasons that prevailed with me,
which perhaps may have very little weight or Credit with many other Persons,
and therefore I shall not trouble your Lordship with them.


Ld. B. I shall not press any thing contrary to your Inclinations, Sir: But if
I may be free on this occasion, I confess, that if I were to venture my Money
in a Lottery, it should be in hopes of a Fortunate Lot.


Dr. I don't say, my Lord, but that a Fortunate Lot is a very acceptable thing;
but yet if I had been sure to have had none, I would have ventured in this as
much as I did.


Ld. A. I never knew a Person of your Coat so fond of a Lottery before; I hope
you will pardon me, Sir, that I am so free with you, for it is your own Discourse
that is the cause of it, which to me seems really to want an Interpreter.


Dr. My Lord, you have put so hard upon me, that your Lordship now forces me to
say something more than I intended. My Lord, I am not fond of that thing called
a Lottery in general; but on the contrary, am very glad that all common Gaming
Lotteries are suppressed. But I humbly conceive --


Merch. My Lord, The drawing of Lots (with submission) is not Malum in se, nor
any ways Scandalous in its own Nature; or else your Lordship would never have
concurred to introduce the Precedent of the Million Lottery. That which was
consistent with the Wisdom of the King, Lords, and Commons assembled in
Parliament, can never bear a Reflection on the Wisdom of a private Person.


Ld. B. What you say is true. Neither are we angry at the thing it self, as you
may observe by the Favor showed to the Greenwich-Hospital Adventure; but
Lotteries have been generally abused since that time to ill purposes, and many
of them not fairly drawn.


Merch. There are many other things that have been abused to ill purposes, as
well as the Drawing of Lots; as to give your Lordship one Instance for all:
What does your Lordship think of the Law of England? Has not that Law, the best
Law in the World, been abused to ill purposes? And what Answer is made to that
Objection but this? That in such Cases it is vitium hominis, non professionis;
and there its agreed that such Abuses by Men ought to be restrained and
regulated, but without the least Reflection, nay indeed with a tacit
Commendation of those that make a right use of the Law, that do act fairly, and
have the Right on their side. And this I conceive to be our Case.


Ld. B. You say well, if your Lottery was fairly drawn to the Satisfaction of
all Persons concerned, and not abused to any ill purpose?


Merch. My Lord, as to the fairness of Drawing, I must beg leave to acquaint
your Lordship, that the Mine-Adventure is allowed to exceed all, (and with due
submission be it spoken) even the Million Lottery it self. For though (without
doubt) the Million Lottery, and many others) were very fairly drawn, yet the
Mine-Adventure Tickets being Subscribed with the Parties own Handwriting
(which no others were) did not only prevent Fraud, but all Mistakes which often
happened when the Party depended on the Number of the Tickets only! But here
the Names of the Adventurers being read as well as the Numbers of the Tickets,
and Registered by two Clerks on Oath, as well Blanks as Prizes, one corrected
the other, that if the number of the Ticket was mistaken, as it often happened,
in printing, reading, or entering, yet the Name of the Adventurer writ thereon
was always right, and could not be mistaken, and certainly nothing in nature
could be more fair; and indeed all Persons concerned have so acknowled'd.


Ld. A. That was exceeding fair indeed, and beyond all manner of Exception. But
what say you to the other part of my Lord's Objection, Was not the Drawing of
Lots in this Case abused to ill purposes.


Merch. My Lord, with submission I conceive, if ever the Drawing of Lots was
allowable, it was in this Case: For this was not in the nature of a common
Gaming Lottery, where the Undertaker was to have so much per Cent. out of the
Money adventured, since no Person gained a Farthing by this Adventure more than
another, unless by having better Fortune. But several Gentlemen being concerned
as Partners in a Mine, and being entangled with many Difficulties and
Lawsuits, and knowing no other way to reconcile their Differences, did agree
together to the Drawing of Lots. This was Necessity, not Choice, and seems to
be justified by the Common Law of England, where one of the Ancient Divisions
by Daughters and Heirs, as Copartners, is by Drawing of Lots. And this puts me
in mind of a pleasant Story I have heard of a Grand Marshal of France, who upon
the Conclusion of the War, obtained to be a Judge of a certain Province, where
he behaved himself very well; and being commanded by the King to give an
Account how he was able to manage and give Satisfaction to so great a Province,
being not bred up to the Law. He confessed and declared, that there were three
sorts of Causes that came before him: Some were so plain and evident, that any
Man on hearing Counsel on both sides, might easily determine them. Others being
more difficult, and a little above his Martial Understanding, he took time to
consider of; and after some Conversation with the Advocates on both sides, he
discovered who had the Right in such Causes. But there were others, so very
Nice and Difficult, that though he took a long time to consider of them, and
his Bottles of Hermitage and Flasks of Champagn flew about like Lightning
amongst the Advocates, yet he could never get the Counsel on either side to
yield, but they still pleaded with Zeal, (in private as well as public) for
their respective Clients. Well, says the King, and what did you do then? The
Marshal was very unwilling, yet being forced to it, did confess that he had no
other way in that Case, but to retire into his Closet, and to throw Dice fairly
on the Drumhead, Now for the Plaintiff, Now for the Defendant. On my word (says
the King) Thou art the most just Judge I have in all my Dominions; Go on and
prosper.

So these Gentlemen being engaged in a very difficult Cause, and fearing their
Lease of the Mines would expire before their Suit in Chancery would be ended,
(the Counsel on both sides being very positive in their Opinion for their
respective Clients;) they thought fit to submit to the Drawing of Lots, as
being the only way left to raise a Stock, reconcile all Differences, and set
the Mines on work. And is there any hurt in all this?


Ld. B. No certainly; all Mankind must allow that the Drawing of Lots in such a
Case was very allowable. But still I would fain know the Reverend Doctor's
Reasons for his great Zeal in this matter; for we have interrupted his
Discourse all this while.


Dr. My Lord, this worthy Gentleman has prevented a great part of my Defense,
and in much more diverting Terms than I could pretend to. But yet, my Lord, I
must still own, I had other Reasons for my Engaging in this Affair. But --


Ld. A. Nay, Pray go on Sir.


Dr. My Lord, I must then declare, that I was not only satisfied that the
Drawing of Lots was lawful, since we find in Sacred Writ, that Joshua divided
the Land to the Children of Israel by Casting of Lots; and that Lots were drawn
in the Choice of an Apostle; and also that it was absolutely necessary in this
Case, for the Reasons aforesaid. But I was farther satisfied, that this Lottery
was at first contrived with a very good Design, not only to Reconcile all
Differences amongst the Partners, and set on work so great a Mine for the
Public Good, and employ great Numbers of poor Workmen, their Wives and
Children; but also thereby to enable the first Contriver thereof to Carve out
of the Mines a very Great and Noble Share for Charitable Uses, which could not
in all probability have been obtained by any other means. This, my Lord, was
the Reason that induced me to engage in this Undertaking: For being informed,
that this very thing was the Occasion that many Persons refused to be concerned
in it, pretending that the Undertaking was entangled (as they called it) with
so great a Charity, I thought it became every good Man to give a helping Hand
to it, not only to bring this particular Undertaking to good Effect, but by the
Success of this, to encourage all other Persons concerned in Mineral Works, to
follow so good an Example; and to set apart some Share of the Profits thereof
to Charitable Uses, if it were only to the Relief of such poor Miners, their
Wives and Children, as may in time stand in need thereof. And since, my Lord,
all this Good may be done, without being one of the Committee for the
Management of the Mines, or being interrupted from the Duty of our Function by
any Temporal Care or Concern in this Affair, I humbly hope that none of my Coat
have any reason to be ashamed of promoting so good an Undertaking.


Ld. B. I protest, Doctor, I must beg your pardon, I am much a Stranger to this
Matter: Pray, Sir, what is this Charity?


Dr. My Lord, there is a Twelfth part of the Profits of all these Mines
appropropriated to Charitable Uses, which I take to be a competent Share
thereof, and being placed in good Hands, may conduce very much to the promoting
of many Great and Noble Designs in the World; As for the Augmentation of poor
Vicaridges in Wales; for the Assistance and Encouragement of such Persons as
shall Endeavor the Conversion of Infidels in the Indies; for Relief of
Greenwich and other Hospitals; of poor Miners and Laborers at the Works, their
Wives and Children, and in time, of other poor People in most of the Great
Corporations in the Kingdom.


Ld. A. The Design is very good indeed; but I seldom knew a Charity in the
Hands of a Company, ever well applied.


Dr. But this is in the Disposition of one single Person.


Ld. A. And ten to one, but that single Person will put it all in his own
Pocket.


Dr. No, my Lord; Though it is a hard Task to undertake for another in this
wicked Age; yet I dare venture to undertake, that this Charity shall be applied
to the best Uses. But in case of any Abuse or Neglect therein, (if any such
thing should ever happen,) your Lordship knows that we can by a Commission of
Charitable Uses, compel a due Execution of this Trust, and a proper Application
thereof to those Charitable Uses it was designed.


Ld. A. You may so: But if I am not mistaken, there was some mention made of a
Gift in Tickets to the Poor of several Corporations; How does that Matter stand
now? Had any of them Good Fortune?


Dr. My Lord, that Case stands thus: Sir H. M. having purchased a Power in the
Settlement for that purpose, did at first intend to give Two hundred pounds in
Tickets to the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor of London, and the Court of
Aldermen, toward the Relief of the Poor of the City of London; and One hundred
pounds in Tickets to the Poor of Bristol and York, and so proportionably to the
Poor of other Corporations, as far as Ten thousand pounds; and that the
Magistrates of such respective Corporations should draw Lots, for and on the
behalf of their respective Poor, as other Persons did for themselves; whereby
it might have happened that several Corporations might have been so Fortunate,
as to have got such a share in the Mines, as would have discharged them of the
whole Burden of the Poors Tax. But that is now altered.


Ld. B. Truly Doctor, I think it was very well intended; How came it to pass
that so good a Design was altered?


Dr. My Lord, the old Partners, who had an Election, whether they would take
Money for their Shares, or Subscribe to this New Undertaking, being
apprehensive that by such a Disposition, all those Corporations would have an
Interest in the Government and Management of the Mines; and not knowing what
might be the Consequence of such a thing, did absolutely refuse to Subscribe to
the Mine-Adventure, unless Sir H. M. would alter that Design; and thereupon
after many long Debates about it, and Consultation had with some Learned
Divines, it was agreed, That instead of Ten thousand pounds in Tickets, the
Poor shall have a Twelfth part of the Profits of all these Mines, clear of all
manner of Charges; and that the same shall be disposed by Sir H. M. to such
Person and Persons, and for such pious and charitable Uses, and in such
Proportion, Manner, and Form as he shall think fit. And, it now standing thus,
I doubt not but Sir H. M. will in due time be mindful of the Poor of those
Corporations accordingly.


Ld. B. Then it is in Effect the same thing as it was before, only the Charity
is changed from a Casual Profit to an Annual standing Revenue for the Poor,
which I think is much more equal: But pray, Sir, is there any thing yet given
to Charitable Uses?


Dr. My Lord, we must not expect that a Child should speak, as soon as it is
born.


Merch. But if I am not misinformed, there is a School erected on this account
already in Wales.


Dr. There is so; but that is but a small Matter, erected on the Credit of this
Undertaking: I hope in due time to see great Things accomplished by the Aid of
this Charity.


Ld. A. If there be so much good designed as you express, I admire this
Undertaking should be cried down as it is, by some Persons.


Merch. My Lord, The Reason of that may be, for that of late Years, there has
been several Projects set on foot, which have either proved unsuccessful, or
which is worse, mere Cheats, and the generality of Mankind, seldom Enquire into
the Merits of a Cause, but argue, from what has been in another Cause, to what
may be in this.


Ld. B. But that is not fair Arguing, for every Cause stands upon its own
Bottom. If the Judges of the Land should follow that method, without making
Distinctions, they would make mad work in Westminster Hall.


Merch. True, my Lord; but they are too wise to fall into such an Error. We are
speaking of another sort of People, who never allow themselves time to consider
any thing, much less to make any Differences or Distinctions; and Mankind being
naturally inclined to Satyr and Envy, one malicious or designing Person shall
spread a false Report in Town, which will soon be believed by a thousand such
Inconsiderate Persons, without the least Enquiry into the Truth of the Fact.


Ld. A. But why should any Man speak at all against an Undertaking, wherein so
much Good is designed; for if it be so fair and charitable, as is represented,
it seems to me to deserve Encouragement by all Mankind.


Merch. My Lord, there is no Undertaking so Good, so Charitable, or
Advantageous to the Public, but some private Persons may be prejudiced by it;
and in this Case it is certain there are a great many Persons, who think
themselves very much concerned in Interest against this Undertaking; but I
forbear to name any, because I conceive they are under a Mistake, and I will
not make the Difference wider than it is. I hope a little time will open their
Eyes, and dispel all those dark Clouds of Ignorance and Self-interest.


Ld. A. But may not there be another Reason for speaking against this
Undertaking? Do you Merchants always speak as you think in these Cases?


Merch. My Lord, we ought to do so; but I confess I cannot say we always do
what we ought. But is there any great hurt in this? to buy when a Commodity is
cheap, and sell when it is dear.


Ld. A. No, Sir; If you don't use some indirect means at that time to make it
cheap or dear.


Merch. My Lord, The fair Merchant never does any such thing; But I confess it
is often done to our Hands by other Persons, and we take the Advantage of it.


Ld. A. Pray give me a Rule to go by in these Cases.


Merch. My Lord, it is hard to make a Man of Honor and Pleasure a Man of
Business: I hope your Lordship will pardon this Freedom; for all our General
Rules have Exceptions; I may give a good Rule, and yet your Lordship may be
mistaken, and then I shall be blamed.


Ld. A. No, good Sir, it it is better to walk by some Rule than none at all:
Give me your General Rule, and if I don't apply it well, let the Fault lie at
my door.


Merch. Why, then my Lord, the General Rule that all old Merchants on the
Exchange do take, is this; First they observe whether a New Undertaking be
founded on a real Substantial Thing, or on a mere Notion; if the Project be
only Notional, they seldom venture; and those that do, seldom succeed. But if
there be a Staple, or other real Substantial Commodity in the Case, and the
Undertaking is brought to bear, then they watch the first Opportunity when it
is cried down, and buy in; and when all the World is mad, and run it up into
another Extreme, then they sell out, and so take the next Opportunity to buy in
cheap again.


Ld. A. O, is that your way of Dealing? Now we at the other end of the Town do
think, that when a Stock begins to fall, then the Undertaking falls too; but
when the Stock rises, then it is a good Thing, and we lay out our Money in it.


Merch. But we generally think otherwise: For nothing is more common, than for
the same Man to sell a few Shares cheap, in order to buy in a great many more
at the same price. And so on the contrary, several Persons will Combine
together to buy a few Shares at a high price, when they really intend to sell
out.


Ld. A. This is a pretty Trade indeed. How shall a Man do at this rate to be at
any certainty?


Merch. Every Person has a very plain Rule to walk by in this Case, if he will
but take the trouble to follow it.


Ld. A. Pray Sir what is that? I dare say every Person will follow a Rule that
is for his Advantage.


Merch. Really, my Lord, a Man would think so: But yet there are some Persons
that are either so very full of Business, or very Lazy, that they will rather
take things as they find them on the Exchange, then go as far as Lincoln's Inn
to know the Truth.


Ld. A. How can they know the Truth at Lincoln's Inn more than at the Exchange?


Merch. My Lord, at the Office in Lincoln's Inn, every Person may see the
Original Letters from the Officers at the Mines to the Committee, who must take
care that they write nothing but the truth on the peril of their places. And
there they may also see the Orders and Proceedings of the Committee, and
thereby give a great guess at their Opinion of the Mines, and how the Stock and
all other Matters stand with them.


Ld. A. This is plain indeed: But I did not imagine that any such Liberty was
given; for few other Companies in England give such a Liberty.


Merch. True, my Lord: For many other Companies perhaps subsist upon Credit,
but this upon a substantial Foundation; the less others, and the more we are
understood, the greater esteem will be had both for them and us.


Ld. A. Truly, Sir, this is a great proof of what you observe. But why do some
Persons in that part of the World where the Mines lie, speak against this
Underking?


Merch. I am one of that Country my self, and your Lordship hears that I speak
well of it, and so do a great many more very worthy Gentlemen in that
Neighborhood, and many of them are Partners with us. But, my Lord, to tell you
the truth, we have the same common Frailties amongst us in that part of the
World that you have in this; and there are Parties and Factions there, as well
as here, and we speak according to the Party we espouse, or the Interest we are
engaged in; but this never does no hurt amongst us, for we know one another
Humors, and therefore never mind what either Party says, but enquire into the
truth of the Fact, and stick to that.


Ld. B. I think you have said very well; for no Man can tell what private
Animosities, Envies, Contentions, and separate Interests there are in the
World. You cannot move for a Bill to make a River Navigable, which a Man would
think should generally be esteemed a good Undertaking, but you will find as many
Petitions against the Bill, as for it; and so perhaps my Friend has a Mine in
the next County, which he would have to be richer than this. So many Men, so
many Minds, and for ought I know so many Interests too: Besides, some Men want
Understanding, especially in Mineral Works; some want Money; but none want a
Natural Inclination to be Censorious in no part of the World: Therefore he that
cannot judge for himself upon a better Foundation than Hearsay and Report, is
not fit to engage in Mineral Works.


Ld. A. I think so too. But I pray, Doctor, what is your Opinion in this Matter?


Dr. I have heard several good Reasons given, why Men speak against this
Undertaking; Because it is their private Interest, or Policy to do so; or
because they don't understand any thing of the Matter, and being prepossessed
with an ill Opinion of all Things that look like Projects, will not give
themselves the trouble to distinguish, or to be better informed. But yet I
fancy there may be another Reason assigned, why one sort of Men spend their Wit
upon it.


Ld. B. Pray Doctor, what is that?


Dr. My Lord, it is a little out of the common way of Reasoning; and I cannot
tell whether it may be so proper at this time.


Ld. A. Pray Doctor, be free; Let us have your Opinion without any reserve.


Dr. My Lord, since you command it, I will be free. And first, I must observe
to your Lordship, that all the World is divided into two Parties, The good and
the bad; not but that the best Men have some Failings, and the worst Men some
good Qualities: But I mean by this distinction, that the World is divided into
Men who are chiefly governed by the Suggestions and Influences of a good
Spirit, and Men who are governed by those of an evil one.


Ld. B. What then, what do you infer from thence?


Dr. My Lord, I infer thus much; that as there is in every Man, (who is a
little World within himself) an Intestine War between the Flesh and the Spirit;
the one inclining him to do good, and the other to do evil; so there is in the
great World a perpetual War and Opposition between those two Parties
abovementioned.


Ld. A. But pray, Doctor, what is all this to the Opposition that is made to the
Mine-Adventure?


Dr. My Lord, I acquainted your Lordship, that my present Conception was a
little out of the common Road of Reason, and am afraid I shall tire your
Patience.


Ld. B. No; pray Doctor go on.


Dr. My Inference then (in short) is no more but this, That if this Adventure
be well designed; if so noble a Charity is well intended, and likely to take
effect, as I verily believe it will; it is no wonder that one of those Parties
should violently oppose it; for the Prince of this World has an absolute power
over his Subjects; and though wicked Men think themselves free, yet they are
really mere Slaves: They have listed themselves as his Soldiers, and so long as
they continue in his Service, they must fight his Battles whether they will or
no. A Government by an Earthly Prince is outward and visible; but a Government
by a Spirit is inward and invisible, and yet the latter is much more powerful;
for the former only governs the outward Man, but the latter the very Heart and
Affections; and certainly whoever governs the Thoughts of a Man, and his very
Heart and Affections, governs the Man himself.


Ld. A. That is certain indeed. But do you really believe that this Charity
will prove so considerable a thing.


Dr. My Lord, I Will suppose that these Mines should not come near the valuation
made by the Steward, I Will go as low as ever I heard any Person, and suppose
that the Mines should not yield above a fourteenth part of the Steward's
Calculation, which no Man of sense ever doubted, yet even in that Case there
would be a thousand pounds a Year to Charitable Uses, my Lord, this seems no
contemptible thing; such a Sum well applied every year, may contribute to do no
small good in the World.


Ld. B. It is not to be despised indeed.


Dr. But then my Lord, give me leave to suppose on the other hand, what I hope
this Gentleman will be able to prove, That it is not impossible, but that the
Mines in time may answer even the Steward's highest Calculation; and if that
should happen, there would be above Twelve thousand pounds every Year applied
to Charitable Uses. What a noble Thing would this be! Ought not such a Design
to be encouraged? or at least entertained in the World with favorable
Thoughts. A good Man would not rashly condemn any thing of this Nature, but
would at least suspend his Judgment for a season, concluding with himself, that
if this thing were a Cheat, two or three Years time would fully discover it;
but if it be a good thing, why should we rashly and hastily engage against it?


Ld. B. Truly Doctor, you have said a great deal in this Matter, which deserves
to be considered; and I confess I am so far convinced, that I can see no reason
to judge but that the Mine-Adventure may be a profitable and good Undertaking,
notwithstanding the Opposition it has met with by some Persons in the World.
Thus much I can say for it, That in the little Experience I have had, I
generally found, that the best Designs have met with the greatest Opposition;
but I confess, I could never give any good Reason for it before.


Ld. A. This Discourse has really explained a great Mystery to me, for I
confess, I could not understand why so many Reverend Fathers and Doctors of the
Church had engaged in this Adventure; nor why the Undertaking it self was so
much cried down by some Persons? But now I am satisfied.


Dr. My Lord, I must beg leave to add this one thing more; That though this
Undertaking be so much cried down by one Party, yet it is as much cried up by
the other, and I hope with much better Reason.


Ld. B. Truly I begin to be of that Opinion. But pray Doctor, give me leave to
be a little more inquisitive in the Matter of the Mines.


Dr. My Lord, I don't pretend to understand any thing of Mines; I have only
presumed to lay before your Lordship the Reasons that induced me to be
concerned in them; I really believe that this is an honest Undertaking, and
well designed; but I must leave the rest to this worthy Gentleman, who may
perhaps be capable to answer your Lordships farther Enquiries.


Merch. My Lord, I must confess I have taken some pains to be rightly informed
in this Matter, as became me to do, and as far as my Capacity extends, shall be
ready to give your Lordship any farther Satisfaction.


Ld. B. I have heard that though you may raise great quantities of Oar, yet
your Oar is so very hard and poor, that it will turn to no Profit, the Charges
of Smelting is so great, and the yield of the Oar so little.


Merch. That Objection was formerly made, but is long since vanished; ever
since the several sorts of Oar were tried publicly in Stationers' Hall, at a
General Meeting of the Partners; which was done with that Exactness, as gave
every Person entire Satisfaction, and I thought 'twas impossible for that
Objection ever to be started again.


Ld. B. I beg your pardon, Sir, I did not hear what produce those Trials
yielded.


Merch. The three several sorts of Oar were brought into the Hall in a Trunk,
with Partitions; and the Oars were first tried severally by themselves, and
afterward jointly together; and the poorest Oar yielded about two Thirds in
Lead, and the best about three Fourths. I desire any Person to show a large
Vein richer than this in England.


Ld. B. But how did it appear that the Oar tried in Stationers' Hall, was the
Oar from those Mines?


Merch. The Adventurers sent for a Ship-loading of Lead and Oar, on purpose to
have a fair Trial in large Quantities, that they might be at a certainty in
this Particular, and the Workmen below made Affidavit, That the Lead and Oar
put on Board the Ship called the Brothers Desire, Thomas Friend Master, at
Abcrdavoy, was the Produce of the Mines of Bwlch-Yr-Eskyr-hyr; and the said
Master made Affidavit that he brought the same Oar to the Port of London; and
the Master of the Wharf there proved, that he took that very Oar out of the
said Vessel, and brought it to the said Hall, where it was immediately tried.


Ld. B. That was exceeding fair and full proof indeed.


Merch. But besides, the Committee have answered that Objection very fully in
their printed State of the Mines; for there they acquaint us that they make
sive pounds and upwards of every Tun of Oar, one with another, and in large
quantities, over and above all manner of Charges whatsoever; which I think, my
Lord, is a very great Profit, and the finest Trade in the World, if the Mines
hold.


Ld. A. I confess I think it is a prodigious Profit: But are you sure they
don't mistake?


Merch. No, my Lord, I have seen the Trials, and the Original Entries in their
Books at large; and I am satisfied that the clear Profits at present, is above
Six pounds per Tun, but I commend the Committee to set it down very cautiously,
for fear any Accident should happen hereafter, by the fall of the Price of
Lead, or of Lytharge, or the like, for which they ought to make an Allowance.


Ld. A. This Answer has prevented another Doubt, Whether their Lead be good or
not? For if they make so much Profit, their Lead must needs be a good
Commodity; though I confess I have heard that their Lead was brittle, and fit
for no other use but to make Bullets or Shot; and that the Oar was so poor, it
was not possible to make better Lead with it.


Merch. This Objection arises altogether from the unskilfulness of the Person
that makes it; for hard or poor Oar smelted by a skilful Artist, will make as
good Lead, though not as much in proportion, as rich Oar; but there is indeed
more Art and Skill in the doing of it, and many Persons that are used to soft
Oars, do not understand the right way of Smelting hard Oars, which has been the
occasion of this mistake. But, my Lord, this Objection has also vanished a long
time ago, ever since we made the said Trials, and produced our Lead on the Key
of London; and yet that Lead was not made by the most skilful Artist; for the
Lead we now make is beyond that, being exceeding tuff, and fit for all manner
of uses: But at present, till greater quantities of Oar shall be raised, we do
for the most part sell our Lead in a sort of a Powder, called Lytharge.


Ld. B. I have seen that which they call Lytharge of Gold and Lytharge of
Silver, and as I remember it comes from Poland, or some of those Foreign Parts.
Is yours like that?


Merch. O, my Lord, much beyond it; there is none will buy Foreign Lytharge
since this was made.


Lord A. Why? Is this a new thing?


Merch. Yes, my Lord, good Lytharge was never made a Merchantable Commodity in
England, till Mr. Robert Lydall, Chief Operator to the Company, made the
Discovery, for which he has a Patent from his present Majesty.


Ld. B. All Refiners will tell you, that they ever made Lytharge in their
common way of Refining.


Merch. True, my Lord, but never a Merchantable Commodity to Profit or for Sale
in quantities; all the Drugsters, Apothecaries, Potters and Glass-makers about
Town can testify this truth; for it was so bad, and mixed with their Woodashes
and Dust, that it was not fit for their use, and therefore Refiners were
necessitated to reduce it into Lead again with great waste: But this Lytharge
is made another way, never known in England before, and is so clean and free
from all mixture, that it far exceeds all Foreign Lytharge, and even Red-lead
it self. And wherever this Lytharge is known in England, or in any Foreign
Parts, they will not buy any other Lytharge, as I am informed.


Ld. A. Pray Sir, what is the use of Lytharge?


Merch. My Lord, it is bought by the Drugsters, and used by the Apothecaries,
Surgeons, and Painters; but the great use of it is by the Potters, in glazing
Earthen Ware, and by the Glass-makers in making fine Glass.


Ld. B. Do these Persons take off any great quantities?


Merch. I leave it to your Lordship to judge; every Traveller knows that there
is Earthen Ware used all over the World, and that all this Earthen Ware must be
glazed, or else it is so apt to gather dust and filth, that it is not fit for
use: And all this Glazing is with Lead Calcined and made into Powder.


Ld. A. Earthen Ware was made long before your Invention, and therefore the
Potters can stand in no need thereof*


Merch. True, my Lord; the Potters finding no sort of Lytharge made fine and
clean enough for their purpose, were forced with great Care, Trouble, and
Charge to Calcine the Lead themselves, or by continual stirring in an Iron
Kettle, to make it into a Course Powder, which they ground fine at the Mill,
and so mixed it with other proper Ingredients, and made it fit for the Glazing
Trade. But, my Lord, in this way of making, the Fumes are very unhealthy to the
Men, and the Operation chargeable to the Master; so our Lytharge is not only
much finer and better for their use, but cheaper also.


Ld. A. Nay then, you will be sure to have all their Custom. But how do the
Glass-makers use it, for that is a general Commodity too?


Merch. They use it instead of Redlead, which is one Ingredient, in their best
Glasses; it is of such an Oily, Transparent, and yet Binding Nature, that it is
of singular use to them.


Ld. B. But if Red-lead serve their turn, why will they use Lytharge?


Merch. For the same Reasons as the Potters, because it is better and cheaper.


Ld. A. How is it better?


Merch. Red-lead is frequently mixed with Dustand Ashes, and often adulterated
with Red-oaker and Brick-dust; but this Lytharge is always made pure, without
either Dust or Ashes mixed with it. And it is observed, that the Glass made
with this Lytharge is much finer, more white and clear; and which is another
great Advantage, is not so apt to crack when cold, as Glass made with Red-lead
is; which is more burnt in the fire than Lytharge, and so more short and
brittle in its Nature and Use.


Ld. A. Then it is much better indeed: But how is it cheaper?


Merch. Because Lytharge goes farther than Red-lead, which is a Compound, and
has Water, etc. mixed with it, and all that is added to the Lead it self, is
useless to the Glass-makers, and either consumes, or evaporates in the fire; so
that Twenty hundred of this fine Lytharge will make near Two and twenty hundred
of Red-lead; and as has been observed, Lytharge not being so much burnt in the
fire, but being of a much softer nature than Red-lead, sooner and at less
Charge melts again in the fire, and mixeth better with the Sand and Ashes,
used by the Glass-makers to their great Advantage.


Ld. B. Then indeed if you sell the Lytharge at the price of Red-lead, it has
an apparent Advantage.


Merch. My Lord, this Lytharge formerly was sold at above Twenty pounds per
Tun, but now the Company, being willing to make it an Universal Commodity over
all the World for those Uses, are content to sell it near the price of
Red-lead, which is the reason that I asserted it was cheaper, as well as
better, for the use of the Glass-makers.


Ld. A. Do the Potters and Glass-makers in London actually buy and use this
Lytharge?


Merch. My Lord, they do, and agree these Facts abovementioned; but, this is
yet a new thing, and I cannot tell whether all of them know the use of it or
not; nor whether all are so ingenuous as to confess the Truth, because they may
apprehend that it may raise the price of a Commodity they do use; but many of
the Chief of these Trades have freely owned these things to be true to their
Knowledge and Experience.


Lord A. You have opened my Eyes very much in this Matter; for I really thought
the Lytharge that you seem so much to depend on, could have but little vent.


Merch. Though I have said so much of the Nature and Use of Lytharge, and
consequently have proved the great vent of it, yet, my Lord, I must also inform
your Lordship, that we never depended so very much on the vent of our Lytharge.


Ld. A. No! what would you do then?


Merch. My Lord, we can make Red-lead with our Lytharge, and make as much or
more Money of it; and none can make better Red-lead, or cheaper than we, for
our Lytharge is almost Red-lead in its own nature; it wants only grinding and
coloring, and the work is done, whereas others are at much greater Charges.


Ld. B. But you cannot vent all your Lead in Lytharge or Red-lead; What will you
do with the rest?


Merch. We can vent a great deal that way; and the rest we can sell either in
Lead, as others do; or else refine it, and take out the Silver and then reduce
it into Lead again, which we can do to good profit.


Ld. A. But is your Lead reduced, as good as the other? for it is said that such
Lead is not so good.


Merch. That is a Vulgar Error (my Lord) for we find by Experience that our
Lead is the better, and indeed it agrees with the General Rule in all Cases of
Metals, that the oftener it is refined in the Fire, the purer the Metal.


Ld. B. Then certainly it is your interest to refine all your Lead, if your
Silver turn to any account. Pray Sir, what is your Profit by the Silver?


Merch. My Lord, It is not always the same; but sometimes more, sometimes less.


Ld. A. What is the Reason of that?


Merch. I Will endeavor to explain it to your Lordship; but I must first put you
in mind of a Common Experiment of slitting a Groat with Sulphur or Brimstone
set on fire, and if you continue the fire to it, it will turn the Silver Groat
to a black Dust, which can never by any Art be reduced into Silver again. So
that Sulphur (it seems) is a great Enemy to Silver, and being melted together
in the fire, destroys the very Body of it.


Ld. B. I remember that Experiment very well; but what then?


Merch. My Lord, this Silver-oar abounds with Sulphur, and in the Smelting of
it in the Fire, the Sulphur destroys a great part of the Silver, sometimes
more, sometimes less, according to the Skill and Care of the Smelter.


Ld. A. If this be the Case, I cannot see how it can be prevented at all, but
that the Sulphur will always destroy the Silver, notwithstanding any Care of
the Smelter.


Merch. My Lord, some Operators use such a Flux and in Smelting the Leadoar, as
imbibes, fixes, or destroys the strength of the Sulphur, before it has any
great operation on the Body of the Silver; which Flux is not commonly known;
and where it is, there is Skill and Care in the very Use and Application
thereof, and in the ways and proper seasons of mixing and stirring the Oar and
Flux (which is a Compound) together: And this is the Reason that sometimes we
have more Silver, and sometimes less out of the same quantity of Lead.


Ld. A. These are things I did not understand before; but I confess you have
made it very plain to me, that such things may be, by your Instance in this
common Experiment, which almost every Person knows to be true.


Ld. B. Really my Lord, this Gentleman has extremely pleased me with this
Account of the Matter, for it Answers all the Objections founded on the
incertainty of the Yield in Silver, and unskilful Persons, when they hear that
the Oar yields sometimes more, and sometimes less, are apt to conclude that it
yields nothing at all.


Merch. There is another great Reason which occasions an uncertainty of our
Yield in Silver, which is this; We have several Ribs of Oar in the same Veins,
which lie by one another like Planks in a Floor; as for instance, in the great
Vein, we have Potters-Oar, or Soft-Oar, which is of a large Grain; Starry-Oar,
which is of a smaller; and Steely-Oar, which is of the smallest Grain of all;
and generally the smallest grained Oars do abound with most Silver. But at
present these Oars, being all mixed and smelted confusedly together, we have
more or less Silver in every Operation in proportion to the quantity of small
grained Oars that happened to be in each parcel of Lead refined; and this might
be the occasion that some Persons formerly thought our Oar so very poor, and
others so very rich in Silver.


Ld. B. If so, methinks you should take care in raising your Oar, to keep every
sort by it self.


Merch. We do intend to do so for the future; though it is not improper in some
Cases to smelt them altogether in a due proportion. But, my Lord, that we do
make profit of the Silver, to the advantage of the Nation, as well as our
selves, is so fully and fairly tried and entered in our Books, that there is no
room for any Objection in that Case, unless we can suppose that all the
Gentlemen of the Committee would not only be guilty of a notorious Falsity in
their Journals and Leidgers, but also pay a fictitious Profit to the Company
out of their own Pockets, which would be ridiculous to imagine.


Ld. A. I am sure it would be ridiculous to do so: But now you speak of the
Committee again, pray do they really buy in, as is affirmed, or sell out; for I
had rather judge of any Man's Opinion of the Mines (that has a knowledge of
them) by his Actions, than by his Words.


Merch. I have particularly examined that Matter, and do find that the
Committee have bought in, and that not any have sold out any part of their
Principal Money adventured, or Shares arising from the same.


Ld. B. That is a very clear Evidence that they do not believe the
Mine-Adventure to be a Cheat: But pray, what has the Steward of the Mines done
in that Case?


Merch. My Lord, I see your Coach is at the Door, and it is but a little way to
the Office in Lincoln's Inn new Square, if your Lordship please, I will wait on
you there, where you may receive farther Satisfaction in this and many other
Particulars.


Ld. A. Do the Company suffer any Person to look into their Books?


Merch. Any Partner or Person of Quality. We are not ashamed of our Proceedings.


Lord. A. My Lord, I will wait on your Lordship, if you please. What say you
Doctor, will you go along with us?


Dr. My Lord, I am ready to attend your Lordship wherever you command me.


Ld. B. Come Sir, we are all agreed; if you please to show us the way.


Merch. My Lord, This is the Office for the present, which Sir H. M. affords
the Company gratis, for the Convenience of the present Committee.


Ld. B. Pray Sir, be pleased to introduce us.


Merch. I obey your Lordships Commands. Sir, I have brought these Noble Lords
to see the Method of your Accounts relating to the Mine-Adventure.


Accomptant. Sir, the Books are at your Service; you shall see them in what
order you please.


Merch. I thank you, Sir. My Lord, Here is a Register of the Principal Money
adventured; and here is the Transfer Book of the Principal Money, according to
the Form used in the Bank of England; and here is the Journal and Leidger to
the said Transfer Book.


Ld. A. Very well; I see you are in exact Method of Merchants Accounts: If this
be a Cheat, I am sure it is a very formal one.


Ld. B. But pray see for the Name of Mr. Waller, and of the Gentlemen of the
Committee, how they stand there.


Merch. My Lord, Here is an exact Alphabet to the Leidger, by which you will find
all their Names and Accounts in a moment.


Ld. B. That Is a very good method. O, here is Mr. Waller's Accounts: I see he
keeps his Original Stock, and has not sold out any part thereof. On my word, he
is in deep.


Merch. My Lord, he ventured all his Arrears of Salary for many Years, at the
Rate of Two hundred and fifty pounds per Annum, and chose rather to take it in
the Mine-Adventure Tickets then in ready Money.


Ld. A. I think there cannot possibly be a greater Demonstration of his good
Opinion of the Mines, then this I now see with my Eyes; for certainly if he did
not think well of this Undertaking, he would have sold out at any Rate before
this time.


Merch. There is one thing more which demonstrates Mr. Waller's sincerity.


Ld. A. What Is that, Sir?


Merch. Mr. Waller, in his Essay on the Value of the Mines, and also at the
first General Meeting, did propose to take his old Salary of Two hundred and
fifty pounds for the first Year, till the Works were set in order; and
afterward to accept One hundred pounds per Annum for every Ten thousand pounds
per Annum clear Profits gained by the Partners out of the said Mines, over and
above all manner of Charges, whereby he must bring in a clear Profit of Twenty
five thousand pounds per Annum to the Partners, before he can equal his former
Salary; What does your Lordship think of this?


Ld. A. Truly, Sir, I think this is beyond all; What does he mean? does he ever
think to make more than his old Salary?


Merch. Yes, he does; he has such an extraordinary Opinion of the Mines, that
he does not doubt but at this Rate he shall in time receive a Salary of Sixteen
hundred pounds a year.


Ld. A. Well, if he does, much good may it do him. But is the Company
absolutely bound up to this Proposal?


Merch. Not by any Deed in writing; but I cannot tell how far they may be
obliged in honor.


Dr. Sixteen hundred pounds a year is a vast Salary; they may be very generous
to him, and yet take time to consider of setting some bounds to the Proposal;
as for instance, That he shall have a Salary of One hundred pounds per Annum
for every Ten thousand pounds Profit, not exceeding five or six hundred pounds
a year. I think that is very fair.


Merch. Well, that may be considered when his Year is out; we must not be
unkind to him, on any account whatsoever; he is certainly both an honest Man
and a skilful Miner. And every Undertaking of this Nature does very much depend
on the Integrity and Skill of the Persons, who have the management thereof
below, as well as above.


Ld. A. It Is very true. But pray, Sir, now we are here, (for we detain this
Gentleman, the Accomptant, from his Business,) Let us just cast our Eye on what
the Gentlemen of the Committee have done.


Merch. I Will look them out; here are their Accounts.


Ld. A. I see they all keep their Original Stock; and they are most of them
great Purchasers since the Adventure was drawn.


Merch. Yes, my Lord.


Ld. A. Pray sum it up, how much they have purchased in the whole amongst them
all.


Merch. I will, my Lord, it is just Eight thousand seven hundred and fifty five
pounds in the Principal Money adventured.


Ld. A. Well, I see the Gentlemen of the Committee are honest Gentlemen, and
speak the truth. I think nothing in the World can be more Convincing. I
remember in all the late Projects that were not founded on an honest bottom,
the principal Promoters of them sold out immediately, and their Transfer Books,
Journals, and Leidgers were kept private, that no Man could tell what they did:
But here they not only have stood their ground, but laid out more Money; and
all their Proceedings are fair and above board.


Dr. Why, my Lord, there are those in the World who say that all this signifies
nothing.


Ld. B. It may be so: But I suppose they are such as you have already described.


Dr. That they are indeed; they are resolved to make the Mine-Adventure to be a
mere Cheat, right or wrong.


Ld. B. But, pray Sir, what do they say?


Dr. Why truly, they very fairly tell us, That the Committee have done this
only to put a better Gloss on the Matter.


Ld. A. That Is very likely indeed; the Merchants and Lawyers do use to throw
away so many Thousand pounds only to get another Person a good Name, Pray are
they old Partners, or new Adventurers.


Merch. My Lord, the far major Number of the Committee are New-Adventurers.


Ld. A. Then it is plain, those Gentlemen are only concerned in the Profit, not
in the Credit of the Undertaking.


Ld. B. They are so. Well, my Lord, I think we have seen enough to fatisfie any
reasonable Men.


Merch. Nay, pray my Lord, now you are here, look upon the other Books; Here is
the Register of Shares, the Transfer Book, and the Journal and Leidger thereto
belonging, and also the Alphabet to the Leidger; and here your Lordship may
also see the same Persons standing their ground, and purchasing more Shares
also. The Committee have purchased Two hundred forty two Shares, besides the
said Sum of Eight thousand seven hundred and fifty five pounds in Blank Tickets.


Ld. B. I see it, Sir; There is no room for any Rational Man to object any
thing (in my judgment) against the fairness of these Proceedings. Come, let us
go.


Merch. Nay, my Lord, let me show you all, now you have taken this trouble;
here is our Waste-Book Journal and Leidger for the Quick Stock.


Ld. A. Pray Sir, show me how much your Stock is in the whole?


Merch. My Lord, here your Lordship may see that our Original Stock in ready
Money is Twenty thousand pounds; which is the more to be valued, because it
must be made up again complete upon every Dividend.


Ld. A. On my word, you have a Noble Stock: But some do say that the greatest
part of it is spent already.


Merch. My Lord, here is the Account of it; be pleased to take notice how false
that Allegation is.


Ld. A. I observe, your Twenty thousand pounds is not really lessened in all
this time above Five thousand pounds; and I see that some part of this has been
laid out in Stotes, building Houses for the Miners, Carriage of Oar, Stones,
and other incident Charges, that will not be repeated every Year; and in
Smelting and Refining. I think you have been extraordinary Husbands: Nay, I see
you have near Four thousand pounds standing out in Lead, Lytharge, and in
Merchants hands.


Merch. I hope, my Lord, you will judge of all the other Stories raised of us
by the falsity of this Particular.


Ld. B. I shall make no ill use of what I observe; and indeed I cannot but be
of opinion, that you are in a very good Condition, and that all things are very
prudently managed: But suppose any Accident should happen to these Books.


Merch. My Lord, to prevent that, we have here Duplicates of all our Chief
Books.


Ld. A. If you have not a great Treasure, it is pity but you had; for I think
the Bank of England cannot keep their Books in a more exact method.


Merch. I shall not trouble your Lordships, much more at present, but here is a
few other Books which are convenient upon this occasion: Here is a Book for
Entering all Accounts in haec verba; a Book of printed Receipts for Interest
Money; a Book to enter all Letters; a Cash Book; three Books for Entering
Orders; one for the General Meeting; another for the Grand Committee; and
another for the Private or Select Commit; here is Index's to all these Books;
a Docket-Book for short Entries, and a Book of Petty Expenses; a Book of
Entering Caveats, and an Alphabetical Index of all Letters of Attorney and Proxy.


Ld. B. Hay-day, here is no end of your Books: Pray what Salaries do you give
for keeping these Books.


Merch. We have at present but two Officers above, viz. a Gash-keeper and an
Accomptant, and both stand us in no more than One hundred and twenty pounds per
Annum: But we must in time, as Profits arise, and the Trouble increases, allow
more Clerks, and consequently better Salaries.


Ld. A. Who would believe that it was possible things should be so well
managed, and at the same time so strangely represented by some Persons?


Merch. Nay, my Lord, here is one thing more that pleases me very well; Here is
an Alphabetical Index of all Letters, and of the Progress that has been made in
all the Veins, Levels, Adits, and Cross-Drifts to each Vein, so that your
Lordship may readily see an Account of the Mines, and what Oar is raised in
each Vein, and by every set of Workmen, without reading all the Books and
Letters at large, which, my Lord, is a great help to us Men of Business, who
have not always time to be poring over all the Books and Papers at length.


Ld. B. Nothing in the World can be more Exact and Satisfactory; I must now
believe I can ask no Questions but what you will readily Answer, and I shall
not ask them so much for my own Satisfaction, as that I may be able to Answer
all others.

Pray, Sir, How came it to pass that you have not in all this time set on some
Engine to drain the Water in the great Work, and raise Oar there? for I
remember I have often heard this Objection made.


Merch. My Lord, this thing has been several times under Consideration before
the Committee, and in particular the making use of Capt. Savory's Fire-Engine,
which I take to be a very ingenious Invention, and deserves all due
Encouragement.


Ld. A. Well, Sir; and how chance the Committee did not make use of it?


Merch. Not for want of a good Opinion of the Engine, my Lord; but because the
best Engines are chargeable, and a Level, when made, carries off the Water
without any Charge at all.


Ld. B. Pray, Sir, What do you mean by a Level?


Merch. My Lord, a Level is called in some places an Adit, in others a Sough,
or Drain, and may be compared to a Common-Shore, carried on from the bottom of
the Hill at a dead Level, under ground, to the further end of it, to Drain off
all the Water from the Mines, as they work them, without the help of any
Water-Engine, or any further charge.


Ld. A. That is very fine indeed. How deep is your Level from the Surface of
the Ground?


Merch. In some places more, in some places less, according to the rise and
fall of the Ground; but in the deepest place it is Sixty four yards, or
thereabouts.


Ld. B. That is a Noble Level to drain Sixty four yards in Oar from the
Surface. But How will you sink a Pit or Shaft down to such a deepness to let
off the Water?


Merch. My Lord, the Miners work from the bottom of the Hill, or Level, on
several Stages or Stelches one above another, till they come near the Surface,
and so meet the Shaft, that is siinkng downwards: But there are many Shafts in
other places sunk down above a Hundred yards deep, and in Hungary above Three
hundred yards, as Brown in his Travels to the Mine-Towns in Hungary informs us,
when he says, That at the Mine of Chremnits he went down by the Pit, called by
the Name of the Emperor Rodolphus's Shaft, gently descending by the turning
about of a large Wheel, to which the Cable is fastened, a Hundred and eight
Fathoms deep into the Earth; and after many hours being in the Mine, was drawn
out again by the Emperor Leopold's Shaft, straight up, above Three hundred
yards; a height surpassing that of the Pyramids above a third part.


Ld. A. But their Works perhaps are not so much troubled with Water as yours
are.


Merch. They may not, my Lord; but our Method is very easy: For when we have
sunk down as deep as we conveniently can for Water, we bore a Hole through the
Rock quite down to the Level, and so let off all the Water in the Common-shore.


Ld. B. That Is an excellent way indeed; but pray, Sir, how can you bore through
hard Rocks?


Merch. My Lord, we have sharp Chizels, skrew'd to Iron-rods, of about Four
foot long, which are also skrew'd together to what length you please; with
which we pounce the Rock into a Powder, and by continually turning about, we
keep the Hole round, and with the working of the Water, and motion of the
Iron-rod, the Rock or Stone thus beat to dust, will in great measure rise up to
the top of the Ground, and work out of it self; but when the Hole begins to be
choked, we take up the Rods, unskrew the Chizel, and skrew on a Borier, with
which we cleanse the Hole, and then put down the Chizel again, and by this
means we can bore a Yard in a Day in a very hard Rock.


Ld. A. This is a very fine Invention; you will make us perfect Miners: But, pray
Sir, give me leave to ask you, Whether it would not be worth your while to use
some Water-Engine in the mean time, till your Levels can be brought home?


Merch. If the Committee did believe that it would be long before those Levels
could be brought home to the Veins, I doubt not but they would make use of some
Water-Engine; but the Reason which sweyed with them to defer the use of such
Engines a little longer, was this, (as I am informed) Their Shaft sunk down in
the great Vein (which is now fallen in) was about Twenty nine or Thirty yards
deep, and having carried on the Work in a Drift under Ground about Ten yards or
more near to a Bogg, the Water thereof, and the small Stream which runs through
the same, came in so fast into this Drift, that they were not able to withstand
it without a very great Charge; and they are of Opinion, that it will require
several Engines to draw off so great a quantity of Water; the Charges whereof,
and of placing the same under Ground, and of sinking more Shafts for that
purpose, and repairing the old Shafts and Drifts, and the Wages of Men to work
the Engines, will (by the Computation of what has been done and actually
practiced in other Mines) amount to a very considerable Sum of Money, when
perhaps by that time these Engines shall be made, the Shafts sunk and made fit
to receive them, the Engines carried down and placed to Work, the great Levels,
Adits or Soughs may be carried home to the several Veins, and thereby the Water
drained off without any Charge, and no farther use made of all those expenceful
Engines. And therefore though such Engines are necessary, and very advantageous
to all Works, that have not this great advantage of Ground, as we have, to make
a Level to drain off the Water: Yet in our particular Case the Committee did
conceive that it would not be very acceptable to the General Meeting, that they
should expend out of the Trading-stock any considerable Sum on that account, or
(at least) that an Affair of this Nature did require farther consideration.


Ld. A. The Committee do well to be saving of the Stock: But, pray Sir, why
could not the Committee raise Oar in the Levels, and also with the help of
these Engines at the same time, to pay all these Charges?


Merch. Because I doubt the Partners would not be pleased to pay Forty
shillings a Tun, or some other great price, for raising Oar with Engines, when
they will be able to raise Oar enough in the Levels for Five or Six shillings
per Tun.


Ld. B. That Is a good Reason indeed, and I am glad this Objection was thought
off, because many Persons argued from hence, That this great Vein was only a
Belly of Oar and worked out; for otherwise (say they) the Partners might
presently raise Oar with the help of an Engine, but you have fully satisfied me
in that matter.


Merch. That Objection has been formerly answered; A Belly of Oar being Ten,
Twenty, or Thirty, (but none above Fifty yards in length, but this Vein has
been found for several Hundred yards, and all the parallel Veins in this
Mountain show this to be a mistake. But, my Lord, the Committee (who are in
great Expectation of coming up shortly with their Levels to this great Vein) do
yet intend (if any Accident should happen to delay them beyond the Time
proposed) to make use of a Water-Engine, which will immediately demonstrate
this to be a settled Vein.


Ld. A. Pray, Sir, what is the longest Time proposed to carry the Level home to
the great Vein?


Merch. Mr. Waller (the Steward) in his Essay on the value of the Mines,
proposes to have a Years time to set the Works in order, and carry up the
Levels to Oar in the respective Veins, which expires the latter end of May
next, being just a Year from the time he went down to the Mines.


Ld. A. I thought he had proposed it much sooner; I am sure I have heard some
Persons say so.


Merch. I remember that an eminent Counsel being charged with giving an Opinion
that did not hold good in Westminster Hall, asked the Gentleman where he gave
such an Opinion, for he did not remember it, nor could he find his Name in his
Book of Fees; No, says the Gentleman, but if you remember, Sir, I met you on
the Road between Worcester and London, and put this Case to you. That might be
indeed, says the Lawyer, had you no more wit than to try your Cause upon a
Traveling Opinion. So I doubt this might be a sudden Opinion from Mr. Waller:
He is a Sanguine Man, and such Men are apt to believe what they mightily wish
for; and yet I fancy he never gave such an Opinion, but with his usual
Precaution, in case the Rocks under Ground did not prove harder than they were
at that time: But since they did, and to such a degree of hardness, that
whereas the Miners then made good Wages upon a Bargain of Thirty shillings a
Fathom, they can now scarce make their Wages at Six pounds a Fathom. I think we
should be as hard upon him as the Rocks are, if we should tie him up to more
than he deliberately proposed in his Essay.


Ld. B. Truly I think so too; and he does very fairly, if he keeps that Time;
for I seldom knew a Master Builder that promised to build a House in a Year,
ever finish it under two, some unlucky Accident or other frequently falls out
(beyond Expectation) to delay the Work, though at last he may finish a very
stately Pile of Building, and give very good Content.


Merch. Your Lordship observes very well: But in this Case we have reason to
believe Mr. Waller will use his utmost Endeavors, because his Salary is to
arise out of the Profits of the Mines. And I find by his Letters he has a good
heart still; he tells the Committee, That if they will have a little patience, he
doubts not but to show them Welsh Potozi more glorious than they expect, or he
ever promised.


Ld. A. Considering all Circumstances, how deeply he adventures himself, and
how he still stands his ground, I must confess I cannot but think he believes he
shall make a great Thing of it; but yet I perceive many Persons do not fancy
those high Expressions; I think his Forty pounds a year for every Share, did
him no great kindness.


Merch. That Matter has indeed been the most exposed by our Adversaries about
Town of any thing; for many Persons taking things upon common Fame, without
reading over the Essay and Proposals at large, really thought that the
Adventurers were to have Forty pounds per Annum for every Share presently
without any more ado; whereas Mr. Waller did only write an Essay on the value
of the Mines, (not a positive Valuation,) and there offers to the old Partners
(with all due submission to better Judgment) his Opinion thereof; together with
his Reasons at large for the same, that they might themselves Judge of the
Validity of them; by all which he does indeed seem to demonstrate to my poor
Capacity, that in time, with a large Stock, and good Management, the Mines may
be brought to an extraordinary great value; and then it is observed, that at the
highest valuation every Share will be worth Forty pounds per Annum. But Mr.
Waller positively declares in the very Entrance of his Essay, (page 6.) That he
expected one year to put the Works in order, and even then (though a
considerable Profit might be made) yet he did not pretend under some years more
to bring the Works to the highest valuation; that is, to Forty pounds a year
for every Share. But what he means by (some years) I cannot tell, nor I believe
he can but guess himself, for all that depends on Accidents under Ground, and
on the Management by the Partners. But here is nothing that could lead any
rational Person, that read this Book, into an Expectation of having Forty
pounds a year presently.


Ld. A. No certainly: But is there nothing in the other Proposals that could
lead the World into this mistake?


Merch. No, my Lord, it is so far from that, that all those Papers, even the
printed Lists at the Drawing, (where the Publishers that agreed with the Clerks
for the Copy put it in, to make the Lists sell the better for their own Profit)
all refer to the said Essay; and although Mr. Waller's Valuation was very
proper to be taken notice of upon such an Occasion, yet the value of the Mines
in all the Proposals of the Mine-Adventure is expressly set at less than a
fourteenth part of Mr. Waller 's Calculation, which perhaps is as much too
little as the other is thought too great.


Ld. B. That was very cautiously done indeed, and sufficient to prevent such a
Mistake; but if Persons will buy an Estate, and never look over the Writings,
it is their own fault, if they expect more than they ought. But, pray Sir, will
nothing less than Forty pounds a year presently for every Share serve their
turn, How much is that per Cent. profit?


Merch. Forty pounds a year at Ten years Purchase for a Lease of One and twenty
years is worth Four hundred pounds, and I think a Share was valued at that time
at Twenty pounds, or thereabouts, and at that rate the gain from every Share
must have been Two thousand pounds for every hundred pounds adventured.


Ld. A. A very modest and reasonable expectation, especially for such Persons
who were to run no hazard in the Adventure, for even the Unfortunate (it seems)
were to be repaid their Principal Money adventured, with Interest at Six pounds
per Cent.


Merch. They were so: But I don't find that any of the Adventurers did expect
such a present Profit; but our Adversaries abroad have raised this Notion on
purpose to make themselves merry, and ridicule this Undertaking.


Ld. B. I remember a great General, when he was told that the conquered Party
made very severe Songs upon him, instead of being in a Passion, replied with
Contempt, Fie, don't take notice of it, you must give the poor Rogues leave to
be merry: So since you are satisfied you have got the advantage of being
concerned in a good Mine, let those that envy your Happiness be as merry as
they please.


Ld. A. But pray, Sir, let us come to the Merit of the Cause, what Profit do
you believe may probably be made by this Undertaking? I see you fully
understand it, and I shall very much depend on your Judgment.


Merch. My Lord, it behooves a Man to be very cautious in giving his Opinion in
this Case; I can judge for my self, but am not willing to engage another upon
my Judgment; your Lordship sees I have ventured my Money, and that is the best
proof of any Man's good Opinion.


Ld. A. I dont' doubt the Undertaking in General; I verily believe by what I
have heard, that no Man will be a Looser by it; nay, I will go so much farther,
that I believe there is a fair Prospect of great Advantage; but I would fain
know what you, (Sir) do really expect, and in what time?


Merch. I humbly beg your Lordships pardon, the Nature of the thing will not
admit of any positive Answer to the value, nor to the time.


Ld. A. I don't desire a positive Answer, Sir; I am satisfied that no Person
can be absolutely certain of any thing that is out of his sight, especially
under Ground; but since they say that Nature is regular in all its Productions,
as well under Ground as above, there may be fair. Probabilities observed, and a
Person that has had Experience in Mineral Works, may better guess at the
value, and the time, then a Stranger to such Affairs, therefore I desire only
to know your own private Opinion, as near as you can guess at the matter.


Merch. I shall be very unwilling to disoblige your Lordship in any thing; (and
therefore since your Lordship commands it) I Will venture to give my private
Thoughts, and the present Notion I have; but I may be mistaken.


Ld. B. So may any Man; especially under Ground.


Ld. A. But, Sir, I shall be obliged, if you please to go on with your present
Opinion, let it be what it will.


Merch. My Lord, I have often heard this Case compared to the Calculation of
the value of a Horse, by Arithmaticians upon giving a Farthing a Nail for all
the Nails in his Shoes, and doubling the number of Farthings at every Nail;
that is to say, by giving one Farthing for the first Nail, two Farthings for
the second Nail, four Farthings for the third Nail, eight Farthings for the
fourth Nail, and so on by doubling at every Nail, and then adding them up
together, which accounting eight Nails in a Shoe; and so Thirty two Nails in
all the Four Shoes, will amount to four Millions four hundred seventy four
thousand nine hundred twenty four pounds, twelve shillings and four pence, as
by the Table or Calculation thereof here adjoined may more plainly appear.

The TABLE.
Number of Farthings. No of Nalis. No of Shoes. The Sum Total of every Shoe. 1
1 2 2 4 3 8 4 16 5 32 6 64 7 128 8 1 0:5:3 256 9 512 10 1024 11 2048 12 4096 13
8192 14 16384 15 32768 16 2 68:5:3 65536 17 131072 18 262144 19 524288 20
1048576 21 2097152 22 4194304 23 8388608 24 3 17476:5:3 16777216 25 33554432 26
67108864 27 134217728 28 268435456 29 536870912 30 1073741824 31 2147483648 32
4 4473924:5:3

This seems to be an incredible Sum to any Person that is not skilled in
Arithmetic; and yet to others, it is as plain and evident, as Two and Three
make Five. Now, my Lord, something like this I take to be the Case of the
Mines; We must be content to play at small Game at first, for two or three
years, but (I doubt not) they will fully answer our Expectation at the last.


Ld. B. Pray, Sir, can you entertain such a thought as to double your Profit
every year? that would be a vast thing indeed.


Merch. I find that all Authors and experienced Miners do agree, with old
Zenophon upon the Silver Mines of Athens, That our Gains will be greater or
less in proportion to the number of hands we employ: And therefore if we can
employ double the number of Hands, and consequently raise double the quantity
of Oar, why cannot we double our Profit?


Ld. A. That seems very plain. But, pray Sir, How many Men do you employ at
present?


Merch. Not above an Hundred in all manner of Works.


Ld. A. How so?


Merch. My Lord, we have no room for more to work, till our Levels and
Cross-drifts are carried home to the several Veins; for we employ as many Men
as can stand to work in every place, and we change them every eight hours, day
and night, which is all that can be expected in this Case.


Ld. A. Very well; But when your Levels are brought home to the Veins, then I
suppose you will employ double the number of Men presently.


Merch. We shall employ more Men to be sure; but I cannot tell how many. But
this I conceive I may venture to say, That at the end of the Year, after the
Levels are carried home, we shall be able to employ double the number of Men in
raising of Oar, to what we shall do at the beginning of the Year, for we shall
be making more Stages or Stelches for Men to work upon every Month.


Ld. B. And so at that rate you propose to double your Profit also every Year.


Merch. That is my Notion of the Matter, my Lord, I cannot see how it can be
otherwise; but I do not pretend to make such an exact Calculation, that the
Profit shall be just double to a Farthing; but thereabouts, or something near
the matter, I conceive it will be. Pray, my Lord, what can your Lordship object
against the probability of this Notion?


Ld. B. Truly, Sir, I cannot tell what to say against it at present; but for
farther Explanation pray give a particular Instance.


Merch. I will, my Lord; and because I Will keep within compass, I Will suppose
that every two Miners should raise no more than one Tun of Oar in a Week,
(which they actually did when they worked downwards with Gad and Sledge, and
raised the Oar without a Level, by the help of a Water-Engine.) These Men at
this rate, and accounting but Forty working Weeks in the Year, will raise Forty
Tun a Year, and then the Case stands thus: viz.

2 Miners will raise in a year 40 Tun of Oar 4 Miners -- 80 Tun 8 Miners -- 160
Tun 16 Miners -- 320 Tun 32 Miners -- 640 Tun 64 Miners -- 1280 Tun 128 Miners
-- 2560 Tun 256 Miners -- 5120 Tun of Oar, 512 Miners -- 10240 and so on.


But I dare go no further, lest I should be thought by some Persons to be
extravagant, as well as Mr. Waller.


Ld. A. I think you have gone far enough; for if you make but Five pounds
Profit for every Tun of Oar one with another, according to the Abstract, the
Total thereof by this Computation will amount to Fifty one thousand and two
hundred pounds every year, which is a vast Profit to all the Adventurers. But,
pray Sir, why cannot any other Persons that are Propietors of Mines do the same
thing as you propose to do, and then they will raise as much Oar, and make as much
Profit as you can?


Merch. If they have as many Veins in number, as large, as rich, as near the
Surface, with as deep a Level at each end of the Hill, and as near the Sea as
ours, and also as large a Stock as we have, they may raise as much Oar, and
make as much Profit: But I confess, I could never yet read or hear that any
part of the Christian World has such Veins as these, with all the Advantages
aforesaid; and if they want any of them, they will be at a loss; for some Veins
are so small, that the Miners cannot raise the Oar without cutting the firm
sides along with it, and then perhaps two Miners cannot raise a Tun of Oar in a
Month or more, Other Veins are so troubled with Water, that three parts of four
of the Time and Labor of the Workmen is spent in keeping the Water, and
therefore they can raise but little Oar. Others again have so shallow a Level,
that they cannot erect many Stages one above another, for any great number of
Men to work upon. And some are so far from the Sea, that they cannot possibly
get Carriage for any great quantities of Oar, and most private Persons want so
great a Stock as is required to all manner of Charges in such Cases. On the
other side, the Mine-Adventurers have all the Advantages that possibly can be
desired; but I am not for carrying the thing to its highest value at first.


Ld. B. However, let us venture to double the Men once more for our own private
Satisfaction, to see what the Profit will be then: Hold, let me consider, you
will then employ One thousand twenty four Men; truly that is no such
extraordinary number of Men in so many Veins, I know a single Vein, not above
two Foot wide, which employs Six hundred Men; but these Men at the same rate
will be able to raise Twenty thousand four hundred and eighty Tun of Oar in a
year, and consequently the Profit at Five pounds per Tun will be One hundred
and two thousand and four hundred pounds a year; I protest, I cannot tell what
can be said against this, nor why you may not double the Men again, and make as
much more, supposing the Facts be true, that you have such large Veins.


Merch. I am not for terrifying one part of the World, or amusing the other
with great Calculations; though I confess I cannot see at present where the End
of our Profit will be, with alarge Stock and a good Management, and therefore
as I am not for raising the Mines to too high a value, so I am not for
lessening the true value of them, and thereby discouraging the Partners,
provided they do not mistake, and expect that Profit presently which is only
proposed in some years hereafter: And this Caution being carefully observed, I
must then own, that as to the Matter of Fact, a great part thereof has not only
been attested by many Persons of several Ranks and Qualities upon Occular view,
but some Persons of Credit and Reputation have made Affidavits thereof; and
though we are not now capable of seeing so much in the great Vein as in the old
Partners time, by reason the Shafts since they left off working were fallen in,
and the Works drowned with Water; yet we can still see so much at the Surface
of the Ground, as gives very great Satisfaction to all those that are skilled
in Mineral Works, for they see plainly, that there are several Veins bearing
Oar at the day near the Surface, betwixt firm and solid Sides. And whatever may
have happened in other Counties, where they have generally Bellies of Oar, or
where the Veins do lie betwixt Limestone, Sills, or Sides, or where the Sills
do often change; yet I am fully satisfied by Information from the old Miners in
that County of Cardigan, where all the Veins lie between Rag-stone-Sills, or
Sides, without changing the Sills, that it was never known in all the old
Silver Mines of Sir Hugh Middleton, the famous Mr. Bushel, and all the
Patentees of Royal Mines, that any settled Vein (as these are) in the County of
Cardigan, which did bear Oar at the Surface of the Ground, did ever fail or
miscarry at the bottom of the deepest Level they ever made; but on the
contrary, they were always observed to grow richer and better, as they were
worked lower and deeper.


Ld. A. This is very satisfactory indeed. But there is a Report that some
Persons have been down at the Mines, and could not see these Ribs of Oar.


Merch. I doubt, my Lord, this is but a Report, though, I confess, it is
possible such a thing may be; for if any Person, in his great Craft and
Cunning, should go down to the Mines, and not apply to the Steward, he might
come up to Town almost as ignorant as he went down.


Ld. B. Why? Are not the Mines near the Surface to be seen by any Man that goes
upon the place?


Merch. No, my Lord, they lie in a Bogg, and the Water must be drawn off, with
Tubs or Buckets, even in the shallow Cross-Cuts or Shafts, before any Man can
see the Ribs of Oar that lie so near the Surface of the Ground.


Ld. A. Then it is not unlikely but some Person or other has thus made a
Mistake, and lost his Labor.


Dr. But, Sir, you have forgot to take notice, that the upper Level to the Bogg
Vein is carried home, and that the Oar in the said Vein does set well, and
widens downward, so that we are past all doubts about that Vein, which I hope
will be sufficient alone to repay us our Principal Money with Interest.


Merch. All this is set forth by the Committee in the printed Abstract of the
State of the Mines, and it proves a very rich Vein. Nay, some very skilful
Persons are of Opinion, that it will prove as rich as that we call the great
Vein, because it bears as good Oar near the Surface, and widens downwards, as
well as that did; and I hope that single Vein will answer much more Profit than
what you are pleased to mention.


Ld. A. Then the Question seems to be, not whether you shall gain or loose by
this Undertaking? but how much you shall gain? For, that is all that is
uncertain. Pray, Sir, how many Veins have you in all?


Merch. Eight, my Lord; Six of Lead, and two of Copper.


Ld. B. That is a great advantage to have so many Veins lie together, where one
Level will serve to drain the Water from all or most of them. If you can employ
but One hundred Men, and consequently raise Two thousand Tun of Oar in each
Lead Vein, (one with another,) you will gain at that Rate about Sixty thousand
pounds per Annum. But besides, the Committee gives a very good Account of one
of the Copper Veins.


Merch. The Copper Veins are certainly settled Veins between firm Sides, and
rich in Copper; but at what deepness they will gather to a Body of Oar, is yet
uncertain; they have a promising Aspect, and are very large Veins, and in one
of the Cross-drifts which takes most Ground upon it, we meet with rich Strings
of green Copper Oar, which gives great hopes that that Vein will prove quick in
that place, and bear a Body of good Oar.


Ld. A. On, my word, if that should so happen; That one Copper Vein may be
worth all the Lead Veins, Copper being above One hundred pounds a Tun, and Lead
not above Ten or Eleven pounds.


Ld. B. Here is great Expectations indeed: But, pray Sir, how much Oar do you
really believe you shall be able to raise the first year, after the Levels are
carried home to the Veins?


Merch. Your Lordship may guess by what has been said already; but it is not
possible yet to give any certain Account thereof, till the Works are set in
order, and full Trials made of all the Veins.


Ld. A. But, Sir, as you have been free with us in other Matters, pray give us
your present Thoughts of this also; for you can guess at the quantity better
than we.


Merch. My Lord, I can but guess at it; for it may be the Workmen will not
raise so much as I think they will, and it may be they will raise a great deal
more.


Ld. B. Well, at a venture, Sir, let us hear.


Merch. My Lord, I hope they will be able to raise at least One thousand Tuns the
first year after the Levels are up, if not more; which may be done by Fifty
Miners, or there abouts, at the Rate aforesaid.


Ld. A. Surely you may employ the first year more than Fifty Miners in all
those Mines.


Merch. Truly, I think so, my Lord, a great many more; but I love to keep
within compass, lest any Person should suffer by my Computation.


Ld. B. I must confess, I think you have made a very modest Calculation; and
yet I fancy, if you double that quantity every year, for five years, you will
raise a vast Sum. Pray, Sir, cast it up; you will do it in a moment.


Merch. I will, my Lord; Here it is done.


The Mines of Bwlchyr-yr-Eskir.
Debtor. To Principal Money Adventured l. 125000 The Interest thereof at Six
pounds per Cent. for Five years l. 37500 Total l. 162500 l. 162500 The Mines of
Bwlchyr-yr-Eskir.
Per Contra. Creditor. Tun of Oar raised. Clear Profit. By the first years
produce from 50 Miners T. 1000 l. 5000 By the second years produce from 100
Miners T. 2000 10000 By the third years produce from 200 Miners T. 4000 20000
By the fourth years produce from 400 Miners T. 8000 40000 By the fifth years
produce from 800 Miners T. 16000 80000 Total. Tuns 31000 l. 155000 By Balance
being so much wanting to pay off Principal and Interest 7500 Total l. 162500

So that it appears that in Case we employ but Fifty Miners the first year, yet
in Five years after the Levels are carried home to the Veins, we are likely to
raise One hundred fifty five thousand pounds, and thereby to repay every
Adventurer his Principal Money adventured with Interest at Six pounds per Cent.
to a very small matter.

Ld. B. But if you venture to double your Men once more, as I really think you
easily may in so many Mines, then the Sixth year you will get One hundred and
sixty thousand pounds, which added to the said Sum of One hundred and fifty
five thousand pounds, makes Three hundred and fifteen thousand pounds, out of
which deduct the said Sum of One hundred sixty two thousand and five hundred
pounds, there remains a Dividend of One hundred fifty three thousand and five
hundred pounds clear Profit, after all the Money adventured is repaid with
Interest. What does your Lordship think of this? was there ever such an
Undertaking as this in England before?


Ld. A. I protest the more I consider it, the more I am astonished at the
thing, for I am not able to deny the force of the Argument, or rather
Demonstration for it, and yet it still looks too big to be believed.


Merch. If I am in an Error, I cannot help it; your Lordship commanded my
present Thoughts, and here you have them; but as I said at first, I may be
mistaken, something or other may happen to lessen the value of these Mines, as
for want of good management, or by reason of another War, or some other
Accident, that I cannot now think off; however, I have demonstrated the thing
according to my poor Capacity. And now your Lordship may consider of these
Calculatins, and see if you can find out any material Errors in them, and then
your Lordship will act according to your better Judgment, without blaming your
humble Servant for his good Intentions.


Lord B. For my part, I cannot tell how any Man in such Cases as this, can give
any tolerable Judgment without the help of such Lights as these are, and
therefore if a Man is resolved to be very safe, he may make very liberal
Allowances for incident Charges, and all manner of Accidents, and then he can
hardly miscarry.


Merch. My Lord, that is my earnest desire, for I had rather the Mines should
stand at any moderate Calculation below the real value, so as to make all
Persons easy, then to have them advanced to too high a value.


Ld. A. You say well, Sir: But as to your former Calculation, I presume you
don't expect that you shall be able to double the number of Workmen every year
to the end of your Lease?


Merch. No, my Lord, pray pardon me, I thought that Matter had been
sufficiently explained before; there is no Mine in the World but must be
limited in that respect, according to its largeness and the depth of the Level.


Ld. B. What number of Men have usually been employed in other Mines of Lead
and Copper that were no larger than these?


Merch. Mr. Waller in his Essay gives your Lordship an Account, that in some
small Veins not above two Foot thick, Six hundred Men have been employed, and
in some others, not so large as these, Two thousand Men; in others Four
thousand Men, and at Potozi above Twenty thousand Men.


Ld. B. What a vast number then may you (in time) set at work in all these
Veins? Certainly you may employ several thousand Men.


Merch. Pray, my Lord, let us suppose that we cannot employ more than is above
set forth; for I fancy they will raise as much Oar as will be sufficient to
answer all our Expectations.


Ld. B. I Will suppose what you please; but I see very plainly, that in time you
will employ a great number of Men more than you have mentioned: However, there
is still one Objection left, That you will often meet with Twitches and Faults
in your Mines, and then a great part of their Time will be employed in dead
work, without raising any Oar.


Merch. My Lord, you observe very well; Twitches are as natural in Veins of
Oar, as the Valvulae, or little folding Doors are in the Veins of a Man's Body;
and the Veins of Oar are better with them, than without them, for they preserve
the Mineral Feeder, and thereby enrich the Oar; and I am very willing your
Lordship shall make what Allowances you please for these Obstructions, without
giving any further Answer.


Ld. B. Nay, Sir, pray let us hear all that can be said on both sides.


Merch. If your Lordship will promise that no ill use shall be made of it, I
will declare what I think of this Objection.


Ld. B. I Will promise you, Sir, it shall not.


Merch. Then, my Lord, I must confess I have made liberal Allowances for all
these Accidents already; for when your Lordship considers that a Tun of Oar
lies in the compass of two Foot square, or thereabouts, and that two Men in
blasting upwards with Gunpowder, will raise more Oar than six Men in working
downwards with Gad and Sledge, your Lordship will not think it improbable for
two Men in one of these large Veins, to raise a Tun of Oar in a day, whereas I
have supposed that they will raise but one Tun of Oar in a Week.


Ld. B. If a Tun of Oar lies in so little a compass, and your Works are once
brought into such an Order, that you can work upwards from the Level, certainly
one Blast of Gunpowder will bring down more than a Tun of Oar.


Merch. It will either bring it down, or so crack the Load of Oar, that with
Iron Bars two Men will presently pull down a Tun of Oar.


Ld. B. And then, I presume, the Miners can make a Blast in a Night and a Day,
that is, in Twenty four hours.


Merch. Yes, my Lord, in five or six hours, if no extraordinary Accidents
happen to delay them.


Ld. A. Hey day; Why, at this rate you will raise more Oar in one Year then you
can Smelt in two or three?


Merch. So some Persons think, my Lord: But I doubt not but we shall be able
from time to time to build Furnaces sufficient to answer our Occasions.


Ld. B. But stay, Sir, if you can raise Oar at this rate, I doubt your Mines
will hardly hold out to the end of your Term.


Merch. My Lord, a great Heap of Oar above Ground lies in a little room below.
The Steward, who has experienced how much Oar he has raised in a Yard square,
has computed at his highest Valuation, that the Mines cannot be exhausted during
our Term to the deepness of our Level; which your Lordship will the easier
believe, when you consider that the Mine of Chermnitz in Hungary has lasted
Nine hundred and fifty years, and that the Mine of Potozi, not above Six foot
wide in any place, has lasted from the Year 1546. which is about One hundred
fifty three years, with Twenty thousand Men at work. And Zenophon upon the
Silver Mines of Athens, tells us, That as they dug on, they still discovered
fresh Veins; and though their Mines had been wrought for many Ages with great
numbers of Hands, yet they continued still so far from being drained or
exhausted, that they could discover no visible difference in their then present
state of the Mines from the Account their Ancestors had delivered down to them;
and when they had most Laborers at work at the Mines, they found they had
still Business for more Hands then were employed. And Mr. Waller acquaints us,
That all great Veins of this kind are in some respects like a great large
spreading Oak, and has a great number of Branches, which like Boughs of a
Tree, shoot forth from the Body of the Vein, insomuch that after a considerable
Sum of Money shall be gained out of the same, and many Years spent in the
working thereof, there will be still discovered fresh Veins shooting forth from
the sides thereof, which are innumerable, and scarce ever to be exhausted.


Ld. B. But let us suppose however, that the Mines may be worked out to the
bottom or sole of the Level, what will you do then?


Merch. My Lord, we must then place a Water-Engine with a Wheel in the great
Level, and turn the Watercourse that runs through the Bogg in Troughs, down
one of the Shafts upon the Wheel, and so by that means drawing off the Water
from the Mines, we shall raise the Oar Forty yards deeper than the Level; or
else we may use Captain Savory's Fire-Engine for that purpose, which we find
best.


Ld. A. Now you say something; then indeed if you can raise Oar so much deeper
than the Level, I believe there will be no want of Oar; for Forty yards in Oar
for Twelve hundred yards in length in so many Veins, will be a vast Addition:
Pray Sir, cast it up in the great Vein.


Merch. I will, my Lord. Let me consider; If a solid of two foot square in Oar
will yield one Tun, how many Tuns will a Vein Twelve hundred yards in length,
Two yards in breadth, and Forty yards in depth yield? Answer, Three hundred
twenty four thousand Tun; which being valued at Five pounds per Tun, amounts to
One million six hundred and twenty thousand pounds: Is not this a fair Profit
from the Oar below the Levels? But I will abate One hundred and twenty thousand
pounds for Twitches and Faults in the Vein, though there is not usually so many
at that deepness as near the Surface; and I have supposed the Vein but Six foot
wide, though we have had it already Seven foot six inches, and in all
probability will be much broader at that deepness.


Ld. A. If you can raise so much below, what vast quantities may be raised
above the Levels? which in some places is Sixty four yards deep from the
Surface.


Ld. B. Nay, but if one Vein will yield so much, what will all the Veins yield?


Merch. I hope they will yield sufficient to satisfy your Lordship, that the
Veins will not be exhausted during the present Lease.


Ld. A. I think you have given us a very plain demonstration of that; but what
will you do when your Term is expired?


Dr. Pray, my Lord, let us make the most of what we have, I am not much
concerned to look so far before me; if I can have such a profitable Bargain for
One and twenty years, I do not care who has it after me.


Ld. A. But I love to look as far as I can, that my Posterity may see, that I
had some respect for them as well as for my self; therefore I shall be glad to
hear what is likely to be the Issue of this Business.


Merch. I Will acquaint your Lordship what I suppose will be the Issue of it. As
soon as our Works are brought to perfection, and we are reimbursed our
Principal Money adventured; or that we are all encouraged with the Success of
this, and satisfied that we stand upon sure ground, we shall take care either
to renew our present Lease, or take other Mines at a reasonable Duty; or we
shall do both, as we see best.


Ld. B. Then you don't intend to give over the Mining Trade at the end of the
Term.


Merch. Over! No, my Lord, I hope the Company of the Mine-Adventurers will
flourish to the end of the World.


Ld. A. If this Undertaking be once brought to perfection, I cannot see any
reason to imagine but that the Partners will venture on in the same way,
especially after so great Encouragement.


Ld. B. Truly, it is not unlikely but they may: But, pray Sir, are they who
have only Blank Tickets Members of the Company, as well as they who have Shares.


Merch. No, my Lord, the Company consists of such Persons who have Shares, and
they who have Blanks are only Creditors of the Mines, but have no Vote in
Elections, or Interest in the Capital Stock.


Ld. A. Pray, Sir, whether would you advise a Friend to buy Blanks or Shares.


Merch. My Lord, if I knew the Temper of the Person, and the Ability of his
Purse, I could tell better how to advise him.


Ld. A. Suppose the Case as you please.


Merch. Why then, my Lord, I would not have a diffident distrustful Person, or
a Person exceeding timorous in his Nature; buy either Blanks or Shares for one
Year or two.


Ld. A. Why so; here is less hazard, and more profit than in most Adventures at
Sea.


Merch. But such a Person will not give us time to bring the Mines to
perfection; as soon as the Levels are carried home, then he will expect that we
raise Mountains of Oar presently, before there is room for any great number of
Men to stand to work.


Ld. B. But supposing you meet with a Man of Courage and Patience, how would
you advise him?


Merch. If he be a Man of small Substance, that lives upon the Interest of his
Money, I advise him to buy Blanks, because they are a present Profit; but if he
be Rich, and can stay for his Money, he may buy Shares, which will bring in a
plentiful Return in due time.


Ld. A. Pray, Sir, How comes it to pass that Blanks do now sell under the value
of Five pounds per Ticket.


Merch. I cannot imagine any reason for it; there can be no doubt but they will
be once (and in all probability several times) paid off, and in the mean time
the Interest thereof at Six pounds per Cent. will be punctually paid.


Ld. A. Will it so? Then there is no doubt but they will quickly advance to
parr, and for ought I now, sell at Five pounds ten shillings, or Six pounds a
Ticket.


Merch. They will certainly advance when the Levels are carried home, whatever
they do at present: But this Undertaking is yet in its Infancy, and not at all
understood.


Ld. A. So much the better for you that have Money: But, pray Sir, wherein lies
the Advantage of the Shares?


Merch. The Shares (as soon as the Blanks are once paid off) will have a
considerable dividend, and be advancing every Year toward the highest
valuation of Forty pounds per Share, which is a prodigious Profit above the
Rate they were first sold, as I have already demonstrated, and in the mean time
the Proprietors thereof have the management of the Mines; are entitled to a
Capital Stock of Twenty thousand pounds at the end of the Term, and to all
Advantages which shall be procured in the mean time, in the Reversion of these,
or in the Purchase of any other Mines, free from the Encumbrances of Blank
Tickets, or any other Payments, and when it is considered what Improvements have
been made already in so short a time in Smelting and Refining, and what may be
made before this Term will be expired, I don't know but a Share in this
Company, may by that time be advanced to as high a degree (in proportion) as
the New-River-Water was, which I think did advance from One hundred pounds a
share to Three thousand pounds or more, where it now continues.


Ld. A. Suppose it should; what will a Share of these Mines (sold at Twenty
pounds in the beginning of this Undertaking) be then valued at?


Merch. At Six hundred pounds per share.


Ld. B. That would be a prodigious thing indeed; but, do you really think that
the Company will continue this Trade to profit after the present Lease shall be
expired.


Merch. I leave that to your Lordships Judgment upon what has been said; I
would willingly know what can hinder them? Have not they a liberty to renew
this Lease and Purchase other Mines, and lay them open in a readiness to make
continual Works after this Lease is expired? Have not they the best Artists of
all sorts to assist them in farther Discoveries and Emprovements? What is the
great Difficulty in Cases of this Nature, but to raise a large Stock? and to
have a good Constitution? Mines are not so much wanting in this Kingdom as
Money and Management; Private Persons are generally ruined by such
Undertakings, which are too big for them, and a private Person will get more by
a moderate Part or Duty of a Mine clear of all Charges under the Management of
so great a Company, than by managing the whole himself, with his own private
Stock and Interest, so that (in short) they will not only have at the end of
this Term a Noble Stock of Twenty thousand pounds in ready Money, but also
other rich Mines in readiness for raising Oar, and for immediate profit; and
when the Proprietors of the Shares shall have all the Profit thereof to
themselves free from the Encumbrance of the Blanks, as aforesaid, what a great
Income will they have?


Dr. Pray, good Sir, have a care you don't raise Envy instead of Pity, you will
have some Persons who before cried this Undertaking down for a Cheat, come and
whisper about that this is too great a thing for a Subject.


Merch. That Is likely enough, for they act upon the same Principle still; but
if it be too great for one, I hope it is not too great for Eight hundred
Subjects.


Ld. A. How! Eight hundred Partners, that is a great Number indeed; if you get
One hundred and sixty thousand pounds a year, that is but Two hundred pounds
per Annum one with another, which is very inconsiderable.


Merch. It Is so indeed, but pray, my Lord, if we venture our Money in a Mine,
why should not we have as much favor as the Merchants that venture at Sea;
they are not envied if they get One hundred thousand pounds a Man.


Ld. A. The Merchants bring in great profit to the Nation, in the Customs to
the King, and in employing the Poor.


Merch. Nay, my Lord, we must beg leave to say, that no Company can bring in so
much real substantial Profit to this Nation as the Mine-Adventurers; for all
that is dug out of the Earth is an Addition to the Stock of the Nation; and
then none will Employ so many Poor as we shall.


Dr. Certainly, if any Company ever deserved to be Encouraged this does, where
so much Good is designed, as well to the Public as to the Poor.


Ld. B. Methinks the way to judge of the Advantage of this Undertaking, is to
Examine what the King did make of Royal Mines before the late Act concerning
them.


Merch. I doubt your Lordship will not be able to make any Judgment by that,
for it is plain he made very little, if any at all; they were granted away from
the Crown to Patentees, under a small Duty to the King, which was seldom paid,
and they never could agree to raise any great Stock, and being opposed by all
the Proprietors of the Lands where the Mines lay in every County, they could
not make any considerable matter of them.


Ld. A. Then the Nation was in effect deprived of the Advantages of all the
best Mines, till the said Act was passed in favor of the Subject.


Merch. They were so; and what a vast loss has that been to this Nation?


Ld. A. A vast loss indeed; but perhaps the particular Profit to the King
(though small) might be greater before the Act, then since.


Merch. No, my Lord; I do really think that his Majesty will in a few years,
when these Works are brought to perfection, gain more by the very Customs of
Lead since this Act, then his Majesty and all his Royal Predecessors from the
Conquest did from Royal Mines themselves before.


Ld. A. Nay then, if the King and his People are all Gainers by this Act, it
was certainly a very happy Law for the Nation.


Merch. It was so; and I think it is plain that every Law that Enriches the
People, enriches the King, since his Wealth must arise from theirs.


Ld. A. It Is very true; and this very thing proves what an inseparable Union
there is betwixt the Interest of the King and his People; for whilst their
Interest in the Case of Royal Mines was divided, neither King nor People could
get any thing by them; but now their Interest by this Law is united, both will
be great Gainers.


Merch. But, my Lord, there is one thing more to be considered in this Case,
that may prove of vast Consequence to his Majesty and his Royal Successors.


Ld. A. What is that, Sir? I shall be glad to hear such good News.


Merch. This gracious Act of Royal Mines has quite altered the Scene of the
Mineral World; for before, every Man that had an Estate or Interest in his
Country, endeavored to conceal their Mines, but now they all labor to find
them out, and therefore it is not unlikely but sometime or other, one of those
concealed Mines, or some other, may be sound out, and prove so rich in Silver,
as may be worth his Majesty's acceptance at the price proposed in the late Act
concerning Royal Mines, and one such Vein would be an inestimable Treasure to
his Majesty, and his Royal Successors.


Ld. A. It would so: And the way to promote such a Discovery, is to Encourage
those that Unite together in a Joint Stock for the working of Mines: But, pray
Sir, why did the People of England so very much oppose the Patentees, and
endeavor to conceal their Mines.


Merch. Because the Proprietors thereof were to have no advantage by them, nor
the least share of the Profit; but on the contrary, their Lands were torn up to
the very Bowels, and covered with Heaps of Rubbish, and Highways were made
over their Corn and Pasture Land, without paying any Consideration for the
same, to the great Grievance and Oppression of the Subject.


Ld. A. I live in a Level Country where no Mines are, and never saw any of
these hardships committed on the Subject; but it is no wonder the Patentees of
Royal Mines could make no great Profit, when it was the Interest of all the
Country to oppose them.


Merch. Nay, they did not only oppose them in general, but the Miners and the
Country People did make them pay sauce for every particular thing: I believe we
carry on our Works for a third part of the Charge that it cost the Patentees.


Ld. A. How! that is a vast Advantage indeed; Then it should seem that the
People are not averse to the Thing, but to the Persons.


Merch. My Lord, I don't apprehend that they were averse to the working of
Mines, nor to the Persons of the Patentees; but to the least intrusion into
their Properties, and to the damnifying their Estates by any Person or Persons
whatsoever, the People of England were always averse, and I believe ever will
be.


Ld. A. Truly I cannot blame them; but what do you do to oblige them more than
the Patentees.


Merch. There is a great deal of difference betwixt their Proceedings and ours,
for they came without asking leave, by a great Power and Authority, and without
paying any Consideration for the Trespass done to their Estates: But we are
called in by Consent and in Aid of the Proprietor; paying a valuable
Consideration for what we have. In short, we come in as Friends, and they were
esteemed as Enemies.


Ld. A. That is a great difference indeed: But by their calling you into their
Assistance, I perceive the Proprietors don't care to work their own Mines
without Partners.


Merch. My Lord, there is no working Lead-Mines or Copper-Mines without a large
Stock; and it is generally observed that two or three Sets of Adventurers are
either ruined or totally discouraged before the Mines can be set in order, and
bring in Profit, as it happened in the Case of these very Mines. There were two
Setts of Undertakers disappointed before this Company was Established,
notwithstanding the Oar appeared at the day near the Surface of the Ground, and
two or three small Stocks, to the value of Six or Seven thousand pounds, were
raised and spent in carrying up the Levels, erecting Smelting-Houses, and in
other dead Charges, without the least return of clear Profit, which has so
opened the Eyes of the private Proprietors of Mines, that they will not venture
on them now without a good back to support them.


Ld. A. They do very wisely; and therefore its plain that Mines can never be
wrought effectually for the Public Good of this Kingdom, but by Companies of
Men; for few or no private Gentlemen, though of great Estates in Land, are able
to raise so great a Stock as is required in these Cases.


Merch. Your Lordship is certainly in the right of it; and therefore I conceive
(with submission) that it is for the Interest of this Nation that such
Companies be Encouraged, for thereby his Majesty will not only make a certain
profit in his Customs, but be in hopes of a rich discovery, every private
Subject will make a secure Profit by his Mines, and a considerable Addition
will every Year be made to the General Stock of the Nation. And what is usually
said of the Treasure of the King, may be truly said also of the Treasure of the
People, that it is Vinculum Pacis and Bellorum Nervi.


Ld. A. I look upon Wool, Corn, and the Mines of England to be our Staple
Commodities, whereby the People of England may with good management become
Gainers in the Balance of Trade, and therefore all Companies that make
Improvements at home, and promote the vent of these Commodities abroad, do most
certainly deserve all Encouragement imaginable.


Merch. A late Learned Author in an Essay upon the probable Methods of making a
People Gainers in the Balance of Trade, published about a year since,
expresses the very same Opinion: I have the Book here, if your Lordship please,
I Will read the very words, for I think they are not unworthy to be taken notice
of.


Ld. A. Pray Sir, do so.


Merch. In his Introduction these are the words, viz.

The Land is to yield the Product, which Product is to yield the Wealth, so
that we should enquire how this product stands in every Particular, but more
especially in the principal constituent Parts of England's Strength, namely
Wool, Corn, and our Mines, for it is by the well ordering and wise disposition
of these Branches of our Wealth, that we are to be Gainers in the Balance of
Trade. And in Page 94. after he has treated of the Land of England, and the
Product thereof, of several kinds, he goes on in these very words, viz.

Our Mines are the Product of the Earth, and undoubtedly capable of great
Improvements; we ought to respect them as the Parents of our Trade, and which
made us known to the first Merchants of the World, the Phoenicians. We have
Tinn, Lead, Copper, Calamy, Iron, Coal, Culm, Allom, Copperas, with other sorts
of Minerals; and what is in this manner dug out of the Earth, cannot be a less
Article then about Seven or Eight hundred thousand pounds per Annum in the
whole Rental of the Kingdom.

They who work these Mines, and deal in Minerals, know best what Laws and
Constitutions they want to make their Business more easy at home, and to give
their Commodities a free vent abroad; but if they need any help from the
Legislative Power, most certainly they ought to have it, since their Stock and
Labor turn so much to the Common Good, for whatever their Product yields in
Foreign Markets, is clear National Profit.

There are lately published some extraordinary Accounts of the Mines in
Cardiganshire, where it is said there are Eight large Veins of Silver, Lead, and
Copper Oar, lying near together in one Mountain, nigh a Navigable River and a
good Port. Mine-Adventure and Expedient, p. 7.
It Is alleged that these Mines with a large Stock, in a few years, may be
advanced to a clear Profit of One hundred and seventy thousand pounds per
Annum. This Computation does not seem at all extravagant to those who have
looked into the Accounts of what Mines produce in other Countries, provided the
Oar be good, the Veins like to last, (and large ones seldom fail) and provided
there be no invincible Impediment from Nature to their working; they have stood
still several Years for want of a good Agreement among the Adventurers.

It Is said Sir H. M. has put them in a way of being wrought; but if his
Expectient should not succeed, and if new Differences should arise, the
Legislative Authority, may very well and justly interpose, even to compel the
Partners to some Agreement, whereby the Work may be carried on; (...) justice
due to the Public, at no time to suffer a few Stock-jobbing Citizens to stand
in the way of any National Advantage, the Fraud and Corruption of which sort of
Men have hurt England in more than one particular.

If these Mines come but any thing near the value Mr. William Waller has put
upon them, and with reasons very probable, they are a fit object of the States
care; and upon inspection into their true worth, if private Purses cannot raise
a Stock sufficient to set them going, it were better done upon some public
Fund, to be repaid out of the Profits, than to loose what is represented as so
immense a Treasure. But should it prove less, it is not to be neglected, for
Nations (like private Men) who will thrive, must look into small things as well
as great; and for this we have the Examples of France and Holland, whose
Ministers examine into the minutest Matters, where the Public may possibly
reap any Advantage; and it is a very commendable piece of Wisdom, were it but
for this single reason, that to do so constantly, begets a habit of Care and
Diligence in things of higher importance.

Thus (my Lord) you see what this ingenious Gentleman says, who has made it
his Business to enquire into Matters of this Nature; he does not think the
highest Valuation of these Mines extravagant, provided the Oar be good, the
Veins like to last, and there be no invincible Impediment from Nature to their
working; but it is proved before, that the Oar is good, and that there is no
reason to fear its lasting, and that the Levels being carried home, and thereby
the Water carried off, there can be no Impediment from Nature to their working.

And then he is so sensible of the great Advantages that may accrue thereby to
the Nation, that rather than so immense a Treasure should be lost, he seems to
think it reasonable that the Parliament should lend the Partners a Stock to
carry it on, to be repaid out of the Profits; but since by the Aid of many new
Adventurers they have at last, with great difficulties, raised a sufficient
Stock themselves, and are willing to run all the hazard of so great an
Undertaking for the public Good of the Kingdom, as well as for their own
particular and private Advantage, it can never be doubted, but that his most
gracious Majesty, and all our Noble Senators and Patriots of their Country,
will be ready to give this Undertaking all the Encouragement that it is capable
of.


Ld. A. There is not the least doubt to be made of it; for his Majesty is
already very sensible of the great Advantages to the Public by such
Undertakings, as may appear by several Patents granted by his Majesty for the
Encouragement thereof; in one of which a particular Friend of mine is
concerned, and I remember the beginning of it is in these words: viz.

WIlliam and Mary by the Grace of God, King and Queen of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, etc. Whereas we have been informed
by the humble Petition of W. C. etc. That our Kingdom of England and Dominion
of Wales do much abound in Mines, especially of Lead, great part whereof remain
unwrought, to the manifest loss of the Public, and that the reason why so
great a part of the Wealth of our Dominions remains useless, is partly because
there is not sufficient diligence and application used in discovering of Mines,
and partly because the working of Mines being very chargeable, and the Profit
subject to great hazard, many Owners of Land where the Mines are, cannot or
dare not themselves undertake the same. And whereas they have most humbly
besought us to enable them, and diverse others therein mentioned, in a Corporate
Capacity to digg and work such Mines as they shall be legally entitled unto,
and to buy and refine Oar by a Joint Stock, Now know ye, that we being desirous
to promote all Endeavors tending to the public Good of this our Kingdom, and
to Encourage so commendable an Undertaking, of our especial Grace, certain
Knowledge, and mere Motion, have Given, Granted, Constituted, Declared and
Appointed, and by these Presents for Us, our Heirs and Successors, do Give,
Grant, Constitute, Declare and Appoint, that our right trusty and well-beloved
J. Lord C. etc. and such others as shall be admitted into the said Society,
henceforth be, and shall be one Body Corporate and Politic in Deed and in
Name, by the Name of the Governor and Company for Digging and Working of
Mines, and for Buying and Refining Oar by a Joint Stock in England. Which
Patent is dated the Seventh Day of September, in the Fifth Year of their
Majesty's Reign.

By Writ of a Privy Seal, Pigott.
Pro fine in hanaperio viginti Marcas. J. Summers CS.


Merch. Your Lordship has an excellent memory; I am glad to find that such
Undertakings have been already countenanced and encouraged. But I think this
Company has not been very successful.


Ld. A. No, Sir; They obtained the favor of a Charter, but could not agree to
raise a Stock, or Purchase any Mines.


Merch. Those two main Points should have been first settled, and the
Undertaking carried on and fully tried upon a private Agreement under Hand and
Seal, before they had proceeded farther.


Ld. A. It should so. Pray Sir, what Method have you observed in this Case?


Merch. We first purchased a rich Mine, and then agreed under Hand and Seal to
a Constitution for the Management thereof, which is composed of all the best
Charters and Constitutions of Companies about Town.


Ld. A. And you are all effectually bound in Law to the Observation of that
Constitution?


Merch. Yes, my Lord, we are so.


Ld. A. Pray Sir, let me hear how you are governed.


Merch. We are governed by a General Meeting, a Grand Committee, and a Select
Committee.


Ld. A. Who has Votes in each of these Meetings?


Merch. All the Partners who have three Shares have a Vote in a General
Meeting, and all who have ten Shares in a Grand Committee, and the Select
Committee is elected every Year at a General Meeting, out of those Partners who
have Twenty Shares.


Ld. A. In whom does the Active managing Part lie?


Merch. In the Select Committee.


L. A. Then you will do well to take care that they be not only honest
Gentlemen, but Men of Temper and Conduct, fit for Business, and such as have a
considerable Interest in the Mines. But what is the Power of the Grand
Committee?


Merch. The Grand Committee was intended to ease the General Meeting of any
trouble, unless upon extraordinary Occasions: But now the General Meeting,
having agreed to meet every second Thursday in May and November, there will be
little or no Business for the Grand Committee.


Ld. A. But, pray Sir, what care is taken in your Elections to avoid
Animosities and Heats?


Merch. We Elect by Balletting, whereby the Votes of all the Partners are
delivered in a Skrowl of Paper, and a Scrutiny being made, the Committee is
declared by majority of Voices, without knowing how any Person gave his Vote.


Ld. A. That is certainly the best way; for there are many honest Gentlemen
that will be disobliged, if their Friends Vote against them, though they are
not qualified for doing the Company so much Service as others in a Business of
this Nature; and all the Partners are to respect the Public Good in these
Cases, and not any Private Friendship.


Merch. The Public Good is their own Good in this Case; and he must be a very
weak Man indeed that will act against himself.


Lord A. But, I don't find there is any care taken for the Security of those
that live in the Country, who cannot conveniently attend at these Elections in
London.


Merch. Yes, there is my Lord; for they may send up a Letter of Attorney to A.
B. and in his absence to C. D. and in both their absence to E. F. to Vote for
them as a Proxy, and also empower any one of them to receive their Interest or
Dividend; which Letter of Attorney, being delivered into the Office, may stand
for as many years as they please, till they think fit to alter it; but they
must name none to Vote for them, but some of the present Partners who have
three Shares.


Ld. A. All this is very well provided: But has every Partner as many Votes as
he has three Shares? Then the Mines in time may come into the management of a
few rich Persons that shall engross all to themselves.


Merch. No, my Lord, Sir H.M. who had by the old Constitution the majority of
Shares in himself at every General Meeting, and consequently the majority of
Votes, has now for the good of the Company reduced himself, and all others, to
one Vote only, though they have ever so many Shares.


Ld. A. That was very well done, and is the Method that is found most Secure,
and gives greatest Satisfaction, the same being also observed in the Bank of
England, and the New East India Company: But may any of the Select Committee
Vote by Proxy too?


Merch. No, my Lord, there is too great a Trust reposed in them to be deputed
to any others; all the Treasure of the Company is in their keeping, and under
their management, and no Personal Trust can be transferred to a Proxy or Deputy.


Ld. A. That is very true; you ought indeed to be very careful of your
Treasure, that it be not wasted or imbezel'd. Pray Sir, how do you keep your
Stock, does it lie dead by you in a Chest?


Merch. No, my Lord, we keep it in Bank sealed Bills, at Three pounds per Cent.
Interest in the Bank of England; according to the Directions of our Settlements.


Ld. A. And how do you Secure your Bank Bills?


Merch. In a strong Iron Chest, with Seven several Locks and Keys, to be kept
by Seven several Members of the Committee.


Ld. A. And when you take out any Bank sealed Bills, to whom are they delivered?


Merch. To the Cash-keeper, who has given good Security for the faithful
discharge of his Office; and he applies and pays the same according to the
Order of the Committee.


Ld. A. Very well. But, pray Sir. how many of the Select Committee make a
Quorum?


Merch. Five besides the Chairman?


Ld. A. May any five of them, with the Chairman, dispose of all the Treasure
of the whole Company?


Merch. No, my Lord, this Matter stands thus: If the value be above Five
thousand pounds, the Order, Bargain, or Agreement must be made and signed in
Writing, under the Hands of Seven of the Committee, and if above the value of
Ten thousand pounds, or be to continue above a Year, then it is to be confirmed
by the Grand Committee or General Meeting.


Ld. B. That is very cautiously and prudently provided: Now indeed I see that
you have a very good Constitution for the management of the Mines.


Merch. There is this farther to be observed, That all Material Bargains,
Contracts and Agreements relating to the said Mines, are to be signed by those
Members of the Committee that make them, that in case of any mismanagement, it
may not be trusted to an Entry by the Book-keeper only, as is usual; but it may
also appear under their own Hands, who were the Authors of it.


Ld. A. Nothing can be more fair or better contrived: But, pray Sir, what do
you allow your Committee for all this trouble?


Merch. They have Twenty shillings amongst them at every Meeting, and no more.


Ld. A. No! that is very little indeed; in other Companies they have Twenty
shillings, or more, apiece; but this is not Two shillings each, if they all
appear.


Merch. My Lord, they are Men of considerable Estates, and don't value those
little Returns; neither was this designed, but for a small Refreshment, or the
like.


Ld. A. What did you allow Sir H.M. and Mr. Player for their several Journeys
to Wales, and taking all that pains for you?


Merch. Not a farthing.


Ld. A. How! that was a little hard, was it not?


Merch. My Lord, this is the way to preserve our Stock till the Mines bring in
greater Profit, and then we may be more generous.


Ld. A. I see you have some Public spirited Men amongst you, and that is a
good sign of bringing your Undertaking to the Effect proposed. But to return to
your Constitution; I have indeed seen your Transfer Books, but I forgot to ask
what Fee must be paid for every Transfer.


Merch. Each Party pays a Shilling besides the Stamp; that is all.


Ld. A. That is a very cheap Conveyance, to pass an Interest of several
Thousand pounds value for a Shilling: But can they convey their Interest away
to each other by no other Conveyance, but by a Transfer and Acceptance in those
Books in the Office.


Merch. No, My Lord, for all the Partners concerned in the Mine-Adventure, are
either such who executed the Grand Settlement, by which our Constitution was
established, or such as we call New-Adventurers, who came in as Assignees under
that Settlement, and have also under their Hands in Stamp-Paper submitted to be
governed by that Constitution, which does expressly declare, That no Person
before such Transfer and Acceptance made and entered, shall have any Vote in all
or any of the said Meetings or Committees, or any Share or Dividend of the
Profits of the said Mines.


Ld. A. Then it is very clear that they must comply with their own
Constitution: But are their Tickets of no force or value now? because it is
writ upon them, This Ticket entitles the Bearer to Five pounds out of the
Profits of the Mines, etc.


Merch. There was not room to write more upon the Tickets, but it was supposed
that every Person would read the Settlement of the Mine-Adventure, which shows
that those Tickets did entitle the Bearer to so much, according to the
Limitations in the said Settlement, that is, until the Drawing was over; and
Registers made, and signed by the Managers; together with the said Transfer
Books; but afterward there is not the least regard to be had to these Tickets,
only that by them any Person may observe whether he has had Justice done him by
the Accomptant to the Company, that is, whether his Interest in the Mines be
truly stated and entered in the said Registers.


Ld. A. But what shall the Partners have to lie by them in case of Mortality,
to show that they have such an Interest in the said Mines.


Merch. As much as any Person has in the like case in the Bank of England; he
may have a Certificate or Copy of the Transfer from the Office, where it is
registered, which is sufficient.


Ld. A. Very well, I am satisfied; for he has a Certificate or Copy of the
Transfer, and the Security of two Registers, besides several Journals and
Leidgers and their Duplicates, to prove his Title; But, pray Sir, what is the
manner of Summoning a General Meeting?


Merch. A General Meeting must be summoned by hanging up a Public Notice
thereof in writing on the first Pillar on the right hand near the South-gate of
Entrance into the Royal Exchange, and at the usual place of Meeting, a Month
before the time appointed. This is all that is required by the Settlement: But
there is generally further Notice given in the News Papers; but now every
Person may take notice of Course that they have agreed to meet every second
Thursday in May and November.


Ld. A. How many Members make a Quorum in a General Meeting?


Merch. As many as will make up (amongst them) One thousand Shares; but any
lesser Number may meet pursuant to notice, and adjourn.


Ld. A. I think this is well ordered, for that is such a Number as may probably
meet together to do Business, and is also sufficient to prevent any Surprise
upon the Company: But suppose a Person that has a great number of Shares should
divide them into several Hands, on purpose to make a majority of Votes; such a
design may be of ill consequence, and I don't see how you can prevent it?


Merch. For this Reason every Partner is obliged, if required by the Chairman,
or any six of the Partners, to make a voluntary Affidavit before a Master in
Chancery, that he has three Shares in a General Meeting, and ten Shares in a
Grand Committee, and twenty Shares in a Select Committee, in his own Right, and
not in Trust for any other Person, or else he is to have no Vote.


Ld. A. That is excellently well contrived indeed; but how is the Grand
Committee summoned?


Merch. The Grand Committee are to meet every second Wednesday in June of
Course, and at other Times by such Summons from the Select Committee, Ten days
before the Time appointed, as is directed for a General Meeting as aforesaid:
But I conceive that there will be little Business left for them to do, the
General Meeting being now appointed to be held Twice a year, as aforesaid.


Ld. A. I cannot see that there is any thing wanting to make you a happy
Company, and to preserve Peace and Unity amongst you.


Merch. I hope there is not; For if any difference arises, there is a Provision
made for that too.


Ld. A. In Westminster Hall you mean.


Merch. No, my Lord, all the Partners are bound by this Settlement, to choose
Arbitrators; and if they cannot agree, the Arbitrators are to choose an Umpire;
and if he neglects or refuses to determine the Difference, it is humbly
referred to the Lord Mayor of London, if no Partner, or else to the Lord
Chancellor for the time being, to be determined in a Summary way without
Process of Law.


Ld. A. You have more care taken of you, for ought I can understand, than all
the Companies in Town: Certainly it was no Lawyer that drew such a peaceable
Constitution?


Merch. My Lord, there is good and bad of all Professions, Ranks, and Qualities
of Men whatsoever; the Gentleman that drew this, I believe, does not pretend to
any Merit or Experience in these Affairs: But this I may observe of him, that
it is not likely he would have taken so much pains about a Constitution and
Method of Management, if he had not at that time entertained a very good
Opinion of the Mines.


Ld. A. Truly, what you say is another very great Argument of the Sincerity of
the Underaker. But, pray Sir, how are the Mines managed in the Country?


Merch. By a Grove Steward, and a Pay Steward.


Ld. A. What is the Office of a Grove Steward?


Merch. The Grove Steward is the Steward of the Mines, and is to govern and
direct the Miners and Workmen, set them Bargains, take care that the Mines are
regularly worked, and effectually carried on, to the best advantage; to see the
Our weighed out to the Cartiers, and to grant Warrants to the Pay-Steward for
the Payment of the Mines, according to their respective Bargains.


Ld. A. What is the manner or way of setting Bargains; is it done in public or
private?


Merch. In public. As for instance; when the Steward of the Mines has a
Bargain to set out, he comes into the Field, and there openly and publicly
proclaims and proposes to the Miners the taking of such a Bargain, and he or
they that comes to the lowest Rate have the Bargain granted to them.


Ld. A. This is extraordinary fair; for then the Rate of all Bargains are known
to a hundred Persons, or more: But do you never employ any Man at days wages?


Merch. Seldom or never; it is better set any Bargain then employ Men under
ground at Day-wages.


Ld. A. You had need then to have a very skilful Steward in so great a work, or
else a Thousand pounds a year may be quickly lost for want of setting good
Bargains.


Merch. It may so; we have had an Instance of that in the Old Partners time,
where Mr. Waller set a Bargain at Thirty shillings a Fathom, and afterward,
another Person being employed (on a Trial) in Mr. Waller's Place, what do you
think he paid a Fathom in the same Drift? with a new Set of famous Miners not
to be paralleled in the whole Kingdom?


Ld. A. I cannot tell, it may be Three pounds a Fathom.


Merch. Be pleased to guess again; it is almost incredible.


Ld. A. Six or Seven pounds a Fathom.


Merch. Above Ten pounds a Fathom; it appears by the Accounts of their Work.


Ld. A. It Is no wonder then that some Men are ruined, and others get Estates by
the same Mines: but how does Mr. Waller do to set a good Bargain in a new Work?


Merch. He is a Man of great Experience, and can give a very great guess at all
sorts of Work; but however, he does not trust to that, but he takes a lusty
willing Fellow, and sets him on for a day, and stays by him, and comforts him
with a Pipe of Tobacco, and a Dram of the Bottle, and by this days Labor he can
calculate what that Work is worth, and so sets the Bargain accordingly.


Ld. A. That is a very good way; but is he not over-reached sometimes in his
Bargains?


Merch. Yes, he is, he cannot be infallible under ground; but yet for one
Bargain the Miners get an advantage over him, he gets the better of them in
Ten; and we are forced to consider them in some cases, when they work very
hard, and are not able to make their Wages, nor scarce get Subsistence.


Ld. A. Most Men, when they take a Bargain, work so hard for themselves, that
they expect to get double Wages; and it is hard if he will not let them get
single Wages.


Merch. My Lord, as he is saving for the Partners, so he endeavors to do right
to the poor Miners, for he sets them Bargains for a short time; and if they are
too hard upon the Miners, he advances in the next Bargain; but if too easy, he
makes them abate; so that in the main he contrives that they shall get good
Wages, but they shall be sure to work hard for it.


Ld. A. That Is very well done: But do the Miners never combine against him to
raise a Bargain?


Merch. Never of late; they did once Rebel against him; but being a Man of good
Courage and Conduct, he broke the Confederacy, cashiered the Leaders, and has
been an absolute Commander ever since; the Miners both love him and fear him.


Ld. A. That Is the way to govern such sort of People. Well, I see you are very
happy in a good Steward; but what will you do if he should die?


Merch. There is another Gentleman in the World that understands a little of
this matter, and is deeply concerned to look after it: However, there is care
taken to breed up skilful Men to succeed him.


Ld. A. That is very prudently done: But how often do you make a pay?


Merch. We pay Subsistence Money every Week, and make a clear Pay every six
Weeks.


Ld. A. Very well: And what is the Office of the Pay Steward?


Merch. The Pay Steward is our Cashier, receives all the Money sent down for
the use of the Mines, and pays the Miners their Wages according to their
Bargains, keeps all the Accounts in good order, of Wast-Book, Journal and
Ledger, and produces the Warrants from Mr. Waller as Vouchers for every
Payment; he also looks after our Stores, as Coal, Iron, Timber, etc. and gives
an exact account thereof, and takes care of the carriage of our Oar to the
Water side; and for the faithful discharge of his Trust he has also given us
good Security.


Ld. A. Certainly nothing in the World can be better managed. But what Salaries
do you give these Officers?


Merch. I have given an Account of Mr. Waller's Salary before; and as to the
Pay Steward, he has no more than Fifty pounds per Annum for him and his
Assistant.


Ld. A. That is very moderate; but how is the Smelting and Refining managed?


Merch. Our Smelting and Refining is all done with Pit-coal, which is much
cheaper than Wood or Charcoal.


Ld. A. Have you Coal in that Country?


Merch. No, my Lord, the nearest place is Neath or Swanzey in Glamorg anshire;
and therefore it was contrived, to save charges in Freight, that the same
Vessels which bring Coal to Oar to be smelted in Cardiganshire, shall carry
back Oar to Coal to be smelted at Neath; and this is established by the
Settlement of the Mine-Adventure.


Ld. A. That was well contrived; but whether is it more advantageous to Sir H.
M. to have the Oar smelted at Neath, or in Cardiganshire?


Merch. I suppose it is indifferent to him; but only in one respect, it would be
more advantageous for him to have all the Oar smelted in Cardiganshire, then at
Neath; for the Partners being obliged to take his Coal at the Market price, he
can carry it much cheaper to the Waterside, to be shipped off for Cardiganshire,
then to the Silver Mills at Neath; but yet at present we Smelt and Refine all
at Neath, though to his loss.


Ld. A. How so? Then you prejudice your Friend, and have no use for your Coal
in Cardiganshire.


Merch. We having no Smelting or Refining Houses in Cardiganshire, with proper
Furnaces fit for present use, and Sir H. M. having Furnaces ready at Neath, we
were glad to use them at present, or else we should have lost a years time;
besides the Duty of Coal, which is great in Cardiganshire, being saved at
Neath, with the Advantages of having Timber, Lyme, Sturbridge-Clay, Iron, and
other Necessaries much more plenty there, we find we can really do our Business
more cheap at Neath than in Cardiganshire. However, we are laying up a Stock of
Coal in readiness against our Buildings are made in that Country.


Ld. A. That is well done: But what Officers have you at Neath?


Merch. We have a skilful Operator, for smelting and refining, and we have a
Clerk or Pay Steward?


Ld. A. What is the Office of your Operator?


Merch. To oversee and direct all the Smelters and Refiners, that they smelt
the Oar, and refine the Lead, to the best profit and advantage; that they loose
no Lead in the Slags, nor any Silver in the Lytharge; and to be continually
making Experiments and Improvements in this Art?


Ld. A. I like the first part of his Office very well, but in the latter he may
do more hurt than good; for you may spend as much in Chemistry as you get by
the Mines.


Merch. No, my Lord, we are better Husbands then that comes to; for our
Experiments costs us not one Farthing, except a Barrel of Crucibles, and about
Ten pounds every year for a Flux.


Ld. A. How so! Must you not have Iron, Brick, Sturbridge-Clay, etc. to build,
essay Furnaces, and pay Wages to Workmen to keep the Fire, and attend the
Operations; must you not have Coal to make this Fire, and Servants to carry
away the Ashes? etc.


Merch. All Chemists must have these things and many more, and be at great
Charges, and indeed all others in the common way of working, and as they
commonly make their Furnaces; but we have so contrived our great Furnaces in
the first building of them, that we make all sorts of Trials, and in all
degrees of Heat, with the same Fire, and by the help of the same Men that are
bound to attend these Furnaces; which saves a vast Expense, and encourages us
to be always trying new Experiments, to our great Advantage.


Ld. A. That is very ingeniously contrived, I could be content to be such a
sort of Chemist my self; but I suppose you must employ a great number of Men to
work all your Furnaces Night and Day; how do you keep such a Tribe of Men in
good order?


Merch. They are all kept to a strict Method, and bound to observe the Orders
of the Workhouse, under several Penalties, according to the Nature of the
Offense; as for Swearing, Cursing, Quarrelling, being Drunk, or neglecting
Divine Service on a Sunday, One shilling; for absenting from their Work two
hours in a day without leave of the chief Operator, or refusing to obey his
lawful Commands, one days Wages; for absenting one whole day without leave, a
weeks Wages, etc. all which Forfeitures are put into a strong Box, as a reserve
for such of them as fall sick, or come to any Accident. And all the Men are
also bound to Secrecy, and to discover any Fraud, Deceit, or Mis-management,
under the Penalty of One hundred pounds.


Ld. A. This is also very well ordered, for that will make them watch one
another, that if they don't do their Duty, they may get as many Forfeitures for
the Public Stock as they can; and this will be a good Precedent for the
Workhouse in Cardiganshire. But what is the Duty of the Clerk of the Works?


Merch. The Clerk sees all the Oar weighed to the Smelters, and all the Lead to
the Refiners; takes an Account of the Product, and attends the drawing off the
Silver from every Test, and keeps an exact Account thereof, and of all the
Stores; he is also our Cashier in that place, receives all the Money, and pays
all the Workmen their Wages.

And as to the Coal this Method is observed, The Officer at the Coal-pits and
the Coal-carriers keep one Tally, and an Officer at the Silver Mills and
Coal-carriers keep another Tally, which are compared and entered by the Clerk,
who has an Assistant that is Witness to all his Proceedings and Entries; and
these four Officers are all obliged to give in their Accounts to the Company
upon Oath whenever they shall be required.


Ld. A. Certainly there cannot be any thing more fair or better managed: But is
there no way to deceive you of some of the Silver?


Merch. I think it is a very hard matter; for first, we Essay every parcel of
Lead on a small Test, to see how much Silver it holds in a pound; then we stand
by the first Trial in the great Furnaces, and examine very carefully the yield
thereof, by which we know what all the rest must afford to a small matter.
Besides, there are many Men employed together in one Workhouse, who must all
combine together, and forfeit their Obligations, or else they cannot deceive us.


Ld. A. Well, Sir, I see you are in such a Method, that you are not easily to
be imposed upon. And since I perceive it is the Opinion of wise Men, that it is
not improbable but that your Mines may in time answer Mr. Wallers's
Calculation, I desire to know (if that should happen) what Addition will be
made every year in Silver to the General Stock of the Nation; for I am always
for the Public Good as much as I can; and after so long and expenceful a War,
I should be glad to hear that the Nation was like to be replenished every year
with a good Stock of Welsh Bullion; such a thing as this would fall out very
happily, and providentially for this Kingdom; and would be discountenanced by
none but those that are Enemies to their Country, or at least prefer their own
private gain before the Interest of the Public.


Merch. There have been of late great Improvements made in the Iron Trade by
the ingenious Major Hanbury; and also in the Smelting and Manufacturing of Lead
by several others; but that which would be most valuable and advantageous to
this Nation, viz. The Art of Separating of Silver from Lead, is not yet brought
to its highest Perfection. The Mine-Adventurers, by the Aid and Ingenuity of
Mr. Robert Lydall, have made the fairest step toward it; for that Oar which
the greatest Artists in the Kingdom could not Smelt and Refine to any Profit at
all, it is most certain they do; whereby, I doubt, we have raised the Envy, and
consequently the Opposition of some Eminent and Ingenious Refiners, who perhaps
may think it a Reflection on their Ingenuity, that any Improvement should be
made in that Art by any other but themselves. But this Failing being so very
common and natural to Mankind, ought easily to be excused; and we have been so
very tender of their Reputation (whatever they have been of ours) that we have
not pretended to Extract much more Silver out of a Tun of Lead than they did,
and for that we have given a Reason, because the Oar in sinking deeper grew
better and richer then it was before; so that their Sincerity in their former
Trials is freely owned and confessed. But there being a great difference
betwixt Refining of Silver, which is properly their Business, and Extracting of
Silver out of Lead, which is properly ours; they may not have those
Opportunities and Conveniences of making Experiments and Improvements in the
latter, as we have. Besides, there is a great difference betwixt their way of
Extracting, and ours, in respect of the Charge, for they do it with Wood, and
we with Pit-coal; they in London, where all things are dear, and we in a
Country where all things are cheap; they do it from Oar which costs about Four
pounds a Tun at their Mills, and we with Oar that costs about Twenty shillings.


Ld. A. I am glad you have any Advantages that may encourage you to proceed in
the separating of Silver from Lead; because it is plain, that how little Profit
soever you may make, all the Silver extracted is clear gain to the Nation; so
that in case you extract no more than Five pounds out of a Tun of Lead, and the
Charges of doing it amounts to Four pounds ten shillings, whereby the Profit to
the Company is no more than Ten shillings in a Tun, which is very
inconsiderable; the Nation will gain the whole Five pounds, which is
considerable, and may amount to a vast Revenue, if you have Encouragement to
extract the Silver out of great quantities of Oar. And therefore I desire to
know what the Nation will get at that rate, in case the Mines should ever be
advanced any thing near to Mr. Waller's Calculation.


Merch. My Lord, the Nation would gain above One hundred thousand pounds per
Annum, as your Lordship may easily compute from the Calculation in Mr. Waller's
Essay.


Ld. B. How! That will be a great Advantage to this Kingdom indeed; you need
not fear Encouragement from all good Men and true Lovers of their Country, as
soon as the Nature of your Undertaking is known to the World.


Merch. But pray, my Lord, be pleased to consider that the Nation does not only
get by the Silver extracted, but also by the Lead, Lytharge, and Red-Lead;
which being Exported out of this Kingdom, will Import their full value in
Foreign Commodities, without carrying our Coin and Bullion out of the Nation;
and if our Exports are of greater value then our Imports, the Balance of Trade
is gained.


Ld. B. You observe very well; and it is the undoubted Interest of this
Kingdom, to Export as little Silver and Bullion and as much of our own
Commodities as we can, in order thereby to gain the Balance of Trade: Which is
the great thing we have always labored for in England, and the only thing that
can make this Nation truly great and powerful.


Merch. But besides all this, it may not be improper to observe what a Chain of
advantageous Consequences to the Nation will attend such an Undertaking as
this; How many Hundred (if not Thousands in time) of Men, Women, and Children
will be employed? The Men in raising, winding up, and stamping; the Women and
Children in dressing and washing the Oar. How many Men and Horses in carrying
the same to the Waterside? How many Sail of Ships will be employed in carrying
Oar to Coal, and Coal to Oar round the South-Coast of Wales? How many Seamen to
Man all those Ships? what numbers of Men will be employed in building and
making all Materials for the Rigging of so many Ships with Sails, Masts, etc.
and in Repairing the same; in loading and unloading the Vessels; and many other
ways that are too numerous now to be mentioned.


Ld. A. These will be considerable; as we find by experience in the Trade of
New Castle Coal, which has all these Consequences, to the great Advantage of
the Nation.


Merch. My Lord, New Castle Coal had a beginning some time or other, as well as
this Undertaking; I desire your Lordship to tell me, whether you believe that
any Man that should at that time have given an Estimate of what did afterward
come to pass, how many thousand Men, and what vast number of Ships and Seamen
would be employed in that Trade, to the great Advantage of the whole Nation,
whether at that time his Account thereof would not have seemed as improbable as
Mr. Waller's Essay on the value of these Mines.


Ld. A. Truly Sir, I believe it would; and therefore it must be confessed, That
Undertakings of this Nature ought to receive all Encouragement imaginable,
because they may conduce very much to the Public Good if they succeed; and if
they do not, they can do none any hurt, but those that are concerned in the
Adventure.


Ld. B. Such Men in other Countries are esteemed Public spirited Men, and it
is the Wisdom and Policy of their Lawmakers always to assist and encourage
them, and I doubt not but they will be encouraged here, when they are
understood. But this is a new Undertaking, and unfortunately timed, in an Age
when all new things are called Projects, and condemned without a hearing.


Merch. 'Twas well timed in one respect, for Lead is grown a scarce and dear
Commodity, and many Veins of late have failed in other Countries.


Ld. A. I think we are all now convinced, that you are engaged in an
Undertaking that is likely to be very advantageous to the Public as well as to
your selves, as soon as the Works can be fet in order, and brought to
perfection. And therefore I desire to know, first, What are the Difficulties
you meet with; Secondly, What Laws and Constitutions you want to make your
Business more easy at home, and to give your Commodities a free vent abroad.


Ld. B. Without doubt it was considered, that such an Undertaking as this must
meet with many Difficulties, or else what occasion had there been for joining
so many Purses together, and raising so great a Stock.


Merch. Your Lordship observes very well, that all great Undertakings do often
meet with great Difficulties, and therefore do require Time and great Purses,
as well as Care and Conduct to bring the same to Perfection. But this is little
considered by those who condemn this Undertaking for delay, when I really think
that no Undertaking has ever gone on better for the time than this has done,
or met with fewer Difficulties. Sir H. M. and Mr. Waller went down to the Mines
the latter end of May last, and what Conveniences has been erected and made at
Neath in Glamorganshire for Smelting, Refining, and Carriage of our Goods, the
Abstract of the State of the Mines, set out by the Committee, does sufficiently
show; as also that Mr. Waller since that time has erected convenient Houses to
Entertain One hundred and fifty Miners, on that barren desolate Mountain where
the Mines lie; that the constant and punctual Payments has encouraged the
Country to bring Provisions to them; that the Works have been carried on Night
and Day, with fresh Men every eight hours: And although Mr. Waller never
proposed in his Essay to set the Works in order under a Year, yet he is now
working in Oar in the Bog Vein, and does expect to be raising Oar in many more
places before the year is expired; and had not the Rocks proved excessive hard,
which is all the difficulty we have hitherto met with, we had in all
probability carried our Levels to Oar in many places before this time.


Ld. A. But, Sir, you have now put me in mind of a great difficulty indeed; for
some are so confident, as to say, that the Rocks are so very hard, you will
never be able to get through them.


Merch. No! that is hard indeed; but, my Lord, it is plain we have got through
them in some places, and that we have got into the heart of them in many other;
so that they are not unconquerable.


Ld. B. But does not this Difficulty much discourage you?


Merch. No, my Lord, not at all; for it is a constant Observation amongst all
Miners, that the harder the Rock, the richer the Mine; Nature generally makes
the Case, stronger or weaker, according to the richness of the Treasure therein
contained; for wherever the sides of a Vein are cracked and broken, the Mineral
Water that feeds the Vein, runs off, and the Vein proves dead, or very poor:
But when the sides of a Vein are solid and firm, without cracks, the Mineral
Feeder impregnates and enriches the Mine, and the same proves quick and rich in
Oar.


Ld. A. What you say is very rational, I confess; but yet from the hardness of
the Rocks there is a great delay and loss of time.


Merch. My Lord, with humble submission, I cannot allow that any time is lost,
that we never proposed to save: I own, that if Mr. Waller does not get through
these hard Rocks by the latter end of May next, as he proposed, then we may be
said to loose all the time beyond May; and yet if the Veins do happen to prove
at last much richer than he proposed, it will be no loss at all, but an
Advantage.


Dr. I must beg leave on this occasion to take notice, that I have observed all
along in this Undertaking, a very great and particular Providence, beyond what
is common and ordinary in other Cases; I have had an account, by how many
strange accidental Occurrences these Mines came to the knowledge, and
afterward to the management of those Persons, under whose Hands the first part
of this Undertaking did so wonderfully prosper. It was not without admiration
that I saw so many Persons of different Parties, Sexes, and Interests amongst
the old Partners, entirely agree to refer all their Controversies and Lawsuits
to the determination of a Person that was a mere Stranger to them, when the
dissent of any one Member had destroyed the whole Undertaking; I say, the sight
of that Grand Settlement of the Mine-Adventure, signed and Sealed by so many
Persons of different Qualities and Interests, dispersed over the whole Kingdom,
did not raise in me a common or ordinary Notion of the thing. Neither was it
without some wonder that I beheld such an Undertaking set forth in the dead
time of a Long Vacation (when the Town was empty, and many monied Men gone into
the Country) to prosper to so high a degree, that Mr. Neale declared he never
saw such crowding for Subscriptions before; That new Adventurers, of all Ranks
and Qualities, should agree in the same Opinion about it; Lords, Bishops,
Members of Parliament, Divines, Merchants, and Lawyers in all Parts of the
Kingdom: That all things that seemed at first to be an obstruction, even the
very Differences in the Family of the Proprietor, tended at last to the
promoting of it: And therefore, I must confess, I am inclined to believe that
even this particular Accident of the hardness of the Rocks, will also (some way
or other) tend to the Advantage of the Unkertaking.


Ld. A. I confess there has been several remarkable Passages in this
Undertaking, and besides what you have mentioned, the drawing of it so very
fair, the appropriating so considerable a part of the Profits to Charitable
uses, the Establishing so good a Constitution, the management of it with so
much Care and Exactness in relation to the Accounts, and with such Frugality as
to the main Stock, the vigorous prosecution of the Works, and the great
Purchases so lately made by the Committee; all this induces me to have a very
good Opinion of the Undertaking, that it is founded on an honest Bottom, and
that it will be prosperous in time: But I confess, I cannot understand how the
hardness of the Rock can tend to the Advantage of the Undertaking, unless by
keeping in the Mineral Feeder within the firm sides, and so making the Veins
richer, as that Gentleman has observed.


Dr. My Lord, I humbly conceive that there is nothing can conduce more to the
advantage of any Undertaking then an entire Union and good Agreement amongst
the Partners; and there is no large Companies but may have some uneasy Members
amongst them; Now, is it not an Advantage to have them out?


Ld. A. I understand you, Sir; and so you fancy that this Noise about the
hardness of the Rocks, may make some uneasy impatient Members sell out, and
Men of better Temper come in their places.


Dr. I do so, my Lord; and for my part, I have never had any Apprehension that
this Undertaking could any ways miscarry, but by some disagreement amongst the
Partners.


Merch. I hope there can be no manner of danger of that, since we have
certainly as good a Constitution for the management of the Mines as any Company
in England can have, for indeed it is composed of the best part of all their
Constitutions, and I never saw any Company more unanimous in all my Life, which
I confess is a very great Encouragement to me to venture my Money amongst them.


Ld. A. You know it is a Maxim, Concordia parvae Res crescunt, Discordia magnae
dilabuntur; it is all your Interests to preserve this good Temper amongst you:
But pray, Sir, is the Estate in Law of the Mines vested in the Adventurers?


Merch. No, my Lord; the Estate in Law is vested in Trustees of great Worth and
Integrity, who are to permit and suffer the Partners to receive the Profits,
and to manage the Mines according to the Constitution beforementioned.


Ld. A. That was well contrived.


Merch. Nay, my Lord, we have been so careful to do every Person Right and
Justice, that there is a Clause in the great Settlement, That in Case any
Adventurer shall be in Debt, and suffer an Extent or Execution to come forth
against him, that the Committee for the time being shall and may sell and
dispose of such Adventurers Shares and Interest in the Mines, at the best Price
that can be had on the Exchange for the same, and therewith pay off and
discharge the said Debt, the Creditor assigning his Security to the said
Committee.


Ld. B. Well, Sir, I must own that I am abundantly satisfied that this is an
honest Undertaking: But what do you, say to my Lord's other Question? Do you
want no help from the Legislative Power?


Merch. There is no Company so great, but the Legislative Power is able to make
them greater; but at present I don't know of any thing that we have to desire,
unless his Majesty and the Parliament shall think fit to pass an Act to save
the Lives of some Criminals condemned to Die for lesser Offenses, and order
them to be Transported over Severn to work in the Mines.


Dr. Sir, I thank you for that Thought, certainly there is nothing could
redound more to the honor of a Christian Kingdom than such a Law, whereby the
Souls of many Thousands of Men may by the Grace of God be eternally saved, as
well as their Bodies, from utter ruin and destruction.


Merch. But besides the Charity of such a Law, there is no small Policy
therein; for thereby the Nation would reap the benefit of their Labor, and the
poor penitent Criminals be able to make some Atonement for their Crimes in the
Service of their Native Country.


Ld. A. What you mention is a Law that all good Men would be very well pleased
with, but that we have got such a horrible Notion in England of Slavery, that I
doubt such a Law will never be carried in our Parliament.


Ld. B. Truly, my Lord, I am of your Opinion; I believe it would never admit of
a Debate; the very Title of such an Act to make Englishmen Slaves, would be
sufficient to throw it out of the House upon the first Motion.


Dr. My Lord, I humbly beg leave, with all due submission to your Lordships, to
discourse this Matter a little farther, I humbly hope your Lordships (however)
will not throw it out without Debate, nor be offended with me for offering my
poor Thoughts on this Occasion to your Lordships Consideration.


Ld. B. No, good Doctor; Pray go on Sir, and say what you please.


Dr. My Lord, I presume that our Noble English Patriots are not angry with mere
Words or Sounds, but with the Thing it self called Slavery; that is, they abhor
that Absolute and Arbitrary Power which is used in other Countries of
condemning Men to the Galleys for lesser Offenses; but I cannot think they do
abhor the saving of an English-man's Life, when he is condemned to die. That
which is now proposed, is not to make Englishmen Slaves that are entitled to
Liberty; but, on the contrary, to save condemned Criminals (that have forfeited
their Liberty) from the Slavery, both of Sin and Death.


Ld.B. But you would still make them Slaves to work at the Mines.


Dr. My Lord, I would so; but they are first dead in Law; they have forfeited
their Birthright; they are no longer Englishmen; they are condemned by the
Laws of England to die; their Blood is Attainted, and the Law has no farther
tenderness or regard for them. Can any Englishman be in fear of such a Law? No
certainly; If he commits no Offense worthy of Death he is in no danger: if he
does, he will be glad of such a Deliverance, to save his Life, to have time to
Repent, and to live among Christians in his own Country, where he will have a
Chaplain to take care of his Soul, as well as a Keeper of his Body.


Ld.A. I protest the Doctor distinguishes very well in this Case; If Men would
have patience to hear this Matter fairly debated, I cannot think but they would
have another Opinion of such a Law then now they have; for (as the Doctor
observes) the Thing we fear, is, That in Case of Misdemeanors, or other
slighter Offenses, instead of Fine and Imprisonment, or any other usual
Corporal Punishment, the Judges should have power to condemn an English man to
any sort of Slavery, which would be of ill consequence, for we are tender of
our Liberty: But where there is no danger of loosing our Liberty, till a Man is
first condemned to die, and has forfeited his Estate, Liberty, Life, and all,
I think that alters the Case very much; for this is to add Liberty to an
Englishman, not to take it away, since there is more Liberty in any Life, than
in the dark Regions of Death.


Merch. Truly, my Lord, I think such a Law could never be more seasonable then
at this time. Our late War has taken off many thousand Men's Lives, the Country
want Men for their necessary work of Husbandry, especially in Harvest time, and
if another War should happen the King would want Soldiers; and therefore for
all Felonies and Larcenies without Benefit of Clergy, (except Treason and
Murder) I think such a Law would be of great advantage to the Public, as I
shall endeavor to demonstrate to your Lordship.


Ld. B. 'Twould be a great advantage to your Mines perhaps; but I don't know
whether it would be so great an advantage to the Public, to have a Nest of
Rogues in the Kingdom.


Dr. Hard Labor will in time bring down the highest Spirits; and with God's
blessing and good management in a Christian Country, may bring them to a sense
of Religion and Virtue.


Merch. My Lord, though I propose some advantage to the Mines by this Law, yet
I propose more to his Majesty and the Public, if your Lordship please to hear
me out.


Ld. A. Sir, I Will hear you very patiently in any thing for the advantage of his
Majesty and Public, therefore pray go on.


Merch. My Lord, I propose that the Mine-Adventurers shall pay an
Acknowledgment to his Majesty for every such Criminal; that is to say, Whereas
a Workman in that Country may deserve Nine pence per day, I would divide that
Nine pence into three parts, and apply, Four pence per day to maintain the
Criminal in Meat and Drink, Three pence per day to his Majesty, and Two pence a
day to the Company for Clothes and other incident Charges; whereby his Majesty
would have an Annual Rent of Four pounds per Ann. and upwards for each
Criminal; at which rate One thousand Criminals would yield above Four thousand
pounds per Annum, and Ten thousand Criminals above Forty thousand pounds per
Annum. This is no contemptible Income; and in all the Mines of the whole
Kingdom so many Men may easily be employed.


Ld. B. I protest I am brought over; I like this Motion very well; and I cannot
tell how far this Thought may be improved to many other purposes, as well as to
the Mines, and bring in a very great Revenue, and thereby become very
advantageous to the Public, and very agreeable to the Parliament.


Ld. A. But how would you be able to govern such a multitude of Men, and keep
them in good order.


Merch. What has been done, may be done: Nay, what is now actually done in
Hungary and other places, may I hope be practiced in this Kingdom. If once
there was a disposition to such a Law, I presume it would not be difficult to
pen it so, as to provide against all Objections and Inconveniences: and if
England shall get but the Moiety of what is got by such a Law in Hungary, it
would please both the King and Parliament very well. The Mines in Hungary bring
in a vast Revenue, and are worked by condemned Criminals, or else they could
not get a farthing profit by them.


Ld. B. But, Sir, I question whether this Punishment would be so great a Terror
to Offenders as Death.


Merch. I presume it will be a much greater Terror to Offenders; for though
when Death approaches and looks them in the Face, when the Terror of an Evil
Conscience, and Fears of greater Punishment in another World, mortifies their
Spirits, and daunts their Courage, they would perhaps much rather work at the
Mines, and have time to repent, then take a sudden Leap in the Dark, under all
those Horrors and Amazements of a guilty Soul; yet when Men are in the Vigor
of their Youth, when their Spirits are high, their Courage bold and daring, and
they are brought to great Necessities and Want, and thereby grow desperate, and
are inveigled and drawn in by ill Company, to a lewd and wicked Course of Life,
they generally cry out for A merry Life and a short one; they then look upon
Death with an Atheistical Eye, without any Sense or Horror of Punishment in
another World, and the pain of Hanging appears to be so inconsiderable and so
short, that it causes no great Terror to them: But the Thoughts of being
perpetually condemned to such hard work as the Mines, where they will be sure
to do all the most slavish, and aborious work; Men that are used to Plenty and
Ease will be extremely terrified with such a Thought more then can be imagined;
it will seem as terrible to them as to be hanged every day, and yet not to die
and be eased of the pain.


Ld. A. Truly, Sir, you have convinced me, I really believe it would be much
more terrible: But however, because it is a new thing, I should think it very
advisable that such a Law should be Temporary at first, and then there can be
no danger in making a Trial of it.


Merch. Nay, my Lord, I am so very tender of proposing any thing that should be
inconsistent with the Liberty of the English Nation, that I should humbly
propose that such a Law should be so penned, that for fear of any the least
Inconvenience, it should still be in the Election of his Majesty, either to let
such Criminals suffer Death according to the usual Judgment passed upon them,
(which should still be the same as formerly, without alteration) or else
(instead of Transportation to the Indies) to grant them a Reprieve for working
at the Mines, and then the Criminal, being uncertain which Punishment might be
inflicted upon him, would be under a double Terror, both of Death and of the
Mines.


Ld. B. Now you have made the thing so clear to me, that I can see no manner of
Prejudice by it, first to make such a Law Temporary, then that the Judgment be
still the same, quod suspendatur per Callum, etc. and only a Power granted to
his Majesty in Capital Offenses of a lesser nature, (instead of Transportation)
to grant a Reprieve (not a Pardon) for working at the Mines, etc. his Majesty
receiving such an Annual Rent for every such Criminal as aforesaid, whilst in
health and able to work; there can be nothing said against this in my judgment.


Ld. A. Truly, my Lord, I think so; unless Hanging be a Privilege inseparably
annexed to the English: But what if a Criminal grow sickly and unable to work,
how shall he then be maintained?


Dr. My Lord, by the Constitution of the Mine-Adventure, all aged and impotent
Miners and Laborers in their Service, are to be maintained out of the Profits
of the Mines.


Ld. A. That is an extraordinary good thing indeed, that those who spend their
Lives in your Service, to make you rich, should not starve themselves; but
whenever they shall grow impotent and unable to work, they may have a
comfortable Subsistence provided for them.


Merch. This was the Contrivance of our Steward, Mr. Waller, that has drawn us
all into this Undertaking; and this of saving of condemned Criminals to work at
the Mines is my poor Thought, which I humbly submit to better Judgment.


Dr. Whatever becomes of this Thought your good Intentions will be always had
in remembrance, and if he that saves the Soul of one Sinner covers a multitude
of sins, what must such a Law as this do, that tends to the saving of Thousands?


Merch. I hope it will bring a Blessing upon the whole Nation, upon his most
Sacred Majesty, the Right honorable the House of Lords, upon all the Commons
of England, and especially upon their Representatives in Parliament, and upon
all that have a hand in it, and amongst the rest upon us and our Mines.


Ld. A. Well, Sir, this is a Proposal worthy of Consideration, and I hope in
time it may be modeled by our Judicious and Learned Senators and Patriots of
their Country, into such a Law as may be consistent with the Liberty of the
English Nation, as well as with the Christianity and Charity of our Religion.
But, pray Sir, is there any thing else you would desire that may contribute to
make you a flourishing Company.


Merch. Nothing, at present, that I can think of.


Dr. How, Sir! Can you that have just now bestowed so good a Thought upon us,
think of nothing more?


Merch. No, Sir; I cannot think of more then four principal things required to
make an Undertaking of this Nature prosperous and successful, viz. a Rich Mine,
a Large Stock, Skilful Miners, and a Good Constitution; and the Gentleman I
formerly mentioned has taken care for us in every one of these Particulars; he
has chose a large Mine near the Sea, and a good Port, fully tried and approved;
he has contrived a way to raise, and also to secure a large Stock for us to the
end of our Lease; and by his Provision for decayed Workmen, he has encouraged
able Miners to come over to these Works from all Parts of the Kingdom. And
then, as to the Constitution for the management of the Mines, I have had their
Lordships entire Approbation, and therefore I cannot (for my part) imagine what
can now be wanting to make this a flourishing Company.


Dr. I am sorry for it: You Merchants when you have freighted out a strong Ship
to Sea, have placed a good Master, a skilful Pilate, and able stout Mariners in
her, are apt to think you have done your business, and that nothing more is
required; But, Sir, I must beg leave to put you in mind, that after all there
is one thing more which you have not yet mentioned, without which all the rest
of your Politics and Contrivances will not be of any value to you.


Merch. Pray, Sir, what is that?


Dr. Really, Sir, I am much concerned you should not be able to guess at it
your self.


Merch. O, Sir, I presume now I understand your meaning. I Will assure you,
Doctor, I could never forget so material a thing as is contained in the very
first words in all our Charter Parties, Last Wills and Testaments; but to tell
you the truth, I often forbear to mention such things in the Company of Great
Men for fear of Censure.


Ld. B. I am sorry, you should be afraid, upon any account whatsoever, to own
your dependence on a Divine Power and Providence, which has so highly prospered
all your Undertakings in other Matters; and as to us Lords, I must beg leave to
retort your own Observation upon you, That there is good and bad of all
Professions, Ranks and Qualities whatsoever: And I Will assure you, Sir, if we
had no other Reason to believe a Divine Power and Providence, the Regular
Production of Mines under Ground is sufficient to convince us of this Truth.


Merch. I beg your Lordships pardon for my reservedness in this matter; I must
confess I have all the reason in the world to acknowledge a Divine Providence
in all my Affairs, and I am sure I have an entire dependence thereon for the
Success of this Undertaking, for I know by experience, that the Race is not to
the swift, nor the Battle to the strong, nor Riches to Men of Understanding,
but the Almighty disposes every thing as he sees best.


Dr. I doubt not but the Charity out of these Mines will bring a Blessing upon
them, which will in a reasonable time convince the rest of this Nation
concerned in Mineral Works, that it will not be their Loss, but their Interest,
to appropriate a reasonable Part of all their Gains (especially of these hidden
Treasures) to the Service of their great Lord and Master, from whose Bounty
they received them.


Merch. A little more time will open the Eyes of the World, and set this
Undertaking in its proper Light; but I presume it will now be very agreeable to
these Noble Lords to propose an Adjournment, for I doubt we have so tired their
Lordships patience, that they will never care to hear any more of Mines after
this long Discourse.


Ld. B. I am so far from being tired, that I do assure you, Sir, I am
abundantly satisfied with your Account of them.


Merch. That is your goodness, my Lord; but I hope it appears by this time,
that this Undertaking is not to be despised or treated with too much neglect.


Ld. B. You have had our Opinions of that already, and it is plain that it wants
nothing to bring it into the highest Esteem but to be understood; it is a new
thing, and really some that are concerned with you, can give but an indifferent
account of the matter.


Merch. Your Lordship has hinted at the true Reason for that, because it is a
new thing, and very different from other Undertakings, though they at first
setting up might be as difficult to be understood as this; which being
entangled by Differences amongst the old Partners, could not be reduced to any
effectual Method and Order without large Settlements, and a New Constitution.
But I hope your Lordships understand it now pretty well.


Ld. B. I understand it so well, that I think every good Englishman ought to
assist and countenance your Undertaking.


Ld. A. Truly, my Lord, I am of your Opinion, I think it a very Noble and a
very Charitable Undertaking; and that all that have any Love to their native
Country, or Charity for the Poor, will both speak and act in favor of it.


Merch. I humbly thank your Lordships, I hope so too: I know what the Ministers
of France and Holland, and most other Countries usually do, on such Occasions,
to encourage Adventures of this Nature; and I doubt not but we have many wise
and honorable Persons in this Kingdom, who understand and wish well to the
Public Good of this Nation, and will not willingly suffer any private Interest
to interpose, where the Public is concerned.


The Conclusion from the Precedent Discourse.
THus you see the Nature of this Undertaking fully explained and set forth; and
that notwithstanding the drawing of Lots, has been of late abused to ill
purposes, and therefore disallowed, yet in this Case it was not only allowable,
but absolutely necessary, and the means of establishing a considerable Gift to
charitable Uses. And that the Mine-Adventure was drawn with all the fairness
and exactness imaginable, to the entire satisfaction of all the Adventurers.
You see the sincerity and good intentions of the first Undertakers fully
demonstrated; That they have in all respects dealt very justly and honorably
by all the Partners concerned. You see with what exactness the Accounts of this
Company are kept. What care and pains has been taken in composing and
establishing a Constitution for the better management of the Mines, for doing
Justice, and preserving Peace and Unity amongst all the Partners. You observe
what progress has been made, both in the effectual working of the Mines night
and day, and in the smelting and refining of the Oar raised from the same, and
what a great Profit above all Charges is made thereby, and that this is done
with all the good husbandry and management that an Undertaking of this Nature
is capable of. You may also perceive that we are not like to want Oar during
our Lease, nor fresh Mines to employ our Stock at the end thereof. You see all
the Objections fully and fairly answered, and how false, frivolous and
malicious many of them were: You will from hence be better able to judge of the
intrinsic value of these Mines, and what credit ought to be given to the
future Reports and Cenfures of malicious or self-designing Men against this
Public Undertaking. You may also observe in what proportion the Annual Profits
of these Mines will probably increase for some years, and consequently by what
steps and degrees they will be continually advancing toward the highest
valuation; and thereby you will the better know how to balance your
Expectations, and give your present and future Interest their just weight. You
will also take notice from what has been discoursed, how much Undertakings of
this Nature may in time conduce to the public good of the whole Nation, and in
particular toward gaining the balance of Trade; especially since the highest
valuation of these Mines does not seem improbable to Men of judgment, who have
looked into the Accounts of what Mines produce in other Countries.

And therefore it is with all humility and submission to better judgments
conceived, that the Nature of this Adventure being thus explained, it will not
be very much for the honor or reputation of any true Englishman to oppose or
discourage such an Undertaking, where the Adveaturers cannot reasonably be
supposed to do any prejudice, but may do a great deal of good to this Nation.

However, since it appears that the interest of his Majesty and the Public is
so much concerned, and that not only the Poor of Greenwich-Hospital but of most
of the great Corporations and Boroughs in England, will reap advantage front
the prosperity of the Mine-Adventure. It cannot be doubted, but that our most
gracious Sovereign, and our Noble Senators and Patriots of their Country, will
readily condescend to give it any assistance and encouragement, which they in
their great Wisdom and Goodness shall hereafter from time to time judge
requisite and proper; whose gracious Smiles and favorable Countenance will
soon disperse those thick and dark Clouds of Ignorance and private Interest
that overspread this lower Region.

And it is humbly hoped, that amongst all his Majesty's great and glorious
Actions, it will be no dishonor to the present Reign, nor to the honorable
Members of both Houses of Parliament, that the glorious Act concerning Royal
Mines, (that opened a new Scene of concealed Treasure to this Kingdom,) was
passed in their time; nor that these Mines were the first occasion, and this
Undertaking the first good Effect of that happy Law; especially when it is
observed, that by the Industry of the Mine-Adventurers, some Addition shall
every day be made to the Public Stock of the Nation in good Bullion, extracted
out of our own Mines, and consequently in time many Millions of good Sterling
saved to this Nation, that was before totally lost, and in great measure
enjoyed by Foreign Countries.

It Is humbly hoped that it will be no dishonor or prejudice to this Nation to
improve the growth and manufactures of our own Country; not only by extracting
the Silver out of Lead, as aforesaid, but by making Lytharge of Silver as
universal a Commodity as our Lead it self, out of which it is made (to our
shame) in other Nations.

This Undertaking is yet in its infancy, but if it has the honor to he
protected in its just Rights, and nursed up by the Legislative Power, with the
usual care that is generally afforded to all other the Natural Products of our
own Country, it is not doubted, but the Fruit thereof will in a reasonable time
redound very much to their Honor, as well as to the Profit of the King and
Kingdom.

How many great and wonderful things are often brought to pass from very small
and despicable beginnings, is obvious to all that either bestow any time in
reading what is done abroud, or observing what is acted at home; and it is not
impossible, nor perhaps improbable, but some Men now in being may live to see
this Company of the Mine-Adventurers bring in more real intrinsic and
substantial Profit to this Nation then any other Company whatsoever. However,
this is most certain, that they will have no occasion to carry any Silver or
Bullion out of the Kingdom, as others do, and that they will always Trade in
Staple Commodities, that import their full value into England. It Is no very
easy matter to judge of some Companies (though they make great Gains to
themselves, and vast Sums of Money do circulate through their hands) whether
the Nation gets by them or not? but it is certain, that all that is gained and
expended by this Company, brings in a clear National Profit; for their very
Expenses (as well as Gains) circulate in our own kingdom, and at the same time
raise the Materials of a Staple Commodity out of the Earth, that employ great
numbers of Men, Women, and Children, in the Manufacture thereof, and is all an
Addition to the General and Fundamental Stock of the Nation.

FINIS.
THE SECOND ABSTRACT OF THE State of the MINES OF Bwlchyr-Eskir-Hyr; From the
31st Day of January last, to the 30th Day of April, 1700.
By Order of the Committee.
The Committee have received an Account of the Mines to the Effect following:

February the 3d.
THAT Mr. Waller had set Four Men to Sink 100 Yards West of the Bog-Work; where
they came at Two Yards deep to a Vein of Oar mixed with Vein-Stone Eight Foot
wide. That he is raising Oar in the little North-Vein; but when the Levels are
up, he shall raise more Oar in a Day, than he can do now in a Month, and Two
Thirds cheaper.

February the 6th.
That in the said new Discovery he cannot sink down much deeper for Water, till
the Level is carried home to it; but believes at the deepness of the Level,
that it will be a larger Vein than that which is called The Great Vein; that
however, he had let a Bargain to Andrew Slack for 100 Tons of Oar at 1 l. 5 s.
per Ton, for Raising, Stamping, Washing, and making the Oar Merchantable.

February the 13th.
That observing the said new Discovery did improve, he gave Andrew Slack a
Guinea for his Venture, and to discharge his Bargain. And afterward, the same
Day, set the same Bargain of 100 Tons to John Pryfe and Partners, at 14 s. per
Ton, the Vein being then Gathered into a solid Rib of Oar about half a Yard
wide, and in some Places One Yard wide in si^^^ Oar, besides a rich Mixture of
Oar and Vein-stone about Five Foot more; which Rib of Oar is above twice as
large as the great Vein was at that Deepness. This (he says) is a Glorious
Sight, and that few Veins at Sixty Yards deep, can show so much Oar as this
Vein does at three Yard deep.

February the 19th.
That the New Discovery did mend in Sinking downwards: We have it now in the
deepest part Four Foot wide in firm Oar; and we have opened it Ten Yards in
length.

February the 27th.
That the New Discovery continued Four Foot wide in pure Oar, and for the most
part Potters Oar, besides a rich Mixture of Oar and Vein-stone, and that it did
under-cut in Oar into the Spar-Rider, which seemed to be the North-side of the
Vein; so that I have Hopes, and not without Reason, that the Spar-Rider, at the
deepness of our Level, may be all Oar; For we have cut in one place a Foot into
the Rider, and it is all Oar; but this Bog-Water proves a great Hindrance to
us. -- We have Strings of rich Copper-Oar in Powel's Drift.

March the 4th.
In the new Work we are sumping in Oar, in order to set a Pump, till our Level
is carried home to it. I am dressing up the old shallow Level to the great
Work, in order to raise Oar there; and I am carrying up Curtis Drift to the new
Work.

March the 12th.
Curtis-Drift to the new Discovery goes very briskly forward. We continue
sumping in Oar in that Work, and driving Stoups from the Sumps each way. We
have cut Eighteen Inches into the Spar-Rider, and have not reached the far side
of the Oar.

March the 19th.
I hope to clear the great Work of Water in a short time, and raise Oar there.
In Curtis-Drift we find sparks of Oar near 100 Weight: I doubt not but this
Clay Vein will prove a good Vein at the Deepness of our Level. The new Work
continues to widen as we sink downwards.

Note, These Letters do also give an Account of the Progress made in all the
Levels and Cross-Drifts, too long to be inserted in this Abstract; but this
great Discovery is confirmed by several hands, that is to say,

Mr. D. Jones to Mr. T. Hawkins, Feb. 20.
I have no more to add, but only the good News of a Noble Sight of Oar in the
New Discovery, which I saw last Saturday.

Mr. Sym. Pryse to Mr. Shiers, Feb. 20.
There is a very Glorious Sight of Oar in the New Discovery. -- Wishing
Prosperity to the Adventurers, I am

Your Humble Servant, Simon Pryse.

William Pugh of Mathaverve, in the County of Montgomery, Esquire a Person of great
Worth and Reputation, being obliged to come up to London, was pleased to send a
skilful Artist in Mines to view this new Discovery; with Orders that he should
write him such an Account thereof as (if Occasion were) he would make Oath of
the Truth thereof, whereupon he sent him this following Letter.

To William Pugh, Esquire
SIR,
I Was according to your Order, on Monday last, being the 19th Instant, at
Bwlchy-Eskir-Hyr, where I had the Convenience of taking a full View of the new
Discovery there, which I found as follows:

The Vein is 120 Yards West of the Bogg-work, it is opened or barred Ten Yards
in length, the top of the Oar at Three Foot deep from the Surface is a Foot
Wide; it is half a Yard in a Rib of pure Oar, somewhat deeper, and in less then
Nine Foot sinking, it affords a Rib of very good Oar, four Foot in Wideness,
and in a word, Increases still as they Sink, and the firm Sides open kindly:
The Oar is for the most part firm Potters Oar, two Inchces or there abouts of
small grained Oar being mixed with it, which when cut with a Knife, proves very
mellow and soft as the other. This is a true and just Account of the Work,
which (if occasion required) I will make an Affidavit of, who have no Interest
in mis-representing things, nor any other design than to do right to the Truth,
and to satisfy you how the matter really stands.

Sir, I am, Your most humble Servant, Richard Morris.


Though it cannot be doubted but this will give full Satisfaction of the truth
of this matter, yet at the request of some of the Adventurers, Mr. David Jones
now in London, having made the following Affidavit, it was not thought fit to
omit the same on this occasion.

David Jones of the Parish of Laubadarn Vawr, in the County of Cardigan Gent.
makes Oath, That on the second day of March last past, he this Deponent did go
to the Mines of Bwlchyr- Eskir-Hyr, in the County of Cardigan; late of Sir
Carbery Pryse, and now belonging to Sir Humphrey Mackworth and Partners, and
(amongst other things) did there particularly view a new Work, or Vein of Oar,
lately discovered in the Bog Eastward from the great Work, and about 120 Yards
Westward from the Bogwork, and did carefully measure the said Vein in the
deepest part thereof, and found it to be three Yards eight Inches deep, or
thereabouts, and four Foot three Inches broad in Oar; and also, that the said
Vein did gain one Foot more in Oar into the Sparr-rider; and further, that the
said Vein of Oar, was then opened and barred to the Surface of the Ground, for
ten Yards two Foot in length, or thereabouts, which was the Largest and most
Glorious sight of Oar that this Deponent ever saw or heard of, so near the
Surface of the Ground; and this Deponent further says, that the Sample of the
Oar lately delivered by this Deponent to Sir Humphrey Mackworth at his Chambers
in Lincoln's Inn, was taken up by this Deponent out of the Oar of the said Vein,
and that he verily believes that the Oar in the said Vein, will generally hold
as good as the same he so delivered to Sir Humphry Mackworth, as aforesaid.

David Jones
Jurat 3o. Die April Ann. Dom. 1700. Coram me Magistro Cancil. Tho. Pit.

Rich. Morris to W. Pugh, Esquire March 24.
THe new Discovery at Bwlchyr-Eskir-Hyr widens downwards, and that which was
hard Oar at the top, cuts out to good Potters Oar; they will lengthen their
work above double in a short time.

Mr. Waller to the Committee, March 26.
THe new Discovery continues to widen downwards, and the Spar-rider under cuts
in good Oar, so that I continue my hopes, that the said Oar which is three
Yards wide will be all Oar at our Level, for it is altered strangely in four
Yards driving; it is all white Spar at the Surface, and at four Yards deep, the
Sun-side of it is very fine Oar near two Foot wide in some places.

In Curtis Drift, the Sparks of Oar increase from one Hundred to two Hundred
weight of fine Potters Oar; this Vein is now above five Yards wide.

I am Timbering the Shaft to the Great Work, and shall raise Oar there as soon
as I have it in Order. -- I have sent to Darbyshire for more Miners. --

April the 2d.
Curtis-Vein continues its Sparks in large Lumps of pure Oar, and they increase
upon us, so that I expect them in a short time to take a set in a firm Rib of
Oar. This Bog will prove a wonderful rich Work; the Vein is near six Yards
wide, and all thrown with Lumps of this fine Oar, and this is but seven Yards
from the Surface, and we are going upon the Rise of our Sills. --

Our new Discovery still widens downward, we are troubled with Water and cannot
raise much Oar yet, but when Curtis-Drift is carried home to it, we shall then
double and treble our Men in raising Oar there. --

We have not half so much Water in the Great Work as we use to have, we think
that the West level has met with some Crack in the Rocks that helps to drain
it; I am Timbering yet in the Shaft and expect more Miners. --

April the 9th.
Curtis-Vein increases in Oar, the new Work continues to widen downward, and we
have firm Ribs of Oar in the Spar-rider; when Curtis-drift is up, that will be
a rich Work indeed.

I am now beginning to raise Oar in the Great Work, but have no new Men come
yet; I will send my Man to the North for more Men, for I shall have room for a
great many in a little time.

April the 9th.
Mr. John Norman writ a Letter to Col. John Perry a Member of Parliament,
giving an account of the Mines to the same Effect as is above mentioned. --

Mr. Waller to the Committee, April 16th.
THe large Sparks of Oar Continue in Curtis-drift toward the new Work, which
will be as large as a Belly of Oar at the deepness of our Level. The new Work
continues to increase downward, and the Oar grows more soft: I am raising Oar
in the great Work, but have no more Men as yet. In Wallers-drift we have some
small Sparks of Oar, so I hope we grow near that Vein: The West Level is hard,
I suppose we are in the side of the Clay Vein, and when we are in that Vein, we
shall go briskly forward.

Mr. Simon Prys to Mr. D. Jones, Apr. 17.
YOu may acquaint the Committee, that the Work goes on Bravely, and the great
Vein mends upon it; so does likewise the new Vein which was discovered at their
going out of the Country, and I hope by the time the Masters come down, they
will find all the Works in a good Method and Posture.

Mr. Waller to the Committee in these words following, April 23d. 1700.
SInce mine of the 16th. I began a Shaft eight Yards North of the new Work, and
on the point where the large Sparks of Oar is got at seven Yards deep. But here
at three Yards deep in this new Shaft we struck upon the Quick Vein, so that
the bottom of it is, as if it were paved with good Potters Oar, and we have got
no side of it, so what widness it will reach till I see the sides, I cannot
inform you; we raised Oar of all sizes, from a Stone to 200 weight, and some so
large we could not remove till our Shaft is Timbered; this is what I expected,
for in mine of the 2d. of April, I told you we were going upon the rise of our
Sills, so that I doubt not but we shall reach here where it will take its set,
for here the Oar is gathered into one body, and is raised within three Yards of
the Surface. --

We are Sumping and driving in the new Work in good firm, mixed hard and soft
Oar, and the Spar-rider continues to under cut in Oar. I intend a Cross-drift
from the New Shaft bottom, which will be eight Yards, and will clear the new
Work of Water about nine Yards deep --

I told you in mine of the 9th. of April, that I was begun to sink at (e) in
the West Level; we are got about seven Yards deep, and there we are come to
Oar, it is not yet in a firm Rib, which a little sinking will bring it to.

We raise more Potters Oar out of the Great Work than formerly. It grows softer
the deeper we go, and our West Level will come thirty Yards under our Soles, so
that it may be much softer at our Level; however, we can raise it upwards when
our Levels comes up, as fast as we please, or as fast as it can be drawn.

The West Level is not so hard as it was, we have no other alteration in any
part of our Works.

As to raising of Oar, I have done what was possible in the Winter Time, the
Water being so strong upon us, that we were not able to sink down our Sumps
till the Weather grows Warmer, that the Men may be able to work naked in the
Water; But as soon as Curtis-Drift is driven home, and a Sump sunk into the
Level, and a few Stages made, I shall quickly make you amends. I have such a
glorious Sight before me, that I am in the Condition of Tantalus, and am
resolved to work Night and Day till I have cleared the Works of Water: But I
hope, Patience will not be so great a Task now your Victory is in Prospect, as
it was before. We have lately raised Oar in several Places, but till I have
raised greater Quantities, did not think it worth while to dress it up and
weigh it; for when the Works are in Order, and the Water Conquered, I shall
then raise more Oar in one Day, than I can now in one Month.

I have all Hands fully employed, and want more: And though, to please you, I
do now raise Oar before the Works are in Order, yet you will have more Profit
from what is left, than from what is now raised before the Levels are up.

Gent', I beg your Pardon for this tedious Letter, and hope you will believe me.

Honored SIRS, Your Honors most Obedient, Humble Servant, Will. Waller.

Mr. Turner came in with his Ship last Saturday Night.
The Smelting and Refining at Neath, is carried on with all the Diligence and
care that can be expected; several Ships being employed to carry oar to Coal,
and Coal to Oar, round the South Coast of Wales. And some Improvements have
been lately made in the Art of separating Silver from Lead; which it is hoped
will tend to the great Advantage of the Nation, as well as of this Company.

Sir Humphry Mackworth has lately ordered a Pair of strong Floodgates to be
placed at the Mouth of the Canal lately cut by him from the River of Neath,
whereby Vessels of 100 Tons may come up and discharge at the Crane, within Four
Hundred Yards of the Smelting and Refining-Houses; he has also erected a
Red-Lead Mill, a large Court with a high Wall, a Compting-House, and other
Conveniences: And we have Two Ship-Loading of Lead and Lytharge ready to come
from Neath to London; and have received an Account that the Ship called the
Tichfield, Henry Gilbert Master, is sailed from the Port of Neath, bound for
London, and freighted with Lead and Lytharge of Lead, for the Use of the
Company.

This Account is such as needs no Explanation, the Mines beginning now to speak
for themselves, with more proper Arguments than can be expressed in Writing;
and the Committee having thus discharged their trust by giving a true Relation
of the Matters of Fact, do leave every Adventurer to use his own Judgment in
the Construction of them.

By Order of the Committee. Fr. Pigot, Sec'


