Some had yr hands struck off and hanged others beheaded. Some hanged and
quartered (...) Some Tortured by bools thumbkins firematches.

Some taken and instantly shot in (...) fields. Some banished, others perished
in shipwreck. women hanged, others drowned of stakes in the sea



A Hind let loose, OR An Historical Representation of the TESTIMONIES, Of the
Church of Scotland, for the Interest of Christ, with the true State thereof in
all its Periods: TOGETHER WITH A Vindication of the present Testimony, against
the Popish, Prelatical, and Malignant Enemies of that Church, as it is now
stated for the Prerogatives of Christ, Privileges of the Church, and Liberties
of Mankind, and sealed by the sufferings of a Reproached Remnant of
Presbyterians there, witnessing against the Corruptions of the Time.

WHEREIN Several Controversies of Greatest Consequence are enquired into, and
in some measure cleared; concerning hearing of the Curats, owning of the
present Tyranny, taking of ensnaring Oaths and Bonds, frequenting of field
meetings, Defensive Resistance of Tyrannical Violence, with several other
Subordinate Questions useful for these times.

By a Lover of true Liberty.

Psalm. 94. 20. Shall the Throne of iniquity have fellowship with Thee that
frames mischief by a Law? Prove. 28. 15. As a roaring Lion and a ranging Bear
so is a wicked Ruler over the poor people. Hos. 8. 4. They have set up Kings
but not by me, they have made Princes and I knew it not. Revel. 12. 11. And
they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb and by the word of their Testimony
and they loved not their Lives unto the Death. Printed in the Year MDCLXXXVII.

The Preface to the Reader.
Christian Reader,
PResuming it is thy desire, to answer the holy and honorable designation I
accost thee with, I shall take the Confidence to assure thee, it is my design
to answer in some measure the expectation, which the Title of this Treatise
would offer; in the hope, that, wherein I come short (as I indeed confess not
only my jealous fears, but my sensible conviction of my insufficiency for such
a great undertaking) thy Christian tenderness will impute it to my weakness,
and not to any want of worth in the Cause I manage; which is truly worthy,
weighty, noble, and honorable, in the esteem of all the Lovers of Christ, that
have Zeal for his Honor in exercise: And therefore as it gives me all the
encouragement I have, in dependence on his furniture, whose Cause it is, to
make such an Essay; So it animates my ambition, albeit I cannot manage it with
any proportion to its merit, yet to move the Christian Reader to make enquiry
about it, and then sure I am he will find it is Truth I plead for, though my
plea be weak. All I shall further say by way of Preface is to declare the
Reason of the Title and the design of the work.

Though Books use not to be required to render a reason of their names, which
often are arbitrarly imposed, more for the Authors fancy, and the times fashion
than for the readers Instruction: yet, seeing the times injuries do oblige the
Author to conceal his name, the Title will not obscurely notify it to some, for
whose satisfaction this is mainly intended, and signify also the Scope of the
subject; which aims at giving goodly words, not suggared with Parasitick
sweetness, nor painted with affected pedantry, but fairly brought forth in
unhampered freedom, for the beauty of the blessing of humane and Christian
Liberty, in its due and true boundaries. This was the subject of a discourse,
as some may remember, on that Text whence this Title is taken Genesis 49. 21.
Naphtali is a hind let loose: In prosecuting of which, the Speaker with several
others, falling at the same time into the hands of the hunters, to learn the
worth of that interrupted subject from the experience of the want of it; an
occasion was given, and interpreted by the Author to be a Call, to study more
the preciousness of that privilege predicated of Naphtali, which is the right
an^ property of the wrestling Tribe of Israel, the persecuted witnesses of
Christ now every where preyed upon: And now, providence having opened a door,
for delivering himself as a roe from the hand of the hunter, he thought it his
duty, and as necessary a piece of service as he could do to the Generation, to
bring to light his Lucubrations thereupon: With an endeavor to discover, to
all that are free born, and are not contented slaves mancipated in a stupid
subjection to Tyrants absoluteness; that, this Character of Naphtali, satisfied
with favor and full with the blessing of the Lord, that he is a hind let loose
from the yoke of Tyrannical slaverie, is far preferable, in the account of all
that understand to be Christians or men, to that infamous Stigma of Issachar
(the sin, shame, and misery of this age) to be a strong Ass couching under two
burdens, and he saw that rest was good, and the Land that it was pleasant, and
bowed his shoulder to bear, and became a servant unto tribute. But to all that
are not altogether strangers in our Israel it will appear, that this Title is
not ineptly applied to the subject and design of this Treatise. The party,
whose Case and Cause and Contendings are here treated of, being known to have
the same situation of residence in Scotland, that Naphtali had in Israel, viz.
the West and the South (Deuteronomy. 33. 23.) will be found, among all our Tribes,
most appositely to bear the signature of Naphtali, who, in their wrestlings for
the Interest of Christ and the Liberties of his Israel, have mostly jeoparded
their lives in the high places of the fields; and chiefly to deserve his Elogy,
being a hind (called wild by nickname in the scorn of them that are at ease,
but) truly weak in their present wilderness Condition, to wrestle against the
force and fraud of their Cruel and cunning hunters, who cease not (when they
have now got the rest of the Roes and hinds of the field made fast asleep,
under the bondage of the Lions dens and Mountains of Leopards, by a pretense of
a falsely so called Liberty of Conscience) to seek and pursue the chase of them
for a prey; Yet, really they are let loose, and not only suffered to run loose,
as a prey to the hunters by the unwatchfullness of their keepers, but made to
escape loose, by the mercy of the Mighty one of Jacob, from the nets of the
hunters, and snares of the foulers, and from the yoke of the bondage of these
beasts of prey, to whose Authority they will not oune a willing subjection: And
being such hinds, so let loose, they make it their work, to give goodly words,
for the worth and honor and Royalties of their Princely Master, and for the
precious Liberties wherewith he has endoted and entrusted his Spouse and
Children, and to keep the goodly words of his patience, until he return as a
Roe or a young Heart upon the Mountains of Bether. This being the party, who are
represented as the Wild folk of Scotland, the design of this Treatise is to
hold forth the History of their manifold Chases, the Craft, keenness, and
Cruelty of their hunters, and the goodlyness of the words of their Testimony:
Which, by reason of the likeness of the Testimony of former Periods with the
present, and that the latter may be vindicated by the former, is resumed from
the beginning of the Church of Scotlands wrestlings against the Enemies of
Christ, and deduced through all the most signal steps of this long propagated
and hereditary War. And lest my words should not be goodly enough, nor my
notions grateful to the Critics of this age, who cast every thing as new and
nice, which is someway singular and not suited to their sentiments; that it may
appear the Cause here cleared and vindicated is not of yesterday, but older
than their Grandfathers who oppose it, I dare avouch without vanity, there is
nothing here but what is confirmed by Authors of greatest note and repute in
our Church, both ancient and modern, namely, Buchanan, Knox, Calderwood, Acts
of General Assemblies, Cawses of Wrath, Lex Rex, Apologetical Relation,
Napthali, Ius Populi, History of the Indulgence, Banders disbanded, Rectius
Instruendum, and some other Authors much respected: whose Authority, more
always repelled by rage than ever yet resisted by reason, though I value more,
than all the vain oblatrations of the Opposers of this Testimony, and think it
sufficient to confute all imputations of its Novelty, and to counterballance
the weight that may be laid on the Contradictions of the greatest that treat on
this subject: Yet I do not lay so much stress on the reason of their Authority,
as on the Authority of their reason; which is here represented with that Candor
and Care, that, lest any should cavil that they are wrested or wronged, when
made to speak so patly to the present Controversies, I have chosen rather to
transcribe their words, than to borrow their matter dressed up in my own;
except where the prolixity and multiplicity of their Arguments, as clearly
demonstrating that which I adduce them for as that for which they were primarly
intended, did impose the necessity of abridging them; which yet is mostly in
their oun words, though reduced into a Syllogistical form. But this obloquie
of Novelty being anticipated, when I reflect on the helps I have collected from
so many hands, I am rather afraid, the Truths here delivered be comtemned as
obsolete and antiquate, than cast at for new speculations. However I am
content, yea it is my ambition that nothing here be looked upon as mine, but
that it may appear, this is an old Plea; and that the party here pleaded for,
who are stigmatized with many singularities, are a people, who ask the old
paths and the good way, that they may walk therein; and though their paths be
not now much paved, by the frequency of passengers, and multitude of Professors
walking therein; and albeit it must indeed be confessed, the word of their
Testimony is some way singular, that the same things were never the word of
Christ's patience, stated as heads of suffering before; yet they are not
untroden paths, but the same way of Truth, which has been maintained by the
witnesses of Christ in all the Periods of our Church, and asserted by the
greatest Confessors, though never before sealed by Martyrs. As for the
Arguments I bring to clear and confirm them, whether they be accounted mine or
borrowed from others, I am very indifferent; if they prove the point they are
brought for, which I hope they will be sound to do: But of this ^ am confident,
there is nothing here can be condemned, until some one or more of those grave
Authors be confuted, and when that is done (which will be ad Calendas Graecas,
or against the 30. of February) there is something besides here which will
challenge Consideration.

The design then of this work is of great importance: even no less than to
essay, the discussing the difficulties of all our Conflicts with open Enemies,
about the present state of the Testimony; the vindicating of all the heads of
sufferings sustained thereupon, these 27 years past; the proposing of the right
state of the Testimony for the Interest of Christ, not only of this but of all
former Periods; with an account of the propagation and prosecution of the
witnessings, wrestlings, and sufferings for it from time to time; to the end it
may appear, not only how great the sufferings have been, since this fatal
Catastrophe and overturning of the Covenanted Reformation, and unhappie
restoration of Tyranny and Prelacie; but that the grounds, upon which they
have been stated, are not niceties and novelties (as they are reproached and
reputed by many) but worthy and weighty Truths of great value and validity,
and of near affinity unto and Conformity with the continued series and
succession of the Testimonies in all former Periods. So that in this little
Treatise must be contained, a Compendious History of the Church of Scotland
her Testimony in all ages, a vindication of the present state of it, yea in
effect a short Epitome of the substance of those famous forecited Authors, as
far as we need to consult them concerning the Controversies of the present time
with Adversaries: Which is much, and perhaps too much, to be undertaken in so
small a volume. But considering, that many who are concerned in this Cause, yea
the most part who concern themselves about it, are such who have neither access
nor time nor capacity to revolve the voluminous Labors of these Learned men,
for light in this Case; I have done my best, to bring them into one body of a
portable bulk, with as great brevity as could consist well with any measure of
perspicuity; Not meddling with any thing, but what I thought might some way
conduce to clear some part of the present Testimony.

Every undertaking of this nature, cannot but be liable to several
disadvantages that are unavoidable, this has many discouraging and difficult.
One is, that it shall be exposed to the Common fate of such representations, to
be stigmatized as a seditious Libel, and so may be sent to the flames to be
confuted; and to inflame the fury of these firebrands, already hell-hot, into
the utmost extremity of rage against the Author, that ever Cruelty it self at
its fullest freedom did exert, against Truth and reason arraigned and cast for
Sedition and Treason: The only Sanctuary in such a Case is, in prospect of
this, to have the greater care, that nothing be spoken, but what the Speaker
may dare to affirm in the face of Cruelty it self. A Second common disadvantage
is obvious from the Consideration of the humor of the Age, wherein fancy has
greater force than faith, and nothing is pleasing but what is parasitical, or
attempered to the palate of the Greatest not of the best; And naked Truth,
without the fairdings of flattery, or paintings of that pakiness which is
commonly applauded as prudence now adays, is either bogled at or exposed to
scorn and Contempt; and reason, if roundly written, except it meet with an
honest heart, is commonly read with a stammering mouth, which puts a T before
it, and then it is stumbled at as Treason: This Essay does expect no
Entertainment from any, but such who resolve to harbor Truth be the hazard
what will, even when the world raises the Hue and Cry after it, and from such
who are really groaning, either by suffering or Sympathy, under the same
grievances here represented. There is a Third which makes it not a little
difficult, the quality, quantity, and intricacy of the matter, here to be
confined to such a Compend. All which together considered, do infer a fourth
difficulty, that hardly can it get a pass through the Press; which is blocked
up against all such books, that may offer a manifestation of the innocence of
that people, and the injustice and inhumanity of their enemies; which is their
only hope of preventing the worlds knowledge and condemnation of their actings.
Yea there is a fifth, that wants not its own difficulty, that though the Press
were patent, yet an empty Purse, from a poor impoverished people, will as
readily preclude all access to it, as if it were locked up by Law; but both
together make it hard. But there is a sixth disadvantage yet more discouraging,
that the man as well as the money is wanting to manage the business: And this
needs no other proof, than the necessity of my poor pen to undertake it,
instead of a better. It must needs be very low with that people, that stand in
need of such a pitiful patrociny as mine is. Our persecuted brethren elsewhere,
have this advantage of us, that they have Champions to espouse their quarrel,
which we have not; but only such, who, as they are reputed in the world, so in
their own sense, own themselves to be very unaccomplished for such work; and
under this invincible disadvantage also, that, being forced to a wandering and
unsettled life, they have no convenience, nor can be accommodated with time nor
helps to perform it; and so circumstantiated, that either it must be done at
this time, and in this manner, or not at all. In the seventh place, we are at a
greater loss than any suffering people, in that among all other bitter
ingredients we have this Gall also in our Cup, that they that suffer most among
us have not the comfort and benefit of the Sympathy of others, that sufferers
use to have from good people. The reason of this makes an Eight discouragement,
besides what is said above; that not only is the Case and Cause of that poor
persecuted and wasted Witnessing Remnant obscure in it self, and not known in
the world, nay not so much as in the very neighboring Churches of England and
Ireland; but also more obscured by the malice of Enemies, traducing,
calumniating, and reproaching that righteous Remnant whom they intend to ruin;
not indeed as Heretics (which is the case of other suffering Churches, wherein
they have the advantage of us also, that tho the name be more odious, yet it
makes the notion of their Cause and the nature of their enemies more notour,
and is more effectual to conciliate Sympathy from all that know, that
Protestants are persecuted by Papists under the notion of Heretics; But we are
at a loss in this, that our Persecuters, at least the most part of the
Executioners of the Persecution, will not as yet avouch that Protestanism is
Heresy, though we want not this Nickname likewise from the Chief of them,
that are professed Papists) but as Schismatics, Seditious, Rebels, Traitors,
Murderers, holding Principles inconsistent with Government (to wit, their
Tyranny) and the peace of humane Society (to wit, their Association against
Religion and liberty) and therefore to be exterminated out of the world. And
this Imposture covering all their mischiefs, has prevailed so far with the
blinded world, that under this brand the Consideration of their Case and Cause
is buried, without farther inquiry. This were yet more tolerable from open
enemies; if there were not another more pressing discouragement in the Ninth
place, peculiar to them in Scotland; that having to do with treacherous as well
as Truculent Enemies, as they have been much destroyed by open force, so much
more by fraud: while by ensnaring favors some have been flattered from the
Testimony, others disdaining and suspecting, as well as deprived of and
secluded from, these favors, have s^uck to it; hence Defection brought on
Division, and Division Confusion, which has reduced the Reformation to a
ruinous heap. In the next place, as the Consequent of the former, while the
purer Remnant have been resolutely prosecuting the Testimony, and not only
keeping themselves free of, and standing at the surthest distance from, all
degrees of Compliance, but also witnessing against their Brethren involved in
them, and thinking it their duty to discountenance them in these Corruptions
and backslidings; they have been therefore reproached and misrepresented very
industriously, as Ignorant, imprudent, transported with blind Zeal,
Extravagant, wild, Separatists, espousing new and nice notions, Rejecters of
the Ministry, Imposers on the Ministry, Denyers of all Government, Usurpers of
an imaginary Government of their oun, that died as fools, and as guilty of
their oun blood. By which odious and invidious obloquies, they have easily
prevailed with many, both at home and abroad, that are more credulous than
considerate, to believe these things of them: Hence, with prejudicate people a
contrary Representation will find difficult acceptance. However this Moreover
is another great disadvantage, and renders an Essay to vindicate their
sufferings very uneasy, that they are thrust at and tosted on both hands, by
Enemies and professed friends: And by Enemies, that are not all Papists: but
professed Protestants, ouning the same fundamentalls in opinion, though in
practice not holding the same Head: And by friends, that not only are
Protestants, but Presbyterians, under the bonds of the same Solemn and Sacred
Covenants, the obligation whereof they still oune; And not only so, but such,
whose Piety and Godliness cannot be doubted. This is a Gravamen grievous to
bear, and greatly aggravates the difficulty. Finally, the greatest of all is,
that not only their Cause is rendered odious, but must be confessed truly to be
odd and someway singular; and therefore will seem strange and surprising to
Strangers, to hear an account of extraordinary sufferings for and upon
extraordinary Causes, which never were formerly stated as heads of suffering.
For now it is the Dragons chiefest stratagem with us, like to be the most
subtle, ensnaring, and successful of any, that ever he set on work since ever
he began this War with the Lamb, (which yet I hope will prove as fatal to his
Interest as the former) to bring the sufferings of Christ's witnesses to such a
state, that may seem to spectators little or nothing relative to Religion, that
so he may destroy both them and their Testimony unlamented, and by that Trick
divert others from concerting that same necessary witness in the season
thereof. And for this end he will change both matter and manner, in managing
the War. He will not now persecute for the old Controverted heads of Popery,
with fire and faggot as formerly, for refusing to worship Our Lady, or the
blessed Sacrament of the Altar. These weapons and Engines are so worn out of
use, that they will not work now as they did before. And that old Baud of
Babylon is become so ugly and out of date, that he does not believe her beauty
can be so bewitching, except she put on a new busk. But her Eldest Daughter,
the Prelatical Church, of the same Complexion with herself, except that she is
colored with Protestant paint, is fitter for his service, to allure our Land
into fornication; And who will not be entyced, must be forced to Communion with
her, by finings, confynings, exactions, extortions, and impositions of Oaths
etc. Religion must be little concerned here: for there is Preaching enough, and
of Protestant Doctrine too, and without the Monkie-Tricks, and Montebank
shows, and fopperies of English-Popish Ceremonies, and Lyturgical services:
What would they be at? Is it not better to yield to this, than to fall into the
hand of the Scotish-Spanish-Inquisition, that will rack the Purse, the Body,
and Conscience, and all? This is one Complex head of suffering, and thought a
very small one by many. But now finding this would not do his business yet, it
looked too like Religion still: He has therefore invented a new Machin: He
will not now Persecute, nor force the Conscience at all (so good natured is the
Devil and his Lieutenant grown, in their old age) for matters of mere
Religion. Nay (if we may believe him, who when he speaks a lie speaks it of
his own) he has not done it this long time, but only, in all the violent
Courses exercised against these Sufferers, he has been Magistratically
chastising the disobedience and rebellion, of a few turbulent Traitors, who
would not oune the Government. And thus under the notion of Rebellion, and
disouning Authority, he has had access and success to destroy almost an
innumerable number of honest and innocent, faithful and fruitful, lovers of
Christ; who though indeed they have had their sufferings stated upon those
points, yet I doubt not shall be found among the followers of the Lamb, and
Confessors and Martyrs of Christ, who have overcome by the blood of the Lamb
and the word of their Testimony, not loving their lives unto the Death, whose
blood is crying for vengeance against the shedders thereof, And He will make
inquisition for it, when He comes to overturn, overturn, and take His own
right, for which they have been Contending. Nevertheless this is a prejudice
too prevalent with many, to misregard the Case and Cause of these Contenders,
or any thing that can be said to represent them favourablie. And all these
disadvantages, difficulties, and discouragements together considered, would
soon cool my Courage, and at first blush make me leave off before I begin, were
I not persuaded that it is the Cause of Christ these reproached people are
suffering for, and that their great sufferings and reproaches are both alike
unjust, from both which the Lord will vindicate them, and bring forth their
righteousness as the light and their judgment as the noon day, ^n His oun time.
In confidence of which, depending on his Conduct, I shall undertake, as
briefly as is possible for me, to represent their case, and clear the Cause, so
far at least as concerns their Contest with their pesecuting Enemies, wi^h
whom I only deal at present; it not being my purpose to descend particularly
into their necessitated Contendings with Complying Brethren, partly because
they would make the volume to excresce unto too great a bulk, and because they
are to be seen elsewhere; yet in effect these also are not only here
narratively deduced, but whatever is odious in them is vindicated, and what
is difficult in some measure enodated.

But it may be expected and desiderated, that I should give a distinct
deduction of all the Steps of this woeful defection, against which a great part
of the Testimony has been stated: but I would have the Reader advertised, I
touch only that part of the Testimony which has been sealed by severe
sufferings from enemies. It were a Task transcending my Capacity, and a Theme
wherein I have no pleasure, besides that it is inconsistent with my Leisure, to
enlarge upon such a sad and shameful subject: Though the world indeed is at a
loss, that they that would do it cannot, and they that would and should do it
will not; And it is a greater loss, not only to Scotland, but also to the whole
Christian world, that what has been done in this kind already cannot see the
light, or rather that the Church of Christ is deprived of its light, which
through the injury of the times, and the disingenuous Prudence of some, who
suffer themselves to be imposed upon by the Patrons of Defection, is embezilled
and suppressed. I mean that excellent and faithful History of Defection, the
posthumous work of famous Mr. M'ward, whose praise is in the Churches: which if
they that have it in keeping, would do themselves the honor, and the world the
happiness, of publishing it, there would be no more need to discover, from
whence, to what, and how, that Church has fallen and degenerate; nor so great
dissicultie in that indisputable and indispensable duty that such a day calls
for, in searching and trying our ways to the end we may turn again to the
Lord; Nor any necessity for my poor essay, to invite and incite the people of
the lord to take Cognizance and Compassion of poor perishing Scotland. I wish
that they who have it, may consult more their oun duty and credit, and what
they owe to the memory of the dead, the Churches edification, the days
Testimony, and the honor of Christ, than to continue robbing the world of such
a Treasure; which I doubt not to call Treason against Christ, and Sacrilege
against the Church, and stick not to tell them, if they will not publish it,
the world must know there was such a thing done. But it not being my design
now, to detect or reflect upon all the defections of that declining, and by
declensions divided, and by divisions almost (only not) destroyed Church; I
shall meddle with them no further, than what is necessary to clear the cause;
refering the knowledge and account of them, either to the Notoriety of the
grossest of them, or to the more particular enarration of them, to be found in
papers emitted and published by the Contenders against them: Of which one is
of this same years edition, entitled, The Informatory vindication of a poor,
wasted, misrepresented Remnant, etc. In which may be evident, that
notvvithstanding of all this darkness and distress, defection and division,
under which the Church of Scotland has been so long and is still laboring,
there is yet a poor waste, vvounded, rent and almost ruined, but still
wrestling and witnessing Remnant, of Professors and Confessors of Christ
there, who though they have not only had their soulls exceedingly filled with
the scorning of those that are at ease and with the contempt of the proud, but
their bodies also killed all day long and counted as sheep for the slaughter,
have yet through grace endeavored to overcome by the blood of the Lamb and the
word of their Testimony, and have not loved their lives dear unto the death,
and have continued to this day contending both against Professed Enemies, and
also declining friends, sustaining from both the utmost of rage and reproach.
And since that little book gives an account, what their Conten^ings have been
against their backdravving brethren on the right and left hand, I shall spare
labor to offer a discussion of them, only endeavor to make it not difficult
to decide and determine, on whose side Truth lies, by what is here hinted.

I shall conclude, with advertising the Reader of one thing further; that, as
this Reproached people, for whose Testimony I am pleading, is now the only
party that is persecuted in Scotland (some fevv excepted; who are exempted
from the pretended favor of the current Indemnities) and their persecution
still continues, notvvithstanding of the impudent as well as insnaring
Declarations of Universal Liberty to all Dissenters, which they look upon as
their honor and happiness, to be thought incapable of Tyrannical and
Antichristian favors; So their past and present oppressions and sufferings are
only here in general agregated described as to their kinds, and vindicated as
to their causes: the particular deduction of their number, weight, and
measure; of their names that have been martyred and murdered, both by formality
of Law and without all formality of Law, by Sea and Land, City and Country,
on Scaffolds and in the fields; of the manner of their sufferings; and of the
form of their Trialls and Testimonies, being intended shortly (if the Lord
will) to be emitted and published in a book by it self; which vvil discover
to the world as rare instances of the injustice, illegality, and inhumanity of
the Scottish Inquisition, and of the innocence, zeal, ingenuity, and patience of
the vvitnesses of Christ, as readily can be instanced in these latter ages.
Only here is a taste till more come: which if the Lord shall bless for its
designed end, the Glory of God, the vindication of Truth, the information and
satisfaction of all Serious Sympathisers with Zions sorrovves, and the
Conviction or Confutation of Reproachers, so far at least as to make them
surcease from their invidious charges of things whereof the innocence is here
vindicated, I have obtained all my design, and shall desire to give the Lord
the praise.

To fill up the vacancy of this page, it will not be unprofitable for the
Reader, to cast his eye upon these Sentences of Great Authors, which relate to
some heads of the following discourse.
Erasm. Ut Atagen, alias vocalis, captus obiuutescit, ita quibusdam servitus
adimit vocem, qui liberi loquuntur libere. Nazianzen. Melius est pro pietate
dissidium, quam concordia fucata. Bernard. Si autem de veritate sumitur
scandalum, utilius est ut scandalum oriatur, quam veritas relinquatur. Bracton.
Rex est qui been regit, Tyramius qui populum opprimit. Cicero. Amittit is omne
imperii jus, qui e^ imperio Rempublicam oppugnat. Aristot. Qui legi paret, is
Deo and legi paret; qui Regi, homini and belluae. Sweton. Sub paena perjurii
non tenentur fidem fervare Regi degeneri. Ambros. Qui non repellit a socio
injuriam, si potest, tam est in vitio quam ille qui facit. Chamier. At Cives
omnes jus habent insurgendi contra Tyrannos, qui vi aperta regna occupant.
Barclai. Contra Monarchom. Tyrannos, ut hosts publicos, non solum ab universo
populo, sed a singulis etiam, impeti caedique, jure optimo posse, tota
Antiquitas censuit. AN Historical Representation OF THE TESTIMONIES OF THE
Church of Scotland, With the true state of the same in all the Periods thereof.
WITH A Vindication of the present Testimony.
THe Church of Christ, in the impression of all that have the least spark of
the days Spirit, is now brought to such a doleful and dreadful Case and
Crisis; that if it may not be reckoned The killing of the Witnesses: yet all
that have or desire the knowledge of the times, will judge it no impeachment to
the Prophecy to say, it is either very like or near unto it. When now the
Devil is come down in great wrath as knowing his time is but short, and
therefore exerting all the energy of the venom and violence, Craft and Cruelty
of the Dragon: And Antichrist, alias Pope, his Captain General, is now
universally prevailing, and plying all his hellish Engines, to batter down, and
bury under the rubbish of Everlasting Darkness, what is left to be destroyed of
the work of Reformation: And the Crowned heads or horns of the Beast, the
Tyrants, alias Kings, of Europe, his Council of War, are advancing their
Prerogatives upon the ruins of the Nations and Churches Privileges, to such a
pitch of Absoluteness; and improving and employing their power, for promoving
their Masters (the Devil and Antichrists) Interests, to whom they have gifted
the Churches, mancipated their own, and sacrificed the Nations Interest; and
that with such combination of Counsels, and Countenance of providential
success, that all the Powers of Hell, the Principalities of Earth, and the
Providence of Heaven, overruling all things for the accomplishment or the
Divine purpose, and purchase, and prediction, seem to conspire to produce that
prodigious Period, and ultimus Conatus of the Churches Enemy. And the
commencement is so far advanced, that, now in all the Churches of Europe,
either the Witnesses of Christ are a killing, or the witness for Christ is in a
great measure killed; either the followers of the Lamb, who are cal^ed and
chosen and faithful, are killed for their Testimony, or fainting in their Zeal,
and falling from their first Love, they are cooled or cajoled from their
Testimony. Some are indulging themselves in their ease, settleing on their
Lees, and sleeping in a stupid security; And, while the Lord is roaring from
above, and His and their Enemies raging about them, and designing to raze them
after they have ruined their Neighbors, they are rotting away under the
destructive Distempers of detestable Neutrality, loathsome lul^warmness,
declining and decaying in Corruptions, defections, divisions, distractions,
confusions, and so judicially infatuated with darkness and delusions, that they
forget and forgo the necessary Testimony of the day. Others again, outwearied
with the length and weight of the Trial, under the tentation of Antichrists
formidable strength on the one hand, and a deceitful prospect of an insnaring
Liberty on the other, are overcome either to be hectored or flattered from
their Testimony. And so in these Churches, comprehending all that are free from
Persecution at this time, the Witness for Christ is in a great measure killed.
Other Churches, which are keeping and contending for the word of Christ's
patience, are so wasted. and almost worn out, with Persecutions, afflictions,
and calamities, that, after they have been and are (so much) daily killed for
the Word of God, and the Testimony of Jesus, it may well be said, there has
been and is a great slaughter of the Witnesses. And it were hard to determine,
which of them can give the largest and most lamentable account of their
sufferings, or which of them have had the greatest and most grievous
experiences, of the Treachery and Truculency, Violence and Villainy, of
Atheistical and Papistical Enemies: whether the Reformed Church of France,
howling under the paw of that devouring Lion, the French Tyrant; or the
Protestants of Hungary, under the tearing Claws of that ravenous Eagle the
Tyrant of Austria; or those of Piedemont, under the grassant Tyranny of that
little Ty^er of Savoy. The accounts they give in print, the reports they bring
with them in their flight from their respective Countries, and the little Hints
we have in Gazetts and News Letters, must needs enforce a conviction, if not
extort a Compassion, of the greatness of their pressures; and that with such a
parity, that it is doubtful which preponderats. I shall not make comparisons,
nor aggravate nor extenuate the sufferings of any of the Churches of Christ,
beyond or below their due measures: But will presume to plead, that Scotland,
another Ancient and sometimes famous Reformed Church, be enrolled in the
Catalogue of suffering Churches, besides these mentioned; and crave, that she
may have a share of that Charity and Sympathy, which is the demand and desire
of afflicted Churches of Christ, from all the fellow members of that same body:
And so much the rather is this her due; that, whereas among all the rest of the
Churches, Christ's witnesses are killed in some particular respect, and each of
them have their own proper complaint of it; some upon the account of
Persecution, some of defection, division etc. Of this it may be said, in all
respects, both the witnesses of Christ, and a witness for Christ, are killed
with a witness. This is the Case of the sometimes Renouned, famous, faithful,
and fruitful, Reformed, Covenanted Church of Scotland, famous for unity,
faithful for verity, fruitful in the purity of Doctrine, Worship, Discipline,
and Government; which now, for these 27 years past, under the Domination of the
late Tyrant and present Usurper of Britain, has been so wasted with
oppression, wounded with Persecution, rent with Division, ruined with
defection, that now she is as much despised, as she was before admired: And her
Witness and Testimony for Reformation, is now as far depressed and suppressed
in obscurity as it was formerly declared and depredicated in glory and honor.
And yet, which should move the greater commiseration, her witnessings and
wrestlings, Trials and Tentations, have not been inferior, in manner or
measure, quality or continuance, to any of the forementioned Churches, tho in
extent not so great, because her precinct is not so large, whereby the number
of her oppressed and murdered Children could not be so multiplied, though her
Martyrs be more, and the manner of their Murder more illegal, than can be
instanced in any of them, during that time. A particular enumeration or
enarration whereof, cannot be here exhibited, but is referred and reserved to a
peculiar Treatise of that Subject, which ere long the world may see. Only I
shall give a compendious account of the kinds and causes, grounds and Heads, of
their sufferings, who have been most slighted and least sympathised with,
though they have sustained the greatest severities of any; and inend endeavor
to vindicate the Merit of their Cause, in the most principal heads upon which
their sufferings have been stated: Whereby it will appear to impartial men,
that will not be imposed upon, there has been, and yet is, a great and
grievous, and some way uparalleled, Persecution in Scotland, at least inferior
to none: Which has not hitherto been culy considered, with any proportion to
the importance thereof.

But tho this be the Scope, it is not the sum of what is intended in this
Discourse. The Method I have proposed to prosecute it withal, will discover
it: Which is. 1. To give a brief and summary account, of the Series and
Succession, success and result, of the several Contendings of the Witnesses of
Christ, against His Enemies in Scotland from time to time; that it may appear;
whether or not the present sufferings as now stated can be condemned, if the
former be approven. 2. To rehearse some of the chief means, methods, and
measures, that the Popish, Prelatical, and Malignant saction, have managed, for
the ruin of this witnessing Remnant, and some of the most signal steps of
sufferings sustained by and from these within these 27 years; by which it will
appear, that the Persecution in Scotland has been very remarkable (though
little regarded) both in respect of the injustice, illegality, and inhumanity of
the Persecutors, and in respect of the innocence, Zeal, and ingenuity of the
Persecuted. 3. To clear the state and vindicate the merit of the cause of their
sufferings, as to the most material heads of it, that are most controverted at
this time. In the first of these, I must study all compendious brevity, as may
consist with the clearing of my Scope: which is not to enlarge an Historical
deduction, of the rise and result, progress and prosecution, occasion and
continuation, of every Controversy the Church has had with her several
Adversaries in several Periods; But only to hint at the chief Heads of their
contendings, with a design to make it appear; that the most material Heads of
sufferings that are now condemned, as new and nice notions, have been
transmitted from age to age, from the beginning even to this present time,
through all the Periods of this Church.

PERIOD. I.
Comprehending the Testimony of the Culdees.
IT is not without reason reckoned among the peculiar prerogatives of the
renouned Church of Scotland, that Christ's conquest in the conversion of that
Nation, is one of the most eminent Accomplishments of Scripture Prophecies, of
the propagation of His Kingdom in the New Testament Dispensation: Not only
because it was, when called out of Gentile Paganism, among the rudest of
Heathen Nations, and in the ackowledgment of all, among the uttermost parts of
the Earth, which were given to Christ for His inheritance and possession;
Whereunto He had, and has still, undoubted right, by His Fathers grant, and by
His oun purchase; and took Infeofment of it by a glorious conquest, of that
Land which the Roman Arms could never subdue, and erected His victorious
Trophies there, whither their Triumphs could never penetrate, obtaining and
thereby accomplishing that predicted Song of praise, From the uttermost parts
of the Earth have we heard Songs, even Glory to the righteous; Which gives us
groun^ to expect, that however Christ's Interest there be now very low, and like
to be lost as a prey in the Dragons Mouth, Yet Christ, having such undoubted
and manifold right to it, will not so easily quit or forego His possession: But
also because, He has so constantly continued His possession, and maintained
His Title, by a long course of Contendings, by the Testimonies of His
witnesses, against the Invaders thereof, through all the Periods of the Church,
from the very infancy of this new Dispensation: And because, Scotlands
conversion into the Christian Faith was among the first fruits of the Gentiles,
of the oldest date, that any standing Church holding the head Christ this day
can deduce its original from. For it is clear from Ancient Records, the
Christian Faith was embraced here, a few years after the Ascension of our
Savior, being taught by the Disciples of John the Apostle; and received
afterward great increment from the Brittons, flying to Scotland to escape the
Persecution of the Emperor Domitian, and was long promoted by the ancient
Culdees or Cultores Dei; men whose memory is still fragrant, for piety and
purity of faith and life, who continued some hundreds of years, under various
vicissitudes of Providence, before either Prelacy or Popery was known in
Scotland. They were first universally encouraged by King Cratilinth, in the
time of the last Persecution under Dioclesian, which brought many of Christ's
witnesses hither for Shelter, who were very helpful for the settling of Truth,
and the total extirpation of the Idolatry of the Druides, the Heathen Priests;
whereby the pure Doctrine, Worship, and Government also of Christ's Institution,
was established and continued many years, while these Witnesses of Christ had
no other emulation but of well doing and to advance Piety. In this Period,
these ancient and first Confessors and Witnesses of Christ, did wrestle
strenously, according to their strength and light, for the Truths and words of
Christ's patience, controverted in their day, both against professed Enemies
Pagan Persecutors and (...), and pretended friends corrupters of the Faith.
Their Testimony was stated, in a peculiar manner, for the verity, value, and
virtue of Christ's Natures and Offices, in (...) rel^^ive to either, against the
Malignants and Sectaries of their time: particularly for the concerns of His
Pr^phetical Office. And though we be at a loss, that for the most art their
witness is buried in oblivion, through the darkness of the times succeeding:
yet the scraps and fragments that are left, do furnish us with these few
Remarks.

I. They maintained the verity of the Christian Doctrine, against both Pagan
Persecutors, and Heretical perverters; And the purity of His instituted
worship, without the vanity of humane inventions, or conformity with, either
the Druides on the one hand, or the Heretics on the other: with which,
sometime before the end of that Period, they were in^ested: Chiefly the
Pelagians, with whom the faithful would have no communion, but abstracted
themselves in a Monastical life, liveing and exercising their Religion in
Cells, from whence many places in the Country yet retain the name, as
Kilmarnock, Kil-Patrick etc. that is the Cells of these eminent men among the
Culdees. And their Government also, was that of the primitive order without
Bishops, with little vanity, but great simplicity and holiness. Many Authors do
testity, that near about 400 years the Church of Scotland knew nothing of the
Episcopal Hierarchy, until Pa^adius brought it in, and not without great
opposition.

II. In these Recesses, they had the advantage, both of outward peace when
others were in trouble, and of inward peace of conscience, when others were
debauched with many conjurations, and abjurations, combinations and
confederacies, imposed and exacted by them that prevailed for the time: whereby
they might both keep themselves free of insnaring Oaths, perfidious
complyances, and Associations with the wicked, and also intertain and encourage
the oppressed for equity, who fled unto their sanctuary for safety. We find
they refused to enter into League with malignant Enemies. One memorable passage
I shall insert (though strictly it belong not to this Period, as I distinguish
it, yet falling out, within 80 years thereafter, in the time of the Culdees, it
will not obscurely evidence the truth of this) Goranus the 45 King of Scots,
earnestly dissuaded Lothus, King of Picts, to entertain the League with the
Saxons, not only because they were treacherous and cruel, but because they were
Enemies to the Countre^ and to the Religion they professed, concluding thus,
Homi^i vero Christiano id long omnium videri etc. But to a Christian nothing
must seem more grievous, than to consent to such a Covenant, as will extinguish
the Christian Religion, and reduce the profane Customs of the Heathen, and
arm wicked Tyrants the enemies of all humanity and piety against God and His
Law: whereupon Lothus was persuaded to relinquish the Saxons. Buchan. Histor.
rer. Scotic.

III. Though they were not for partaking in wicked unnecessary Wars, without
authority or against it; yet we have ground to conclude, they were for War, and
did maintain the principle of resisting Tyranny: since there was never more of
the pactice of it, nor more happy resistances in any age, than in that. Where
we find, that, as their Ancestors had frequently done before, so they also
followed their footsteps, in resisting, reduceing to order. repressing, and
bringing to condign punishment, Tyrant; and Usurpers; And thought those
actions, which their Fathers did by the light of nature and dictates of reason,
worthy of imitation, when they had the advantage of the light of Revelation and
dictates of Faith; the one being indeed moderate and directed but no ways
contradicted by the other. Therefore we read; that, as their Predecessors had
done with Thereus the 8th King of Scotland, whom they banished in the year
before Christ's Incarnation 173. With Durstus the II King, whom they slew in
Battle, in the year before Christ 107. Evenus 3. who was imprisoned and dyed
there, in the year before Christ 12. Dardanus, the 20th King, who was taken in
Battle, beheaded by his oun Subjects, his head exposed to Mockage, and his body
cast into a sink, Anno Christi 72. Luctatus the 22. King, who was slain for his
Leachery and Tyranny, anno 110. Mogaldus the 23. King, slain anno 113. Conarus
the 24. King, a Leacherous tyrant, dyed in Prison, anno 149. Satrael the 26.
King, hanged anno 159. So, after the Christian Faith was publicly professed,
they pursued Athirco, the 29. King, when degenerate into Tyranny, who was
forced to kill himself anno 231. They slew Nathalocus, the 30. King, and cast
him into a privy anno 242. They beheaded Romachus, the 36. King, and carried
about his head for a show, anno 348. As they did with many others afterward,
as witnesses Buchan. lib. 4. Histor. Scotic,

IV. Whence it is evident, that as they attained, even in these primitive
times, and maintained the purity and freedom of their Ministry, independent on
Pope, Prelate, or any humane Supremacy (that Antichristian Hierarchy, and
Erastian blasphemy, not being known in those days) so they contended for the
order and boundaries of the Magistracy, according to Gods appointment and the
fundamental constitutions of their Government; and thought it their duty to
shake off the yoke, and disoune the Authority of these Tyrants that destroyed
the same. Yea we find that even for incapacity, stupidity, and folly, they
disouned the Relation of a Magistrate, and disposed of the Government another
way, as they did with Ethodius 2. whose authority they did oune, but Titulo
tenus. See Buchan. loco Citato,

PERIOD. II.
Comprehending the Testimony of the same Culdees with that of the Lollards.
THe following Period was that fatal one, that brought in universal Darkness on
the face of the whole Church of Christ, and on Scotland with the first of them:
which, as it received very early Christianity, so it was with the first
corrupted with Antichristianisme: For that Mystorie of iniquity that had been
long working, till he who let was taken out of the way, found Scotland ripe
for it when it came: which, while the Dragon did persecute the woman in the
wilderness, did vallantly repel his Assaults, but when the Beast did arise, to
whom he gave his power, he prevailed more by his subtlety, than his rampant
Predecessor could do by his rage. Scotland could Resist the Roman Legions while
heathenish, but not the Roman Locusts when Antichristian. At his very first
appearance in the world under the Character of Antichrist, his harbinger
Palladius brought in Prelacy to Scotland, and by that conveyance the contagion
of Popery: which has always been, as every where so especially in Scotland,
both the Mother and Daughter, cause and effect, occasion and consequence, of
Popery. These rose, stood, and lived together, and sometimes did also fall
together: and we have ground to hope, that they shall fall again; and their
final and fatal fall is not fa^ off. Whatever difficulty Authors do make, in
calculating the Epoch of the 42 months of Antichrists duration in the world,
because of the obscurity of his first rise; yet there needs not be much
perplexity in finding out that Epoch in Scotland, nor so much discouragment
from the fancyed permanency of that Kingdom of wickedness. For if it be
certain, as it will not be much disputed, that Popery and Prelacy came in by
Palladius, sent Legate by Pope Celestine, about the year 450. then if we add
42 Months or 1260 Prophetical d^yes, that is years, we may have a comfortable
prospect of their Tragical conclusion. And though both clashings and
combinations, oppositions and conjunctions, this day may seem to have a
terrible aspect, portending a darker hour before the Dawning; yet all these
^eelings and revolutions, though they be Symptoms of wrath incumbent upon us
for our sins, they may be looked upon, through a prospect of faith, as presages
and prognostics of Mercy impendent for His Names Sake, encouraging us, when we
see these dreadful things come to pass in our day, to lift up our heads for the
day of our Redemption draws nigh. This dark Period continued ^igh about 1100
years, in which though Christ's witnesses were very few, yet He had some
witnessing and Prophecieing in sackcloth all the while. Their Testimony was the
same with that of the Waldenses and Albingenses, slated upon the grounds of
their secession or rather abstraction from that Mystery Babylon, Mot^^^r of
harlots Popery and Prelacy, for their corruption in Doctrine, worship,
Discipline, and Government. And did more particularly relate to the concerns of
Christ's Priestly Office, which was transmitted from the Culdees to the
Lollards, And by them handed down to the Instruments of Reformation, in the
following Period. Their Testimony indeed was not Active, by way of forcible
resistance, against the Sovereign Powers; but passive, by way of Confession and
Martyrdom, and sufferings and verbal contendings, and witnessings against the
prevailing corruptions of the time. And no wonder it should be so, and in this
some way different from ours, because that was a dispensation of suffering,
when Antichrist was on the Ascendant, and they had no call nor capacity to
oppose him any other way, and were now spirited for this passive Testimony, in
which circumstances they are an excellent pattern for imitation, but not an
example for confutation of that principle of defensive resistance which they
never contradicted, and had never occasion to confirm by their practice. But as
in their manageing their Testimony, their manner was somevvay different from
ours on this respect; so they had far the advantage of us, that their cause was
so clearly stated upon the greatest of heads of sufferings, having the clearest
connection with the fundamentals of Religion. Yet we shall find in this Period
our Heads of suffering someway homologated, if we consider.

I. That as they did faithfully keep and contend for the word of Christ's
patience under that dispensation, in asserting and maintani^g both the verity
of Christ's Doctrine, and the purity of His Worship, by testifieing against the
corruptions, errors, Idolatries, and Superstitions of Popery; so they did
constantly bear witness against the usurpation and Tyrannical domination of the
Antichristian Prelates. And as the Culdees did vigorously oppose their first
introduction, and after aspiring domination, as well as the corruptions of
their Doctrine, As we have the contendings of Eminent witnesses recorded from
age to age; in the fourth and fifth Age, Columbe, Libthac, Ethernan, Kintogerne
or Mungo; in the Sexth and seventh Age, Colmanus, C^emens, and Samson with
others, in the Eight and ninth Age, Alcuin, Rabanus Maurus, Ioannes Scotus
Acrigena, are noted in History; And the Lollards, by their Examinations and
Testimonies, are found to have witnessed against the exercise of their power,
and sometimes against the very Nature of their power it self: so in their
practice, they condemned Prelacy as well as Popery, in that their Ministers did
in much painfullness, poverty, simplicity, Humility, and Equality, observe the
Institution of our Lord. And so far as their light served, and had occasion to
inquire into this point, they acknowledged no officer in the House of God
superior to a preaching Minister, and according to this standart they rejected
and craved Reformation of exorbitant Prelacy. And it is plain that they were
frequently discovered, by discountinanceing and withdrawing from their
superstitions and Idolatrous worship: for all which, when they could not escape
nor repel their violence, they cheerfuly embraced and endured the flames.

II. That their Adversaries did manage their cruel craft, and crafty cruelty,
in murdering those Servants of God, much after the same methods that ours do;
except that they are many stages outdone by their successors, as much as
perfect Artists do outstrip the rude beginings of Apprentices. But on the other
hand, the Suffe^ers in our day, that would follow the example of those Worthyes
under Popery, would be much condemned by this generation, even by them that
commend the matter of their Testimony, though they will not allow the manner of
it to be imitated in this day. The Adversaries of Christ in this and that
generation, are more like then his Confe^sors and witnesses are. The
Adversaries then, when constrained by diversions of the times troubles, or when
their designs were not ripe, pretended more moderation and aversation from
severity, but no sooner got they opportunity (which always they sought) but so
soon they renewed the Battle against Jesus Christ; so now: when they had seven
abominations in their hearts, and many cursed designs in their heads, they
always spoke fairest; so now: when they had a mind to execute their cruelty,
they would resolve beforhand whom to pitch upon before conviction; so now: And
when so resolved, the least pretense of a fault, obnoxious to their wicked Law,
would serve their design; so now: They used then to forge Articles, and falsely
misrepresent their answers, and declarations of their principles; so now. Yet
on the other hand, if now poor sufferers should glory in that they are counted
worthy to suffer shame for the name of Christ, as they did then; If now they
should suffer with as great cheerfullnesse, for the smallest points as for the
greatest heads, as they did then, who endured the flames as gallantly, for
eating a Goose upon Friday, as others did for the Doctrine of Justification, or
Purgatory, or Indulgences, or worshipping of Images and Saints; If now they
should speak for every truth in question, with all simplicity and plainness,
without reserves or shifts declining a Testimony, as they did; If they should
supersede from all applications to their Enemies for savor, and not meddle with
either petitioning or bonding with them, as they did; nay not accepting
deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection: Then they might
expect the severe Censure of ignorant and precise fools, as the most part who
suffer now are counted.

III. That they stood aloof from every appearance of a base Compliance with
them; not so much as to give them an interpretative sign of it, which in their
meaning might be thought a recantation, though abstractly consideredit might be
capable of a more favorable construction: As the required burning of their
Bill was; which might have been thought a condemning of their accusations: but
because that was not their Adversaries sense of it, they durst not do it. Not
like many now a days, who will not be solicitous to consult that. Neither
would they take any of their Oaths, nor pay any of their Eccllesiastical
Exactions, as we find in the Articles brought in against the Lollards of Kyle.
Knox Hist. of Reform. These things are easily complied with now: and such as
will suffer upon such things are condemned.

IV. That while the Love of God and his blessed Truth, and the precepts,
promise, and presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, did enable them into all
patience with joy, in a passive Testimony, being by the call of a clear 8:
necessary providence sent and set forth to behis witnesses; they did not
indeed endeavor any resistance: yet we find they never resigned nor abandoned
that first and most just privilege of resistance; nay, nor bringing public
beasts of prey to condign punishment, in an extraordinary way of vindictive
Justice, for the Murder of the Saints. As, upon the Murder of Mr. George
Wishchard, was done with Cardinal Beaton, who was slain in the tower of St.
Andrews by James Melvin: who perceiving his consorts in the interprise moved
with passion, withdrew them and said; this work and judgment of God, although
it be secret, ought to be done with greater gravity, And, presenting the point
of the sword to the Cardinal, said, Repent thee of thy former wicked life, but
especially of the shedding of the blood of that notable instrument of God, Mr.
George Wishchard, which albeit the flame of fire consumed before men, yet it
cries for vengeance upon the^ and we from God are sent to revenge it; for here,
before my God, I protest, that neither the hatred of thy person, the love of
thy riches, nor the fear of any trouble thou could have d^me to me in
particular, moved or moves me to strike thee, but only because thou have been
and remainest an obstinate Enemy against Christ Jesus, and His holy Gospel. Of
which fact, the famous and faithful Historian Mr Knox speaks very honorably,
and was so far from condemning it, that while after the slaughter they kept out
the Castle, he with other Godly men went to them and stayed with them, till
they were together carried captives to Fr^nce. Yet now such a fact, committed
upon such another bloody and treacherous Beast, the Cardinal Prelat of
Scotland, eight years agone, is generally condemned as horrid Murder.

V. However, tho in this dark Period there be no noted instances of these
witnesses resisting the Superior powers, for reasons above hinted: yet in this
Period, we find many instances of noble and virtuous Patriots, their not only
resisting, but also revenging to the utmost of severity rigorous and raging
Tyrants. As may be seen in Histories. For before the corruption of Antichrist
came to its hight, we find Ferchardus I. the 52. K. was drawn to judgment
against his will, great crimes were laid to his charge, and among others the
Pelagian heresy, and contempt of Baptism, for which he was cast into Prison,
where he killed himself; anno 636. Eugenius 8. the 62. King degenerating into
wickedness, and rejecting the Admonitious of his friends and especially of the
Ministers, was killed in a convention of his nobles, with the consent of all,
anno 765. Donaldus 7. was imprisoned, where he killed himself, anno 859. Ethus,
surnamed Alipes, the 72. King was apprehended, and his wicked life laid out
before the people, and then compelled to resign the Government, and dyed in
Prison, anno 875. Afterward when the Government was transmitted to the
Stewarts, James the 2. the 103. King, who killed William E. of Douglas in the
Castle of Sterling, most treacherously after he had pretended a civil
treatment, was publicly defied by the Earls friends; who took the Kings
public writ and subscription made to the said Earl, and tied it to a horse
tail, dragging it through the streets, and when they came to the Market place
they Proclaimed both King and Nobles perjured Covenant-breakers: And thereafter
when E. James his Brother, was desired to submit, he answered, he would never
put himself in their reverence, who had no regard to shame, nor to the laws of
God or man, and who had so perfidiously and treacherously killed his Brother
and his Cousins. James 3. the 104. King for his Treachery and Tyranny was
opposed and purswed by arms by his oun subjects; who finding himself under
disadvantages, sent to the rebels (as he thought them and called them) an
offer of peace, and received this answer; that seeing the King did nothing
honestly, a certain war seemed better to them then a peace not to be trusted,
that there was no other hope of agreement but one, that he should quite the
Government, otherwise it was to no purpose to trouble themselves with treaties.
Thereafter in a battle he was slain at Bannockburn, by Gray, Ker, and
Borthwick. James the 4. the 105. King was also constrained, by the valor of
Archibald Douglas E. of Angus called Bell the Cat* to reform the Court, and
put away some wicked Sycophants from his Counsel, and give way tho against his
will to the execution of judgment upon others: which was the occasion of that
foresaid Agnomen to the Earl. For, he with other Nobles, in a meeting at
Lawder, consulting how to reform and repress the insolency of the Court, had
the Apologue of the Mice laid out before them; that the Mice ^ell upon
deliberating how to be rid of the Cat, and concluded the best way was to put a
bell about her neck, but when it came to be put in execution, never a Mouse
durst undertake it: The Earl quickly made application, saying, I will bell the
Cat; and forthwith went out and meeting Cochran, one of these wicked
Consellours, took hold of him, and hanged him with a horse halter over the
bridge of Lawder, and rushing in to the Kings presence proceeded to snatch
Ramsey, another of the countries Enemies, out of the Kings Arms, but that he
yielded at length to the Kings earnest entreaties to spare him. However we see
how generously zealous these noble Patriots were for the countries good,
against Tyranny, tho they were ignorant of Religion: Yet this all alongs was
still the character of the Scots in these days, none more terrible to Tyrants,
none more Loyal to Kings then they.

PERIOD. III.
Containing the Testimony of the Reformation from Popery.
AS in the former the Testimony was mostly Passive, so in the following Period,
when they were increased in number and strength that embraced the Gospel, the
Lord called and spirited to an Active Testimony, for these two Twins, Religion
and Liberty, that were then sought to be stifled in the birth, and are now
designed more declaredly to be destroyed, after they have grown up to some
maturity: Which, as it renders the cruelty of the present destroyers the more
grassant and grievous, so it rubs the more indeleble Infamy, on the shamfull
security and Asslike stupidity of this generation, that have received such an
excellent Testimony deposited to their trust, transmitted to them through a
continued tra^ct of the witnessings and wrestlings of their worthy Ancestors,
and now let it slip and slide through their feeble fingers; And does the more
justify, yea magnify, the poor endeavors of the present Sufferers, who at
least, when they cannot react these mighty works in defending Religion and
Liberty, do choose rather to die than to resign the Testimony, or quite the
least Privilege that their Progenitors possessed them of: And though they be
superciliously despised, as little insignificant nothings, in the eyes of the
bulk of the big boasters of this blind age; yet, if these valiant Heroes who
did such exploits for their God, in commenceing and carrying on the work of
Reformation, were now to see the dull Dotages of this dreaming generation (not
only suffering and consenting to, but congratulating and applauding, the
introduction and reestablishment of Idolatry and Tyranny, Popery and Slavery,
upon the ruins of the work they built with so great expense.) And were to read
the pitiful Petitions, and airy and empty, flattering and fauning Addresses, to
this Antichristian Tyrant, for the Toleration of that Religion and Liberty,
under the odious notion of a Crime, which they had conveyed to them under the
security of a fundamental Law; They, if any, would be acknowledged as their
Children, who disdain and disoune such dishonorable and dastardly yeeldings,
and are therefore most despised with disdain and despite. A brief Rehearsal of
their Contendings will clear the Case.

While the Queen Dowager Regent reigned by the curse of God, and employed all
her power and policy to suppress the Gospel in Scotland; God so Counteracted
her, that the blood of the Martyrs she caused to be murdered proved the seed of
the Church; and the endeavors of His Servants had such success, that no small
part of the Barons and Gentlemen, as well as commons, began to abhor the
Tyranny of the Bishops: yea men almost universally began to doubt, whether they
could without sin give their bodily presence to the Mass, or offer their
Children to the Papistical Baptism? Whether these that were in any public
trust, could with safe conscience serve the higher Powers, in maintaini^g of
Idolatry, persecuting their Brethren, and suppressing Christ's Truth! or whether
they might suffer their Brethren to be murdered in their presence, without any
declaration that such Tyranny displeased them? And from the Scriptures they
were resolved, that a lively Faith required a plain Confession, when Christ's
Truth is impugned; And that not only they be guilty that do evil, but also they
that consent to evil, and this they should do, if seeing such things openly
committed, they should be silent, and so allow whatsoever was done. From doubts
they came to determinations, to endeavor that Christ Jesus His glorious Gospel
should be Preached, His holy Sacraments truly ministered, Superstition,
Idolatry, and Tyranny should be suppressed in this Realm; And that both as to
the Worship, Discipline, and Government, the Reverend face of the first
primitive and Apostolic Church should be reduced again to the eyes and
knowledge of men. And in this they never fa^nted till the work was finished. To
accomplis^ this, famous and faithful Mr Knox, and other Servants of the Lord,
did Preach diligently in Private Meetings. And for that, when they were
summoned before the Queen; several zealous and bold men repaired to her, and
plainly in the hearing of the Prelates, did charge them with the cruel device
intended, and told her with a vow, they should make a day of it, because they
oppressed them and their tennents, for feeding of their idle bellies, they
troubled the Preachers, and would murder all; should they suffer this any
longer? No, it should not be. Thereafter, the more effectually to prosecute the
Reformation begun, they entered into Covenants, to maintain and advance that
work of Reformation, And to stand to the Desence thereof; and of one another,
against all wicked Power, that might intend Tyranny or trouble against them,
and to resent any injury done to any of their Brerhren, upon the account of the
Common Cause, as done to all. Of which Covenants they entered into many very
solemnly: one was at Edinburgh anno 1557. Another at Perth, 1559. Another at
Sterling 1559. binding, that none should have any correspondence with the
Queen, without notifieing it to one another, And that nothing should proceed
therein, without common Consent of them all. Another at Leith, anno 1560.
Another at Air, anno 1562. of the same tenor. By which Covenants, as their
Conjunction was the more firm among themselves, so was it the more fearful to
their Adversaries; when according to the tenor of them they kept their
Conventions, and held Counsels with such gravity and clossness, that the
enemies trembled. I mention these things more particularly, because these same
very things commended in our Fathers, are now condemned in a poor handful, that
wo^ld aim at imitating their example, in renewing and reiterating such
Covenants of the same Nature and Tenor, and binding to the same very duties,
and prosecute in the same methods of keeping General Meetings for
Correspondence, and consultation about common mutual Duties in common danger;
whereunto they have not only present necessity to urge them, but also preterite
examples of these Worthies to encourage them, and their experience of comfort
and tranquillity they reaped, by these Christian Assemblies and Godly
Conferences, as ost as any danger appeared to any member or members of their
body. These beginings the zealous Covenanted Reformers left no means unessayed
to promote, by Protestations to the Parliament, and Petitions, and many
reiterated Addresses to the Queen Dowager: From whom they received many renewed
fair promises; which she had never mind to keep, and wanted not the impudence,
when challenged for breaking them, to declare, It becomes not Subjects to
burden their Princes with promises, further then it pleased them to keep the
same: And at another time, that she was bound to keep no Faith to Heretics:
And again, that Princes must not be strictly bound to keep their promises; And
that her self would make little Conscience to take from all that sort their
Lives and Inheritance, if she might do it with an honest excuse. Wherein she
spoke not only the venom of her oun heart, but the very soul and sense,
principle and project, of all Popish Princes: Whereby we may see what security
we have for Religion and Liberty this day, though the most part make such a
pretense a pillow to sleep on. But after many Discoveries in this kind of the
Queens Treachery, at length they would no more be bribed by promises, blinded
by pretenses, nor boasted by her Proclamations, (slandering their interprise,
as if it pertained nothing to Religion) from their endeavors to prosecute the
same: but finding themselves compelled to take the Sword of Just defense,
against all that should pursue them for the matter of Religion, they first
signified unto her; That they would notify to the King of France; and all
Christian Princes, that her cruel unjust and most Tyrannieal murder intended
against Touns and Mnltitudes, was and is the only Cause of their revolt from
their accustomed obedience, which they ouned and promised to their Sovereign;
provided they might live in Peace and Liberty, and enjoy Christ's Gospel,
without which they firmly purpose never to be subject to mortal man; And that
better it were to expose their bodies to a thousand deaths, than to deny
Christ; which thing not only do they, who commit open Idolatry, but also all
such, as, seeing their Brethren purswed for the Cause of Religion, and having
sufficient means to comfort and assist them, do nevertheless withdraw from them
their dutiful support. And thereafter, they published a Declaration to the
generation of Antichrist, the pestilent Prelates, and their shavelings within
Scotland. That they should not be abused, thinking to escape just punishment,
after that they in their blind fury had caused the blood of many to be shed,
but if they proceeded in this their malicious Cruelty, they should be dealt
with all, wheresoever they should be apprehended, as Murderers, and open
Enemies to God and to Mankind. And that with the same measure they had
measured, and intended to measure to others, it should be measured to them --
that is, they should, with all force and power they had, execute just vengeance
and punishment upon them; yea begin that same War which God commands Israel
to execute against the Canaanites, that is, Contract of Peace should never be
made, till they desist from their open Idolatry and cruel Persecution of Gods
Children. I rehearse this Declaration the more expressly, because in our day
Declarations of this style and strain, and aiming at the same Scope, is
hideously hissed and houted at as unheard of novelties. Finally, when by all
their Letters, Warnings, Admonitions and Protestations, they could obtain no
redress, but rather an increase of insupportable violence; they proponed the
Question in a General Meeting: Whether she, whose pretenses threatened the
bondage of the whole Commonwealth, ought to be suffered so Tyrannically to
domineer over them? Unto which the Ministers, being required to give their
judgment, answered, that she ought not. And accordingly they declared her
deposed, from all Government over them; because of her persecuting the
Professors of the true Religion, and oppressing the Liberties of the true
Lieges, never being called nor convinced of any Crime; because of her intrusion
of Magistrates against all order of Election; because of her bringing in
strangers to suppress the Liberty of the Country, and placing them in greatest
Offices of Credit, because of her altering and subverting the old Laws of the
Realm etc. Which I mention, because hence we may see what things our Fathers
judged, did dissolve the relation between the people and their Rulers: And when
applied to our Case, will justify their reasons that have renounced the present
Tyranny: This was done at Edinburgh, anno 1559. And thereafter, while they
vindicated themselves, and went on with the work of Reformation, throwing down
all monuments of Idolatry, and propogateing the Reformed Religion; God so
blessed their endeavors that their Confession of faith, and all Articles of
the Protestant Religion, was Read and Ratified by the three Estates of
Parliament, at Edinburgh Iulij 1560. And the same year the Book of Discipline,
containing the form and order of Presbyterial Government, was subscribed by a
great part of the Nobility. Thus through the wisdom and power of God alone,
even by the weakness of very mean Instr^ments, against the rage and fury of
the devil, and of all the powers of Hell, was this work of Reformation advanced
and effectuated; And came to the establishment of a Law, which did not only
ratify and confirm the P^ote^^ant Religion, but abolish Antichristian Popery,
and appoint punishment for the Professors and promoters thereof. Which Law,
often confirmed and ratified afterward, though it be now cassed and rescinded
by the Prerogative of the present Tyrant, because it anulls and invalidates his
pretense to succession in the Government (it being expressly enacted
afterward, by a Parliament at Edinburgh 156. Confirming this, that all Princes
and Kings hereafter before their Coronation shall take Oath to maintain the
true Religion then professed, and suppress all things contrary to it) yet is
still in force in the hearts of all honest men, that will not prostitute
Religion, Law, and Liberty to the lusts of Tyrants; and will be accounted a
better bottom to build the hope of enjoying Religion upon, than the perfidious
promises of a Popish Usurper, pretending a Liberty to dissenting Protestants,
by taking away the Penal Statuts, the Legal Bulwark against Popery: All which
yet, to the reproach of all Protestants, some are applauding and Congratulating
in this time by their Addresses and Petitions, to this destroyer of Law and
Religion. I wish they would look back to see what the building of this Bulwark
cost our Fathers, before they sell it at such a rate: And compare the present
Addresses, Courting and Carressing the Papists, with the Addresses of these
worthy builders of what they are destroying. There is one dated Edinb. May. 27.
1561. Presented to the Council, showing, that honesty craved them; and
conscience moved them, to make the secrets of their heart patent, which was;
That, before ever these Tyrants and dumb Dogs empire over them professing
Christ Jesus within this Realm, they were fully determined, to hazard Life,
and whatsoever they had received. of God in temporal things -- And let these
Enemies of God assure themselves, that if their Counsel put not order unto
them, that they should shortly take such order, that they shall neither be able
to do what they list, neither yet to live upon the sweat of the brows of such
as are no Debtors to them. And when the mischievous Mary, the daughter of the
Degraded Queen, returning from France, set up the Mass but in her oun family;
the Godly at that time gave plain signification, that they could not abide that
the Land which God by His power had purged from Idolatry, should in their eyes
be polluted again. Shall that Idol (say they) be suffered again to take place
within this Realm: It shall not. The Idolatrous Priests should die the death
according to Gods Law. And a Proclamation being issued to protect the Queens
Domestic Servants, that were Papists; There was a Protestation given forth
presently, That if any of her Servants shall commit Idolatry, say Mass,
participate therewith, or take the defense thereof, in that case this
Proclamation was not extended to them in that behalf, nor to be a Safeguard to
them in that behalf, no more then if they commit murder. Seeing the one is
much more abominable in the sight of God then the other. But that it may be
Lawful to inflict upon them, the pains contained in Gods word, against
Idolaters, wherever they may be apprehended without favor. The words of John
Knox upon the following sabbath may be added. That one Mass was more fear^ul
unto him then if ten thousand armed Enemies, were Landed in any part of the
realm, of purpose to suppress the whole Religion: for (said he) in our God
there is strength to resist and confound Multitudes, if we unfeignedly depend
upon Him; but when we join hands with Idolatry, it is no doubt, but both Gods
amiable Presence and comfortable defense, will leave us and what shall then
become of us? Yea when it was voted in the General Assembly, whether they might
take the Queens Mass from her? Many frankly affirmed; that as the Mass is
abominable, so it is just and right, that it should be suppressed: And that in
so doing, men did no more hurt to the Queens Majesty, than they that should by
force take from her a Poisoned Cup, when she were going to drink it. Thus we
have some Specimen of the Zeal of our fathers against Idolatry. But in a little
time, Court favors blunted it in many. And then had the Servants of God a
double Battle, fighting or the one hand against Idolatry, and the rest of the
abominations maintained by the Court. And upon the other hand, against the
unfaithfullness of false brethren, and Treachery of Sycophants, who informed
the Court against the Ministers for their free and faithful Preaching and
warning on all occasions; yet they sustained the brunt of all these assaults,
and came off with honor. At length to be short, in process of time, this Mary
a woman of a proud and crafty wit, and an endured heart against God and His
Truth, insisted in the same steps of Tyranny and Treachery (but with greater
Aggravations) that her Mother walked in, and was served according to her
desert. For after that her Darling Davie Rizio, the Italian Fiddler (whom most
men then supposed, and do still suspect, to be the Father of King James, this
man's Grandfather; and some do think it not unlikly that his Successors have
derived from this stock the Italian Complexion and Constitution, both of body
and mind, Spare and Swarthy, Cruel and Crafty) received his ^ue rewards in her
presence, by the Kings consent and Counsel: she conceived such contempt of and
indignation against the poor uxorious young King, Henry of Darnely; that she
never rested, till she and Bothwel contrived and executed his Murder. And then
she married that Murdering Adulterer, the said Earl of Bothwel. Whereupon the
Protestant Noblemen pursueing the Murder, took her and sent her Prisoner to
Lochlevin; where they made her resign the Government to her Son James, then an
Infant. And afterward she was beheaded by Elizabeth Queen of England. We see
now by this deduction what was the Testimony of this Period, and how in many
things it confirms the Heads of the present Sufferings, which we may
particularly remark.

I. The Reformation of Scotland had this common with all other Protestant
Churches, that it was carried on by resisting the opposing powers: But it had
this peculiar advantage above all, that at once and from the beginning, both
Doctrine and Worship, Discipline and Government, were Reformed: as Mr. Knox
witnesses, that there was no Realm upon the face of the Earth at that time
that had Religion in greater Purity. Yea, says he, we must speak the Truth
whomsoever we offend, there is no Realm that has the like Purity; for all
others, how sincere soever the Doctrine be, retain in their Churches and the
Ministry thereof some footsteps of Antichrist and dregs of Popery, But we
(praise to God alone) have nothing in our Churches that ever flowed from that
Man of Sin. The Doctrine was purely Reformed, according to the Rule of Christ,
both as to Matter and Manner of Delivery. As to the Matter of it, what it was,
the Confession of Faith ratified in Parliament anno 1560. Does witness. In the
Manner of it, they studied not the smooth and pakie prudence that is now so
much applauded, for not observeing which, such as would fain be honest in this
duty, are so much condemned; but they cried aloud against and did not spare the
sins of the time, with application to every degree of men: as we have it
published and vindicated in Mr. Knox his History. They cried that the same God
who plagued Pharaoh, repulsed Sennacherib, struck Herod with worms, and made
the bellies of dogs the Grave and Sepulcher of the Spiteful Iezabel, will not
spare misled Princes, who authorize the Murderers of Christ's members in this
our time: Many now a days will have no other Religion than the Qween; the
Queen, no other than the Cardinal; the Cardinal, no other than the Pope; the
Pope, no other than the Devil: Let men therefore consider what danger they
stand in, if their Salvation shall depend upon the Queens faith. And they used
to defend such manner of free dealing, from the examples of the Prophets
reproving Kings Personally: Now if the like and greater corruptions be in the
World this day, who dare interprise, to put to silence the Spirit of God, whih
will not be subject to the apetites of misled Princes. Mr. Knox his defense
before the Queen, when rebuked for speaking of her Marriage in the pulpit, was:
The Evangel, says he, has two points, Repentance and Faith; in preaching
Repentance, of necessity it is that the sins of men be noted, that they way
know wherein they offend. And in his dispate with Lithingtoun, requiring where
any of the Prophets did so use Kings and Rulers; he gave the example of Elias.
reproveing Achab and Iezebel, that dogs shall lick the blood of Achab and eat
the flesh of Jezebel; which was not whispered in their ears, but so as the
People understood: well enough, for so witnessed Iehu after the accomplishment;
Elizeiu reproved Iehoram, saying, what have I to do with thee, if it were not
for Jehoshaphat, I would not have looked toward thee; though a subject yet he
gave little reverence to the King. These were their Arguments for faithfullness
then which are now exploded with contempt. Their worship was also Reformed from
all Dregs of Popery, and fopperies of humane Ceremonies, retained in many other
Churches; especially in England. To whose Bishops, in Queen Elizabeth's time,
the Assembly wrote; That if Surplice* Corner cap, Tippet etc. have been the
badges of Idolaters in the very act of Idolatry, what have Preachers to do with
the dregs of that Romish Beast? Yea what is he that ought not to fear to take,
either in his hand or fore head, the mark of that odious Beast? -- We think you
should boldly oppose your selves to all power, that will dare extol it self
against God, and against all such as do burden the Conscience of the faithful,
further then God has burdened them by His oun word. The Disclpline and
Government was from the beginning Presbyterial, even before the establishment;
both in practice, among the Persecuted Ministers who kept their private
Meetings: And in their Doctrine, This was one of Mr Knox's Articles, he
sustained at St Andrews, upon his first entry unto the Ministry, Art. S. There
is no Bishop except he preach even by himself wiihout any substitute. But so
soon as they attained any settlement, they assembled in their first National
Synod, anno 1560. by virtue of that Intrinsic Power, granted by the Lord to
His Church; nor did they so much as petition for the Indulgence of the then
Authority; But upon Christ's warrant, they kept and held their Courts in the
name of the Lord Jesus Christ only, and in His sole Authority, by direction of
His Word and Spirit, concluded all their Counsels, Votes, and Acts. And as they
knew nothing of an Exotic Supremacy, so they put out and held out Prelacy, and
kept a perfect Parity; which was nothing infringed by the extraordinary
Employments and Commissions delegated to some Superintendents, upon the account
of the particular exigence of these times.

II. Next we find in the Practice of these renouned Reformers, many
demonstrations of pure zeal, worthy of all imitation: which I remark the
rather, because poor Sufferers that would now imitate it, are condemned as
blind and ignorant zelots. But why are not the Reformers condemned for the same
things? We find in the first place, that they were so far from complying with,
or conniving at, or countenancing public sins, that they could not contain
themselves from declaring their Detestation of the sight of them: yea the very
boys did abominate it, as at the Reformation of St Iohnstoun, a boy cried with
a bold voice, This is intolerable, that when God by His Word has plainly
condemned Idolatry, we shall stand and see it used in despite. Whereupon he
and others throw down all the monuments of Idolatry in the place. But if now
any should enterprise such a thing, when the Idol of the Mass is set up in
every City, they might expect Ierubbaals censure of the Abiezrites; the it is
true they might have the same encouragement, because they have the same Command
as he had, to wit, the perpetual precept of throwing down Idolatrous Altars.
Next they were so far from complying with the Enemies, in keeping the peace
with them, that they thought it a great sin not to oppose them, when their
brethren were forced to take the sword of self defense, being persuaded by
these arguments: That by their fainting and abstracting their support, the
Enemies would be encouraged; And thereby they should declare themselves both
Traitors to the Truth once professed, and Murderers of their Brethren, whom
their presence and Concurrence might preserve; And that if they should deny
their Brethren suffering for His Names sake, they should also deny Christ, and
be denied of Him; And that God has often punished subjects with their Princes,
for winking at and not resisting their manifest iniquity; And therefore, as He
is immutable in nature, so would He not Pardon them in that which He has
punished in others etc. Which Arguments prevailed with the noble Earl of
Glencarn, in zeal to burst forth in these words -- Albeit never man should
accompany me, yet I will go to my Brethren, and if it were but a Pike upon my
shoulder, I had rather die with that company then Live after them. But now
professors cannot only sit at home in their shops and ceiled houses, when the
Lords people are pursued and murdered in the fields, but also can hire their
Murderers, and strengthen their hands, by paying them Cesses and Localities,
and what they require for help to do their work, and maintaining them in their
iniquity. Which famous Mr Knox disproveth very much in his day; Arguing that if
people thought they were innocent, because they were not the actors of such
iniquity, they were utterly deceived; for God does not only punish the chief
offenders, but the Consenters to such iniquity, And all are judged to consent,
who give not Testimony against it; As the Rulers and Bishops are Criminal of
all the innocent blood, that's shed for the Testimony of Christ's Truth, so are
all who assist and maintain them in their blind rage, and give no declaration
that their Tyranny displeases them; This doctrine is strange to the blind
world, but the verity of it has been declared in all notable punishments from
the beginning; when the old world was destroyed by water, Sodom and Jerusalem
were destroyed, were all alike wicked? yet all perished; why? All kept silence,
or did not resist, by which al^ approved iniquity, and joined hands with the
Tyrants, as it had been in one Battle against the Omnipotent. Which words if
impartially applied, will condemn and confute the dull Daubings of the present
Complyances, in maintaining Tyrants and their Emissaries, by Emoluments which
they require and exact, and that professedly, for promoting their accursed
projects; And will justify Conscientious sufferers, for refuseing to pay these
impositions. And this will the more appear, if we add some more of his pithie
expressions in the same place, clearing the subject he is upon, and answering
an objection, what poor people might do, when compelled to give obedience to
all their Rulers demanded? Ye may says that Author, without sedition withhold
the fruits and profits, which your false Bishops and Clergy most unjustly
received of you: Upon which he subjoins the preceding Arguments. Yet now a
days these have no weight, but such as refuse either to pay Oppressors
exactions, or Curats stipends, are condemned for giddy fools. Again we find,
that when they were challenged for duty, they would never decline a declaration
of its righteousness, nor do any thing directly or indirectly which might seem
a condemning of it. And therefore they would receive no pardons for these things
which they could not confess to be offenses. John Knox, challenged for
offending the Queen, had her promise, that if he would confess an offense, his
greatest punishment should be, but to go within the Castle of Edinburgh, and
immediately to return to his own house; he refused absolutely. But now, if our
Pardon-mongers and prudent men had been so circumstantiate, surely they could
have helped themselves with their distinctions, they might confess and be
pardoned for offending the Queen, tho not confess it to be a fault in their
Conscience: But Mr Knox had not learned that then. When they were pursuing the
Murder of King Henry of Darnely, the Queen finding her self not strong enough,
offers to forgive and pardon that insurection: The Earl of Morton, in name of
all the rest, did not only refuse a Cessation, but told her they would not ask
a pardon. But now sufferers, for refusing of these base and unmanly as well as
unchristian Complyances, are much condemned. Finally, because this strictness,
especially in their severity against their Enemies, may be accused of Jewish
rigidity, inconsistent with a Gospel Spirit of Lenity; which also is imputed to
the much condemned sufferers of Scotland at this time, for their Testimonies
against Toleration and Liberty of Conscience: Let us hear what Knox says;
whatsoever God required of the Civil Magistrate in Israel or Juda, concerning
the observation of true Religion during the time of the Law, the same does He
require of Lawful Magistrates, professing Christ Jesus, in the time of the
Gospel: And Cites a large Testimony out of Augustine to this purpose. And
afterward objecting to himself the practice of the Apostles, who did not punish
the Idolatrous Gentiles; he answers, That the Gentiles, being never avowed to
be Gods people before, had never received his Law, and therefore were not to be
punished according to the rigor of it, to which they were never subject, being
strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel; But if any think, after the Gentiles
were received in the number of Abraham's children, and so made one people with
the Jews believing, then ^hey were not bound to the same obedience of Isreal's
Covenant, the same seems to make Christ inferior to Moses, and contrare to the
Law of His heavenly Father; for if the Contempt and transgression of Moses's
Law was worthy of death, what judge we the contempt of Christ's ordinance to be?
And if Christ be not come to dissolve, but to fulfill the Law of His Heavenly
Father, shall the Liberty of His Gospel be an occasion that the special glory
of His Father be trodden under foot, and regarded of no man? God forbid; And
therefore I fear not to affirm, that the Gentiles be bound by the same
Covenant that God made with His people Israel, in these words; Beware that thou
make not any Covenant with the Inhabitants of the Land but thou shall destroy
their Altars etc. When therefore the Lord puteth the Sword in the hand of a
people, they are no less bound to purge their Cities and Countries from
Idolatry, then were the Israelites, what time they received the Possession of
the Land of Canaan.

III. For the head of Resistance of Superior powers, we have no clearer
instances in any Period then in this, where of the above mentioned hints give
some account, to which in their sentiments and arguments may be here subjoined.
They prised and improved this principle so much, that they put it in their
Confession of faith Art. 14. To save the Life of Innocents, to repress Tyranny,
to defend the oppressed, are among the good works of the Second Table, which
are most pleasing and acceptable to God, as these works are commanded by
Himself; And to suffer innocent blood to be ^hed if we may withstand it, is
affirmed to be sin, by which Gods hot Displeasure is kindled against the proud
and unthankful world. And if there were no more to render the late. Test of
Scotland detestable, that condemns all resistance of Kings upon any pretense
whatsoever, this may make all Christians and all men abhor the contrivance of
it; that that same Test that confirms this Thesis, does also impose the
Antithesis upon Conscience. It obliges to this Confession in the first part of
it, and to deny it in the Latter. But no wonder, that men of feared Consciences
can receive any thing, tho never so contradictory to it self; And that men who
deny sense and that principle irradicated in humane nature, may also deny
Conscience, and make a fool of it in sowdering Contradictories. But not only
did our Reformers assert this Truth for which now their children adhering to
their Testimony suffer both rage and reproach, but also gave their reasons for
it. As (1) Mr Knox, in his first Conference with the Queen, argues thus: There
is neither greater honor nor obedience to be given to Princes than Parents;
but so it is that the father may be stricken with a frenzy, in the which he
would slay his oun children; now if the children arise, take his weapon from
him, bind his hands, do the children any wrong? It is even so with Princes,
that would murder the Children of God subject to them, their blind zeal is
nothing but a very mad frenzy; and therefore to take the sword from them, and
cast them into prison till they be brought to a more sober mind, is no
disobedience against Princes. (2) In his Conference with Lithingtoun, he proves
the same point, from the consideration of the justice of God, punishing the
people for not resisting the Prince. The Scripture of God teaches me (says
he) Jerusalem and Judah were punished for the sins of Manassoh; If you allege
they were punished because they were wicked, and not because the King was
wicked, the Scripture says expressly, for the sins of Manasseh; yet will I not
absolve the people, I will grant the whole people offended with their King, but
how? to affirm that all Judah committee the acts of his impiety, has no
certainty; who can think, that all Jerusalem should turn Idolaters immediately
after Hezekias notable Reformation? One part therefore willingly followed him
in his Idolatry, the other suffered him, and so were criminal of his sin, even
as Scotland is guilty of the Queens Idolatry this day. In the same Discourse he
makes it plain, that all are guilty of Innocents murder who do not oppose it,
from Ieremies words in his defense before the Princes -- Know ye for certain if
ye put me to death ye shall surely bring innocent blood upon your selves and
upon the City and upon the Inhabitants thereof; Now if the Princes and the
whole people should have been guilty of the Prophets blood, how shall others be
judged innocent before God, if they suffer the blood of Innocents to be shed
when they may save it? (3) Ibid. he argues from the distinction between the
person placed in Authority, and the ordinance of God, the one may be resisted
the other cannot. The plain words of the Apostle makes the difference: The
ordinance is of God, for preservation of mankind, punishment o^vice, which is
holy and constant; Persons commonly are profane and unjust: He that resists
the power there, is only meant of the just power wherewith God has armed His
Magistrates, which who so resists, resists Gods or^inance; But if men in the
fear of God, oppose themselves to the fury of Princes, they then resist not
God, but the Devil who abuses the sword and Authority of God: It is evident the
people resisted Saul, when he had sworn Jonathan should dye, whom they
delivered: The Spirit of God accuses them not of any crime, but praises them
and condemns the King: This same Saul again commanded the Priests of the Lord
to be slain, his guard would not obey, but Doeg put the Kings cruelty in
execution; I will not ask, whether the Kings servants not obeying resisted the
ordinance of God, or whether Doeg murdering gave obedience to just Authority?
The Spirit of God condemns that fact Psalm. 52. that God would not only punish
the Commander, but also the merciless executer; Therefore they who gainstood
his command, resisted not the ordinance of God. (4). Ibid. He argues from
examples, not only of resisting but of punishing Tyrants: chiefly the example
of Uzziah is pertinent to this purpose, 2 Chon. 26. who after his usurping the
Priests Office, was put out of the Temple. When it was replied, that they were
the Priests that with stood the King, not simple people: He answered, The
Priests were subjects, as Ab^athar was deposed by Solomon etc. yet they made
him go out of the Temple for his Leprosy, and the people put him from the
Kingdom. It is noted also that Mr Knox, in that discourse, adduces examples of
those, who use to be brought in as objections against defensive Arms, even the
Primitive Christians, before that Passage last cited: what precepts, says he,
the Apostles gave, I will not affirm; But I find two things the faithful did,
the one was they assisted their Preachers even against the rulers, the other
was they suppressed Idolatry wheresoever God gave unto them force, asking no
leave of the Emperor nor of his deputies: Read the Ecclesiastical Histories,
and ye shall find examples sufficient.

IV. In the next place we may inquire into the judgment of these Reformers,
concerning that Question that is now so pusling to many; which indeed was never
started before this time as a head of suffering, but now, when it is started,
we may gather from our Ancestors Actings and Determinations about it, how it
ought to be answered. They were indeed in capacity, and accordingly did improve
it, for disouning the Authority of both the Queens: but their capacity was not
the thing that made it duty, if it had not been so before. Capacity makes a
thing possible, but not lawful: It does indeed make a duty seasonable, and
clears the Call to it, and regulates the timing of Affirmative duties, but the
want of it can never dispense with negative Precepts: And a duty, negative
especially, may become necessary, when it has not the advantage of
seasonableness or capacity; certainly it were duty to depose ^he Pope from his
usurped authority, and to disoune it even in Rome it self, but there it would
not be thought very feasible or seasonable, for twenty or thirty people to
avouch such a thing there, yet at all times it is a duty never to oune it. It
is thought unseasonable and unfeasable to disoune the Tyrants authority, but it
is made necessary, when u^ged never to oune it. And for this we have the
grounds of our Ancestors, showing who may be disouned, and must not be ouned. I
shall first insert here John Knox his propositions, prosecuted in his second
blast, extant at the end of Anton. Gilbies Admonition to England and Scotland.
1. It is not birth only nor propinquity of bloodh that makes, a King lawfully
to Reign over a people, professing Christ Jesus and His Eternal verity, but in
his Election, the ordinance which God has established in the election of
inferior judges, must be observed. 2. No manifest Idolater, nor notorious
transgressor of Gods holy precepts, ought to be promo^ed to any public
regiment, honor, or dignity, in any realm, Province, or City, that has
subjected themselves to Christ Jesus and His blessed Evangel. 3. Neither can
Oath, or promise, bind any such people to obey and maintain Tyrants, against
God and His Truth known. 4. B^t if rashly they have promoted any manifest
wicked person, or yet ignorantly have chosen such an one, as after Declares
himself unworthy of regiment, above the people of God (and such be all
Idolaters and Cruel Presecuters) most justly may the same men depose and punish
him, that unadvisedly before they did nominate, appoint, and elect. Accordingly
this was done in deposing both the Queens: which is fully vindicated by the
Earl of Morton, in his discourse to the Queen of England, as Buchanan Relates
it, Lib. 20. Page 746. The deed it self, neither the Custom of our Ancestors of
taking a Course with their Governor, will suffer it to be accounted new, nor
the moderation of the punishment to be odious: for it were not needful to
recount so many Kings punished by death, bonds, and exile by our Progenitors.
For the Scottish nation, being from the beginning alwise free, has created Kings
upon these conditions, that the Government entrusted to them by the peoples
suffrages, might be also (if the matter required) removed by the same
suffrages: Of which Law there are many footsteps remaining even to our day; for
both in the Isles about, and in many places of the continent, in which the old
Language and institutions have any abode, this Custom is kept, in creating
their Governors of Clanns: And the Ceremonies, used at the entering into
Government, do yet retain the express representation of this Law. Whence it is
evident, that the Government is nothing else but a mutual stipulation between
Kings and people: which further appears, from the inviolated tenor of the
Ancient Law, since the beginning of the Scottish Government, reserved even unto
our memory, without the least essay either to abrogate it, or disable, or
diminish it. Yea even when our fathers have deposed, banished, and more
severely punished so many Kings, yet never was any mention or motion made, of
relaxing the rigor of that Law: And not without reason, seeing it was not of
that kind of Constitutions, that change with the times, but of those which are
engraven in the minds of men from the first original, and approved by the
mutual consent of all Nations, and by natures Sanction continued inviolable and
perpetual, which being subject to no other Laws do Command and rule all. This,
which in every action does offer it self to our eyes and minds, and whether we
will or not abides in our breasts, our Predecessors followed; being always
armed against violence, and ready to suppress Tyrants -- And now for the
present, what have we done, but insisting in the footsteps of so many Kingdoms
and free Nations, suppressed Tyrannical Licentiousness, extolling it self above
all order of Laws, not indeed so severely as our Predicessors in like cases; if
we had imitated them, not only would we have been far from all fear of danger,
but also have escaped the trouble of Calumnies -- What would our Adversaries be
at? Is it that we should arm with Authority Tyrants convicted of grievous
Crimes, maintained by the spoils of the subjects, having hands embrued in royal
blood, and hearts gaping for the oppression of all good men? And shall we put
them upon our head, who are infamously suspected of Parricide, both projected
and perpetrated? To which we may add, a foreign conclusion indeed, but
adduced and maintained by Mr Craig, in the Assembly anno 1564. which had been
determined by Learned men in Bononia, Principes omnes, tam supremi quam
inferiores, possunt and debent Reformari, vel deponi per cos per quos
eriguntur, confirmantur, vel admittuntur ad officium, quoties a side praestita
subditis per juramentum desiciant, quoniam relatio juramenti subditorum and
principum mutua est, and utrinque aequo jure servanda and resormanda, juxta
Legem and conditionem juramenti ab utraque part sacti. That is, all Rulers be
they supreme or inferior, may and ought to be reformed, or bridled (to speak
moderatly) by them by whom they are chosen, confirmed, or admitted to their
office, so often as they break that promise made by Oath to their subjects,
because that the Prince is no less bound by Oath to their subjects, then are
the subjects to their Princes, And therefore ought it to be kept and reformed
equally, according to Law and condition of the Oath that is made of either
Party. By comparing which two Testimonies together, we may see the reasons, why
neither of the two Royal Brothers, that have ruled in our day, could be
conscienciously ouned as Magistrates, in the Case they have been in for several
years past: The first testimony is for the second* Brother, the Latter is for
he first that's gone. But as for Mr Knox his opinion, it is evident he had
written a^ a book against the Government of women: which though he did not
intend it particularly against Mary of Scotland, yet* it did invalidate her
authority as well as other women's. This book he ounes and maintains, in his
first conference with her, and consequently could not oune her authority as of
the Lord, though he gave her common respect, as the title of Majesty etc. yet
when he was particularly urged by the Queens question, you think, said she,
that I have no just authority; He would not answer in the affirmative, but
shifted it, by telling her; That learned men in all ages, have had their
judgment free, and most commonly disagreeing from the Common judgment of the
world. And tho, he says, he could live under her government (so may and would
the greatest disouners of Tyranny, if they be not troubled with questions about
ovvneing it) yet he affirms that with the Testimony of a good Conscience, he
had communicate his judgment to the world, and that if the realm found no
inconveniences in her government, he would no further disallow than within his
oun breast. Certainly then in his Conscience he did not and could not oune her,
as the Magistrate of God; And that tho many things which before were holden
stable, had been called in doubt, yet neither Protestant nor Papist could
prove, that any such question was at any time moved in public or private,
Neither could ever such a question be moved, if the Conscience were not posed,
and then when it must speak, it must of necessity be unpleasant to Tyrants.
Thus we have heard both the positions and scruples of this witness, let us also
hear his arguings that People may punish Princes for their Idolatry and murder
etc. And therefore much more may disoune them: And therefore again much more
may they forbear to oune them, when called; for can a dead man by Law be ouned
to be a Magistrate, and Custos of the Law. Idolatry (says he in his conference
with Lithington) ought not only to be suppressed, but the Idolater ought to die
the death: but by whom? by the people of God, for the Commandment was given to
Israel; yea a Command, that if it be heard that Idolatry is committed in any
one City, that then the whole body of the people arise and destroy that City,
sparing neither man woman nor child. But shall the King also be punished? If he
be an Idolater, I find no privilege granted unto Kings more then unto people,
to offend Gods Majesty. But the people may not be Judges to their King. -- God
is the universal Judge; so that what His Word commands to be punished in the
one, is not to be absolved in the other; And that the people, yea or a part of
the people, may not execute Gods judgments against their King being an
offender, I am sure you have no other warrant, except your own imaginations,
and the opinion of such as more fear to offend their Princes than God. In the
same Conference we have the instance of Iehu adduced to prove that Subjects may
execute Gods judgments upon their Princes. It was objected, Iehu was a King
before he executed judgment upon Ahabs house, and the fact was extraordinary,
and not to be imitated. He answered, he was a mere Subject; No doubt Iezabel
both thought and said he was a Traitor, and so did many others in Israel and
Samaria. And whereas it was said, that the fact was extraordinary; I say, it
had the ground of Gods ordinary judgment, which commands the Idolater to die
the death; and therefore I yet again affirm, it is to be imitated of all those
that prefer the true honor of the true Worship and Glory of God to the
affection of flesh and wicked Princes. We are not bound, said Lithingtoun to
follow extraordinary examples, unless we have the like Comman^ment and
assurance. I grant, said the other, if the example repugne to the Law, but
where the example aggrees with the Law, and is as it were the execution of Gods
judgment expressed within the same, I say that the example approved of God
stands to us in place of a Commandment; for as God in His Nature is Constant
and Immutable, so cannot He condemn in the ages subsequent that which He has
approved in His Servants before us. Then he brings another Argument from
Amaziah who fled to Lachish, but the people sent thither and flew him there.
Lethingtoun doubted, whether they did well or not: ^e answered, where I find
execution according to Gods Law, and God Himself not accuse the doers, I dare
not doubt of the equity of their Cause: And it appears. God gave them
sufficient evidence of His approving the fact, for He blessed them with peace
and prosperity. But prosperity does not alwise prove that God approves the
fact: yes, when the acts of men agree with the Law, and are rewarded according
to the promise in that Law, then the prosperity succeeding the fact is a most
infallible assurance that God has approved it; but so it is, that there is a
promise of lengthening out prosperity to them that destroy Idolatry. And again,
concluding Uzziahs example, he says there, The people ought to execute Gods
Law, even against their Princes, when that their open Crimes by Gods Law
deserve punishment, especially when they are such as may infect the rest of the
multitude.

V. There is another thing for which people have suffered much in our day of
blasphemy rebuke and trouble, which yet we find was not so odious in our
Reformers eyes as this dull and degenerate age would represent it. That in some
cases it is Lawful and laudable for private persons, touched with the zeal of
God and love to their Country, and respect to Justice trampled upon by
Tyrants, to put forth their hand to execute righteous judgment upon the Enemies
of God and mankind, intolerable Traitors, Murderers, Idolaters; when the ruin
of the Country, Destruction of Religion and Liberty, and the wrath of God is
threatened, in and for the impunity of that vermin of villains, and may be
averted by their destruction, always supposed, that these whose office it is to
do it decline their duty. The mind of our Reformers as to this is manifest,
both in their practice and opinion. We heard before of the slaughter of
Cardinal Beaton, and of the fiddler Rizio: we shall find both commended by Mr
Knox, giving account how these that were carried Captives to France for this
Cause from St Andrews were delivered. This (says he) we write, to let the
posterity to come to understand, how potently God wrought in preserving and
delivering of those, that had but a small knowledge of His Truth, and for the
love of the same hazarded all; That if we in our days, or our posterity that
shall follow, shall see a dispersion of such as oppose themselves to impiety,
or take upon them to punish the same otherwise then Laws of men will permit, if
such shall be left of men, yea as it were despised and punished of God: yet let
us not damn the persons that punish vice (and that for just cause) nor ye^
despair, but that the same God that dejects will raise up again the persons
dejected, to His glory and their comfort: And to let the world understand in
plain terms what we mean; that great abuser of this Commonwealth, that Pultron
and vile Knave Davio was justly punished March 9. 1565. by the Counsel and
hands of James Douglas Earl of Mortoun, Patrick Lord Lindsay etc: who for
the^r just act, and most worthy of all praise, are now unworthily left of all
their Brethren. This is not only commended by the Author alone, but we find it
concluded by all the Brethren at that time, when the Queen brought in the Idol
of the Mass again, and the proud Papists began to avow it: then let it be
marked that, The Brethren universally offended, and espying that the Queen by
Proclamation did but delude them, determined to put to their own hands, and to
punish for example of others; And so some Priests in the West Land were
apprehended, Intimation was made to others, as to the Abbot of Cosragnel, the
Parson of Sanquhar, and such, that they should neither complain to the Queen
nor Council, but should execute the punishment that God has appointed to
Idolaters in His Law, by such means as they might, wherever they should be
apprehended. Upon this the Queen sent for Mr Knox, and dealt with him
earnestly, that he would be the instrument to persuade the people not to put
hand to punish. He perceiving her craft, willed her Maj. to punish Malefactors
according to Law, and he durst promise quietness, upon the part of all them
that professed Christ within Scotland, but if her Maj. thought to delude the
Laws, he feared some would let the Papists understand, that without punishment
they should not be suffered so manifestly to offend Gods Majesty. Will ye
(quoth she) allow they shall take my Sword in their hand? The Sword of Justice
(said he) Madam is Gods, and is given to Princes and Rulers for one end; which
if they transgress, sparing the wicked and oppressing the Innocents, they that
in the fear of God execute judgment, where God has commanded, offend not God,
although Kings do it not: the examples are evident, for Samuel spared not to
slay Agag the fat and delicate King of Amalek, whom King Saul had saved;
Neither spared Elias Iezabels false Prophets, and Baals Priests, albeit that
King Ahab was present; Phineas was no Magistrate, and yet feared he not to
strike Zimri and Cozbi in the very act of filthy fornication: And so Madam your
Maj. may see that others then Magistrates may Lawfully punish, and have
punished the vice and crimes that God commands to be punished. He proved it
also at more length in his Appellation, from Deuteronomy. 13. If thy Brother solicit
thee secretly saying, let us go serve other Gods, consent not to him, let not
thine eye spare him (...) him; let thy hand be first upon him, and afterward
the hand of the whole people. Of these words of Moses, two things appertaining
to our purpose are to be noted: The first is, that such as solicitate only to
Idolatry ought to be punished to death, without favor or respect of person;
for He that will not suffer man to spare his son, wife, etc. will not wink at
the Idolatry of others, of what state or condition soever they be: It is not
unknown that the Prophets had Revelations of God, which were not common to the
people; Now if any man might have claimed any privilege from the rigor of the
Law, or might have justified his fact, it should have been the Prophet, but God
commands, that the Prophet that shall so solicitate the people to serve strange
Gods, shall dye the death, notwithstanding that he allege for himself dream,
vision, or Revelation, because he teaches Apostasy from God: hereby it may be
seen, that none provoking the people to Idolatry ought to be exempted from the
punishment of death. Evident it is that no state, condition, nor honor can
exempt the Idolater from the hands of God, when He shall call him to an
account: How shall it then excuse the people, that they, according to Gods
command, punish not to death such as shall solicitate or violently draw the
people to Idolatry? The second, is that the punishment of such Crimes, as
Idolatry, blasphemy, and others that touch the Majesty of God, does not
appertain to Kings and chief Rulers only, but also to the whole body of the
people, and to every member of the same, according to the vocation of every
man, and according to that possibility and occasion which God does minister, to
revenge the injury done against His Glory: And that does Moses more plainly
speak in these words of the same Chapter, If in any City which the Lord thy
God gives thee, thou shall hear this brute, there are some men sons of Belial
-- Plain it is that Moses speaks not nor gives charge to Kings, Rulers, and
Judges only; but he commands the whole body of the people, yea and every member
of the same, according to their possibility. And who dare be so impudent as to
deny ^his to be most reasonable and just? For seeing God had delivered the
whole body from bondage, and to the whole multitude had given His Law, and to
the twelve tribes had distributed the Land of Canaan; was not the whole and
every member addebted to confess the benefits of God, and to study to keep the
possession received? which they could not do, except they kept the Religion
established, and put out iniquity from amongst them. To the carnal man this may
seem to be a rigorous and severe judgment, that even the Infants there should
be appointed to the cruel death: and as concerning the City, and spoill of the
same, man's reason cannot think but that it might have been better bestowed,
than to be consumed. But in such cases let all creatures stoup, and desist from
reasoning, when Commandment is given to execute His Judgment. I will search no
other reasons, than the Holy Ghost has assigned; first, that all Israel should
fear to commit the like abomination; And secondly, that the Lord might turn
from the fury of His anger: Which plainly does signify, that by the defection
and Idolatry of a few, Gods wrath is kindled against the whole, which is never
quenched, till such punishment be taken upon the offenders, that whatsoever
served them in their Idolatry be brought to destruction etc. I have enlarged so
far upon this Period, that it may appear, there is nothing now in Controversy,
between the suffering and reproached party now in Scotland, and either their
Friends or Enemies, which could fall under our Reformers inquiry; but they have
declared themselves of the same sentiments, that are now so much opposed: And
therefore none can condemn the present heads of suffering, except also they
condemn the Reformers judgment; and consequently the imputation of novelty must
fall.

PERIOD. IV.
Containing the Testimony of the first Contenders against Prelacy and
Supremacy, from the year 1570. to 1638.
HItherto the Conflict was for the Concerns of Christ's Prophetical and Priestly
Office, against Paganisine and Popery. But from the year 1570. And dounward,
the Testimony is stated, and gradually Prosecuted, for the Rights, Privileges,
and Prerogatives of Christ's Kingly Office: which has been the peculiar Glory
of the Church of Scotland, above all the Churches in the Earth, that this has
been given to her as the word of her Testimony; and not only Consequentially
and Reductively, as all other Churches may challenge a part of this dignity,
but Formally and Explicitly to contend for this very head, The Headship and
Kingship of Jesus Christ, the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, and His
Mediatory Supremacy over His oun Kingdom of Grace, both visible and Invisible.
This is Christ's supremacy, a special radiant Jewel of His Imperial Croun:
which, as it has been as explicitly incroached upon in Scotland, by His
Insolent Enemies, as ever by any that entered in opposition to Him; so it has
been more expressly witnessed and wrestled for, by His suffering Servants in
that Land, than in any place of the world. This was in a particular manner the
Testimony of that Period, during the reign of King James the Sixth; as it has
been in a great measure in our day, since the year 1660. Which, as it is the
most important Cause, of the greatest Consequence that Mortals can contend for;
So it has this peculiar Glory in it, that it is not only for a Truth of
Christ, of greater value then the standing of Heaven and Earth, but also it is
the very Truth, for which Christ Himself died, considered as a Martyr; And
which concerns Him to vindicate and maintain as a Monarch. The Witnesses of
that day made such an high account of it, that they encouraged one another to
suffer for it, as the greatest Concern; being a witness for Christ's Glorious
and free Monarchy, which as it is the end of the other two Offices, so the
Testimony is more Glorious to God, more honorable to His Son, and more
Comfortable to them, then the Testimony either for His Prophetical office, or
for His Priesthood, because His Kingdom was specially impugned at the time; As
Mr Forbes and Mr Welsh write in a Letter to the Ministers at Court. The
Corruptions and Usurpations wronging this Truth, that they contended against,
were Prelacy and the Kings Supremacy in Ecclesiastical matters: which will be
useful to hint a little, how they Prosecuted the Conflict. When Satan (whose
Kingdom was then declining) by several instruments and means, both by force and
fraud, did endeavor to put a stop to the Reformation, by reintroducing the
Antichristian Hierarchy of Prelacy, when he could not reestablish the
Antichristian Doctrine of Popery; he left no means unessayed to effectuate it.
And first he began to bring the name Bishop in request, that was now growing
obsolete and odious, by reason of the abuse of it (as it ought to be still; for
though the name be found in the Scriptures, yet neither is that Catechrestical
application of it to Prelates to be sound, nor was there any other reason for
the translation of it after that manner, except it were to please Princes;
seeing the native signification of it is an Overseer, proper and common to all
faithful Pastors.) And indeed his first essay reached little further then the
bare name, for they were to be subject to and tried by Assemblies, and hardly
had so much power as Superintendents before. But it was a fine Court-juggle for
Noblemen, to get the Church revenues into their hands, by restoring the
Ecclesiastical titles, and obtaining from the titulars either Temporal Lands,
or Pensions to their dependers: so they were only Tulchan Bishops, a Calfeskin
to cause the Cow give milk. Yet, though this in our day would have been thought
tolerable; The faithful Servants of Christ did zealously oppose it. Mr Knox
denunced Anathema to the Giver, and Anathema to the Receiver. And the following
Assembly condemned the office it self, as having no sure warrant, authority,
nor ground in the Book of God, but brought in by the folly and corruption of
men's invention, to the overthrow of the Church; and ordained all that brooked
the office, to dimit simpliciter, and to desist and cease from preaching, while
they received de novo admission from the General Assembly, under the pain of
excomunication. Hereby they were awakened and animated, to a more vigorous
Prosecution of the establishment of the House of God, in its due Government. In
pursuance whereof, the Assemblies from that time until the year 1581. Did with
much painfulness and faithfulness attend the work; until, by perfecting of the
Second Book of Discipline, they completed their work, in the exact Model of
Presbyterial Government, in all its Courts and Officers. Which was Confirmed,
and Covenanted to be kept inviolate, in the National Covenant, subscribed that
year by the King, his Court, and Council; and afterward by all ranks of People
in the Land. Whence it may be doubted, whether the impudence of the succeeding
Prelates that denied this, or their perjury in breaking of it, be greater. This
was but the first brush: a brisker assault follows. Wherein, for the better
establishment of Prelacy, that what it wants of Divine right, might be supplied
by the accession of humane Prerogative, and not only Diocesan but also Erastian
Prelacy might be set up, to destroy Christ's Kingdom and advance Satan's; the
Earl of Arran and his wicked Accomplices, move the King, contrary both to the
Word and Oath of God, to usurp the prerogative of Jesus Christ, and assume to
himself, a blasphemous Monster of Supremacy, over all Persons, and in all
Causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil. But this also the faithful Servants of
God did worthily and valiantly resist: and at the very first appearance of it,
gave in a Grievance to the King, anno 1582. That he had taken upon him a
spiritual Power, which properly belongs to Christ, as only King and Head of the
Church; the Ministry and execution whereof, is only given to such as bear
office in the Ecclesiastical Government in the same: so that in the Kings
Person, some men press to erect a new Popedom, as though he could not be full
King of this Commonwealth, unless as well the spiritual as temporal Sword be
put in his hand, unless Christ be rest of His Authority, and the two
Jurisdictions confounded, which God has divided, which directly tends to the
wrack of all true Religion. Which being presented by the Commissioners of the
General Assembly; the Earl of Arran asked, with a frouning Countenance, who
dare subscribe these treasonable Articles? Mr Andrew Melvin answered, we dare,
and will subscribe, and render our Lives in the Cause. And afterward, that same
Assembly presented Articles, showing, that seeing the spiritual Jurisdiction of
the Church, is granted by Christ, and given only to them, that by preaching,
teaching, and overseeing, bear Office within the same, to be exercised, not by
the injunctions of men, but by the only Rule of Gods Word -- hereafter, no
other of whatsomever degree, or under whatsomever pretense, have any color to
ascribe, or to take upon them any part thereof, either in placing or displacing
of Ministers, without the Churches admission, or in stopping the mouths of
Preachers, or putting them to silence, or take upon them the judgment of trial
of Doctrine etc. But in contempt and contradiction to this, and to prosecute
and exert this new usurped Power, Mr Andrew Melvin was summoned before the
secret Council, for a Sermon of his, applying his doctrine to the Times
Corruptions: whereupon he gave in his declinature against them as incompetent
Judges; and told them, they were too bold, in a Constitute Christian Church, to
pass by the Pastors, Prophets, and Doctors, and to take upon them to judge the
Doctrine, and to control the Ambassadors of a Greater then was there, which
they neither ought nor can do. There are (says he, Loosing a little Hebrew
Bible from his girdle) my Instructions and Warrant: see if any of you can
control me, that I have past my injunctions. For this he was decerned, to be
warded in the Castle of Edinbrugh, but he being informed, that if he entered in
ward he would not be released, unless it were for the scaffold, he conveyed
himself secretly out of the Country. Hereafter when the Parliament 1584. had
enacted this Supremacy, and submission to Prelacy, to be subscribed by all
Ministers; the faithful first directed Mr David Lindsey to the King, desiring
that nothing be done in Parliament prejudicial to the Churches Liberty: who got
the Prison of Blackness for his Pains. And then when they could not get access
for shut doors to Protest before the Parliament; yet, when the Acts were
proclaimed at the Cross of Edinburgh, they took public Documents, in name of
the Church of Scotland (though they were but two) that they protested against
the said Acts: and fled to England, leaving behind them reasons that moved them
to do so. And Mr James Melvin wrote against the subscribers at that time very
pertinently: Proving, first, that they had not only set up a new Pope, and so
become Traitors to Christ, and condiscended to that chief error of Papistrie,
whereupon all the rest depend; but further, in so doing they had granted more
to the King, than ever the Popes of Rome peaceably obtained etc. And in the
end, as for those that Lamented their oun weakness and feebleness, he advises
them, to remove the public slander, by going boldly to the King and Lords, and
show them how they had fallen through weakness, but by Gods power are risen
again; and there by public note and witness taken, free themselves from that
subscription, and to will the same to be delete, renouncing and detesting it
plainly, and thereafter publicly in their Sermons, and by their Declaration
and retractation in writ, presented to the faithful, manifest the same, let
them do with stipend, benefice, and Life it self what they list. This I insert,
because this Counsel is now condemned, and when poor people, offended with
Ministers subscriptions of Bonds and other Complyances, desire acknowledgments
of the offense, they reject it as an impertinent imposition, and plead they are
not obliged to manifest any retractation but to an Ecclesiastical Judicatory.
To which I shall say nothing here, but this is no novelty. After this, it is
known what bickerings the faithful witnesses of Christ had, in their Conflicts
with this supremacy, upon the account of Mr David Blacks Declinature, which
they both advised him to, and approved when he gave it in, against the King and
Conncil as Judges of his Doctrine. And the Commissioners of the General
Assembly ordained all, to deal mightily with the power of the word, against the
Councils encroachments; for which they were charged to depart forth of
Edinburgh. After which he added a second Declinature: Declaring, there are two
Jurisdictions in this realm, the one Spiritual the other Civil; the one
respecting the Conscience, the other externals; etc. -- Therefore, in so far as
he was one of the spiritual office-bearers, and had discharged his spiritual
Calling in some measure of grace and sincerity, should not nor could not be
Lawfully judged, for preaching and applying the word, by any Civil power; he
being an Ambassador and Messenger of the Lord Jesus, having his Commission
from the King of Kings, and all his instructions set down and limited in the
book of God, that cannot be extended, abridged, or altered by any mortal wight,
King or Emperor; And seeing he was sent to all sorts, his Commission and
discharge of it should not nor cannot be Lawfuly, judged, by them to whom he
was sent; they being sheep and not Pastors, to be judged by the Word and ^^t to
be judges thereof in a judicial way. The Interloquutor being past against him
for this; the Brethren thought it duty, that the Doctrine of the Preachers
should be directed against the said Interloquutor, as against a strong and
mighty hold set up against the Lord Jesus, and the freedom of the Gospel; and
praised God for the force and unity of the Spirit, that was among themselves.
And being charged to depart out of Town, they leave a faithful Declaration at
Large; showing, how the Liberties of the Church were invaded and robbed: But
all this was nothing, in comparison of their wrestlings for the Royalties of
their Princely Master, and Privileges of His Kingdom, against that Tyrants
Insolences, after he obtained he Croun of England. For then he would not
suffer the Church to indict her oun Assemblies. And when the faithful thought
themselves obliged to counteract his Encroachments, and therefore conveened in
an Assembly at Aberdeen, anno 1605. they were forced to dissolve: and
thereafter, the most eminent of the Ministers there assembled, were transported
Prisoners to Black-ness. Whence being cited before the Council, they decline
their Judicatory. And one of their Brethren, Mr Robert Youngson, who had
formerly succumbed, being moved in Conscience, returned: and when the rest were
standing before the Council, desired to be heard; and acknowledged his fault,
and therefore, howbeit not summoned by the Lords, was charged by the Living
God, and compelled to compear that day, to justify that Assembly, to the great
astonishment of the Lords, and comfort of His brethren; He subscribed the
Declinature with the rest: And for this they were arraigned, and condemned, as
guilty of Treason, and banished. Before the execution of which sentence, Mr
Welsh wrote to the Lady Fleming, to this effect. What am I, that He should
first have called me, and then constituted me a Minister of glad things, of the
Gospel of Salvation, these fifteen years already, and now last of all to be a
sufferer for His Cause and Kingdom? To witness that good Confession, that Jesus
Christ is the King of Saints, and that His Church is a most free Kingdom, yea
as free as any Kingdom under Heaven, not only to convocate, hold and keep her
Meetings, Conventions, and Assemblies: But also to judge of all her affairs in
all her Meetings and Conventions, among His members and Subjects. These two
points. (1) That Christ is the Head of His Church. (2) That she is free in her
Government from all other jurisdiction except Christ's, are the special Cause of
our imprisonment, being now convict as Traitors, for maintaining thereof. We
have now been waiting with joyfulness to give the last Testimony of our blood
in confirmation thereof. If it would please our God to be so favorable, as to
honor us with that dignity. After this, the King resolving by Parliament to
advance the estate of Bishops again, as in the time of Popery, without Cautions
as before; and further to establish not only that Antichristian Hierarchy, but
an Erastian Supremacy: The faithful Ministers of Christ, thought themselves
bound in Conscience to protest. And accordingly they offered a faithful
Protestation to the Parliament Iulij -- 1606. obtesting, that they would
reserve into the Lords own hands, that Glory which He will communicate neither
with man nor Angel, to wit, to prescribe from His holy Mountain a Lively
pattern, according to which His oun Tabernacle should be formed: Remembering
alwise, that there is no absolute and undoubted Anthority in this world, except
the sovereign Authority of Christ the King; to whom it belongs as properly
to rule the Church, according to the good pleasure of His oun will, as it
belongs to Him to save His Church by the Merit of His oun Sufferings: All
other anthority is so entrenched within the marches of Divine Command, that
the least overpassing of the bounds set by God Himself, bring men under the
fearful expectation of Temporal and Eternal judgments. -- If ye should
authorize Bishops, ye should bring into the Church the ordinance of man, which
experience has found, to have been the ground of that Antichristian
Hierarchy, which mounted up on the steps of Bishops preeminence, until that
man of sin came forth, as the ripe fruit of man's wisdom, whom God shall
consume with the breath of His oun mouth. Let the svvord of God pierce that
belly, which brought forth such a monster: And let the staff of God crush that
egg, which has hatched such a Cockatrice: And let not only that Roman
Antichrist be thrown down from the high bench of his usurped authority, but
also let all the steps whereby he mounted up to that unlawful preeminence, be
cut down and utterly abolished in this Land: And beware to strive against God
with an open displayed banner, by building up again the walls of Jericho, which
the Lord has not only cast down, but also has laid them under an horrible
Interdiction and execration, so that the building of them again must needs
stand to greater charges to the builders, then the reedifying of Jericho, to
Hiel the Bethelite in the days of Ahab. Yet notwithstanding of all opposition,
Prelacy was again restored in Parliament. And to bring all to a Compliance with
the same, Presbytries and Synods universally charged, under highest pains, to
admit a constant Moderator without change: which many refused resolutely, as
being the first step of Prelacy. Upon this followed a great Persecution of the
faithful, for their Nonconformity, managed by that Mongrel and Monstrous kind
of Court, made up of Clergymen and Statesmen, called the High Commission Court,
erected anno 1610. whereby many honest men were put violently from their
charges and habitations; the Generality were involved in a great and fearful
Defection. But the Copestone of the wickedness of that Period, was the
Ratification of the five Articles of Perth; kneeling at the Communion, private
Communion to be given to the sick, private Baptism, and Confirmation of
Children by the Bishop, and observation of festival days. Which were much
opposed and testified against by the faithful, from their first hatching anno
1618. to the year 1621. when they were ratified in Parliament: at what time
they were also witnessed against from Heaven, by extraordinary Lightenings and
Tempest. And against this the Testimony of the faithful continued, till the
Revolution anno 1638. Here we see how the Cause was stated in this Period; and
may gather also, wherein it aggress, and how far it differs from the present
Testimony, now suffered for under all rage and reproach.

I. The matter of the Testimony was one with that that we are suffering for,
against Popery, Prelacy, and Supremacy; except that it was not so far extended
against Tyranny, because that Tyrant was not such an usurper, nor such a
violater of the fundamental constitutions of the Civil Government, as these
that we have had to do with all. But as to the managing the Testimony, they far
out stripped their successors in this generation, in conduct and courage,
Prudence and zeal, as is above hintend in many instances: to which we may add
some more. When several plots of Papist Lords had been discovered, conspiring
with the King of Spain, And they were by the Kings Indulgence favored, and
some were also persuaded to treat with them: famous Mr Davidson opposed with
great resolution; Declaring before the Synod of Lothian, that it favored much
of defection in these days, that such notorious rebels to God, His Church,
and the Country, should be so treated with; we should not rashly open a door to
Gods Enemies, without better proof of their manners nor were yet seen. And when
a convention in Falkland was consulting to call home these conspiring Traitors:
Mr Andrew Melvin went thither uncalled; and when found fault with by the King
for his boldness, he answered, Sir, I have a call to come here from Christ and
His Church, who have special Interest in this Turn, and against whom this
Convention is assembled directly: I charge you, and your Estates, in the Name
of Christ and His Church, that ye favor not His Enemies whom He hates, nor go
about to call home nor make Citizens of these, who have traitorously sought to
betray their City and native Country, with the overthroiw of Chists Kingdom.
And further challenged them of treason against Christ, His Church and the
Country, in that purpose they were about. About the same time in a private
Conference with the King, he called the King Gods silly vassal; and taking him
by the sleeve, told him; Sir, you, and Church and Country is like to be
wracked for not telling the Truth, and giving you faithful Counsel; we must
discharge our duty, or else be enemies to Christ and you: Therefore I must tell
you, there are two Kings and two Kingdoms; There is Christ and His Kingdom,
whose subject King James the 6th is, and of whose Kingdom he is not a King, nor
a Head, nor a Lord, but a member, and they whom Christ has called to vvatch
over and govern his Church, have sufficient Authority, and Power from Him,
which no Christian King should control but assist, otherwise they are not
faithful subjects to Christ. Sir, when you were in your svvedling clouts,
Christ reigned freely in this Land, in spite of all His enemies; but now the
wisdom of your Council, which is Devilish and pernicious, is this, that you
may be served of all sorts of men to your purpose and grandour, Jew and
Gentile, Papist and Protestant, because the Ministers and Protestants in
Scotland are too strong, and control the King, they must be weakened and
brought lovv, by stirring up a party against them, and the King being equal and
indifferent, both shall be fain to flee to him, so shall he be well settled:
But, Sir, let Gods wisdom be the only wisdom, this will prove mere and mad
folly; for His curse cannot but light upon it, so that in seeking both you
shall lose both. To the like effect, Mr Robert Bruce, in a Sermon upon Psalm,
51. gives faithful warning of the danger of the times. It is not we (says he)
that are Party in this cause; no, the quarrel is betwixt a greater Prince and
them. What are we, but silly men? Yet it has pleased Him to set us in this
Office, that we should oppone to the manifest usurpation that is made upon His
Spiritual Kingdom. Is there a more forcible mean to draw down the wrath of God,
than to let Barrabas that nobilitate Malefactor pass free, and to begin the war
against Christ and His Ministry. It puteth on the Copestone, that so many of
our brethren should not be so faithful, as their Calling and this Cause
craveth. Fie upon false brethren, to see them dumb, so faint hearted, when it
comes to the Chock: Not only are they ashamed to speak the thing they think,
which is a shame in a Pastor, but speak directly against their former Doctrine.
They will speak the Truth a while, till they be put at, but incontinent they
will turn and make their gifts weapons to fight against Christ; for there is
none so malicious as an Apostate when he begins to slide back etc. The same
faithful witness, because he would not preach as the King would have him,
against his oun conscience, to justify and Proclaim the Kings Innocence, in a
forged conspiracy against him, was put from his Church in Edinburgh, and being
requested in an insinuating manner to desist from preaching but for nine or ten
days; he condiscended at first, thinking the matter of no great importance:
yet that night his body was cast in a fever, with the terror of his conscience,
and he promised he should never obey their Commandment any more. These were
faithful men, yet we find they challenge themselves in deep humiliation, for
their short comings and defections, at the renovation of the National Covenant,
March, 30. 1596. the greatst solemnity ever had been seen in Scotland before
that time, so that the place might worthily have been called Bochim. O when
shall we see such a day, when even the most faithful among us, shall mourn over
our far more aggravated defections! but if they mourned then for these first
degrees of declensions, we may say, quam gravius ingemiscerent illi fortes
viri, qui propter Ecclesiae Scoticanae Libertatem. olim in acie decertarunt, si
nostram hanc ignaviam (ne quid gravius dicam) conspicerent! I know
notwithstanding of all this, that some encourage themselves in a base
Compliance with the present corruptions of our Church, from the practice of
these Worthies; Alleging, they did not scruple to hear and join with
Prelatical men, dispensing the ordinances. But this Objection will be easily
refelled, if we consider, first, the Period wherein they were but growing up to
a more perfect Reformation, and therefore might bear with many things which we
cannot, after we have been reformed from them: They were then advancing and
still gaining ground, we are now declining, and therefore should be more shie
to lose what we have gained. They had then of a long time enjoyed their
Judicatories, unto which they might recur for an orderly redress of such
grievances that offended them; and when they were deprived of them, yet they
were still in hopes of recovering them, and so suspended their total secession
from that corrupt Church, until they should recover them; in the mean time
still holding their right and maintaining their cause against these Invaders.
But we were at thevery first beginning of this unhappy Revolution, totally
deprived of our Judicatories, and denuded of all expectation of them in an
ordinary way, and of all place, but what they are Masters of to contend with
them that way; therefore must keep our selves free of their* Communion. But
next if we consider their practice, we shall find these Worthies were not such
Conformists, as our Complyers would make them. What if we find among them
Meetings, that were Called and Counted as Seditious and Schismatic, as Ours
are now? we find a field Meeting, yea a General Assembly, at Dumfermling
without and against the Kings vvarrant, when the ^ports were shut against
them, anno 1585. But that is not so pat to the purpose, as that we find
Private-Meetings at Edinburgh, and that in the very time of public Service in
the Churches, discharged by open Proclamation anno 1624. wherein it is
charged, that they had no respect to the ordinary Pastors, contemned and
impugned their Doctrine, disobeyed and controlled their Discipline, abstained
to hear the Word preached, and to Participate of the Sacraments. And long
before that, we find the sincerer sort scrupled to hear Bishop Adamson, not
withstanding that he was absolved in the Assembly. And that afterward, the
doubt being proponed to the Assembly, if it be a slander to a Christian, to
absent himself from the Sermons of them that are suspended from all function in
the Ministry. The Assembly Ansvvered, there is no slander in the Case but
rather it is slanderous to resort. And why is not this ground to think it
slanderous or scandalous to resort to them, who deserve to be suspended (all of
them by a Spiritual cognizance, and some of them to be suspended Corporally,
for their villainy) when there can be no access orderly to do it. And the
rather, because we find in this Period, that sometimes Ministers were so
faithful and zealous against the Corruptions of the Ministry, that they
decerned Ministers to be suspended for far smaller faults, than many now could
exempt themselves from; viz. if they were not powerful and Spiritual, if they
did not apply their Doctrine to Corruptions, if they were obscure and too
Scholastic before the people, cold and wanting zeal, flatterers, dissembling
at public sins for flattery or fear etc. As we may read in the Advice of the
Brethren, deputed for penning the Corruptions in the Ministry, anno 1596. I
wish our silent prudent Ministers now would consider the justness of this
Censure, and what ground people have to be offended at such censurableness. But
not only this may answer the false imputation of Conformity on these witnesses
of Christ at that time, but I shall set down a part of a Letter of one of the
banished Ministers at that time, discovering his mind about hearing these men,
that were then serving the times. Mr John Welsh, writing to Mr Robert Bruce, --
what my mind is concerning the root of these branches, the bearer will show you
more fully. They are no more to be counted Orthodox, but Apostates; They have
fallen from their Callings by receiving an Antichristian, and bringing in of
Idolatry, to make the Kingdom culpable, and to expose it to fearful Judgments,
for such an high perfidie against an Oath so sol^mnly enacted and given; And
are no more to be counted Christians, but strangers, Apostates, and
Persecutors, And therefore not to be heard any more, either in public, or in
Consistories, Colleges, or Synods; for what fellowship has light with
darkness? We see then as to that part of the Testimony, they were not dissonant
to the vvitness of the present reproached sufferers.

II. As the matter and manner of their Testimony against all the invaders of
the Churches privileges, did speak forth a great deal of sincere and pure
zeal; so their practice was conform, showing forth a great deal of strictness,
and aversness from all sinful Complyances, even with things that would be now
accounted of very minute and inconsiderable consequence, and for which honest
sufferers now are flouted at as fools. When that Oath was formed for
acknowledging the Supremacy, there was a Clause added which might have been
thought to salve the matter, according to the Word of God. I fear many now
would not stand to subscribe, with such a qualification. Yet the faithful then
perceived the Sophistry, that it made it rather worse, affirming that that
brat of Hell was according to the word of God: And therefore, though there were
several eminent men to persuade them to it both by advice and example, yet they
could not in conscience Comply; And pleaded also from the illegality of that
imposition, that they should be charged with the subscription of Laws, a thing
never required before of any subject; if they offended against the Laws, why
might they not be punished according to the Laws? When many honest faithful
Patriots, for their attempt at Ruthven to deliver the Country from a vermin
of Villains that abused the King, to the destruction of the Church and Kingdom,
were charged to crave Pardon, and take remission; they would do neither,
judging it a base condemning of duty: which puts a brand upon our sneaking
Supplicators, and Petitioners, and Pardon-mongers, as unworthy to be called the
race of such Worthies, who scorned such baseness, and choosed rather to endure
the extremity of their unjust Sentences, of Intercommuning and Banishment etc.
And when the Earl of Gowrie accepted of a Remission, he afterward condemned
himself for it, and desired that his old friends would accept of his
friendship, to whom he had made himself justly suspected. Mr Black, when he had
the same favor offered to him, refused altogether, left so doing he should
condemn himself, and approve the Courts Proceedings: And the Brethren,
confering with the Counselors, craving that some penalty should be
condiscended unto for satisfying his Majesty in his honor, would not
condescend to any how light soever; lest thereby they should seem to approve
the Judicatorie and their Proceeding. The Imprisoned Ministers, for declining
the Council, had it in their offer, that if they would without any confession
of offense only submit themselves to his Majesty, pro scandalo, accepto non
dato, they should be restored to their places: But it pleased God so to
strengthen them, that they stopped their Mouths, and convinced them in their
Consciences, that they could not do it without betraying of the Cause of
Christ. Again in another case, we have Instances of such strictness, as is much
scorned now a days. The Ministers of Edinburgh were committed to ward, for
refusing to pray for the Queen, before her execution in Forthringam Castle
1586. they refused not simply to pray for her, but for the preservation of her
life, as if she had been innocent of the crimes laid to her charge, which had
imported a condemnation of the proceedings against her. Afterward in the year
1600. the Ministers of Edinburgh, would not praise God for the deliverie of the
King, from a pretended Conspiracy of the Earl of Gowrie at that time, of which
they had no credit nor assurance; and would not crave Pardon for it neither.
For this Mr Robert Bruce was deprived of the exercise of his Ministry, and
never obtained it again in Edinburgh: But now for refusing such compelled and
imposed Devotion, to pray or praise for the King, poor people are much
condemned. I know it is alleged, that these faithful sufferers in those days,
were not so strict as they are now, in submitting to unjust Sentences, and
obeying and keeping their Confinements. I shall grant, there was much of this,
and much might be tolerate in their circumstances, when the Court procedure
against them was not so illegal, their Authority was not so Tyrannical, nor so
necessary to be disouned, and they were so stated, that they were afraid to
take guilt upon them, in making their escapes: whereas it is not so with us.
Yet we find very faithful men broke their Confinements: As Mr John Murray,
confined about Dumfreis, perceiving there was no end of the Bishops malice, and
that he would be in no worse case than he was, he resolved without License
either of King or Council to transport himself: So did also Mr Robert Bruce.

III. For resistance of Superior Powers, we have in this Period, first the
practice of some Noblemen an Ruthven, anno 1582. who took the King, and seized
on that Arrant Traitor, Enemy to the Church and Country, the Earl of Arran;
declaring to the world the Causes of it, the Kings Correspondence with Papists,
his usurping the Supremacy over the Church, and oppressing the Ministers, all
by means of his wicked Counselors, whom therefore they removed from him. The
King himself emitted a Declaration allowing this deed. The General Assembly
approved of it, and persuaded to a Concurrence with it, and nothing was wanting
to ratify it, as a most Lawful and laudable action. At length the Fox
escapes, and changes all, and retracts his former Declaration. The Lords again
rallie, and interprise the taking of the Castle of Stirling, and gain it; but
afterward surrender it: after which the Earl of Gowrie is executed, and
Ministers are commanded to retract the Approbation of Ruthven business, but
they refused: and many were forced to flee to England, and the Lords were
banished. But in the year 1585. they return with more success, and take the
Castle of Stirling. The cowardly King does again acknowledge and justify their
Enterprise, that they needed no Apology of words, Weapons had spoken well
enough, and gotten them audience to clear their own Cause: but his after
carriage declared him as crafty and false, as he was cowardly and fearful.
Again we have the advice of the General Assembly, for resisting, when the
Ministers were troubled, upon Mr Blacks bussiness, and there was an intention
to pull them out of their Pulpits: They advised them to stand to the discharge
of their Calling, if their flocks would save them from violence, and yet this
violence was expected from the King and his Emissaries. As to that point then
there can be no dispute.

IV. There was little occasion for the Question about the Kings Authority in
this Period, but generally all acknowledged it: because they were not sensible
of his usurpation, and his cowardice made him incapable of attempting any thing
that might raise commotions in civil things. Yet we remark, that whatsoever
Authority he usurped beyond his sphere, that was disouned and declined by all
the Faithful, as the Supremacy. Next that they resented, and represented very
harshly, any aspiring to Absoluteness; as Mr Andrew Melvin could give it no
better name, nor intertain no better notion of it, then to term it, The
bloody Guillie, as he inveighs against it in the Assembly, 1582. And next, in
this same Period, we have a very good description of that Authority, which the
King himself allows not to be ouned, which out of a Kings mouth abundantly
justifies the disouning of the present Tyranny: This same King James, in a
speech to the Parliament in the year 1609. says, A King degenerateth into a
Tyrant, when he leaves to rule by (...), much more when he begins to invade
his Subjects Persons, Rights, and Liberties, to set up an Arbitrary Power,
impose unlawful taxes, raise forces, make War upon his Subjects, to pillage,
plunder, wast, and spoil his Kingdoms.

PERIOD. V.
Containing the Testimony for the last Reformation from Prelacy, in all its
steps, from the year 1638, to 1660.
THe following Period, from the year 1638. to 1660, continues and advances the
Testimony, to the greatest hight of Purity and Power, that either this Church
or any other did ever arrive unto, with a Gradation, Succession, and
Complication of wonders, of Divine Wisdom, Power, Justice and Mercy, signally
and singularly ouning and sealing it, to the Confusion of His Enemies, Comfort
of His People, Conviction of Indifferent Neutrals, and Consternation of All.
Now after a long winter, and night of Deadness and Darkness, the sun returns
with an amiable approach of Light and Life: now the winter was past, the rain
was over and gone, the flowers appear on the earth, and the time of singing of
birds is come, and the voice of the turtle is heard in our Land. Now the second
time, the Testimony comes to be managed in an Active manner, as before it was
Passive: As the one has been always observed to follow interchangably upon
the other, especially in Scotland, and the Last always the Greatest; which
gives ground to hope, though it be now our turn to suffer, that when the summer
comes again after this winter, and the day after this night, the next Active
Testimony shall be more notable than any that went before. The matter of the
Testimony was the same as before, for the Concerns of Christ's Kingly
Prerogative, but with some more increase as to its opposites: for these grew
successively in every Period, the Last always including all that went before.
The first Period had Gentilisme principally to deal with, the second Popery,
The third Popery and Tyranny, the fourth Prelacy and Supremacy, this fifth
has all together, and Sectarianisme also, to contend against. The former had
always the opposites on one hand, but this has them in extremes on both
hands; both fighting against one another, and both fighting together against
the Church of Scotland, and she against both, till at length one of her
opposites prevailed, viz. the Secterian Party, and that prevailing brought in
the other, to wit, the Malignant, which now domineers over all together.
Wherefore, because this Period is in it self of so great importance, the
Revolutions therein emergent so eminent, the Reformation therein prosecuted
wanting little of its perfect Complement; the Deformation succeeding in its
Deviation from the Pattern being so destructive; to the end it may be seen from
whence we have fallen, and whether or not the present reproached Sufferers have
lost or left their ground, we must give a short deduction of the Rise,
Progress, and End of the Contendings of that Period.

In the midst of the forementioned Miseries and Mischiefs, that the pride of
Prelacy and Tyrannical Supremacy had multiplied beyond measure upon this Church
and Nation, and at the hight of all their haughtiness, when they were setting
up their Dagon, and erecting Altars for him, imposing the Service Book, and
book of Canons etc. the Lord in Mercy remembered His people, and surprised them
with a sudden unexpected Deliverance, by very despicable means; even the
opposition of a few weak women, at the beginning of that Contest, which, ere it
was quashed, made the Tyrant tumble headless off his throne. The zeal against
the English popish Ceremonies, obtruded on Edinburgh, did first inflame some
feminine hearts to witness their detestation of them; but afterward was
followed out with more Masculine fervor, accosting King and Council with
Petitions, Remonstrances, Protestations, and Testimonies against the
Innovations, and resolving upon a mutual Conjunction, to defend Religion,
Lives, and Liberties, against all that would innovate or invade them. To
fortify which, and conciliate the favor both of God and man in the
Resolution, All the Lovers of God, and friends to the Liberty of the Nation,
did solemnly Renew the National Covenant (wherein they were signally
countenanced of the Lord) which, though in it self obliging to the
Condemnation of Prelatical Hierarchy, and clearly enough confirming
Presbyterial Government, yet they engaged into it with an inlargment, to
suspend the practice of Novations already introduced, and the approbation of
the Corruptions of the present Government, with the late places and power of
Church men, till they be tried in a free General Assembly. Which was obtaine^
that same year, and indicted at Glasgow: and there, not with standing all the
opposition that the Kings Commissioner could make, by Protestations and
Proclamations to dissolve it, the six preceding Assemblies establishing
Prelacy were annulled, The Service Book, and high Commission were condemned;
All the Bishops were deposed, and their Government declared to be abjured in
that National Covenant; though many had, through the Commissioners,
persuasions, subscribed it in another sense without that application: As also
the five Articles of Perth were there discovered, to have been inconsistent
with that Covenant and Confession, and the Civil places and power of Church
men were disproved and rejected: on the other hand Presbyterial Government
was Justified and Approved, and an Act was passed for their keeping yearly
General Assemblies. This was a bold beginning, into which they were animated
with more than humane resolution, against more than humane opposition, Hell as
well as the powers of the earth being set against them. But when the Lord gave
the Call, they considered not their oun deadness, nor were daunted with
Discouragments, nor staggered at the promise through unbelief, but gave Glory
to God, out braving all difficulties. Which in the following year were much
increased, by the Prelates and their Popish Partakers, rendevouzing their forces
under the Kings Personal Standart, and menacing nothing but misery to the
zealous Covenanters: yet when they found them prepared to resist, were forced
to yield to a Pacification, concluding that an Assembly and Parliament should
be held for healing all grievances of Church and State. In which Assembly, at
Edinburgh, the Covenant is ratified and subscribed by the Earl of Traquair
Commissioner, and enjoined to be subscribed by the body of the whole Land, with
an explication expressly condemning the five Articles of Perth, the Government
of Bishops, the Civil places and power of Church men: But the sons of Belial
cannot be taken with hands, nor bound with bonds of faith, humanity, or honor;
For in the year following, King and Prelates, with their Popish Abettors, go to
arms again; but were fain to accommodate the matter by a new Pacification,
whereby all Civil and Religious Liberties were ratified. And in the following
year 1641, by Laws, Oaths, Promises, subscriptions of King and Parliament
fully confirmed. The King, Charles the I. being present, and consenting to all;
though in the mean time he was treacherously encouraging the Irish murderers,
who by his Authority made a Massacre of many thousand Innocent Protestants in
Ireland. But in Scotland things went well, the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus was
greatly advanced, the Gospel flourished, and the Glory of the Lord did shine
upon us, with such a splendour that it avvaked England, and animated the Lords
People there, then groaning under those Grievances from which Scotland was
delivered, to aspire to the like Reformation. For advice in which, because
though all aggreed to cast off the yoke of Prelacy, yet sundry forms of Church
Government were projected to be set up in the room thereof, chiefly the
Independent order, determining all Acts of Church Government, as Election,
ordination, and deposition of officers, with Admission, Excommunication, and
Absolution of members, to be done and decided by the voices of every Particular
Congregation, without any Authoritative Concurrence or interposition of any
other, condemning all imperative and decisive power of Classes etc. as a mere
usurpation; Therefore the Brethren in England vvrote to the Assembly then
fitting at Edinburgh, who gave them answer That they were grieved, that any
of the Godly should be found not aggreeing with other Reformed Churches in
point of Government, as well as Doctrine; and that it was to be feared, where
the edge of Discipline and Government is different, the Doctrine and Worship
shall not long continue the same without change; That the Government of the
Church, by Compound Presbytries and Synods, is a help and strength, and not a
hinderance to particular Congregations and Elderships, in all the parts of
Government; and are not an extrinsecal Power set over Particular Churches, but
the intrinsecal power where with Christ has invested His Officers, who may not
exercise it Independently, but with subordination unto Presbytries etc. Which
as they are Representative of particular Churches, conjoined together in one
under their Government; so their determination, when they proceed orderly,
whether in Causes common to all, or brought before them by reference in case of
aberration, is to the several Congregations Authoritative, and not Consultatory
only. And this subordination is not only warranted by the light of nature, but
grounded upon the Word of God, and conform to the Pattern of the Primitive and
Apostolic Church, for the Preservation of verity and unity, against Schism,
Heresy, and Tyranny, which is the fruit of this Government where soever it
has place. So from henceforth the Assembly did incessantly urge uniformity in
Reformation, with their Brethren in England, as the chiefest of their Desires,
Prayers, and Cares. And in the year 1643. prevailed so far, that the English
Parliament did first desire that the two Nations might be strictly united for
their mutual defense, against the Papists and Prelatical faction and their
Adherents in both Kingdoms; and not to lay down Arms, till these implacable
Enemies should be brought in subjection: and did instantly urge for the help
and assistance from Scotland. Which being sent did return with an Olive branch
of Peace, and not without some beginings of a Reformation in England. And
afterward, a bloody War beginning between the King and Parliament, with great
success on the Kings side, whence the Papists at the time got great advantage
(witness the cessation of Arms concluded in Ireland) Commissioners were sent
from both Houses to Scotland, earnestly inviting to a nearer union of the
Kingdoms, and desiring Assistance from this Nation to their Brethren in that
their great distress: And this, by the good hand of God, produced the solemn
League and Covenant of the three Kingdoms, first drawn up in Scotland, and
approven in the Assembly at Edinburgh, and afterward embraced in England, to
the terror of the Popish and Prelatical party, and to the great comfort of such
as were wishing and waiting for the Reformation of Religion, and the recoveries
of Just Liberties. The tenor whereof did import, their sincere and constant
endeavors, in their several places and Callings, for preservation of the
Uniformity in Reformation, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government;
The extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, Error and Prof^nity; the preservation of
the Rights and Liberties of the people, and of the Magistrates Authority, in
defense of the true Religion and Liberty; the discovery and punishment of
Incendaries; the retaining of the Peace and Union of the Kingdoms; the mutual
assistance and defense of all under the bond of this Covenant; and the
performing all duties we owe to God, in the amendment of our Lives, and walking
exemplarly one before another. This is that Covenant comprehending the purpose
of all Prior, and the Pattern of all posterior Covenants, to which Christ's
witnesses did always adhere, for which the present witnesses do suffer and
contend; That Covenant, which the Representative of Church and State in the
three Nations did solemnly Subscribe and Swear, for themselves and posterity,
of which the obligation, either to the duty or the punishment, continues
indispensibly on the Generation; which for the moral equity o^ its matter, the
formality of its manner, the importance of its purpose, the holiness of its
solemn Engagment, and the Glory of its Ends, no power on Earth, can Disannul,
Disable, or Dispense; That Covenant, which the Lord did Ratify from Heaven, by
the conversion of many thousands at their entering under the bond of it,
securing and establishing unto them, and all the faithful, the blessings and
privileges therein expressed, and avouching Himself to be their God, as they
had avouched themselves to be His people; That Covenant, which in all the
Controversies it has occasioned, did never receive a greater confirmation than
from the malice and opposition of its Adversaries; That Covenant, which
malignants do malign and deny, and Sectaries scorn and lay aside, as an
Almanac out of date; which has been many ways traduced and reproached by
enemies, and yet could never be reflected on by any Serious in this Land,
without a honorable and fragrant remembrance: Especially that Retortion of
Adversaries of the rigor of its imposition upon Recusants, to justify their
cruelty upon its Asserters now, is to be refelled, not with confutation of its
importance, but with disdain of its impudence. For who were the Recusants: but
wicked enemies to God and Church and Nation, who for their malignancy were then
to be prosecuted, not for their scrupling at a Covenant, but for their
contumacious Contempt of a Law? This was no violence done to their conscience;
for as they had none, and could not pretend to any, so they were never troubled
for that, but for their opposition and conspiracy against the common cause.
However, it went through at that time: And that the Covenanted Reformation, in
a nearer conjunction betwixt the united Churches, might be promoted, the
Parliament of England called an Assembly of Divines at Westminster: and desired
the Assembly of Scotland to send thither their Commissioners; which accordingly
nominated and elected, Mr Alexander Henderson, Mr Robert Douglas, Mr Samuel
Rutherford, Mr Robert Balzie, Mr George Gillespie Ministers, And John Earl of
Cassils, John Lord Maitland, and Sir Archbald Iohnstoun of Waristoun, Ruling
Elders; to Propone, Consult, Treat, and conclude in all such things as might
conduce to the extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, Heresy, Schism, Superstition,
and Idolatry, and for the settling of the so much desired union of the whole
Island, in one form of Church Government, one Confession of Faith, one common
Catechism, and one Directory for the Worship of God. Forces were also sent, to
assist the Parliament of England: which were favored with great success in
their Entreprizes, till that War was ended by the total overthrow of Tyranny at
that time, and all its upholders. But that Popish, Prelatical, and Malignant
faction being brought much under in England, attempted (not unlike the Syrians,
who thought the God of Israel was not God of the Hills and Valleys both) to
try the fortune of War in Scotland, under the conduct of that Treacherous and
truculent Traitor Montrose, gathering an Army of wicked Apostates and Irish
Murderers: who prevailing for a time, did punish, in the Justice of God, the
Hypocrisy and self-seeking of such in this Land whose hearts were not upright
in His Covenant; at length was defeat at Philiphaugh, in the year 1645. yet
certain it is, that they had Commission and warrant from the King: as the
Assembly that year, Feb. 13. remonstrates it to himself; Warning him in the
name of their Master, the Lord Jesus Christ, that the guilt which cleaved to
his throne was such, as (whatsoever flattering Preachers or unfaithful
Counselors might say to the contrary) if not timely repented, could not but
involve himself and his Posterity, under the wrath of the Everliving God, for
his being guilty of the shedding of the blood of many thousands of his best
Subjects, for his permitting the Mass and other Idolatry in his family and
Dominions etc. At the same time also the Assembly did zealously incite the
Parliament to a speedy course of Justice, against these Incendaries and
Murderers, as the only mean of cleansing the Land from that deluge of blood
then current, and of appeasing the wrath of God: and solemnly and seasonably
warned all ranks, to applaud the Glory and Righteousness of that Judgment of
the sword, in the hands of these Apostates and Murderers, and to search to
understand the Language of that Dispensation; wherein many Public sins and
breaches of Covenant are pointed at, as the Causes of that desolation; And the
Covenant it self is there very Encomiastically vindicated. We are so far from
repenting of it (say they) that we can not mention it without great joy and
thankfullness to God, as that which has drawn many blessings after it, and
unto which God has given manifold evident Testimonies: for no sooner was the
Covenant begun to be taken in England, but sensibly the condition of affairs
there was changed to the better, and our forces sent into that Kingdom, in
pursuance of that Covenant, have been so mercifully and manifestly assisted and
blessed from Heaven, that we have what to answer the enemy that reproacheth us
concerning that business, and that which may make iniquity it self to stop her
mouth: but which is more unto us than all victories, the Reformation of
Religion in England, and Uniformity therein between both Kingdoms (a principal
end of that Covenant) is so far advanced, that the Government of the Church by
Congregational Elderships, Classical Presbyteries, Provincial and National
Assemblies, is aggreed upon by the Assembly of Divines at Westmnster, and voted
and conc^uded in both houses of Parliament. After this the Malignants in
England being crushed in all their Projects, the King renders himself to the
Scots in New castle: by whom (because by Covenant they were not obliged to
defend him, but only in defense of Religion and Liberty, which he had been
destroying and they defending; because in this war he did directly oppose and
oppugn these conditions, under which they were only to defend him, and
therefore they had all along carried toward him as an enemy, as he to them;
And because by the same Covenant they were obliged to discover, and render to
condign punishment all Malignants and Incendaries, of whom he was the chief,
and to re^ain the Peace and Union of the Kingdoms, which could not be retained
in maintaining their destroyer, And to assist mutually all entered into that
Covenant, which he was fighting against) he was delivered up into the English,
and kept under restraint in the Isle of Wight, until he received his just
demerit, for all his oppressions, Murders, Treachery, and Tyranny; being
condemned and execute Ianuar. 30. anno 1648/9 Which fact, though it was
protested against both before and after by the Assembly of the Church of
Scotland, out of zeal against the Sectarians, the executioners of that
extraordinary Act of Justice; yet it was more sor the manner than for the
matter, and more for the motives and ends of it than for the grounds of it,
that they opposed themselves to it, and resented it. For they acknowledged and
remonstrated to himself, the Truth of all these things upon which that sentence
and execution of Justice was founded. And when a wicked Association, and
Unlawful Engagment was on foot to rescue him, they opposed it with all their
might: Showing, in their Answers to the Estates that year 1648. and
Declarations and Remonstrances, the sinfullness and destructiveness of that
Engagment; that it was a breach of the Commandments of God, and of all the
Articles of the Covenant; Declaring withal, they would never consent to the
Kings Restitution to the exercise of his Power, without previous assurance by
solemn Oath under his hand and seal, for settling of Religion according to the
Covenant. By which it appears, they were not so stupidly Loyal, as some would
make them. Yet indeed it cannot be past without regrate, that there was too
much of this plague of the King's Evil even among good men: which from that time
forth has so infected the heads and hearts of this Generation, that it has
almost quite extinct all Loyalty to Christ, and all zeal for Religion and
Liberty. Then it began to infuse and diffuse its Contagion, when after the
death of Charles the first, in the year 1649. they began, after all that they
had smarted for their trusting these treacherous Tyrants, and after that Grace
had been showed them from the Lord their God, by breaking these men's yokes from
from off their necks, and putting them again into a Capacity to act for the good
of Religion, their oun safety, and the peace and safety of the Kingdom, to
think of joining once more with the people of these abominations, and taking
into their bosoms these Serpents which had formerly stung them almost to death.
Hinc il^^ lachrimae, en origo and Scaturigo nostrae defectionis! There was
indeed at that time a Party faithful for God, who considering the many breaches
of the Solemn League and Covenant, and Particularly by the late Engagment
against England, did so travel that they procured the Covenant to be renewed,
with the Solemn Acknowledgment of sins and Engagment to duties, which was
Universally subscribed and sworn through all the Land; wherein also they
regrete this tampering with Malignants. And therefore the Lord did mightily
save and defend them from all their Adversaries, subdued them at Stirling, and
in the North. They did also give warning concerning the young King, that
notwithstanding of the Lords hand against his Father, yet he hearkens unto the
Counsels of these, who were Authors of these Miseries to his Father; by which
it has come to pass, that he has hitherto refused to grant the just and
necessary desires of the Church and Kingdom, for securing of Religion and
Liberty: And it is much to be feared, that these wicked Counselors, may so far
prevail upon him, as to engage him in a war, for overturning the Work of God,
and bearing down all those in the three Kingdoms that adhere thereto. Which if
he shall do, cannot but bring great wrath from the Lord upon himself and
throne, and must be the cause of many new and great Miseries and Calamities to
these Lands. And in the same warning, by many weighty reasons, they prove, that
he is not to be admitted to the exercise of his power, without security for
Religion and Liberty. And when the bringing home of the King came to be voted
in the Assembly, there was one faithful witness, Mr Adam Kae Minister in
Galaway, protested against it; fore showing and fore telling, what mischeef and
misery he would bring with him when he should come. These things might have had
some weight, to demur the Nation from meddling with that perfidious Traitor. But
all this serves only to aggravate the sin and shame of that distraction, which
has procured all this destruction, under which the Land mourns to this day:
That notwithstanding of all these Convictions, warnings yea and discoveries of
his Malignancy, Treachery, and inclinations to Tyranny; They sent
Commissioners, and concluded at Treaty with him at Breda. During which Treaty,
the Commissions which he had sent to that bloody villain Montrose, and his Cut
throat Accomplices, to raise an Army, and wast and invade the Country with fire
and sword the second time; were brought to the Committee of Estates,
discovering what sort of King they were treating with. Whereupon, after serious
Consulting not only together, but with the Lord: And after many debates what to
do in such a doubtful case, wherein all was in danger, the Estates concluded
to break off the Treaty, and recall their Commissioners. To which intent, they
sent an Express with Letters to Breda; which by providence falling into the
hands of Libberton, a true Libertine, and false betrayer of his trust and
Country, was by him, without the knowledge of the other Commissioners,
delivered unto the King: who consulting the Contents of the Packet with his
Jesuitical and Hypocritical Cabal, found it his interest to play the fox (being
disappointed at that time to play the Tiger) and dissemble with God and man.
And so sending for the Commissioners, he made a flattering speech to them,
showing that now after serious deliberation he was resolved to comply with
all their Proposals. Where upon the poor cheated Commissioners dispatch the
post back with Letters, full of praise and joy, for the satisfaction they had
received. The Estates, perceiving themselves imposed upon, consulted again
what to do; and in end, being oversvvayed more with respect to their oun
credit (which they thought should be impeached, if they should retract their
oun Plenipotentiary Instructions, to conclude the Treaty upon the Kings assent
to their Conditions) than to their reclamant consciences, they resolved to
bring home that pest, and thereby Precipitated themselves and us into
ineluctable misery. Yet they thought to mend the Matter, by binding him with
all Cords, and putting him to all most explicit Engagments, before he should
receive the Imperial Croun. Well, upon these terms home he comes, and before
he set his foot on British ground he takes the Covenant. And thereafter,
because the Commission of the General Assembly, by the Act o^ the West Kirk
August. 13. 1650. Precluded his Admittance unto the Croun, if he should refuse
the then required satifaction, before his Coronation he emits that Declaration
at Dumferling; wherein, Professing and appearing in the full persuasion and
love of the Truth, he repents (as having to do with and in the sight of God)
his Fathers opposition to the Covenant and work of God, and his oun reluctances
against the same, hoping for Mercy through the blood of Jesus Christ, and
obtesting the prayers of the faithful to God for his stedfastness; and than
protests his Truth and sincerity in entering into the Oath of God, resolving
to prosecute the ends of the Covenant to his utmost, and to have with it the
same Common friends and Enemies, exhorting all to lay down their enmity against
the cause of God, and not to prefer man's Interest to Gods, which will prove an
Idol of Jealousy to provoke the Lord, and he himself accounts to be but
selfish flattery. A declaration so full of heart Professions, and high
Attestations of God, that none considering what followed can reflect thereon,
without horror and trembling from the holy Jealousy of the Lord, either for
the then deep dissimulation or the after unparalelled Apostasy. I know it is
objected by Court parasites, that the King was then compelled to do these
things. To which I shall only say: It would have cost any of them their head at
that time, to have asserted that he did upon deliberation and choice mock God
and man, and entered into these Engagments, only with a purpose to be thereby
in better Capacity, to destroy what he swore to maintain; only because he could
not have the Croun without this way, which in the Confession of the objectors
themselves was only deliberate and premeditate Perjurie. Next, if it should, be
granted he was Compelled; let it be also considered, who Compelled him; and
these will be found to be the deceitful Courtiers. For, let it be adverted,
what Mr Gilespie declares of the Case, who put the pen in his hand when he
subscribed that Declaration: He, perceiving there was sufficient ground to
Jealouse his reality, and seeing evidently that the Courtiers prevailed with
the King on a sudden to offer to subscribe the Declaration (when they observed
that the Commissioners of Churh and State were resolute, and ready to go away
in a fixedness, to leave out the putting of his Interest in the state of the
quarrel) and being afraid of the sad Consequences of it, spoke his mind
plainly to the King, That if he was not satisfied in his Soul and Conscience,
beyond all hesitation of the righteousness of the subscription, he was so far
from overdriving him to run upon that, for which he had no light, as he
obtested him, yea he charged him in his Masters name, and in the name of these
who sent him, not to subscribe this Declaration, no not for the three Kingdoms.
Whereupon the King answered, Mr Gillespie, Mr Gillespie I am satisfied, I am
satisfied with the Declaration, and therefore will subscribe it. Upon which
some of the Courtiers swore that Mr Gillespie intended simply to dissuade the
King from subscribing it, that so Church and State might professedly lay aside
his Inetrest: which would have defeat their hopes to make up themselves, as now
they have done, upon the then designed ruin of the Interest of Truth. Then at
his Coronation, we have his again reiterated confirmations of that Covenant:
first, he is desired in name of the people to accept the Crown, and maintain
Religion according to the National and Solemn League and Covenant; whereunto he
gave his apparently Cordial consent (the words are in the form and order of
the Coronation with the whole Action.) Then next, a Sermon being Preached upon
2 King. 11. 12, and 17. the action commenceth, with his most solemn renewing of
the National and solemn League and Covenant, by Oath. Then, he is presented to
the people, and their willingness demanded to have him for their King on these
terms. At the same time, in the next place, he took the Coronation Oath. Then
on these terms he accepted the Sword. And after the Crown is set upon his
head, the peoples obligatory Oath is proclaimed on the terms foresaid,
otherwise he is not that King to whom they swore subjection. Then being set
upon the Throne, he was by the Minister put in mind of his Engagments, from 1 Chronicles. 29. 33. And then the Nobles of the Land came one by one kneeling, and
lifting up their hands between his hands, swore the same Oath. These things
done, the whole Action was closed with a most solid and severe exhortation from
several instances, Neh. 5. 13. Ier. 34. 18, 19, 20, etc. There after in the
year 1651. followed the Ratification of all these preceding Treaties,
Transactions, and Engagments, concluded and enacted by the King, and the
Parliament then fully and freely conveened; whereby the same did pass into a
Perpetual Law. And this Covenant, which from the beginning was and is the most
sure and indispensible Oath of God, became at length the very fundamental Law
of the Kingdom, whereon all the rights or privileges, either of King or
people, are principally bottomed and secured. This might seem security
sufficient, but considering the former discoveries and experiences they had of
his Treachery, and the visible appearances (in the mean time) of his Refusalls,
visible Reluctances, manifest Resilings, open Counter actings, and continued
prejudices against the Covenant, and his following unprecedented avowed
perjurie, every thing does indelebly fasten upon them the weakness at least of
an overweening Credulity, and upon him the wickedness of a perfidious Policy,
in all these Condiscensions. After this it came to pass, that zeal for the
Cause rightly stated was suddenly contracted to a few, and the flame thereof
extinguished in many, and Court wild fire substitute in its place: whereby a
plain defection was violently carried on by the Public Resolutioners, who
relapsing into that most sinful Conjunction with the People of these
abominations, so solemnly repented for and resolved against, did
notwithstanding bring in Notorious Malignants, into places of power and Trust,
in Judicatories and Armies, in a more Politic than Pious way of requiring of
them a constrained and dissembled Repentance, to the mocking of the God of
Truth, and Scorn of all our holy Engagments. Which defection did not only cause
for a long time an incurable Division; the first of that kind, and most
permanent of any that ever was in the Church of Scotland, by reason of the
surcease of General Assembl^es, stoped and hindered by the yoke of the
Sectarian Usurpation; but also was the spring and source of all our defections
since, all flowing from and fomented by that same spirit that fostered that:
And for that, since that time, the Lord has been contending with this Church
and Nation, bringing us under the bondage of these Malignant Enemies, whom we
suffered them then to encourage and introduce. And both at that time, and since
that time, the Lord never countenanced an Expedition where that Malignant
Interest was taken in unto the state of the quarrel. Upon this our Land was
invaded by Oliver Cromwell, who defeat our Army at Dumbar, where the Anger of
the Lord was evidently seen to smoke against us, for espousing that Interest.
And remarkable it is, how in that very day where in the Public Resolutions
were concluded in the Assembly at St Andrews, the Lord then shed the blood of
His people at Ennerkeithing; so as that the Assembly, having in great have
hurried through this Approbation, were all made to run for it, and Adjourn
themselves to Dundie, where they met and completed that step of defection. And
afterward its known, what a peculiar vengeance fell upon that City, where this
deed was done beyond all the Cities of the Nation. Next, an Army being raised,
according to these unhallowed Resolutions, and the Lord putting remarkable
Discountinance upon them in their attemptings at home, as was manifest in their
attemptings at Torewood etc. They march into England; and there did the Lord
continue, by His leaving our Army to the Sword, to preach that Doctrine to the
world Josh. 7. 10, 11, 12. [ Israel has sinned and transgressed the Covenant
-- have taken the accursed thing -- and dissembled also, and have put it even
amongst their oun stuff, therefore the Children of Israel could not stand
before their enemies, but turned their backs before their Enemies, because they
were accursed: Neither will I be with you any more, except ye destroy the
accersed thing from among yow] An army of near 30000 was totally routed at
Worcester; and the Achan, the Cause of the overthrow, was forced to hide
himself in the Oak, and thence to transport himself beyond sea, where he
continued a wandering fugitive in Exile, till the year 1660. In the mean time
the Sectarian Army here prevailed, till, after the usurper Cromwell his death,
the false Monk then General, with a Combination of Malignants and Public
Resolutioners, did machinate our misery, and effectuated it by bringing home
the King to England from his banishment: Wherein he was habituate into an
implacable hatred against the Work of God. Yet, though since the Kings first
reception into Scotland, our declensions were still growing until they
produced this fearful Revolt from God, wherein the Nation is now involved;
there was still a faithful Remnant of Ministers and Professors, zealous for the
Cause, keeping their Integrity; who in their Remonstrances and Testimonies
witnessed against both their Malignant Enemies and their backsliding Brethren
the Resolutioners, and also against the Sectarians their Invaders; whose vast
Toleration and Liberty of Conscience, which they brought in to invade our
Religion as they had invaded our Land, and infect it with their multifarious
Errors, was particularly by the Synod of Fife, and other Brethren in the
Ministry that joined themselves to them, Testified against, and demonstrated
to be wicked and intolerable. Now to see how far the present Testimony is
Con^irmed by the witnesses of this Period, we may resume some Reflections on it.

I. They impartially carried on the Testimony against Prelacy, and the Popish
Prelatical and Malignant faction on the one hand, and the Sectarians on the
other, without ever waving the Testimony against either, or at the least
winking at the one to weaken the other: both which Testimonies they though of
so great importance, that they could not dispense with but faithfully maintain
both, in their witnessings and warnings. In that seasonable and necessary
Warning and Declaration concerning present and imminent dangers, given at
Edinb. July 27. sess 27. They say first of the S^ctaries That prevailing Party
of Sectaries in England, who have broken the Covenant, and despised the Oath of
God, corrupted the Truth, subverted the fundamental Government, Look upon us
with an evil eye, as upon these who stand in the way of their Monstrous and new
fangled devices in Religion and Government; and though there were no Cause to
fear any thing from that party, but the Gangren and infection of those many
damnable and abominable errors which have taken hold on them; yet our vicinity
unto and daily Commerce with that Nation, may justly make us afraid, that the
Lord may give up many in this Land into a spirit of delusion to believe Lies,
because they have not received the Love of the Truth. In that same warning they
say we are not so to have the one of our eyes upon the Sectaries, as not to
have the other upon Malignants, they being an Enemy more numerous and more
dangerous than the other; not only because experience has proven, that there
is a greater aptitude and inclination in these of our Land to comply with
Malignants, than Sectaries, in that they carry on their wicked design, under a
pretext of being for the King, but also because there be many of them in our
oun bovvells. By which we may see, how impartially they opposed both; and
that this cannot be condemned in the Testimonies of the present Sufferers,
except the Assembly be condemned. And because many now a days have
extenuating notions of those debates, against Prelacy and Sectarianisme, about
the Government of the Church etc. and condemn these that would adhere to and
suffer for the Punctilio's of it, as rigid nicetie: I shall, for seeing what
account the Assembly had of them, cite their words in a Letter to the Assembly
of divines at Westminster, Dated Edin. June 18. 1646. The smallest (say they)
of Christ's Truths (if it be Lavvfull to call any of them small) is of greater
moment than all the other businesses, that ever have been debated since the
beginning of the world to this day: but the highest of honors and heaviest of
burdens is put upon you; to declare, out of the Sacred Records of Divine
Truth, what is the Prerogative of the Croun and extent of the Scepter of Jesus
Christ; what bounds are to be set betvveen Him Ruling in His House, and
powers established by God on Earth; how and by whom His House is to be
Governed; and by what vvayes a restraint is to be put on these, who would
pervert His Truth and subvert the faith of many.

II. In the manner of maintaining this Testimony, these famous Fathers while
faithful for God gave us a perfect pattern of purity and strictness, in
opposition to all degrees of conformity and compliance with the Corruptions of
the time; and laid down such Rules and Constitutions, as might regulate us in
our Contendings about present Defections, and teach us what account to make of
them, and how to carry toward them: which if adverted unto, would evince how
manifest and manifold the declinings of many have been from the late
Reformation, that yet pretend to adhere unto it, and how Justifieable the
aversation and abstraction of the present reproached suffering party is, from
all these defections and the daubings of them, because so much deviating and
declining from the attained Reformation. I need not repeat, how Prelacy, and
all the parts and pendicles of that Antichristian Hierarchy, were abjured in
the National Covenant, and condemned in the Acts of Assemblies, and reabjured
in the solemn League and Covenant, and in the solemn Acknowledgment of ^ins and
Engagment to duties, where also we came under Sacred and Inviolable Engagments,
to endeavor the extirpation thereof: Which does clearly file the present
Countenancing and submitting to the Prelatick Curats, in receiving ordinances
from them, among the grossest of defections; being altogether inconsistent with
these Acts and Constitutions and Covenant-obligations to extirpate them, as
much as the countenancing of Popish Priests were inconsistent therewith, being
both equally Covenanted to be extirpated. Next, though in this Period, Tyranny
being in its Retrograde Motion, Erastian Supremacy was not so much contended
for, and therefore not so much questioned as formerly, being held exploded with
exsecration out of doors and out of doubt; yet the Testimony was still
continued against it, in the uninterupted maintaining of the Churches
Privileges and freedom of Assemblies, against all Encroachings of Adversaries.
And therefore the embracing of the late detestable Indulgences, were as
Contrary to the Actings of this as to the Testimonies of the former Period,
against the Supremacy from which they flow. Yea many Particulars, might be
instanced, wherein the Accepters had declined from the Covenanted Reformation
then prosecuted; not only in their Confederating with Malignant Usurpers, for
the pretended benefit of them (by which, if there had been no more, they are
obnoxious to the Censure of the Church, standing registered in an Act of
Assembly, ordaining all persons in Ecclesiastic office, for the like or lesser
degrees of Compliance, yea even for procuring protections from Malignant
Enemies, to be suspended from their office and all exercise thereof At Edinb.
1646. Sess, 14) Nor only in their taking sinful Instructions from them,
restricting them in the exercise of their Ministry; but in admitting
themselves, by their patronage, to be by them presented to their prelimited and
preimposed Congregations: which involves them in the iniquity of the Abolished
Patronages, condemned by the Assembly; for that the Ministry of such so
presented, is made too much to depend upon the will and pleasure of man, and
such an imposition is Destructive of the Church and peoples Liberties,
obstructive of the Gospels freedom and faithful plainness, and occasion of much
base flattery and partiality; And in subjecting to, homologating, and
fortifying a Sacrilegions Supremacy, overturning the Intrinsic power of the
Church, contrare to the Covenant obliging to the Preservation of the
Government, as well as to the Doctrine of the Church, in the first Article
thereof; And in their suffering themselves, either directly or indirectly,
either by Combination, persuasion, or terror, to be divided and withdrawn from
that blessed Union and Conjunction, which they were obliged to maintain and
promove, according to the 6th Art. of the Solemn League and Covenant; And in
their strengthening the Erastian Usurpations of Enemies encroaching upon the
Churches Liberties and Christ's prerogatives, against which were are engaged
expressly in the Solemn Acknowledgment of sins and Engagment to duties, where
also we have these words Art. 2. Because many have of late labored to supplant
the Liberties of the Church, we shall maintain and defend the Church of
Scotland, in all her Liberties and Privileges, against all who shall oppose or
undermine the same, or encroach thereupon under any pretext whatsomever, Next,
we have many Demonstrations of the zeal and strictness of these Servants of
Christ, in their Synodical determinations of Censures, to be past upon many
Ministerial Corruptions; which will condemn the present course of covering and
countenancing them, and commend the Contendings of a poor reproached party
against them, in their conscientious abstracting from them. Of which
determinations, I shall rehearse some. Among the Enormities and Corruptions of
the Ministry, in their Callings, this is one,. 4. 5. Silenee in the public
Cause -- Some accounting it a point of wisdom to speak ambiguously -- whereof
the remedy is. 15. That beside all other scandals, Silence or Ambiguous
speaking in the public Cause -- be seasonably Censured, Genesis Ass. at Edinb.
Iunij 13. 1646. There is indeed an Act against withdrawers from Ministers: but
in the self same Act, they are charged to be diligent in fulfilling their
Ministry, to be faithful in Preaching, declaring the whole Counsel of God, and
as they have occasion from the Text of Scripture to reprove the sins and
errors, and press the duties of the time, And in all these to observe the Rules
prescribed by the Acts of Assembly, wherein if they be negligent, they are to
be Censured, Gen, Ass. Edinb. Aug. 24. 1647. Sess. 19. Then there is that Act,
August 3. 1648. Sess. 26. for Censuring Ministers for their silence, and not
speaking to the Corruptions of the time; Calling it, a great Scandal, through
some Ministers their reserving and not declaring themselves against the
prevalent sins of the times; appointing, that all that do not apply their
Doctrine to these Corruptions, which is the Pastoral Gift, and that are cold or
wanting of Spiritual zeal, Dissembling of Public sins, that all such be
Censured even to deprivation; for forbearing or passing in silence the Errors
and Exorbitancies of Sectaries in England, or the defections current at home,
the plots and Practices of Malignants, the Principles and Tenants of
Erastianisme; And if they be found too sparing, general, or ambiguous in their
applications and reproofs, and continuing so, they are to be deposed, for being
pleasers of men rather than servers of Christ, for giving themselves to a
detestable indifferency or Neutrality in the Cause of God, for defrauding the
souls of people, yea for being highly guilty of the blood of Souls, in not
giving them warning. And in that seasonable and necessary warning of the Genesis
Ass. Edinb. Iuij 27. 1649. Sess. 27. we are taught how they resented the
unfaithfulness of Ministers continuing in defections, and how we are to look
upon them and carry to them: where they say; It is undenyably true, that many
of the evils, wherewith this Church and Kingdom has been afflicted in our age,
have come to pass because of the negligence of some and corruptions of others
of the Ministry; And the course of backsliding was carried on, until it
pleased God to stir up the spirits of these few, who stood in the Gap, to
oppose and resist the same, and to begin the work of Reformation in the Land;
since which time, the silence of some Ministers, and the compliance of others,
has had great influence upon the backslidings of many amongst the people, who,
upon the discovery of the evil of their way, complain that they got not
warning, or that if they were warned by some, others held their peace, or did
justify them in the course of their backsliding: we can look upon such
Ministers no otherwise, than upon these that are guilty of the blood of the
Lords people, and with whom the Lord will reckon, for all the breach of
Covenant and defection that has been in the Land; The Priests lips should
preserve knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth, for he is the
Messenger of the Lord of Hosts, but such as are departed out of the way, and
have caused many to stumble at the Law, therefore has the Lord made them
contemptible before all the people, according as they have not kept His ways,
but have been partial in His Law, because they have lost their savor, He has
cast out many of them as unsavory salt. Further more, to evidence the Purity
and power of zeal burning and blazing in these days, in their Contendings
against Public Enemies on all hands, I shall instance some of their Acts and
Testimonies, clearly condemning the manifold Complyances of this Generation,
and which may contribute somewhat to Justify the reproached preciseness of a
Remnant, standing at the furthest distance from them. There is an Act for
Censuring the Complyers with the public Enemies of this Church and Kingdom,
Genesis Ass. Edinb. Iunij 17. 1646. Sess. 14. where, they judge it a great and
scandalous provocation, and grievous defection from the public cause, to
comply with these Malignants (such as James Graham then was) in any degree,
even to procure Protections from them, or to have invited them to their houses,
or to have drunk James Graham his health, or to be guilty of any other such
Gross degrees of Compliance; censured to be suspended from the communions, ay
and while they acknowledge their offense. And yet now, for refusing these
degrees of compliance, for not having the protectior of a Pass from the wicked
courts of malignant enemies, by taking a wicked oath, and for refusing to drink
the Kings health, a greater Enemy then ever James Graham was, some poor
conscientious people have not only been murdere^ by Enemies, but mocked and
condemned by professores. There is an Act likewise, and declaration against all
new oaths or bonds in the common cause imposed without consent of the Church
Genesis Ass. Edinb. July 28. 1648. Sess. 18. Enjoining all the members of the
Church to forbear the swearing or subscribing any new oaths or bonds, in this
Cause, without Advice and concurrence of the Church, especially any negative
oaths or bonds, which may any way limit or restrain them in the duties
whereunto they are obliged, by National or Solemn League and Covenant. Yet now,
for refusing Oaths, not only limiting in Covenanted duties, but contradicting
and condemning many material Principles of the Covenanted Reformation, many
have not only lost their Lives, but also have been condemned, by them that are
at ease having a wider conscience to swallow such baits. It is known how
pertinacious the most faithful in those days were, in their contendings
against Associations, in any undertaking for the cause, with persons
disaffected to the true state thereof. I need not give any account of this,
were it not that now that Principle is quite inverted; and poor Adherers to it,
for their abstracting and substracting their concurrence with such promiscuous
Associations, are much hated and flouted; therefore I shall give some hints of
their sentiments of them. In their Answer to the Committee of Estates, Iulij
25. 1648. Sess. 14. the Genesis Assembly says, It was represented to the
Parliament, that for securing of Religion it was necessary, that the Popish,
Prelatical, and Malignant party, be declared Enemies to the cause upon the one
hand, as well as Sectaries upon the other, and that all Associations either in
forces or counsels, with the former as well as with the latter, be avoided. And
in their declaration concerning the Present dangers of Religion, especially the
unlawful Engagment in War, Iulij, ult. 1648. Sess. 21. They say, suppose the
ends of that Engagment be good (as they are not) yet the means and ways of
Prosecution are unlawful; because there is not an equal avoiding of rocks on
both hands, but a joining with Malignants to suppress Sectaries, a joining
hands with a black devil to beat a white devil; They are bad Phisicians who
would so cure one disease, as to breed another as evil or worse -- we find in
the Scriptures condemned, all Confederacies and Associations with the Enemies
of true Religion, whether Canaanites Exodus 23. 32. and 24. 12, 15. Deuteronomy. 7. 2.
or other heathens 1. King. 11. 1, 2. More Arguments against Associations may be
seen in that excellent discussion of this useful Case, Concerning Associations
and Confederacies with Idolaters Infidels Heretics or any other known enemy of
Truth or Godliness, by famous Mr G. Gillespie, published at that same time:
whereunto is appended his Letter to the commission of the General Assembly,
having these golden words in it, words fitly spoken in that season, when he was
a dying, at the beginning of the Public Resolutions Having heard of some
motions and beginings of compliance, with these who have been so deeply engaged
in a war destructive to Religion and the Kingdoms Liberties, I cannot but
discharge my conscience, in giving a Testimony against all such compliance. I
know and am persuaded, that all the faithful witnesses that gave Testimony to
the Thesis, that the late Engagment was contrary and destructive to the
Covenant, will also give Testimony to the Appendix, that compliance with any
who have been active in that Engagment is most sinful and unlawful. I am not
able to express all the evils of that compliance, they are so many -- But above
all, that which would highten this sin even to the Heavens is, that it were not
only a horrid backsliding, but a backsliding into that very sin, which was
specially pointed at and punished by the prevailency of the Malignant party,
God justly making them thorns and scourges who were taken in as friends. Alas!
shall we split twice upon the same rock? yea run upon it, when God has set a
beacon on it? yea I may say, shall we thus out face and out dare the Almighty,
by protecting His and our Enemies, by making peace and friendship with them,
when the anger of the Lord is burning against them. I mus^ here apply to our
present condition, the words of Ezrah. 9. 14 -- O happy Scotland, if thou can
now improve and not abuse this Golden opportunity? but if thou help the
ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord, wrath upon wrath, and woe upon woe,
shall be upon thee from the Lord. Whereunto is subjoined his dying Testimony to
the same purpose; wherein are these words,, But if there shall be a falling
back, to the sin of compliance with Malignant ungodly men, then I look for the
breaking out of the wrath of the Lord, till there be no remedy. This was the
warning of a worthy dying Man. Notwithstanding of which and many other warnings
and witnessings, a course of compliance was commenced by the pulick
Resolutioners, and continued in to this day; wherein that faithful warning of a
dying servant of Christ is verified. But before I leave this purpose, I must
obviate an objection that some make use of for strengthening themselves in
their incorporations and joinings at least in Worship, with the corruptions of
the time, and for condemning conscientious withdrawers; That the Godly in those
days did not separate from the men of these complyances and defections, as
many do now, to wit the protesting party did not withdraw from the public
Resolutioners and Associators with Malignants. I answer, first, many and these
the most Godly and tender did withdraw, even from their oun Ministers, and
would have gone 40. or 50 miles to hear a faithful Minister at that time: yea
Ministers themselves, in the case of intrusion of the unfaithful, would have
supplied the Paroch, as if the Church had been vacant, and when they could not
get access to the pulpit, they preached in the fields, on purpose to witness
against, and professedly to withdraw the people from such an unfaithful
Intruder; as might be instanced particularly for time and place, if need were.
But next, The Church then, though broken by division, and under the subjection
of strangers deprived of her General Assemblies, yet was in a constitut Case,
enjoying the privilege, power and order of Synods and Presbyteries, to whom
the people offended with their Ministers might address themselves, for an
orderly redress, and removal of these Scandals in an ordinary way; and so they
needed not assume to themselves that power to regulate their communion, that in
a broken State, as now is, must be allowed to them. And besides, both the
Ministers at that time who were faithful, though they might have proceeded to
censure and silence the corrupt party as they were obliged, yet not only found
it difficult by reason of the injury of the times; but also thought it best to
spare them, And the people to bear them, as burdens; until, as they were still
in hopes, they should obtain a General Assembly to take order with them but now
it is not so. And then the defection was but beginning, and people did not know
and could not expect it would go such a length, and therefore could not fall
upon the rigor of that duty, which such disorders call for at first: but if
they had seen where these beginings would Land them at length, I doubt not but
they would have resisted those beginings, in such a way as would have precluded
this imputation of novelty upon our necessitated with drawings.

III. We have in this Period, not only an Illustrious Testimony for the
Principle, but a continued and unintermitted putting into practice the duty of
defensive Arms, in resisting the Soverain power, malversing and abusing
Authority to the destruction of the ends of it; which resistance was avowed,
encouraged, and furthered by the General Assembly, both for the defense of
themselves, and for the help of their Brethren in England. Take one expression
in their Solemn and seasonable Warning to all ranks Feb. 12. 1645. Sess 18.
Unless men will blot out of their hearts the love of Religion and cause of God,
and cast off all care of their Country, Laws, Liberties etc. (all being in
visible danger of present ruin and destruction) they must now or never appear
actively, each one stretching himself to, yea beyond his power. It is no time
to dally, or to go about the business by halfs, nor be almost but altogether
zealous: Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently. If we have
been forward to assist our Neighbor Kingdoms, shall we neglect to defend our
oun? Or shall the Enemies of God be more active against His cause, than His
people for it? God forbid. In another seasonable and necessary warning July 27.
1649. Sess. 27. They say, But if his Maj. or any having or pretending power and
commission from him, shall invade this Kingdom, upon pretext of establishing
him in the exercise of his royal power; as it will be an high provocation
against God, to be accessory or assisting there to, so it will be a necessary
duty to resist and oppose the same. These Fathers could well distinguish,
between Authority and the person abusing it: And were not so Loyal, as now
their degenerate Children are ambitious to show themselves, stupidly stouping
to the shadow thereof, and yet will be called the only Asserters of
Presbyterian principles. But we find, they put it among the Characters of
Malignants, to confound the Kings honor and Authority with the abuse and
pretense thereof, and with Commissions, warrants, and Letters, procured from
the King by the Enemies of the cause and Covenant, as if we could not oppose
the Latter, without increaching upon the former. But here, an Objection or two
must be removed out of the way, before we go forward. One is, from the Third
Atticle of the Covinant; where there seems to be a great deal of Loyalty,
obliging to defend the Kings Maj. his person and Authority, in the preservation
and defense of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms, that the world
may bear witness with our consciences of our Loyalty, And that we have no
thoughts or intentions to diminish his Majesty's just power and greatness. I
Ans. There is indeed a deal of Loyalty there, and true Loyalty, because
Lawfully limited, being qualified with and subordinate unto the preservation
and defense of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdom (as the makers of
the Covenant do expound it, in the Assembles declaration against the unlawful
Eugagment July ult. 1648. Sess. 21.) not that Reverse Loyalty, which makes
duties to God conditional and limited, and duties to thee King absolute and
unlimited, as our Loyalists do now. And I wish others were free of it, who have
sworn Oaths of unlimited Alledgiances, to maintain the King in any power unto
which his force aspires; and to justify this their Loyalty, will bring in this
Article of the Covenant with a distorted sense, reading it backward, that we in
the preservation and defense of Religion must preserve and defend the King: As
if Religion obliged to defend him, do what he will. It were better such
pretended Covenanters, denied the Covenant, than to be such a reproach to it,
in wresting its genuine sense. But I have adduced the sense of the best
Interpreters of it, the General Assembly. Next when they entered under the bond
of this Covenant, they did it with a purpose to oppose all his invasions upon
Religion and the Liberty of the people, and to vindicate these precious
Interests from his usurpings, into a state of Liberty: And shall we imagine,
that that very Oath of God did lay upon them or us an obligation, to defend the
person who is a destroyer of all these, contrary to the very nature of the
Oath, contrare to the scope of the Covenanters, and contrary to their
subsequent practice? But then it will be urged, why then was that clause cast
into the Covenant? I answer we have not the same cause to keep it, as they had
some cause to put it in, with accommodation to the present possessor of the
Soveraignity. The ouning of it in our circumstances would be as great a
reproach to us, as the want of it was to them in theirs. They put in the words,
to prevent the worlds mistake, and to remove that odium industriously heaped
upon the heads of those, whose hearts were associate in the defense of Religion
and Liberty, therefore they would profess they would not be disloyal while he
was for God. And a defiance may be given to clamor, and calumny it self, to
give one instance of the defect of performance hereof, while he went not about
to ruin those things, incomparably more precious then his person or Authority,
and in ruining whereof no person can retain Authority.

IV. But now two things will chiefly be desiderated, which now we oune in our
Testimony, for which many have dyed, that seem not to be confirmed by or
consistent with the Testimony of this Period. One is, that we not only maintain
defensive resistance, but in some cases vindictive and punitive force, to be
executed upon men that are bloody beasts of prey, and burdens to the earth, in
cases of necessity, when there is no living for them. This principle of Reason
and natural Justice, was not much inquired into in this time; when the sun was
up, whose warmth and light made these beasts creep into their dens, and when
they, being brought under subjection, could not force people into such
extraordinary violent courses when the ordinary and orderly course of Law was
running in its right Channel. Yet from the ground of their ordinary Procedure,
Military and Civil, against such Monsters, we may gather the lawfullness of an
ordinary Procedure in a pinch of necessity, conform to their grounds: I hope
to make this evident, when I come ex proposito to vincicate this head. But
there is another thing that we onne, which seems not to have been known in
these days, viz. That when we are required to oune the Authority of the
present Dominator, we hold sinful to oune it. Yet we find these Reverend and
renouned Fathers ouned King Charles I. and did not refuse the succession of
Charles II. I shall answer in order. First, as to King Charles the first, there
was a great difference betuixt him and his sons that succeeded; he never
declared Parliamentarely that neither Promises, Contracts, nor Oaths should
bind him, as the first of his perfidious sons did; It might have been then
presumed, if he had engaged so far for promoving the Work of God, he would have
been a man of his word (for to say a King of his word, is antiquitate in a good
sense, except that it means he is as absolute in his word as in his sword, and
scorns to be a slave to it) Neither professed he himself a Papist, as the
second Son has done: Again it must be granted, that more might have been
comported with in the beginning, when there were some hopes of redress, than
after such process of time; whereby now we see and feel beyond all debate, that
the Throne stands and is stated, not only in opposition to, but upon the ruins
of the Rights and Privileges both of Religion and Liberty. But was not the
equivalent done by the Church, anno 1648. when they refused to concur with that
unlawful Engagment, for restoring of the King, till security be had, by Solemn
Oath under his hand and Seal, that he shall for himself and Successors, give
his assent to all Acts and Bills for enjoining Presbyterial Government, and
never make opposition to it, nor endeavor any change thereof? Iulij ult. 1648.
Sess, 21. But it will be said, that in their renewing the Covenant that year,
they did not leave out that Article. True, thereby they stopped the mouths of
their Adversaries: And then they were not without hopes, but that in his
straits he might have proved a Manasseh taken among the thorns. And the
Covenanters at that time, not being clear that he had done that which ipso jure
made him no Magistrate, chused rather while matters stood so to engage to
maintain him, than simply to disoune him (which yet our forefathers did upon
smaller grounds many times) in the hopes of being prevailed with at last. But
when they saw that this proved ineffectual, therefore at the Coronation of the
new King they made the Covenanted Interest the sole Basis upon which alone
Authority was conferred upon him. For the second, though they did not refuse
the succession of Charles the Second (which was their blame and our bane, of
which we may blush this day) yet we find many things in that Transaction
which justify our disouning of him, and condemn the ouning of the present
Possessor. (1.) In that seasonable and necessary warning Iulij 27. Sess. 27.
whereas many would have admitted his Maj. to the exercise of his Royal
power, upon any terms whatsoever: The Assembly declares first; That a
boundless and illimited power is to be acknowledged in no King nor
Magistrate; neither is our King to be admitted to the exercise of his power,
as long as he refuses to walk in the administration of the same, according to
this rule. Secondly, that there is a mutual stipulation and obligation betvveen
the King and the people, as both of them are tied to God, so each of them are
tied to one another, for the performance of mutual and reciprocal duties;
accordingly Kings are to take the Oath of Coronation, to abolish Popery and
maintain the Protestant Religion: As long therefore as the King refuses to
engage and oblige himself for security of Religion and safety of his people, it
is consonant to Scripture and Reason and Laws of the Kingdom, that he should
be refused. Thirdly, in the League and Covenant the duty of defending and
preserving the King, is subordinate to the duty of preserving Religion and
Liberty: And therefore, he standing in opposition to the public desires of the
people for their security, it were a manifest breach of Covenant, and a
preferring the Kings Interest to the Interest of Jesus Christ, to bring him to
the exercise of his power. Fourthly, That it was for restraint of Arbitrary
Government, and for their Just defense against Tyranny, that the Lords people
did join in Covenant, and have been at the expense of so much blood these years
past; And if he should be admitted to the Government before satisfaction, it
were to put in his hand that Arbitrary Power, and so to abandon their former
Principles, and betray the Cause. Fifthly, That he, being admitted before
satisfaction, would soon endeavor an overturning of the things which God
has wrought, and labor to dravv public administrations, concerning Religion
and Liberty, into that course and Channel in which they did run under Prelacy,
and before the work of Reformation. Whence they warn that every one take heed
of such a snare, that they be not accessery to any such design, as they would
not bring upon themselves and their families, the guilt of all the detriment
that will undoubtedly follow thereupon, of all the miseries it will bring upon
the Kingdoms -- And therefore whosoever attempt the same, oppose themselves to
the cause of God, and will at last dash against the Rock of the Lords power,
which has broken in pieces many high and lofty ones, since the beginning of the
work in the Kingdoms. (2) I shall here insert the Act of the West-Kirk,
declaring their mind very manifestly.

West Kirk. August. 13. 1650. The Commission of the General Assembly,
considering that there may be just ground of stumbling, from the K. Maj.
refusing to subscribe and emitt the Declaration, offered to him by the
Committee of Estates and the Commission of the General Assembly, concerning his
former carriage and resolutions for the future, in reference to the Cause of
God and the enemies and friends thereof; Does therefore declare, That this Kirk
and Kingdom does not oune or espouse any Malignant Party, or Quarrel, or
Interest, but that they fight merely upon their former Grounds and Principles,
and in the defense of the Cause of God and of the Kingdom, as they have done
these twelve years past: And therefore, as they disclaim all the sin and guilt
of the King and of his house, so they will not oune him nor his interest,
otherwise than with a subordination to God, and so far as he ounes and
prosecutes the Cause of God, and disclaims his and his fathers opposition to
the Work of God, and to the Covenant, and likewise all the enemies thereof; And
that they will with convenient speed take unto Consideration the Papers, lately
sent unto them by Oliver Cromwell, and vindicate themselves from all the
falsehoods contained therein; especially in these things wherein the quarrel
betwixt us and that party is Mistated, as if we ouned the late Kings
proceedings, and were resolved to prosecute and maintain his present Maj.
Interest, before and without acknowledgment of the sin of his house and former
ways, and satisfaction to Gods people in both Kingdoms.

A. KER.

Aug. 13. 1650. The Commit of Estates, having seen and considered a
Declaration of the Commission of the General Assembly, anent the stating of the
quarrel wherein the Army is to fight, do approve the same, and heartily concur
therein.

Tho: Henderson.

In the (3) place: It is specified in the Causes of wrath, as one of the steps
of defection, Art. 9. Step. 5. That a Treaty should have been closed with him,
upon his subscribing demands, after he had given many clear evidences of his
disaffection and enmity to the work and people of God: That these demands,
which he was required to subscribe, did not contain a real security, a real
abandoning of former Malignant courses and principles, and cleaving to the Work
of God; It was not a paper or verbal security, which we were bound to demand of
him, but a real one; and to entrust him without this, was but to mock God, and
deceive the world, and to betray and destroy our selves, by giving up all
precious Interests of Religion and Liberty unto the hands of one, who was in a
course of enmity to them: That both before, and in the mean time of the treaty,
he had given evidence of his enmity in many instances, there condiscended upon
particularly; that he authorized James Graham to invade this Kingdom, and
encouraged him by Letters to go on in that Invasion, even whilst he was in
terms of a Treaty with us, as appeared by bringing into our hands the
Authentic Commission it self, and sundry Letters under his own hand. Next, in
the same Causes of wrath, among the sins of the Ministry, in relation to the
public,. 10, 11, 12, 13. That they agreed to receive the King to the Covenant,
barely upon writing, without any apparent evidences of a real change of
principle: That they did not use freedom, in showing what was sinful in
reference to that Treaty, but went on therein when they were not satisfied in
their consciences, for fear of reproach and of being mistaken: That they were
silent in public, and did not give Testimony, after a discovery of the Kings
Commission to James Graham for invading the Kingdom: That they pressed the King
to make a Declaration to the world, whilst they knew by clear evidences that he
had no real conviction of the things contained therein.

PERIOD. VI.
Containing the Testimony through the continued Tract of the present
Deformation from the year 1660. to this day.
NOw comes the last Catastrophe of the Deformation of the Church of Scotland,
which now renders her to all Nations as infamously despicable, as her
Reformation formerly made her admired and envied; which in a Retrograde motion
has gradually been growing these 27 years, going back through all the steps by
which the Reformation ascended, till now she is returned to the very border of
that Babylon, from whence she took her departure, and reduced through
defection, and division, and persecutions, to a confused Chaos of almost
irreparable dissolution, and unavoidable desolation. Through all which steps
notwithstang, to this day, Scotland has never wanted a witness for Christ,
against all the various steps of the Enemies advancings, and of professed
friends declinings: Though the Testimony has had some singularities, some way
discriminating it from that of former Periods; in that it has been more
difficult, by reason of more desperate and dreadful assaults of more enraged
enemies, more expert and experienced in the accursed art of overturning than
any formerly; In that it has been attended with more disadvantages, by reason
of the Enemies greater prevalency, and Friends deficiency, and greater want of
significant Assertors, than any formerly; In that it has been entangled in
more multifarious intricacies, of questions, and debates, and divisions among
the Assertors themselves, making it more dark, and yet in the end contributing
to clear it more than any formerly; In that it has been intended and extended
to a greater measure, both as to matter and manner of contendings against the
Adversaries, and stated upon nicer points; more enixely prosecuted and
tenaciously maintained, and sealed with more sufferings, than any formeriy; In
that it has had more opposition and contradiction, and less countenance from
professed friends to the Reformation, either at home or abroad, than any
formerly. And yet it has had all these several specialities together, which
were peculiar to the former Testimonies, in their respective Periods: being
both Active and Passive, both against Enemies and Friends; And in cumulo stated
against Atheism, Popery, Prelacy, and Errastian Supremacy, which were the
successive heads of the former Testimonies, and also now extended in a
particular manner against Tyranny. And not only against the substance and
essence of these in the abstract, but against substance and circumstance,
abstract and concret root and branch, head and tail of them, and all complying
with them, conforming to them, or countenancing of them, or any thing
conductive for them, or deduced from them, any manner of way, directly or
indirectly, formally or interpretatively. This is that extensive and very
comprehensive Testimony of the present Period, as it is now stated and sealed
with the blood of many: Which in all its parts, points and pendicles is most
directly relative, and dilucidly reducible, to a complex Witness for the
Declarative Glory of Christ's Kingship and Headship over all, as He is God and
as He is Mediator, which is the greatest concern that Creatures have to contend
for, either as Men or as Christians. The matter of this Testimony, I shall give
a short manuduction to the progress and Result of its Managment.

During the Exile of the Royal Brothers, it is undenyably known that they were,
by their Mothers caresses and the Jesuits Allurements, seduced to abjure the
Reformed Religion (which was easy to induce persons to that never had the
sense of any Religion) and to be reconciled to the Church of Rome: And that,
not only they wrote to the Pope many promises of promoting his projects, if
ever they should recover the power into their hands again, and often frequented
the Mass themselves; but also, by their example and the influence of their
future hopes, prevailed with many of their dependents and attendants abroad, to
do the like. Yet it is also unquestionably known, that in the mean time of his
Exile, ^e renewed and confirmed, by private Letters to Presbyterians, his many
reiterated Engagments to adhere to the Covenant, and declared that he was and
would continue the same man, that he had declared himself to be in Scotland
(wherein doubtless, as he was an expert Artist, he equivocated, and meant in
his heart he would continue as Treacherous as ever) which helped to keep a
Loyal Impression of his Interest in the hearts of too many, and an expectation
of some good of him, of which they were ashamed afterward. And immediately
before his return, its known what promises are contained in that Declaration
from Breda (from whence he came also the second time, with greater Treachery
than at the first) to all Protestants that would live peaceably under his
Government; beginning now to weigh out his perfidie, and perjurie, and breach of
Covenant, in offering to tolerote that in an Indulgence, which he swore to
maintain as a duty. But in all this he purposed nothing, but to ingyre and
ingratiate himself into the peoples over credulous affections, that they might
not obstruct his return, which a jealousy of his intended Tyranny would have
awakened them to withstand. And so having seated himself, and strengthened his
power against the attemptings of any, whom his conscience might suggest an
apprehension that they ought to resist him, he thought himself discharged from
all obligations of Covenants, Oaths, or promises, for which his faith had been
pledged. And from the first hour of his arrival, he did in a manner set himself
to affront and Defy the Authority, of God, and to be revenged upon his Kingdoms
for inviting him so unanimously to sway their Scepter; in polluting and
infecting the people with all debaucheries and monstrous villainies; and
commencing his incestous Whoredoms that very first night he came to his Palace,
wherein he continued to his dying day outvying all for vileness. Yet he went on
deluding our Church with his dissimulations, and would not discover all his
wickedness hatched in his heart at first, till his designs should be riper; but
directed a Letter to the Presbytery of Edinburgh, declaring he was resolved to
protect and preserve the Government of the Church of Scotland, as it is settled
by Law without violation: Wherein it was observed he altered the Style, and
spoke never a word of the Covenant, our Magna Charta of Religion and
Righteousness, our greatest security for all Interests entrusted to him, but
only of Law; by which, as his practice expounded it afterward, he meant the
Prelatical Church, as it was settled by the Law of his Father, since which time
he reckoned there was no Law but Rebellion. This was a piece and preludie of
our base defection, and degeneration into blind, blockish, and brutish
stupidity; that after he had discovered so much perfidie, we not only at first
tempted him to Perjurie, in admitting him to the Crown, upon his mock-engagment
in the Covenant, whereby God was mocked, His Spirit was grieved, His Covenant
prostituted, the Church cheated, and the State betrayed; but after the Lord had
broken his yoke from off our necks, by sending him to exile ten years, where he
was discovered to be imbibing all that venom and Tyrannical violence, which he
afterward vented in revenge upon the Nations; and after we had long smarted for
our first transaction with him; yet not withstanding of all this, we believed
him again, and Issachar-like couched under his burdens, and were so far from
withstanding, that we did not so much as witness against the readmission and
restoration of the head and tail of Malignants, but let them come in peaceably
to the throne, without any security to the Covenanted cause, or for our Civil
or Religious Interests, and by piece meal, at their oun ease, leisure and
pleasure, to overturn all the Work of God, and reintroduce the old
Antichristian yoke of abjured Prelacy, and blasphemous Sacrelegious Supremacy,
and Absolute Arbitrary Tyranny with all their abominations: which he, and with
him the generality of our Nobility, Gentry, Clergy, and commonality by him
corrupted, without regard to faith, or fear of God or man, did promote and
propogate, until the Nation was involved in the greatest revolt from, and
rebellion against God, that ever could be recorded in any Age or Generation;
Nay attended with greater and grosser Aggravations, than ever any could be
capable of before us, who have had the greatest Privileges that ever any
Church had; since the National Church of the Jews, the greatest light; the
greatest effects of matchless magnified love, the greatest Convictions of Sin,
the greatest Resolutions and Solemn Engagments against it, and the greatest
Reformation from it, that ever any had to abuse and affront. O Heavens be
astonished at this, and horribly afraid! for Scotland has changed her Glory,
and the Crown has fallen from off her head, by an unparalelled Apostasy, a
free and voluntary, vvilfull and deliberate Apostasy, an avoued and declared
and Authorized Apostasy, Tyrannically carried on by Military violence and
cruelty, a most universal and every way unprecedented Apostasy! I must a
little change my method, in deducing the narration of this Catastrophe, and
subdistinguish this unhappie Period into several steps; shevving how the
Enemies opposition to Christ advanced, and the Testimony of His Witnesses did
gradually ascend, to the pitch it is now arrived at.

I. These Enemies of God, having once got footing again, with the favor and
the fawnings of the foolish Nation, went on fervently to further and promote
their wicked design: and meeting with no opposition at first, did encourage
themelves to begin boldly. Wherefore, hearing of some Ministers peaceably
Assembled, to draw up a Monitory Letter to the King, minding him of his
Covenant Engagments and promises (which was though weak, yet the first witness
and warning against that Heaven-daring wickedness then begun) they cruelly
incarcerate them. Having hereby much daunted the Ministry from their duty in
that day, for fear of the like unusual and outrageous usage. The Parliament
conveens Ianuar. 1. 1661. without so much as a Protestation for Religion and
Liberty given in to them. And there, in the first place, they frame and take
the Oath of Supremacy, Exauctorating Christ, and investing His usurping Enemy
with the spoils of his robbed Prerogative, acknowledging the King only supreme
Governor over all persons and in all Causes, and that his power and
Jurisdiction must not be declined. Whereby under all persons and all Cause^,
All Church Officers, in their most properly Ecclesiastic Affairs and Concerns
of Christ, are comprehended: And if the King shall take upon him to judge their
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, or Government, he must not be declined as an
incompetent Judge. Which did at once enervate all the Testimony of the 4th
Period above declared, and laid the foundation for all this Babel they have
built since, and of all this war that has been waged against the Son of God,
and did introduce all this Tyranny and absolute power which has been since
carried to its Complement, and made the Kings Throne the foundation of all the
succeeding perjurie and Apostasy. Yet, though then our Synods and Presbytries,
were not discharged, but might have had access in some Concurrence to witness,
against this horrid Invasion upon Christ's Prerogative and the Churches
Privilege, no joint Testimony was given against it, except that some were
found witnessing against it in their singular Capacity by themselves. As
faithful Mr James Guthrie, for declining this usurped Authority in prejudice of
the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus, suffered death, and got the Martyrs Crown upon
his head: And some others, for refusing that Oath arbitrarly imposed, were
Banished or Confined, when they had gained this Bulwark of Christ's Kingdom;
Then they waxed more insolent, and set up their Ensigns for signs, and broke
down the carved Work of Reformation with axes and hammers. In this Parliament
1661. They past an Act Rescissorie, whereby they annulled and declared void the
National Covenant, the Solemn League and Covenant, Presbytrial Government, and
all Laws made in favors of the Work of Reformation, since the year 1633. O
horrid wickedness! both in its nature so attrocious, to condemn and rescind
what God did so signally seal as His oun Work, to the conviction of the world,
and for which He will rescind the Rescinders, and overturn these Overturners of
His Work, and make the curse of that broken Covenant bind them to the
punishment, whom its bond could not oblige to the duty Covenanted; And in its
design and end so base and detestable, for nothing but to flatter the King in
making way for Prelacy, Tyranny, and Popery, and to indulge the licenciousness
of some debauched Nobles; who could not endure the yoke of Christ's Government,
and to suppress Religion and Righteousness under the ruins of that
Reformation. But O holy and astonishing Justice, thus to recompense our way
upon our own head! to suffer this work and cause to be ruined under our unhappy
hands, who suffered this Destroyer to come in before it was so effectually
secured, as it should not have been in the power of his hand (whatever had been
in his heart, swelled with enmity against Christ) to have razed and ruined that
Work as now most wickedly he did, and drew in so many into the guilt of the
same deed, that almost the whole Land not only consented unto it but applauded
it; by approving and countenancing another wicked Act framed at the same time,
by that same perfidious Parliament for an Anniversary Thanksgiving
commemorating every 29. of May, that Blasphemy against the Spirit and Work of
God, and celebrating that unhappy Restoration of the Rescinder of the
Reformation; which had not only the concurrence of the universality of the
Nation, But (alas for shame that it should be told in Gath etc!) even of some
Ministers who afterward accepted the Indulgence (one of which a Pillar among
them, was seen scandalously dancing about the bonefires.) And others, who
should have alarmed the whole Nation quasi pro aris and focis, to rise for
Religion and Liberty, to resist such wickedness, did wink at it. O how
Righteous is the Lord now in turning our Harps into mourning! Though alas! we
will not suffer our selves to this day, to see the shining Righteousness of
this Retribution: And though we be scourged with Scorpions, and brayed in a
Mortar, our madness, our folly in these irreligious frolicks, is not yet
acknowledged let be lamented. Yet albeit, neither in this day when the Covenant
was not only broken but Cassed and declared of no obligation, nor afterward
when it was burnt (for which Turks and Pagans would have been ashamed and
afraid at such a terrible sight, and for which the Lords Anger is burning
against these bold burners, and against them who suffered it, and did not
witness against it) was there any public Testimony by protestation, or
Remonstrance, or an public witness? though the Lord had some then, and some
who came out afterward with the Trumpet at their mouth, whose heart then
sorrowed at the sight: And some suffered for the sense they showed of that
Anniversary abomination, for not keeping which they lost both Church and
Liberty. Its true the ordinary Meetings of Presbytries and Synods were about
that time discharged, to make way for the exercise of the new power conferred
on the four Prelates who were at Court, reordained and Consecrated thereby
renouncing their former Title to the Ministry. But this could not give a
discharge from a Necessary Testimony, then called for from faithful Watchmen.
However the Reformation being thus rescinded and razed, and the House of the
Lord pulled down, then they begin to build their Babel. In the Parliament anno
1662. by their first Act they restore and reestablish Prelacy, upon such a
foundation as they might by the same Law bring in Popery, which was then
designed; and so settled its Harbinger Diocesan and Erastiar Prelacy, by fuller
Enlargment of the Supremacy. The very Act begins thus. For as much as the
ordering and disposal of the external Government of the Church, does properly
belong to his Maj. as an Inherent right of the Croun, by virtue of his Royal
Prerogative, and Supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastic -- what ever shall be
determined by his Maj. with advice of the Arch Bishops, and such of the Clergy
as he shall nominate, in the external Government of the Church (the same
consisting with the standing Laws of the Kingdom) shall be valide and
effectual. And in the same Act all Laws are rescinded, by which the sole power
and Jurisdiction within the Church does stand in the Church Assemblies, And all
which may be interpreted, to have given any Church power, Jurisdiction, or
Government to the Office bearers of the Church, other than that which
acknowledges a dependence upon, and subordination to the Sovereign power of
the King as Supreme. By which, Prelates are redintegrated to all their
privileges and preheminencies, that they possessed anno 1637. And all their
Church power (robbed from the Officers of Christ) is made to be derived from,
to depend upon, and to be subordinate to, the Croun prerogative of the King:
whereby the King is made the only fountain of Church power, and that exclusive
even of Christ, of whom there is no mentioned exception: And his vassals the
Bishops, as his Clerks in Ecclesiastiks, are accountable to him for all their
administrations; A greater usurpation upon the Kingdom of Christ, than ever the
Papacy it self aspired unto. Yet, albeit here was another display of a banner
of defyance against Christ, in altering the Church Government of Christ's
Institution into the humane Invention of Lordly Prelacy, in assuming a power by
prerogative to dispose of the external Government of the Church, and in giving
his Creatures patents for this effect, to be his Administrators in that usurped
Government; There was no public, Ministerial, at least united Testimony
against this neither. Therefore the Lord punished this sinful and shamful
silence of Ministers, in His holy Justice, though by men's horrid wickedness;
when by another wicked Act of the Council at Glasgow, above 300 Ministers were
put from their Charges; and afterward, for their Nonconformity in not
Countenancing their Diocesan Meeting, and not keeping the Anniversary day May
29. The rest were violently thrust from their labors in the Lords vineyard,
and banished from their Parishes, and adjudged unto a nice and strange
Confinement, twenty miles from their oun parishes, six miles from a Cathedral
Church as they called it, and three miles from a Burgh; whereby they were
reduced in to many inconveniences. Yet in this fatal Convulsion of the Church,
generally all were struck with blindness and baseness, that a
Paper-Proclamation made them all run from their posts, and obey the Kings
Orders for their ejection. Thus were they given up, because of their forbearing
to sound an alarm, charging the people of God, in point of Loyalty to Christ,
and under the pain of the Curse of the Covenant, to a wake and acquit
themselves like men, and not to suffer the enemy to rob them of that Treasure
of Reformation, which they were put in possession of, by the tears, prayers,
and blood of such as went before them; instead of those prudential fumblings,
and fisflings then and since so much followed. Wherefore the Lord in His holy
righteousness, left that enemy (against whom they should have cried and
contended, and to whose eye they should have held the Curse of the Covenant, as
having held it first to their oun, in case of unfaithful silence in not holding
it to his) to cast them out of the House of the Lord, and dissolve their
Assemblies, and deprive them of their privileges, because of their not being
so valiant for the Truth, as that a full and faithful Testimony against that
Encroachment might be found upon record. Nevertheless somewere found faithful
in that hour and pour of darkness, who kept the Word of the Lords patience, and
who were therefore kept in and from that tentation (which carried many away
into sad and shamful defections) though not from suffering hard things from the
hands of men; and only these who felt most of their violence, found grace
helping them to acquit themselves suitably to that days Testimony, being
thereby prevented from an Active yielding to their impositions, when they were
made passively to suffer force. However that season of a public Testimony was
lost, and as to the most part never recovered to this day. The Prelates being
settled, and readmitted to voice in Parliament, they procure an Act,
Dogmatically condemning several Material parts and points of our Covenanted
Reformation, to wit, these positions That it was lawful for Subjects, for
Reformation or necessary self defense, to enter into leagues, or take up Arms,
against the King: And particularly declaring that the national Covenant, as
explained in the year 1638. and the Solemn league and Covenant, were and are i^
themselves unlawful Oaths, and were taken by and imposed upon the subjects of
this Kingdom against the fundamental Laws and Liberties thereof, That all such
gatherings and petitions, that were used in the beginning of the late troubles,
were unlawful and seditious: And whereas then People were led unto these
things, by having disseminated among them such principles as these, That it was
lawful to come with petitions and Representations of grievances to the King,
That it was lawful for people to restrict their Allegiance under such and such
limitations, and suspend it until he should give security for Religion etc. It
was therefore enacted, that all such positions and practices founded thereupon,
were treasonable -- And further did enact* that no person, by writing, praying,
preaching, or malicious or advised speaking, express or publish any words or
sentences, to stir up the people to the dislike of the Kings prerogative and
Supremacy, or of the Government of the Church by Bishops, or justify any of
the deeds, actings, or things declared against by that Act. Yet not
withstanding of all this subversion of Religion and Liberty, and restraint of
asserting these Truths here trampled upon either before men by Testimony, or
before God in mourning over these Indignities done unto Him, in everting these
and all the parts of Reformation, even when it came to Daniels case of
confession, preaching and praying Truths interdicted by Law; fevv had their
eyes open (let be their vvindovvs in an open avouching them) to see the duty of
the day calling for a Testimony. Though afterward, the Lord Spirited some to
assert and demonstrate the Glory of these Truths and duties to the world. As
that Judicious Author of the Apologetical Relation, whose Labors need no
Elagium to commend them. But this is not all: for these men, having now as
they thought subverted the Work of God, they provided also against the fears of
its revival: making Acts, declaring, that if the outed Ministers dare to
continue to preach, and presume to exercise their Ministry, they should be
punished as seditious persons; requiring of all a due acknowledgment of, and
hearty compliance with, the Kings Government Ecclesiastical and Civil; And that
whosoever shall ordinarily and wilfully withdraw and absent from the ordinary
Meetings for Divine Worship in their ou^ Churches on the Lords day, shall incur
the Penalties there insert. Thus the sometimes Chaste Virgin, whose name was
Beulah to the Lord, the Reformed Church of Scotland, did now suffer a violent
and villainous rape; from a vermin of vile Schismatical Apostates, obtruded and
imposed upon her, instead of her able, painful, faithful and succeseful
Pastors, that the Lord had set over her, and now by their faintness and the
Enemies force robbed from her; And none now allowed by Law to administer the
Ordinances, but either Apostate Curats, who by their Perjurie and Apostasy
forfaulted their Ministry, or other Hirelings and Prelat^ Journey-men, who run
without a Mission except from them who had none to give according to Christ's
Institution, the seal of whose Ministry could never yet be shown in the
Conversion of any sinner to Christ: but if the tree may be known by its fruit^,
we may know whose Ministers they are; ut ex ungue Leonem, by their Conversions
of Reformation into Deformation, of the Work and Cause of God into the
similitude of the Roman beast, of Ministers into Hirelings, of their Proselytes
into ten times worse children of the Devil then they were before, of the power
of Godlyness into formality, of Preaching Christ into Orations of Morality, of
the purity of Christ's Ordinances into the vanity of men's Inventions, of the
beautiful Government of the House of God for Edification, to a Lordly
pre-eminence and Domination over consciences, in a word of Church and State
Constitutions for Religion and Liberty all up side down into wickedness and
slavery: These are the Conversions of Prelacy. But now this astonishing blow to
the Gospel of the Kingdom, introducing such a Swarm of Locusts into the Church,
And in forcing a Compliance of the people with this defection, and that so
violently and rigorously, as even simple withdrawing was so severely punished
by severe Edicts of fyning, and other arbitrary punishments at first; what did
it produce? did it awaken all Christ's Ambassadors, now to appear for Christ,
in this clear and clamant case of Confessing Him, and the freedom and Purity of
His Ordinances? Alas! the backwardness and bentness to backsliding, in a
Superseding from the duties of that day, did make it evident, that now the Lord
had in a great measure forsaken them, because they had forsaken Him. The
standart of the Gospel was then fallen, and few to take it up. The Generality
of Ministers and Professors both went and Conformed so far as to hear the
Curats, contrary to many points of the Reformation formerly attained, contrare
to their Covenant Engagments, and contrare to their oun principles and practice
at that same time; scrupling and refusing to keep the Bishops visitations, and
to Countenance their Discipline and power of Jurisdiction, because it was
required as a Testification of their acknowledgment of, and Compliance with the
present Government, And yet not scrupling to Countenance their Doctrine and
usurped power of Order required also by the same Law, as the same Test of the
same Compliance and submission. Its strange that some yet do plead for
persisting in that same Compliance, after all the bitter Consequents of it.
Other Ministers Lay altogether by in their retired recesses, waiting to see
what things would turn to: Others were hopeless, turned Farmers and Doctors:
others more wyllie, staid at home, and Preached quietly in Ladies Chambe^^ But
the faithful thought that this Tyrannical ejection did (...) or could not
unminister them, so as they might not Prea^^^ Gospel where ever they were, as
Ambassadors of (...); but rather found themselves under an indispensible
necessity to Preach the Gospel and witness for the freedom of their Ministry,
and make full proof of it, in preaching in season and out of season: and
thereupon as occasion offered preached to all such as were willing to hear; but
at first only in private houses, and that for the most part at such times, when
Sermons in public surceased (a superplus of Caution.) But afterward, finding
so great difficulties and Persecutions for their house Meetings, where they
were so easily attrapped, were constrained at last to keep their Meetings in
the fields, without shelter from cold, wind, snow, or rain. Where testifieing
both practically and particularly against these Usurpations on their Masters
Prerogatives, and witnessing for their Ministerial freedom, contrary to all
Law-Interdictions, without any Licenses or Indulgences from the Usurper, but
holding their Ministry from Jesus Christ alone, both as to the Office and
exercise thereof; they had so much of their Masters Countenance, and success in
their labors, that they valued neither hazards nor hardships, neither the
contempt of pretended Friends, nor the Laws nor threatenings of Enemies,
adjudging the penalty of death it self to Preachers at Field Conventicles as
they called them. Now having thus overturned the Church Government, by
introducing Prelacy, to advance an absolute Supremacy; the effects whereof were
either the Corruption, or Persecution of all the Ministry, Encouragment of
profanity and wickedness, the enerease and advancment of Popery, Superstition,
and Error, cruel impositions on the Conscience, and oppressions for Conscience
sake, by the practices of cruel Supra-Spanish Inquisitions, and all manner of
outcryes of outrageous violence and villainy: The King proceeds in his design,
to pervert and evert the well modelled and moderated Constitution of the State
Government also, by introducing and advancing an Arbitrary Tyranny; the effects
whereof were, an absolute Mancipation of Lives and Liberties and estates unto
his lust and pleasure, the utter subversion of Laws, and absolute
impoverishin^^ the people. For effectuating which, he first proc^^ lasting
Imposition of intolerable Subsidies and Taxati^^, to impoverish that he might
the more easily enslave the Nation; Next a further recognizance of his
Prerogative, in a subjection of persons, fortunes, and whole strength of the
Kingdom to his absolute arbitrament, in a Levy of Militia of 20000 footmen, and
2000 horsemen sufficiently armed, with 40 days provision, to be ready upon the
Kings call to march to any part of his Dominions, for opposing whatsoever
invasion, or insurrection, or for any other service. The first sproutings of
Tyranny were cherished, by the cheerful and stupid submission generally
yielded to these exorbitances; under which they who suffered most were inwardly
Malcontents, but there was no opposition to them by word or Action, but on the
contrary, generally people did not so much as scruple sending out or going out
as Militia-men: never adverting unto what this Concurrence was designed, and
demanded, and given for; Nor what an accession it was, in the nature and
influence of the mean it self, and in the sense and intention of the Requirers,
unto a Confederacy for a Compliance with, and a Confirmation and strengthening
of Arbitrary Tyranny. After the fundamental constitutions of both Church and
State are thus razed and rooted up, to confirm this Absolute Power, he
contrived to frame all inferior Magistrates according to his mould: And for this
end appointed, that all persons in any public Trust or Office whatsoever
should subscribe a Declaration, renouncing and abjuring the Covenants; whereby
Perjurie was made the chief and indispensible qualification, and Conditio sine
qua non, of all that were capable of exercing any power or place in Church or
State. But finding this not yet sufficient security for this unsettled
settlement; because he well understood, the people stood no ways obliged to
acknowledge him but only according to the solemn Covenants, being the
fundamental Conditions whereupon their Allegiance was founded (as amongst all
people, the Articles mutually consented betwixt them and these whom they set
over them, are the constituent fundamentalls of Government) and well knowing,
that he and his Associats, by violating these Conditions, had loosed the people
from all subjection, to him, or any deriving power from him, whereby the people
might justly plead, that since he had kept no Condition they were not now
obliged to him, he therefore contrived a new Oath of Allegiance to be imposed
upon all in public trust both in Church and State; wherein they are made to
oblige themselves to that Boundless breaker of all Bonds Sacred and Civil, and
his Successors also, without any reciprocal obligation from him to them, or any
reserved restriction, limitation, or qualification, as all humane Authority by
Gods Ordinance must be bounded. Whereby the Swearers have by Oath homologated
the overturning of the very Basis of the Government, making free people Slaves
to the subverters thereof, betraying their native Brethren and posterity to the
lust of Tyranny, and have in effect as really as if in plain terms affirmed,
that whatsoever Tyranny shall command or do, either as to the overturning of
the work of God, subverting of Religion, destroying of Liberty, or persecuting
all the Godly to the utmost extremity, they shall not only stupidly endure it,
but actively concur with it, and assist in all this Tyranny. Alas there was no
public Testimony against this Trick, to bring people under the yoke of
Tyranny; except by some who suffered for Conscientious refusing it, while many
others did take it, thinking to salve the matter by their pitiful quibleng
senses, of giving Caesar his due. Where as this Caesar, for whom these Loyal
Alleg^ers plead, is not an ordinary Caesar, but such a Caesar, Nero, or Caligula,
that if he got his due, it would be in another kind. Strange! can Presbyterians
swear that Allegiance, which is substitute in the place of the broken and burnt
Covenant? Or could they swear it to such a person, who having broken and buried
the Covenant, that he who had sworn it might have another right and another
Allegiance than that of the Covenant, had then remitted to us all Allegiance
founded upon the Covenant? However, having now prepared and furnished himself
with Tools so qualified for his purpose, in Church and State, he prosecutes his
Persecution with such fervor and fury, rage and revenge, impositions and
oppressions, and with armed formed force, against the faithful following their
duty in a peaceable manner, without the least shadow of Contempt even of his
abused Authority, that at length in the year 1666, a small party were compelled
to go to defensive arms. Which, whatever was the desire of the Court (as it is
known how desirous they have been of an Insurrection, when they thought
themselves sure to suppress it, that they might have a vent for their Cruelty;
and how one of the Brothers has been heard say, that if he might have his
wish, he would have them all turn Rebels and go to arms.) Yet it wa^ no
predetermined design of that poor Handful. For Sir James Turner, pursuing his
cruel orders in Galoway, sent some Soldiers to apprehend a poor old man; whom
his neighbors compassionating, entreated the Soldiers to loose him as he lay
bound, but were answered with drawn Swords and necessitated to their own
defense: In which they relieve the man, and disarm the Soldiers, and further
attacqued some others oppressing that Country, disarming 10 or 12 more, and
killing one that made resistance. Whereupon, the Country being alarmed, and
fearing from sad experience Sir James would certainly avenge this affront upon
the whole Country, without distinction of free and unfree, they gather about 54
horsemen, march to Drumfreis, take Sir James Turner Prisoner, and disarm the
Soldiers, without any more violence. Being thus by Providence engaged without
any hope of retreat, and getting some Concurrence of their Brethren in the same
Condition, they come to Lanerk, where they renew the Covenant; and thence to
Pentland hills: where, by the holy Disposal of God, they were routed, many
killed, and 130 taken Prisoners, who were treated so treacherously and
truculently, as Turks would have blushed to have seen the like. Hence now on
the one hand, we may see the Righteousness of God, in leaving that Enemy to
Him, whom we embraced, to make such avowed Discoveries of himself, without a
blush to the world, and to scourge us with Scorpions that we nourished and put
in his hands: And also, how justly at that time He left us into such a damp,
that like Asses we couched under all burdens, and few came out to the help of
the Lord against the Mighty, drawing on them Meroz's Curse, and the blood of
their butchered Brethren; after we had sitten, and seen, and suffered all
things Civil and Sacred to be destroyed in our sight without resentment. And
though the Lord, who called out these worthy Patriots who fell at Pentland to
such an appearance for His Interests, did take a Testimony of their hands with
acceptance by sufferings, and singularly Countenanced them in sealing it with
their blood; yet He would not give success nor His presence to the Enterprise,
but left them in a sort of infatuation, without Counsel and Conduct, to be a
prey to devourers, that by a sad inadvertency they took in the Tyrants Interest
into the State of the Quarrel. Which should have warned His people for the
future, to have stated the Quarrel otherwise.

II. By this time; and much more after, the King gave as many proofs and
demonstrations of his being true to Antichrist, in minding all the promises and
treaties with him, as he had of his being false to Christ, in all his Covenant
Engagments with His People. For in this same year 1666. he, with his dear and
Royal Brother the Duke of York, contrived, countenanced, and abetted, the
burning of London, evident by their employing their Guards to hinder the People
from saving their oun, and to dismiss the Incendiaries the Papists, that were
taken in the fact. The Committee, appointed to cognosce upon that business,
traced it fo far, that they durst go no further, unless they would arraign the
Duke, and charge the King, and yet before this it was enacted as Criminal for
any to say the King was a Papist. But having gained so much of his design in
Scotland; where he had established Prelacy, advanced Tyranny to the hight of
Absoluteness, and his Supremacy almost beyond the reach of any additional
supply, yea above the Popes oun Claim, and had now brought his only opposites,
the few faithful Witnesses of Christ, to a Low pass; he went on by Craft as well
as Cruelty, to advance his oun in promoting Antichrists Interest. And
therefore, having gotten the Supremacy devolved upon him by Law (for which also
he had the Popes dispensation, to take it to himself for the time, under
promise to restore and surrender it to him, as soon as he could attain his end
by it, as the other Brother succeeding has now done) he would now exert that
usurped power, and work by infnaring policy to effectuate the end which he
could not do by other means. Therefore, seeing he was not able to suppress the
Meetings of the Lords people for Gospel Ordinances, in house and fields, but
that the more he labored by violent courses the greater and more frequent they
grew; he fell upon a more Crafty device, not only to overthrow the Gospel and
suppress the Meetings, but to break the faithful, and to divide, between the
Mad-cap and the Moderate Fanatics (as they phrased it) that he might the more
easily destroy both; to confirm the usurpation, and to settle people in a
sinful silence and stupid submission to all the Encroachments made on Christ's
Prerogatives, and more effectually to overturn what remained of the Work of
God. And, knowing that nothing could more fortify the Supremacy than Ministers
their homologating and acknowledging it; Therefore he offered the first
Indulgence, Anno 1669. Signifying in a Letter, dated that year June 7. His
gracious pleasure was, to appoint so many of the outed Ministers, as have lived
peaceably and orderly, to return to preach and exercise other functions of the
Ministry, in the Paroch Churches where they formerly served (provided they be
vacant) and to allow Patrons to present to other vacant Churches, such others
of them as the Council should approve: That all who are so Indulged, be
enjoined to keep Presbytries, and the Refusers to be confined within the bounds
of their paroches: And that they be enjoined not to admit any of their
neighbor Paroches unto their Communions, nor Baptize their Children, nor marry
any of them, without the allowance of the Minister of the Paroch, and if they
Countenance the people deserting their oun Paroches, they are to be silenced
for shorter or longer time, or altogether turned out, as the Council shall see
cause: And upon Complaint made and verified, of any Seditious discourse or
expressions in the Pulpit, uttered by any of the Ministers, they are immediately
to be turned out, and further punished according to Law: And seeing by these
orders, all Pretenses for Conventickles were taken away, if any should be found
hereafter to Preach without Authority, or keep Conventickles, his Pleasure is,
to proceed with all severity against them, as Seditious persons and Contemners
of Authority. To salve this in point of Law (because it was against former
Laws of their oun) and to make the Kings Letter the supreme Law afterward,
and a valid ground in Law, where upon the Council might proceed, and enact, and
execute what the King pleased in Matters Ecclesiastic; he therefore caused
frame a formal Statutory Act of Supremacy, of this Tenor. That his Maj. has
the supreme Authority and Supremacy over all Persons and in all Causes
Ecclesiastic, within his dominions, and that by virtue thereof, the ordering
and disposal of the external Government of the Church, does properly belong to
him and his successors, as an Inherent right to the Croun: And that he may
settle, enact, and emitt such Constitutions, Acts, and Orders, concerning the
Administrating thereof, and Persons employed in the same, and concerning all
Ecclesiastical Meetings and Matters, to be proposed and determined therein; as
he in his Royal wisdom shall think fit: which Acts, Orders, and Constitutions,
are to be observed and obeyed by all his Maj. Subjects, any Law, act, or custom
to the contrary notwithstanding. Where upon, accordingly the Council, in their
Act Iuli^. 27. 1669. do nominate several Ministers, and appoint them to Preach,
and exercise the other functions of the Ministry, at their respective Churches
there specified, with Consent of the Patrons. The same day also they conclude
and enact the forementioned Restrictions, conform to the Kings Letter above
rehearsed, And ordain them to be intimat to every person, who is by Authority
foresaid allowed the exercise of the Ministry. These Indulged Ministers,
having that Indulgence given only upon these terms, that they should accept
these Injunctions, and having received it upon these terms also (as an
essential part of the bargain and Condition, on which the Indulgence was
granted and accepted, as many following Proclamations did expressly declare) do
Appoint Mr Hutcheson, one of the number, to declare so much; In Acknowledging
his Maj. favor and Clemency, in granting that Liberty, after so long a
restraint; And however they had received their Ministry from Jesus Christ,
with full Prescriptions from Him for regulating them therein, yet nothing could
be more refreshing on earth to them, than to have free Liberty for the exercise
of their Ministry, under the Protection of Lawful Authority: And so they
purposed to be have themselves, in the discharge of the Ministry, with that
wisdom that became faithful Ministers, and to demean themselves toward Lawful
Authority, notwithstanding of their known judgment in Church affairs, as well
becomes Loyal subjects; And their prayer to God should be, that the Lord
should bless his Maj. in his person and Government, and the Council in the
public administration, and especially in the Pursuance of his Maj. mind in his
Letter, wherein his singular moderation eminently appears. -- Afterward they
issued out Proclamations, reinforcing the punctual observation of the
forementioned Injunctions, and delivered them into the Indulged. In the mean
time, though Cruel Acts and Edicts were made against the Meetings of the Lords
people, in houses and the fields, after all these Midianitish wyles to suppress
them; such was the presence of the Lord in these Meetings, and so powerful was
His Countenance and Concurrence with the Labors of a few, who laid out
themselves to hold up the Standart of Christ; that the number of Converts
multiplied daily, to the praise of free Grace, and to the great encouragment of
the few hands that wrestled in that Work, through all humane discouragment.
Therefore King and Council was put to a new shift, which they supposed would
prove more effectual: To wit, because there was a great number of Non-conformed
Ministers not yet Indulged, who either did or might hereafter hold
Conventickles, therefore, to remeed or prevent this in time coming, they
appoint and ordain them to such places where Indulged Ministers were settled,
there to be confined with allowance to Preach as the Indulged should employ
them; thinking by this means to incapacitate many to hold Meetings there or
elswere: And to these also they give injunctions and restrictions to regulate
them in the exercise of their Ministry. And to the end that all the outed
Ministers might be brought under restraint, and the Word of God be kept under
bonds, by another Act of Council they Command, that all other Ministers (not
Disposed of as is said) were either to repair to the Paroch Churches where they
were, or to some other Paroches where they may be ordinary hearers, and to
declare and condescend upon the Paroches where they intend to have their
Residence. After this they assumed a Power, to Dispose of these their Curats as
they pleased, and transport them from place to place; whereof the only ground
was a simple Act of Council, the Instructions always going along with them, as
the constant Companion of the Indulgence* By all which it is apparent; what
ever these Ministers allege, in vindication of it to cover its deformity, in
their Balmes to take away its Stink, and in their Surveyes to gather Plasters
to scurf over its Scurveyness, viz. that it was but the removal of the Civil
restraint, And that they entered into their places by the Call of the People (a
mere mock pretense for a Prelimited imposition, whereby that Ordinance of
Christ was basely prostituted and abused) And that their Testimony and
Protestation was a Salvo for their conscience (a mere Outopian fancy* that the
Indulgers with whom they bargained never heard of, otherwise, as they did with
some who were faithful in testifying against their Encroachments, they would
soon have given them a Bill of Ease) It cannot be denied, that that doleful
Indulge^^e, both in its Rise, Contrivance; Conveyance, Grant, and Acceptance,
End and Effects, was a Grievous Encroachment upon the Princely Prerogative of
Jesus Christ the only Head of the Church; whereby the usurpers Supremacy was
Homologated; bowed to* complied with, strengthened and established* the Cause
and Kingdom of Christ betrayed, His Churches Privileges surrendered, His
Enemies hardened, His Friends stumbled, and the Remnant rent and ruined; in
that it was granted and deduced from the Kings Supremacy, and conveyed by the
Council; in that, according to his pleasure, he gave and they received a
License and warrant, to such as he nominated and Elected and judged fit and
qualified for it, and fixed them in what particular Paroch he pleased to
assign, under the notion of a Confinment, in that he imposed and they submitted
to restrictions in the exercise of their Ministry, in these particular
Paroches, inhibiting to Preach elsewhere in the Church; And with these
restrictions, he gave and they received instructions to regulate and direct
them in their functions: All which was done without Advice or Consent of the
Church: And thereupon they have frequentlie been called and coveened before the
Counci^, to give ac^ount of their Ministerial exercise, and some of them
sentenced, silenced, and deposed for alleged disobedience. This was a manifest
Treason against Christ, which involved many in the actual guilt of it that day,
and many others who gaped after it and could not obtain it, and for more at
that time and since in the guilt of Misprision of Treason, in passing this also
without a witness. Thus, in holy judgment, because of our Indulging and
Conniving at the usurper of Christ's Throne, He left a great part of the
Ministers to take that wretched Indulgence; and another part, instead of
remonstrating the wickedness of that deed, have been left to palliate, and
plaster, and Patronize it, in keeping up the Credit of the King and Councils
Curats, wherein they have showed more zeal, than ever against that wicked
Indulgence. Yet the Lord had some Witnesses, who pretty early did give
significations of their resentment of this dishonor done to Christ, as Mr
William Weer, who having got the Legal Call of the People, and discharging his
duty honestly, was turned out; And Mr John Burnet, who wrote a Testimony
directed to the Council, showing why he could not submit to that Indulgence,
inserted at large in the History of the Indulgence; Where also we have the
Testimony of other ten Ministers, who drew up their Reasons of Non-Complyance
with such a snare; And Mr Alexander Blair, who, upon occasion of a Citation
before the Council for not observing the 29 of Maij, having with others made
his appearance, and got new Copies of Instructions presented to them, being
moved with zeal and remembering whose Ambassador he was, told the Council
plainly, that he could receive no Instructions from them in the exercise of his
Ministry, otherwise he should not be Christ's Ambassador but theirs, and
herewith lets their Instructions drop out of his hand, knowing of no other
Salv^ or manner of Testifying for the Truth in the Case for which he was
imprisoned, and died under Confinement. But afterward, the Lord raised up some
more explicit Witnesses against that defection. All this Trouble was before
the year 1673. About which time, finding this device of Indulgences proved so
steadable for his Service in Scotland, he was induced to try it also in
England; which he did almost with the same or like success, and producing the
same effects of defection, security, and unfaithfulness. The Occasion was upon
his wars with the Dutch: Which gave another demonstrative discovery of his
Treachery and Popish perfidie, in breaking League with them, and entering into
one with the French, to destroy Religion and Liberty in Britain: Wherein the
King of France assures him an Absolute Authority over his Parliaments, and to
reestablish the Catholic Religion in his Kingdoms of England Scotland and
Ireland; to Compass which it was necessary first to abate the pride and power
of the Dutch, and to reduce them to the sole Province of Holland, by which
means the King of England should have Zeland for a retreat in case of need, and
that the rest of the Low Countries should remain to the King of France, if he
could render himself Master of it. But to return to Scotland. While by the
forementioned Device, he thought he had utterly suppressed the Gospel in house
and field Meetings, he was so far disappointed, that these very means and
Machins by which he thought to bury it, did chiefly contribute to its revival.
For, when by Persecution many Ministers had been chased away by illegal
Law-Sentences, many had been banished away, and by their ensnaring Indulgences
many had been drawn away from their duty, and others were now sentenced with
Confinements and Restraints, if they should not choose and fix their residence
where they could not keep their Quiet and Conscience both; they were forced to
wander and disperse through the Country, and the People being tired of the cold
and dead Curats, and wanting long the Ministry of their old Pastors, so longed
and hungered after the Word, that they behoved to have it at any rate cost what
it would; which made them entertain the dispersed Ministers more earnestly, and
encouraged them more to their duty. By whose Endeavors, through the mighty
power and presence of God, and the Light of His Countenance now shining through
the Cloud, after so fatal and fearful a darkness that had overclouded the Land
for a while, with such a resplendent brightness, that it darkened the Prelatick
Locusts, and made them hiss and gnash their tongues for pain, and dazeled the
eyes of all Onlookers; the Word of God grew exceedingly, and went through at
least the Southern borders of the Kingdom like lightning, or like the Sun in
its Meridian beauty; discovering so the Wonders of Gods Law, the Mysteries of
His Gospel, and the Secrets of His Covenant, and the Sins and Duties of that
day, that a numerous issue was begotten to Christ, and His Conquest was
Glorious, Captivating poor slaves of Satan, and bringing them from his power
unto God, and from darkness to Light. O! who can remember the Glory of that
Day, without a melting heart, in reflecting upon what we have lost, and let go,
and sinned away, by our Misimprovements? O that in that our day we had
hearkened to His voice, and had known the things that belonged to our peace! A
day of such power, that it made the People, even the bulk and body of the
People, willing to come out and venture, upon the greatest of hardships and the
greatest of hazards, in pursuing after the Gospel, through Mosses and Moors,
and inaccessible Mountains, Summer and Winter, through excess of heat and
extremity of cold, many days and night-journeyes; even when they could not
have a probable expectation of escaping the Sword of the wilderness, and the
barbarous fury of bloody Burrio's raging for their prey, sent out with orders
to take and kill them, it being now made Criminal by Law, especially to the
preachers and Convocaters of those Meetings. But this was a day of such power,
that nothing could daunt them from their duty, that had tasted once the
sweetness of the Lords presence at these persecuted Meetings. Then had we such
Humiliation-dayes for personal and public Defections, such Communion-dayes
even in the open fields, and such Sabbath-Solemnities, that the places where
they were kept might have been called Bethel, or Peniel, or Bochim, and all of
them Iehovah-Shammah; wherein many were truly Converted, more Convinced, and
generally all Reformed from their former immoralities: That even Robbers,
Thieves, and Profane Men, were some of them brought to a saving subjection to
Christ, and generally under such restraint, that all the severities of heading
and hanging etc. in a great many years, could not make such a Civil
Reformation, as a few days of the Gospel, in these formerly the Devils
Teritories, now Christ's Quarters, where His Kingly Standart was displayed. I
have not Language to lay out the inexpressible Glory of that day: But I will
make bold to say two things of it, first, I doubt if ever there was Greater
days of the Son of Man upon the Earth since the Apostolic times, than we
enjoyed for the space of Seven years at that time: And next, I doubt, if upon
the back of such a lightsome day there was ever a blacker night of darkness,
defection, division, and confusion, and a more universal impudent Apostasy,
than we have seen since. The world is at a great loss, that a more exact and
complete account demonstrating both these, is not published, which I am sure
would be a fertile Theme to any faithful pen. But this not being my scope at
present, but only to deduce the steps of the Contendings of Christ's Friends and
His Enemies, I must follow the thread of my Narration. Now when Christ is
gaining Ground by the preached Gospel in plenty, in purity, and power, the
Usurpers Supremacy was like to stagger, and Prelacy came under universal
Contempt, in so much that several Country Curats would have had but scarce half
a dozen of hearers, and some none at all. And this was a General Observe that
never failed, that no sooner did any poor Soul come to get a serious sense of
Religion, and was brought under any real Exercise of Spirit about their Souls
Concerns, but as soon they did fall out with Prelacy and left the Curats. Hence
to secure what he had possessed himself of by Law, and to prevent a dangerous
Paraxisme which he thought would ensue upon these Commotions, the King returned
to exerce his innate Tyranny, and to emit terrible Orders, and more terrible
Executioners, and bloody Emissaries, against all Field Meetings: which, after
long patience* the people at length could not endure; but being first chased to
the Fields, where they would have been content to have the Gospel with all the
inconveniences of it, and also expelled from the Fields, being resolute to
maintain the Gospel, they resolved to defend it and themselves by Arms. To
which, unavoidable necessity in unsupportable extremity did constrain them, as
the only remaining remedy. It is known, for several years they met without any
Arms, where frequently they were disturbed and dispersed with Soldiers some
killed others wounded, which they patiently endured without Resistance: At
length the Ministers that were most in hazard, having a Price set upon their
heads to be brought in dead or alive, with some attending them in their
wanderings, understanding they were thus appointed for death, judged it their
duty to provide for the necessary defense of their lives from the violence of
their Armed Assaulters. And as Meetings increased, diverse others came under
the same hazard, which enforced them to endeavor the same remedy, without the
least intention of prejudice to any. Thus the number of Sufferers increasing,
as they joined in the Ordinances at these persecuted Meetings, found themselves
in some probable Capacity to defend themselves and these much endeared and
precious Gospel Privileges, and to preserve the Memory of the Lords great Work
in the Land, which to transmit to posterity was their great design. And they
had no small encouragment to endeavor it, by the satisfying sweetness and
comfort they found in these Ordinances, being persuaded of the justness of
their Cause, and of the groundlessness of their Adversaries quarrel against
them: And hereunto also they were incited and prompted, by the palpableness of
the Enemies purposes to destroy the Remainder of the Gospel, by extirpating the
Remnant that professed it. Wherefore in these circumstances, being redacted to
that strait, either to be deprived of the Gospel or to defend themselves in
their Meetings for it; And thinking their turning their backs upon it for
hazard, was a cowardly deserting duty, and palpable breach of
Covenant-Engagments, abandoning their greatest Interest, They thought it
expedient, yea necessary, to carry defensive Arms with them. And as for that
discouragment from the difficulty and danger of it, because of their fewness
and meanness, it did not deter or daunt them from the endeavor of their duty;
when they considered, the Lord in former times was wont to oune a very small
party of their Ancestors, who in extremity jeoparded their lives in defense of
Reformation against very potent and powerful Enemies: These now ouning the same
Cause, judged themselves obliged to run the same hazard, in the same
circumstances, and to follow the same method, and durst not leave it unessayed,
leaving the event to God: considering also, that not only the Law of Nature and
Nations does allow self defense from unjust violence, but also the indissoluble
obligation of their Covenants, to maintain and defend the true Religion and one
another in promoving the same, made it indispensible to use that endeavor, the
defect of which through their former supineness gave no small encouragment to
the Enemies: They considered also what would be the consequence of that War,
declared against all the Faithful of the Land with a displayed banner,
prosecuted with fire and ^word, and all acts of horrid hostility, published in
printed Proclamations, and written in Characters of blood by barbarous
soldiers, so that none could enjoy Gospel Ordinances dispensed in Purity, but
upon the hazard of their lives: And therefore, to prevent and frustrate these
effects, they endeavored to put themselves in a posture. And hereunto they
were encouraged, by the constant experience of the Lords countenancing their
endeavors in that posture, which always proved successful for several years,
their enemies either turning their backs without disturbance, when they
observed them resolve defense, or in their assaultings repulsed: So that there
was never a Meeting which stood to their defense, got any considerable harm
thereby. Thus the Lord was with us while we were with Him, but when we forsook
Him then He forsook us, and left us in the hands of our enemies. However, while
Meetings for Gospel Ordinances did continue, the wicked Rulers did not cease
from time to time to increase their numerous ^ands of Barbarous Soldiers, for
suppressing the Gospel in these field-Meetings. And for their Maintinance, they
imposed new wicked and arbitrary Cesses and Taxations, professedly required for
suppressing Religion and Liberty, banishing the Gospel out of the Land, and
preserving and promoting his Absoluteness over all Matters and Persons Sacred
and Civil: Which, under that tentation of great suffering threatened to
Refusers, and under the disadvantage of the silence and unfaithfulness of many
Ministers, who either did not condemn it or pleaded for the peaceable payment
of it, many did comply with it then, and far more since. Yet at that time there
were far more Recusants, in some places, (especially in the Western Shires)
than Complyers: And there were many of the Ministers that did faithfully
declare to the people the sin of it; Not only from the illegality of its
imposition, by a convention of overawed and prelimited States; but from the
nature of that imposed Compliance, that it was a sinful transaction with
Christ's declared Enemies, a strengthening the hands of the wicked, an Obedience
to a wicked Law, a Consenting to Christ's Expulsion out of the Land, and not
only that, but (far worse than the sin, of the Gadarens) a formal Concurrence
to assist His Expellers, by maintaining their force, a hiring our Oppressors
to destroy Religion and Liberty; And from the fountain of it, an Arbitrary
power domineering over us, and oppressing and overpressing the Kingdoms with
intolerable exactions That to pay it, it was to entail slaverie on the
posterity; And from the declared end of it, expressed in the very Narrative of
the Act, viz: to levy and maintain forces for suppressing and dispersing
Meetings of the Lords people, and to show unanimous affection for maintaining
the Kings Supremacy as now established by Law; which designs he resolved, and
would be capacitate by the Granters to effectuate by such a Grant, which in
effect, to all tender Consciences, had an evident tendency to the exauctorating
the Lord Christ, to maintain Soldiers to suppress His Work, and murder His
Followers, yet all this time Ministers and Professors were unite, and with one
soul and shoulder followed the Work of the Lord, till the Indulged* being
dissatisfied with the Meetings in the fields, whose Glory was like to overcloud
and obscure their beds of ease, and especially being offended at the freedom
and faithfulness of some, who set the Trumpet to their mouth, and showed Jacob
his sins and Israel his transgressions impartially without a clock or cover,
they began to make a faction among the Ministers, and to devise how to quench
the fervor of their zeal who were faithful for God. But the more they sought
to extinguish it, the more it brake out and blazed into a flame. For Several of
Christ's Ambassadors, touched and affected with the affronts done to their
Princely Master by the Supremacy and the Indulgence its Bastard brood and brat,
began after long silence to discover its iniquity, and to acquaint the people
how the Usurper had invaded the Mediators Chair, in taking upon him to depose;
suspend, silence, plant and transplant His Ministers, where and when and how he
pleased, and to give forth warrants and Licenses for admitting them, with
Canons and Instructions for regulating them in the exercise of their Ministry,
and to arraign and censure them at his Courts for delinquencies in their
Ministry; pursuing all to the death who are faithful to Christ, and maintain
their Loyalty to His Laws, and will not prostitute their Consciences to his
lusts, and bow down to the Idol of his Supremacy, but will oune the Kingly
Authority of Christ. Yet others, and the greater number of dissenting
Ministers, were not only deficient herein, but defended them, joined with them,
and (pretending prudence and prevention of Schism) in effect homologated that
deed and the practice of these Priests Ezekiel. 22. 26. teaching and advising the
people to hear them, both by precept, and going along with them in that
Erastian Course: And not only so, but condemned and censured such who preached
against the sinfulness thereof, especially in the first place, Worthy Mr
Walwood, who was among the first Witnesses against that defection, and Mr Kid,
Mr King, Mr Cameron, Mr Donald Cargil etc. who sealed their Testimony
afterward with their blood; yet then even by their Brethren were laden with
the reproachful Nicknames of Schismatics, blind Zea^ots, I^suits etc. But it
was always observed, as long as Ministers were faithful in following the Lord
in the way of their duty, Professors were fervent, And ununder all their
Conflicts with Persecuters* the courage and zeal of the lovers of Christ was
blazing, and never out-braved by all the enemies boastings to undertake brisk
Exploits: which from time to time they were now and then essaying, till
defection destroyed, and division diverted their zeal against the Enemis of
God, who before were always the object against which they whetted the edge of
their just Indignation. Especially the insulting insolency and insolent
villainy of that public Incendiarie, the Arch-Prelate Sharp, was judged
intolerable by ingenuous Spirits; because he had treacherously betrayed the
Church and Nation, and being employed as their delegate to oppose the
threatened introduction of Prelacy, he had like a perjured Apostate and
perfidious Traitor advanced himself into the place of Primate of Scotland, and
being a member of Council he became a chief Instrument of all the Persecution,
and main Instigator to all the bloody violence and cruelty that was exerced
against the people of God; by whose means, the letter sent down to stop the
shedding of more blood after Pentland was kept^ up, until several of these
Martyrs were Murdered. Therefore in Iulij 1668. Mr James Mitchel thought in his
duty to save himself, deliver his Brethren, and free the Land of the violence
of that beast of prey, and attempted to cut him off: which failing, he then
escaped, but afterward was apprehended; and being moved by the Councils Oath,
and Act of Assurance promising his life, he made Confession of the fact: Yet
afterward for the same he was arraigned before the Justiciary, and the
Confession he made was brought in against him, and witnessed by the perjured
Chancellor Rothes, and other Lords, contrare to their Oath and Act produced in
open Court, to their indeleble infamy: whereupon he was tortured, condemned,
and executed. But Justice would not suffer this Murder to pass long unrevenged,
nor that Truculunt Traitor, Iamos Sharp the Arch-Prelat, who was the occasion
and cause of it, and of many more both before and after, to escape remarkable
punishment; the severity whereof did sufficiently compense its delay, after ten
years respite, wherein he ceased not more and more to pursue, persecute, and
make havoc of the Righteous for their duty, until at length he received the
just demerit of his perfidie, perjury, apostasy, sorceries, villainies, and
murders, Sharp arrows of the Mighty and coals of Juniper. For upon the 3. of
May 1679. several worthy Gentlmen, with some other men of Courage and zeal for
the cause of God and the good of the Country, executed righteous Judgment upon
him in Magu^ Moor near St Andrews. And that same month, on the Anniversary day
May 29. the Testimony at Rutherglen was Published, against that abomination of
celebrating an Anniversary day, kept every year for giving thanks for the
setting up an usurped power, destroying the Interest of Christ in the Land --
And angainst all sinful and unlawful Acts, emitted and executed, published and
prosecuted against our Covenanted Reformation. Where also they burnt the Act of
Supremacy, the Declaration, the Act Recissory etc. in way of retaliation for
the burning of the Covenants. On the Sabbath following Iun. 1. A field Meeting
for the Worship of God near to Loudoun-hil was assaulted by Graham of
Claverhouse, and with him three troops of horse and Dragoons, who had that
morning taken an honest Minister and about 14 Countrymen out of their beds and
carried them along with them as Prisoners to the Meeting in a Barbarous manner.
But by the good hand of God upon the Defendents, they were repulsed at
Drumclogg and put to flight, the Prisoners relieved, about 30. of the Soldiers
killed on the place, and 3. of the Meeting, and several wounded on both sides.
Thereafter the people retreating from the pursuit, consulted what was expedient
in that juncture, whether to disperse themselves as formerly, or to keep
together for their necessary defense. The result was, that considering the
craft and cruelty of those they had to deal with, the sad consequents of
falling into their hands now more incensed than ever, the evil effects that
likely would ensue upon their separation, which would give them access to make
havoc of all; they judged it most safe in that extremity for some time not to
separate. Which Resolution, coming abroad to the ears of others of their
Brethren; determined them incontinently to come to their Assistence,
considering their necessity, and their oun lyableness to the same common
danger, upon the account of their endeavors of that nature elsewhere to defend
themselves, being of the same judgment for maintaining of the same Cause, to
which the were bound by the same Covenants, and groaning under the same
burdens; they judged therefore that if they now with held their assistence in
such a strait, they could not be innocent of their Brethrens blood, nor found
faithful in their Covenant: To which they were encouraged with the Countenance
and success the Lord had given to that Meeting, in that defensive Resistance.
This was the Rise and Occasion of that Appearance at Bothwelbridge, which the
Lord did in His Holy Sovereignty confound, for former Defections by the means
of Division, which broke that little Army among themselves, before they were
broken by the Enemy. They continued together in amiable and amicable peace for
the space of 8 or 9 days, while they endeavored to put out and keep out every
wicked thing from amongst them, and adhered to the Rutherglen-Testimony, and
that short Declaration at Glasgow confirming it; Representing their present
purposes and endeavors, where only in vindication and defense of the Reformed
Religion -- as they stood obliged thereto by the National and Solemn League and
Covenant, and the Solemn Acknowledgment of Sins and Engagment to duties;
Declaring against Popery, Prelacy, Erastianisme, and all things depending
thereupon. Intending hereby to comprehend the defection of the Indulgence, to
witness against which all unanimously aggreed: Until the Army increasing, the
Defenders and Daubers of that defection, some Ministers and others, came in who
broke all, and upon whom the blood of that Appearance may be charged. The
occasion of the breach was, first, When in the sense of the obligation of that
Command, when the host goes forth against thine enemies, keep thee from every
wicked thing, an overture was offered to set times apart for humiliation for
the public sins of the Land, according to the practice of the Godly in all
ages before engaging their enemies, and the laudable precedents of our
Ancestors; that so the Causes of Gods wrath against the Nation might be
enquired into and confessed, and the Lords Blessing, Counsel, and Conduct to
and upon present Endeavors, might be implored. And accordingly the Complying
with abjured Erastianisme, by the acceptance of the ensnaring Indulgence,
offered by and received from the Usurping Rulers, was condescended upon among
the rest of the grounds of fasting and humiliation, so seasonably and
necessarely called for at that time. The Sticklers for the Indulgence refused
the overture, upon politic considerations, for fear of offending the Indulged
Ministers and Gentlemen, and provoking them to withdraw their Assistence. This
was the great Cause of the division, that produced such unhappy and destructive
effects. And next, whereas the Cause was stated before according to the
Covenants, in the Rutherglen-Testimony and Glasglow-Declaration, wherein the
Kings Interest was waved; These Dividers drew up another large paper (called
the Hamiltoun-Declaration) wherein they assert the Kings Interest, according to
the third Article of the Solemn League and Covenant. Against which the best
affected contended, and protested they could not in Conscience put in his
Interest in the State of the Quarrel, being now in stated opposition to Christ's
Interests, and inconsistent with the meaning of the Covenant, and the practices
of the Covenanters, and their own Testimonies; while now he could not be
declared for as being in the defense of Religion and Liberty, when he had so
palpably overturned and ruined the Work of Reformation, and oppressed such as
adhered thereunto, and had burnt the Covenant etc. Whereby he had loosed the
people from all obligation to him from it. Yet that contrary faction prevailed,
so far as to get it published in the name of all: whereby the Cause was
perverted and betrayed, and the former Testimonies rendered irrite, and the
Interest of the public Enemy epsoused. Finally, the same day that the Enemy
approached in sight, And a considerable advantage was offered to do execution
against them, these Loyal Gentlemen hindered and retarded all Action, till a
Parley was beat, and an Address dispatched to the Duke of Monmouth, who then
commanded his Fathers Army. By which nothing was gained, but free Liberty given
to the Enemies to plant their Canon, and advance without interruption. After
which, in the Holy All-overruling Providence of God, that poor handful was
signally discountenanced of God, deprived of all Conduct, divested of all
Protection, and laid open to the raging Sword, the just punishment of all such
tamperings with the Enemies of God, and espousing their Interest, and omitting
humiliation for their own and the Lands sins. About 300 were killed in the
Fields, and 1000. and upwards were taken Prisoners, stripped, and carried to
Edinburgh, where they were kept for a long time in the Gray Friars Churchyard,
without shelter from cold or rain. And at length had the tentation of an
insnaring bond of peace: Wherein they were to acknowledge that Insurrection to
be Rebellion* and oblige themselves never to rise in Arms against the King,
nor any commissionate by him, and to live peaceably etc. Which, through fear of
threatened death, and the unfaithfulness of some, and the impudence of other
Ministers that persuaded them to take it, prevailed with many: Yet others
resolutely resisted, judging it to imply a condemning of their duty, an
abandoning of their Covenant-Engagments, wherein they were obliged to duties
inconsistent with such bonds, and a voluntary binding up their hands from all
oppositions to the declared War against Christ, which is the native sense of
the peace they require, which can never be entertained long with men so
treacherous. And therefore upon Principles of Reason and Conscience they
refused that pretended Indemnity, offered in these terms. Nevertheless the
most part took it: and yet were sentenced with banishment; and sent away for
America as well as they who refused it; And by the way, (a few excepted,)
perished in Shipwreck: whose blood yet cries both against the Imposers, and the
Perswaders to that bond.

III. This fearful and fatal stroke at Bothuel, not only was in its immediate
effects so deadly, but in its consequents so destructive, that the decaying
Church of Scotland, which before was beginning to revive, was then cast into
such a swoon that she is never like to recover to this day. And the
Universality of her Children, which before espoused her Testimony, was after
that partly drawn by Craft, and partly drawn by Cruelty, from a Conjunction
with their Brethren in prosecuting the same, either into an open defection to
the Contrary side, or into a detestable indifferency and neutrality in the
Cause of God. For first of all the Duke of Monmouth, whose nature more averse
from Cruelty than the rest of that Progeny made him pliable to all suggestions
of wicked policy, that seemed to have a show or smoothness and lenity, procured
the emission of a pretended Indemnity, attended with the foresaid Band of p^ace
for its Companion. Which were dreadful snares, catching many with flatteries,
and fair pretenses of favors, fairded over with curious words and cozening
names of living peaceably etc. while in the mean time a most deadly and
destructive thrust (as it were under the fifth rib) because most secret, was
intended against all that was left remaining of the Work of God undestroyed,
and a bar put upon all essays to revive or recover it by their oun consent,
who should endeavor it. This Course of Defection carried away many at that
time: And from that time, since the taking of that bond of peaceable living,
there has been an universal preferring of peace to Truth, and of ease to duty.
And the generality have been left to swallow all baits, tho the hook was never
so discernible, all those ensnaring Oaths and Bonds imposed since, which both
then and since People were left to their oun determination to choose or refuse;
many Ministers refusing to give their Advice when required and requested
thereunto, and some not being ashamed or afraid to perswad the People to take
them. The Ministry then also were generally ensnared with that banded
Indulgence, the pretended benefit of that Indemnity, which as it was designed
so it produced the woeful effect of propagating the defection, and promoting the
division, and laying them by from their duty and Testimony of that day, which
to this day they have not yet taken upon their former ground. For when a
Proclamation was emitted, inveighing bitterly against field Meetings, and
absolutely interdicting all such for the future under highest pain, but
granting Liberty to Preach in houses upon the terms of a Cautionary bond given
for their living peaceably: yet excluding all these Ministers who were
suspected to have been at the late Rebellion; and all these who shall afterward
be admitted by Non-Conforme Ministers: And certifying, that if ever they shall
be at any field Conventickle, the said Indemnity shall not be useful to such
Transgressors any manner of way: And requiring security, that none under the
color of this favor continue to preach Rebellion. Though there seems to be
enough in the Proclamation it self to have scarred them from this scandalous
snare, yet a Meeting of Ministers at Edinburg made up of Indulged, avowed
Applauders of the Indulgence, or underhand Approvers and favorers of the same,
and some of them old Public Resolutioners, assuming to themselves the name of
a General Assembly, yea of the Representative of the Church of Scotland, voted
for the Acceptance of it. And so formally transacted and bargained upon base,
dishonest, and dishonorable terms with the Usurper, by consenting and
compacting with the People to give that bond, Wherein the People upon an humble
Petition to the Council, obtaining their Indulged-Minister do bind and oblige
-- that the said -- shall live peaceably. And in order thereto to present him
before his Maj. Privy Council, when they shall be called so to do; And in case
of failzie in not presenting him, to be Liable to the sum of 6000 Merks.
Whereby they condemned themselves of former unpeaceableness, and engaged to a
sinful Peace with the enemies of God, and became bound and fettered under these
bonds to a forbearance of a Testimony, and made answerable to their Courts, and
the People were bound to present them for their duty. The sinfulness,
scandalousness, and inconveniences of which transactions, are abundantly
demonstrated by a Treatise thereupon, entitled, The Banders disbanded.
Nevertheless many embraced this new bastard Indulgence, that had not the
benefit of the former brat, of the same Mother the Supremacy, and far more
consented to it without a witness, and most of all did some way homologate it,
in preaching under the sconce of it: Declining the many reiterated and urgent
Calls of the ^ealous Lovers of Christ, to come out and maintain the Testimony
of the Gospel in the open fields, for the honor of their Master and the
freedom of their Ministry. Whereupon, as many poor People were stumbled and
jumbled into many confusions, so that they were so bewildered and bemisted in
doubts and debates, that they knew not what to do, and were tempted to question
the Cause formerly so servently contended for against all opposition, then so
simply abandoned, by these that seemed sometimes valiant for it, when they saw
them consulting more their oun ease than the Concerns of their Masters Glory,
or the necessity of the poor people hungering for the Gospel, and standing in
need of Counsel in time of such abounding snares, whereby many became a prey to
all tentations: So the more zealous and faithful, after several Addresses,
Calls, and Invitations to Ministers, finding themselves deserted by them,
judged themselves under a necessity to discountenance many of them, whom
formerly they followed with pleasure; and to resolve upon a pursuit and
prosecution of the duty of the day without them, and to provide themselves with
faithful Ministers, who would not shun for all hazards to declare the whole
Counsel of God. And accordingly through the tender Mercy of God,
compassionating the exigence of the People, the Lord sent them first Mr Richard
Cameron, with whom after his serious solicitation his Brethren denied their
concurrence, and then Mr Donald Cargil; who, with a zeal and boldness becoming
Christ's Ambassadors, maintained and prosecuted the Testimony, against all the
Indignities done to their Master and wrongs to the Cause, both by the
encroachments of Adversaries and defections of their declining Brethren.
Wherein they were signally countenanced of their Master; And the Lords
Inheritance was again revived with the showers of the Gospels blessings,
wherewith they had been before refreshed; and enlightened with a Glance and
Glimpse of resplendent brightness, immediately before the obscurity of this
fearful night of darkness that has succeeded. But as Christ was then
displaying His beauty, to His poor despised and persecuted People; so
Antichrist began to blaze his bravery, in the solemn and shameful reception of
his harbinger, that Pimp of the Romish whore, the Duke of York. Who had now
pulled off the Mask, under which he had long covered his Antichristian
Bigotrie, through a trick of his brother, constrained by the Papists
importunity, and the necessity of their favor, and recruit of their Coin,
either to declare himself Papist, or to make his brother do it: whereby all the
locusts were engaged to his Interest, with whom he entered into a Conspiracy
and Popish Plot, as was discovered by many infallible evidences, and confessed
by Coleman his Secretary, to Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey; for which, lest he should
witness against him, when Coleman was apprehended, that Gentleman was cruelly
murdered by the Duke of Yorks contrivance and command. Yet for all the
demonstrations of his being a Bigot Papist, that he had long given unto the
world, it is known what some suffered for saying, that the Duke of York was a
Papist and being forced to leave England he was come to Scotland to promots
Popery and Arbitrary Government. However, tho the Parliament of England, for
his Popery and Villainy, and his ploting and pursuing the destruction of the
Nation, did vote his Exclusion; yet degenerate Scotland did receive him in
great pomp and pride. Against which, the forementioned faithful witnesses of
Christ did find themselves obliged to testify their just resentment, and to
protest against his succeeding to the Croun, in their Declaration published at
Sanquhair, June 22. 1680. Wherein also they Disoune Charles Stewart, as having
any Right, Title, or Interest in the Croun of Scotland or Government thereof,
as being fore^aulted several years since, by his perjurie and breach of
Covenant, Usurpation on Christ's Prerogatives, and by his Tyranny and breaches
in the very Leges regnandi in matters Civil -- And declare a war with him, and
all the men of these practices -- homologating the Testimony at Rutherglen, and
disclaiming that declaration at Hamiltoun. This Action was generally condemned
by the body of lurking Ministers, both for the matter of it, and the
unseasonableness of it, and its apparent unfeasibleness, being done by a
handful so inconsiderable, for number, strength, or significancy. But as they
had very great and important reasons to disclaim that Tyrants Authority, hinted
in the Declaration it self, and hereafter more fully vindicated: so the
necessity of a Testimony against all the Tyrannical Encroachments on Religion
and Liberty, then current and increasing; and the sin and shame of shifting and
delaying it so long, when the Blasphemous Supremacy was now advanced to its
summity; the Churches Privileges all overturned; Religion and the Work of
Reformation trampled under foot; the Peoples Rights and Liberties destroyed,
and Laws all subverted; and no shadow of Government left but arbitrary
Absoluteness, obtruding the Tyrants will for Reason, and his Letter for the
Supreme Law (witness the Answer which one of the Council gave to another,
objecting against their Proceedings as not according to Law, what devil do ye
talk of Law? have not we the Kings Letter for it?) And all the ends of
Magistracy wholly inverted; while innocent and honest People were grievously
oppressed in their persons, Consciences, and Estates; And Perjuries,
Adulteries, Idolatries, and all impieties were not only connived at, but
countenanced as badges of Loyalty, and manifest and monstrous Robbries and
Murders Authorized, Judgment turned into gall, and the fruit of Righteousness
into hemlock; do justify its Seasonableness: And the ends of the Declaration,
to keep up the Standart of the Gospel, and maintain the Work of Reformation,
and preserve a Remnant of faithful Adherers to it; the nature of the Resolution
declared, being only to endeavor to make good and maintain their Revolt, in
opposition to all who would pursue them for it, and reinforce them to a
subjection to that yoke of slaverie again; and the extremity of danger and
distress that party was in, while declared and pursued as Rebels, and
intercommuned and interdicted of all supply and solace, being put out of their
oun, and by Law precluded of the harbor of all other habitations, and so both
for safety and subsistence compelled by necessity to concur and keep together,
may alleviate the Censure and stop the Clamor of its unfeasibleness. But tho
it is not the prudence of the managment, but the justness of the Action, that I
would have vindicated from obliquies; yet it wanted nothing but success to
justify both, in the conviction of many that made much outcry against it. In
these dangerous (...) in his maintenance of the true Covenanted Religion --
which homage they cannot now require upon the account of the Covenant, which
they have renounced and disclaimed; and upon no other ground we are bound to
them -- the Croun not being an inheritance, that passes from Father to son
without the Consent of Tenants -- (3) Of the hope of their returning from these
Courses: Whereof there is none, seeing they have so often declared their
purposes of persevering ill thein, And suppose they should dissemble a
repentance -- supposing also they might be pardoned, for that which is done --
from whose guiltiness the Land cannot be cleansed, but by executing Gods
righteous Judgments upon them -- yet they cannot now be believed, after they
have violated all that humane wisdom could devise to bind them. Upon these
accounts they reject that King, and those associate with him in the Government
-- and declare them henceforth no lawful Rulers, as they had declared them to
be no lawful Subjects -- they having destroyed the established Religion,
overturned the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, taken away Christ's
Church Government, and changed the Civil into Tyranny, where none are
associate in partaking of the Government, but only these who will be found by
Justice guilty of Criminals -- And declare they shall, God giving power, set up
Government and Governors according to the Word of God, and the qualifications
required Exodus 18. verse. 20. -- And shall not commit the Government -- to any
single person, or lineal succession, being not tied as the Jews were to one
single family -- and that kind being liable to most inconveniences, and aptest
to degenerate into Tyranny -- And moreover, that these men set over them shall
be engaged to Govern Principally, by that Civil and Judicial Law (not that
which is any way Typical) given by God to His people of Israel -- as the best
so far as it goes, being given by God -- especially in matters of life and
death -- and other things, so far as they reach, and are consistent with
Christian Liberty -- exempting Divorces and Polygamie -- 6. Seeing the greatest
part of Ministers, not only were defective in Preaching against the Acts of the
Rulers for overthrowing Religion -- but hindered others also who were willing,
and censured some that did it -- and have voted for acceptance of that
Liberty, founded upon and given by virtue of that blaspemously arrogate and
Usurped power -- and appeared before their Courts to accept of it, and to be
enacted and authorized their Ministers -- whereby they have become the
Ministers of men, and bound to be answerable to them as they will -- And have
preached for the lawfulness of paying that Tribute, declared to be imposed for
the bearing down of the true Worship of God -- And advised poor Prisoners to
subscribe that Bond -- which if it were universally subscribed -- they should
close that door, which the Lord has made use of in all the Churches of Europe,
for casting off the yoke of the whore -- and stop all regress of men, when once
brought under Tyranny, to recover their Liberty again. -- They declare they
neither can nor will hear them etc. nor any who encouraged and strengthened
their hands, and pleaded for them, and trafficqued for union with them. 7. That
they are for a standing Gospel Ministry, rightly chosen and rightly ordained
-- and that none shall take upon them the Preaching of the Word etc. unless
called and ordained thereunto -- And whereas Separation might be imputed to
them, they refell both the malice, and the ignorance of that Calumny -- for if
there be a Separation, it must be where the change is; and that was not to be
found in them, who were not separating from the Communion of the true Church,
nor setting up a New Ministry, but cleaving to the same Ministers and
Ordinances, that formerly they followed, when others have fled to new ways,
and a new Authority, which is like the old piece in the new Garment. 8. That
they shall defend themselves in their Civil, Natural, and Divine Rights and
Liberties -- And if any assault them, they shall look on it as a declaring a
war, and take all advantages that one enemy does of another -- but trouble and
injure none but those that injure them -- This is the Compend of that Paper
which the Enemies seized and published, while it was only in a rude draught,
and not polished, digested, nor consulted by the rest of the Community: yet,
whether or not it was for their advantage so to blaze their oun baseness in
that Paper truly represented, I leave it to the Reader to judge: or, if they
did not thereby Proclaim their oun Tyranny, and the Innocence and honesty of
that people, whom thereby they were seeking to make odious; but in effect
inviting all Lovers of Religion and Liberty to Sympathise with them, in their
difficulties and distresses there discovered. However that poor Party
continued together in a posture of defense, without the Concurrence or
Countenance of their Covenanted Brethren, who staid at home, and left both them
to be murdered and their Testimony to be trampled upon, until the 22. of Iulij
1680. Upon the which day they were attacqued at Airsmoss, by a strong party of
about 120 horse well armed, while they were but 23 horse and 40 foot at most;
and so fighting valiantly were at length routed, not without their Adversaries
Testimony of their being resolute men: Several of Zions precious Mourners, and
faithful Witnesses of Christ, were killed; and among the rest, that faithful
Minister of Christ, Mr Richard Cameron sealed and fulfilled his Testimony with
his blood. And with others, the valiant and much honored Gentleman, David
Hackstoun of Rathillet, was after many received wounds apprehended, brought in
to Edinburgh; and there, resolutely adhering to the Testimony, and disouning
the Authority of King and Council, and all their Tyrannical Judicatories, was
cruelly murdered, but countenanced eminently of the Lord. Now remained Mr
Donald Cargil, deprived of his faithful Colleague, destitute of his Brethrens
concurrence, but not of the Lords Counsel and Conduct; by which he was prompted
and helped to prosecute the Testimony, against the Universal Apostasy of the
Church and Nation, Tyranny of Enemies, Backsliding of Friends, and all the
wrongs done to his Master on all hands. And considering, in the zeal of God,
and sense of His holy Jealousy provoked and threatening wrath against the
Land; for the sins especially of Rulers; who had arrived to the hight of
Heaven-daring Insolence in all wickedness, in which they were still growing and
going on without control; That notwithstanding of all the Testimonies given
against them, by public Preachings, Protestations, and Declarations,
remonstrating their Tyranny and disouning their Authority; yet not only did
they still persist in their sins and scandals, to make the Lords fierce Anger
break forth into a flame, but were ouned also by Professors, not only as
Magistrates, but as members of the Christian and Protestant Church; And that,
however both the defensive arms of men had been used against them, and the
Christian arms of Prayers, and the Ministerial weapon of Preaching, yet that
of Ecclesiastical Censure had not been Authoritatively exerted against them:
Therefore, that no Weapon which Christ allows His Servants under His Standart
to manage against His Enemies might be wanting, tho he could not obtain the
Concurrence of his Brethren to strengthen the solemnity and formality of the
Action; yet he did not judge that defect, in this broken Case of the Church,
could disable his Authority nor de^ur the duty, but that he might and ought to
proceed to Excommunication. And accordingly, in September -- 1680. at the
Torwood, he excommunicated some of the most scandalous and Principal Promoters
and Abettors of this Conspiracy against Christ, as formally as the present Case
could admit: After Sermon upon Ezekiel. 21. 25, 26, 27. And thou profane wicked
Prince of Israel, whose day is come etc. He had a short and pertinent discourse
on the nature, the subject, the causes, and the ends of Excommunication in
general: And then declared, that he was not led out of any private Spirit or
passion to this Action, but constrained by Conscience of duty and zeal to God
to stigmatize with this brand, and wound with the Sword of the Lord, these
Enemies of God that had so Apostatized, rebelled against, mocked, despised and
defied Our Lord, and to declare them as they are none of His, to be none of
ours. The persons excommunicated, and the Sentence against them, was given
forth as follows -- I being a Minister of Jesus Christ, and having Authority
and Power from Him, do, in His Name and by His Spirit, excommunicat^, cast out
of the true Church, and deliver up to Satan, Charles the Second, King etc. The
Sentence was founded upon these grounds, declared in the pronunciation thereof
(1) for his high mocking of God, in that after he had acknowledged his own
sins, his fathers sins, his mothers Idolatry -- yet had gone on more avowedly
in the same than all before him. (2) for his great Perjurie, in breaking and
burning the Covenant. (3) for his rescinding all Laws for establishing the
Reformation, and enacting Laws contrary thereunto. (4) for commanding of
Armies to destroy the Lords people. (5) for his being an Enemy to true
Protestants, and helper of the Papists, and hindering the execution of just
Laws against them. (6) for his granting Remissions and Pardons for Murderers,
which is in the power of no King to do, being expressly contrare to the Law of
God. (7) for his Adulteries, and dissembling with God and man -- Next by the
same Authority, and in the same name, he excommunicated James Duke of York, for
his Idolatry, and setting it up in Scotland to defile the Land, and entycing
and encouraging others to do so: Not mentioning any other sins, but what he
scandalously persisted in in Scotland etc. With several other rotten Malignant
Enemies, on whom the Lord has rati^^ed that Sentence since very remarkably,
whose sins and punishments both may be read more visiblie in the Providence of
the time, than I can record them. But about this time, when amidst all the
abounding defections and divisions of that dark and dismal hour of tentation,
some in zeal for the Cause were endeavoring to keep up the Testimony of the
day, in an abstraction from Complying Ministers; Others were left (in holy
judgment, to be a stumbling block to the Generation hardening them in their
defections, and to be a beacon to the most zealous to keep off from all
unwarrantable excesses) to fall into fear^ul extravagances and delirious and
damnable delusions, being overdriven with ignorant and blind zeal into untroden
paths, which led them into a labyrinth of darkness; when as they were stumbled
at many Ministers their unfaithfulness, so through the deceit of Satan and the
hypocrisy of his Instruments, they came to be offended at Mr Cargil his
faithfulness, who spared neither left hand declensions nor right hand extremes,
and left him and all the Ministers; not only disouning all Communion with those
that were not of their way, but execrating and Cursing them; and kept
themselves in desert places from all Company; where they persisted prodigiously
in fastings, and singing Psalms, pretending to wonderful raptures and
Enthusiasmes: and in fine, I. Gib with 4 more of them came to that hight of
Blasphemy, that they burnt the Bible and Confession of Faith. These were the
sweet singers, as they were called, led away into these delusions by that
Impostor and Sorcerer John Gib; who never increased to such a number, as was
then feared and reported, being within thirty and most part women: all which
for the most part have been through Mercy reclaimed from that destructive way,
which through Grace the Reproached Remnant, adhering to the foresaid Testimony,
had always an abhorrence of. Wherefore that ignorant and impudent Calumny, of
their Consortship with Gibs followers, is only the vent of viperous Envy. For
they were the first that discovered them, and whose pains the Lord blessed in
reclaiming them, and were always so far from partaking with them, that to this
day these that have come off from that way, and have offered the Confession of
their scandal, do still complain of their over-rigid severity, in not admitting
them to their select fellowships. To which may be added this undeniable
Demonstration, that whereas the persecu^ing Courts of Inquisition did always
extend the utmost severity against the Ouners of this Testimony, yet they
spared them: And the Duke of York, then in Scotland was so we^ pleased with
Gib's Blasphemies, that he favored him extraordinarly, and freely dismissed
him. This was a cloudy and dark day, but not without a burning and shining
light as long as that faithful Minister of Christ, Mr Donald Cargil, was
following the Work of the Lord; who shortly after this finished his Testimony,
being apprehended with other two faithful and zealous Witnesses of Christ, Mr
Walter Smith, and Mr James Boog, who with 2 more were altogether, at Edinburgh
27. Iulij 1681. Crouned with the Glory of Martyrdom. Then came the day of the
Remnants vexation, trouble, darkness and dimness of anguish, wherein who so
looked unto the Land could see nothing but darkness and sorrow, and the light
darkened in the Heavens thereof, wherein neither Star nor Sun appeared for many
days, and poor People were made to grope for the wall like the blind, and to
stumble in noon day as in the night. While the Persecution advanced on the one
hand, a violent spait of defection carried down the most part of Ministers and
Professors before it, driving them to Courses of sinful and scandalous
Conformings with the times Corruptions, Compearings before their Courts,
Complyings with their Commands, paying of these Cesses and other Exactions,
Taking of their Oaths and Bonds, and countenancing their Prelatical
Church-Services, which they were ashamed to do before. And thereupon on the
other hand the Divisions and Confusions were augmented, and poor people that
desired to cleave to the Testimony were more and more offended and stumbled at
the Ministers, who either left the Land in that clamant Call of the peoples
necessity, or lurked in their own retirements, and declined the duty of that
day, leaving people to determine themselves in all their perplexities, as a
prey to all tentations. But the tender Pastor and Shepherd of Israel, who leads
the blind in the way they know not, did not forsake a Remnant in that hour of
tentation who kept the Word of His Patience; and as He helped those that fell
into the hands of Enemies to Witness a good Confession, so He strengthened the
zeal of the remaining Contenders, against all the Machinations of Adversaries
to crush it, and all the Methods of Backsliding Professors to quench it. And
the mean which most effectually preserved it in life and vigor, was the
expedient they fell upon of Corresponding in General Meetings, to consult,
inform, and confirm one another about common duties in common dangers, for
preservation of the Remnant from the destruction and contagion of the times,
and propagation of the Testimony: Laying down this General Conclusion for a
foundation of Order, to be observed among them in incident doubtful cases, and
emergent Controversies, that nothing relative to the public, and which
concerns the who^e of their Community, be done by any of them, without
harmonious consent sought after and rationally waited for, and sufficient
deliberation about the best means and manner. In the mean time, the Duke of
York, as Commissioner from his brother, held a Parliament wherein he presided,
not only against all righteous Laws that make a bloody and avowed Papist
incapable or such a Trust, but against the Letter of their oun wicked Laws,
whereby none ought to be admitted but such as swear the Oaths; yet not only was
he constitute in this place, but in the whole Administration of the Government
of Scotland without the taking any Oath, which then he was Courting to be
entailed Successor and heir of the Croun thereof; And for this ^n^ made many
pretenses of flatteries, and feigned expressions of love, and of doing many
acts o^ kindness to that ancient Kingdom, as he has made many dissembling
protestations of it since, for carrying on his oun Popish and Tyrannical
designs: But what good will he has born to it, not only his acts and actings
written in Characters of the blood of Innocents declare, but his words do
witness, which is known when and to whom he spoke, when he said, It would never
^e well til all on the southside of Forth were made a hunting field. However in
that Parliament, anno 1681. he is chiefly intended, and upon the matter by a
wicked Act declared legal and lineal Successor, and a detestable Blasphemous
and Self-contradictory Test is framed for a Pest to Consciences, which turned
out of all places of Trust any that had any remaining measure of common
honesty; And when some was speaking of a bill for securing Religion in case of
a Popish Prince, the Dukes answer was notable, that whatsoever they intended or
prepared against Papists should light upon others: whereby we may understand
what measures we may expect, when his designs are ripe. And to all the Cruel
Acts then and before made against the People of God, there was one superadded
regulating the execution of all the rest, whereby at one dash all Civil and
Criminal Justice was overthroun, and a foundation laid for Popish-Tyranny, that
the Right of Jurisdiction both in Civil and Criminal Matters is so inherent in
the Croun, that his Maj. may judge all Causes by himself, on any other he
thinks fit to commissionate. Here was Law for Commissionating Soldiers to take
away the lives of Innocents, as was frequently exemplified afterward, and may
serve hereafter for erecting the Spanish Inquisition to murder Protestants when
he thinks fit to commissonate them. Against which wicked Encroachments on
Religion and Liberty, the Faithful thought themselves obliged to emit a
Testimony: And therefore published a Declaration at Lanerk, Iannary 12. 1682.
Confirming the preceding at Sanquhair, and adding reasons of their Revolt from
the Government of Charles the Second. 1. For cutting off the neck at one blow
of the noble Constitution of Church and State, and involving all Officers in
the Kingdom in the same perjurie with himself. 2. For exalting himself into a
sphere exceeding all measures Divine and humane, Tyrannically obtruding his
will for a Law in his arbitrary Letters, so that we are made the reproach of
Nations, who say, we have only the Law of Letters instead of the Letter of the
Law. 3. For his constant adjourning and dissolving Parliaments at his pleasure.
4. For his arrogantly arrogated Supremacy in all Causes Civil and
Ecclesiastic, and oppressing the Godly for Conscience and duty. 5. For his
exorbitan^ Taxings, Cessings, and grinding the faces of the poor, dilapidating
the rights and revenues of the Croun, for no other end but to employ them for
keeping up a Borthel* rather than a Court. 6. For installing a successor, such
an one (if not worse) as himself, contrare to all Law, Reason, and Religion,
and framing the Test etc. And in end offer to prove, they have done nothing in
this against our Ancient Laws, Civil or Ecclesiastic -- but only endeavored
to extricate themselves from under a Tyrannous yoke, and to reduce Church and
State to what they were in the year 1648 and 1649. After which Declaration,
they were more condemned by them that were at ease than ever, and very
untenderly dealt with; being without any previous admonition reproached,
accused, and informed against, both at home and abroad, as if they had turned
to some wild and unhappy Course. For which Cause, in the next General Meeting,
they resolved to delegate some of their number to foreign Churches, on purpose
to vindicate themselves from these Calumnies, and to represent the justness of
their Cause, and the sadness of their Case, and provoke them to some Sympathy
abroad, which was denied at home: And withal to provide for a Succession of
Witnesses, who might maintain the Testimony, which was then in appearance
interrupted, except by Martyrdom and Sufferings. Therefore by that means having
obtained access for the instruction of some young men, at an University in the
United Provinces, in process of time, Mr James Renwick received Ordination
there, and came home to take up the Standart of his Master, upon the ground
where it last was left, and to carry on the Testimony against all the
oppositions of that day, from open Enemies and backsliding Professors: an
undertaking more desperate-like than that of Unus Athanasius contra totam
orbem, and like that of a Child threshing down a Mountain. Which yet against
all the outrageous rage of ravening Enemies, ranging, ravaging, hunting,
chasing, pursuing after him, through all the touns, villages, cottages, woods,
moors, mosses, and mountains of the Country; and against all the scourge of
tongues, contradictions, condemnations, obliquies, reproaches, and cruel
mockings of incensed Professors, and generally of all the Inhabitants of the
Land; he was helped to prosecute, by many weary wanderings, travells, and
traversings through the deserts, night and day, Preaching, Confering, and
Catechizing, mostly in the cold winter nighrs in the open fields: until, by the
Blessing of God upon his labors, not only was the faithful Witnessing Remnant
that joined in the Testimony, further cleared confirmed, and encouraged, and
their number much increased by the coming in and joining of many others to the
fellowship of their settled Societies; but also many others, in (...) but as
soon as it grew dark, all hope lost, they dispersed, every man shifting for
himself; only a few keeping together all the nixt day, had a skirmage with a
Party of the Enemies, in which they slew the Captain, and about 12 or some more
of his men, and afterward they dispersed themselves also. The Enemies,
searching the Country, gleaned up the E. of Argyle himself, Col. Rumbol an
Englishman, Mr Thomas Archer Minister, Gawin Russel, an David Law, who were all
condemned and execute at Edinburgh, and many others who were banished to
America: and about some 20 in the Highlands, who were hanged at Inerarie. In
England, the D. of Monmouths expedition, though it had more action, yet
terminated in the same success, the loss of many hundred lives, many killed in
Battle: And afterwas, by the mercy of the Duke of York* several hunderds in the
West of England were carried about and hanged before the door of their oun
habitations; and to make his Captains sport by the way, according to the number
of the hours of the day, when the murdering humor came in their head, so many
of the poor Captives were hanged, as a prodigious monument of monstrous
Cruelty. This was the Comencement of the present Tyrants Government. In the
mean time, the Wanderers in Scotland, tho they did not associate with this
Expedition upon the account of the too promiscuous admittence of persons to
trust in that Party, who were then and since have discovered themselves to be
Enemies to the Cause, and because they could not espouse their Declaration as
the State of their Quarrel, being not concerted according to the constant Plea
of the Scots Covenanters, and for other reasons given in their late
Vindication: yet against this Usurpation of a bloody Papist, advancing himself
to the Throne in such a manner, they published another Declaration at
Sanquhair, May 28. 1685. Wherein, Approving and adhering unto all their former
Declarations, And considering that James Duke of York, a Professed and
Excommunicate Papist, was proclaimed -- To testify their resentment of that
deed, And to make it appear unto the world, that they were free thereof, by
concurrence or connivance; They Protest against the foresaid Proclamation of
James Duke of York as King: In regard that it is the choosing of a Murderer to
be a Governor, who has shed the blood of the Saints -- that it is the hight
of Confederacy with an Idolater, for bidden by the Law of God -- contrary to
the Declaration of the Genesis Ass. of the Church, Iulij 27. 1649. And contrary to
many wholesome and laudable Acts of Parliament -- and inconsistent with the
safety, faith, Conscience, and Christian Liberty of a Christian People, to
choose a subject of Antichrist to be their Supreme Magistrate -- and to entrust
an Enemy to the Work and People of God with the Interests of both: And upon
many important grounds and reasons (which there they express) they Protest
against the validity and Constitution of that Parliament, approving and
ratifying the foresaid Proclamation -- And against all kind of Popery in
General and Particular heads -- as abjured by the National Covenant, and
abrogated by Acts of Parliament -- and against its entry again into this Land,
And every thing that does or may directly or indirectly make way for the same:
Disclaiming likewise all Sectarianisme, Malignancy, and any Confederacy
therewith. -- This was their Testimony against Popery in the season thereof:
which tho it was not so much condemned as any former Declarations, yet neither
in this had they the Concurrence of any Ministers or Professors; who as they
had been silent, and omitted a seasonable Testimony against Prelacy, and the
Supremacy, when these were introduced, so now also, even when this wicked
Mystery and Conspiracy of Popery and Tyranny, twisted together in the
present design of Antichrist, had made so great a progress, and was evidently
brought above board, they were left to let ^lip this opportunity of a Testimony
also, to the reproach of the declining and far degenerate Church of Scotland.
Yea to their shame, the very rabble of ignorant People may be brought as a
witness against the body of Presbyterian Ministers in Scotland, in that they
testified their detestation of the first Erection of the Idolatrous Mass, and
some of the souldierie, and such as had no Profession of Religion, suffered
unto death for speaking against Popery and the designs of the King, while the
Ministers were silent. And some of the Curats, and members of the late
Parliament 1686. made some stickling against the taking away of the penal
Statutes against Papists; while Presbyterians, from whom might have been
expected greater opposition, were sleeping in a profound submission. I cannot
without Confusion of Spirit touch these obvious and dolorous reflections, and
yet in candor cannot forbear them. However the Persecution against the
Wanderers went on, and more cruel Edicts were given forth against them, while a
relenting abatement of severity was pretended against other Dissenters. At
length what could not be obtained by Law at the late Parliament for taking off
the Statutes against Papists, was effectuated by Prerogative: and to make it
pass with the greater approbation, it was convoyed in a channel of pretended
Clemency, offering a sort of Liberty, but really introducing a licencious
Latitude, for bringing in all future snares by taking off some former, as
arbitrarly as before they were imposed, in a Proclamation dated Feb. 12. 1687.
Granting, by the Kings Sovereign Authority, Prerogative Royal, and absolute
power, which all Subjects are to obey without reserve, a Royal Toleration, to
the several Professors of the Christian Religion afternamed, with and under the
several Conditions, restrictions, and limitations aftermentioned. In the first
place, tolerating the Moderate Presbyterians to meet in their private houses,
and there to hear all such Ministers, as either have or are willing to accept
of the Indulgence allanerly, and none other: And that there be nothing said or
done contrare to the well and peace of his reign, seditious or treasonable,
under the highest pains these Crimes will import, nor are they to presume to
build Meeting houses, or to use outhouses or barns -- In the mean time its his
Royal will and pleasure, that Field Conventicles, and such as Preach at them,
or who shall any way assist or connive at them, shall be prosecute according to
the utmost severity of Laws made against them -- In like manner tolerating the
Quakers to meet and exercise in their form, in any place or places appointed
for their Worship -- And by the same absolute power, foresaid, suspending,
stoping, and disabling all Laws or Acts of Parliament, Customs, or
Constitutions against any Roman Catholic subjects -- So that they shall in all
things be as free in all respects as any Protestant subjects whatsoever, not
only to exercise their Religion, but to enjoy all Offices, benefices, etc.
which he shall think fit to bestow upon them in all time coming -- And cassing,
annulling, and discharging all Oaths whatsoever, and Tests, and Laws enjoining
them. And in place of them this Oath only is to be taken -- I A. B. do
ackowledge, testify, and declare that James the Seventh etc. is rightful King
and Supreme Governor of these Realms, and over all persons therein; And that
it is unlawful for Subjects, on any Pretense or for any Cause whatsoever, to
rise in Arms against him, or any Commissionated by him; and that I shall never
so rise in Arms, nor assist any who shall so do; And that I shall never resist
his power or Authority, nor ever oppose this Authority to his person -- but
shall to the utmost of my power assist, defend, and maintain him, his heirs and
lawful successors, in the exercise of their Absolute power and Authority
against all deadly -- And by the same absolute power giving his full and ample
Indemnitie, to all the foresaid sorts of People, under the foresaid
restrictions. Here is a Proclamation for a Prince: That Proclaims him in whose
name it is emitted, to be the greatest Tyrant that ever lived in the world, and
their Revolt who have disouned him to be the justest that ever was. For herein
that Monster of Prerogative is not only advanced, paramount to all Laws Divine
and humane, but far surmounting all the lust, impudence, and insolence of all
the Roman, Sicilian, Turkish, Tartarian, or Indian Tyrants that ever trampled
upon the Liberties of Mankind; who have indeed demanded absolute subjectio^,
and surrender of their Lives, Lands, and Liberties at their pleasure, but never
arrived at such a hight of arrogance as this does, to claim absolute obedience,
without reserve of Conscience, Religion, Honor, or Reason; Not only that which
ignorantly is called Passive, never to resist him, not only on any Pretense,
but for any Cause, even tho he should command his Popish Ianizaries to murder
and massacre all Protestants, which is the tender mercy and burning fervent
charity of Papists; but also of absolute Active obedience without reserve, to
assist, defend, and maintain him in every thing, whereby he shall be pleased to
exercise his absolute power, tho he should command to burn the Bible as well as
the Covenant (as already he applauded John Gib in doing of it) and to burn and
butcher all that will not go to Mass, which we have all grounds to expect will
be the end of his Clemency at last. Herein he claims a power to command what he
will, and obliging subjects to obey whatsoever he will command: A power to
rescind, stop, and disable all Laws; which unhinges all stabilitie and
unsettles all the security of humane society, yea extinguishes all that
remains of natural Liberty: Wherein, as is well observed by the Author of the
Representation of the threatening dangers impending over Protestants Page 53.
It is very natural to observe, that he allows the Government, under which we
were born, and to which we were sworn, to be hereby subverted and changed, and
that thereupon we are not only absolved and acquitted from all Allegiance to
him, but indispensably obliged, by the ties and engagments that are upon us, to
apply our selves to the use of all means and endeavors against him, as an
Enemy of the People and subverter of the legal Government. But this was so
gross, and grievously gripping in its restrictions, as to persons, as to the
place, as to the matter allowed the Presbyterians in Preaching, that it was
disdained of all; and therefore he behoved to busk it better, and mend the
matter, in a Letter to the Council (the Supreme Law of Scotland) bearing date
March 31. 1687. of this tenor -- Whereas we did recommend to you to take care,
that any of the Presbyterians should not be allowed to Preach, but such only as
should have your Allowance for the same, and that they at the receiving the
Indulgence should take the Oath contained in the Proclamation -- These are
therefore to let you know, that thereby we meant such of them as did not
solemnly take the Test; but if nevertheless the Presbyterian Preachers do
scruple to take the said Oath, or any other Oath whatsoever, and that you shall
find it reasonable or fit to grant them or any of them our said Indulgence, so
as they desire it upon these terms; It is now our will and pleasure -- to
grant them our said Indulgence, without being obliged to take the Oath, with
power unto them to enjoy the benefit of the said Indulgence (during our
pleasure only) or so long as you shall find they behave themselves regularly
and peaceably, without giving any cause of offense to us, or any in Authority
or trust under us in our Government. -- Thus finding the former Proposal not
adequately apportioned to his design, because of its palpable odiousness, he
would pretend his meaning was mistaken (tho it was manifest enough) and
mitigate the matter by taking away of the Oaths altogether, if any should
scruple it; whereas he could not but know, that all that had sense would abhor
it: yet it is clogged with the same restrictions, limited to the same persons,
characterized more plainly and peremptorly, with an addition of Cautions, not
only that they shall not say or do any thing contrare to the well and peace of
his reign seditious or treasonable; but also that they behave themselves
regularly and peaceably without giving any cause of offense to him or any under
him; which comprehends lesser offenses than sedition or treason, even every
thing that will displease a Tyrant and a Papist, that is, all faithfulness in
seasonable Duties or Testimonies. But at length lest the difformity and
disparity of the Proclamation for the Toleration in Scotland, and the
Declaration for Liberty of Conscience in England, should make his Pretenses to
Conscience suspect of disingenuity, and lest it should be said he had one
Conscience for England and another for Scotland; therefore he added a third eke
to the liberty, but such as made it still an ill favored patched project to
destroy Religion and true Liberty, in another Proclamation dated at Windsor,
June 28. 1687. wherein he says -- Taking into our Royal Consideration, the
sinistrous Interpretations, which either have or may be made of some
Restrictions (mentioned in the last) we have thought fit by this further to
declare, that we will Protect our Archbishops etc. And we do likewise, by our
Sovereign Authority, Prerogative Royal, and Absolute power, suspend, stop, and
disable, all penal and Sanguinary Laws; made against any for Nonconformity to
the Religion established by Law in that our Ancient Kingdom -- to the end, that
by the Liberty thereby granted the peace and security of our Government in the
practice thereof may not be endangered, we hereby straightly charge all our
Loving subjects, that as we do give them leave to meet and serve God after
their oun way, in private Houses, Chapels, or Places purposely hired or built
for that use, so that they take care that nothing be Preached or taught, which
may any way tend to alienate the hearts of our People from us and our
Government, and that their Meetings be peaceably and publicly held, and all
persons freely admitted to them, and that they do signify and make known to
some one or more of the next Privy Counselors, Sheriffs, Stewards, Bailiffs,
Justices of the Peace, or Magistrates of Burgh Royal, what place or places they
set a part for these uses, with the names of the Preachers -- provided always
that the Meetings be in houses, and not in the open fields; for which now after
this our Royal grace and favor (which surpasses the hopes, and equals the
very wishes of the most zealously concerned) there is not the least shadow of
execuse left: Which Meetings in the fields we do hereby strictly prohibit and
forbid, against all which we do leave our Laws and Acts of Parliament in full
force and vigor, notwithstanding the premises; and do further command all our
Judges, Magistrates, and Officers of forces, to prosecute such as shall be
guilty of the said field Conventicles with the utmost rigor; for we are
confident, none will after these Liberties and freedoms, given to all without
reserve to serve God in their oun way, presume to meet in these Assemblies,
except such as make a pretense of Religion to cover their treasonable designs
against our Royal person and the peace of our Government

This is the Royal Charter for security of the Protestant Religion (intended to
secure it so, that it shall not go much abroad again) in Lieu of all the Laws,
Constitutions, Oaths, and Covenants wherewith it was formerly confirmed. This
is the only patent which the Royal Daties, the Moderate Presbyterians, have now
received to ensure their enjoyment of it durante beneplacito, during his
pleasure whose Faith is as absolute over all ties of promises, as his power
from whence it flows is over all Laws; whose chiefest principle of Conscience
is that no Faith is to be kept to Heretics. Here is the Liberty which is said
to surpass the hopes and equal the wishes of the most zealously concerned;
holding true indeed of too many, whose hopes and wishes and zeal are terminate
upon peace rather than Truth, ease rather than duty and their own things rather
than the things of Christ; But as for the poor wild Wanderers, it some way
answers their fears and corrosponds with their jealousies, who put the same
interpretation upon it as on all the former Indulgences, Indemnities and
Tolerations, proceeding from the same fountain and designed for the same
sinistrous ends with this, which they look upon as more openly and obviously
Antichristian: and therefore, while others are rejoicing under the
bramble-shadow of it, they think it a cause of weeping and matter of mourning,
not because they do not share of the benefit of it, but because they are afraid
to share of the Curse of it. For which cause, tho a freedom be pretended to be
given, to all without reserve to serve God in their own way, they think it
necessary to reserve to themselves the Liberty wherewith Christ has made them
free, and to serve Him in His Way tho interdicted by men, and to take none from
Antichrist restricted with his reserves; And do look upon it as a Seasonable
Testimony for the Cause of Christ, and the Interest of the Protestant Religion,
and the Laws and Liberties of the Country, all overturned and subverted by
this Toleration, to keep their Meetings as in former times, in the open fields
whither their Tyranny has driven them. And let them call these Meetings
covered and treasonable designs against the Government on pretense of Religion,
I trust it shall be made evident in the Conviction of all that know Religion,
that their designs are to preserve it, in opposition to the Tyranny that goes
about all these ways to suppress it. Though I must suspend the Reasons of
their keeping their Meetings in the fields, till I come to discuss that Case in
its oun place: Here I shall only say, none that is acquainted with their
Circumstances, which are as dangerously stated as ever, by reason of the
Constant Persecution of Cruel enraged Enemies incessantly pursuing them without
relenting, notwithstanding of all this pretense of Clemency and tenderness to
Conscience, but may know they can neither have safety, secrecy, nor convenience
in houses for fear of their entrapping enemies, and none will blame them that
after so many discoveries of their truculent treachery they dare not trust
them: And besides, they think it sinful, scandalous, and inconvenient to seem
to homologate this Toleration, the wickedness whereof they are convinced of,
from these Reasons.

I. Considering the Granter in his personal Capacity, as to his Morals, they
look upon him as a person with whom they cannot in Prudence communicate, in any
transaction of that nature. First, because being in his Principles and practice
professedly treacherous, yea obliged to be both perfidious and cruel by that
Religion whereunto he is addicted, he cannot be trusted in the least concerns,
let be those of such momentous consequence as this, without a stupid abandoning
of Conscience, Reason, and Experience. Since both that known principle, that no
Faith is to be kept to Heretics, which is espoused by all Papists, does to
them justify all their lying dissimulations, equivocations, and treacheries
imaginable; and that Lateran Canon, that enjoins Kings to destroy and
exstirpate Heretics under pain of excommunication, does oblige him to be
cruel; besides what deep engagments he is known to be under by Oaths and
Promises to the Pope, both in his exile, and while a subject, and since he came
to the Croun; which make him to all Considering persons to be a person of that
Character, whose deceitful dainties are not to be desired, and that when he
speaks fair is not to be believed, for there are seven abominations in his
heart. Of which open and affronted Lies we have a sufficient swatch, both in
his Proclamation for Scotland and Declaration for England; where he speaks of
his constant resolves of uniting the hearts of Subjects to God in Religion, and
to their Neighbors in Christian Love, and that it never was his principle to
offer violence to any man's Conscience, or use invincible necessity against any
man on the account of his persuasion; and that their Property was never in any
case invaded since his coming to the Croun; and that it has been his constant
sense and opinion, that Conscience ought not to to be constrained nor People
forced in matters of mere Religion. To which, his uninterrupted endeavors to
divide us from God and from on another, that he might the more easily destroy
us, and his constant encroachments upon Laws, Liberties, and Properties, and
all Interests of men and Christians for Conscience sake do give the lie
manifestly. And it must be great blindness not to see, and great baseness
willingly to wink at that double faced equivocation, in matters of mere
Religion; by which he may elude all these flattering promises of tenderness, by
excepting at the most necessary and indispensable duties, if either they be
such wherein any other Interest is concerned beside mere Religion, or if their
troubles sustained thereupon be not altogether invincible necessities. Hence
the plain falsehood and doubleness of his Assertions as to what is past, may
give ground to conclude his intended perfidie in the promises of what is
future. Next, it is known what his Practices and Plots have been for the
destruction of all honest and precious Interests; what a deep hand he had in
the burning of London, in the Popish plot discovered, anno 1678. in the Murder
of the Earl of Essex, yea in the Parricide committed upon his oun brother. By
all which it appears, nothing is so abominable and barbarous which he has not
a Conscience that will swallow and digest without a scruple; and what he has
done of this kind must be but preparatory to what he intends, as meritorious to
atone for these villainies. And in his esteem, and persuasion of Papists,
nothing is thought more meritorious than to exstirpate the Protestant Religion,
and destroy the Professors thereof. Therefore being such a person with whom in
Reason no honest man could transact, for a tenure of the least piece of Land or
house or any holding whatsoever, they dare not accept of his security or
protection for so great an Interest, as the freedom and exercise of their
Religion under the shadow of such a bramble. If it was the Shechemites sin and
shame to strengthen a naughty Abimelech, and strengthen themselves under the
shadow of his protection, much more must it be to take protection for Religion
as well as peace, from such a Monster of cruelty and treachery. This were
against their Testimony, and contrary to the Laudable Constitutions of the
Church of Scotland, to take no Protections from Malignant Enemies, as was
showed above in Montroses case. See Page 82. above.

II. Considering his Religion more particularly, they judge it unlawful so to
bargain with him as this Acceptance would import. It is known he is not only a
Papist, an Apostate Papist, and an Excommunicate Papist (as is related above)
but a fiery Bigot in the Romish Religion, and zealous sworn votarie and vassal
of Antichrist: who, as the Letter of the Jesuit from Liege lately published in
print tells us, is resolved either to convert England to Popery or die a
Martyr, and again that he styles himself a son of the Society of Jesuits, and
will account every injury done to them to be a wrong done against himself;
being known to be under the conduct and guidance of that furious Order, yea and
enrolled as a member of that Society. Which makes it the less to be wondered,
that he should require absolute obedience without reserve, seeing he himself
yields absolute obedience as well as implicit faith, without reserve, to the
Jesuits. Such a Bigot was Mary of England (as also his great Grandame of
Scotland if she had got her will) And his Bigotrie will make him emulous of her
Cruelty, as counting it a diminution of his glory, for such a Champion as he
under Antichrists banner to come short of a woman's enterprises: Nor would the
late King have been so posted off the stage, if his successor were not to act
more vigorously than he in this Tragical design, to which this Toleration is
subservient. He is then a Servant of Antichrist, and as such under the
Mediators Malediction; yea in this respect is heir to his Grandfathers
imprecation, who wished the Curse of God to fall upon such of his Posterity as
should at any time turn Papists. How then can the Followers of the Lamb strike
hands, be at peace, associate, confederate, or bargain with such a declared
Enemy to Christ? Certainly the Scripture-Commands of making no Covenant or
League, interdicting entering into any affinity with the People of these
abominations, and forbidding saying a Confederacy with them, do lay awful bonds
on the Faithful to stand aloof from such. The People might have had Liberty of
Conscience under the Assyrian Protection, when they were saying a Confederacy
with him, but in so doing they forefaulted the benefit of the Lord being a
Sanctuary to them. To bargain therefore with such an one for a Toleration of
Religion, were contrary to the Scriptures, contrary to the Covenants and
Principles of the Church of Scotland, against Associations and Confederacies
with such Enemies. See Gillesp. Useful Case of Conscience concerning Assoc.
hinted Page 83. and more Head. 3. Arg. 1. But to accept of this Liberty as now
offered were a bargaining; for where there is a Giving and Receiving upon
certain Conditions, where there are Demands and Compliance; Commands and
Obedience, Promises and Relyance, Offers upon terms and Acquiescence in these
terms, what is there wanting to a bargain, but the mere formality of
Subscriptions? At least it cannot be denied, but the Addressers have bargained
for it, and in the name of all the Accepters, which must stand as their deed
also; if they do not evidence their resentment of such Presumption, which I do
not see how they can, if they abide under the shadow thereof the same way as
they do. I grant Liberty is very desirable, and may be taken and improven from
Enemies of Religion: And so do the Wanderers now take it and improve it to the
best advantage, without receiving it by acquiescing in any terms. But such a
Liberty as this was never offered without a destructive design, nor ever
received without a destructive effect. It is one of the filthy flatteries
found in the English Addresses, particularly that from Totness, that the
present Indulger is like another Cyrus who proclaimed Liberty to the People of
God Ezra. 1. But who sees not the disparity in every respect? Cyrus at his very
first entry into the Government did lay out himself for the Churches good; This
man who speaks now so fair, his first work was to break our head and next to
put on our hood, first to assert and corroberate his prerogative, and then by
virtue of that to dispense with all Penal Laws: It was foretold that Cyrus
should deliver the Church at that time; But was it ever promised that the
Church should get Liberty to advance Antichrist? or that Antichrist, or one of
his Limbs, should be employed in the Churches deliverance, while such? The Lord
stirred up the Spirit of Cyrus; Can it be said without blasphemy that the Lord
stirred up this man, to contrive the introduction of Popery by this Gate and
Gap, except in a penal sense for judgment? Cyrus had a Charge to build the Lord
a House, but this is not a Charge but a Grant or License, not from nor
according to Gods Authority but man's, not to build Christ a House, but a Babel
for Antichrist; and all this Liberty is but contrived as scaffolding for that
Edifice, which when it is advanced then the scaffolding must be removed.

3. Considering him in his Relation as a Magistrate, it were contrary to their
Testimony so often renewed and ratified, and confirmed with so many reasons,
and sealed by so much blood, bonds, banishment, and other sufferings, to oune
or acknowledge his Authority which is mere Usurpation and Tyranny; in that by
the Laws of the Land he is incapable of Government, and that he has neither
given nor can give, without an hypocritical and damning cheat, the Oath and
Security indispensibly required of him before and at his entry to the
Government. Yet this Liberty cannot be Complied with, without recognoscing his
Authority that he arrogates in giving it: Seeing he tenders it to all his good
Subjects, and gives it by his Sovereign Authority, and to the end that by the
Liberty thereby granted the peace and security of the Government in the
practice thereof may not be endangered; And in the Declaration to England, it
is offered as an expedient to establish his Government on sach a foundation, as
may make his Subjects happy, and unite them to him by inclination as well as
duty; to which indeed the Acceptance thereof has a very apt subserviency:
seeing it implies, not only ouning of the Government out of Duty, but an union
and joining with it and him by inclination, which is a cordial Confederacy with
Gods enemy, and a cooperating to the establishment of his Tyranny; that the
peace and security thereof may not be endangered. And in his former
Proclamation, he gives them the same security for their Rights and Properties,
which he gives for Religion; And in the English Declaration, adds that to the
perfect enjoyment of their Property, which was never invaded etc. Which to
accept, were not only to take the security of a manifest lie, but to prefer the
word of a man that cannot, must not, will not keep it (without going cross to
his principles) to the Security of Right and Law which is hereby infringed, and
to acknowledge not only the Liberty of Religion, but the Right of Property to
his grant: which when ever it is removed, there must remain no more Charter for
it, but stupid slavery entailed upon Posterity, and pure and perfect Tyranny
transmitted to them. The sin and absurdity where of may be seen demonstrated
Head. 2.

4, Considering the Fountain whence it flows, they cannot defile themselves
with it. In the English Declaration, it flows from the Royal will and pleasur^
which speaks a Domination Despotical and Arbitrary enough, but more gently
expressed than in the Scots Proclamation; where it is refounded on Sovereign
Authority, Prerogative Royal, and Absolute Power: Proclaiming by sound of
Trumpet a Power Paramount to all Law, Reason, and Religion, and outvying the
hight of Ottoman Tyranny* A Power which all are to obey without res^rve: A
power to Tolerate or Restrain the Protestant Religion, according to his Royal
will or pleasure: An Absolute power which can not be limited by Laws, nor most
Sacred Obligations, but only regulated by the Royal lust; whereby indeed he may
suffer the Protestant Religion, but only precariously so long as he pleases,
and until his Royal pleasure shall be to command the establishment of Popery,
which then must be complied with without control. Whereby all the tenure that
Protestants have for their Religion, is only the Arbitrary word of an absolute
Monarch, whose principles oblige him to break it, and his ambition to disdain
to be a slave to it. Now the Acceptance of this Grant, would imply the
recognizance of this power that the Granter claims in granting it; which
utterly disolves all Government, and all security for Religion and Liberty, and
all the precious Interests of men and Christians: Which to acknowledge, were
contrare to Scripture, contrary to Reason, and contrary to the Principles of
the Church of Scotland, particularly the Declaration of the Genesis Ass. Iulij 27.
1649. See page 89. etc. and contrary to the Covenant.

5. Considering the Channel in which it is conveyed, they cannot Comply with
it. Because it comes through such a Conveyance, as suspends, stops, and
disables, all penal Laws against Papists, and thereby everts all the
Securities and legal Bulwarks that Protestants can have for the establishment
of their Religion; yea in effect leaves no Laws in force against any that
shall attempt the utter subversion of it, but rati^ies and leaves in full vigor
all wicked Laws and Acts of Parliament, against such as would most avowedly
assert it; and stops and disables none of the most cruel and bloody Laws
against Protestants: for the most cruel are such as have been made against
Field-Meetings, which are hereby left in full force and vigor. Hence as he has
formally by absolute power suspended all Laws made for the Protection of our
Religion, so he may when he will dispense with all the Laws made for its
establishment; and those who approve the one by such an Acceptance, cannot
disallow the other, but must recognosce a power in the King to subvert all
Laws, Rights, and Liberties, which is contrare to Reason as well as Religion,
and a clear breach of the National and Solemn League and Covenants.

6. Considering the Ends of its Contrivance, they dare not have any accession
to accomplish such wicked Projects, to which this Acceptance would be so
natively subservient. The expressed ends of this Grant are, to unite the hearts
of his Subjects to him in Loyalty and to their Neighbors in love, as in the
former Proclamation; And that by the Liberty granted the peace and security of
his Government in the practice thereof may not be endangered, as in the latter
Proclamation; And to unite the Subjects to him by inclination as well as duty
which he thinks can be done by no means so effectually as by granting the free
exercise of Religion, as in the English Declaration. Whence we may gather not
obscurely, what is the proper tendency of it, both as to the work and worker,
to wit, to incline and induce us by flattery to a lawless Loyalty, and a
stupid contented slavery when he cannot compel us by force, and make us
actively cooperate in setting and settling his Tyranny, in the peaceable
possession of all his Usurpations, Robberies, and Encroachments upon our
Religion, Laws, and Liberties, and to incorporate us with Babylon, for wbo are
the Neighbors he would have us unite with in love, but the Papists? against
whom all the Lovers of Christ must profess themselves irreconcilable Enemies.
The English Declaration does further discover the design of this device, in one
expression which will most easily be obtained to be believed of any in it, viz.
that he heartily wishes that all the People of these Dominions were members of
the Catholic Church: which clearly insinuates, that hereby he would entyce
them to commit fornication with that Mother of harlots; which entycing to
Idolatry (if we consult the Scripture) should meet with another sort of
entertainment than such a kind and thankful Acceptance, which is not an
opposing of such a wicked wish, but an encouraging and corroberating of it. And
further he says, that all the former tract of Persecutions never obtained the
end for which it was employed; For after all the frequent and pressing
endeavors that were used, to reduce this Kingdom to an exact con^ormity in
Religion, it is visible the success has not answered the design, and that the
difficulty is invincible. Wherein we may note his extorted acknowledgment,
that all former endeavors to destroy the Work of God have been successless,
which induces him to try another method, to which this Acceptance is very
subservient, to wit, to destroy us and our Religion by flatteries, and by peace
to overturn Truth, and by the subversion of Laws to open a door to let in
Popery and all abominations. But what is more obscurely expressed in his
words, is more visibly obvious in his works, to all that will not willingly
wink at them; discovering clearly the end of this Liberty is not for the Glory
of God, nor the Advantage of Truth, or the Churches Edification, nor intended
as a benefit to Protestants; but for a pernicious design, by gratifying a few
of them in a pretended favor to rob all of them of their chiefest Interests,
Religion, Laws, Rights, and Liberties, which he could not otherwise effectuate
but by this arbitrary way; for if he could have obtained his designs by Law: he
would never have talked of Lenity or Liberty, but having no legal ends he
behoved (...) compass them by illegal means. They must then be very blind who
do not see, his drift is, first to get in all Popish Officers in places of
Public Trust, by taking off the Penal Laws disabling them for the same; Then
to advance his Absoluteness over all Laws, in a way which will be best
acknowledged and acquiesced in by People, till he be so strengthened in it that
he fears no control; And then to undermine and overturn the Protestant
Religion, and establish Popery and Idolatry: which he is concerned the more
violently to pursue, because he is now growing old, and therefore must make
have, lest he leave the Papists in a worse condition than he found them: which
to be sure the Papists are aware of, and their conscious fears of the Nations
resentments of their Villainies will prompt them, as long as they have such a
Patron, to all vigilance and violence in playing their game: And withal,
hereby he may intend to capacitate himself for subduing the Dutch, against whom
he has given many indications of a hostile mind of old and of late; not only
in hiring two Rascals to burn the Amsterdam-fleet heretofore, but in stirring
up and protecting the Algerine Pirates against them; So universal a Protector is
he become of late, that Papists and Protesiants, Turks and Jews are shrouded
under the shadow of his Patrociny, but with a design to destroy the best, when
his time comes. Which cursed designs cannot be counteracted, but very much
strengthened by this Acceptance.

7. Considering the Effects already produced thereby, they cannot but abhor it.
Seeing the eyes of all that are tender may affect their hearts, observing how
the Papists are hereby encouraged and increased in numbers, the whole Nation
overflowed wlth their hellish Locusts, and all Places filled with Priests and
Jesuits, yea the executive power of the Government put into the hands of the
Romanists, and on the other hand how the People are endangered with their
abounding and prevailing Errors (to which the Lord may and will give up those
that have not received the love of the Truth) Truth is sallen in the streets
and equity cannot enter, a Testimony against Antichrist is abandoned and laid
aside as unseasonable, the edge of zeal for the Interest of Christ is blunted
and its fervor extinginshed, they that should stand in the Gap and upon the
watch Tower are laid aside from all opposition to the invasions of the Enemy,
and lulled asleep by this bewitching Charm and intoxicating Opium, Ministers
and Professors are generally settling on their lees and languishing in a fatal
security, Defection is carried on, Division promoted, and Destruction is
imminent. Is it not then both a part of the Witness of the Faithful, and of
their wisdom to stand aloof from such a Plague, that has such destructive
effects?

8. Considering the Nature and Name of this pretended Liberty, they cannot but
disdain it as most dishonorable to the Cause of Christ. It is indeed the
honor of Kings and happiness of People; to have true humane and Christian
Liberty established in the Common wealth, that is, Liberty of Persons from
slaverie; Liberty of Privileges from Tyranny, and Liberty of Conscience from
all impositions of men; Consisting in a freedom from the Doctrines, Traditions,
and Commandments of men against or beside the Word of God, in the free
enjoyment of Gospel Ordinances in purity and power, and in the free observance
and establishment of all His Institutions of Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government, in subordination to the only Rule of Conscience, the revealed Will
of its only Lawgiver Jesus Christ. When this is ratified as a Right by the
Sanction of approven Authority, and countenanced and encouraged as Religion, by
the Confirmation of Laws, approving whatsoever is Commanded by the God of
Heaven to be done for the House of the God of Heaven (which is the full amount
of all Magistrates Authority) Then we are obliged to accept of it with all
thankful acceptance. But such a Liberty, as overturns our Rights, our
Privileges, our Laws, our Religion, and Tolerates it only under the Notion of
a Crime, and indemnifies it under the notion of a Fault to be Pardoned, and
allows the exercise thereof only in Part so and so modified, cannot be
accepted by any to whom the reproach thereof is a burden, and to whom the
reproaches of Christ are in esteem, in such a day when even the hoofs of
Christ's Interest buried in bondage are to be contended for. Whatever Liberty
this may be to some Consciences, it is none to the tender according to the Rule
of Conscience, It is only a Toleration which is always of evil: for that which
is good cannot be tolerated under the notion of good, but countenanced and
encouraged as such. Therefore this reflects upon our Religion, when a
Toleration is accepted which implies such a reproach: And the annexed Indemnity
and Pardon tacitly condemns the Profession thereof as a fault or Crime, which
no Christian can bear with, or by his acceptance homologate these reproaches,
if he consider the nature of it: And much more will he be averse from it, if he
consider how dishonorable it is to God (whatever some Addressers,
particucularly the Presbyterians at London, have blasphemously alleged, that
God is hereby restored to His Empire over the Conscience) Since the Granter,
after he has robbed the Mediator of His Supremacy and given it away to
Antichrist, And God of His Supremacy Imperial as Universal King by a Claim of
Absolute Power peculiar to Him, he has also robbed Him of His Empire over the
Conscience, in giving every man the Empire over his oun Conscience, which he
reserves a power to retract whem he pleases.

9. Considering the Extent of it, they cannot class themselves amoug the number
of them that are Indulged thereby. It takes in not only the Archbishops and
Bishops, and the Prelatical and Malignant Crew, but all Quakers, and Papists,
reaching all Idolatry, Blasphemy, and Heresy, and Truth also (which could
never yet dwell together under one sconce) Whereby the Professors of Christ
come in as Partners in the same bargain with Antichrists Vassals; And the Lords
Ark has a place with Dagon, and its Priests and Followers consent to it; And
the builders of Babel and of Jerusalem ar made to build together, under the
same Protection; and a sluice is opened to let the enemy come in like a flood,
which to oppose the Accepters cannot stand in the Gap nor lift up a Standart
against them. Liberty indeed should be Universally extended to all the Lords
People, as Cyrus his Proclamation was General, who is there among you of all
His People? his God be with him. But a Toleration of Idolaters, Blasphemers,
and Heretics, as Papists, etc. is odious to God, because it is contrary to
Scripture, expressly Commanding Idolaters to die the death, and all Seducers
and Entycers to Apostasy from God to be put to death without pity; and
Commending all righteous Magistrates that executed Judgment accordingly, as
Asa, Hezekiah etc. yea even Heathen Magistrates that added their Sanction to the
Laws of God, as Artaxerxes is approven for that Statute, that whosoever will
not do the Law of God and of the King, judgment should be executed speedily
upon him. And in the New Testament this was never repealed but confirmed, in
that the sword is given to Magistrates, not in vain, but to be a terror to, and
revengers to execute wrath upon all that do evil, among whom Seducers that are
evil workers and Idolaters are chiefly to be ranked, being such as do the worst
of evil to mankind. Ephesus is commended because they could not bear them which
are evil: and Thyatira reproved for suffering Iezebel: by which it appears,
that our Lord Jesus is no friend to Toleration. It is true this is spoken
against Churchmen; but will any think that will be approven in Civil Powers,
which is so hateful in Church Officers? Surely it will be the duty and honor
of these horns spoken of Revel. 17. to eat the whores flesh and burn her with
fire: And shall that be restricted only to be done against the great
Antichrist, and not be duty against the lesser Antichrists, the limbs of the
Great one? It is recorded of Julian the Apostate, that among other devices he
used, to root out Christianity this was one, that he gave Toleration openly to
all the different Professions that were among Christians, whereof there were
many heretical in those days: which is exactly aped by James the Apostate now
for the same end. It is also contrare to the Confession of faith Chap. 20. 4.
asserting that for their publishing such opinions, or maintaining of such
practices, as are contrary to the light of Nature, or to the known Principles
of Christianity, whether concerning Faith Worship, or Conversation, or to the
power of Godliness, or such erroneous opinions or practices, as either in their
oun nature, or in the manner of publishing or maintaining them, are destructive
to the external Peace and. Order, which Christ has established in the Church;
they may lawfully be called to account, and proceeded against by the Censures
of the Church, and by the power of the Civil Magistrate. And therefore to
accept of this Toleration is inconsistent with the Principles of the Church of
Scotland, with the National and Solemn League and Covenants, and Solemn
Acknowledgment of sins and Engagement to duties, in all which we are bound to
extirpate Popery, Prelacie etc. With the whole tract of Contendings in the
fifth Period above related, and particularly by the Testimony of the Synod of
Fife, and other Brethren in the Ministry, against Cromuels vast Toleration and
Liberty of Conscience, mentioned above Page 76. for it is plain, if it be not
to be suffered, then it is not to be accepted.

10. Considering the Terms wherein it is offered, they cannot make such a
shameful bargain. In the former Proclamation it is granted expressly under
several Conditions, Restrictions, and Limitations: whereof indeed some are
retracted in the Latter, as the restriction of it to Moderate Presbyterians,
which would seem to be taken off by extending to all without reserve to serve,
God in their oun may; but being evidently exclusive of all that would serve God
in Christ's way, and not after the mode prescribed, it is so modified and
restricted that all that will accept of it must be Moderate Presbyterians
indeed, which as it is taken in the Court sense must be an ignominy to all that
have zeal against Antichrist. The Limitation also to private houses and not to
outhouses, is further enlarged to Chapels or places purposely hired but still
it is stinted to these, which they must bargain for with Counselors, Shiriffs
etc. So that none of these Restrictions and Limitations are altogether removed,
but the Condition of taking the Oath only: yet it is very near to an
equivalency homologated, by the Accepters acknowledging in the Granter a
Prerogative and Absolute Power over all Laws, which is confirmed and
maintained by their Acceptance. As for the rest that are not so much as said to
be removed, they must be interpreted to remain, as the terms, conditions,
restrictions, and limitations, upon which they are to enjoy the benefit of
this Toleration. And what he says, that he thought fit by this Proclamation
further to declare, does confirm it, that there are further explications, but
no taking off of former restrictions. Hence it is yet clogged with such
provisions and restrictions, as must make it very nauseous to all truly tender
(1) The restriction as to the Persons still remains, that only Moderate
Presbyterians, and such as are willing to accept of this Indulgence allanerly,
and none other, and such only whose names must be signified to these Sheriffs,
Stewards, Bailifs etc. are to have the benefit of this Indulgence: wherey all
the zealous and faithful Presbyterians are excluded, (for these they will not
call them Moderate) and all that would improve it without a formal Acceptance,
and all who for their former diligence in duty are under the lash of their
wicked Law, and dare not give up their names to those who are seeking their
lives, must be deprived of it. (2) It is restricted to certain Places still,
which must be made known to some one or more of the next privy Counselors and
whereby they are tied to a dependence on their warrant, and must have their
lease and license for Preaching the Word in any place, and Field-Meetings are
severely interdicted, though signally countenanced of the Lord, whereby the
Word of the Lord is bound and bounded; and by this Acceptance their bloody
Laws against Preaching in the open fields, where People can have freest access
with convenience and safety, are justified. (3) The manner of Meeting is
restricted, which must be in such a way as the peace and security of the
Government in the practice thereof may not be endangered, and again that their
Meetings be peaceably held, which is all one upon the matter with the bond of
peace, and binding to the good behavior so much formerly contended against by
Professors, and is really the same with the Condition of the Cautionary Bond in
the Indulgence after Bothuel, of which see Page 129. And further they must be
openly and publicly held, and all persons freely admitted to them; which is
for the informing trade, exposing to all the inconveniences of Jesuits, and
other Spies and Flies their delations, in case any thing be spoken reflecting
on the Government, a great tentation to Ministers. (4) The worst of all is upon
there matter of Preaching. which is so restricted and limited, that nothing must
be said or done contrare to the well and peace of his reign, seditious or
treasonable; And in case any treasonable speeches be uttered the Law is to take
place against the guilty, and none other present, providing they reveal to any
of the Council the guilt so committed, as in the former Proclamation: And in
the last it is further declared, that nothing must be Preached or taught, which
may any way tend to alienate the hearts of the People from him or his
Government. Here is the price at which they are to purchase their freedom (a
sad bargain to buy Liberty and sell Truth) which yet hardly can be so exactly
paid, but he may find a pretense for retrenching it when he pleases; for if a
Minister shall Pray for the overturning of a throne of iniquity, or for
confounding all that serve graven Images, and for destruction to the Pope and
all that give their power to that beast, there will be something said against
the well of his Government; Or if any shall hear this and not delate it, then
the same pretense is relevant; Or if he shall Preach against the Kings Religion
as Idolatry, and the Church of Rome as Babylon, and discharge his Conscience
and Duty in speaking against the Tyranny of the times; Or let him Preach
against any public sin faithfully, a Popish Critic or Romish Bigot shall
interpret it to be an alienation of the Peoples hearts from the King and his
Government. But who can be faithful, and Preach in season and out of season
now, but he must think it his duty to endeavor to alienate the hearts of the
People from such an Enemy to Christ, and his absolute Tyranny, so declaredly
stated against God? What Watchman must not see it his indispensable Duty, to
warn all People of his Devilish designs to destroy the Church and Nation, and
Preach so that People may hate the whore, and this Pimp of hers? Sure if he
Preach the whole Counsel of God, he must Preach against Popery and Tyranny.
And if he think this Indulgence from Absolute Prerogative, granted and accepted
on these terms, can supercede him from this faithfulness, then he is no more
the Servant of Christ but a pleaser of men. Therefore since it is so clogged
with so many restrictions, so inconsistent with duty, so contrary to Scripture,
so clearly violatory of Covenant-Engagements, so cross to the constant
Contendings and Constitutions of this Church, and Acts of Ass. (See Page 80.
etc.) it were a great defection to Accept of it.

11. Considering the Scandal of it, they dare not so offend the generation of
the Righteous by the Acceptance, and dishonor God, disgrace the Protestant
Profession, wrong the Interest thereof, and betray their native Country, as
thus to comply with the Design of Antichrist, and partake of this cruel tender
mercy of the beast; who has always mischief in his heart, and intends this as
a Preparative for inducing or enforcing all that are hereby lulled asleep
either to take on his Mark, or bear the Marks of his fiery fury afterward. For
hereby foreign Churches may think, we are in a fair way of reconciliation with
Antichrist, when we so kindly accept his Harbingers favors. And it cannot but
be very stumbling to see the Ministers of Scotland, whose Testimony used to be
terrible to the Popish and renouned through all the Protestant Churches,
purchasing a Liberty to themselves at the rate of burying and betraying the
Cause into bondage and restraint, and thus to be laid by from all active and
open opposition to Antichrists Designs, in such a season. The world will be
tempted to think, they are not governed by Principles but their oun Interest in
this juncture, seeking their oun things more than the things of Christ; And
that it was not the late Usurpation upon, and overturning of Religion and
Liberty that offended them, so much as the Persecution they sustained thereby;
but if that Arbitrary Power had been exerted in their favors, tho with the
same prejudice of the Cause of Christ, they would have complied with it as they
do now. Alas sad and dolorous have been the Scandals given and taken by and
from the Declining Ministers of Scotland heretofore, which have rent and racked
the poor Remnant, and offended many both at home and abroad, but none so
stumbling as this. And therefore the tender will be shie to meddle with it.

12. Considering the Addresses made thereupon, with such a stain of foulsome
and blasphemous flatteries, to the dishonor of God, the reproach of the Cause,
the betraying of the Church, and detriment of the Nation, and exposing
themselves to the contempt of all, the poor Persecuted Party dare not so much
as seem to incorporate with them. I shall set down the first of their
Addresses, given forth in the name of all the Presbyterian Ministers, And let
the Reader judge whether there be not Cause of standing aloof from every
appearance of being of their number. It is dated at Edinburgh, Iulj 21. 1687.
of this tenor.

To the Kings most excellent Majesty. The humble Address of the Presbyterian
Ministers of his Majesty's Kingdom of Scotland.
We your Maj. most loyal subjects, the Ministers of the Presbyterian persuasion
in your Ancient Kingdom of Scotland, from the due sense we have of your Maj.
gracious and surprising favor, in not only putting a stop to our long sad
sufferings for Nonconformity, but granting us the Liberty of the Public and
Peaceable exercise of our Ministerial function without any hazard: As we bless
the Great God who has put this in your Royal heart, do with all find our
selves bound in duty to offer our most humble and hearty thanks to your Sacred
Majesty, the favor bestowed being to us and all the People of our Persuasion
valuable above all our earthly comforts, especially since we have ground from
your Maj. to believe that our Loyalty is not to be questioned upon the account
of our being Presbyterians, who as we have amidst all former tentations
endeavored, so we are firmly resolved still to preserve an entire Loyalty in
our Doctrine and Practice (consonant to our known Principles, which according
to the Holy Scriptures are contained in the Confession of faith, generally
ouned by Presbyterians in all your Maj. Dominions) and by the help of God so to
demean our selves, as your Maj. may find cause rather to enlarge than to
diminish your favors toward us; thoroughly persuading our selves from your
Maj. justice and goodness, that if we shall at any time be otherwise
represented, your Maj. will not give credit to such information, until you have
due cognition thereof: and humbly beseeching, that those who promote any
dsloyal Principles and practices (as we disoune them) may be looked upon as
none of ours, whatsover name they may assume to themselves. May it please your
most excellent Maj. graciously to accept of this our most hmble Address, as
proceeding from the plainness and sincerity of Loyal and thankful hearts, much
engaged by your Royal favor, to continue our fervent Prayers to the King of
Kings, for Divine illumination and conduct, with all other blessings Spiritual
and Temporal, ever to attend your Royal Person and Government, which is the
greatest duty can be rendered to your Maj. by

Your Maj. most humble, mast faithful, and most obedient Subjects. Subscribed
in our Names, and in the name of the rest of our Brethren of our Persuasion, at
their desire.

Which received this Gracious return.

The Kings Letter to the Presbyterians in his ancient Kingdom of Scotland.
We love you well: and we heartily thank you for your Address: we resolve to
Protect you in your Liberty, Religion, and properties all our life: And we
shall lay down such methods, as shall not be in the power of any to alter
hereafter. And in the mean tune we desire you to Pray for our Person and
Government. To which may be added that kind Complement of the Chancellors:
Gentlemen, My Master has commanded me to tell you, that I am to serve you in
all things within the compass of my power.


These Gentlemen needed not to have been sollicitous, that those who avouch an
Adherance to the Covenanted Reformation, and avow an opposition to
Antichristian Usurpers (which they call promoting Dislayal principles and
practices) might not be looked upon as of their Confederacy: for all that abide
in the principles and Practices of the Church of Scotland (which they have
deserted) and that desire to be found Loyal to Christ, in opposition to His and
the Churches and the Countries Declared Enemy, would count it a sin and
scandal, laying them obnoxious to the Displeasure of the Holy and Jealous God,
who will resent this heinous Indignity they have done unto His Majesty (if
they do not Address themselves unto Him for pardon of the iniquity of this
Address, which is the desire of those whom they disoune that they may find
Grace to do so) and a shameful Reproach, exposing them to the Contempt of all
of whom they expect Sympathy, to be reckoned of their Association who have
thus betrayed the Cause and the Country. These mutual Complements (so like the
Caresses of the Romish whore whereby she entyces the Nations to her
fornication) between the Professed Servants of Christ and the Vassals of
Antichrist, if they be cordial; would seem to import that they are in a fair
way of compounding their differences and to accommodate their oppositions at
length; which yet I hope will be irreconcileably maintained and kept up by all
true Presbyterians, in whose name they have the impudence to give out their
Address: But if they be only Adulatory and flattering Complements, importing
only a Conjunction of tails like Samsons foxes) with a Disjunction of heads and
hearts, tending toward distinct and opposite Interests; then, as they would
suite far better the Dissmulations of Politicians, than the Simplicity of
Gospel Ministers, and do put upon them the brand of being men-pleasers rather
than Servants of Christ, so for their dissemblings with Dissemblers, who know
their Complements to be and take them for such, they may look to be paid home
in good measure, heaped up and running over, when such methods shall be laid
down as shall not be in the power of any to alter, when such designs shall be
obtained by this Liberty and these Addresses, that the after bought wit of the
Addressers shall not be able to disappoint. However the Address it self is of
such a dress, as makes the thing addressed for to be odious, and the Addressers
to forefault the respect, and merit the indignation of all that are friends to
the Protestant and Presbyterian Cause, as may appear from these obvious
Reflections. 1. It was needful indeed they should have assumed the name of
Presbyterians (though it might have been more tolerable to let them pass under
that name, if they had not presumed to give forth their flatteries in the name
of all of that Persuasion, and to allege it was at their desire; which is
either an illuding equivocation, or a great untruth, for though it might be the
desire of the men of their oun persuasion, which is a newly start up opinion
that Interest has led them to espouse, yet nothing could be more cross to the
real desires of true Presbyterians, that prefer the Truth of the Cause to the
external peace of the Professors thereof) and call it the humble Address of
Presbyterian Ministers: for otherwise it could never have been known to come
from men of the Presbyterian persuasion; seeing the Contents of this Address
are so clearly contrary to their known Principles. It is contrary to
Presbyterian Principles, to Congratulate an Antichristian Usurper for
undermining Religion, and overturning Laws and Liberties. It is contrary to
Presbyterian Principles, to justify the abrogation of the National Covenant, in
giving thanks for a Liberty whereby all the Laws are called and disabled
therein confirmed. It is contray to Presbyterian Principles, to thank the King
for opening a door to bring in Popery, which they are engaged to exstirpate in
the Solemn League and Covenant. It is contrary to Presbyterian Principles to
allow or accept of such a vast Toleration for Idolaters and Heretics, as is
evident above from all their Contendings against it, which is also contrary to
the Confession of faith, generally ouned by Presbyterians, as may be seen in
the place forecited Chap. 20. Par. 4. It is contrary to Presbyterian Principles
to consent to any Restrictions, Limitations, and Conditions, binding them up in
the exercise of the Ministerial function, wherewith this Liberty is loaded and
clogged; whereby indeed they have the Liberty of the Public and peaceable
exercise of it, without any hazard of present Persecution, but not without
great hazard of sin, and incurring the guilt of the blood of Souls, for not
declaring the whole Counsel of God, which Addressers cannot declare, if they
Preserve an entire Loyalty in their Doctrine, as here they promise. 2. There
is nothing here sounds like the old Presbyterian strain; neither was there ever
an Address of this style seen before from Presbyterian hands. It would have
looked far more Presbyterian like, instead of this Address, to have sent a
Protestation against the now openly designed introduction of Popery, and
subversion of all Laws and Liberties which they are Covenanted to maintain, or
at least to have given an Address in the usual Language of Presbyterians, who
used always to speak of the Covenants, and Work of Reformation: But here never
a word of these, but of Loyalty to his excellent, to his Gracious, and to his
Sacred Majesty, of Loyalty not to be questioned, an Entire Loyalty in
Doctrine, a resolved Loyalty in Practice, and a servent Loyalty in Prayers:
And all that they are solicitous about, is not lest the Prerogatives of their
Master be encroached upon, and the Liberties of the Church be supplanted, and
Religion wronged; but lest their Loyalty be questioned, and they be otherwise
represented: And all that they beseech for is, not that the Cause of Christ be
not wronged, nor Antichristian Idolatry introduced by this Liberty; but that
these who promove any disloyal Principles and Practices may be looked upon as
none of theirs, wherein all their encouragment is, that they persuade
themselves from his Maj. justice and goodness, that he will not give credit to
any other information until he take due cognition thereof. Here is a Lawless
unrestricted Loyalty to a Tyrant, claiming an absolute power to be obeyed
without reserve, not only professed, but solicitously sought to be the
Principle of Presbyterians; whereas it is rather the Principle of Athiestical
Hobbes exploded with indignation by all rational men. This is not a Christian
Loyalty, o^ profession of Conscientious Subjection, to a Minister of God for
good who is a terror to evil doers, but a stupid subjection and absolute
Allegiance to a Minister of Antichrist, who gives Liberty to all evil men and
seducers. This is not the Presbyterian Loyalty to the King, in the defense of
Christ His Evangel, Liberties of the Country, Ministration of Justice, and
punishment of iniquity, according to the National Covenant; And in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms,
according to the Solemn League and Covenant; but an Erastian Loyalty to a
Tyrant, in his overturning Religion Laws and Liberties, and protecting and
encouraging all iniquity. This Loyalty in Doctrine will be found Disloyalty
to Christ, in a sinful and shameful silence at the wrongs done to Him, and not
declaring against the Invasions of His open Enemies. This Loyalty in Practice
is a plain betraying of Religion and Liberty, in lying by from all opposition
to the open Destroyer of both. And this Loyalty in Prayers, for all blessings
ever to attend his person and Government, will be found neither consonant to
Presbyterian Prayers in reference to Popish Tyrants, nor consistent with the
Zeal of Christians, and the Cries of all the Elect unto God to whom vengeance
belongs, against Antichrist and all his Supporters, nor any way conform to the
Saints Prayers in Scripture, nor founded upon any Scripture promises, to pray
for a blessing to a Papists Tyranny, which cannot be of Faith and therefore
must be sin. It were much more suitable to pray, that the God which has caused
His Name to dwell in His Church, may destroy all Kings that shall put to their
hand to alter and destroy the House of God, Ezrah. 6. 12. 3. This Address is so
stuffed with sneaking flatteries, that it would become more Sycophants and
Court-Parasites than Ministers of the Gospel; and were more suitable to the
Popish, Prelatical, and Malignant faction to congratulate and rejoice in their
professed Patroh and Head, and fill the Gazetts with their Adulatory Addresses,
which heretofore used to be deservedly inveighed against by all Dissenters;
than for Presbyterians to take a Copy from them, and espouse the practice which
they had condemned before, and which was never commended in any good
Government, nor never known in these British Nations, before Oliver's
Usurpation and Charles his Tyranny; flattery being always counted base among
ingenuous men. But here is a Rhapsodie of flatteries, from the deep sense they
have of his Maj. gracious and surprising favor -- finding themselves bound in
duty to offer their most humble and hearty thanks, to his Sacred Maj. the
favor bestowed being to them -- valuable above all earthly comforts. One would
think this behoved to be a very great favor, from a very great friend, for
very gracious ends: But what is it? In not only putting a stop to their long sad
sufferings; which were some ground indeed if the way were honest: but this not
only supposes an also; what is that? but also granting us the Liberty -- which
is either a needless Tautology (for if all Sufferings were stopped, then
Liberty must needs follow) or it must respect the qualifications of the
Liberty; flowing from such a Fountain, absolute power; through such a
Conveyance, the stoping all penal Laws against Papists; in such a Form as a
Toleration; for such Ends, as overturning the Reformation and introducing
Popery. This is the favor for which they offer most humble and hearty thanks,
more valuable to them than all earthly comforts; tho it be manifestly intended
to deprive the Lords People, at the long run, of the Heavenly Comforts of the
Preached Gospel. Sure, if they thank him for the Liberty, they must thank him
for the Proclamation whereby he grants it, and justify all his Claim there to
Absoluteness, being that upon which it is superstructed, and from which it
emergeth, And so become a listed faction to abett and oune him in all his
attemptings, engaged now to demean themselves as that he may find cause rather
to enlarge than to diminish his favors, which can be no other way but in
assisting him to destroy Religion and Liberty, at least in suffering him to do
what he will without control. O what an indeleble reproach is this for
Ministers, who pretend to be set for the defense of the Gospel, thus to be
found betraying Religion, through justifying and magnifying a Tyrant, for his
suspension of so many Laws whereby is was established and supported. 4. It
were more tolerable if they went no further than flatteries: but I fear they
come near the border of Blasphemy, when they say, that the Great God has put
this in his Royal heart: which can bear no other Construction but this, that
the holy Lord has put it in his heart to assume to himself a blasphemous and
absolute power, whereby he stops and suspends all Penal Laws against
Idolaters, and gives a Toleration for all Errors: Or if it be capable of any
other sense, it must be like that as the Lord is said to have moved David to
number the People, or that Rev. 17. 17. God has put it in their hearts to
fulfill His Will, and to aggree and give their Kingdom unto the Beast. But to
bless God and thank the Tyrant for this wicked Project, as deliberate and
purposed by men, I say is near unto Blasphemy. And again where they say, they
are firmly resolved by the help of God so to demean themselves as his Maj. may
find cause rather to enlarge than to diminish his favors; this in effect is as
great Blasphemy as if they had said, they resolved by the help of God to be as
unfaithful Time-serving and Silent Ministers as ever plagued the Church of God;
for no otherwise can they demean themselves so as he may find cause to enlarge
his favors toward them, it being no way supposible that his enlarging his
favors can consist with their faithfulness, but if they discover any measure
of zeal against Antichrist, he will quickly diminish them.

Thus far I have compendiously deduced the Account of the Progress, and
Prosecution of the Testimony of this Church to the present State thereof, as it
is Concerted and Contended for, by the Reproached Remnant now only Persecuted:
which I hope this pretended Liberty shall be so far from obscuring and
interrupting, that it shall contribute further to clear it, and engage them
more to Constancy in it, and induce others also to Countenance it, when they
shall see the sad effects of this Destructive Snare, which I leave to time to
produce: And hope, that as the former Representation of their Cause will
conciliate the Charity of the unbyassed, so an Account of their Sufferings
thereupon will provoke them to Sympathy. To which I now proceed.

PART. II.
CONTAINING A BRIEF ACCOUNT Of the Persecution of the last Period, And of the
great Sufferings whereby all the Parts of its Testimony were sealed.
THe foregoing Deduction, being the first thing I proposed to be discussed in
the Method of this Essay, has now swelled to such a Bulk, that the Last Period
of it does in a manner swallow up what I intended to have said on the Second:
Because it gives grounds to gather the Methods and Measures that our
Adversaries have managed, for the ruin of this Witnessing Remnant, and also
discovers some special steps of their Sufferings within these 27. years past,
under the Tyranny of both the Brothers. It will now be the more easy to glean
the Gradations of the Means and Machins, used by this Popish, Prelatical, and
Malignant faction, to raze the Work of Reformation, and to build their Babel of
Popery and Slaverie on the ruins thereof; And to aggregate an Account in
brief of the Great Sufferings of the Faithful. Which though it be beyond my
power and besides my purposes at present, to offer a Narrative of it, with any
proportion to the greatness of the subject; A more particular Relation thereof,
being now projected, if Providence permit, to be Published to the world, which
will discover strange and unheard of Cruelties: yet in this little heap of some
hints only of the kinds of their Sufferings, I do not question but it will
appear, that the Persecution of Scotland has been very remarkable, and
scarcely outdone by the most Cruel in any Place or Age, in respect of
injustice, illegality, and inhumanity, though perhaps inferior in some other
Circumstances. But that none could be more unjust, illegal, or inhumane, I need
not further, I cannot better, demonstrate than only to Declare the matter of
fact, as it fell out in the several Steps of the Last Period.

1. In the Entry of this fatal Catastrophe, the first of their Mischievous
Machinations was to remove out of the way all who were eminent Instruments in
carrying on the former Work of God, or might be of influence for obstructing
their Antichristian and Tyrannical designs, both in the State and in the
Church. And accordingly when the Marque^s of Argyle, who had a main hand in
bringing home the King, and closing the Second Treaty at Breda, went up to
London to Congratulate his return from exile, he was made Prisoner in the
Tower, thereafter sent down to Scotland, indyted of high Treason, at length
beheaded, and his head placed upon the Tolbooth of Edinburgh (A watch word of
warning to our Addressers, who may ere all be done meet with the same sauce)
for no other alleged Cause, but for his Compliance with the English when they
had our Land in subjection; a thing wherein the Judges that condemned him were
Socii Criminis: but really for another provocation that incensed the King
against him, which made him a Tyrant as infamous for villainy as for violence,
to wit, for his reproving the King (when others declined it) for an Adulterous
Rape, which he held for so piacular a Crime, that he resolved nothing should
expiate it but the blood of this Nobleman. For the same Pretended Cause was the
Lord Waristoun afterward executed to death at Edinburgh, after they had missed
of their design of taking him off by Clandestine ways abroad. Then they fall
upon the Ministers: And because Mr James Guthrie was a man, who had been
honored of God to be zealous and singularly faithful in carrying on the Work
of Reformation, and had asserted the Kingly Authority of Christ in opposition
to the Erastian Supremacy encroaching thereupon, therefore he must Live no
longer, but is condemned to die, and most basely handled as if he had been a
most Notorious Thief or Malefactor; he is hanged, and afterward his head placed
upon one of the Ports of Edinburgh; where it abides to this day Preaching not
only against the Enemies Rebellion against God, but against the defection of
many Ministers since, who have Practically denied that Great Truth for which he
Suffered, viz, his Testimony against the Supremacy, and for declining the
Usurped Authority of him who Arrogated it. At the same time there was a
Proclamation, which they caused to be read at all the Church-doors, discharging
Ministers to speak against them or their Proceedings, whereby Profane and
Malicious persons were encouraged to witness against their Ministers. By which
means (though many were in no hazard, thinking it commendable Prudence,
commended indeed by the world, but hateful unfaithfulness before God, to be
silent at such a time) some faithful Ministers giving faithful and free warning
and Protesting against the present Defection, were condemned of Treason, and
banished out of the three Dominions. Others Indicta Causa without access to
give in their defenses, were sentenced with banishment, and could never get an
Extract of their sentence: And further were compelled to subscribe a bond, under
pain of death to remove out of all the Dominions betuixt and such a day. This
was the lot, and also the blot, of these famous and faithful Ministers, Mr John
Livingstoun, Mr To M^ Ward, Mr Io. Broun etc. who spent the rest of their days
in Holland, serving their Generation by their excellent Writings. Then after
they had disposed of many other Ministers, whom they thrust out for not keeping
the 29th of May, having now laid by the most Eminent, and whom they feared most
of the Ministry, they shortly thereafter outed and violented the rest from the
exercise of their Ministry, and straitened them with strange and severe
Confinements, yea because they would not be out done (...) suppressing Religion
by any, no not by Julian the Apostate, they proceeded to poison all the springs
and fountains of Learning; ordaining that none be Masters in Universities,
except they take the Oath of Supremacy, and oune the Government of Prelacy, and
none be admitted to teach in a School without the Prelates License. These
Courses brought many Ministers and Expectants to great Sufferings.

2. Hitherto they reached only Noblemen, Gentlemen, and Ministers, and others
whom they thought might stand in their way: of advancing their Cursed Designs.
The next Drift is, when they had emptied the Churches of Ministers, and filled
them with the vermin of ignorant and scandalous Curats, to force the People to
Conformity, and to Disoune and discountenance their oun Ministers; first, by
severe Edicts of exorbitant fining not only the persons themselves
contraveening, but those that had the Superiority over them, and rigourous
execution of these fines, to the Depopulation of a poor Country, by Military
force. Whereby, where there was but one Church in the bounds, still enjoying a
Minister whom the People could hear, the profane Soldiers would beset that
Church in time of Worship, and cause all within to pay their fines, or take the
garments from them that could not, and beat them to the effusion of their
blood: And where the Church was planted with a Curat, the Soldiers would come
and call the Names of the Parishoners, and amerciate the Absents in such fines
as they pleased. In other Places they went to private houses, and by force
drove them to Church, even though sick and unable. But where the Dissenters
were numerous, great bands of Legal Robbers were sent to exact and extort these
exorbitant fines, by plundering, quartering, beating, wounding, binding men
like beasts, chasing away from houses, and harrassing whole Countrysides, in a
hideous manner. And yet after all these insolences, some of the common sort
were compelled to subscribe an acknowledgment, that the Captain had used them
civilly and discreetly; though the account of others of that place manifests
the violence to have been so monstrous, that it justified the greatest
barbarity: showing their exactions to have been intolerable, both for the
quantity, without all proportion or pity, and for the manner of it, consuming
and wasting poor Peoples provision by their very dogs, and sparing no more
these who conformed than others who did not conform at all, and punishing
husbands for their wives, yea doubling and tripling the same exactions after
payment. Next, though at first they did not imprison any for simple absenting
themselves from the Curats, yet they began to fill Prisons with such as at any
time showed more than ordinary zeal against the Curats Intrusion, and testified
their dissatisfaction to his face; for which, some were imprisoned, scourged,
stigmatized, and thereafter carried to Barbados. Others, because they would
not give the Prelates their Title of Lords, when conveened before them were also
scourged: And one Minister seized for Preaching, and offending the Prelates by
the same fault, was carried first to the Thieves hole, laid in irons in company
with a Madman, and then banished to Shetland, the coldest and wildest of all
the Scots Islands.

3. But when fining would not do, and still the People were more averse from
the Curats, by getting some times occasions of hearing their oun Ministers in
private: Hence were houses forced and searched, many hailed to Prisons, and
several necessitate to escape at windows with the hazard of their lives; spies
sent unto and set in suspected places, to seize and fall upon such as they
found at such Meetings, or but suspected to have been there. Whence it came to
pass, that many both men and women, young and old, have been dragged to
Prisons, and there closs kept as Malefactors, besides several other
outrageous and illegal Acts of violence and oppression committed against them,
contrare to all Law, Equity, and Conscience.

4. After Pentland defeat, they ruled by rage more than either Law or Reason.
There 40. Prisoners who were taken upon quarter, and solemn Parol to have their
life spared, yet treacherously and bloodily were all hanged (except 5. that
were reprieved) who had much of the Lords presence at their deaths, and
assurance of His love, strengthening them to seal a Noble Testimony. One of
them a much honored young Minister, only for having a sword about him though
not present at the fight, did first most patiently endure the cruel Torture of
the Boots (a Cruel Engine of Iron, whereby with wedges the Leg is tortured
until the marrow come out of the bone) and afterward death, with great Courage
and Constancy. Upon the Scaffold, at their execution, they then began that
barbarity never practiced in Scotland before, but frequently and al most
always at all the executions since, to beat Drums that they might not be
heard. After this Conflict, many were forefaulted of their Estates, and
intercommuned, with inhibition to all to reset, conceal, or correspond with any
that had escaped, under the pain of being accounted guilty of the same
Rebellion, as they called it. Soldiers are permitted to take free quarter in
the Country, and Licensed to all the abuses that either Rapine or Cruelty may
suggest; to examine men by tortures, threatnening to kill or roast alive, all
that would not delate all they knew was accessory to that Rising; To strip them
who did so much as resett the fugitives, and thrust them into Prisons in cold,
hunger and nakedness, and crowd them so with numbers, that they could scarce
stand together, having the miseries of their oun excrements superadded; yea to
m^rther without process such as would not, nay could not, discover those
persecuted People. But not only time but heart and tongue would fail, to relate
all the Violences and Insolences, the stobbings, woundings, stripping and
impriso^ings of menspersons, violent breaking of their houses both by day and
night, beatings of Wives and Children, ravishings of women, forcings of them by
fire Matches and other tortures, to discover their husbands and nearest
relations, although not within the compass of their knowledge, and driving away
all their goods that can be carried away, without respect to guilt or
innocence, and all the Cruelties* that were exercised without a check by these
Ruffians at that time.

II. After all these tender Mercies and Clemencies or Cruelties, which his
Gracious Maj. was pleased to confer or commit upon these poor Contenders for
Religion and Liberty; he and his Cabal the Council, thought it not enough to
suppress them with Oppressions and force, distrusting the Authority of his Law
(that he knew the People would no more observe, than he would observe a promise
or Oath) and diffiding also the Authority of his sword, which he had above
their heads; he proposes terms of bargaining with them, whereupon he would
suffer them to live, and to which he would have them bound to live according to
his Prescript: Therefore, besides the old Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy
that were still going among hands, he caused coin New Ones to keep the Peace,
and to live Orderly, meaning to conform themselves to the Disorders of the
times. Whereby, after he had wrought such destruction to their Bodies and
Estates, and almost nothing was left them but a bit of a Conscience, he would
rob them of that too; verifying the Constant Character of the wicked, They only
consult to cast a man down from his excellency: What is a man's excellency but a
good Conscience? But these men, having feared Consciences of their oun not
capable of any impression, they presume to impose upon all others, and cannot
endure so much as to hear of the Name of Conscience in the Country, except it
be when it is baffled in the belchings of beastly mouths. As one, that was well
acquaint with he Councils humor in this point, told a Gentleman that was going
before them. To have one of these Oaths imposed upon him, who was before hand
signifying his Scruples that he could not do such things in Conscience;
Conscience (said he) I beseech you whatever you do, speak nothing of Conscience
before the Lords, far they cannot abide to hear that word. Therefore it is,
that since this last Revolution there have been more Conscience-debauching and
ensnaring Oaths invented and imposed, and some repugnant and contradictory to
others, than ever was in any Nation in the World in so short a time. And hereby
they have had woeful success in their designs, involving the generality of the
Land in the sin of Perjurie and false swearing with themselves. And it has
been observed, that scarcely have they let on year pass without imposing some
Oaths or Bonds upon Presbyterians; Such always as are unlawful to take, yea
and impossible to keep, sometimes more obviously gross, some times more
seemingly smooth, sometimes tendered more generally through the Kingdom,
sometimes imposed upon particular Shires; And these carried on sometimes by
Craft and Cunning, sometimes by Force and Cruelty. Doubtless it is not the
least part of their design, hereby to make Oaths and Bonds become a trivial and
common thing, and by making all men of as Capacious Consciences as themselves.

2. Further they never ceased to express their fear of another Rising (their
guilty Consciences dictating that they deserved greater opposition) Hence, to
secure themselves and incapacitate the People from further Attempts of that
nature, they order all Withdrawers from Churches, all who did not join to
suppress the Lords People, to deliver up their Arms betuixt and such a day,
and not keep a horse above such a very mean price, unfit for service.

3. When force could not do the business then they try flatteries; and hence
Contrive that wicked Indulgence to divide and distroy the Ministers that
remained, and to suppress Meetings. But when this bait so well busked could not
catch all, but still there were Meetings for administering the Ordinances; their
flattery turns to fury, and the Acceptance of that Indulgence by some, and
despising of it by others, did both animate and instigate them unto a following
forth of their design, by all the Cruel Acts and bloody executions. And hereby
the residue of the Faithful of the Land were exposed unto their rage, while the
Indulged became Interpretatively guilt of, and accessorie to all the Cruelties
used and executed upon Ministers and Professors, for adhering unto that way.
Hence it was common at private and peaceable Meetings when, without Arms of
defense, they were disturbed by Soldiers, and exposed to all manner of
villainous violence, some being dragged to Prisons, some banished and sold to
French Captains to be transported with Rascals, many intercommuned and driven
from their Dwellings and Relations, Great sums of money were proferred to any
that would bring in severa^ of the most eminent Ministers, either dead or
alive; yea several at several times were killed, and others cruelly handled:
All which for several years they patiently endured without Resistance. But
especially, when not only they were driven to the fields to keep their Meetings
in all weathers, Summer and Winter, but necessitate to meet with Arms, then
they raised more Troops of horse and Dragoons to pursue them with all rage, as
Traitors and Rebels. Hence what pursuings, hornings, huntings, hidings,
wanderings through Mountains and Moors, and all Kinds of Afflictions, the
People of God then met with, because of their following that necessary and
signally blessed Duty; All the Lands Inhabitants know, the Jaylors can witness
to this day, and the barbarous Soldiers, bloody Executioners of the Commands
of their enraged Masters, having orders to wound and kill and apprehend all
they could take at these Meetings, or on the way suspected to be going to or
coming from them, having encouragment to apprehend some Ministers, and bring
them dead or alive, by the promise of two thousand Merks, others valued at one
thousand, and several Professors also with prices put upon their heads. Hence
others that were taken of them were sent into the Bass, a Dry and Cold Rock in
the Sea, where they had no fresh water, nor any provision but what they had
brought many miles from the Country, and when they got it, it would not keep
unspoiled. And others, both Ministers and many hundreds of Professors, were
outlawed; whereby all the Subjects were prohibited to reset, supply,
intercommune with any of them, or to correspond with them by word writ, or
message, or furnish them with meat, drink, house, harbor, victual, or any
other thing useful under the highest pains. Hence also Prisons were filled: And
the Wives and Children of the Outed Ministers, that were come to Edinburgh for
shelter, were commanded to dislodge, within a short day prefixed, under the
pain of being forcibly shut up or dragged out. For which and other such uses,
to apprehend and seize on Meetings, a Major was appointed in Edinburgh, with
command over the town Guards, and a good Salarie for that end. Then Prisons
being filled, they were emptied to make room for others in Ships, to be taken
away to be sold for Slaves, in one of which were sent to Virginia above 60 men,
some Ministers; who, through the kindness and Sympathy of some English Godly
People, were relieved at London. A greater Barbarity not to be fonnd, in the
Reigns of Caligul^ or Nero.

4. But all this is nothing to what followed: when, thinking these bloodhounds
were too favorable, they brought down from the Wild Highlands a host of
Savages upon the western Shires, more terrible than Turks or Turtars, men who
feared not God nor regarded man; And being also poor pitiful Skybalds, they
thought they had come to a brave world, to waste and destroy a plentiful
Country, which they resolved before they left it to make as bare as their oun.
This hellish Crew was adduced to work a Reformation, Like the French
Conversions, to press a Band of Conformity, wherein every Subscriber was bound
for himself and all under him, wife, Children, Servants, Tenants, to frequent
their Paroch-Churches, and never to go to these Meetings, nor reset nor
intertain any that went, but to inform against, pursue, and deliver up all
vagrant Preachers as they called them, to t^yal and Judgment. Which they
prosecuted with that rigor and restless boundless rage, that the Children then
unborn and their pitiful Mothers do lament the memory, of that day, for the
loss of their fathers and husbands. Many ho^ses and families then were left
desolate in a winter flight, many lost their Cattle and Horses, and some in
seeking to recover them lost their lives, by the Sword of these Burrio's. So
that it was too evident, both by what orders was given, the severitie of
prosecuting, and the expressions of some great ones since, that nothing less
than the utter ruin and desolation of these Shires was consulted and concluded,
and that expedition at that time calculated for that end; for what else can be
imagined could induce to the raising 10, or 11000 barbarous Savages the joining
them to the standing forces, and with such cruel orders the directing them all
to the West; where there was not one person moving the finger against them;
neither could they pretend any quarrel, If it was not the faithfulness of the
People there in their Covenanted Religion, and their hoplessness of complying
to their Popish and Tyrannical designs, and therefore no course so feasible as
to destroy them; So for dispatching thereof, order is given forth that
whosoever refuses to subscribe that Hell-hatched bond, must instantly have 10,
20, 30, 40, more or fewer according to his condition as he is poorer or richer,
of these new Reformers sent to him, to ly not only upon free Quarters to eat up
and destroy what they pleased, but also (for the more speedy expedition)
ordered to take a six pence for each common Soldier a day, and the Officers
more, according to their degrees, and so to remain till either the bond was
subscribed, or all destroyed; Nor was these Trusties deficient to further their
purposes in prosecuting their orders, Who coming to their Quarters used
ordinarily to produce a Billgate for near to as many more as came, and for these
absents they must have double money, because their Landlord was not burdened
with their maintenance, and where that was refused would take the readiest
goods, and if any thing remained not destroyed and plundered at their
removeing, which was not transportible, rather then the owner should get any
good of it, they would in some places set fire to it, as they did with the
Corn-stacks. It would require several great volumes to record the many
instances of horrid Barbarities, Bloods, and Villainies of that wicked
expedition, so that what by free Quarterings, Exactions, Robberies, Thifts,
Plunderings and other acts of Violence and Cruelty, many places was ruined
almost to desolation, all which the faithful choosed rather to suffer, than to
sin in complying: and albeit their oppression was exceeding lamentable, and
their loss great, yet that of the complyers was greater and sader who lossed a
good Conscience in yielding to them, and compounding with them.

5 Then the Country behoved to pay the Soldiers for all this Service, and hire
them to do more, by paying the imposed Cess; whereby they were sharpened into a
greater keenness in Cruel executions of their Orders, returning to those places
of the Country whether they had chased the Persecuted People, who still kept
their Meetings wherever they were, though they could not attend them but upon
the hazard of being killed, either in the place (where some had their blood
mingled with their sacrifice) or fleeing, or be exposed to their dreadful
Cruelties more bitter than death. For then it was counted a greater Crime, and
punished with greater severity, for Persons to hear a faithful Minister Preach,
than to commit Murder, Incest, Adultery, or to be guilty of Witchcraft, or
Idolatry, or the grossest abominations: for these have past unpunished, when
some for their simple presence at a Meeting, have been executed unto the death.
Then also, when some were forced to flee into the English border for shelter,
there also were Parties ordered to pursue those poor hunted Partridges, who
could not find a hole to hide their head in. There we lost a valiant Champion
for Truth, and truly zealous Contender for the Interest of Christ, that
universally accomplished Gentleman and Christian, Tho. Ker of Heyhope, who was
cruelly murdered in a rancounter with a Party of the English side.

Thereafter followed that Lamentable stroke at Bothuel, where about 300 were
killed on the field, and about 10. or 1100 taken Prisoners, and stripped, and
brought into Edinburgh in a merciless manner. After which, first two faithful
and painful Ministers and Witnesses of Christ, Mr John Kid and Mr John King,
received the Croun of Martyrdom, sealling that Testimony with their blood, and
many others after them for the same Cause. Then the Enemy, after the manner
used before, first to wound our head and then put on a hood upon it (as they
have done always after a Mischief, and intending a greater) offered their Bond
of peace, on terms that clearly condemned the Cause, never to rise in arms
against the King etc. by which bond, many of the Prisoners, after they had lain
several weeks in a Churchyard, without the shadow of a house to cover them
night and day, were Liberate: And many of the rest, by the persuasion of some
Ministers, at whose door their blood lied as well as at the Enemies, took that
bond; and yet were sent away with others that did not take it, in a Ship bound
for America between, 2. and 300. in all, who were all murdered in the Ship,
being shut up under the hatches, when it split upon a rock in the North of
Scotland, except about 50 persons; whereof many to this day are Living
Witnesses of such a Cruelty.

III. Hitherto only the Common Rules and Rudiments of the Art of Persecution
were put in practice, exactly quadrating with the Rules of Adam (...) the (...)
for introducing of Popery, in his Polit. Lib. 2. Cap. ^8. which are, (1) To
proceed as Musicians do, in tuning the^^ Instruments gradually. (2) To press
the examples of some eminent men to draw on the rest. (3) To banish all Arch
Heretics at once (that is the most zealous Witnesses of Christ) or at least
with all expedition by degrees. (4) To put them out of all power and trust, and
put in friends to the Catholic Interest. (5) To load the Protestant Opinions,
as are most obnoxious, with all odious Constructions. (6) To discharge all
Private Conventieles* (7) To (...) and execute rigorous Laws against the most
dangerous. (8) To foment all quarrels among Prote^^^^ts, and strengthen the
Party that is ready to comply. (...), and many other of a deeper Projection and
greater ^erfection, were fallen upon afterward, equalling^ the most
mischievous Machins of Spanish Inquisition; (...) the Methods that effectuated
the desolation of the Church of (...), that were exactly followed, as they are
related in Clarks Martyrology. Especially the last of Cantzens Rules was
industriously observed, in the Device of the Indulgences both before and after
Bothwel; which contributed more to the rending and ruining the Remnant, (...)
expose the Faithful to rage and cruelty, than any thing for when by these
ensnaring favors many were drawn away from their duty, the rest that
maintained it, and kept (...) the Testimony; were both the more easily preyed
upon; and more cruelly insulted over. Hence the few Field-Meetings that were
kept, were more fiercely pursued after Bothwel than the many before, and more
cruel Laws were made against them, and more bloody executions, than I can find
words to express in short. But in a word, no Party of T^rtars invading the
Land, or Crew of Cutthroats destroying the Inhabitants, or the most Capital
Malefactors, could have been more violently opposed, or more vigorously sought
to be suppressed, than these poor Meeters were. But I must make some more
special hints.

1. They not only raised more forces to exhaust the strength and substance of
the already wasted Country, and laid on and continued from one term to another
that wicked exaction and cruel oppression of the Cess, for the same declared
ends of suppressing and banishing what remained of the Gospel, and imposed
Localities for maintaining the Soldiers employed in those designs; for
refusing which many families were pillaged, plundered, and quite impoverished,
besides the heating and abusing them: But also they went on unweariedly with
their Courts of Inquisition, pressing the Bonds of peace, and dragging them
like dogs to Prisons that would not subscribe them, And for taking up in their
Porteous Rolls the names of all that were suspect to have been at (...)
In^urection; which they gathered by the Informations of ^^^cophants, and
reputed them convict if being (...) they did not appear, and forced others to
swear (...), and delate upon Oath whom they did either ^ee or heard that they
were in arms, or went to Meetings. And such as refused suffered bonds or
banishment. Yea, having made it Criminal to reset, harbor, corrospond or
converse with these whom they declared Rebels, they thereupon imprisoned,
fined, and ruined vast numbers, (...) having seen or spoken with some of them,
or because they did not discover or apprehend them when they (...) they might,
and even when they were not obliged and could not know whether they were
ob^o^ious persons or not: for which many Gentlemen and others were Indy^ed and
imprisoned, and so^e arraigned and condemned to death. For these Causes, the
Country (...) harrassed and destroyed by four extraordinary Circuit (...)
successively going about with their numerous train^^ whereby many were
grievously oppressed, and with their oppressions tempted with many Impositions
of Conscience debauching Oaths, and Bonds to compear when called, and to keep
the Church, and to refrain from going to Meetings etc. and by these tentations
involved in Complyances and Defections.

2. To enrich themselves by these means with the spoil of the Country did not
satisfy these Destroyers; but they must glut themselves with the blood of the
Saints, upon every pretext that they could catch, under any color of Law. As
upon the account of Bothwel Insurrection, many were cruelly executed to the
death, some Gentlemen, and some Common Country men, without any Legal
Conviction, by packing bloody Juries and Assizes most partially for their
Murdering ends, besides more than can be reckoned that were kept to perish in
their imprisonments. And not only for being actually in arms, or any overt act
of transgressing their wicked Laws, but even for their extorted opinion of
things, or because they could not condemn these necessitated Risings in arms
to be Rebellion and a sin against God, which they were forced to declare by
terrible menacings of death and torture, they have been condemned to death;
making their arbitrary Laws to reach the heart, thoughts, and inward
sentiments of the mind, as well as outward actions. Whereupon this became a
Criminal question robbing many of their Lives, Was the rising at Bothwel-bridge
Rebellion and a sin against God? And this another, Was the killing of the
Bishop of St Andrews horrid Murder? which if any answered negatively, or did
not answer affirmatively, they were cruelly condemned to death: for which first
five innocent Christians were execute upon the spot, where that Murderer fell.
Tho they declared, and it was known, they were as free as the Child unborn, and
that some of them had never seen a Bishop that they knew from another man, and
were never in that place of the Country where he was killed. And afterward
this was the constant question that all brought before them were troubled with,
which some avouching to be duty were dismembered alive, their hands struck off,
and then hanged, and their heads cut off when dead.

3. After Sanquhair Declaration, they observed the Jesuits rules more exactly,
especially that mentioned above to load the Opinions as are most obnoxious with
all odious Constructions, and to make it both Criminal to declare them, and
also Criminal to conceal and wave their intrapping questions thereupon. For
after Mr Hal^ was killed at the Queensferrie, and Mr Cameron with several
worthies were slain at Airsmoss, and after Mr Hackstoun for declining the
Authority of his Murderers, head and tail, and for being accessory to executing
Judgment upon the Arch-traitor or Archbishop of St Andrews (tho he laid not
his hands on him himself, nor was present at the action, but at a distance when
it was done) was tortured alive, with the cuting off of his hands, and then
hanged, and before he was dead ripped up, his heart taken out, carried about on
the point of a knife and throun into a fire, and afterward his body quartered.
Then, not only such as were with that little handful at Airsmoss were cruelly
murdered, but others against whom they could charge no matter of fact, were
questioned if they ouned the Kings Authority? which if any did not Answer
affirmatively and positively, he was to look for nothing but exquisite torments
by terrible kinds of tortures, and death besides. And if any declared their
judgment, that they could not in Conscience oune such Authority as was then
exercised; or if they declined to give their thoughts of it, as judging
thoughts to be under no humane jurisdiction; or if they answered with such
innocent specifications as these, that they ouned all Authority in the Lord, or
for the Lord, or according to the Word of God, or all just and Lawful
Authority, these under-went and suffered the Capital punishment of Treason. And
yet both for declining and declaring their extorted Answers about this, they
were condemned as unsufferable Maintainers of Principles inconsistent with
Government.

4. But here, as in Egypt, the more they were afflicted the more they grew, the
more that the Enem^es rage was increased the more were the People inflamed to
inquire about the Grounds of their Suffering, seeing rational men and Religious
Christians die so resolutely upon them; And the more they insisted in this
Inquisition, the more did the number of Witnesses multiply, with a growing
increase undauntedness, so that the then shed blood of the Martyrs became the
seed of the Church, and as by hearing and seeing them so signally countenanced
of the Lord many were reclaimed from their Courses of Compliance, so others
were daily more and more, confirmed in the ways of the Lord, and so
strengthened by His Grace that they choose rather to endure all Torture, and
embrace death in its most terrible aspect, than to give the Tyrant and his
Accomplices any acknowledgment: yea not so much as to say, God save the King,
which was offered as the price of their life, and Test of their acknowledgment,
but they would not accept Deliverance on these terms, that they might obtain a
better Resurrection. Which so enraged the Tygrish Truculency of these
Persecuters, that they spared neither age, sex, nor Profession: the tenderness
of youth did not move them to any relenting, in murdering very boys upon this
head, nor the gray hairs of the aged; neither were women spared, but some were
hanged, some drouned, tied to Stakes within the Sea-mark, to be devoured
gradually with the growing waves, and some of them of a very young, some of an
old age. Especially after the murder of the never to be forgotten Martyr, Mr
Cargil, the multitude of merciless Sufferings upon this account cannot be
enumerated; which increased far beyond all the former steps, after the Lanerk
Declaration, which was burnt with great Solemnity by the Magistrates of
Edinburgh in their robes, together with the Solemn League and Covenant, which
had been burnt before, but then they would more declaredly give new
demonstrastrations of their rage against it, because they confessed and were
convinced of its being conform unto and founded upon that Covenant. And
because the Incorporation of Lanerk did not, because they could not, hinder the
publishing of it, therefore they were threatened with the loss of their
Privileges and forced to pay 6000 Merks. Upon the back of which, the
Sufferings of poor People that ouned the Testimony were sadder and sharper, and
further extended than ever: Some being banished for Soldiers to Flanders, etc.
some to be sold as Slaves in Carolina, and other Places in America, to empty
the filled Prisons and make room for more ^ which were daily brought in from
all quarters, and either kept languishing in their ^asty Prisons, or Thiefes
holes, in bolts and irons to make them weary of their life, or dispatched as
Sacrifices and led as dumb Sheep to the slaughter, without suffering them to
speak their dying words, for beating of Drums, or disposed of to Masters of
Ships to be transported in Slaverie.

5. Had they satisfied themselves with murdering them out of hand, it would
have been more tolerable, and reckoned some degree of mercy, in comparison of
their malice; which, after all their endeavors to murder their Souls, by
ensnaring Offers, enslaving Bonds, blasphemous and contradictory Oaths, and
multiplying captious Questions to catch the Conscience, or at least vex the
Spirits of the Righteous, whom they could not prevail with to put forth their
hands into iniquity, did proceed to invent all exquisite torments more terrible
than death. Some at their first apprehending were tortured with Fire-matches,
burning and for ever thereafter disabling their hands: Then laid fast and
locked up in great Irons upon their legs, where they lay many Months in the
cold of winter, without any relaxation. Some were tortured with the Boots,
squeezing out the marrow of their legs: Others with Thumbkins, piercing and
bruising the bones of their thumbs: And some tormented with both one after
another, and besides kept waking nine nights together by watchful Soldiers.
who were sworn not to let the afflicted person sleep all that time.

6. All this Tyranny had been the more tolerable, if they had kept within any
bounds of colorable or pretended shadow of legality, or in any consonancy to
their oun wicked Laws, or exemplars of any former Persecutions. But in an
ambition to outdo all the Nero's, Domitians, Dioclesians, Duke d' Alva's, or
Lewis de Grands, they scorned all forms as well as Justice of Law, and set up
monstrous Monuments of unprecedented illegalitie and inhumanitie. For when,
after all their hornings, harrass^ngs, huntings, searchings, chasings,
catchings, imprisonments, torturings, banishments, and effusions of blood, yet
they could not get the Meetings crushed, either in public or private, nor the
zeal of the poor Wanderers quenched, with whom they had interdicted all
harbor, supply, comfort, refreshment, converse or corrospondence, and whom
they had driven out of their oun and all other habitations, in Touns, Villages,
or Cottages, to the Deserts, Mountains, Moors, and Mosses, in whose hags and
holes they were forced to make Dens and Caves to hide themselves, but that they
would still meet for the Worship of God, either in Public (though mostly in
the cold winter nights) or in their Private fellowships for Prayer and
Conference; and to rescue their Brethren, and prevent their Murder in these
extremities, would surprise and take advantages of the Soldiers now and then:
They then raged beyond all bounds, and not only apprehending many innocent
persons (against whom they had nothing to accuse them of, but because they
could not satisfy them in their Answers) sentenced, and executed them, all in
one day, and made an Act to do so with all; but allowed the bloody Soldiers to
murder them, without either Trial or Sentence. Especially after the
Apologetical Declaration, affixed on the Church-doors, they acted with an
unheard of Arbitrariness. For not only did they frame an Oath of Abjuration,
renouncing the same; but pressed it universally upon pain of death, upon all
men and women in City and Country, and went from house to house forcing young
and old to give their judgment of that Declaration, and of the Kings Authority
etc. to ridicule and reproach and make a Ludibrum of all Government: yea
empowered Soldiers, and common Varlets, to impannel Juries, condemn and cause
to be put to death innocent Recusants, and having stopped all Travel and Commerce
without a Pass, signifying they had taken that Oath, they gave power to all
Hostlers and Innkeepers to impose Oaths, upon all Passengers, Travelers,
Gentlemen or Countrymen, who were to swear that their Pass was not forged. And
Prisoners that would not take the Oath, were according to the foresaid Act
condemned, sentenced, and execute, all in one day, and early in the morning,
that the People might not be affected with the Spectacles of their bloody
Severities. Yea Spectators also, that gathered to see the execution, were
imposed upon, and commanded to give their judgment, whether these men were
justly put to death or not. And not only so, but after that, they gave Orders
and Commands to to the Soldiers to pursue the chase after these Wanderers more
violently, and shoot or other wise put them to death wherever they could
apprehend them: Whereby many were taken and instantly most inhumanely murdered.

IV. In the beginning of this killing time, as the Country calls it; the first
Author and Authorizer of all these Mischiefs, Charles II. was removed by death.
Then one would have thought, the Severity would have stopped: And the Duke of
York succeding, in his late Proclamation would make the world believe, that it
never was his principle, nor will he ever suffer violence to be offered to any
man's Conscience, nor use force or invincible necessity against any man on the
account of his persuasion; Smooth words, to cover the mischiefs of his former
Destructions, and the wickedness of his future designs. To which, his former
celebrated saying, that it would never be well till all the south-syd of Forth
were made a hunting-field, and his acts and actings designed to ve^ify it,
since his unhappy succession, do give the lie. For immediately upon his mounting
the Throne, the executions and Acts prosecuting the Persecution of the poor
Wanderers, were more Cruel than ever.

1. There were more butchered and slaughtered in the fields, without all shadow
of Law, or Trial, or Sentence, than in all the former Tyrants reign; who were
murdered without time given to deliberate upon death, or space to conclude
their Prayers, but either in the instant when they were Praying shooting them
to death, or surprising them in their Caves, and murdering them there, without
any grant of Prayer at all; Yea many of them murdered without taking notice of
any thing to be laid against them, according to the worst of their oun Laws,
but slain and cut off without any pity, when they were found at their labor in
the field, or traveling upon the road. And such as were Prisoners were
condemned for ^e^using to take the Oath of Abjuration, and to oune the
Authority, and surprised with their execution, not knowing certainly the time
when it should be, yea leff in suspense whether it should be or not, as if it
had been on design to destroy both their Souls and Bodies. Yea Queens^errie had
the impudence to express his desire of it, when some went to solicit him,
being then Commissioner, for a Reprieval in favors of some of them, he told
them, they should not have time to prepare for Heaven, hell was too good for
them.

2. There have been more banished to foreign Plantations in this man's time,
than in the others. Within these two years, several shipfulls of honest and
Conscientious Sufferers have been sent to Iamacia (to which before they were
sent, some had their ears cut) New Ieresey, and Barbados, in such Crowds and
Numbers, that many have died in transportation; as many also died before in
their pinching Prisons, so thronged that they had neither room to lie nor sit.
Particularly the Barbarous usage of a great multitude of them that were sent to
Denotter Castle, when there was no room for them in Edinburgh, is never to be
forgotten; which the wildest and rudest of Savages would have thought shame of.
They were all that long way made to travel on foot, men and women, and some of
both sexes, very infirm and decrepite through age, and several sick, guarded
by bonds of Soldiers, And then put in to an old ruinous and rusty house, and
shut up under vauts above 80 in a room, men and women, without air, without
ease, without place, either to lie, or walk, and without any Comfort save what
they had from Heaven, and so straitened for want of refreshment which they
could not have but at exorbitant prices inconsistent with their poor empty
purses, and so suffocated with the smell of the place, and of their oun
excrements, that as several of them died, so it was a wonder of Mercy that any
of them could outlive that Misery: Yet there they remained some months, at a
distance from all their friends, being sent thither to that Northern Corner out
of the South and West borders of the Country; and some out of London. Whose
transportation hither, if it were not a part of this Tragical Story, would seem
a merry and ridiculous passage to Strangers discovering the ridiculous folly as
well as the outrageous fury of their Persecuters. For at a Private Meeting in
London, among others some Scotchmen, of very mean figure, some Tailors, a
Shoemaker, a Chap man etc. were taken, and being found to be Scotchmen, were
not only examined at the Common Courts there but by Sir Andrew Foster, by
express Commission from the late King a little before his death; who threatened
them under a strange sort of Certification (considering what fell out
immediately thereafter) that assuredly they should be sent to Scotland very
shortly, if there were not a Revolution of the Government. But this Revolution
following within a few days retarded it a little: yet not long thereafter they
were sent in a Yacht, with a Guard of Soldiers, and a Charge of high Treason.
But when brought before the Council of Scotland, the amount of all that ^ussle
with them was, a Question posed to them under pain of death, whether the King
should be King or no? that is, wheither they ouned his Authority or not. Yet
tho some of the poor men did oune it, they were sent to Denotter Castle: And
thence among the rest banished and transported to New Iersey; in which passage,
by reason of their Crowd and bad provision, the most part in the ship were cast
into a fever, and upwards of 60 died yea even since the former Proclamation for
this pretended Liberty, there are 21. men and 5. women sent to Barbados
against whom nothing could be a^ledged but matters of mere Religion and
Conscience: which, as it Proclaims the Notoriousness of these impudent lies
wherewith the Proclamations for this Liberty are stuffed; So it puts an
indeleble brand of infamy upon some L^ndon Merchants, that are said to pretend
to some profession of Religion, who sent the ship to transport them, thereby to
make gain of the merchandise of the Lords Captives.

3. There have been more Cruel Acts of Parliament enacted in this Tyrants time,
than the former made all his reign. For in his first Parliament held by
Queensberrie Commissioner, not only was there an Act for making it Treason to
refuse the Oath of Abjuration, confirming all the illegalities of their
Procedure hereupon before; but an Act making it Criminal to oune the Covenant,
and another Act making it Criminal for any to be present at a Field Meeting,
which was only so to Preachers before. Yet neither these Acts, and all the
executions following upon them, have daunted, nor I hope shall drive them, nor
the Indemnity and Toleration (so generally now applauded) draw them from the
Duty of ouning both these, that are so much the more Publicly to be avouched,
that they are so openly interdicted by wicked and blasphemous Tranny, though
for the same they expect from the Scottish Inquisition all the murdering
violence, that hell and Rome and Malignant rage can exert.

But to conclude this Tragical Deduction: As these hints we have heaped
together of the Kinds and several sorts (the Particulars being impossible to be
reckoned) of barbarities and arbitrary Methods, used in carrying on this
Persecution, demonstrating the reign or rather rage of these two Dominators,
under which we have houled these 27, years, to be a Complete and habitual
Tyranny, do discover the inhumanity and illegality of their Proceedings, having
no other Precedent save that of the French Conversions, or Spanish Inquisition,
out done by many stages in respect of Illegality by the Scottish Inquisition,
and the Practices of the Council of Scotland, and Iusticiary Court; So I shall
shut up all in a summarie Relation, of the Common Practicks and forms of
Procedure in these Courts: which will be useful to understand a little more
distinctly, to the end the Innocence of Sufferers may more clearly appear. 1.
They can accuse whom they will, of what they please; And if by summar Citation,
he will not, may be because he cannot, compear, if once his Name be in their
Porteous rolls, that is sufficient to render him convict. 2. They used also to
seize some, and shut them up in Prison year and day, without any signification
of the cause of their imprisonment. 3. They can pick any man off the Street,
and if he do not answer their Captious Questions, proceed against him to the
utmost of severity; as they have taken some among the Crowd at Executions, and
imposed upon them the Questions. 4. They can also go through all the houses of
the City, as well as the Prisons, and examine all families upon the Questions
of the Councils Catechism, upon the hazard of their life; if they do not
answer to their satisfaction, as has been done in Edinburgh. 5. When any are
brought in by Seizure, sometimes (as is said before) they let them lie long
without any hearing, if they expect they cannot reach them: But if they think
they can win at them any way, then they hurry them in such have, that they have
no time to deliberate upon, and oftentimes have no knowledge or conjecture of,
the matter of their Prosecution. Yea if they be never so insignificant, they
will take Diversion from their weightiest affairs, to examine and take
Cognizance of poor Things, if they understand they dare vent or avow any
respect to the Cause of Christ: And the silliest body will not escape their
Catechization, about affairs of State, what they think of the Authority etc. 6.
If they be kept in Prison any space, they take all ways to pump and discover
what can be brought in against them: Yea sometimes they have exactly observed
that Device of the Spanish Inquisition, in suborning and sending Flies among
them, under the disguise and show of Prisoners, to search and find out their
minds, who will outstrip all in an Hypocritical zeal, thereby to extort and
draw forth words from the most wary, which may be brought in judgment against
them the next day. 7. When Prisoners are brought in before them, they have
neither Lybel nor Accuser, but must answer super inquirendis, to all Questions
they are pleased to ask. 8. If at any time they form a sort of Lybel, they
will not restrict themselves to the Charges thereof, but examine the person
about other things altogether extraneous to the Lybel. 9. They have frequently
suborned Witnesses; and have sustained them as Witnesses, who either were sent
out by themselves as Spies and Inte^ligencers, or who palpably were known to
delate those against whom they witnessed out of a pick and prejudice, and yet
would not su^^er them to be cast for partial Counsel. 10. If they suppose a man
to be wary and circumspect, and more prudent than forward in the Testimony;
then they multiply questions, and at first many impertinent Interrogations,
having no Connection with the Cause, to try his humor and freedom, that they
may know how to deal with him; And renew and reiterate several Criminal
examinations, that they may know whereof, and find matter wherein, to indyte
him by endeavoring to confound, or entrap, or involve him in Confessions, or
Contradictions, by wresting his words. 11. They will admit no time for advice,
nor any Lawful defense for a delay, but will have them to answer presently,
except they have some hopes of their Compliance, and find them beginning to
stagger and succumb in the Testimony; in that case, when a man seeks time to
advise, they are animated to a keenness to impose, and encouraged to an
expectation of Catching by their snares, which then they contrive and prepare
with greater cunning. 12. If a man should answer all their questions, and clear
himself of all things they can allege against him yet they used to impose some
of the Oaths, that they concluded he would not take; and according to the
measure of the tenderness they discovered in any man, so they apportioned the
Oaths to trap them, to the Stricter the smoother Oaths, to the Laxer the more
odious, that all natural Consciences did scar at. 13. They will not only have
their Laws obeyed, but subscribed; And they reckon not their Subjects
obedience secured by the Lawmakers sanction, but the Peoples handwriting; And
think it not sufficient that People transgress no Laws, but they must also
oune the justice of them, and the Authority that enacts them, and swear to
maintain it: And yet when some have done all this, and cleared themselves by
all Complyances, they will not discharge them, but under a bond to answer again
when called. 14. They will have their Laws to reach not only actions but
thoughts, and therefore they require, what People think of the Bishops death,
and of Bothwel Insurection; And whether they oune the Authority, when they can
neither prove their disouning of it, nor any way offending it. 15. They will
have men to declare their thoughts, and hold them convict if they do not answer
Positively all their Captious questions; And if they will not tell what they
think of this or that, then they must go as guilty. 16. If they insist in
waving, and will not give Categorical Answers, then they can extort all and
prove what they please by torture: And when they have extorted their thoughts
of things, tho they be innocent as to all actions their Law can charge them
with, then they used to hang them when they had done. 17. They have wheedled
men sometimes into Confession either of Practices or Principles, by promising
to favor their ingenuity, and upbraiding them for dissemblers if they would
not, and by mock-expostulations, why were they ashamed to give a Testimony? And
then make them sign their Confessions at the Council, to bring them in as a
witness against them at the Criminal Court. 18. Yea not only extrajudicial
Confession will sustain in their Law, but when they have given the Public
faith, the Kings security, the Act and Oath of Council, that their Confesion
shall not militate against them, they have brought it in as witness against
them, and given it upon Oath, when their former Oath and Act was produced in
open Court, in demonstration of their perjurie. 19. When the matter comes to an
Assize or Cognizance of a Jury, they use to pack them for their purpose, and
pick out such as are listed, who they think will not be bloody enough. 20.
Sometimes when the Jurie has brought their verdict in favors of the Pannal,
they have made them sit down, and resume the Cognition of the Case again, and
threatened them with an Assize of error if they did not ^ring him in guilty.
21. Yea most frequently the Kings Advocate used to Command them to Condemn and
bring in the Pannal Guilty, under most peremptory Certification; of punishment
if they should not; so that they needed ^o Juries but only for the fashion. 22.
Sometimes they have sentenced innocent persons twice, once to have their ears
cut and be banished, and after the lopping of their ears, some have been
re-examined and Sentenced to death, and execute. 23. They have Sentenced some
and hanged them both in one day; Others early in the morning, both to surprise
the persons that were to die, and to prevent Spectators of the sight of their
Cruelty; Others have been kept in suspense, till the very day and hour of their
execution. 24. Not only have they murdered serious and zealous Followers of
Christ, in taking away their Lives, but endeavored to murder their Names, and
to murder the Cause for which they suffered; loading it with all Reproaches, as
Sedition and Rebellion etc. which was their peculiar Policy, to bring the Heads
of Sufferings to Points that are most obnoxious to men's Censure, and accounted
most extrinsick to Religion, whereby they levelled their-designs against
Religion, not directly under that notion, but obliquely in the destruction of
its Professors, under the odium and reproach of enemies to Government. 25. But
chiefly they labor to murder the Soul, defile the Conscience, and only consult
to cast a man down from his excellency, which is his integrity; that is a
Christians Croun, and that they would rather rob him of as any thing, either by
hectoring or flattering him from the Testimony! which they endeavor by
proposing many offers, with many threatenings in subtle terms; And pretend a
great deal of tenderness, protesting they will be as tender of their blood as
of their oun Soul (which in some sense is true, for they have none at all of
their oun Souls) and purging themselves as Pilate did, and charging it upon
their oun head. 26. They will be very easy in their Accommodations, where they
find the poor man beginning to faint, and hearken to their overtures wherein
they will grant him his life, yielding to him as cunning Anglers do with
Fishes: And to persuade him to some length in complying, they will offer
Conference sometimes or reasoning upon the Point, to satisfy and inform his
Conscience, as they pretend, but really to catch him with their busked hook.
27. If they have any hope of prevailing they will change a man's Prison, and
take him out from among the more strict and fervent in the Cause, that might
sharpen and strenghen his zeal, and put him in among the more cool and remiss.
28. Sometimes they used to stage several together, whereof they knew some would
Comply, to Tantalize the rest with the sight of the others Liberty, and make
them byte the more eagerly at their bait to catch the Conscience. But when they
had done all they could; Christ had many Witnesses, who did retain the Croun of
their Testimony in the smallest Points, till they obtained the Croun of
Martyrdom, and attained to the Croun of Glory, Speaking boldly to them without
fear or shame, and disdaining their flattering Proposals, but looking on them
under a right notion as stated there in opposition to Christ; whereby they
found this Advantage, that hence they were restrained from all sinful tampering
with them, or intertaining any discourse with them, but what was suitable to
speak to Christ's enemies, or doing any thing to save their life but what became
Christ's Witnesses, who loved not their lives unto the death. Of whom
universally this was observed, that to the Admiration of all, the Conviction of
many enemies, the Confirmation of many friends, the Establishment of the Cause,
and the Glory of their Redeeme^, they went off the stage with so much of the
Lords Coun^enance, so much Assurance of Pardon and Eternal Peace, so much hope
of the Lords returning to Revive His Work and Plead His Cause again in these
Lands, that never any suffered with more meekness, humility, and composure of
Spirit, and with more faithfulness, stedfastness, and resolution, than these
Worthies did for these despised and reproached Truths: for which their
surviving Brethren are now Contending and Suffering, while others are at ease.

PART. III.
THE PRESENT TESTIMONY Stated and Vindicated in its Principal Heads.
BY what is above premitted, the Reader may see the Series and Succession of
the Testimony of Christ's Witnesses in Scotland from time to time, in all the
Periods of that Church; how it has been transmitted from one generation to
another Down to our hands; how far it has been extended; and what Increments
it has received in every Period; how it has been opposed by a Continued
Prosecution of an hereditary War against Christ, by an Atheistical, Papistical,
Prelatical, and Tyrannical faction; and how it has been concerted, contended
for, maintained, and sealed actively and passively, by an Anti-pagan,
Anti-Popish, Anti-Prelatical, Anti-Erastian, Anti-Sectarian, and
Anti-Tyrannical Remnant of the Followers, Professors, Confessors, and Martyrs
of Christ in all Ages. Now it remains in the third and last Place to consider
the Merit of the Cause as it is now Stated, to see whether it will bear the
weight of those great Sufferings wherewith it has been sealed. I hope all the
Lovers of Christ, who have an estee^. ^ven of His reproaches above all the
Treasures of Egypt; will grant that if these sufferings be Stated on the least
or lowest of the Truths of Christ's, then they are not Misstated, no^ built upon
a bottom that will not bear them, or is not of that worth to sustain them. For
Certainly every Truth, the least of Truths, is of greater value than any thing
that we can suffer the loss of for it, yea of infinitely greater value than the
whole world. So that if I prove these Heads of Suffering to be Truths, wherein
Conscience is concerned, the Cause will be sufficiently vindicated from the
loadings and lashings of such as prefer Peace to Truth. and ease to duty, who
to Justify their oun backwardness and detastable lukwarmness call some of them
only State questions about things Civil, and not Gospel Truths and Heads to
State suffering upon: And if they be Truths and Duties, the Cause will some way
be rendered more Illustrious, that it is Stated upon the smallest hoofs and
hair-breadths of the Concerns of Christ's Declarative Glory; as being a greater
witness of its Ouners Love and Loyalty to Christ, and of their pure and tender
zeal for His honor, than if for more substantial and fundamental Truths, which
a Natural Conscience may reclaim to Decline, when for the meanest
Circumstantials of Christ's Truths they dare and are ambitious to bestow their
dearest blood. But if the Complexe of them be impartially Considered, no
unprejudiced Arbiter will suffer himself to have such extenuating Impressions
of the present Word of Patience, and Testimony of the suffering Remant in
Scotland this day: But it will appear to be a very weighty and worthy Concern,
as any that either Men or Christians can be called to Witness for; being the
Privilege of all mankind, the Duty of all Christians, and the Dignity of all
Churches, to assert, It is for the Glory and Croun Prerogatives and Imperial
Regalia of the King of Kings, with reference to His visible Kingdom, of which
the Government is laid upon His shoulders, against the heaven-daring
Usurpations and encroachments made thereupon, both as He is Mediator and King
and Head of the Church, and as He is God and Universal King of the world. As He
is Mediator, it is His Peculiar Prerogative to have a Supremacy and Sole
Sovereignty over His oun Kingdom, to institute His oun Government, to
constitute His oun Laws, to ordain His oun Officers, to appoint His oun
Ordinances, which He will have observed without alteration, addition, or
diminution until His Second Coming: This His Prerogative has been and is
invaded by Erastian Prelacy, Sacrilegious Supremacy, and now by Antichristian
Popery, which have overturned His Government, inverted His Laws, subverted
His Officiers, and Perverted His Ordinances. As He is God and Universal King,
it is His in communicable Property and Glory, not only to have Absolute and
Illimited Power, but to invest his Deputed Ministers of Justice with His
Authority and Ordinance of Magistracy, to be administered in subordination to
Him, to be regulated by His Laws, and to be improved for His Glory and the
good of Mankind: This Glory of His has been invaded by Tyrants and Usurpers
arrogating to themselves an Absolute Power, intruding themselves without His
investment into Authority, in a Rebellion against Him, in opposition to His
Laws, and abusing it to His dishonor, and the destruction of Mankind. Against
both which Encroachments the Present Testimony is stated, in a Witness for
Religion and Liberty, to both which these are destructive. This will appear to
be the Result and Tendency of the Testimony in all its parts, opposed by the
Enemies of Religion and Liberty, and the end of all their oppositions, to bring
it to this Crinomenon, who shall he King? Jesus or Caesar? Let any seriously
search into all their Proclamations and Edicts against Religion and Liberty,
this will be found to be the soul and sense of them, practically and Really
speaking to this purpose, especially since this man came to the Throne.

J. R.

JAmes the 7/2 by the V. of G. King of Scotland, England, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Antichristian faith: To'all and sundry our good subjects, whom
these presents do or many concern, Greeting. We having taken into our Royal
Considerati^n, the many and great inconveniences which have happened in that
our Ancient Kingdom of Scotland, especially of late years, through the
persuasions of the Christian Religion, and the great heats and animosities,
betuixt the Professors thereof, and our good and faithful subjects, whose faith
and Religion is subject and subservient to our Royal will (the Supreme Law, and
Reason, and public Conscience) to the disappointment of our Projects,
restraint of our pleasures, and Contempt of the Royal power, Converting^ true
Loyalty and absolute subjection, into words and names (which we care not for)
of Religion and Liberty, Conscience and the Word of God, thereby withdrawing
some to the Christian faction from an absolute and implicit subjection to us
and our will, as if there were a Superior Law to which they might appeal; And
considering that these Rebellious Christians do never cease to assert and
maintain strange Paradoxes, such Principles as are inconsistent with the glory
and interest of our Government, as that the Authority of Kings should be hemmed
in with Limits, and that their Acts and Actions are to be examined by another
rule than their oun Authority to make them Lawful, that somethings in the
Kingdom are not subject to the Kings Authority, That there is a Kingdom within
a Kingdom not subordinate to the King, And that there is another King Superior
to the Supreme whom they will rather obey than us, And that we must either take
Laws from Him or otherwise we are not Magistrates; And Considering also their
Practices are Conform to their, Principles, They will not obey our Laws but
the Laws of Another inconsistent with ours, and will calculate their Religion
according to His Laws and not according to ours, And continually make their
Addresses to and receive Ambassadors from a Prince whom we know not, whom our
Predicessors of truly worthy memory did crucify, One Jesus who was dead, whom
they affirm to be alive, whose Government they allege is Supreme over all
Kings Whom they acknowledge but as His Vassals; Being now by favorable
fortune, not only brought to the Imperial Croun of these Kingdoms through the
greatest difficulties, but preserved upon the throne of our Royal Ancestors,
which from our Great founder Nimrod of Glorious Memory, and our Illustrious
Predecessors Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar, Herod the Great, Nero, Caligula etc. of
blessed and pious Memory, has been ever opposite to and projecting the
Destruction of that Kingdom of Christ: Do, after their Laudable example,
resolve to suppress that Kingdom by all the means and might we can use, because
His Government is hateful to us, His yoke heavy, His sayings are hard, His
Laws are contrary to our lusts; Therefore we will not let this man reign over
us, we will break His bonds and cast away His Cords, from us; And advance and
exerce our Sovereign Authority, Prerogative Royal, and Absolute Power, which
all our subjects are to obey without reserve. And as by virtue of our
Supremacy, whereby we are above all, but such as we are pleased to subject our
selves to, settled by Law and Lineally Derived to us as an Inherent right to
the Croun, we have Power to order all matters of Church as well as State, as we
in our Royal wisdom shall think fit, All Laws and Acts of Christ to the
contrary notwithstanding; And accordingly in our Royal wisdom have overturned
the platform of that Government which Christ has instituted, razed all Courts
fenced in His Name, and severely interdicted all Meetings of His subjects, and
intertainment of His Ambassadors; many of whom, in contempt of Him that sent
them, we have punished according to Law, for negotiating His Affairs in our
Kingdoms without our pleasure, and requiring Allegiance and obedience to Him,
after we had exauctorated Him; we have also established our Right Trusty and
Entirely beloved Clerks in Ecclesiastic affairs, and their underlings, by our
Authority to have the Administration of the business of Religion, and empowered
our Right Trusty and well beloved Cousins and Counselors, to Compel all to
submitt to them, by Finings, Confinings, Imprisonment, Banishment, Oaths, and
Bonds, and all Legal means: So now having prosecuted this war against Christ to
this length, that we have no fears of a Rally of His forces again so often
beaten, we are now engaged with other Antichristian Princes to give our Power
to our holy Father Antichrist, so far as may serve his purpose to oppse Christ
in his way; but we reserve so much to our seeves, as may encroach upon Him in
our Capacity. And therefore we have thought fit to restore to Antichrist our
Ecclesiastical Supremacy, from whom we borrowed it, and for which we have no
use at present: But we resolve to maintain and prosecute our Sovereign
Authority, Prerogative Royal, and Absolute Power foresaid, against Christ, and
without subordation to Him, from whom as we sought none so we received no Power
by His Warrant and Grant, and against whom we mind to manage it to the utter
most of out power. Yet reflecting upon the Conduct of the four last Reigns, how
after all the frequent and pressing endeavors that were used in each of them,
to reduce our Kingdoms to Antichrist, the Subjects of Christ were so stubborn,
that the success has not answered the design: We must now change our Methods
alitle, and tolerate that Profession of Christ which we cannot yet get
overturned, His Subjects being so numerous, but always upon these terms, that
they take aspecial care that nothing be Preached or taught among them, which
may be a Testimony for Christ's Prerogatives in opposition to our Usurpation, or
may any way tend to alienate the hearts of our People from us or our
Government, or Preach his Truths which we have condemned as Seditious and
Treasonable, under the highest pains these Crimes will import. Hereby we shall
establish our Government on such a foundation, on the ruin of Christ's, as may
make our subjects happy, and unite them to us by Inclination as well as Duty,
in a belief that we will not constrain Conscience in matters of mere Religion:
for which we have a Dispensation from our holy-Father, and also from our oun
Absoluteness, to be slaves to this Promise no longer then consists with our
Interest: And which we have power to Interpret as we please: And would have all
to understand, that no Testimony for Christ's Supremacy against our
Encroachments thereupon, shall be Comprehended under these Matters of mere
Religion ^or which the Conscience shall not be constrained: But we will have
the Consciences of such Subjects of his, that dare assert it, brought to a Test
and probation how they stand affected in this Competition betuixt us and this
King Jesus, and see whether they will oune or decline our Authority, because
not of him, nor for him, nor to him, but against him and all his Interests. Our
will is therefore, that all who will Countenance any other Meetings of His
Subjects than we have allowed, or connive at them, shall be prosecuted
according to the utmost severity of our Laws made against them, which we leave
in full force and vigor notwithstanding of the Premises. And for this effect,
we further Command all our Judges, Magistrates, and Officers of our Forces, to
prosecute all these Subjects and Followers of Christ, who shall be guilty of
treating with, or paying homage to that exauctorated King of theirs, in their
Assemblies with His Ambassadors in the Fields, with the utmost rigor as they
would avoid our highest Displeasure: for we are confident, none will after
these Liberties and freedoms we have given to all without reserve, to serve God
Publicly in such a way as we by our Sovereign Authority, Prerogative Royal,
and Absolute Power foresaid, have prescribed and allowed, presume to meet in
these Assemblies, except such whose Loyalty to Christ does alienate them from
us and our Government. As also under the same Certifications, by the same
Sovereign Authority, Prerogative Royal and Absolute Power foresaid, We charge,
empower, warrant, and Authorize, against all hazards (Hell excepted) all our
foresaid Judges and Officers in their respective places, to Prosecute and
execute our Laws, against all that may be suspected or convicted of their
Adherence to Christ, or be found guilty of ouning their Allegiance to Him as
their Liege Lord by Solemn Covenant, which we have caused burn by the hand of
the hangman, and declared Criminal to oune it, or shall be found guilty of
declining Allegiance to us and our Absolute Authority, stated in opposition to
Him and His, or of maintaining that pernicious Principle, inconsistent with our
Government that their lives are their oun, which they will preserve without
surrender to our Mercy: All which we Command to be executed to death, or
banished as Slaves, as shall be found most conducible to our Interest. And to
the end, the few that remain of that way may be totally exterminated, we
straightly Command all our Soldiers, Horse and Foot, to be ready upon order, to
march and make search, pursue and follow, seize and apprehend, kill and slay
and cause to perish, all such whether they shall be found at Meetings, or in
their wanderings, wherever they may be apprehended: And ordain all our good
Subjects to be assistent to these our Forces, in prosecuting this War against
Christ and his Followers, and Contribute their best help and encouragement, in
giving them their required Maintinance, and duly paying the Cess and Locality
imposed for that end; And that they shall not dare to Countenance, Converse
with, resett, harbor, supply, or keep any manner of Correspondence with any of
these Traitors that adhere to Christ, under the pain of being found airt and
part with them, and obnoxious to the same Punishments to which they are liable;
But on the contrary to Assist our Forces, to apprehend, and raise the Hue and
Cry after them wherever they shall be seen, that they may be forthwith purswed,
seized, cut off, and destroyed, which we order to be instantly done upon the
place, where ^^ey or any of them are apprehended, and that without any delay or
mercy to age or sex etc.

On the other hand if any will take a look of the Declarations and Testimonies
of the other Party, without prejudice or stumbling at some Expressions which
may be offensive to Critics, he will find the Scope and Strain of them to have
this Importance.

WE, a Poor Company of Persecuted, reproached, and despised Christians; who
indeed have not many wise men among us after the flesh, not many mighty, not
many noble, but are a few foolish, weak, base, and despised nothings in the
world; Yet having this Ambition to be His called, chosen, and faithful
Soldiers, who is King of Glory, King of Heaven, King of Saints, King of
Nations, King of Kings, whose Kingdom is Everlasting and Universal; Considering
the many insolent indignities, affronts, and reproaches cast upon His Name and
Glory, and the many Usurpations, Encroachments, and Invasions made upon His
Croun and dignity, by a Pestilent Generation of His Atheistical, Papistical,
Prelatical, and Tyrannical Enemies, who have rebelled against Him, and have
renounced, corrupted, and subverted His Royal Government, both in the Church
and in the world, both in His Kingdom of Grace and of Power: Do bear Witness
and Testimony against these Rebels, from the Highest to the Lowest: And assert
the Interest and Title of our Princely Master, and oune Allegiance and absolute
obedience to Him and His Government, to which He has all undoubted right; An
Essential right by His Eternal God head, being the Everlasting Father whose
goings forth have been of old from Everlasting; A Covenant right by Compact
with the Father, to bear the Glory and rule upon His Throne, by virtue of the
Council of Peace between them both; A Donative right by the Fathers right of
Delegation, by which He has all Power given to him in Heaven and in Earth, and
all Authority even because He is the Son of man; An Institute right by the
Fathers Inauguration, which has set Him as King in Zion; An Acquisite right by
His oun Purchase, by which He has merited and obtained not only Subjects to
Govern, but the Glory of the Sole Sovereignty over them in that relation, a
Name above every Name; A Bellical right by Conquest, making the People fall
under Him, and be willing in the day of His Power, and overcoming those that
make war with Him; An Hereditary right by Proximity of blood and Primogeniture,
being the first born, higher then the Kings of the Earth, and the first born
from the dead, that in all things He might have the Preeminence; An Elective
right by His Peoples choice and surrender, a Croun wherewith His Mother Crouned
Him in the Day of His espousals. In a humble recognizance of all which Rights,
we oune and avouch, that He has that Incommunicable Prerogative of Sole
Sovereignty, over his Visible Kingdom as well as Invisible, without a Copartner
or Competitor, either Coordinate or subordinate; in Prescribing Laws, by no
humane Authority to be reversed; in appointing Ordinances, immutable without
addition or diminution, for matter or manner; instituting a Government, which
no man or Angel can without Blasphemy arrogate a Power either to invert or
evert, change or overturn; And Constituting Officers, which must depend only on
His Authority and His alone; and must be clothed only with His Commission and
His alone, guided by His Instructions and His alone, Acting according to His
Laws and Prescribed Platform and His alone, without any dependence on,
subordination to, License warrant or Indulgence from, any Mortal. And therefore
We disoune and detest every thing that has not the stamp of His Authority,
either in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline or Government: And will discountenance
Prelacy, Supremacy, Popery, and all Corruption contrary to His Institution,
who is Sole and Supreme Lawgiver to the Conscience, and will submit to, or
comply with nothing that may directly or indirectly signify our respect unto
them. Hence we will take none of their Oaths, subscribe none of their bonds,
yield to none of their Impositions, pay none of their Exactions: Neither will
we hear or receive Ordinances from any Minister, but the faithful Authorized
Ambassadors, of Christ our King, whatever either rage or reproach we suffer
for it. We assert and affirm also, that our Exalted Prince is King of the whole
world, by whom Kings reign and Princes Decree Justice, as His Ministers of
Justice, in subordination to Him; whom He has appointed to rule over us, with
just boundaries that they may not exceed, and true Characters by which we
should know them and pay them deference. And therefore, whosoever shall
arrogate to themselves and extend their power beyond and above His prescripts,
being neither called to, nor qualified for, nor improving the Office, for the
ends He has appointed; We will acknowledge them no otherwise than Usurping
Tyrants, and not Magistrates nor Ministers of Justice, to whom He has given the
Sword by His preceptive Will, only as Lions, Bears, Wolves, to whom he has
given a rod by His providential Will: In that case we may be passively subject
when we cannot do better, but will never oune Conscientious Allegiance to them,
nor oune them as our Lawful Magistrars* And therefore we will not bow to their
Idols they have set up, nor prostitute either Conscience or Liberty to their
Lust, But will endeavor under our Masters Banner and Conduct to preserve
whatever he has entrusted to us, Religion, Life, Liberty, Estate, And
whatsoever the Lord our God has given us to possess, As they unjustly possess
what their God gives them: And will maintain a war of constant opposition to
them (against whom our Lord has declared a war for ever) without parley, Treaty
of peace, Capitulation, Composition, Truce or any Transaction: we will neither
Meddle nor make with them less or more, nor seek their favor, nor embrace it
when it is offered, on any terms that may imply any obligation to surcease
from our duty to our King, and irreconcilable opposition to them etc.

Now I shall come more Distinctly to the purpose, in offering a short
vindication of the Heads and Grounds of our great sufferings: Dividing them
into their principal parts, which I reduce to two, viz Negatives and Positives.
The Negative Grounds? I reckon three principally. 1. For Refusing to
acknowledge a Corrupt Ministry. 2. For Refusing to oune a Tyrannical
Magistracy. 3. For Refusing to Swear and subscribe their unlawful imposed
Oaths, Chiefly that of Abjuration, which was the occasion of suffering unto
death. The positive Grounds are also three. 1. For frequenting field-meetings,
to receive Gospel-Ordinancs from faithful Ministers. 2. For maintaining the
principle and practice of Defensive Resistance of Superior powers. 3. For
maintaining the privilege and Duty of offensive revenge in executing Justice
upon Murdering Enemies of Mankind in cases of extreme necessity. In prosecuting
which, I shall intertexe some subordinate questions relating to their
respective Heads, and endeavor to discuss them briefly.

HEAD. I. Where The Sufferings of many for Refusing to acknowledge a Corrupt
Ministry are Vindicated: and the Question of Hearing Curats is cleared.
THis Question though it may seem nice and of no great Moment, to Persons of
Gallio's or Laodiceds temper, indifferent and Lukwarm dispositions, consulting
their oun more them the things of Christ, which maks it pass without any
enquiry with the most part of the world: Yet to all who are truly tender in
keeping a good Conscience free of the times Contagion, to all who have the true
Impression of the fear of God, who is Jealous especially in the matters of his
worship, to all who have the true zeal of God eating them up, in a just
indignation at the indignities done to him, in usurping the office, and
corrupting the Administration of the Ministry, to all who truly Love the
Gospel and put a due value on the Ordinances of Christ, the Corruptions whereof
this Question touches, it will be accounted of great importance. There are
three Questions about the Duty of hearing the Word, Concerning which the Lord
Jesus gives us very weighty Cautions, viz what we should hear, Mark. 4. 24. how
we should hear Luke 8. 18. and whom we should hear. The last of which, though
it be not so expressly Stated as the other two, yet the Searcher of the
Scriptures will find it as clearly Determined, and as many Cautions to guard
from erring in it, as in any other Case, And that the Concern of Conscience in
it is very weighty. And certain it is if there had been more advertency in this
Point, there would not have been such inconsideration and Licenciousness in the
matter and manner of hearing. Nor would that itching humor and Luxuriancy of
lust, in heaping up teachers to please the fancy, have been so much encouraged,
to the great detriment of the Church, disgrace of the Gospel, and destruction
of many poor Souls. But through the ignorance and neglect of this Duty of
trying whom we should hear, by seeking some satisfieing evidence of their being
clothed with Authority from Christ, the world has been left louse in a
License to hear what they pleased, and so have received the Poison of error
from Monte banks, instead of the true and wholesome Potions of Christ's
Prescripts from them that had Power and skill to administer them. Hence the
many Sects, and Schisms, and errors, that have Pestered the Church in all
ages, have in a great measure proceeded from this latitude and laxness of
Promiscous hearing of all whom they pleased, whom either the worlds Authority
empowered, or by other means were possessed of the place of Preaching, without
taking any Cognizance whether they had the Characters of Christ's Ambassadors
or not. If this had been observed, and People had scrupled and refused to hear
these whom they might know should not have Preached; neither the Great
Antichrist, nor the many lesser Antichrists, would have had such footing in the
world as they have this day. It is then of no small Consequence to have this
Question cleared. Neither is it of small difficulty to solve the intricacies of
it, what Characters to fix for a discovery of Christ's true Ministers; whom we
should submit to and obey in the Lord, and Love and esteem them for their Works
sake, and for their qualities sake, as standing in Christ's stead, having the
dispensation of the word of Reconciliation committed to them; And how we may
discern those Characters, what judgment is incumbent to private Christians, for
the satisfaction of theiroun Consciences in the Case; And how they ought to
demean themselves in their practice, with out Scandal on either hand, or sin
against their oun Conscience; how to avoid the rocks and Extremes that
inadvertency or precipitancy in this matter may rush upon; So as to escape and
sail by the Scylla of sinful Separation on the one hand, and the Charybdis of
sinful union and Communion on the other, which are equally dangerous;
especially how these Cautions are to be managed in a broken and disturbed and
divided Case of the Church. The Question also is the more difficult, that as it
was never so much questioned before this time, and never so much sought to be
obscured, by the perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds to find out
evasions to cover sin and escape sufferings upon this account; So it has never
been discussed by Divines either at home or abroad, with relation to our Case,
except what has been of late by some faithful men, who have suffered upon this
head, from whom I shall gather the most of my Arguments, in as Compendious a
way as I can without wronging them. The reason, I fancy, that we are at such a
loss in our helps from the Learned on this head, is partly, that they have
written with relation to their oun times, in a Constitute Case of the Church,
when Corruptions and disorders might be orderly rectified, and people might
have access to get their scruples removed in a Legal way by Church Order, in
which case the Learned and Judicious Mr Durham has written excellently in his
book on Scandal, but therein neither he nor others did consult nor could have a
prospect of such a case as ours is; And partly, that foreign Divines, not
having this for their exercise, could not be acquainted with our
circumstantiate case, and so are not fit nor Competent Arbiters to decide this
Contraversie; hence many of them do wonder at our sufferings upon this head.
Every Church is best acquainted with her oun Testimony. Yet we want not the
suffrage of some of the Learned of them, as the Great Gisb. Voetius in his
Polit Eccles. in several places comes near to favor us: where he allows
People to leave some and hear such Ministers as they profit most by, from these
grounds, that people should choose the best and most edifying gifts, and from
that scripture 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. Prove all things etc. and answers objections to
the contrare, and grants that upon several occasions one may abstain from
explicit Communion with a Corrupt Church, for these reasons, that such
Communion is not absolutely necessary, Necessitate either Medii or Precepti,
where the Christian shall have more peace of Conscience, and free exercise of
Christian Duties elsewhere, And that he may keep Communion with more Purity in
other places Polit. Ecces. Quest. 17. Page 68. And he approves of People
refusing to bring their Children to be baptized by such Corrupt Ministers,
because they may wait until they have occasion of a Minister, for if the best
gifts be to be Coveted why should not the best Ministers be preferred? and why
should not Christians show by their deeds, that they honor such as fear the
Lord, and contemn a vile Person? They ought not to partake of other men's sins 1
Cor. 5. 9. 11. Ephesians. 5. 11. They should not strengthen the hands of the wicked
and make sad the Godly; The Authority of such Ministers should not be
strengthened Voet. Polit Eccles. Page 637. to 640. But though it labor under
all these disadvantages: yet it is not the less but so much the rather
necessary, to say somewhat to clear it, with dependence upon light from the
Fountain, and with the help of those faithful men who has sufficiently cleared
it up, to all that have a Conscience not blinded or bribed with some
prejudices, by which more light has accrued to the Church in this point of
withdrawing from Corrupt Ministers, (...) ever was attained in former times;
which is all the good we have got of Prelacy. In so much that I might spare
labor in adding any thing, were it not that I would make the Arguments
vindicating this Cause of suffering alitle more public, and take occasion to
show, that the grounds espoused by the Present and reproached party for their
withdrawings, so far as they are stretched, are no other than have been ouned
by our writers on this head; to the intent it may appear, there is no
Discrepancy but great likness and harmony between the Arguments and Grounds of
withdrawing, in the late Informatorie Vindication etc. and those that are found
in other writings. And so much the rather I think it needful to touch this
subject now, that not only this has been the first ground of our sufferings,
but many that suffered a while for it, now have fainted, and condemned all
their former Contendings for this Part of the Testimony, calling in question
all these reasons that formerly satisfied' them. But to proceed with some
distinctness in this thorny point: Some Concessory Assertions must first be
premitted, And then Our Grounds Propounded.

First, I willingly yield to and Cordially close with the Truth of these
Assertions.

I. The Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace, ought to be the Endeavor of
all that are members of the One Body of Christ, Partakers of his One Spirit,
called in One Hope, Professing One Lord, Confessing One Faith, sealed with One
Baptism Ephesians. 4. 3. etc. And for Brethren to dwell together in Unity, is good
and pleasant, and like the precious Ointment upon the head, that ran down upon
Aarons beard Psalm. 133. 1, 2. A fragrant Ointment indeed, if it be composed
aright of Gospel-simples, according to Divine art, and the Wisdom that is from
above, which is first pure and then peacable; and not made up of Adulterate
Politics: that Union that has the Spirit for its Author, the Scripture for
its Rule, Peace for its bond and beauty, love for its Cement, Faith for its
foment, Christ for its foundation, and Truth and holiness for its constant
Companions, cannot but be intensely desired, enixely endeavored, and fervently
followed, by all the Professors of the Gospel of Peace, and Subjects of the
Prince of Peace: Which makes Division and Schism not only a great Misery, but
a Grand sin. But it must be in the way of Truth and Duty, and consistent with
holiness and the honor of Christ, otherwise if it be in the way of Apostasy
and defection, it is but a Confederacy and Conspiracy against the Lord. And
true Union can neither be attained, nor retained, nor recovered; except the
sinful Cause of Division, Defection; and the holy overruling Cause, the Anger
of the Lord be removed, in turning to and following him.

II. Tho there be not perfect Union, but diversity both of judgments and
practices, in several Cases there may be Communion with a Church in its
Ordinances and Ministry. As 1. We may have a Catholic Communion with all
Christian Ministers and Members of the Catholic Church, considered as such;
holding the Head Christ, and the foundation sure. And so we may meet for
Worship with all Devout men in every Nation under Heaven, whether they be
Parthians, or Medes, or Elamites, or French or Dutch etc. tho differing in
Controversies of lesser moment, not overturning that; if they hold the
Universal* Testimony of the Gospel, against the Common enemies thereof, Jews,
Turks, or Pagans: for there is neither Greek nor Jew if he be a Christian,
Christ is all and in all Col. 3. 11. But if they be Heretics, we can have no
Communion with them. 2. We may have a more special Communion with all
Protestant Ministers and Members of the Reformed Church, considered as such,
more strictly, and upon stricter conditions: providing they hold, not only the
Universal of Christians, but the General Testimony of Protestants, against the
Greater and lesser Antichrists; tho differing from us in some circumstantial
points, not Reformed, and not contradictory unto the Protestant Testimony,
against Popery and all Heresy; nor declining from their oun Reformation, by
Defection or Schism. And Consequently, its Lawful to oune Communion with the
Churches of the United Provinces, and take Ordination from them, tho they have
some forms not allowable, from which they were never Reformed, because they
are sound in the Protestant Testimony. But with the Sectarians or Schismatics
or Apostates among them, we cannot oune that special Communion. 3. We may have
a more Particular Communion upon yet stricter conditions, with all our
Covenanted Brethren, Ministers and Members of the Churches of Britain and
Ireland, considered as such: Providing they hold, not only the Universal, not
only the more Special, Protestant Testimony against the Greater and lesser
Antichrists, but the Covenanted Testimony for the Reformation in Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline, and Government, against Popery, Prelacy, Superstition,
Heresy, Schism, and Profanness, according to the Covenant; Tho differing from
us in those Controversial points, never Reformed, and which were never the Word
of Christ's patience, and do not overturn the Covenanted Testimony. But with
those that contradict and counteract that, we cannot oune that particular
Communion. 4. We may have yet a nearer Organical Communion, upon stricter
conditions still, with all the Ministers and Members of the National Church of
Scotland, constitute and confederate under one Reformed Government, according
to the Rule of Christ: providing they hold, not only all the former Testimonies
under the foresaid considerations, but the Presbyterian Testimony as stated in
the Ecclesiastical Constitutions, and sworn to in the National Covenants and
Engagements of that Church, founded upon the Word of God, against Popery,
Prelacy, Erastianisme, Sectarianisme, Toleration, Schism and Defection; tho
differing in some things from us, never Reformed, never considered in
Ecclesiastical Judicatories, never engaged against in our Covenants, never
Stated as the Word of patience and Matter of Testimony. But with those that
oppose, suppress, reproach, and abandon this Testimony, we cannot oune this
Organical Communion, in this broken State of the Church. We may have yet a
stricter Congregational Communion, upon stricter conditions, in and with the
Ordinary or extraordinary Meetings or Societies of the Lords people for Gospel
Ordinances, with any Minister or Ministers, duly and truly admitted to that
function, according to Christ's Appointment, and the Call of the people, whether
in a fixed or unfixed relation: provicing he holds the Testimony of Christ,
under all the former considerations, and ounes and adheres unto the true
received principles of the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline, and Government, founded upon the written Word of God, and
whatsoever Declarations or Testimonies, former or latter, particular or more
General, are aggreable thereunto; tho differing from us in some of the Integral
and not Essential parts of our Testimony, against the Enemies of our Covenanted
Reformation. But with such as deny or decline from it, by Schism or Defection,
or Compliance with the enemies thereof, we cannot oune this Congregational
Communion, in this broken State of the Church.

III. Tho there be many things in a Church, to brangle and lessen the Comfort
of our Communion with it and the Ministry thereof; yet we may keep fellowship
with a true Church, tho in many things faulty and Corrupt, as all Churches are
in some measure in this Militant State. As the Church of Corinth had many
corruptions in their practice, yet no separation is enjoined from it. And the
Lord did not require separation from the Churches of Perga^^^ and Thyatira,
though they had many corruptions and deficiencies in Discipline, in a
Toleration of Heretics; and would lay no other burden upon them, but to hold
fast what they had: as Mr Durham shows in his Comment. on the Revel. chap. 2.
Lect. 6. Page 148, 149. as also Chap. 18. Lect. 1. Page 585. in 4to. This must
be granted especially in these cases. 1. In the infant State of the Church,
when the Reformation is only begun: then many things may be tolerated, before
they be gradually Reformed, which in an adult State are not to be suffered. 2.
In a growing case of the Church, advancing out of corruptions: then many things
may be born with, while they are ascending and wrestling up the hill, which in
a Declining State; when the Church is going backward, must not be yielded unto.
See that Objection of hearing Prelatical men in the time of former Prelacy,
answered above, Peri. 4. Page 54. 3. In a Constitute and settled case of the
Church, enjoying her Privileges and Judicatories, corruptions may be ^oreborn,
and the offended are not to withdraw, before recourse to the Judicatories for
an orderly redress: But in a broken and disturbed State, when there is no
access to these Courts of Christ; then people, tho they must not usurp a power
of Judicial Censuring these corruptions, yet they may claim and exercise a
discretive power over their oun practice; and by their withdrawing from such
Ministers as are guilty of them, signify their sense of the moral equity of
these censures that have been legally enacted against these and the equivalent
corruptions, and when they should be legally inflicted. As we do upon this
Ground withdraw from the Prelatick Curats, and likewise from some of our
Covenanted Brethren, upon the account of their being chargable with such
corruptions and defections from our Reformation, as we cannot but show our
dislike of. This the Reverend Author of Rectius instruendum justifies Confut.
3. Dial. Chap. 1. Page 8. where he is showing, what separation is not sinful;
and gives this for one, if we separate in that, which a National Church has
commanded us as her Members to disoune, by her standing Acts and Authority,
while those from whom we separate oune that Corruption. Which holds true of the
Curats, and Indulged, and Addressers, and all that we withdraw from. However it
be, certainly those are to be withdrawn from, with whom we cannot communicate
without submitting to the Laws establishing them, and taking on that Test and
badge of our incorporation with them, and partaking of their sin, and in hazard
of their judgment.

IV. Tho in some cases, as we are warranted, so are necessitated to withdraw:
yet neither do we allow it upon slight or slender grounds, nor can any tender
soul be forced to discountenance the Ministers of Christ (I do not speak here
of the Prelatick Curats) without great reluctance and grief of heart, even when
the grounds of it are solid and valid, and the necessity unavoidable. Therefore
we reject these as insufficient Grounds, besides what are given already. 1. We
cannot withdraw from a Minister, for his Infirmities or weaknesses, Natural,
spiritual or Moral. 2. Neither for Pers^nal faults and escapes: We expect a
faithful, but not a sinless Ministry. 3. Nor for every defect in faithfulness,
through Ignorance, want of courage, Misinformation, or being biased with
affection for particular persons. We do not hold, that faults in Members, or
defects in Ministers, do pollute the Oordinances, and so necessitate a
Separation; but aggree with what Mr Durham says on Revel. chap. 2. Lect. 6.
Page 147. in 4to. Sincerity discovered, will cover many faults. 4. Nor for
every discovery of Hypocrisy; tho we may have gro^nd to suspect a Man's
principle and Motive be not right, yet if he be following duty unblameably, and
have a Lawful Call, What then! notwithstanding every way, whether in Pretense
or in Truth, Christ is Preached, therein me may rejoice Philip. 1. 18. 5. Nor
yet for real Scandals, not attended with obstinacy, if Ministers will take
reproof and admonition, and at least by Doctrinal Confessing and practical for
saking them satisfy the offended. 6. Yea tho his Scandals be so gross, that we
must discountenance him, when he persis^s in them: yet that is not a disouning
of his Ministry `or a rejecting his Commission, but a discountenancing for his
disorders, until they be removed. But the Apologet. Rela^ Sect. 14. Page 290,
291. says (1) there may be Ministerial corruptions, that cut the very throat
of the Office, and make one no Officer -- and it is past questioning, such may
be shunned, without all hazard of Separation (2) when personal faults are very
gross and palpable, open and avowed, such may be shuned without any hazard of
Separation; because the man's being an Officer coram Deo is much to be
questioned, and there is great probability that ipso facto he had forefaulted
the same, tho such should be the corruption in a Church, that notwithstanding
of all this he may be maintained. (3) Separation is (...) thing, and not
hearing such or such a man is a far other thing: there may be many just grounds
of exception against a particular person, why people may refuse to countenance
him, without any hazard of separation, or joining with separatists in their
principles: Separation is one thing, and refusing to attend the Ministry of
such a man is another thing; for a man may join with Ordinances in another
congregation, and so testify that he has no prejudice at the Ministry, but
only against such a man in particular. Whence it is an ignorant as well as
malicious calumny, to say, that our withdrawing from the Curats, and also from
some Ministers, whom otherwise we respect and reverence as Godly Ministers, for
their offensive defections, is a disouning all the Ministry of Scotland.
Whereas, we do profess indeed a disouning of the Curats Ministry, but for our
Reverend Presbyterian Ministers, tho we do discountenance many of them with sad
hearts, for their not keeping the Word of the Lords patience in this hour of
tentation, nor adhering to the principles and constitutions of the Church of
Scotland: Yet this is not a disouning of their Ministry, but a Refusing to
countenance them in their present administrations, in this disturbed State,
till these offenses be removed.

V. As to disoune the Ministry, were hateful Sectarianisme; so to dissolve or
break off Communion with a true Church, whereof we are Members, were an
unnatural Schism, which is horrid sin. But because among all the various
Sufferings, wherewith the poor tossed, and racked Remnant now Persecuted have
been exercised, this has not been the lightest; that they have been on all
hands stigmatized as Schismatics and Separatists, not only because they have
maintained a resolved withdrawing from the Curats, but also have
discountenanced many Presbyterian Ministers, with whom they have been offended
for their declining Courses, and Complyances with the Times Corruptions, and
forsaking in a great measure the duty of this day: I shall distinguish some
cases of Separation, out of the Writings of our approven Authors, which will
j^^tify all their withdrawings. 1. Mr Durham distinguishes these three;
Schism, separating from the Unity and Communion of a true Church, consisting
not always in diversity of Doctrine, but in divided Practices, according to that
of Augustine, Schismaticos facit not diversa fides, sed disrupta communionis
Societas: Then separation, either in whole from a Church as no Church, or in
part in some things wherein they cannot communicate with that corrupt Church,
which is Lawful if it exceed not its ground: Then lastly, Secession, a local
removing to a better Church. The first of these cannot be imputed to the
Persecuted Wanderers: for they separate from no true Church, whereof they were
Members, but these from whom they separate, will be found to be the
Schismatics. 2. The second of these, to wit, separation, is either Positive
and Active, or Negative and Passive. The first is, when a party not only leaves
Communion with a Church, whereunto they were formerly joined, but also gathers
up new distinct Churches, different from the former, under another Government
and Ministry and Ordinances, disouning those they left. The latter is, when
the faithful Remnant of a declining Church, standing still and refusing to
concur with the backsliding part of the same Church, after they have become
obstinate in their defections, holds clossly by, and adheres unto the
Reformation attained. This Famous Mr Rutherfoord in his due Right of
Presbytries page 253. 254. shows to be Lawful, and calls it a Non-Union, as
that in Augustines time, when the Faithf^l did separate from the Donatists,
which is Lawful and laudable. 3. Mr Rutherfoord there proceeds to distinguish,
between a separation from the Church in her worst and most part, and a
separation from the best and least part: and these who separate from the worst
and greatest part, do notwithstanding retain a part of, and a part in the
Visible Church, because they do not separate from the Church according to the
least and best part thereof; as the Godly in England who refused the Popish
Ceremonies and Antichristian Bishops. Hence it will follow, that though now
People should withdraw from Communion with the greatest part of the Church,
which is now Corrupted, they cannot be counted Separatists because, they hold
still Communion with the better tho lesser part. Moreover he says Page 254.
255. That there may be Causes of Non-Union with a Church, which are not
sufficient causes of separation. Lastly he tells us ibid. Page 258. When the
Greatest part of a Church makes defection from the Truth, the lesser part
remaining sound, the Greast part is the Church of separatists; tho the manyest
and greatest part in the actual exercise of Discipline be the Church, yet in
the case of right Discipline the best tho fewest is the Church. For Truth is
like life, that retireth from the manyest Members unto the heart, and there
remains in its fountain in case of dangers. So that it is the major part
which has made defection, that are to be accounted Separatists, and not such
who stand to their principles, tho they cannot comply or join with the corrupt
Majoritie. Thus the Apol. Relat. rehearsed his words Sect. 14. page 292. 293.
4. There may be a Lawful withdrawing, where the Ordinances and Ministry are
not cast at, as the Apol, Rel. says. ibid. 291. So then, so long as people do
not cast at the Ordinances, but are willing to run many miles to enjoy them:
nor cast at the Church as no Church (tho they sadly fear, that God shall be
provoked by this dreadful defection, which is carried on by these men and their
favorers, to give her a Bill of divorce) nor at the Ministry, for they love
those that stand to their Principles dearly, and are most willing to hear them
either in public or private. 5. It is granted by all that write against
Separatists, that separation from a Church is Lawful, when the case so falls
out, that union cannot be kept up with her without sin, Voet. Polit. Eccles.
page 68. quest. 17. 6. The Grave Author of Rectius Instruendum Confut. 3. Dial.
Chap. page 7. etc. allows, every Separation is not Schism, even from the
Church which has essentials, yea and more than essentials: If it be from those
(tho never so many) who are drawing back from whatever piece of duty and
integrity is attained; for this is still to be held fast, according to many
Scripture Commands. So Elias, when Gods Covenant was forsaken, was as another
Athanasius (I and I only am left) in point of tenacious integrity. 7. Next he
says, if we separate in that which a National Church has commanded us as her
Members to disoune, by her standing Acts and Authority, while those from whom
we separate oune that Corruption. 8. Likewise he there asserts, there is a
Lawful forbearance of Union and Compliance with notorious Backsliders, in that
which is of it self sinful, or inductive to it: which is far from Separation
str^ctly taken. The Commands of abstaining from all appearance of evil, and
hating the garment spotted with the flesh, do clearly include this. 9. He
adds, many things will warrant Separation from such a particular Minister or
Congregation; which will not warrant Separation from the Church National; nor
infer it, by Mr Durhams acknowledgement ( on Scandal, page 129.) for if
Scandals become excessive, he allows to depart to another Congregation. 10.
Lastly he says, There is a Commanded withdrawing from Persons and Societies
even in Worship, the precepts Romans 16. 17. 2 Cor. 6. 17. Prove. 19. 27. Act. 2.
40. will clearly import this by Consequence -- Surely the Ministers and
Professors, adhering to the Reformat^on, must be the true Church of Scotland,
tho the lesse^ number: These Soldiers who keep the Generals Orders, are the
true Army, not the deserters of the same.

But Secondly, it being in part cleared by these Assertions, what is our mind
in this Controversy, I shall lay coun from Scripture Oracles, all the Causes
and Cases justifying and warranding withdrawing from any Ministers; with
application of all of them to the Curats, and accommodation of some of them to
all that the Wanderers withdraw from: with Arguments endeavoring to evince the
Validity of them, and evidencing they are not new Notions, but the same Grounds
which approven Authors have improved in this Controversy. I shall omit the
ordinary Criticismes in stating the Question, in distinguishing betuixt hearing
and joining in Worship, and ouning them as our Ministers, and submitting to
them etc. And only essay to prove this Thesis: We cannot without sin oune
Church Communion in Gospel Ordinances with the Prelates or their Curats, as Our
Ministers, but must Withdraw from them, and any other guilty of the like
Corruptions, which we can make out against them. I shall not resume what
Confirmations this Thesis is strenthened with, from the Testimonies or Church
Constitutions of former Periods, which are premitted in the foregoing
discourse: Nor make any repitition of the Circumstances of our present
Condition, Represented above, which contributes to clear it: but shortly come
to the Arguments.

I. It is necessary that we must acknowledge them Ministers of Christ's, and his
Ambassadors clothed with his Commission, from whom we receive the ordinances
of the Gospel. For otherwise they must be looked upon as Thieves, Robbers,
Usurpers, and strangers whom Christ's sheep will not, nay must not hear, John.
10. 1, 5. And how shall they preach, or be heard, except they be sent, Romans 10.
15. for such whom we know may not Lawfully preach, we cannot Lawfully hear.
These from whom we may receive the Mysteries of God, we must account Ministers
of Christ 1 Cor. 4. 1. and Ambassadors for Christ, standing in his stead,
beseeching us to be reconciled to God 2. Cor. 5. 20. Hence such as we doubt to
acknowledge Ministers of Christ, clothed with His Commission, them we cannot
hear without sin: But the Prelatical Curats are such as we doubt to acknowledge
Ministers of Christ, clothed with His commission: Therefore we cannot hear
them. The Minor only needs probation. These who neither have nor can have the
Qualifications of a Minister of Christ, nor the Lawful call of a Minister of
Christ, cannot be acknowledged with confidence to be Ministers of Christ
clothed with His commission: But the Prelatical Curats are such: Ergo. --
First they neither have nor can have the qualifications of Christ's Ministers:
Since few of them have the personal, as Christians, far less the Ministerial as
Officers, mentioned 1. Tim. 3. 2-4. Tit. 1. 6-9. except it be to be husbands of
one wife, and if that do not make them Ministers, they have nothing else:
especially four are wanting in all of them. (1) Blamelessness, and freedom from
Scandal, even such as affects the office (besides other gross disorders in
their life and conversation, obvious to the view of onlookers being men who
have denied the Faith, and therefore unfit to have the privilege of Church
members in any well Go^erned Church) being in the experience of all that know
them signalized under the Characters of those that run unsent, and from whom we
are commanded to withdraw: Causing the people to err by their lies and by
their lightness, not sent of God Ier. 23. making the heart of the righteous
sad, and strengthening the hands of the wicked Ezekiel. 13. 22. See also Ezekiel. 34
2, 3. Such as we are commanded to beware of Math. 7. 15, 16. Such as we must
mark and avoid, Romans 16. 17, 18. Phil. 3. 2. Disorderly walkers from whom we
must withdraw 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. Covenant-breakers from whom we are commanded to
turn away 2 Timothy 3. 3, 5. They are not then Blameless: and in showing how fitly
these aggree unto the persons now spoken of, time needs not be spent, such as
know them can best Judge. Hence, such as either are not fit to be Church
members, or have all the Characters of such Officers from whom we are to
withdraw, cannot be acknowledged capable of the qualifications of the Ministers
of Christ: But such are the Curats: Ergo -- (2) The qualification of Vigilance
cannot be found with them: for all that know them will acknowledge that they
neither do, nor can in Preaching the word be instant in season and out of
season, so as to make full proof of their Ministry 2 Timothy 4. 1-5. Nay they can
give no proof of their Ministry at all, further than may be competent to dumb
Dogs that cannot bark, Isa. 56. 10, 11. for they nor no man can say, that the
diseased they have strenghtened, or healed that which was sick etc. Ezekiel. 34.
4. And it is known to all that know them, that if ever there were any that
assumed to themselves the name of Levites, who departed out of the way, and
caused many to stumble at the Law, and corrupted the Covenant of Levi, and
therefore were deservedly contemptible and base before all the people ( Mal. 2.
8, 9.) they are the men. Let any man judge then, whether they have the
qualifications of the Messengers of the Lord of hosts. Hence, they that can
give no proof of their Ministry, but that which proves them to be such whom the
Lord condemns, and such who deserve to be contemned of all, cannot be
acknowledged to be qualified as the Lords Ministers: But the Prelatick Curats
can give no proof of their Ministry etc. Ergo -- (3) The qualification of
Aptness to teach is wanting, yea incompatible with them, not only such of them
as are noted for ignorance, of whom clearly that is verified, they are blind
watchmen, they are all ignorant (Isa. 56. 10.) but even their Greatest Clerks
and Rabbis may fitly be called after the name of their forefathers, whom
Christ calls blind Leaders of the blind, concerning whom he gives a Command to
let them alone Math. 15. 14. Either generally they are discovered to be such
Masters of Israel, as know not these things John. 3. 10. being men not
exercised in Religion, and have not Learned the Truth as it is in Jesus: or
they are such, as if they have had gifts or Grace, yet now they are palpably
blasted of God, and so cannot profit the people at all, being such as do not
stand in Gods Counsel, for then they should have turned the people from their
evil way, and so they are not apt to teach others when they are not taught of
God, but steal his words every one from their Neighbor, clearly discovering
they are not sent of Him Ier. 23. 21, 22, 30, 32. And because they do not stand
in Gods Counsel, they cannot declare all the Counsel of God, Act. 20. 27. For
they can neither be apt to teach repentance toward God, since they cannot be
supposed to be sensible of these sins to be repented of, for which the Land
perishes and is burnt up like a wilderness, Ier. 9. 12. for then they would
first repent themselves of their oun Conformity with Prelacy, of their breach
of Covenant etc. All that they can do in such a subject is, to see vain and
foolish things, and not to discover the Lands intiquity, but to see false
burdens, and causes of banishment, Lam. 2. 14. Nor can they be apt to teach
faith, seeing in many things they teach otherwise than Christ has taught us in
his word, and consen^ not to wholesome words and to the Doctrine which is
according to Godlyness from such the Command is to withdraw, 1. Tim. 6. 3-5.
whose Mouths must be stopped when they teach things which they ought not, Tit.
1. 9-11. which is undeniable to all that know what sort of stuff they Preach,
contrary to the word of God, and the principles of our Covenanted Reformation.
Hence if none of them be apt to teach, then none of them is fit to be heard;
But none of them is apt to teach: Ergo -- It is true private Christians may not
judge of the enduements and qualifications of Ministers, yet every private
Christian h^th the judgment of discretion, and that way may judge such an one
if he appear qualified according to the rule of the word; And may doubt if he
be a qualified Minister Coram Deo, wanting these qualifications which the word
requires, Apol. Relation Sect 15. p. 283. Secondly, They have not the Lawful
Call of a Minister of Christ, So much as an External Call of his Institution:
which I prove thus. They that have Presentations from Patrons, and Collations
from Prelates, and no more for a Call, have no Lawful Call at all: But the
Curats have presentations from Patrons, and collations from Prelates, and no
more for a Call: Ergo they have no Lawful Call at all. The Minor cannot be
doubted: for in this Government, the Ministers Mission, Call, Ordination, and
Relation to such a people over whom he is to officiate, flows all from the
Prelate; the Congregational Eldership has not the least interest in it: hence
the Presbyterian way of Calling Pastors was ranversed by the Parliament, when
Prelacy was set up, and the old custom of Patronages was restored, Rectius
Instru. Consut. of 1 Dial. chap. 4. page 3. The Major proposition may be proven
by parts. First, presentations from Patrons cannot give a Lawful Call: for
besides what other reasons might be given against this old relict of Popish
bondage of patronages; It destroys that privilege and Liberty of the Church
in calling their oun Pastors, and makes all Intruders, without the Churches
choice; whereas the flock are allowed a Judgment of Discretion, knowledge of,
and consent to the admission of their Pastors, to whom they entrust their Souls
Directions, before they be subject and obey him in the Lord, for otherwise he
is a stranger that has not come in at the door, and they must not, nor will
not be imposed upon, John. 10. 1-5. They had an Interest in choosing and
nominating even the Apostles, though there were other Apostles of infallible
knowledge as to qualifications, present to ordain them: And they appointed two
to be chosen by Lots, Act. 1. 23. and even the Deacons were looked out and
chosen by the people, and appointed over their business Act. 6. 3. Much less
ought Ministers, to be thrust upon such a weighty employment, to pleasure Great
Men who are Patrons, since in their faithfulness the people are infinitely more
concerned. Rectius Instruen. ubi Supra. Hence, if the Curates have no Call but
what destroys the Peoples Privilege, they have no Lawful Call at all, neither
ought they to be ouned or Countenanced as Called Ministers: But by the
Presentation of Patrons they have no Call, but what destroys the peoples
Privilege: Ergo -- Next Collations from Prelates cannot give a lawful Call: for
(1) they cannot give that to others which they have not themselves: But they
have not a Lawful Call themselves, because they are not Lawful officers, as is
clear, and may be proven afterward. (2) The only way of Conveyance of an
ordinary Call to this office, is by the Act of a Presbytrie, Tim. 4. 14. And by
Ministers their ordaining Elders in every Church, with the Consent of that
Church: But a Prelates Collation is not this Act of a Presbytrie. (3) That which
only makes a man a Prelates Depute, cannot give him a Call to the Ministry of
Christ: But this Collation only makes a man a Prelates Depute. Or thus, A
Prelates Depute is no Minister: But a Curate is a Prelates Depute: Ergo -- That a
Prelates Depute is no Minister, I Prove: not only from that, that a Prelat qua
talis is not a servant of Christ but an enemy, and therefore cannot confer upon
another that Dignity to be Christ's Servant; but from this, that the Scripture
allows no Derivation of deputed Officers. If no Officers of Christ can have
Deputes of Christ's Institution; then the Deputes that they make cannot be
Christ's Officers of His Institution: But no Officers of Christ can have Deputes
by Christ's Institution: every man that has any piece of Stewardship in Gods
family, must ever see and execute it immediately by himself, and wait upon it
Romans 12. 7, 8. That Curats are Prelates Deputes is clear: for they are subject
to them in order and jurisdiction, and derive all their Power from them, and
are accountable to them. Therefore they cannot be acknowledged with confidence
of conscience to be Christ's Ministers, because they have not such a visible
evidence of the Call of Christ, as in reason and charity does oblige all men to
receive the person so called, as truly sent: which things are so evident in
themselves, that whoever denies them, is obliged by the same consequence to
affirm, that if Simon Magus had in his horrid wickedness purchased the
Apostleship by money, the Christian world had been bound to receive him as an
Apostle, Napht. p. 105. 106. Prior Edit. That their Ministry is the Lords
Ordinance he plainly denied, Napht. page 109. They have nothing like a solemn
ordinanation, having no imposition of hands of the Presbytrie with fasting and
prayer, according to the order of the Gospel, but the sole warrant and mission
of the Prelat, and therefore it cannot be Lawful to countenance such, and to
look upon them as Lawful Ministers Apol. Relat. Sect. 15. page 283. It will be
objected here. 1. That then their baptism is no baptism, if they be no
Ministers. Ans. (1) what sad consequences may follow upon the nulling of their
office, let them see to it who either send such ^orth or employ them. Apol.
Relat. ibid. page 294. the best way to avoid these inconveniences is not to
countenance them. But (2) the same Answers may serve which are adduced for
Popish Baptismes and ordinations: And factum sometimes valet, quod fieri non
debuit. Next it will be Obj. 2. That many of the Curats were in the Ministry
before, therefore the Argument is not stringent against them. Ans. The one half
of it about the qualifications does still urge them, through the want of which,
and their base Treachery and betraying their trust, and perjuries in breaking
Covenant, they have really forfaulted their Ministry, and loosed all from an
obligation to hear them, or any other to whom these Scripture Characters may be
applied, and brings all under the guilt of partaking with them that hear them.

II. It is necessary also, that all whom we may lawfully hear as Ministers and
Ambassadors of Christ, should not only have had a commission from Christ,
sometimes conveyed to them in his orderly appointed way, by and from approven
Church officers; but they must have it then when we hear them, at this time
when we oune Communion with them. For if they have sometimes had it, and
forefaulted it or changed it, by taking anew right another way, it is all one
in point of ouning them as if they had none at all: and we must not meddle with
such changelings, in things that they and we must not come and go upon Prove.
24. 21. Now plain it is that some Curats sometimes had a commission from
Christ, when they were Presbyters; but now they have changed their holding, and
taken a new right from them who are no Officers of Christ, invested with power
to confirm or Convey a Ministerial Mission, and so they have forefaulted what
they had Mr Durham, in a digression on this subject of hearing, shows that
Ministers may forefeit on Revel. chap. 1. page 55. in 4 to. In matter of
hearing (says he) it is not so hard to discern, who are to be counted to speak
without Gods commission; because ordinarely such have no warrantable Call at
all (no not in the outward form, and so cannot be counted but to run unsent)
or by palpable defection from the Truth, and Commission given them in that
Call, they have forefeited their commission: And so no more are to be counted
Ambassadors of Christ, or Watchmen of His flock, than a Watchmen of the City
is to be accounted an observer thereof, when he has publicly made defection
to the Enemy, and taken on with him. Let the Indulged and Addressing Ministers
advert to this; And consider, whether or not the truly tender have reason to
discountenance them, while they continue in their palpable defection. But
undenyably this refells that Objection of the Curats Ordination before they
were Curats: For they that change their holding of a right, and take a new
right which is null, they forego and forefeit their old right, and all right:
But the Prelatick Curats have changed their holding of their right, and taken a
new one which is null: Therefore they have foregone and forefeited their old
one. The minor I prove thus. They who had aright from Christ by Conveyance of
His officers, and take a new grant for the exercise of it, not from Christ, but
by conveyance of such as are none of His officers, they change their hold^ng
and take a new one which is null: But the Prelatick Curats who had a right by
conveyance of His officers, have taken a new grant for the exercise of it, not
from Christ, but by conveyance of the Prelat, which is none of His officers:
Ergo -- The stress of all will ly in the Probation of this, that the Prelat is
none of Christ's officers, and therefore the conveyance of a power from him is
not from Christ. Which I prove. 1. Because His office is cross to the very
nature of Gospel Church Government, and therefore he cannot be a Gospel Church
Ruler. Christ discharged His officers to exercise Dominion (or Lordship Luke
22. 25.) or Authority as the Gentiles did, but that the Chiefest should be only
a Minister Math. 22. 25, 26. The Apostle Paul disclaims Dominion over the
Church, 2 Cor. 1. ult. Peter exhorts the Elders not to be Lords over Gods
Heritage 1 Pet. 5. 3. The Authority of Church officers then is not a Desp^tick
power, but a Ministerial Stewardship. But the Diocesan Bishop is both a Lordly
Title and Power, having all Authority in the Diocese derived from him, as being
as it were the Universal Pastor, and so taking upon him a power, which is
neither commanded, nor can be discharged. Hence, he that subjects his His
Ministry to the Domination of a strange Lord, inverting the Nature of Gospel
Church Government, cannot be ouned in His Ministry: But all Curats subject
their Ministry etc. Ergo -- 2. Because he is an officer Distinct from and
superior to a Presbyter or Pastor; whereas the Scripture makes a Bishop and
Presbyter all one. The Elders of the Church of Ephesus are called Episcopi or
Overseers Act. 20. 17. 28. An ordainded Elder must be a blameless Bishop, as
the steward of God, Tit. 1. 5, 7. Again, it cannot be shown where the Scripture
mentions either Name, qualification, work, Duty, or ordination of an ordinary
Church officer Superior to Presbyters, and which are not likewise appropriat to
them, who are called Rulers, Governors, Bishops. In all the Holy Ghost His
purposed recitalls of ordinary Church Officers, there is not the least hint of
a Diocesan Bishop: and yet a Deacon is described, the meanest officer, in His
work and qualifications. Hence then, if this Diocesan Prelate be such an
uncouth beast, that neither in name nor Nature is found in the word of God, all
the power derived from him is null: But the first is true: Ergo -- 3. Because
every Officer in the Scripture relates to the flock (except the extraordinary
Officers, who were further extended, now ceased) Bishops of Ephesus were
overseers over the flock Act. 20. the Elders that Peter writes to were over the
flock. But this Diocesan Antiscriptural Monster, pretends to be over the
Shepherds: And invents new Degrees and orders of Superiority and inferiority,
of officers of the same kind, beside and against the Scripture, which makes all
Apostles alike, and all Evangelists, so all Teachers: though there be a
Distinction and Superiority in diverse Kinds, yet not in the same. God has set
some in the Church, first Apostles, Secondarly Prophets, thirdly Teachers 1
Cor. 12. 28. but not among Teachers some above others, in a power of order and
Jurisdiction. Hence, an Officer over officers of the same kind is not an
Officer of Christ's institution, And consequently any power conveyed from his is
null: But a Prelat pretends to be an officer over Officers of the same kind:
Ergo -- 4. Because every officer in the Church has equally, and in perfect
parity, equal power and Authority allowed them of God in the exercise of both
the keys, both of order and Jurisdiction: All ruling Elders may rule alike,
and deserve equal honor: And all Preaching Elders have the like Authority, and
the like honor conferred upon them 1 Timothy 6. 17. The scripture attributes both
power of Order and Jurisdiction to all Preaching Presbyters equally. They must
oversee the flock (or as the word is, do the part of a Bishop over them) Act.
20. 28. and they must also feed the flock 1 Pet. 5. 2. Subjection and obedience
is one, to them all alike: All that are over us and admonish us, we must esteem
highly for their works sake 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. and obey and submit our selves to
them that watch for our souls Heb. 13. 17. we find also excommunication belongs
to all alike 2 Cor. 2. 6. and ordination 1 Timothy 4. 14. But the Diocesan Prelat
takes from Presbyters to himself power of ordination, assuming only his Curats
for fashions sake, and the sole decisive power in Church Judicatories, wherein
he has a Negative voice; like a Diotrephes, the first Prelat who loved to have
the preeminence 3 John. 9. the only precedent for Prelacy in the Scripture.
Hence, he that would take all power to himself, which is undivided and equal
to all officers by Christ's appointment, has none by Christ's allowance, but is
to be reckoned an usurping Diotrephes: But the Diocesan Prelat would take all
the power to himself, which is undivided and equal to all. By all which it
appears, the prelate being no Authorized Church Officer of Christ's, no
Authority can be derived from him; And so that such as betake themselves to
this pretended power for warranting them in the function, can warrantably claim
no deference thereupon, nor can be ouned as Ministers whatever they were
before. For this were an acknowledging of the power and Authority of Prelates
(especially when the Law commands our hearing as a submitting to them.) The
reason is because these men came forth from the Prelat, having no other call or
warrant but what the Prelat gives. And so a receiving of them will be a
receiving of the Prelate, as a refusing of them will be accounted a slighting
of the Prelat and his power. Apol. Relat. 15. page 272.

III. It is necessare also, that all with whom we oune Communion as Ministers,
should be Christ's Ambassadors, having then when we hear them, and holding
still their Commission from Christ as King, and only Head of His Church;
conveyed not only from Church officers, in a way that He has revealed as the
Prophet of His Church, but in a way of Dependence upon and subordination to
Christ as King, who ascending far above Principalities and Powers, appointed
and gave the Gifts of the Ministry Ephesians. 4. 8. 11. and set them in the Church 1.
Cor. 12. 28. and gave them commission to go and teach the Nations, by virtue of
that all Power that was given to Him in Heaven and Earth Math. 28. 18, 19. If
then they take a new holding and close with a new Conveyance of the Ministry,
and of the Power to exercise the same, from a new Architectonick usurped Power
in the Church, encroaching on Christ's Royal prerogative, we dare not Homologat
such an affront to Christ, as to give them the respect of His Ambassadors,
when they become the servants of men, and subject even in Ministerial functions
to another Head then Christ; for then they are the Ministers of men, and by
men, and not by Jesus Christ, and God the Father, who raised Him from the dead,
because they do not hold the Head, Col. 2. 19. Hence those that receive and
derive their Church Power from, and are subordinate in its exercise to, another
Head then Christ Jesus, should not be received and subjected to as the
Ministers of Christ in His Church: But the Prelates and their curats do receive
and derive their Church Power from, and are subordinate in its exercise to,
another Head then Christ: Therefore they should not be received etc. The first
Proposition cannot be denied. The Second is proved thus: Those officers in the
Church, Professing themselves such, that derive their Church Power from, and
are subordinate in its exercise to, a Power truly Architectonick and Supreme in
the Church (to wit the Magistrate) beside Christ; Do derive their Power from
and are subordinate in its exercise to another Head than Christ Jesus: But so
it is that Prelates and their Curats do derive etc. Ergo -- The Major is
evident: for whosoever has a Supreme Architectonick Power in and over the
Church, must be a Head to the same, and the fountain of all Church Power. The
Minor is also clear, from the foregoing Historical Deduction, manifesting the
Present Prelacy to be Gross Erastianisme: for the disposal of the Government of
the Church is declared by Law to be the Croun right and an inherent perpetual
Prerogative, and thereupon the Bishops are restored to the Episcopal function;
And it is expressly Declared, that there is no Church Power in the
Church-office bearers, but what depends upon and is subordinate unto the
Supremacy, and authorized by the Bishops, who are declared accountable to the
King for the Administration. By virtue of which Ecclesiastic Supremacy, He put
excomunication and spiritual Censures, and consequently the Power of the Keys,
into the hands of Persons merely Civil, in the Act for the High Commission.
Hence it is clear, that as the fountain of all Church Government, he imparts
his Authority to such as he pleases, and the Bishops are nothing else but his
Commissioners in the exercise of that Ecclesiastic power, which is originally
in Himself, and that the Curats are only His under Clerks. All the stress will
lie in proving, that this Monster of a Supremacy, from which the Prelates and
their Curats have all their Authority, is a Great Encroachment on the Glory of
Christ as King: which will appear if we briefly consider these Particulars. 1.
It usurps upon Christ's Prerogative, who only has all undoubted right to this
Architectonick and Magisterial Dominion over the Church, His oun Mediatory
Kingdom: not only an Essential right by His Eternal Godhead, being the
Everlasting Father, whose goings forth has been of old from Everlasting Isa.
9. 6. Mic. 5. 2. in recognizance of which, we oune but one God the Father, and
one Lord, by whom are all things and we by Him 1. Cor. 8. 6. But also a
Covenant-right, by Compact with the Father, to bear the Glory and rule upon His
Throne, by virtue of the Counsel of Peace between them both Zech. 6. 13. A
Donative right by the Fathers Delegation, by which He has all power given in
Heaven and in Earth, Math. 28. 18. and all things given unto His hand John. 3.
35. and all judgment and Authority to execute it, even because He is the Son of
man, John. 5. 22, 27. and to be Head over all things to the Church Ephesians. 1. 22.
An Institute right, by the Fathers inaugaration, who has set Him as King in
Zion, Psalm. 2. 6. and appointed Him Governor, that shall rule His people
Israel Math. 2. 6. An Acquisite right, by His oun purchase, by which He has
merited and obtained, not only subjects to Govern, but the Glory of the Sole
Sovereignty over them in that relation, A name above every name Phil. 2. 9.
which is, that He is the Head of the Church, which is as much His Peculiar
Prerogative, as to be Savior of the body Ephesians. 5. 23. A Bellical right by
Conquest, making the people fall under Him, Psalm. 45. 4. and be willing in the
Day of His power, Psalm. 110. 3. and overcoming those that make war with Him,
Rev. 17. 14. An Hereditary right by Proximity of blood and Primogeniture, being
the first born higher then the Kings of the Earth, Psalm. 89. 27. and the first
born from the dead, that in all things He might have the preeminence, Col. 1.
18. An Elective right, by His peoples choice and surrender, having a Croun
wherewith His Mother Crouned Him, in the day of His Espousals Cant, 3. ult. By
all which undoubted Titles, It is His Sole incommunicable Prerogative, without
a Copartner or Competitor, Coordinate or subordinate, to be Judge, and only
Lawgiver and King in Spirituals, Isa. 33. 22. to be that one Lawgiver, Iam. 4.
12. who only can give the power of the keys to His officers, (which
Comprehends all the power they have) Math. 16. 19. to be that one Master over
all Church officers, who are but brethren, Math. 23. 8, 10. in whose Name only
they must perform all Church Acts, and all Parts of their Ministry, and not in
the Name of any Mortal, Math. 28. 18. 19. Math. 18. 20. from whom only they
receive what ever they have to deliver to the Church 1. Cor. 11. 23. To be the
only Instituter of His Officers, who has set them in the Church 1. Cor. 12.
28. and gave them to the Church Ephesians. 4. 11. whose Ambassadors only they are 2.
Cor. 5. 20. from whom they have authority for edification of the Church 2 Cor.
10. 8. 2 Cor. 13. 10. in whose Name only they are to assemble, and keep and
fence their Courts, both the least, Math. 18. 20. and the Greatest Act. 15. But
now all this is usurped by one who is not so much as a Church member, let be a
Church Officer, as such: for the Magistrate is neither, as he is a Magistrate,
otherwise all Magistrates would be Church members. Hence they that have all
their power from a mere usurper on Christ's Prerogative, who is neither member
nor officer of the Church, have none at all to be ouned or received as His
Lawful Ambassadors: But the Prelates and their Curats have all their power from
a mere usurper on Christ's Prerogative, who is neither Member nor officer of the
Church: Ergo -- 2. It confounds the Mediatory Kingdom of Christ with, and
subjects it to, the Kingly Government of the world, removes the Seripture Land
Marks and Limits between civil and Ecclesiastic Powers; in making the
Governors of the State to be Governors of the Church, and denying all Church
Government in the hands of Church officers, Distinct from and independent upon
the civil Magistrate: which clearly derogats from the Glory of Christ's Mediatory
Kingdom, which is altogether distinct from and not subordinate to the
Government of the world, both in the Old Testament and in the New. For, they
have distinct fountains whence they flow: civil Government flows from God
Creator, Church Government from Christ the Lord Redeemer, Head and King of His
Church, whose Kingdom is not of this world, John. 18. 36. though for this end
He came into the world, that He should have a Kingdom there, verse. 37. They
have distinct Objects: civil Government has a civil object, the out ward man;
Church Government a Spiritual object, men considered as Christians: In the Old
Testament, the matters of the Lord are clearly distinguished from the matters
of the King 2 Chronicles. 19. ult. In the new Testament, there are matters of Church
Cognizance which do not at all belong to the civil Magistrate; as in the case
of offense, they must tell the Church, not the civil Magistrate Math. 18. 15.
20. In the case of Excommunication, the Church is to act by virtue of the power
of our Lord Jesus Christ 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5. not by the Magistrates power; In the
case of Absolution, the Church is to Judge what Punishment is sufficient, and
what evidence of repentance is sufficient to remove it, 2 Cor. 2. 6. 7. So in
the case of Trial and ordination of Ministers etc. None of these belong to the
Magistrate. They have distinct Natures: The civil is a Magisterial, the
Ecclesiastic is a Minsterial Government; the one is the power of the sword,
the other of the Keys; The one put forth in Political Punishments, the other
in Ecclesiastic Censures: In the Old Testament, the Magistrates power was
Coactive, by death, banishment, Confiscation etc. Ezra. 7. 26. The Church, by
putting out of the Synagogue, interdiction from Sacred things etc. In the New
Testament, The Magistrates power is described Romans 13. to be that of the sword
by punishment; the power of the Church only in binding and Loosing, Math. 16.
19. They have distinct Ends: the end of the one being the good of the Common
wealth, the other the Churches Edification: In the Old Testament, the end of
the civil Government was one thing, and of the Church another, to wit, to warn
not to trespass against the Lord, in that forecited 2. Chron. 19. 10. In the
New Testament, the end of Magistratical power is to be a terror to evil works,
and a praise te the good, Romans 13. 3. but the end of Church power is
Edification 1 Cor. 5. 5. 2 Cor. 10. 8. 2. Cor. 13. 10. They have distinct
Courts of officers: In the Old Testament, the distinction of the civil and
Ecclesiastic Sanhedrin is known, where there were distinct causes, and Persons
set over them to judge them respectively 2. Chron. 19. ult. In the New
Testament, we find officers given unto the Church 1 Cor. 12. 28. with no
mention of the civil Magistrate at all, And Church Assemblies distinct from
Parliaments or senats (yea when the Magistrate was an Enemy) determining
questions that did not belong to the Magistrate at all Act. 15. we have Rulers
distinct from the Rulers of the Common wealth 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. whom we are to
obey and submit our selves as those who are accountable to Christ only, for to
whom else can they give account of souls? Heb. 13. 17. we have Rulers inferior
to Laborers in word and doctrine, not to be honored so much as they: Sure
these cannot be civil Rulers 1 Timothy 5. 17. we have Rulers commended for trying
Impostors, which were not Magistrates, Rev. 2. 2. And others who are rebuked for
suffering Heretics ibid. verse. 14, 15, 20. which supposes they had Authority
to do it; yet distinct from and not depending on the Magistrate. Besides from
this confusion of the two Governments together, and making the Supreme
Magistrate to be Supreme Governor of the Church, would follow many
absurdities; as that They who are not Church members should be Church officers,
even Heathen Magistrates; yea women should be Church officers; and none should
be chosen for Magistrates, but such as have the qualifications of Church
officers. Sic Apol. Relat. Sect. 12. page 190. Rectius Instruen. Confut. 1
Dial. chap. 6. page 50. Hence, they that in deriving their Authority do
confound the tuo Governments, civil and Ecclesiastic, and take it all from a
mere civil power, cannot be ouned as having any Authority of Christ's
Institution: But the Prelates and their Curats, in deriving their Authority, do
confound the tuo Governments civil and Ecclesiastic and take it all from a
mere civil power. This same Argument equally militates against hearing the
Indulged Ministers who have taken a License and warrant from the Usurper of
this Supremacy: because it is highly injurious to Christ's Headship; very
contrary to to Presbyterian Principles; clearly Homologatorie of the Supremacy;
plainly Prejudicial to the power of the people; very much establishing
Erastianisme; Sadly obstructive and destructive to the good of the Church;
wronging our cause and ground of suffering; Strengthening the Prelates hands;
contradictory to our Covenants* Prejudging the Meetings of Gods people; and
heinously Scandalous and offensive: As is clear by, and unanswerably poven in
the History of the Indulgence.

IV. There is a necessity that any man whom we may Join with as a Minister,
must not only be a minister, and a Minister clothed with Christ's commission
then when we Joins with Him, but He must also have a right to administer there
where we Ioin with Him. Else we can look upon him no otherwise than a thief and
a robber. whom Christ's sheep should not hear Io. 10. 1-5. Now the Prelates and
Curats, though they should he accounted and acknowledged Ministers, yet they
have not a right to officiate where they have intruded themselves. Hence we
have several Arguments, as. 1. They who have no just Authority, nor right to
officiate fixedly in this Church as the proper Pastors of it, ought not to be
Received but withdrawn from: But the Prelates and their Curats have no just
Authority, or right to officiate in this Church as her proper Pastors:
Therefore they ought not to be received, but withdrawn from. All the debate is
about the Minor, which may thus be made good. They who have entered into and do
officiate fixedly in this Church, without her Authority and Consent, have no
right so to do: But the Prelates and their Curats have entered into and
officiate fixedly in this Church, without her Authority and Consent: Ergo --
The Major is manifest: for if this Church have a just right and power of
Electing and Calling of Ministers, then they who enter into and officiate
fixedly in this Church, without her Authority and Consent, have no just
Authority or right so to do: But this Church has a just right and power of
Electing and Calling of Ministers, as all true Churches have And, if it were
not evident from what is said above, might be easily demonstrated from
Scripture. The minor, to wit, that the Prelates and their Curats have entered
into and officiate fixedly in this Church, without her Authority and consent,
is evident, from matter of fact: for there was no Church Judicatory called or
convocated, for bringing of Prelates in to this Church; but on the contrary her
Judicatories were all cashiered and discharged, and all her officers turned out
to let them in; And all was done immediately by the King and Acts of Parliament
without the Church; A practice wanting a Precedent in this and (for any thing
we know) in all other Churches: All that the Curats can say is, that they came
in by the Bishop and Patron, who are not the Church, nor have any power from
her for what they do; all their right and power is founded upon and derived
from the Supremacy, whereby the Diocesan Erastian Prelat is made the Kings
Delegate and substitute, only empowered thereto by his Law. This is Mr Smiths
1st and 6 Argum. If we suppose a particular Congregation acknowledging their
oun Lawful Pastor, and a few violent Persons arise and bring in a Minister by
plain force, and cast out their Lawful Pastor; Are not the faithful in that
Church obliged to relinquish the Intruder, and not only Discountenance him, but
endeavor his ejection? This is our case Napth. Page 106. 5. Prior Edit. 2. If
we cannot submit to these Curats, without consenting to the great Encroachments
made upon the Privileges of this Church, then we cannot submit to them without
sin: But we cannot submit to them without consenting to the great Encroachments
made upon the Privileges of this Church: Therefore we cannot submit to them
without sin. The Minor is all the question: but instances will make it out. As
first, The robbing of the Church of the Privilege of Election of her Pastors,
and substituting the bondage of Patrons presentations, is a great Encroachment
upon the Privilege of this Church: But accepting of Curats as Ministers
Lawfully called, notwithstanding that they want the Election of the people, and
have nothing for their warrant but a presentation from the Patron, were a
Consenting to that Robbery and wicked Substitution. It will be of no force to
say, our forefathers did submit to this, and to a Ministry who had no other
Call. This is answered above in the Narrative: Its a poor Consequence to say,
the posterity may return backward, because their forefathers could not advance
further forward. Secondly, the thrusting out of Lawful Ministers without any
Cause but their adhering to the Covenanted work of Reformation, and the
thrusting in others in their rooms who denied the same, is a great Encroachment
on the Churches Privileges; But embracing and encouraging Curats by
countenancing their pretended Ministry were a consenting to this violent
extrusion and intrusion. The minor is proven thus. They who leave the extruded
and countenance the Intruded, they consent to the extrusion and intrusion, and
declare they confess the Intruded his right is better than his who is extruded;
But they who embrace and encourage Curats by countenancing their pretended
Ministry, do leave the extruded, to wit, their old Ministers, and countenance
the intruded: Ergo -- To say, that people in this case should protest against
these Encroachments, is frivolous; for withdrawing is the best protestation:
And if after their protestation they still countenance the Encroachment, they
should undo their oun protestation. The same Argument will militate against
countenancing the Indulged, or any that obtained Authority to Preach in any
place by a power encroaching on the Churches Liberties. There is an objection
to be removed here, from Math. 23. 2, 3. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses
Chair, therefore whatever they bid you observe, that observe and do; therefore
they who without a title usurp the office may be heard. Ans. 1. The case is no
ways alike; for then the Lord had no other Church in the world but that, which
was confined in its Solemnities of worship to that place, where they intruded
themselves: He had not yet instituted the New Testament form of
Administration, in its ordinances and Officers. Therefore the Head of the
Church being present might give a Toleration, Durante beneplacito: But it is
not so now. But 2. Our Lords words bears no command for the people to hear them
at all, but only not to reject sound Doctrine, because it came from them:
Surely he would not bid them hear such, as He calls Plants that His Father had
never planted, whom He bids let alone, Math. 15. 13, 14. and who were Thieves
and Robbers whom His Sheep should not hear.

V. They must not only be Ministers, and acknowledged as such then and there,
when and where we join with them; but they must be such as we can oune Church
Communion with in the Ordinances administrated by them, as to the matter of
them. Otherwise if they pervert and corrupt their Ministry, by preaching and
maintaining errors, either in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, or Government,
contrare to the Scriptures, our Confessions, and principles of our Covenanted
Reformation, and contradictory to our Testimony founded thereupon and aggreable
thereunto, maintaining errors condemned thereby, or condemning Truths
maintained thereby, we must withdraw from them. For if any seek to turn us away
from the Lord our God, we most put away that evil and not consent nor hearken
to them, Deuteronomy. 13. 5, 8. We must cease to hear the instruction that causes to
err from the words of knowledge, Prove. 19. 27. we must have a care of these
Leaders that will cause us to err lest we be destroyed with them Isa. 9. 16.
we must mark these who contradict the Doctrine that we have Learned, and avoid
them Romans 16. 17. If any man teach otherwise we must withdraw our selves from
such 1 Timothy 6. 3, 5. If there come any and bring not this Doctrine, we must not
receive him, nor bid him God speed, in that work of his preaching or practicing
against any of the Truths, we have received from the word 2 John 10, 11. Hence
we most not hear false Teachers, who in preaching and prayer bring forth false
Doctrine contrary to the principles of our Reformation: But the Curats are
false Teachers, who in preaching and prayer bring forth salse Doctrine etc.
Therefore we must not hear them. The Minor is certain, in that not only many of
them are tainted with points of Popery and Ar^inianisme; but all of them do
teach false Doctrine tending to seduce the hearers; when in their preaching
they cry up the Lawfullnesse of Prelacy, and vent bitter invectives against
Presbyterian Government, condemn the work of Reformation, and enveigh against
the Covenant, and so teach and encourage people to follow them in open
perjurie, and condemning all our Testimony, as nothing but Treason and
Sedition; which we are persuaded is Truth, and that therefore they are
Blasphemers: And in their prayers, stuffed with error and larded with
Blasphemy, they reproach the work of Reformation, and the power of Godlyness,
and pray for a blessing on the Prelates, and on their courses which are cursed;
besides their parasitick prayers for the King, to be blessed in his Government
when stated in opposition to Christ, and several other things that tender
consciences cannot go along with them therein. And yet if they hear them they
must go along and actively concur with them, as their mouth to God. If it be
obj^cted here: That this does not strike against all, nor against any at all
times, because some Preaches always sound Doctrine, and all preach sometime
sound Doctrine; and the like may be said of their prayers: Therefore sometimes
at least they may be heard. I ans. 1. This may be alleged for all Heretics,
who do all at sometimes preach sound Doctrine, and yet these Scriptures are
stringent against them at all times, which I have adduced: for by these fr^its
which they bring forth at sometimes, they show themselves to be such as we must
beware of at all times. 2. We cannot know when they will Preach sound Doctrine,
seeing by their subjection to that Government, they are obliged to maintain
Prelacy, and impugn our Covenanted constitution.

VI. They must not only be such as we can Join with in the Ordinances as to
the Matter of them, but in the manner also they must be such Administrators, as
we are obliged in charity to think the Lord will approve of them, and their
Administrations, and of us in our Communion with them; Or at least that in
their manner of Dispensing ordinances, they be not such as we find are under a
recorded sentance of dreadful punishment, both against them and their
partakers: for if it be so, it is as sufficient a ground to withdraw from them,
as for men to withdraw from a Company staying in a house, that they see will
fall and smother them in its ruin; yea it is as warrantable to separate from
them, as for Israel to separate themselves from the Congregation of the Rebels
who were to be consumed in a moment, Numb. 16. 21. or for the Lords people to
come out of Babylon, that they receive not of her plagues Rev. 18. 4. Now we
find that not only the Prophets of Baal, and Inticers to Idolatry, and Leaders
to error upon the matter are threatened, and the people for adhering to them
but we find also (as is observed by Rect. Instruend. confut. dial. chap. 1.
page 21.) many terrible charges and Adjurations laid upon Ministers, in
reference to a faithful Diligence in their Ministerial function, and a suitable
Testimony concerning the sin and duty of the time, that they are commanded to
cry aloud and show the people their sin, Isa. 58. 1. and as they would not have
the blood of souls upon them, to give faithful warning touching the peoples
case and hazard, sin, and duty, especially in times of great sin and judgment,
when God is terribly pleading His Controversy with them, Ezekiel. 3. 17.
therefore they must be instant in season and out of season 2 Timothy 4. 2. And for
their negligence and unfaithfulness herein, we find many Scripture woes and
threatenings thundered against them. When in the deceit of their oun heart they
promise assured Peace, when the Lord is pleading against a Generation, they are
threatened to be consumed with sword and famine, and the people to whom they
Prophecy shall be cast out in the Streets, Ier. 14. 13. 15. 16. therefore we
dare not admit them to Prophecy to us. When they strengthen the hands and
harden the hearts of evildoers, that none does return from his wickedness,
the Lord threatens to feed them with wormwood, and commands not to hearken to
them, Ier. 23. 14-16. their blood shall be required at their hands Ezekiel. 3. 18.
one builds a wall, and another daubs it with untempered mortar, then ye o great
hailstones shall fall, and they shall be consumed in the midst thereof Ezekiel.
13. 10, 11, 14, 18, 22. we dare not join with either builders or daubers of
such a work, as is carried on to the dishonor of Christ and ruining of
Reformation, nor by our countenance and concurrence strengthen either builders
or daubers. lest we also be consumed in the midst thereof. When there is a
Conspiracy of the Prophets, and the Priests violate the Law, and profane holy
things, and show no difference between the unclean and the clean then the Lord
will pour out His Indignation upon all, Ezekiel. 22. 25 -- ad^fin. We would
endeavor to keep our selves free of having any hand in that Conspiracy. These
Scriptures do give the perfect pourtracture of our Curats, in the conviction of
all that know them. Hence we draw a complexe Argument: Such Ministers as can do
no good by their Ministry, but a great deal of hurt to their hearers, and
expose themselves and them both to the Indignation of a jealous God, are not to
be heard: But the Curats are such as can do no good by their Ministry, but a
great deal of hurt to their hearers, and expose themselves and them both to the
Indignation of the jealous Lord: Therefore they are not to be heard. The
connection of the Major is clear from what is said above. The Minor is also
evident from the application of these Scriptures, thus: They that in the deceit
of their oun heart promise Peace to, and strengthen the hands of evil doers,
and give them not warning, but seduce them by daubing their wickedness, and
show no difference between the unclean and the clean etc. are such as can do no
good by their Ministry, but a great deal of hurt to hearers, and expose
themselves and them both to the Indignation of God: But the Curats are such:
and all others who are so unfaithful as give no warning against but Justify
the sins of the times. To be short, the Minor of both these foregoing Arguments
is evident from the experience of all that go to the Curats, who wrong thereby
their oun souls, mar their edification, and run to Cisterns without water. What
blessing can be expected upon the labors of such, who having perjured
themselves in taking on with the Prelates, are prosecuting that Course of
defection, and making themselves Captains to lead the people back to Egypt,
encouraging profanity and wickedness, being themselves Patterns and Patrons of
the times corruptions? And seeing a blessing cannot be expected upon their
labors, but rather a curse, as daily experience makes good, when instead of
any work of conversion or conviction among people, there is nothing seen but a
fearful hardening in profanity ignorance and Atheism; so that many that seemed
to have somewhat like Religion before, through hearing of them, are turned
loose and laxe in all Duties: yea never can it be instanced these 27 years,
that they have brought one soul to Christ, from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan unto God; but many instances might be given of their murdering
souls, as indeed they can not be free of it, who cannot warn nor declare the
whole Counsel of God. Hence these who cannot but be soul-Murderers, may not be
heard nor entertained as Soul-Phisicians: But the Curats cannot but be
soul-Murderers: Again we can expect no good from them, but a great deal of
hurt: Seeing their Ministry is not the Lords Ordrnance, which He will approve,
and no performances can be acceptable unto the Lord which are not, in manner as
well as in matter aggreeable to His will: hence the wickedness even of the
Lords Lawful Priests, not only caused the people to abhor the offerings of the
Lord, but even the Lord Himself to abhor His Sanctuary, and to account their
incense an abomination, so that He could not away with the Calling of their
Assemblies, which yet upon the matter were duties. Should not we then hate that
which the Lord hates, and withdraw from that which He has forsaken? But the
Meetings of the Curats for Administration of Ordinances in their way, the Lord
hates, and has signally forsaken: Therefore we should hate and forsake them.
This is confirmed by what Mr Durham says in that digression about hearing
Revel. 1. page 55. in 4to. seeing edification is Gods gift, can it be expected
but in his way, Or can that be accounted His way which He has not warranted.

VII. As we would not partake of their Judgment in countenancing of their
Administration of Ordinances, so we would keep our selves free from all
participation of their sin. For we must not be partakers with any in sin, nor
have fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, that we must reprove,
and that we find the Lord reproves and condemns, Ephesians. 5. 7, 11. And not only
Ministers in ordaining, but people in hearing, may be in hazard of partaking of
some men's sins who enter into the Ministry 1 Timothy 5. 22. we must keep at the
greatest distance from sin. Hence if we cannot hear the Curats without
partaking of their sin, then we must not hear them: But we cannot hear the
Curats without partaking of their sin. Therefore we must not hear them. The
Minor I prove. If hearing of them be a Tessera of our Incorporation with them,
^ Test of our Submission to them, a badge of our comp^yance with them, and sign
of our Approbation of them, then we cannot hear them without partaking of their
sin: But hearing of them is such: The Major cannot be denied, if Prelacy and
conformity therewith be sin, as is in part proven above: for if these be sins,
then we must not incorporate with, nor submit to them, nor comply with them,
nor approve them. The Minor I prove by Parts. 1. Hearing of Curats is a Tessera
of our Incorporation with them. For Communion in Sacred things does infer an
incorporation of the Communicants or Joiners in all cases, both in Lawful and
unlawful Communions 1 Cor. 10. 17-20. All partakers of the bread are one body,
and they which eat of the Sacrificies are partakers of the Altar; And also they
that partake of the Sacrifice offered to Devils, though they do not offer it so
themselves, yet they are incorporate and have fellowship with Devils. And 2
Cor. 6. 14-17. where they that do not come out, and are separate from unlawful
Communions, are expostulated with as making an unequally yoked fellowship,
between righteousness and unrighteousness, light and darkness; Christ and
Belial, the Temple of God and Idols. Hence then, if we cannot partake of their
Sacred things without partaking of their Altar, and becoming one body with
them; and making such an unequally yoked Mixture with them, then we must be
separate: But the first is true from these places. This Argument concludes with
equal force, against joining with any deeply engaged in the gross defections of
the time. 2. Hearing of Curats is a Test of our Submission to them, and
Compliance with them: for so it is required by Law, as the Acts themselves say,
that a cheerful concurrence, countenance, and assistence given to such
Ministers, and attending all the ordinary Meetings for divine worship, is an
evidence of a due ackowledgment of and hearty compliance with his Maj.
Government Ecclesiastical and civil, as now established by Law within this
Kingdom, Act of Parl. Iul. 10. 1663. And themselves look on all such as obey
this Act, as their friends, Hence if this be sinful to submit to them, and
comply with their establishment, in obedience to a sinful Act of Parliament,
then it is sinful to hear them: But the former is true, as has been shown.
Ergo -- 3. Hence it follows by native consequence, that hearing of Curats is a
sign of our Approbation of them: for he that gives that which is required, and
accepted, and Interpreted as an evidence of a due acknowledgment, and of
compliance with the Government Ecclesiastical, gives the sign of his
Approbation of it: But the hearer of Curats does that in obedience to the Act,
requiring, accepting, and expressly interpreting it so: Therefore etc.

VIII. As we would be free of their sin, in approving of, and complying with
their course; so we must endeavor to stand at the greatest Distance from all
appearance of sin in our selves, either by commission or omission, in which our
Joining with them in these circumstances would involve us. For we must astain
from all appearance of evil 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22. and from every thing that
circumstances may make sinful: for otherways suppose a thing might be
materially Lawful and not simply sinful, yet circumstances may make it sinful,
and a countenancing it so circumstantiated, does infer a Communion in these
Circumstances that make it sinful. They that eat of the sacrifice are Partakers
of the Altar, and if the Altar be not of Gods Approbation, the thing offered
though otherwise Lawful to be eaten, cannot justify the eaters, so
circumstantiated. An Idol is nothing, and that which is offered in Sacrifices
to Idols is nothing, yet they who eat of it, when they know it is so
circumstantiated, have fellowship with Devils 1 Cor. 10. 18, 19, 20, 21. And it
is called Idolatry comp. verse. 14. which provokes the Lord to jealousy verse.
22. Especially when an action is so circumstantiated, that it would infer an
omission of our Duty, and a declining from or denying of our Testimony, then it
is clearly sinful. For whosoever shall deny the Lord before men, him will He
deny before His Father, Math. 10. 33. And we must hold fas^ the Profession of
our faith without wavering, Heb. 10. 23. and keep the word of His patience, if
we would be kept in the hour of tentation, and hold it fast that no man take
our Croun Rev. 3. 10, 11. All Truth must be avowed, and practically avowed, on
the greatest hazard: And as this Testimony must be full, so must it be also
constant. It was Demass shame, that the afflictions of the Gospel made him
forsake the Apostle, after great appearances for Christ: And therefore whatever
Truth or Duty is opposed, that becomes the special object of this Testimony.
Rectius Instruend. Consut. 3. Dial. chap. 1. page 18. 19. Hence, if Hearing of
the Curats would infer and involve us under the guilt both of commission of
sin, and omission os Duty, then we cannot hear them without sin: But the former
is true: Therefore also the Latter. I prove the Minor by Parts. First, that it
would infer and involve us under the guilt of Commisssion of sin, All that is
said above does evince it: And besides, palpable breach of Covenant, hereafter
to be charged and cleared: And, Idolatry is a great sin of that na^ur: but the
hearing of the Curats does infer this. Which may be made out, thus: The breach
of the sceond Commandment is Idolatry (for to make the sins against that
Command odious, they are all commprehended under that odious name of
worshipping Images; as the sins against the seventh are called Adultrie,
comprehending all unchaste thoughts, words, and actions) Hearing of Curats is a
breach of the second Command: Ergo -- The Minor I prove thus: Every worship not
according to Christ's appointment, is a breach of the second Commandment: But
hearing of Curats is a worship not according to Christ's appointment. Which I
prove thus: A worship enjoined by and performed in obedience to a Law,
establishing a humane Ordinance in the Church, besides and against the
Institution of Christ, is a worship not according to Christ's appointment: But
the hearing of Curats is a worship enjoined by and performed in obedience to a
Law establishing a humane Ordinance, to wit, Diocesan Erastian Prelacy, with
the Curats their substitutes. Hence also the second does follow by necessary
consequence, that it would infer and involve us under the guilt of Omission of
Duty. For first, if reductively it may involve us under the guilt of Idolatry
and breach of the second Commandment, then it will infer the guilt of omission
of these necessary Duties incumbent to the Lords people with a reference to
Idolatry; to make no Covenant with them nor with their Gods, nor let them dwell
in the Land lest they make us sin, Exodus 23. 32, 33 Exodus 34. 14, 15. to
overthrow their Altars, and break their Pillars, and destroy the names of them
out of the place Deuteronomy. 12. 3. Judge* 2. 2. I do not adduce these precepts, to
stretch them to the full measure of the demerit of the grossest of Idolaters:
for as there are degrees of breaches or the Commandment, some grosser some
smaller, so there are also degrees of punishment, and as to the manner of
destroying and extirpating all pieces of Idolatry: But that the Commands being
founded upon a Moral ground, lest they (...) and snares unto us, do oblige us
to some endeavor (...), extirpating and overthrowing all Pieces or (...)
according to the word and our Covenants; And (...) true and right Zeal of God,
should and would not only inspire all with an unanimous aversion against the
profane intruding Curats, but animate us as one man to drive away these wolves
and theives, and to eradicate these plants which our heavenly Father never
planted, Napht. Prior edit. page 108. The least Duty that can be inferred is
that of the Apostles, flee from Idolatry 1 Co,. 10. 14. which Idolatry there
mentioned to be avoided, is to eat of the sacrifices offered to Idols: whence
we infer that if to eat of things consecrated to Idols be Idolatry, then also
to partake of Sacred things consecrated by Idols must be Idolatry; as the
Curats dispensing of Ordinances is consecrated by, and has all its Sanction
from, an I^ol of Diocesan Erastian Prelacy: But we see the Apostle expresses
the former: Therefore we may infer the Latter. Further it will also infer a
declining from and denying a Necessary Testimony, in the case circumstantiated.
Even the smallest matter is great, when a Testimony is concerned in it, were it
but the circumstance of an open window; Daniel durst not omit it upon the
greatest hazard. And now this is clearly come to a case of confession, when
there is no other way to exoner our consciences before God and the world, and
declare our Nonconformity to this course of backsliding, no getting of wrongs
redrest or corruptions in the Ministry removed but by this practice: And
certainly some way we must give public Testimony against these courses, and
there is no otherway so harmless and innocent as this, though suffering follow
upon it Apol. Relat. Sect. 14. 272. 273. And now there is no other way
apparent, whereby the difference shall be kept up betuixt such as honestly mind
the Covenanted work of Reformation, and the corrupt Prelatical and Malignant
Enemies. but this Argument also will infer the expediency of withdrawing, from
all Ministers with whom our circumstantiat Joining would involve us in a
participation with their defections.

IX. As we would endeavor to avoid Sin in our selves; So we must have a care
to give no occasion of others sinning, by our taking Liberty in a promiscuous
Joining in Church Communion, whereby we may offend and stumble the consciences
of others: for to that, in this as well as in other things, we must have a
special respect, and forbear things not only for our oun unclearness, but for
the sake of others also. If therefore the Hearing of Curats be a Scandal, we
must refuse it, be the hazard what will. For who so shall offend one of Christ's
little ones, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck
Math. 18. 6. No man must put a stumbling block or an occasion to fall in his
brothers way, Romans 14. 13. They that sin so against the brethren, and wound
their weak Conscience, they sin against Christ 1 Cor. 8. 12. we must forbear
somthings for conscience sake, conscience, I say, not our oun but of others,
giving none offense neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the
Church of God, 1. Cor. 10. 28, 29, 32. and so cut off all occasion from them
that desire occasion 2 Cor. 11. 12. These Commands discharge whatever Practice
give occasion of our brothers sinning, of calling Truth in question, of acting
with a doubting conscience, or which weakens his Plerophory or assurance; And
neither the Lawfulness nor indifferency of the thing it self, nor men's
Authority commanding it, nor the weakness yea or wickedness of those in hazard
to be stumbled, will warrant the doing of that out of which offense arises,
Rectius Instruend. Confut. 3. Dial. chap. 1. page 19. Mr Durham in that
forecited place says, It carries offense along with it; in reference to the
party who runs unsent, it proves a strengthening and confirming of him, and so
a partaking of his sin; in reference to others, either strengthens them by that
example to cast themselves in that snare, which possibly may be their ruin, or
it grieves them and makes them sad who are tender of such things, or gives
occation to make all difference of that kind to be thought light of. Hence, If
Hearing of the Curats be an offense or Scandal, both in reference to
Malignants, and in reference to the Godly, and in reference to the Posterity,
Then it must be avoided: But the former is true: which is evidenced by parts.
First, in reference to Malignants, it hardens and encourages them in their
opposition to the work of God, and all backsliders and Complyers with them in
their Apostasy; This strengthens their hands in their wicked courses, when
they see how they are countenanced by all, and that there is no disrespect put
upon them, nor dissatisfaction evinced against their courses, then they
conclude that they are approven of all: And this hardens them, so that they
never once think of the evil of their ways. Next in reference to the Godly, it
stumbles the truly tender, by encouraging them to do contrare to their light
and conscience, even when they are not clear to hear them, then they are
emboldened thereunto when they see others doing so; and so it tends to the
wounding of their Peace, and makes them halt in the ways of the Lord. Lastly
with a re^erence to Posterity, it would prejudge them very much: Though now the
honest party be not in a capacity to transmit the work of Reformation unto
their Posterity, in such a manner as were to be wished; Yet they should do
something for keeping fresh the memory of the good old cause, by keeping up
some footsteps of a standing Controversy for Zions Interest against the common
enemy: But now let all Join with, and oune the Curats, what appearance of this
shall the Posterity see? shall not they conclude that the day is lost, and the
cause is gone, when they see that this generation has fled the fields, or
rather sold and betrayed the cause, by ouning, countenancing, and complying
with the enemy, and no standing Testimony against these corruptions? whereas if
there were but this much of a standing difference, betwixt the People of God
and the common Enemies of God, to be seen; Posterity shall in some measure be
kept from being deceived, and shall see the Interest of Christ not killed nor
buried quick, but living though in a bleeding condition, and this will occasion
their engaging for Christ, and interesting themselves in the quarrel; and it is
far better to see the cause of Christ ouned though, by suffering and blood,
then sold and betrayed by base flenching and complying with Persecuters. This
Argument may also found and i^ter a withdrawing from the Addressing Ministers
who to the Great Scandal of Presbyterians give forth their Addresses in the
name of all of that persuasion.

X. Our duty to themselves, yea our greatest office of Love we owe to them in
order to their conviction, does oblige us to withdraw from them. This may seem
a Paradox, yet it will be apparent; if we search the Scriptures, to see what we
owe to Scandalous Brethren. There we find, it is a duty to endeavor by all
Lawful means to shame them out of their sin: And it is an argument of hatred,
when we do not rebuke our Neighbor or when we suffer sin upon him, Lev. 19.
17. If we consider them then as neighbors and friends, we must use endeavors
to take away their sin from them; if we consider them not as such but as
enemies, then we must avoid them, and not be mingled with them, as I could
adduce many Scriptures for that. But I suppose all that will oppose my Thesis,
would have them considered as friends. Well then, if they be scandalous
Brethren, this is the way prescribed by the Apostle to deal with them, in order
not to suffer sin upon them, that we should withdraw from them our Company: and
if we must withdraw our Company, then also a fortiore, we must deny them our
Religious Communion; for that must either be included there, or necessarly
inferred. He writes, not to keep Company if any man that is called a Brother
(mark that speciality) be a fornicator, or covetous, or an Idolater, or a
railer, or an extortioner, with such an one no not to eat 1 Cor. 5. 11. And I
presume they that know them best, will grant, that it would not be hard to
prove that all the Curats in Scotland were chargable with some of these, or at
least Partakers with them. And that if they were all impartially impannelled,
they would be rare ones whom an honest Jury would not bring in guilty of this
lybel. Then we are expressly Commanded, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
to withdraw our selves from every brother that walks disorderly, and not
after the received Tradiction; and if any man obey not the word, to note him
and have no Company with him, that he may be ashamed 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. 14. Sure
neither their office nor their innocence, can exempt them from these rules. For
either they must be considered as our brethren, or not: If not, then we oune no
Church Communion with them, for that is only among brethren that are so in
Sympathy, and affection, and affinity, having one father, and one mother: If
they be brethren, Then all Scandalous brethren are to be withdrawn from; But
they are Scandalous brethren: Therefore they are to be withdrawn from. The
Minor will not be doubted by any but such as are strangers to them, who both in
their Ministerial and Personal Capacity are so scandalous to the Conviction of
all, that Profanness has gone forth from them unto all the Land, and they as
much as ever the Profane Sons of Eli, have made men to abhor the offering of
the Lord 1 Samuel 2. 17. But even strangers that are unacquaint with their
Personal Profligatness and ignorance etc. cannot be altogether ignorant of the
Scandal of Prelacy and E^astianisme, in which they are all involved, of the
Scandal of Apostasy, Perjurie, and breach of Covenant, which is their brand,
and the Nations bane, that has countenanced them. And none can doubt, but if
our Church were dwely constitute and invested with the orderly power of Christ,
and in capacity to exerce and improve it, they would soon be censured every
Soul of them as Scandalous, as they have been also Previously sentanced as
such, by the Acts of our General Abssemblies. This Argument levells also
against all Complying, Indulged, Addressing Ministers, who by these Courses
have incurred the Character of disorderly Brethren.

XI. Our faithfulness to God, and to one another engaged in our Covenants, does
oblige us to turn away from them who have broken it, and so classed themselves
among these Truce-breaking Traitors, who make our times Perilous, from whom we
must turn away 2 Timothy 3. 1-5. It appears from the foregoing deduction, how
solemnly these Nations were engaged both to keep out and put out this
Generation of Prelatists, now prevailing; The obligation of which yet lies upon
all the Inhabitants of the Land, with a binding force, both in regard of their
form, and object, and end. Hence if the Curats be Covenant breakers, and we
also in ouning them, then we cannot oune them without sin; But the Curats are
Covenant breakers, and we also in ouning them. Ergo -- The Minor may be
manifest by an indiction of all the Articles of the Solomn League and Covenant,
broken by them, and all that oune them 1. That Doctrine, worship, discipline,
and Government in the 1. Ar:. sworn to be preserved and propagated, was the
Presbyterian then established, which our Church was in possession of, which
they have opposed, and their ouners resiled from, and have not maintained. 2.
We are engaged in 2. Art. to endeavor the extirpation of Prelacy, and its
dependents; which is diametrically opposite to ouning of Curats: can we oune
them whom we are bound to abhor? and submit to them whom we are bound to
extirpate? Surely this were to rebuild what we have destroyed see Napht. p.
104. And since in relation to Popery, Heresy, and Schism, this Article
obliges us to disoune, and not to hear Papists and Schismatics, why not also
in relation to Prelatists, who are the greatest Schismatics? 3. They have
established and homologated an Erastian Supremacy, to the Prejudice of true
Religion and the Liberties of the Church and Kingdom, and their ouners have
abetted and contenanced the same, and not preserved either the Liberties of
Church or Kingdom, contrary to the 3. Art. 4. They have not only concealed and
Countenanced Malignant Enemies to this Church and Kingdom, but have themselves
been real Incendiaries hindering the Reformation of Religion, making factions
and Parties amongst the People, contrary to this League and Covenant, And their
hearers are so far from bringing them to Condign Punishment. that they have
strengthened their hands in their avowed opposition to the Covenants, contrary
to the 4 Art. 5. They have broken our Conjunction in firm peace and union; and
yet their hearers have not marked and avoided these Causers of Divisions,
contrary to Scripture, and the 5 Art. 6. Instead of assisting and defending all
these that entered into this League and Covenant etc. they have been the
greatest Persecuters of all them that adhered to it; And their ouners have
suffered themselves, by combination or persuasion or terror, to be divided and
withdrawn from their suffering Brethren, and have made defection to the
contrary part, and given themselves to a detestable indifferency in this cause,
contrary to the 6. Art. 7. Instead of humbling themselves for their sins, and
going before others in the example of a real Reformation, they have obstinately
defended their breach of Covenant, and have been Patrons and Patterns of all
deformations; And their ouners and hearers have not repented of that neither,
when they countenance such Covenant-breakers and profane persons, nor of their
not laboring for the purity and power of the Gospel, when they seek it from
such impure hands: Neither do they go before others in Reformation, when they
are such bad examples of defection, contrary to the conclusion of the Covenant.
This Argument will also strike against hearing of such Ministers that have made
themselves guilty of the same, or equivalent breaches of Covenant.

XII. Finally, for Unions sake, and to avoid Schism in the body, we must
withdraw from them. This may seem another Paradox: but it is apparent, if we
consider, that there should be no Schism in the body, but that the members
should have the same care one for another, 1 Cor. 12. 25. And that for to
prevent and remede this, the Apostle beseeches us to mark them which Cause
Divisions, and offenses contrary to the Doctrine which we have learned, and
avoid them, Romans 16. 17. Now then, if the Prelates and their Curats be
Schismatics, and Separatists, and dividers, then we must avoid and withdraw
from them: But so it is that the Prelates and their Curats are Schismatics, and
Separatists, and dividers: Therefore we must avoid and withdraw from them. The
Minor I prove from all the Constituents of a formed Schism, Separation, and
sinful division. 1. They that start out from under due relations to a Church,
and from her Ministry, are Schismatics, Separatists, and dividers, But the
Prelates and their Curats have started out from under due relations to the
Covenanted Church of Scotland, and from her Ministry, in being so unnatural
rebellious Children, as have broken their Mothers beauty and bands, order and
Union, and razed her Covenanted Reformation, in doctrine, worship, Discipline,
and Government: 2. These who withdraw from the Communion of a true Church, and
therefore are Censureable by all her standing acts, are Schismatical
Separatists: But the Prelates and their Curats have withdrawn from the Communion
of the true Church of Scotland, and therefore are censureable by all her
standing acts, in that they have made a faction and Combination repugnant to
the Communion of this Church, and all her established order: 3. Those who
Separate from a Church, whose Principles and Practices are subservient to that
Churches true Union and Communion and right establishment, are properly
Schismatics: But the Prelates and their Curats have Separated from this Church,
whose Principles and practices are subservient to its true Union and Communion
and right establishment; for they could never yet impeach or challenge any
Principle or practice, contrary to the word of God, or not subservient to true
Union and order, but their Principles and practices are stated in opposition to
her purity and Reformation. 4 Those who innovate the worship and Government,
ouned and established in a true Church, are Schismatics: But the Prelates and
their Curats have innovated the worship and Government of the true Church of
Scotland, in bringing a Doctrine new and odd, and not the voice of this Church;
and their worship, over and above the corruption adhering to it, is the
worshipping of an innovating party, contrary to our Churches established order:
5. They that make a rent in the bowels of the true and genuine Church, are the
Schismatics: But the Prelates and their Curats have made a rent in the bowels
of this Church, and have caused all the divisions in this Church. 6. Those that
divide themselves from the fellowship of a pure Church, either in her Ministry,
Lawful Courts, and Ordinances, are the Schismatics: But the Prelates and their
Curats have divided themselves from the fellowship of this pure Church, in her
Ministry, Lawful Courts and Ordinances, in that they have caused the ejection
of her Ministry, dissipation of her Assemblies, and subversion of her pure
Ordinances. 7. Those that break union with such, to whom they were under
obligations to adhere, are Schismatical dividers: But the Prelates and their
Curats have broken Union with such to whom they were under obligations to
adhere, both from the antecedent morally obliging duty, and from the superadded
obligation of the Covenants, neither could they ever pretend any thing that
might loose the obligation: 8. That party in a Reformed Church, which having
overturned her Reformation, has shut out, laid aside, and persecute away sound
adherers thereunto, both Ministers and Professors, and will not admit Ministers
to officiate but upon the sinful terms of compliance with their way, are
Schismatics: But the Prelates and their Curats are that party in this Reformed
Church, which having overturned her Reformation, has shut out, laid aside, and
Persecute away sound adherers thereunto etc. Therefore they are the
Schismatics to be withdrawn from, and their way is the Schism, which we are
bound to extirpate in the Covenant.

HEAD. II. The Sufferings of many for Refusing to oune the Tyrants Authority
vindicated.
THe other Grand Ordinance of God, Magistracy, which He has in His Sovereign
Wisdom, Justice, and Goodness, appointed, ordained, and consecrated, for the
demonstration, illustration, and vindication of His oun Glory, and the
Communication, Conservation, and Reparation of the Peace, safety, order,
Liberty, and universal good of mankind, is next to that of the Ministry of
Greatest Concern: wherein not only the Prudence, Policy, Property, and
Liberty of men, but also the conscience, Duty, and Religion of Christians,
have a special Interest. And therefore it is no less important, pertinent,
profitable, and necessary for every one that has any of these to care and
contend for, keep or recover, to inquire into and understand something of the
institution, constitution, nature, and boundaries of the Sacred ordinance of
Magistracy, than into the holy ordinance of the Ministry; So far at least as
may consist with the sphere of every ones Capacity and Station, and may conduce
to the satisfaction of every ones conscience, in the discharge of the duties of
their relations. Every private man indeed has neither capacity, concern, nor
necessity, to study the Politics, or search into the secrets, or Intrigues of
Government, no more then he is to be versed in all the Administrations of
Ecclesiastical Policy, and Interests of the Ministry: yet every man's Conscience
is no less concerned, in distinguishing the Character of Gods Ministers of
Justice, the Magistrates, to whom he owes and ounes allegiance, that they be not
usurping Tyrants, everting the Ordinance of the Magistracy; than in
acknowledging the Character of Christ's Ministers of the Gospel, to whom he owes
and ounes obedience, that they be not usurping Prelates or Impostors, perverting
the Ordinance of the Ministry. The Glory of God is much concerned, in our
ouning and keeping pure and entire, according to His will and word, both these
Ordinances. And our Conscience as well as Interest is concerned in the
advantage or hurt, profit or prejudice, of the right or wrong, observation or
prevarication, of both these ordinances; being interested in the advantage of
Magistracy, and hurt of Tyranny in the State, as well as in the advantage of
the Ministry, and hurt of Diocesan or Erastian Supremacy in the Church; in the
advantage of Ltberty, and hurt of slavery in the State, as well as in the
advantage of Religion and hurt of Profaneness in the Church; in the profit of
Laws and prejudice of Prerogative in the State, as well as in the profit of
Truth and prejudice of Error in the Church; in the profit of Peace and true
Loyalty, and prejudice of oppression and Rebellion in the State, as well as in
the profit of Purity and Unity, and prejudice of Defection and Division or
Schism, in the Church. So that in Conscience, we are no more free to
Prostitute our Loyalty and Liberty absolutely, in ouning every Possessor of the
Magistracy; than we are free to Prostitute our Religion and faith implicitly,
in ouning every Pretender to the Ministry. This may seem very Paradoxical to
some, because so dissonant and dissentient from the vulgar, yea almost
Universal and invetrate opinion and Practice of the world, that hitherto has
not been so precise in the matter of Magistracy. And it may seem yet more
strange, that not only some should be found to assert this; but that any should
be found so strict and strait-laced, as to adventure upon suffering, and even
to Death, for that which has hitherto been seldom scrupled, by any that were
forced to subjection under a yoke, which they had no force to shake off, and
wherein Religion seems little or nothing concerned; for not ouning the authority
of the present Possessors of the place of Government: which seems to be a
Question not only excentrick and extrinsick to Religion, but such a State
question, as for its thorny Intricacies and difficulties, is more proper for
Politicians and Lawyers to dispute about (as indeed their debates about this
head of Authority, have been as manifold and multiplied as about any one thing)
than for Private Christians to search into, and suffer for, as a Part of their
Testimony. But if we will cast off Prejudices, and the Tyranny of Custom, and
the bondage of being bound to the worlds Mind in our inquiries about Tyranny,
and suffer our selves to Ponder impartially the importance of this matter; And
then to state the question right; We shall find Religion and Conscience has no
small interest in this business. They must have no snall Interest in it, if we
consider the importance of this matter, either extensively, or objectively, or
Subjectively. Extensively considered, it is the Interest of all mankind to know
and be resolved in Conscience, whether the Government they are under be of Gods
Ordination or of the Devils administration; whether it be Magistracy or
Tyranny; whether it gives security for Religion and Liberty, to themselves and
their posterity, or whether it induces upon themselves, and entails upon the
posterity, slavery as to both these invaluable Interests; whether they have
matter of praise to God for the blessings and mercies of Magistracy, or matter
of Mourning for the plagues and miseries of Tyranny, to the end they may know
both the sins and snares, Duties and dangers, Case and Crisis, of the times
they ^ive in. All men that ever enjoyed the mercy of a right Constitute
Magistracy, have experienced, and were bound to bless God for the blessed
fruits of it: And on the other hand, the world is full of the Tragical
Monuments of Tyranny, for which men were bound bath to search into the Causes,
and see the effects of such plagues from the Lord, to the end they might mourn
over both. And from the beginning it has been observed, that as Peoples sins
have always procured the Scourge of Tyranny; So all their miseries might be
refounded upon Tyrants encroachments, Usurping upon or betraying their Trust,
and overturning Religion, Laws, and Liberties. Certainly Mankind is concerned
in point of Interest and Conscience, to inquire into the cause and Cure of this
Epidemick distemper, that has so long held the world in misery, and so
habitually, that now it is become as it were Natural to lie stupidly under it;
that is, that old Ingrained Gangrene of the Kings Evil, or Compliance with
Tyranny; that has long afflicted the Kingdoms of the world, and affected not
only their backs in bearing the burden thereof; but their hearts into a
Lethargick stupor of insensibleness; and their heads in infatuating and
intoxicating them with Notions of the Sacredness and incontroulablness of
Tyranny; and their hands in infeebling and fettering them from all attempts to
work a Cure: Or else it has had another effect on many that have been sensible
of a touch of it; even equivalent to that, which an ingenious Author Mr Gee in
his Preface to the Divine right and Original of the Civil Magistrate (to which
Mr Durham is not absonant) expounds to be the effect of the fourth vial, Rev.
16. 8, 9. when in these Dog-dayes of the world, power is given to the Sun of
Imperial, especially Popish, Tyannie, by their exorbitant streaches of absolute
Prerogative, to scorch men with fire of furious oppressions, they then
blaspheme the Name of God which has power over these Plagues, in their
Mal-content Complaints, grumblings, grudgings, and Murmurings under the
misery, but they do not repent nor give Him Glory, in mourning over the causes
promeriting such a Plague, and their oun accession in exposing themselves to
such a scorching sun, nakedly without a Sconce. Certainly this would be the
remedy that Conscience would suggest, and Interest would incite to, an
endeavor either of allaying the heat, or of subtracting from it under a
shelter, by declining the oblique Malignity of its Scorching rays. But will
the world never be a wakened out of this Dream and dotage, of Dull and stupid
subjection to every Monster that can Mount a Throne? Sure at length it may be
expected, either Conscience from within as Gods deputy, challenging for the
palpable perversion of this His excellent Ordinance, Or Judgments from without,
making sensible of the effects of it, will convince and confute these old
inveterate Prejudices. And then these Martyrs for that universal Interest of
mankind, who got the fore-start and the first sight of this, will not be so
flouted as fools, as now they are. And who knows, what Prelude or
Preparative, fore-boding and presaging the down fall of Tyranny, may be in its
aspirings to this hight of arbitrary absoluteness, and in the many questions
raised about it, and by them imposed upon Consciences to be resolved. If we
consider the object of this question; as Conscience can only clear it, so in
nothing can it be more concerned. It is that Great Ordinance of God, most
signally impressed by a very Sacred and illustrious Character of the Glorious
Majesty of the Most High, who has appointed Magistracy; in which, considering
either its fountain, or Dignity, ends, or effects, Conscience must have a very
great Concern. The fountain or efficient cause of Magistracy, is high and
sublime. The powers that are be of God, not only by the all disposing hand of
God in His Providence, as Tyranny is, nor only by way of naked approbation, but
by Divine institution; And that not only in the general, by at least a
Secondary Law of Nature, but also the special investiture of it, in Institution
and Constitution, is from God; and therefore they are said to be ordained of
God, to which Ordinance we must be subject, not only for wrath but also for
Conscience sake; which is the Great Duty required in the fifth Command, the
first Commandment with Promise; that has the Priority of Place before all the
Second table, because the other Commandments respect each some one Interest,
this has a supereminent influence upon all. But Tyrannical powers are not of
God in this sense. And it were Blasphemy to assert they were of the Lords
Authorization, Conscience cannot bind to a subjection to this. Again the
Dignity of Magistracy, ordained for the maintenance of Truth and righteousness,
the only foundations of peoples felicity, whether temporal or eternal,
including the bonds and boundaries of all obedience and subjection, for which
they are intended and to which they refer, is supereminent; as that Epithet of
higher added to the powers that are of God, may be rendered; making them high
and sublime in Glory, whose highest prerogative is, that being Gods Ministers,
they sit in the Throne of God, anointed of the Lord, judging not for man but
for the Lord, as the Scripture speaks. To this Conscience is concerned in duty
to render honor as due, by the Prescript of the fifth Commandment: but for
Tyranny, Conscience is bound to deny it, because not due; no more than
obedience, which Conscience dare not pay to a Throne of Iniqulty, and a Throne
of the Devil, as Tyranny may be called as really as Magistracy is called the
Throne of God. Next Conscience is much concerned in the ends of Magistracy,
which are the Greatest, the Glory of God and the good of Mankind. And in the
effects of it, the maintenance of Truth, Righteousness, Religion, Liberty,
Peace, and Safety, and all choicest external blessings: But the ends and
effects of Tyranny are quite Contrary, Domineering for pleasure, and destroying
for profit. Can we think that Conscience is nothing Concerned here, that these
great ends shall be subverted, and the effects precluded; and to that effect,
that Tyranny not only be shrouded under a Privilege of impunity, but by our
subjection and acknowledment of it, as a Lawful power, encouraged into all
enormities, and Licensed to usurp, not only our Liberties, but Gods Throne by
an uncontrollable Sovereignty? But if we Consider the subjective Concern of
Conscience, it must be very great: when it is the only thing that prompts to
subjection, that regulats subjection, and is a bottom for subjection to lawful
powers. If it were not out of Conscience, men that are free born are naturally
such Lovers of Liberty, and under Corruption such lusters after Licenciousness,
that they would never come under the Order of this Ordinance, except
constrained for wraths sake: but now, understanding that they that resist the
power resist the Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to
themselves Damnation, they must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also
for Conscience sake. If Conscience were not exercised in regulating our duty to
Magistrates, we would either obey none, or else would observe all their Commands
promiscously, Lawful or unlawful, and would make no difference either of the
matter commanded, or the power commanding: but now, understanding that we must
obey God rather then man, and that we must render to all their dues, fear to
whom fear, honor to whom honor, Conscience regulats us what and whom to obey.
And without conscience there is little hope for Government to prove either
beneficial or permanent: little likelihood of either a real, regular, or
durable subjection to it. The discernible standing of Government upon
conscientious grounds, is the only thing that can bring in conscience, and a
conscientious submission to it; it being the highest and most kindly principle
of, and the strongest and most lasting obligation to, any relative duty. It
will not be Liberty of Conscience (as says the late Declaration for it) but
reality of conscience, and Government founded upon a bottom of conscience, that
will Unite the Governed to the Governors by inclination as well as duty. And
if that be, then there is needful a rule of Gods revealed preceptive will (the
only Cynosure and Empress of conscience) touching the founding and erecting of
Government, that it have the stamp of Gods Authority. It must needs then follow
that conscience has a very great concernment in this question in the General,
and that before it be forced to an abandoning of its light in a matter of such
moments, it will rather oblige people that are conscientious to suffer the
worst that Tyrants can do; especially when it is imposed and obtruded upon
conscince, to give its suffrage and express acknowledment that the present
Tyranny is the Authority of God, which is so visible in the view of all that
have their eyes open, that the meanest capacity that was never conversant in
Laws and Politics can give this verdict that the Constitution and
administration of the Government of the tuo Royal Brothers, under whose burden
the earth and we have been groaning these 27 years past, has been a complete
and Habitual Tyranny, and can no more be ouned to be Magistracy the^ Robbery
can be acknowledged to be a rightful possession. It is so plain, that I need
not the help of Lawyers and Politicians to demonstrate it, nor lanch into the
Ocean of their endless debates in handling the head of Magistracy and Tyranny:
yet I shall improve what help I find in our most approved Authors who have
enlarged upon this Question (though not as I must state it) to dilucidate the
matter in Thesi, and refer to the foregoing Deduction of the succession of
Testimonies against Tyranny, to clear it in Hypothesi. Whence we may see the
occasion, and clearly gather the solution of the Question, which is this.

Whether a people, long oppressed with the encroachments of Tyrants and
Usurpers, may disoune their pretended Authority; and when imposed upon to
acknowledge it; may rather chief to suffer than to oune it?

To clear this question: I shall first premit some concessions, and then come
more formally to resolve it.

I. It must be granted the Question is extraordinary, and never so stated by
any writer on this head; which makes it the more difficult, and odious, because
odd and singular, in the esteem of those who take up opinions rather from the
number of votes than from the weight of the reasons of the asserters of them.
It will also be yielded, that this was never a case of confession for
Christians to suffer upon. And the reason of both is, because, before these
seven years past, this was never imposed upon private and common subjects to
give an account of their thoughts and conscience about the Lawfulness of the
Government they lived under. Conquerers and Usurpers sometimes have demanded an
acknowledgment of their Authority; from men of greatest note and stroke in the
Countries they have seized: but they never since the Creation urged it upon
common people, as a Test of Loyalty; but thought always their Laws, and power
to execute them on offenders, did secure their subjection. Or otherwise to what
purpose are Laws made, and the execution of them committed to men in power, if
they be not thought a sufficient fence for the Authority that makes them;
except it also have the actual acknowledgment of the subjects to ratify it? Men
that are really invested with Authority, would think it both a disparagment to
their Authority, and would disdain such a suspicion of the questionableness of
it, as to put it as a queston to the subjects, whether they ouned it or not.
But the Gentlemen that rule us, have fallen upon a piece of unprecedented
Policy: wherein they think both to involve the Nation in the guilt of their
unparalelled Rebellion against the Lord, by ouning that Authority that promotes
it, and so secure their Usurpations, either by the suffrage of all that oune
them, or by the exstirpation of the Conscientious that dare not, with the odium
and obli^uie of being enemies to Authority; by which Trick they think to bury
the honor of their Testimony. Yet in sobriety without Prophesying it may be
presumed, at the long run this project will prove very prejudicial to their
Interest: and herein they may verify that Scots Proverb, over fast over loose,
and accomplish these Divine sayings He disappointeth the devices of the Crafty,
He takes the wise in their oun Craftiness, and the Counsel of the froward is
carried head long. For as they have put people upon this question, who would
not otherwise have made such inquiries into it; and now finding they must be
resolved in conscience to answer it, when ever they shall be brought before
them; upon a very overly search, they see terrible Tyranny witten in legible
bloody Characters almost on all administrations of the Government, and so come
to be fixed in the verdict that their conscience and the word of God gives of
it: So it may be thought, this question now started, for as despicable
beginings it has, yet ere it come to a full and final Decision, will be more
inquired into through the world, and at length prove as fatal to Tyranny, as
ever any thing could be, and then they may know whom to thank. But however
though the question be extraordinary, and the sufferings thereupon be
unprecedented; And therefore among other contradictions, that may be objected,
that neither in History nor Scripture we can find instances of private people
their refusing to oune the Authority they were under, nor of their suffering
for that refusal: yet nevertheless it may be duty without example. Many things
may be done; though not against the Law of God, yet without a precedent of the
practice of the people of God. Though we could not adduce an example for it,
yet we can gather it from the Law of God, that Tyranny must not be ouned, this
will be equivalent to a thousand examples. Every age in somethings must be a
precedent to the following, and I think never did any age produce a more
honorable precedent, than this beginning to decline a yoke under which all ages
have groaned.

2. It will be also granted, It is not always indispensablie necessary, at all
times. for a people to declare their disclaim of the Tyranny they are under,
when they cannot shake it off; nor, when they are staged for their duty before
wicked and Tyrannical Judges, is it always necessary to disoune their
pretended Authority positively; when either they are not urged with questions
about it, then they may be silent in reference to that; or when they are
imposed upon to give their judgment of it, they are not always obliged, as in
a case of confession, to declare all their mind, especially when such Questions
are put to them with a manifest design to entrap their lives, or entangle their
Conscience. All Truth is not to be told at all times; neither are all questions
to be answered when impertinently interrogate, but may be both Cautiously and
Conscienciously waved. We have Christ's oun practice, and his faithful servant
Paul's example, for a Pattern of such prudence and Christian caution. But yet it
were cruel and unchristian rigor, to censure such as out of a pious principle
of zeal to God and conscience of duty, do freely and positively declare their
judgment, in an absolute disouning of their pretended Authority, when posed
with such Questions, though to the manifest detriment of their lives, they
Conscienciously looking upon it as a case of confession. For where the Lord
has not peremptorily astricted His Confessors to such rules of prudence, but
has both promised and usually gives His Spirits Conduct, encouraging and
animating them to boldness, so as before hand they should not take thought how
or what they shall speak, and in that same hour they find it given them, it
were presumption for us to stint them to our rules of prudence. We may indeed
find rules to know, what is a case of confession; but hardly can it be
determined, what Truth or duty we are questioned about is not, or may not be, a
case of confession. And who can deny, but this may be in some circumstances a
case of confession, even Positively to disoune the pretended Authority of a
bloody Court or Council? when either they go out of their Sphere, taking upon
them Christ's Supremacy, and the Cognizance of the concerns of His Croun,
whereof they are Judges no ways Competent; then they must freely and faithfully
be declined. Or when, to the dishonor of Christ, they blaspheme His Authority,
and the Sacred boundaries* He has prescribed to all humane Authority, and will
assert an illimited absolute Authority, refusing and discharging all offered
Legal and Scriptural restrictions to be put thereupon (as has been the case of
the most part of these worthy though poor Martyrs, who have died upon this
head) then they must think themselves bound to disoune it. Or when they have
done some cruel indignity and despite to the Spirit of God, and to Christ His
prerogative and Glory, and work of Reformation, and people, in murdering them
without Mercy, and imposing this ouning of their King, by whose Authority all
is acted, as a condemnation of these witnesses of Christ their Testimony, and a
justification of their bloody cruelties against them, which has frequently
been the case of these poor people that have been staged upon this account: In
this case, and several others of this sort that might be mentioned, then they
may be free and Positive in disouning this Test of wicked Loyalty, as the mark
of the Dragon of the secular beast of Tyranny. And in many such cases, when the
Lord gives the Spirit, I see no reason but that Christ's witnesses must follow
His Pattern of zeal in the case of confession, which He witnessed before
Pontius Pilate in asserting His oun Kingship, as they may in other cases follow
His Pattern of Prudence. And why may we not imitate the zeal of Stephen, who
called the Council before whom he was staged stiff necked resisters of the Holy
Ghost, Persecuters of the Prophets, and betrayers and Murderers of Christ the
Just one, as well as the Prudence of Paul? But however it be, the present
Testimony against this pretended Authority Lies in the Negative, which obliges
always, semper and ad semper; that is to say, we plead, that it must never be
Ouned. There is a great difference between a Positive disouning, and a not
Ouning: though the first be not always necessary, the Latter is the Testimony
of the day, and a negative case of confession, which is allwise clearer than
the Positive. Though we must not allwise confess every Truth, yet we must never
deny any.

3. It is confessed, we are under this sad disadvantage besides others, that
not only all our Brethren, groaning under the same yoke with us, will not take
the same way of declining this pretended Authority, nor adventure when called
to declare their judgment about it (which we do not condemn, as is said, and
would expect from the rules of equity and charity, they will not condemn us,
when we find our selves in conscience bound to use greater freedom) But also
some when they do declare their judgment, give it in terms condemnatory of,
and contradictory unto our Testimony, in that they have freedom positively to
oune this Tyranny, as Authority, and the Tyrant as their Lawful Sovereign. And
many of our Ministers also are of the same mind. And further as we have few
expressly asserting our part of the debate, as it is now stated: so we have
many famous and learned divines expressly against, us in this point, as
especially we find in their Comments upon Romans 13. among whom I cannot
dissemble my sorrow to find the great Calvin, saying, saepe solent inquirere
etc. men often inquire, by what right they have obtained their power who have
the rule! It should be enough to us that they do govern, for they have not
ascended to this eminency by their oun power, but are imposed by the hand of
the Lord. As also Pareus saying too much against us. For answer to this I refer
to Mr Knox his reply to Lithingtoun, producing several Testimonies of Divines
against him upon this very same head; wherein he shows, that the occasions of
their Discourses and Circumstances wherein they were stated were very far
different, from those that have to do with Tyrants and Usurpers, as indeed they
that are most concerned and smart most under their scourge are in best case to
speak to the purpose. I shall only say, Men's averment in a Case of Conscience
is not an oracle, when we look upon it with an impartial eye, in the case
wherein we are not prepossessed^ it will bear no other value, than what is
allayed with the imperfections of fallibility; and moreover is contradicted by
some others, whose Testimony will help us as much to confirm our persuasion, as
others will hurt us to infirm it.

4. But now when Tyrants go for Magistrates; lest my plea against ouning
Tyranny, should be mistaken as if it were a pleading for Anarchy: I must
assert, that I and all those I am vindicating are for Magistracy, as being of
divine Original, institute for the common good of humane and Christian
Societies, whereunto every soul must be subject, of whatsoever quality or
Character, and not only for wrath but also for conscience sake (though as to
our soul and conscience, we are not subject) which whosoever resists
resists the ordinance of God, and against which Rebellion is a damnable sin,
Whereunto (according to the fifth Commandment, and the many reiterated
exhortations of the Apostles) we must be subject, and obey Magistrates, and
submit ourselves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be
unto the King as Supreme etc. And we account it a hateful brand of them that
walk after the flesh, to despise Government, to be presumptuous, self willed,
and not afraid to speakevil of dignities and that they are filthy dreamers who
despise Dominion and speakevil of dignities, and of those things which they
know not. We allow the Magistrate, in whatsoever form of Government all the
power the Scripture, Laws of Nature or Nations, or Municipal do allow him:
Asserting that he is the keeper and avenger of both the Tables of the Law,
having a power over the Church as well as the state suited to his Capacity,
that is; not formally Ecclesiastical but objectively for the Churches good; an
external power, of Providing for the Church, and Protecting her from outward
violence, or in ward disorder; an imperate power, of commanding all to do their
respective duties; a Civil power of Punishing all, even Church officers, for
Crimes; a Secundary power of Judicial approbation or condemnation, or
discretive, in order to give his Sanction to Synodical results; a Cumulative
power, assisting and strengthening the Church in all her Privileges,
subservient though not servill, Coordinate with Church power not Subordinate
(though as a Christian he is subject) in his oun affairs, to wit Civil, not to
be declined as Judge, but to be obeyed in all things Lawful, and honored and
strengthened with all his dwes. We would give unto Caesar the things that are
Cesars, and to God the things that are Gods But to Tyrants, that usurp and
pervert both the things of God and of Caesar, and of the peoples Liberties, we
can render none of them, neither Gods, nor Cesars, nor our oun; Nor can we from
conscience give him any other deference, but as an enemy to all, even to God,
to Caesar, and the people. And in this, though it does not sound now with Court
parasites, nor with others that are infected with Royal Indulgences and
Indemnities, we bring forth but the transumpt of old Principles, according to
which our fathers walked when they still contended for Religion and Liberty,
against the attemptings and aggressions of Tyranny against both.

5. It must be conceded, it is not an easy thing to make a man in the place of
Magistracy a Tyrant. For as every escape, error, or act of unfaithfulness, even
known and continued in, whether in a Ministers entry to the Ministry, or in his
Doctrine, does not unminister him, nor give sufficient ground to withdraw from
him, or reject him as a Minister of Christ: So neither does every enormity,
misdemeanure, or act of Tyranny, Injustice, perfidie, or profanity in the Civil
Magistrate, whether as to his way of entry to that office, or in the execution
of it, or in his private or personal behavior, denominate him a Tyrant or
usurper, or give sufficient ground to divest him of Magistratical power, and
reject him as the Lawful Magistrate. It is not any one or tuo Acts contrary to
the Royal Covenant or office, that does denude a man of the Royal dignity, that
God and the people gave him: David committed tuo acts of Tyranny, Murder and
Adultery; yet the people were to acknowledge him as their King (and so it may
be said of some others, ouned still as Kings in Scripture) the reason is,
because though he sinned against a man or some particular persons, yet he did
not sin against the State, and the Catholic good of the Kingdom, subverting
Law; for then he would have turned Tyrant, and ceased to have been Lawful King.
There is a great difference between a Tyrant in act, and a Tyrant in habit, the
first does not cease to be a King. But on the other hand, as every thing will
not make a Magistrate to be a Tyrant: So nothing will make a Tyrant habitu, a
Magistrate. And as every fault will not unminister a Minister; So some will
oblige the people to reject his Ministry, as if he turn Heretical, and Preach
Atheism, Mahumetanisme, or the like, the people, though they could not
formally depose him, or through the corruption of the times could not get him
deposed; yet they might reject and disoune his Ministry: So it will be granted,
that a people have more power in creating a Magistrate than in making a
Minister, and Consequently they have more right and may have more light in
disouning a King, as being unkinged; than in disouning a Minister, as being
un-ministerd. It will be necessary therefore, for clearing our way, to fix upon
some ordinary Characters of a Tyrant, which may discriminate him from a
Magistrate, and be ground of disouning him as such. I shall rehearse some, from
very much approved Authors; the application of which will be as apposite to the
tuo Brothers, that we have been burdened with, as if they had intended a
particular and exact description of them. Buchanan de jure regni apud Scotos
Shows that the word Tyran^ was at first honorable, being attributed to them
that had the full power in their hands, which power was not astricted by any
bonds of Laws, nor obnoxious to the Cognition of Judges, and that it was the
usual denomination of Heroes, and thought at first so honorable that it was
attribute to the Gods: But as Nero and Judas were sometimes among the Romans
and Jews names of greatest account, but afterward by the faults of tuo men of
these names, it came to pass that the most flagitious would not have these
names given to their Children; So in process of time, Rulers made this name so
infamous by their wicked deeds, that all men abhorred it as contagious and
Pestilentious, and thought it a more light reproach to be called a hangman then
a Tyrant. Thereafter he Condiscends upon several Characters of a Tyrant. 1. He
that does not receive a Government by the will of the people, but by force
invadeth it, or intercepteth it by fraud, is a Tyrant; and who domineers even
over the unwilling (for Rex volentibus Tyrannus invitis imperat) and procures
the Supreme rule without the peoples Consent, even though for several years
they may so govern, that the people shall not think it irksome. Which very well
aggrees with the present Gentleman that rules over us, who, after he was by
public vote in Parliament secluded from the Government, of which the standing
Laws of both Kingdoms made him incapable for his Murders, Adulteries, and
Idolatries, by force and fraud did intercept first an Act for His Succession in
Scotland, and then the actual Succession in England, by blood and treachery
usurping and intruding himself into the Government, without any Compact with,
or Consent of the people; though now he studies to make himself like another
Syracusan Hiero, or the Florentine Cosinodo Medices, in a mild Moderation of
his usurped power, but the West of England, and the West of Scotland both, have
felt the force of it. 2. Tyrannus non civibus sed sibi gerit imperium, neque
publicae utilitatis sed suae voluptatis rationem habet etc. He does not govern
for the subjects welfare or public ultility but for himself, having no
regard to that but to his oun lust; Acting in this like robbers, who cunningly
disposing of what wickedly they have acquired, do seek the praise of Justice by
injury, and of Liberality by robbery; So he can make some show of a Civil mind,
but so much the less assurance gives he of it, that it is manifest he intends
not thereby the subjects good, but the greater security of his oun lusts, and
stability of empire over posterity, having some what Mitigated the peoples
hatred, which when he has done he will turn back again to his old manners, for
the fruit which is to follow may easily be known both by the seed and by the
sower thereof. An exact Copy of this we have seen within these tuo years, as
often before in the rule of the other Brother. After God has been robbed of His
prerogatives, the Church of her Privileges, the State of its Laws, the
Subjects of their Liberty and property, he is now affecting the praise and
captating the Applause of tenderness to conscience, and Love of Peace, by
offering now Liberty after all his Cruelties; wherein all the thinking part of
men do discern he is prosecuting that hellish Project, introducing Popery and
slaverie; and overturning Religion, Law, and Liberty. 3. Regium imperium
secundum Naturam est, Tyrannicum contra, Regium Liberi inter Liberos est
Principatus, Tyrannus domini in servas etc. Tyranny is against Nature, and a
Masterly Principality over slaves. Can he be called a father, who accounts his
subjects slaves? or a Shepherd, who does not feed but devours his flock? or a
Pilot, who does allwise study to make shipwreck of the goods, and strikes a
leak in the very ship where he sails? what is he then that bears Command, not
for the peoples advantage, but studies only himself, who leads his subjects
into manifest snares? he shall not verily be accounted by me either Commander.
Emperor, or Governor? King James the 6th also, in a speech to the Parliament
anno 1609. makes this one Character of a Tyrant, when he begins to invade his
subjects rights and Liberties. And if this be true, then we have not had a King
these many years: the foregoing deduction will demonstrate, what a slavery we
have been under. 4. Quid qui non de virtute certet c^m bonis etc. What is he
then, who does not contend for virtue with the good, but to exceed the most
flagitious in vices? If you see then any usurping the Royal name, and not
excelling in any virtue, but striving to exceed all in baseness, not tendering
his subjects good with native affection, but pressing them with proud
domination, esteeming the people committed to his trust not for their safegaurd
but for his oun gain; will you imagine this man is truly a King, albeit he
vapors with a numerous Lieveguard, and makes an ostentation of gorgeous Pomp?
The learned Althusius likewise in his Politics cap. 38. Number. 15. (as He is
cited by Ius Populi chap. 16. Page 347.) makes this one Character of a Tyrant,
that liveing in Luxury, whoredom, greed, and idleness, he neglects or is
unfit for his office. How these suite our times we need not express; what
effrontry of impudence is it, for such monsters to pretend to rule by virtue of
any Authority derived from God, who pollute the world with their Adulteries and
Incests, and Live in open defyance of all the Laws of the universal King; with
whom to exceed in all villainies is the way to purchase the Countenance of the
Court, and to aspire to preferment? No Heliogabulus etc. could ever come up the
length in wickedness, that our Rulers have professed. 5. Omnium vim Legum in se
transfer etc. He can transfer unto himself the strength of all Laws, and
abrogate them when he pleases. King James the 6. in that forecited speech
says, a King degenerateth into a Tyrant when he leaves to rule by Law.
Althusius also loc. cit. says, there is one kind of Tyranny which consists
in violating, changing, or removing of fundamental Laws, specially such as
concern Religion; such, says he, Philip the King of Spain, who, contrare to
the fundamental Belgic Laws, did erect an administration of Justice by force
of arms; and such was Charles the 9th of France, that thought to overturn the
Salicque Law. All that knows what has been done in Britain these 27 years,
can attest our Laws have been subverted, the Reformation of Religion
overturned, and all our best Laws rescinded; and now the Penal Statuts against
Papists disabled and stopped, without and against Law. 6. Ad suum eum unius
nutum omnia etc. He can revoke all things to his nod at his pleasure. This is
also one part of King James the 6 his Character of a Tyrant, when he sets upon
arbitrary power. And of Althusius loc. cit. when he makes use of an absolute
Power, and so breaks all bonds for the good of humane Society. We allow a King
an absolute power taken in a good sense, that is, he is not subaltern nor
subordinate to any other Prince; but supreme in his oun dominions: or if by
absolute be meant Perfect, he is most absolute that governs best according to
the word of God. But if it be to be Legibus solutus, loosed from all Laws, we
think it blasphemy to ascribe it to any Creature. Where was there ever such an
arbitrary and absolute power arrogated by any Mortal, as has been claimed by
our Rulers these years past? especially by the present Usurper, who, in this
Liberty of conscience now granted to Scotland, assumes to himself an absolute
power which all are to obey without reserve, which carries the subjects slavery
many stages beyond what ever the Grand Seigneur did attempt. 7. Tyranno -- ad
cives opprumendos etc. For by a Tyrant strangers are employed to oppress the
subjects; They place the establishment of there Authority in the peoples
weakness, and think that a Kingdom is not a Procuration concredited to them by
God, but rather a prey fallen into their hands; Such are not joined to us by
any Civil bond, or any bond of humanity, but should be accounted the most
Capital enemies of God and of all men. King James ub, supra says, he is a
Tyrant that imposes un Lawful Taxes, raises forces, makes war upon his
subjects, to Pillage, Plnnder, wast, and spoil his Kingdoms. Althusins ubi
supra makes a Tyrant, who by immoderate exactions, and the like, exhausts the
subjects, and cites Scripture Ier. 22. 13. 14. Ezekiel. 34. 1 King. 12. 19. Psalm.
14. 4. It is a famous saying of Bracton, He is no longer King; then dum been
regit, while he rules well, but a Tyrant when-soever he oppresses the people
that are trusted to his Care and Government. And Cicero says, amittitis omne
exceritus and imperit jiu, qui eo imperio and exercit^ Rempublicans oppugnat.
He loses all legal power in and over an Army or Empire, who by that Government
and army does obstruct the welfare of that republic. What oppressions and
exactions by armed force our Nation has been wasted with, in part is
discovered above. 8. Althusius in the place above quoted, makes this an other
mark, when he keeps not his faith and promise, but despises his very oath
made unto the people. What shall we say of him then, who not only brake but
burnt, and made it Criminal to assert the obligation of the most solemnly
transacted Covenant with God and with the people, that ever was entered into,
who yet upon these terms of keeping that Covenant only was admitted to the
Government? And what shall we say of his Brother succeeding, who disdains all
bonds, whose professed principle is, as a Papist to keep no faith to Heretics?
9. In the same place he makes this on Character: a Tyrants is he, who takes
away from one or more members of the common wealth the free exercise of the
Orthodox Religion, And the Grave Author of the Impartial inquiry into the
administration of affairs in England, does assert page 3, 4. whenever a
Prince becomes depraved to that degree of wickedness, as to apply and employ
his power and Interest, to debauch and withdraw his subjects from their fealty
and obedience to God, or sets himself to extirpate that Religion which the Lord
has revealed and appointed to be the rule of our living and the means of our
happiness, he does ipso facto depose himself, and instead of being ouned any
longer for a King, ought to be treated as a Rebel and Traiter against the
Supreme and Universal Sovereign. This is the perfect Protracture of our
Princes; the former of which, declared an open war against Religion and all
that professed it; and the Latter did begin to prosecute it with the same
cruelty of persecution, and yet continues without relenting against us; though
to others he tolerates it under the Notion of a Crime, to be for the present
dispensed with, until he accomplish his design. 10. Ibid. he tells us, that for
corrupting of youth he erecteth stage plages, Whore-houses, and other
Play Houses, and suffers the Colleges and other Seminaries of Learning to be
corrupted. There was never more of this in any age, than in the conduct of our
Court, which like another Sodom profess it to be their design to debauch
mankind in to all villainies, and to poison the fountains of all learning and
virtue, by intruding the basest of men into the place of teachers, both in
Church and University, and precluding all access to honest men. 11. Further he
says, he is a Tyrant who does not defend his subjects from injuries when he
may, but suffers them to be oppressed (and what if he oppress them himself?)
It was one of the Laws of Edward the Confessor, Quod si Rex desit officio,
nomen Regis in eo non constabit. If the King fail in the discharge of his Trust
and office, he no longer deserves nor ought to enjoy that name. What name do
they deserve then, who not only fail in the duty of defending their subjects,
but send out their Lictors and bloody Executioners to oppress them, neither
will suffer them to defend themselves! But Althusius makes a distinct Character
of this. 12. Then in fine, he must certainly be a Tyrant, who will not suffer
the people, by themselves nor by their Representatives, to maintain their oun
rights, neither by Law nor force: for, says my Author Forecited, he is a
Tyrant who hinders the free suffrages of members of Parliament, so that they
dare not speak what they would; And chiefly he who takes away from the people
all power to resist his Tyranny, as Arms, strengths, and chief men, whom
therefore though innocent he hates, afflicts, and persecuteth, exhausts
their goods and livelyhoods, without right or reason. All know that our blades
have been all alongs enemies to Parliaments; and when their Interest forced to
call them, what means were used always to pacque and prelimit them and over-aw
them, and how men who have faithfully discharged their trust in them have been
prosecuted with the hight of envy and fury, and many murdered thereupon; And
how all the armed force of the Kingdoms have been inhanced into their hand, and
the people kept so under foot, that they have been rendered incapable either to
defend their oun from intestine Usurpers, or foreign Invaders. All that is
said amounts to this, that when ever men in power do evert and subvert all the
ends of Government, and intrude themselves upon it, and abuse it, to the hurt
of the Common wealth, and the destruction of that for which Government was
appointed; They are then Tyrants, and cease to be Magistrates. To this purpose
I shall here append the words of that forecited Ingenious Author of the
Impartial Inquiry Pap. 13. 14. There can be nothing more evident from the
light of reason as well as Scripture, than that all Magistracy is appointed for
the benefit of mankind and the common good of Societies: God never gave any
one power to reign over others for their destruction (unless by His providence
where He had devoted a people for their sins to ruin) but on whomsoever He
confers Authority over Cities or Nations, it is with this Conditional Proviso
and Limitation, that they are to Promote their Prosperity and good, and to
study their defense and Protection: All Princes are thus far Pactional -- And
whosoever refuses to perform this fundamental condition, he degrades and
deposes himself, nor is it rebellion in any to resist him; whenever Princes
ceases to be for the common good, they answer not the end they were instituted
unto, and cease to be what they were chosen for.

6. It will not be denied but when the Case is so circumstantiate, that it
would require the arbitration of judgment to determine whether the King be a
Tyrant or not, that then people are not to disoune him: for if it be a
question, whether the people be really robbed of their rights and Liberties,
and that the King might pretend as much reason to complain of the people their
doing indignity to his Sovereignty, as they might of his Tyranny; Then it were
hard for them to assume so for the umpirage of their oun Cause, as to make
themselves absolute judges of it, and forth with to reject his Authority upon
these debateable grounds. But the Case is not so with us: no Place being left
for doubt or debate, but that our fundamental rights and Liberties Civil and
Religious are overturned, and an absolute Tyranny exactly Characterized as
above is established on the ruins thereof. Hence we have not disouned the
pretended Authority, because we judged it was Tyrannical, but because it was
really so. Our discretive judgment in the case was not our rule, but it was our
understanding of the rule, by which only we could be regulated and not by the
understanding of another, which cannot be better nor so good of our grievances,
which certainly we may be supposed to understand best our selves, and yet they
are such as are understood every where. To the question then, who shall be
Judge between these Usurping and Tyrannizing Rulers and us? we answer briefly
and plainly, We do not usu^p a judgment in the case, pretending no more
Authority over them in our private Capacity than we allow them to have over us,
that is none at all? Nor can we admit that they should be both Judges and
party; for then they might challenge that prerogative in every case, and
strengthen themselves in an incontrollable immunity and impunity to do what
they pleased. But we appeal to the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, aggreeable
to the word of God, to Judge, and to the whole world of impartial Spectators to
read and pronounce the judgment. L^x Rex Quest. 24. Page 213. says in answer
to this: There is a Court of Necessity no less than a Court of Justice; And the
fundamental Laws must then speak, and it is with the people in this extremity
as if they had no ruler. And as to the doubtsomness of these Laws he says
(1) As the Scriptures in all fundamentals are clear* and expone themselves, and
actu primo condemn Heresies: So all Laws of men in their fundamentals, which
are the Law of Nature and Nations, are clear (2) Tyranny is more visible and
intelligible than Heresy, and its soon discerned -- The people have a Natural
Throne of Policy in their conscience, to give warning, and materially sentence
against the King as a Tyrant -- where Tyranny is more obscure; and the thread
small that it escape the eye of man, the King keeps Possession, but I deny
that Tyranny can be obscure long.

7. I shall grant that many things are yeeldable even to a Grassant Dominator,
and Tyrannical Occupant of the place of Magistracy, as 1. There may be some
cases, wherein its Lawful for a people to yield subjection to a Lawless Tyrant,
when groaning under his overpouring yoke, under which they must patiently bear
the in^^^nation of the Lord, because they have sinned against Him, until He
arise and plead His oun Cause and execute judgment in the earth ( Mic. 7. 9.)
until which time they must kiss the rod as in the hand of God, and oune and
adore the holiness and Sovereignty of that Providence that has subjected them
under such a slavery; and are not to attempt a violent ejection or excussion,
when either the thing attempted is altogether impracticable, or the means and
manner of effectuating it dubious and unwarrantable, or the necessary
Concomitants and consequents of the cure more hurtful or dangerous than the
disease, or the like. As in many cases also a man may be subject to a robber
prevailing against him: So we find the people of Israel in Egyt and Babylon
etc. yielded subjection to Tyrants. But in this case we deny two things to them
(1) Allegiance or active and voluntary subjection, so as to oune them for
Magistrates (2) Stupid Passive obedience, or suffering without resistance. For
the first, we owe it only to Magistrates, by virtue of the Law either Ordinative
of God, or Constitutive of man. And it is no Argument to infer; as a man's
subjecting himself to a Robber assaulting him, is no soild proof of his
approving or acknowledging the injury and violence committed by the robber,
therefore a Persons yielding subjection to a Tyrant a Public robber does not
argue his acknowledging or approving his Tyranny and oppression. For, the
subjection that a Tyrant requires, and which a Robber requires, is not of the
same nature: the one is Legal of subjects, which we cannot oune to a Tyrant;
the other is forced of the subdued, which we must acknowledge to a Robber. But
to make the Parallel; If the Robber should demand, in our subjecting our selves
to him, an ouning of him to be no robber but an honest man, as the Tyrant
demands in our subjecting our selves to him in ouning him to be no Tyrant but a
Magistrate, then we ought not to yield it to the one no more than to the other.
For the Second, to allow them Passive obedience is in-intelligible Nonsense,
and a mere Contradiction: for nothing that's merely passive can be obedience as
relative to a Law, nor can any obedience be merely passive, for obedience is
always active. But not only is the inaccuracy of the Phrase excepted against,
but also that position maintained by many, that in reference to a yoke of
Tyranny there is a time which may be called the proper season of suffering,
that is, when suffering (in opposition to acting or resisting) is a necessary
and indispensible duty, and resisting is a sin: For if the one be an
indispensible duty, the other must be a sin at the same time: But this cannot
be admitted. For, though certainly there is such a season of suffering, wherein
suffering is Lawful, laudable and necessary, and all must lay their account
with suffering, and little else can be attempted but which will increase
sufferings; yet even then we may resist as well as we can: and these two,
Resistance and Suffering at the same time, are not incompatible: David did bear
most patiently the injury of his Sons usurpation, when he said, let the Lord do
to me as seems Him good 2 Samuel 15. 26. chapter 10. 12. and betaketh himself to
fervent prayers Psalm. 3. and yet these were not all the weapons he used against
him, Neither did he ever oune him as a Magistrate. We are to suffer all things
patiently as the Servants of the Lord, and look to Him for Mercy and relief
(Psalm. 123. 2.) but we are not obliged to suffer even in that season, as the
slaves of men. Again, suffering in opposition to resistance, does never fall
under any moral Law of God, execept in the absolutely extraordinary Case of
Christ's passive obedience, which cannot fall under our deliberation or
imitation; Or in the case of a positive Law, as was given to the Jews to
submit to Nebuchadnezzar, which was express and peculiar to them, as shall be
cleared. That can never be commanded as indispensible duty, which does not fall
under our free will or deliberation, but the enemies will as the Lord permits
them, as the Case of suffering is. That can never be indispensible duty which
we may decline without sin, as we may do suffering if we have not a call to it;
yea in that case it were sin to suffer, therefore in no case it can be formally
indispensibly commanded, so as we may not shift it if we can without sin.
Suffering simply the evil of punishment, just or unjust, can never be a
conformity to Gods preceptive Will but only to His Providential disposal, it
has not voluntas signi for its rule, but only voluntas beneplaciti. All the
Commands that we have for suffering, are either to direct the manner of it,
that it be Patiently and Cheerfully, when forced to it wrongfully 1 Pet. 2. 19,
20. or Comparatively to determine our choice in an unavoidable alternative,
either to suffer or sin: and so we are commanded rather to suffer than to deny
Christ, Math. 13. 33. and we are commanded upon these terms to follow Christ
to take up His Cross, when He lays it on in His Providence Math. 16. 24. See
at length this cleared Lex rex Q. 30. Page 317-320. otherwise in no case
subjection even Passive can be a duty; for it is allwise to be considered under
the notion of a plague, Judgment, and Curse to be complained of as a burden,
never to be ouned as a duty to Magistrates. As we find the Lords, people
resenting it as a servitude, under which they were servants even in their oun
Land, which did yield increase unto the Kings whom the Lord had set over them
because of their sins, Neh. 9. 36. 37. 2. In diverse cases there may be some
Compliance with a mere occupant, that has no right to reign; as upon this
account the Noble Marquis of Argyle and Lord waristoun suffered for their
Compliance with the Usurper Cromuel. Such may be the warrantableness, or
goodness, or necessity, or profitableness of a Compliance, when people are by
Providence brought under a yoke which they cannot shake off, that they may part
with some of their Privileges for the avoidance of the loss of the rest, and
for the convenience and profit, peace and safety of themselves and their
Country, which would be in hazard if they did not comply; they may do
whatsoever is due from them to the Public weal, what soever is an office of
their station or place, or which they have any other way a call unto,
whatsoever may make for their oun honest interest, without wronging others or
the Countries Liberties in their transactions with these Powers, even though
such a Compliance may be occasionally to the advantage of the Usurpers: Seeing
good and necessary actions are not to be declined for the ill effects that are
accidental to them, and arise from the use which others make of them. But
though this may be yielded in some cases to such Usurpers, especially
Conquerers, that have no right of occupying the empire, but are Capable of it
by derivation from the peoples consent: yet it must not be extended to such
Usurpers as are also Tyrants, that have no right of their oun, nor are capable
of any, and that overturn all rights of subjects. To such we can yield no
Compliance, as may infer either transacting with them, or ouning them as
Magistrates. We find indeed the Saints enjoyed Places under these, who were not
their Magistrates; as Nehemiah, and Mordecai, and Esther was Queen to
Ahaswerus. But here was no Compliance with Tyrants (for these Heathens were not
such) only some of them were extraordinary Persons, raised up by an
extraordinary spirit, for extraordinary ends, in extraordinary times, that
cannot be brought to an ordinary rule, as Esthers Marriage; and all of them in
their places kept the Law of their God, served the work of their generation,
defiled not themselves with their Customs, acted against no good, and engaged
to no evil, but by their Compliance promoted the welfare of their Country, as
Argyle and waristoun did under Cromuel. Again, we find they paid Custom to
them, as Neh. 9. 36. 37. and we read of Augustus his taxation universally
complied with Luke 2. 1-5. and Christ paid it. This shall be more fully
answered afterward. Here I shall only say (1) It can never be proven that
these were Tyrants. (2) Christ Paid it with such a Caution, as Leaves the title
unstated; not for conscience (as tribute must be paid to Magistrates Romans 13. 5,
6.) but only that he might not offend them (3) Any other instances of the
Saints taxations are to be judged forced acts, badges of their bondage, which
if they had been exacted as tests of their allegiance, they would not have
yielded. Strangers also, that are not subjects, use to pay Custom in their
trafficquing, but not as tests of their allegiance. 3. There may be also in
some cases obedience allowed to their Lawful Commands, because of the
Lawfulness of the thing commanded, or the coincidency of another Just and
obliging Authority commanding the same. We may do many things Tyranno Iubente
which he commands, and Tyranno premente which he enforces, and many things also
ipso sou volente seu nolente whether he will or not But we must do nothing
Tyranni jussu upon the consideration of his Command, in the acknowledgment of
obedience due by virtue of Allegiance, which we oune of Conscience to a Lawful
Magistrate. We must do nothing which may seem to have an accessoriness to the
Tyrants unlawful occupancy, or which depends only on the warrant of his
Authority to do it, or may entrench on the Divine Institution of Magistracy, or
bring us into a Participation of the Usurpers sin. In these cases we can
neither yield obedience in Lawful things, nor in unlawful: Nor can we oune
absolute subjection, no more then we can oune absolute obedience; for all
subjection is enjoined in order to obedience: And to plead for a Privilege in
point of obedience, and to disclaim it in point of subjection, is only the
flattery of such, as having renounced with conscience all distinction of
obedience, would divest others of all privileges, that they may exercise their
Tyranny without Control. Napthali page 28. prior edit. 4. There may be
Addresses made, to such as are not rightful Possessors of the Government, for
justice, or mercy, or redress of some intolerable grievances, without scruple
of accepting that which is materially justice or mercy, or seeking them at the
hand of any who may reach them out to us, though he that conveyes them to us be
not interested in the umpirage of them. Thus we find Jeremiah supplicated
Zedekiah for mercy, not to return to prison: and Paul appealed to Caesar for
justice. But in these Addresses, we may not acknowledge the wicked Laws that
brought on these grivances, nor conceal the wickedness no more than the misery
of them which we have endured, nor may we oune the Legal power of them that we
address to take them off, nor signify any thing, in the matter or manner of our
Representations, that may either import a declining our Testimony for which we
have suffered these grievances, or a contradiction to our declinature of their
pretended Authority: Only we may remonstrate what cruelties we have endured,
and how terrible it will be to them to be guilty of, or accessory to our blood
in not pitying us; which was all that Jeremiah did. And as for Paul's appeal, we
find he was threatened to be murdered by his Contrymen Act. 23. 14. from
whose hands he was rescued, and brought before the judicatory of Festus the
Roman deputy, not voluntarely; thence also they sought to remand him to
Jerusalem, that they might kill him Act. 25. 3. whereupon he demands in justice
that he might not be delivered to his accusers and Murderers, but claims the
benefit of the Heathens oun Law, by that appeal to Caesar. which was the only
constrained expedient of saving his oun life Act. 28. 19. by which also he got
an opportunity to witness for Christ at Rome. But as shall be cleared further
afterward; Caesar was not an Usurper over Judea: which not obscurely is
insinuated by Paul himself, who asserts, that both his person, and his Cause
Criminal of which he was accused (it was not an Ecclesiastical Cause, and so no
advantage hence for the Supremacy) appertained to Cesars Tribunal, and that not
only in fact but of right Act. 25. 10. I stand at Cesars judgment seat where I
ought to be judged. We cannot say this of any tribunal, senced in the name of
them that Tyrannize over us. 5. I will not stand neither upon the Names and
Titles of Kings etc. to be given to Tyrants and Usurpers, in speaking to them
or of them, by way of appellation or compellation: for we find even Tyrants are
called by these names in Scripture, being Kings de fact^ though not dejure, and
indeed not impertinently Kings and Tyrants for the most part are reciprocal
terms. But in no case can we give them any Names or Titles, which may signify
our love to them whom the Lord hates or (...) hate the Lord 2 Chronicles. 19. 2. or
which may flatter them, which Elihu durst not give, for fear his Maker should
take him away Job. 32. 22. or which may be taken for honoring of them, for
that is not due to the vile^ of men when exalted never so high Psalm. 12. ult: a
vile person must be contemned in our eyes Psalm. 15. 4. Nor which may any way
import or infer an ouning of a Magistratical relation between them and us, or
any Covenant transaction or Confederacy with them, which in no terms with them
as such we will say or oune Isa. 8. 12. Hence many sufferers upon this head so
bear to give them their Titles.

8. It will be yielded very readily by us, that a Magistrate is not to be
disouned merely for his differing in Religion from us, yea though he were a
Heathen. We do not disoune our pretended Rulers merely upon that account, but
cheerfully do grant and subscribe to that Truth, in our Confession of faith
chap. 23. 4. That Infidelity or difference in Religion, does not make void the
Magistrates just and Legal Authority, nor free the people from their due
obedience to him: On which our Adversaries have insulted, as if our Principles
and Practices were thereby disproved. But it is easy to answer 1. let the words
be considered; and we are confident, that no sober man will think, the
acknowledgment of just and legal Authority and due obedience, a rational ground
to infer, that Tyranny is thereby either allowed or privileged, Napth. Page
60. Prior Edition. 2. Though Infidelity or difference of Religion does not make
void Authority where it is Lawfully invested; yet it may incapacitate a person,
and Lawfully seclude him from Authority, both by the word of God, which
expressly forbids to set a Stranger over us who is not our brother Deuteronomy. 17.
15. Which includes as well a stranger of a strange Religion as one of a strange
Country, and by the Laws of the Land, which do incapitate a Papist of all
Authority, Supreme or subordinate. And so if this James the 7/2 had been King
before he was a Roman Catholic, if we had no more to object, we should not
have quarrelled his succession. 3. We both give and grant all that is in the
Confession, viz. Dominium non fundari in gratia, that Dominion is not founded
on Grace. Yet this remains evident, that a Prince who not only is of another
religion, but an avowed enemy to and overturner of the Religion established by
Law, and intending and endeavoring to introduce a false, heretical,
blasphemous, and Idolatrous religion, can claim no just and legal Authority,
but in this case the people may very Lawfully decline his pretended Authority;
Nay they are betrayers of their Country and Posterity, if they give not a
timeous and effectual Check to his Usurpings, and make him sensible that he
has no such Authority. Can we imagine, that men in the whole of that blessed
work so remarkably led of God, being convocate by a Parliament of the wisest
and worthyest men that ever was in England, whom they did encourage, by
writing, and preaching, and every way to stand fast in their opposition to the
then King displaying a banner for his prerogative (a court dream) against
Religion and Liberty; should be so far left, as to drop that as a principle and
part of our Religion, which would sacrifice Religion it self to the lust of a
raging Tyrant? Must we believe, that a Religion-destroying Tyrant is a
righteous Ruler? And must we onne him to be a Nursing father to the Church?
Shall we conclude that the common bounds and Limits, whereby the Almighty has
bounded and Limited Mankind, are removed by an Article of our confession of
faith, which hereby is turned into a Court creed? Then welcome Hobs de Cive,
with all the rest of Pluto's train, who would babble us into a belief, that the
world is to be governed according to the pleasure of wicked Tyrants. I would
fain hope at length the world would be awakened out of such ridiculous dreams,
and be ashamed any more to oune such fooleries. And it may be, our two Royal
Brothers have contributed more to cure men of this Moral madness, than any who
went before them. And this is the only advantage, I know, that the Nations has
reaped by their reign.

9. Though we deny that Conquest can give a just Title to a Croun; yet we grant
in some cases, though in the beginning it was unjust yet by the peoples after
consent it may be turned into a just Title. It is undeniable, when there is
just ground of the war; if a Prince subdue a whole Land, who have justly
forfeited their Liberties, when by his grace he preserves them, he may make use
of their right now forefeited, and they may resign their Liberty to the
Conqueror, and consent that he be their King upon fair and Legal and not
Tyrannical conditions. And even when the war is not just, but successful on the
invading Conquerours side, this may be an inducement to the Conquered, if they
be indeed free and uningaged to any other, to a submission, dedition, and
delivery up of themselves to be the subjects of the victor, and to take him for
their Sovereign: as it is like the case was with the Jews in Cesars time,
whose Government was translated by dedition to the Roman power; in the
translation when a doing there was a fault, but after it was done it ceased;
though the beginning was wrong, there was a post-fact which made it right, and
could not be dissolved without an unjust disturbance of public order. Whence,
besides what is said above, in answer to that much insisted Instance of Christ's
paying tribute, and Commanding it to be paid to Caesar, the difficulty of that
instance may be clearly solved. That Tribute which he paid, Math. 17. 24. etc.
and that about the payment whereof He was questioned Math. 22. 21. seem to be
two different Tributes. Many think very probably they were not one and the same
Tribute. Its a question, for whom and by whom that of Math. 17. was gathered;
its most likely it was gathered by the officers of the Temple for its service:
however the payment was made with such caution (tacitly declining the strict
right to exact it from him, but to avoid offense, in an act in it self
unobliging) that their claim is left as much in the dark, as if the question
had never been moved. The other Math. 22. was exacted for Caesar: but to that
captious question our Lord returns such an Answer, as might both solve it, and
evade the snare of the proponders, giving a general Rule of giving to God and
to Caesar each their oun, without defining which of them had the right to the
payment in question; whether Caesar should have it, or whether it should be
paid only for the Temples use: Upon which they marvelled; which they needed
not do, if they had understood in His words an express and positive declaration
of an obligation to make that payment to Caesar; for then they would have
obtained one of their ends, in making Him odious to the people, who were not
satisfied with the payment of it. But however, the knot is loosed by
considering, that they were now Lawfully subject to the Roman Emperors as
their Governors, to whom they were obliged (I do not say Christ was) to pay
tribute. For they had yielded themselves unto and ouned the Roman Dominion, in
Pompey, Caesar Augustus, and Tiberius, ere this question about Tribute paying
was proposed to our Savior, and therefore they who stuck at the payment of it
were a seditious party dissenting from the body of the Nation: Else it is not
supposable readily, that their Dominion in Judea could have been exercised long
without some consent, sufficient to legitimate it to the present Rulers, And
this is the more likely, if we consider the confession of the Jews themselves,
disavowing the power of Capital punishment; It is not Lawful for us to put any
man to death, And ouning Caesar as their King, with an exclusive a
brenounciation of all other, we have no King but Caesar: As Paul also
acknowleeges he ought to be judged at Cesars bar, in his appeal to Caesar. It is
also acknowledged by very good Authors, that this was the tribute which Judas
the Galilean stood up to free the people from, and that the sedition of those
Jews that followed him mentioned Act. 5. 37. who mutinied upon this occasion,
was according to Gamaliels speech disallowed by that Sanhedrin or Council of
the Jews. And it may be gathered out of Josephus, that the Jews of Hircanus
his party came under the Roman power by consent and dedition; while they of
Aristobalus his party looked upon the Romans as Usurpers. Which difference
continued till our Saviors time, when some part of them acknowledged the
Cesarean Authority, some part looked upon it as an Usurpation, and of this
generally were the Pharisees. To confirm this, Calvin's Testimony may be
adduced, upon Math. 22. who says, the Authority of the Roman Emperors was by
common use approved and received among the Jews, whence it was manifest that
the Jews had now of their oun accord imposed on themselves a Law of paying the
tribute, because they had passed over to the Romans the power of the sword.And
Chamiers Panstrat Tom. 2. lib. 15. cap. 16. page 635. what then? if Cesars
Authority were from bad beginings, did therefore Christ untruly say it was from
above? Can no power at first unjust, afterward become just? if that were so,
then either none, or very few King^oms would be just.

10. As Tyranny is a destructive plague to all the Interests of men and
Christians; So Anarchy, the usual product of it, is no less pernicious,
bringing a Community into a Paroxysme as deadly and dangerous. We must oune
Government to be absolutely necessary, for the constitution and conservation of
all Societies. I shall not enter into a disquisition, let be determination, of
the Species or Kind of Magistracy, whether Monarchy, Aristocracy, or Democracy,
be preferable. My dispute at present is not levelled against Monarchy, but the
present Monarch: Not against the Institution of the Species (though I believe,
except we betake our selves to the Divine allowance and permission; we shall be
as pusled to find out the Divine Original of it, as Cosmographers are in their
search of the Spring of Nilus or Theologues of the Father of Melchizedeck) but
the constitution of this Individual Monarchy established among us; which in its
root and branch, Spring and streams, in its Original, Nature, ends, and
effects, is Diametrically opposite to Religion and Liberty; And because its
Contagion, universally perverting and corrupting all the ends and Orders of
Magistracy, does affect and infect all the subordinate officers, deriving their
power from such a filthy fountain; we must also substract and deny their
demanded ackowledgments, as any way due, so long as they serve the pride and
projects of such a wicked power: And do not reckon our selves obliged by
Covenant, or any otherways (though in the third Article of the Solemn League,
we are bound to preserve the rights and privileges of our Parliaments, and
consequently the honor and deference that's due to our Peers, or other
Parliament men, acting according to the trust committed to them, but not when
they turn Traitors engaged in a Conspiracy with the Tyrant) to oune or defend a
Soul-less shadow of a Court Cabal, made up of persons who have sold themselves
to work wickedness, in conspiring with this throne of iniquity against the
Lord, which is all we have for a Parliament, whom we can in no ways oune as our
Representatives, but must look upon them as perjured and perfidious Traitors to
God and their Country, which they have betrayed into the hands of a Tyrant;
And therefore divested of that power and Authority, which they had of the
people as their Representatives, which now is returned to the fountain. And
therefore we must act as we can against them, and also what is necessary for
securing of our selves, Religion and Liberty, without them. We would think
Nobles, ennobled with virtue, a great Mercy and encouragment. And if they would
concur in the Testimony for Religion and Liberty, we would be glad that they
should lead the van and prove themselves to be powers appointed by God, in
acting for Him and His Interest. But for the want of their Conduct, we must not
surcease from that duty that they abandon, nor think that the Concurrence of
Peers is so necessary to legitimate our actions, as that without that formality
our resolutions to maintain the Truth of God on all hazards, in a private
Capacity, were unlawful in the Court of God and Nature: But on the contrare
must judge, that their relinquishing or opposing their duty, which before God
they are obliged to maintain, preserve, and promove, is so far from loosing our
obligation, or eximing us from our duty, that is should rather press us to
prosecute it with the more vigor, without suspending it upon their precedence.
For now they can pretend to no precedence, when they do not answer the end of
their erection, and do not seek the public good but their oun private
advantage, they cease to be the Ministers of God and of the people, and become
private persons. And reason will conclude, that when the Ephori or Trustees
betray their Trust, and sell or basely give away the Liberties and Privileges
of the people, which they were entrusted with, the people cannot be brought
into a remediless condition; if a Tutor waste and destroy the pupills
estate,the Law provides a remedy for the pupil Ius popu. vind. cap. 15. page
335. 336. The remedy in this case can only be, as every one must move in his
oun sphere, while all concur in the same duty; So if any in higher place become
not only remiss, but according to the influence of their power would seduce
others into their Apostasy, it is their duty to resist and endeavor their
Reformation or removal: And if these more eminently entrusted shall turn
directly Apostates, and obstructive and destructive to common Inte^^^^, the
people of an inferior degree may step forward to occupy the places, and assert
the Interests, which they forefault and desert. Neither is this a breach of
good order; for Ordor is only a mean subordinate to, and intended for the Glory
of God and the peoples good, and the regulation thereof must only be admitted
as it is conducible and not repugnant to these ends. A Generals command to his
soldiers in battle, does not impede the necessity of succession, in case of
vacancy of any charge, either through death or desertion, even of such as in
quality may be far inferior to those whose places they step into, Naph. Page
151. Prior Edition. I do not assert this for private peoples aspiring into the
Capacity of Primores or Peers; but that they may do that which the Peers
desert, and dare not or will not do, if the Lord put them in a Capacity to do
it. And more plainly I assert, that if the Peers of the Land, whose duty it is
principally to restrain and repress Tyranny, either connive at it or concur
with it, and so abandon or betray their Trust, then the Common people may do
it; at least are obliged to renounce, reject, and disoune allegiance to the
Tyrant, without the peers. For which I offer these reasons 1. Because all men
have as much freedom and Liberty by nature as Peers have, being no more slaves
than they; because slavery is a penal evil contrare to nature, and a misery
consequent of sin, and every man created according to Gods image is res Sacr^ a
Sacred thing; And also no more subjects to Kings etc. than they; freedom being
natural to all, (except freedom from subjection to Parents, which is a Moral
duty and most kindly and natural, and subjection of the wife to the husband
etc.) but otherwise as to Civil and Politic subjection, man by nature is born
as free as beasts; No Lion is born King of Lions, nor no man born King of men,
nor Lord of men, nor Representative of men, nor Rulers of men, either supreme
or subordinate; because none by nature can have those things that essentially
constitute Rulers, the calling of God, nor gifts and qualifications for it, nor
the election of the People. 2. The original of all that power, that the (...)
or Representatives can claim, is from the people, not from themselves; from
whence derived they their being Representatives, but from the peoples
Commission or Compact? when at the first constit^tion of Parliaments or public
Conventions for affairs of State, necessity put the people, who could not so
conveniently meet all, to confer that honor and burden upon the best
qualified, and who had chief Interest, by Delegation. Hence if the people give
such a power, they may wave it when perverted, and act without their oun
empowered Servants. 3. The peoples power, is greater than the power of any
delegated or constituted by them; the Cause is more than the effect;
Parliament Men do represent the people, the people do no not represent the
Parliament: They are as Tutors and Curators unto the people, and in effect
their servants deputed to oversee their public affairs, therefore if their
power be less the people can act without them. 4. It were irrational to
imagine, the people committing the administration of their weighty affairs unto
them, did denude themselves of all their radical power; or that they can
devolve upon them, or they obtain, any other power but what is for the good and
advantage of the people; therefore they have power to act without them, in
things which they never resigned to them: for they cannot be deprived of that
natural aptitude, and natures birth right, given to them by God and Nature, to
provide the most efficacious and prevalent means for the preservation of their
Rights and Liberties. 5. As the people have had power before they made Peers,
and have done much without them; So these Primores could never do without them,
therefore in acts of common Interest, the Peers depend more upon the people
than the people does upon them. 6. All these primeve rights, that gave rise to
Societies, are equal to both People and Peers, whereof the Liberty to repress
and reject Tyranny is a chief one. The People as well as Peers have a hard in
making the King, and other Judges also, as is clear from Deuteronomy. 17. 14. Judge. 9.
6. 1 Samuel 11. 15. 2 King. 14. 21. therefore they may unmake them as well as
they. To seek to preserve the ends of Government, when they are over-turned, is
essentially requisite to all Societies, and therefore common and competent to
all Constituents of these Societies, Superiors or inferiors. The Glory of God
and Security of Religion, the end of all Christian Government, does concern all
equally. As every one equally is bound to obey God rather than man, so violence
in this case, destroys both the Commonwealth, and makes the end and the means
of Government, and the injured persons obligation thereto to cease, and this
equally to every man of Private or public Capacity. In the Concern of Religion
at least, We must not think, because we are not Nobles or in Authority, that
the care of it or Reformation thereof does nothing pertain to us; Nay in that,
and carrying on the work thereof, there is an equality; As in the erection of
the Old Testament Tabernacle, all the people were to contribute a like, half a
shekel Exodus 30. that it might be for a rememberance before the Lord. Hence it
follows, if we disoune the Supreme Ruler, and the inferior confederate with
him, and cannot have the Concurrence of others; Now through the manifest and
notorious Perversion of the great ends of Society and Government, the bond
thereof being dissolved, we Liberated therefrom, do relapse into our Primeve
Liberty and Privilege, and accordingly as the similitude of our Case and
exigence of our Cause does require, may upon the very same Principles again
join and associate, for our better defense and Preservation, as we did at
first enter into Societies Naph. P. 150. yet, whatever we may do in this case;
We are not for presumptuous Assumptions of Authority, which maleversers have
forefaulted: Neither are we for new erections of Government, but are for
keeping the Society of which we are members entire, in an endeavor to have
all our fellow members united unto God and to one another, in Religion and
Liberty, according to the bond of the Solemn League and Covenant. Certain it is
that Greater Societies under one Government, may in some cases make a
Secession, and divide into Lesser without sedition: or else, how would there be
now so many distinct Commonwealths in the world? seeing at first all was under
one head: and how comes it to pass, that there are so many Kingdoms in Europe,
when it can be instanced when all, or the most part, were under on Roman
Emperor? But this in our Circumstance is no way expedient, neither was it ever
in Projection. But our aim is to abstract our selves inoffensively, and
maintain our rights that remain unrobbed, and to adhere clossly to the
fundamental Constitutions, Laws, and Laudable Practices of our native Kingdom.

11. We oune the obligation of our Sacred Covenants, unrepealably and
indispensibly binding to all the duties of Christian subjection to Magistrates.
But we deny, that hereby we are bound either to maintain Monarchy, especially
thus perverted; nor to oune the Authority of either of the two Monarchs that
have Monarchized or Tyrannized over us these 27 years past. For as to the first
we assert, that that which is in its oun nature Mutable, cannot be simply sworn
unto to be maintained and preserved, but Hypothetically it most, else it were
simply sinful; since it were to make things, in their oun nature and in the
Providence of God changable, unchangable; yea it were a down right swearing not
to comply with, but to spurn against, the various vicisitudes of Divine
Providence, the great Rector of the Universe. And it is unquestionable, that
when things alterable and unalterable are put in the same Oath, to make the
Engagment Lawful the things must be understood, as they are in their oun nature
and no otherwise: else both the Imposer and the Taker grievously transgress;
the former, in taking upon him what is in the power of no Morta, and a
Contradicton to the Prerogative of the Immorta God; and the other, in ouning
that power as just. Hence when these two fall to be in the same Oath, they must
be so understood as it may not be made a snare to the conscience of the Sweaer.
For it may fall so out in the Providence of God, that the Preservation of both
is in all respects made impossible: And an adhesion to the one, may so far
interfere with the Preservation of the other, as if the Mutable and that which
has no objective obligation be stuck to, the other, which with the loss of all
Interests we are to maintain, must be abandoned; yea, that which was sworn to
be maintained as a mean only, and a mutable one too, may not only cease to be a
mean, but may actually destroy the main end, and then it is to be laid aside,
because then it inverts the order of things. Hence also it may be questioned,
if it were not more convenient, to leave out those things that are alterable in
themselves, out of the same Oath with things unalterable, and put them in a
distinct Oaths or Covenant by themselves; as we see Iehojadah did 2 King. 11.
17. He made a Covenant between the Lord and the King and the people, that they
should be the Lords people; between the King also and the People. Here are two
distinct Covenants; the one made with God, about things eternally obligatory,
wherein King and people engage themselves upon level ground, to serve the Lord,
and Joash the King his treacherous dealing with God in that matter brought the
Curse of that Covenant upon him: The other Covenant was Civil, about things
alterable, relating to Points of Government and Subjection. And as he, by
virtue of that prior Covenant, had obliged himself, under the pain of the Curse
thereof, to carry as one Covenanted to God with the people, and so not to
Tyrannize over his brethren: So the people, by virtue of that same Covenant,
were to yield obedience, but in nothing to acknowledge him as having power or
Authority to countermand Gods Command; Neither had it been an act of
disloyalty, to have broken down his Groves, which he had with the addition of
the guilt of Perjurie set up, and to have bound his ungrateful hands from the
blood of the Gracious Zechariah: A perfect parallel to our Case under the
former dominator, save that it was outdone as to all dimensions of wickedness
by him. To speak more plainly, the Religious part of our Covenant is of an
Eternal obligation: but as to the Civil part, it is impossible it can ever be
so, unless it be well and Cautiously understood, that is, unless instead of any
species of Government, as Monarchy, etc. we put in Magistracy it self. For this
is that power which is of God: but Monarchy etc. is only a humane Creature,
about the creation whereof men take a Liberty, according to what suits them
best in their present Circumstances. And as to this Species of Monarchy; men
are never left at Liberty* to cloth therewith any inept or impious Person. And
they are perfectly loosed from it. 1. when that Species of Government becomes
opposite to the ends of Government, and is turned Tyranny, especially when a
legal establishment is pretended; then it affects with its contagion the very
species it self: The house is to be pulled down, when the Leprosy is got into
the walls and foundation. 2. when as it is exercised, it is turned inept for
answering the end of its erection, and prejudicial to the main thing for which
Government is given, to wit, the Gospel and the coming of Christ's Kingdom:
hence it is promised to the Church, Isai. 49. 23. Kings shall be nursing
fathers to the Church -- And Isai. 52. 15. It is promised to the Me^iator, that
Kings shall shute their mouths -- I. e. never a word in their head, but out of
reverence and respect to His absolute Sovereignty, they shall take the Law from
Him, without daring to contradict, far less to take upon them to prescribe in
the House of God, as they in their wisdom think fit. 3. when Providence,
without any sinful hand, makes that species impossible to be kept up, without
the ruin of that for which it was erected: when things come to this push and
pinch, whosoever are clothed with the power are then under an obligation to
comply with that alteration of providence, for the safety of the people; else
they declare themselves unworthy of rule, and such who would sacrifice the
interest of the people to their particular interest; in which case the people
may make their Public servant sensible, he is at his highest elevation but a
Servant. Hence, now when this species named in the Covenant, viz, Monarchy, is
by Law so vitiate, as it is become the mean and instrument of the destruction
of all the ends of that Covenant, and now by Law transmitted to all successors
as a hereditary, pure, perfect, and perpetual opposition to the coming of
Christ's kingdom; So that as long as there is one to wear that Croun (but
Iehavah will in righteousness execute Coniahs doom upon the race Ier. 22. ult.
write this man childless --) and enter heir to the Government as now
established, he must be an enemy to Christ; there is no other way left, but to
think on a new Model molded according the true Pattern. As to the Second, we
are far less obliged to oune and acknowledge the interest of any of the two
Monarchs, that we have been Mourning under these many years, from these Sacred
Covenants. For as to the first of them, Charles the 2. Those Considerations did
cassate his Interest, as to any Covenant obligation to oune him. 1. In these
Covenants we are not sworn absolutely to maintain the Kings Person and
Authority, but only Conditionally, in the Preservation and defense of Religion
and Liberties. Now when this Condition was not performed, but on the contrare
professedly resolved never to be fulfilled; And when he laid out himself to the
full of his power and Authority, for the destuction of that Reformed Religion
and Liberties of the Kingdom; which he solemnly swore to defend when he
received the Croun, only in the terms that he should be a Loyal subject to
Christ, and a true and faithful Servant to the people, in order to which a
Magistrate is chosen, and all his worth, excellency, and valuableness consists
in his answering that purpose; for the excellency of a mean, as such, is to be
measured from the end, and its answerableness thereunto: We were not then
obliged, to maintain such an enemy to these precious Interests. 2. Because, as
the people were bound to him, so he was bound to them by the same Covenant,
being only on these terms entrusted with the Government: All which Conditions
he perfidiously broke, whereupon only, his Authority and our Allegiance were
founded; And thereby we were loosed, from all reciprocal obligation to him by
virtue of that Covenant. 3. Though he and we stood equally engaged to the
duties of that Covenant, only with this difference, that the Kings Capacity
being greater, he was the more obliged to have laid out that power, in causing
all to stand to their Covenant Engagments, as Josiah did 2 Chronicles. 34. 31, 32,
33. (But alas there was never a Josiah in the race) yet he rose up to the hight
of rebellion against God and the people, in heaven-daring insolency, and not
only brake but burnt that Covenant, and made Laws to case and rescind it, and
made a not-concurring in this Conspiracy a note of incapacity for any Trust, in
Church or State. Therefore to plead for an ouning of him in this case, were
only concludent of this, that the Generation had dreamed themselves into such a
distraction, as may be feared will be pursued with destruction, and make such
dreamers the detestation of posterity, and cause all men Proclaim the
righteousness of God, in bringing ruin upon them by that very power and
Authority they ouned in such circumstances. 4. It is a known maxim, Qui non
implet conditionem a se promissam cadit beneficio; and qui remittit
obligationem non potest exigere. He that does not fulfill the conditions falls
from the benefit of it, and whosoever remitts the obligation of the party obliged
upon condition, cannot exact it afterward. So then it is evident that the
subjects of Scotland, were by King Charles the 2de his consent, yea express
command, disengaged from so much of that Covenant as could be alleged in
favors of himself: So that all that he did, by burning and rescinding these
Covenants, and pursuing all who endeavored to ad^ere to them, was a most
explicit Liberating his subjects from, and remission of their Allegiance to
him (and in this we had been fools, if we had not taken him at his word) yea he
rescinded his very Coronation, by an act of his first Parliament after his
return, which did declare null and void all Acts, Constitutions, and
establishments, from the year 1633 to that present session, not excepting those
for his oun Coronation, after which he was never recrouned, And therefore we
could not oune that right, which himself did annul. But as for his Royal
Brother, James the 7/2 we cannot indeed make use of the same reasons and
arguments, to disoune him, as we have now adduced* yet, as we shall prove
afterward, this Covenant does oblige to renounce him. So it is so clear, that
it needs no Illustration, that there lies no obligation from the Covenant to
oune him: And also that for this cause we are obliged not to oune him. 1.
Because as he is an enemy to the whole of our Covenant, and especially to these
terms upon which Authority is to be ouned therein: So he will not come under
the bond of this Covenant, nor any other compact with the people, but intrude
himself upon the Throne, ^n such a way as overturns the Basis of our
Government, and destroys all the Liberties of a free people, which by Covenant
we are bound to preserve, and consequently as inconsistent therewith, to
renounce his Usurpation. For, a Prince that will set himself up without any
transactions with the people, or conditions giving Security for Religion and
Liberty, is an Usurping Tyrant, not bounded by any Law but his oun lusts. And
to say to such an one, Reign thou over us, is all one as to say, come thou and
play the Tyrant over us, and let thy lust and will be a Law to us: which is
both against Scripture and Natural-sense. If he be not a King upon Covenant
terms, either expressly or tacitly, or general stipulations according to the
word of God and Laws of the Land, he cannot be ouned as a father, Protector,
or Tutor, having any fiduciary power entrusted to him over the Commonwealth,
but as a Lawless and absolute Dominator, assuming to himself a power to rule or
rage as he lists: whom to oune were against our Covenants; for there we are
sworn to Maintain his Maj. just and Lawful Authority, and by consequence not to
oune Usurpation and Tyranny, stated in opposition to Religion and Liberty,
which there also we are engaged to maintain. Sure, this cannot be Lawful
Authority which is of God, for God gives no power against Himself; Nor can it
be of the people, who had never power granted them of God to create one over
them, with a Liberty to destroy them, their Religion and Liberty, at his
pleasure. 2. As he is not nor will not be our Covenanted and sworn King (and
therefore we cannot be his Covenanted and sworn subjects) So he is not nor can
not be our Crouned King, and therefore we must not be his Liege subjects,
ouning fealty and obedience to him. For according to the National Covenant; as
all Lieges are to maintain the Kings Authority, consistent with the subjects
Liberties; which if they be innovated or prejudged, such Confusion would ensue,
as this realm could be no more a free Monarchy -- So for the Preservation of
true Religion, Laws, and Liberties of this Kingdom, it is statute by the 8
Act. Parl. 1, repeated in the 99 Act. Parl. 7. ratified in the 23. Act. Parl.
11. and 114 Act. Parl. 12. of King James 6. and 4 Act of K. Charles 1. that all
Kings and Princes ^ at their coronation and reception of their Princely,
Authority, shall make their faithful Promise by their solemn Oath, in the
presence of the Eternal God; That enduring the whole time of their lives, they
shall serve the same Eternal God, to the utter-most of their power, according
as He has required in His most holy Word, contained in the Old and new
Testaments, and according to the same Word, shall maintain the true Religion of
Christ Jesus, the preaching of His holy Word, the due and right Ministration of
the Sacraments, now received and Preached within this realm (according to the
Confession of faith immediately preceding) and shall abolish and gainstand all
false religion, contrary to the same; And shall rule the people committed to
their charge, according to the will and Command of God, revealed in His
foresaid Word, and according to the Laudable Laws and Constitutions received
in this realm, no ways repugnant to the said Will of the Eternal God; And
shall procure, to the uttermost of their power, to the Kirk of God and whole
Christian people, true and perfect peace in all time coming; And that they
shall be careful to root out of their Empire all Heretics and Enemies to the
true Worship of God, who shall be convicted by the true Kirk of God of the
foresaid Crimes. Now this Coronation Oath he has not taken, he will not, he
cannot take; and therefore cannot be our Crouned King according to Law. As
there be also many other Laws incapacitating his admission to the Croun, being
a Professed Papist, and no Law for it at all, but one of his oun making by a
Pacqued Cabal of his oun Accomplices, a Parliament, wherein himself presided as
Commissioner, enacting matterially his succession, and rescinding all these
Ancient Laws: which Act of Succession (which is all the legal right he can
pretend to in Scotland) because it cannot be justified, therefore his right
cannot be ouned, which is founded upon the subversion of our Ancient Laws. But
as he cannot be our Legally Crouned King, so he is not so much as formally
Crouned. And therefore before his Inauguration, whatever right to be King (whom
the Representatives may admit to the Government) he may pretend to, by
hereditary Succession; yet he cannot formally bemade King, till the people make
a Compact with him, upon terms for the safety of their dearest and nearst
Liberties, even though he were not disabled by Law. He might, as they say,
pretend to some jus ad rem, but he could have no jus in re. The Kings of
Scotland, while uncrouned, can exerce no Royal Government; for the Coronation
in Concret, according to the substance of the Act, is no Ceremony (as they,
who make Conscience it self but a Ceremony, call it) nor an accidental
ingredient in the Constitution of a King, but as it is distinctive, so it is
Constitutive: it distinguished Saul from all Israel, and made him from no King
to be a King, it is dative and not only Declarative; it puts some honor upon
him that he had not before. 3. Though the Laws should not strike against his
Coronation, And though the Representatives Legally should take the same
measures with him that they took with his brother, and admit him upon the
terms of the Covenant; yet after such doleful experiences of such transactions
with these Sons of Belial, who must not be taken with hands, nor by the hand,
it were hard to trust, or entrust them with the Government, even though they
should make the fairest Professions: Since they whose Principle is to keep no
faith to Heretics (as they call us) and who will be as absolute in their
promises as they are in their power, have deservedly forefeited all Credit and
Trust with honest men; so that none could rationally refer the determination of
a half Croun reckoning to any of them, far less oune them and their Government
in the Managment of the weightiest affairs of State, since their
Male-versations are written in such bloody Characters, as he that runs may read
them. At least it were wisdom, and is our duty, to take our Measures from the
General Assemblies Procedure with the other Brother, before his admission to
the Government, to suspend our Allegiance to him until Authority be Legally
devolved upon him, and founded upon and bounded by terms giving all security
for Religion and Liberty.

12. As I said before; wary Prudence, in waving such an impertinent and
Ticklish Question, cannot be condemned: since what ever he may be in
conscience, no man in Law can be obliged, so far to surrender the common
Privilege of all Mankind, to give an account of all his inward thoughts, which
are alwise said to be free. And as in nothing they are more various, so in
nothing they can be more violented, than to have our opinion and sentiments of
the current Government extorted from us; a declining of which Declaration of
thoughts, where no overt Act in project or practice can be proven against it,
cannot be Treason in any Law in the world: So a Cautelous Answer, in such a
ticklish and entrapping imposition, cannot be censured in point of Lawfullnesse
of expediency, even though much be concedded, to stop the Mouths of these
bloody Butchers, gaping greedily after the blood of the Answerer; if he do not
really oune, but give them to understand he cannot approve of, this Tyranny.
But as these poor faithful Witnesses, who were helped to be most free, have
alwise been honored with the most signal Countenance of the Lord in a happy
issue of their Testimony: So those that used their Prudentials most, in seeking
shifts to sh^n severity, and studying to satisfy these Inquisitors with their
stretched Concessions, were ordinarily more exposed to snares, and found less
satisfaction in their Sufferings, even though they could say much to justify,
or at least extenuate their Shiftings. I knew one, who had proof of this, who
afterward was ashamed of this kind of Prudence. A short account of whose
managing of Answers to this Question, because it may conduce somewhat to the
explication of it, may here be hinted. The question moved after the usual
form, was, Do ye onne the Authority of King James the 7? In answer to which,
he pleaded first, for the immunity of his thoughts, which he said were not
subject to theirs or any Tribunal. When this could not be an evasion from their
extortions, he objected the ambiguity of the terms in which the Question was
conceived, being capable of diverse senses: And inquired, what they meant by
Authority? what by ouning Authority? By Authority, whether did they mean the
Administration of it, as now improved? if so, then he was not satisfied with
it: or the right as now established? if so, then he was not clear to give his
opinion of it; as being neither significant nor necessary, and that it was
fitter for Lawyers, and those that were better acquaint with the Arcana
Imperii, than for him to dispute it. Again he asked, what they meant by ouning?
either it is Passive subjection; that he did not decline: or Active
acknowledgment of it; and that he said he looked upon as all the suffrage he
could give to its establishment in his station, which he must demur upon some
scruple. The replies he received were very various, and some of them very rare,
either for ignorance or imposture. Sometimes it was answered: To oune the Kings
Authority, is to take the Oath of Allegiance; this he refused. Some answered,
it is to engage never to rise in Arms against the King upon any pretense
whatsoever; this he refused likewise. Others explained it to be, to acknowledge
his right to be King: To this he answered, when the Authority is Legally
devolved upon him by the Representatives of both Kingdoms, it was time enough
for him to give account of his sentiments. Others defined it, to oune him to be
Lawful King by succession: To this he Answered, he did not understand
succession could make a man formally King, if there were not some other way of
Conveyance of it; it might put him in the nearest Capacity to be King, but
could not make him King. Some did thus Paraphrase upon it, that he must oune
him to be his Sovereign Lord under God, and Gods vicegerent, to be obeyed in
all things Lawful: To this he answered, whom God appoints, and the People
choose according to Law, he would oune. When those shifts would not do, but
from time to time being urged to a Categorical Answer; he told them, he was
content to live in subjection to any Government Providence set up, but for
ouning the present Constitution as of God and according to Law, he durst not
acknowledge it, nor oune any Mortal as his Lawful Sovereign, but in terms
consistent with the Covenant securing Religion and Liberty. This not
satisfying, when he came to a more pinching Trial; he declared, he ouned all
Lawful Authority according to the Word of God, and all Authority that was the
Ordinance of God by His Preceptive Will, and he could be subject to any; but
further to acknowledge it, he behooved to have more clearness, for sometimes a
Nation might be charged with that, ye have set up Kings and not by me etc
Further he conceded, he ouned his providential Advancement to the Throne; he
ouned as much as he thought did oblige him to subject himself with patience; he
ouned him to be as Lawful as providence possessing him of the Throne of his
Ancestors, and Lineal succession, as presumed next in blood and line, could
make him: But still he declined to oune him as Lawful King, and alleged that
was all one, whether he was Lawful or not, he refused not subjection,
distinguishing it always from Allegiance. But all these concessions did not
satisfy them, and they alleged he might say all this of a Tyrant: and
therefore commanded him to give it under his hand, to oune not only the Lineal
but the Legal succession of King James the 7. to the Croun of Scotland: which
he did, upon a fancy that Legal did not import Lawful, but only the formality
of their Law; withal protesting, he might not be interpreted to approve of his
succession. But this was a vain Protestatio contra factum. However by this we
see, what is ouning this Authority, in the sense of the Inquisitors. The result
of all is, to acknowledge Allegiance to the present possessor, and to approve
his pretended Authority as Lawful, Rightful, and Righteous: which indeed is the
true sense of the Words, and any other that men can forge or find out is
strained. For, to speak properly, if we oune his Authority in any respect, we
oune it to be Lawful: for eyery Authority, that is ouned to be Authority
indeed, is Lawful; Authority always importing Authorization, and consisting in
a Right or Call to rule, and is formally and essentially contradistinct to
Usurpation: wherever the place of power is merely usurped, there is no
Authority but verbo tenu^; A Style without truth, a barely pretended nominal
equivocal Authority, no real denomination: if we then oune this Man's Authority,
we oune it to be Lawful Authority: And if we cannot oune it so, we cannot oune
it at all. For it is most suitable, either to manly ingenuity, or Christian
simplicity, to speak properly, and to take words always in the sense that they
to whom they are speaking will understand them, without equivacating.

These Preliminaries being thus put by, which do contribute to clear somewhat
in this Controversy, and both furnish us with some Arguments for, and
solutions in most of the objections against, my Thesis in answer to the
Question above stated. I set it down thus. A people long oppressed with the
Encroachments of Tyrants and Usurpers, may disoune all Allegiance to their
pretended Authority, and when imposed upon to acknowledge it, may and must
ratber choose to suffer, than to oune it. And consequently we cannot as matters
now stand oune, acknowledge, or approve the pretended Authority of King James
the 7. as Lawful King of Scotland; as we could not as matters then stood oune
the Authority of Charles the 2. This consequence is abundantly clear from the
foregoing deduction, demonstrating their Tyranny and usurpation. In prosecuting
of this General Thesis, which will evince the particular Hypothesis: I shall.
1. Adduce some Historical Instances, whence it may be gathered, that this is
not altogether without a precedent, but that people have disouned Allegiance to
Tyrants and Usurpers, before now. 2. Deduce it from the Dictates of reason. 3.
Confirm it by Scripture Arguments.

I. Albeit, as was showed before, this Question as now stated, is in many
respects unprecedented; yet the practice, which in our day has been the result
of it, to wit, to disoune or not to oune Prevailing Dominators Usurping the
Government or abusing it, is not so alien from the examples of History, but
that by Equivalency or consequence it may be collected from, and confirmed by
instances.

1. To begin at home, besides many Passages related already for confirmation,
we may add (1) That for about 1025. years, the people had in their choice whom
to oune ar admit to succeed in the Government, even though the Kingdom was
hereditary; and used to elect, not such who were nearest in blood and line, but
these that were judged most fit for Government, being of the same progeny of
Fergus, Buchan. Rer. Scot. lib. 6. page 195. in vita Kennethi. 3. This
continued until the days of Kenneth the 3. who to cover his villainous Murder
of his Brothers Son Malcolm, and prevent his and secure his oun sons
succession, procured this Charter for Tyranny, the settlement of the succession
of the next in line from the Parliament: which, as it pretended the prevention
of many inconveniences, arising from Contentions and Competions about the
succession; So it was limited by Laws, Precluding the succession of Fools or
Monsters, and preserving the peoples liberty to shake off the yoke, when
Tyranny should thereby be introduced: Otherwise it would have been not only an
irrational surrender of all their oune Rights, and enslaving the posterity, but
an irreligious contempt of Providence, refusing and anticipating its
Determination in such a case. However it is clear, before this time, that as
none but the fittest were admitted to the Government; So if any did usurp upon
it, or afterward did degenerate into Tyranny, they took such order with him,
as if he had not been admitted at all; as is clear in the instances of the
first Period, and would never oune every pretender to hereditary succession.
(2) As before Kenneths days, it is hard to reckon the numerous Instances of
Kings that were dethroned, or imprisoned, or slain, upon no other account than
that of their oppression and Tyranny: So afterward, they maintained the same
power and privilege of repressing them, when ever they began to encroach. And
although no Nation has been more patient toward bad Kings, as well as Loyal
toward good ones; yet in all former times, they understood so well their Right
they had, and the duty they owed to their oun preservation, as that they seldom
failed of calling the exorbitantly flagitious to an account. And albeit, in
stead of condoling or avenging the death of the Tyrannous, they have often both
excused and justified it, yet no Kingdom has inflicted severer Punishments
upon the Murderers of just and righteous Princes: And therefore, though they
did neither enquire after, nor animadvert upon those that slew James the 3. a
flagitious Tyrant, yet they did by most exquisite Torments put them to death
who slew James the 1. a virtuous Monarch. Hence, because these and other
instances I mind to adduce of deposing Tyrants, may be excepted against, as not
pertinent to my purpose, who am not pleading for exauctoration and deposition
of Tyrants, being impracticable in our case: I shall once for all remove that,
and desire it may be considered. [1] That though we cannot formally exauctorate
a Tyrant; yet he may ipso jure fall from his right, and may exauctorate
himself, by His Law by whom Kings reign; and this is all we plead for as a
foundation of not ouning him. [2] Though we have not the same power, yet we
have the same grounds, and as great and good if not greater and better reasons
to reject and disoune our Tyrant, as they whose example is here adduced had to
depose some of their Tyrannizing Princes. [3] If they had power and ground to
depose them, then a fortiori they had power and ground to disoune them; for
that is less and inculded in the other, and this we have. [4] Though it should
be granted, that they did not disoune them before they were deposed; yet it
cannot be said that they did disoune them only because they were deposed: for
it is not deposition that makes a Tyrant; it only declares him to be justly
punished, for what he was before. As the sentance of a Judge does not make a
man a murderer or Thief, only declares him convict of these Crimes, and
punishable for them; its his oun committing them that makes him Criminal: And
as before the sentance, having certain knowledge of the fact, we might disoune
the Man's innocence or honesty; So a Rulers Acts of Tyranny and Usurpation make
him a Tyrant and Usurper, and give ground to disoune his just and legal
Authority; which he can have no more than a Murderer or Thief can have
innocence or honesty. (3) We find also examples of their disouning Kings
undeposed; as King Baliol was disouned with his whole race, for attempting to
enslave the Kingdoms Liberties to foreign power. And if this may be done for
such an attempt, as the greatest Court parasites and Sycophants consent; what
then shall be done for such as attempt to subject the people to Domestic or
Intestine Slaverie? Shall we refuse to be slaves to one without, and be, and
oune our selves contented Slaves to one with in the Kingdom? It is known also
that King James the 1. his Authority was refused by his subjects in France, so
long as he was a Prisoner to the English there, though he charged them upon
their Allegiance, not to fight against the party who had his person Prisoner:
They answered, they ouned no Prisoner for their King, nor owed no Allegiance to
a Prisoner. Hence Princes may learn, though people submit to their Government;
yet their resignation of themselves to their obedience is not so full, as that
they are obliged to oune Allegiance to them, when either Morally or Physically
they are incapacitate to exerce Authority over them. They that cannot rule
themselves, cannot be ouned as Rulers over a people.

2. Neither has there been any Nation, but what at one time or other has
furnished examples of this Nature. The English History gives account, how some
of their Kings have been dealt with by their Subjects, for impieties against
the Law and Light of Nature, and encroachments upon the Laws of the Land.
Vortigernu^ was dethroned for incestously marying his oun Sister. Neither did
ever Blasphemies, Adulteries, Murders, Plotting against the lives of Innocents,
and taking them away by Poison or Razor, use to escape the animadversion of
men, before they were Priest-ridden unto a belief that Princes persons were
sacred. And if men had that generosity now, this man that now reigns might
expect some such animadversion. And we find also King Edward, and Richard the
2. were deposed, for Usurpation upon Laws and Liberties, in doing whereof the
people avowed. They would not suffer the Laws of England to be changed. Surely
the people of England must now be far degenerate, who having such Laws
transmitted to them from their worthy Ancestors, and they themselves being born
to the possession of them without a Change, do now suffer them to be so
encroached upon, and mancipate themselves, and leave their Children vassals to
Popery, and slaves to Tyranny.

3. The Dutch also, who have the best way of guiding of Kings of any that ever
had to do with them (witness their having so many of them in Chains, now in
Batavia in the East Indies) are not wanting for their part to furnish us with
examples. When the King of Spain would not condescend to govern them according
to their Ancient Laws, and rule for the good of the people, they declared him
to be fallen from the Seigniorie of the Netherlands, and so erected themselves
into a flourishing Commonwealth. It will not be amiss to transcribe some of
the words of the Edict of the Estates General to this purpose. It is well
known, (say they) that a Prince and Lord of a Country is Ordained by God to be
Sovereign and Head over his subjects, to preserve and defend them from all
injuries, force, and violence, and that if the Prince therefore fails
therein, and in stead of preserving his subjects, does outrage and oppress
them, depriveth them of their Privileges and Ancient Customs, commands them
and will be served of them as slaves; they are no longer bound to respect him
as their Sovereign Lord, but to esteem of him as a Tyrant, neither are they
bound to acknowledge him as their Prince, but may abandon him etc. And with
this aggrees the answer of William Prince of Orange to the Edict of
Proscription, published against him by Philip. the II. There is, says he, a
Reciprocal Bond betwixt the Lord and his vassal; so that if the Lord break the
Oath, which he has made unto his vassal, the vassal is discharged of the Oath
made unto his Lord. This was the very Argument of the poor suffering people of
Scotland, whereupon they disouned the Authority of Charles the Second.

4. The Monarchy of France is very absolute; yet there also the State has
taken order with their Tyrants; not only have we many instances of resistances
made against them, but also of disouning, disabling, and invalidating their
pretended Authority and repressing their Tyranny. So was the two Childerici
served: So also Sigebertus, Dagabertus, and Lodowick the II. Kings of France.

5. The great body of Germany moves very slowly, and is inured to bear great
burdens: yet there also we find Ioan^a of Austria Mother of Charles the 5. was
put to perpetual sonment: which example is adduced by the Earl of Mortoun, in
his discourse to the Queen of England (whereof I rehearsed a part before)
vindicating the deposing and disouning Queen Mary of Scotland. If, says he, we
compare her with Ioanna of Austria -- what did that poor wretch commit, but
that she could not want a little lustful pleasure, as a remedy necessary for her
age? And yet poor Creature, she suffered that punishment, of which our Dame
convicted of most grievous Crimes now complains -- Buchan. Rer. Scotic. l. b.
20. page 748. The Duke of Saxon, the Landgrave of Hesse and the Magistrates of
Magdeburgh, joined in a war against her Son Charles the 5. and drew up a
conclusion by resolution of Lawyers, wherein are these words -- Neither are we
bound to him by any other reason, than if he keep the conditions on which he
was created Emperor. By the Laws themselves it is provided, that the Superior
Magistrate shall not infringe the right of the inferior, and if the Superior
Magistrate exceed the Limits of his power, and command that which is wicked,
not only we need not obey him, but if he offer force we may resist him. Which
Opinion is confirmed by some of the greatest Lawyers, and even some who are
Patrons of Tyranny, Grotius none of the greatest enemies of Tyrants, de jure
belli lib. 1. cap. 4. n: 11. says out of Barclaius, and with him, that the
King does loss his power when he seeks the destruction of his subjects. It
was upon the account of the Tyranny of that bloody house of Austria over the
Helvetians, that they shook off the rule and Government of that family, and
established themselves into a Republic. And at this present time, upon the
same accounts, the Tyranny and Treachery of this Imperial Majesty, the
Hungarians have essayed to maintain and justify a revolt in disouning the
Emperor, now for several years.

6. Polland is an Elective Kingdom, and so cannot but be fertile of many
instances of casting off Tyrants. Henricus Valesius, disouned for fleeing, and
Sigismuadus for violating his faith to the States, may suffice. Lex Rex Q. 24.
Page 217.

7. In Denmark, we find Christiernus their King, was for his intolerable
Cruelty put from the Kingdom, he and all his Posterity, and after twenty years
did end his life in Prison.

8. In Swedland, within the Compass of one Century, the people deposed and
banished the two Christierns, and dethroned and imprisoned Ericus, for their
oppressions and Tyranny, and for pursuing the destruction of their Subjects.

9. The Portugieses, not many years ago, laid aside and confined Alphonsus
their King, for his rapines and Murders.

10. Some Dukes of Venice have been so disouned by these Commonwealths men,
that laying aside their Royal honors as private men, they have spent their
days in Monasteries. Buchan. de jure regni apud Scotos.

11. If we will revolve the old Roman Histories, we shall find no small store
of such examples, both in the time of their Kings, Consuls, and Emperors.
Their seventh King Tarquinius Superbus, was removed by the people, for his
evident Usurpation: Neque enim ad jus regni quicquam praeter vim habebat, ut
qui neque populi jussu, neque Patribus Authoribus, regnavit, says Livius i.e.
for he had nothing for a right to the Government, but mere force, and got the
rule neither by the peoples consent and choice, nor by the Authority of the
Senators. So afterward the Empire was taken from Vitellius, Heliogabulus,
Maximinus, Didius Iulianus, Lex Rex, ub, supra.

12. But it will be said. Can there be any Instances of the Primitive
Christians adduced? Did ever they, while groaning under the most insupportable
Tyranny of their Persecuting Emperors, disoune their Authority, or suffer for
not ouning it? To this I answer. 1. What they did or did not of this Kind, is
not of moment to inquire: seeing their practice and Example, under such
disavantages, can neither be known exactly, nor what is known of it be
accommodated to our case: for (1) they were never forced to give their
judgment, neither was the question ever put to them, whether they ouned their
Authority or not: if they transgressed the Laws, they were liable to the
punishment, they craved no more of them. (2) They confess themselves to be
strangers, that had no establishments by Law, and therefore they behoved to be
passively subject, when in no capacity to resist; there was no more required of
them. Yet Lex Rex Quest. 35. page 371. cites Theodoret affirming, Th^n evil men
reigned through the unmanlyness of the sub^ects. (3) Their examples are not
imitable in all things: They were against resistance, which we doubt not to
prove is Lawful against Tyrannical vio^ence: Many of them refused to flee from
the fury of Persecuters: They ran to Martyrdom, when neither cited nor accused;
And to obtain the Croun thereof they willingly yielded up their lives and
Liberties also to the rage or Tyrants. We cannot be obliged to all these. 2 Yet
we find some examples not altogether unapplicable to this purpose. When
Barochbach, the pretended King of the Jews, after the destruction of
Jerusalem, set himself up as King in Bitter a City in Arabia; the Christians
that were in his precincts, refused to oune him as King; which was one great
cause of his persecuting them. Its true he persecuted them also for other
things, as for their not denying Christ; So are we persecuted for many other
things, than for our simple disouning of the King: yet this is reckoned as a
distinct cause of their suffering, by Mr Mede on the Revel. Part. 1. Page 43.
Gees Magist. Origin. chapter 10. Sect. 7. Page 361. The same last cited Author
shows, that when Albinus, Niger; and Cassius, successively usurped the Empire,
having none of them any Legal investure, the Christians declined the
recognition of their Claim, and would not oune them; and that upon this
Tertulian says, Nunquam Albiniani, nec Nigriani, vel Cassiani, inveniri
potuerunt Christiani, that is, the Christians could never be found to be
Albinians, or Nigrians, or Cassians, meaning they were never ouners of these
men for Magistrates. And so may we say, Pudet inveniri inter Carolinianos and
Iacobinianos hujus temporis. Not unlike is the passage of Ambrose, who in
favors of Valentinia^ the rightful Governor, contested against Maximus the
Tyrant, and not only disouned him but excommunicated him, for which he was
threatened with death. And yet it is observable, that when Maximus offered to
interpose his power in defense of Ambrose, that he might not be banished by
Iustina the Empress, he would not accept of the help of Maximus, whose power he
disallowed and disouned. Whence I observe, that it is not without a Precedent
for a Minister to disoune a Tyrant, to refuse favor from him, yea and to
excommunicate him, yea even without the concurrence of his fainting brethren;
for all which some of our faithful Ministers have been much condemned in our
day, especially Mr Donald Cargil for excommunicating Charles the Second and
James Duke of York, as if such a thing had never been done before: Whereas we
see what Ambrose did to Maximus. And this same faithful Minister Ambrosius
Minister at Millain, in Italy, did also hold out of the Assembly of the
Christians Theodosius the Emperor though a most virtuous Prince, for that
grievous Scandal committed by him, against the innocent people at Thessalonica,
in killing so many of them in a Passionate transport. But 3. since this
objection of the Primitive Christians is much insisted on, both against this
and the head of defensive Arms: I shall further take notice of several
distinctions, that do make the difference between their case and Ours very
vast. (1) There is a great difference betuixt a Prince of the common Religion
of his Subjects, but distinct from some of them, whom yet he does not seek to
entice to his Religion, but gives them liberty and the benefit of the Law as
other Subjects: (which was the case of many in these primitive times
sometimes.) And a Prince by all means, both foul and fair, pressing to a revolt
from the true and to embrace a false Religion. In this case (which is ours with
a witness) it must be granted we should be wary, that we neither engage with
him, nor oune Allegiance to him, when he would withdraw us from our Allegiance
to God. (2) There is a great difference betuixt a Prince, persecuting the true
Religion, which only a few of his subjects here and there did profess, who in
regard of their Paucity were never in capacity to be looked upon as the body of
the people, impowering him as their public Servant: (which was their case) And
a Prince persecuting that Religion^ which was professed by the body of the
Nation, when they set him up. In this Latter case, men of great sense have
denied he should be ouned for a Prince, because then he is stated against the
Common good. This was our case under the former King, and yet under this,
though all Professors be not now persecuted, the public Religion and Ancient
Reformation is persecuted in a few, whom he intends to destroy, and in their
destruction to bury it. (3) There is a difference, betwixt a Prince Persecuting
Religion publicly ouned and received of his subjects, yet never approved nor
confirmed by Law (as it was not in the primitive times) And a Prince
persecuting Religion ratified and established by the Laws of the Land, which is
our case. It will seem clear to every soul, not benighted with Court darkness,
that he then de^acto and ipso jure falls from his right in this case, because
now he is not only stated against the common good, but against the very Laws by
which the Subjects must be ruled. Then he rules not as a Prince* to whom the
Law gives his Measures and Bounds, but rages as a Tiger and Tyrant, and ought
to be carried toward as such. (4) There is a difference, betwixt a Prince
suppressing that Religion established by Law, which he never professed, nor
never gave his consent to these Laws (as might be the case of some of the Arian
Emperors) though it be unlawful for any people to set up any Mortal over them,
who is not in this case bound to the good behavior; And a Prince, opposing,
and oppressing that Religion, which himself has professed and is ratified by
Laws with his oun consent: which was our case under the former King, who did
give the most solemn Ratification of them that ever was given, but afterward
most perfidiously retracted it. As also this Apostate Papist, did sometime
profess himself Protestant, and consented to the Laws establishing it, and the
Penal Statutes against Papists, though now he is going about to raze all, and
ruin that alone valuable Treasure of our Nation, Religion. (5) There is a
difference, betwixt a Prince consenting to Laws establishing Religion which he
now persecuteth (which might have been the case of Julian the Apostate) And a
Prince who not only consented to these Laws, but who did upon these very terms
and no other get and receive his Croun and Scepter, that he should preserve the
Religion as Reformed, and protect as a Father the Professors thereof, and
maintain the Laws establishing it, which yet he perfidiously and perniciously,
being once settled in the Government, Breaks, Casts, Cassats, and Overturns
(which was done by Charles) Or, And a Prince who will neither be bounded by the
Laws he consented to, nor be bound to the Observation of any Laws whatsoever;
but challenges it as his prerogative Royal, to be absolute above all Laws, and
denying all Security upon terms, is free to destroy Religion and Liberty, and
all the valuable Interests of the Nation, when he pleases. This is James his
Character (6) There is a difference, betwixt a Prince breaking the main and
only Article of his Covenant, in a fit of fury and rage, being transported upon
some Mistakes (which was the case of Theodosius the Emperor) And a Prince not
only violating this upon deliberation, but plainly Declaring, that neither Oath
nor Declaration can or will bind him, but these being made void, he will
destroy without restraint all these Covenanted privileges (This was the case
of Charles) Or, And a Prince, who, as he never will come under the bond of a
Covenant with his people, So tho he make never so many fair promises with the
greatest Solemnities, maintains a principle that he will keep no promises, but
when and with whom he pleases, and can get a Dispensation to break all when he
likes. (This is James his Ingenuity.) Sure in this case, Such as are so
Characterized Declare themselves so far from being Princes, that they profess
before the world, they are no more men to be conversed with: for if neither
their words, Writs, vows, promises, Oaths, Declarations, nor Protestations,
can bind them; what Society can be had with them? Are they not to be looked
upon and carried toward as Common Enemies of Morality, Religion,
Righteousness, Liberty, Humanity, yea even of Mankind it self? Now then, let
the world be Judge, if the people of Scotland can be judged in Conscience,
Reason, Prudence, Policy, or any imaginable way, bound to oune their
Authority, being so Stated, and by the Act Rescissory all humane ground
rescinded, that ever it shall be otherwise. let them go seek other slaves where
they can find them, for we will not sell our selves and posterity to Tyrants
as slaves, nor give up our Religion and the exercise of it to the Mouldings of
the Court.

II. In the Second place: It being clear from these forementioned Instances,
that Tyrants and Uusurpers have been disouned; And it being also as clear as
light can make any thing, from the foregoing Account of their Government, and
all the Characters of Truculency Treachery, and Tyranny conspicuously relucent
therein, that these two Gentlemen whose Authority we are pressed to oune, were
Tyrants and Usurpers: It remains therefore to prove from all dictates of Reason
about Government, that their pretended Authority could not nor cannot be ouned.
For the Argument runs thus; The Authority of Tyrants and Uusurpers cannot be
ouned: But the Authority of Charles and James was and is the Authority of
Tyrants and Usurpers: Ergo their Authority cannot be ouned. Now its the Major
of this Syllogisim that I under take to prove. The Minor being so clear from
their History, that to prove it by witnesses were actum agere.

1. All Authority to be ouned of men must be of God, and ordained of God: for
so the Apostle teaches Expressly Romans 13. 1. etc. Which is the alone formal
reason of our Subjection to them, and that which makes it a damnable sin to
resist them, because it is a resisting the Ordin^nce of God. The Lord ounes
Himself to be the Author of Magistrates, Prove. 8. 15. By me Kings reign and
Princes decree Justice. As He is the Author of man and has made him a sociable
Creature so He is the Author of the Order of humane Society which is necessare
for the Preservation of Mankind He being the God of Order and not of Confusion.
And this must hold not only of the Supreme Authority, but of subordinate
Magistrates also; for they must be included in the higher Powers to whom we
must be subject Romans 13. And they that resist them resist Gods Ordinance too.
Their judgment is Gods, as well as the judgment of the Supreme Magistrate Deuteronomy.
1. 17. 2 Chronicles. 19. 6, 8. They are called Gods among whom the Lord judges,
Psalm. 82. 1. He speaks not there of a Congregation of Kings. We are to be
subject to them for the Lords sake, as well as to the Supreme Magistrate 1. Pet.
2. 13. Therefore all Magistrates superior and Inferior are ordained of God in
the respective Places. Its true, Peter calls every degree of Magistracy, an
Ordinance of man, not that he denies it to be an Ordinance of God (for so he
would cantradict Paul Romans 13.) but terms it so Emphatically, to commend the
worth of obedience to Magistrates though but men, when we do it for the Lords
sake: Not effectively as an invention of men, but subjectively because
exercised by men, and created and invested by humane suffrages considered as
men in Society, and objectively for the good of man, and for the external
Peace and safety of man thereby differenced from the Ministry, an Ordinance of
Christ, for the spiritual good of men's souls. Hence, Those Rulers that are not
of God nor ordained of God, cannot be ouned without sin: But Tyrants and
Usurpers are the Rulers, that are not of God nor ordained of God, but are set
up and not by Him etc. Hos. 8. 1-4. Therefore they cannot be ouned without sin.
I refer it to any man of conscience and Reason to judge, if these Scriptures
proving Magistracy to be the Ordinance of God, for which alone it is to be
ouned, can be applied to Tyrants and Usurpers: How will that Rom, 13. read of
Tyrants? let every soul be subject to Tyrants, for they are ordained of God as
His Ministers of Justice etc. and are a terror to evil works and a praise to
the good, would not every man nauseate that as not the Doctrine of God? Again,
how would that sound Prove. 8. By me Tyrants reign and Usurpers decree
injustice? harsh to Christian ears. Can they be said to be Gods among whom the
Lord judges? If they be, they must be such as the witch of Endor saw, Gods
coming out of the earth, when she raised the Devil; in a very Catichrestical
meaning, as the Devil is called the God of this world. And indeed they have no
more power, nor otherwise to be ouned, than he has: for this is a Truth,
Tyranny is a work of Satan and not from God; because sin either habitual or
actual is not from God; Tyranny is sin in habit and act: Ergo -- The Magistrate
as Magistrate is good in nature and end, being the Minister of God for good, A
Tyrant as a Tyrant is quite contrary. Lex Rex says well A power Ethical,
Politic, or Moral, to oppress, is not from God, and is not a power but a
Licentious deviation of a power, and no more from God but from sinful Nature
and the old Serpent, than a license to sin, Quest. 9. Page 59. Hence sin, a
License to sin, a Licencious sinning, cannot be from God: But Tyranny,
Usurpation, absolute power encroaching upon all Liberties, Laws, Divine and
humane, is sin, a License to sin, a Licencious sinning. Ergo -- But to make
this clear, and to obviate what may be said against this: let it be Considered
how the powers that be are of God and ordained of God. Things are said to be of
God and ordained of God two ways; by His purpose and providence, and by His
Word and Warrant. Things may be of God, either of His Hand working or bringing
them about ordaining and ordering them to be to His Glory; either by a holy
overruling Providence, as Samsons desire of a wife was of God Judge. 14. 4. and
Amaziahs insolent and foolish rejection of Ioash his Peaceable overture 2 Chronicles. 25. 20. Or by a powerful effective providence, So Romans 11. 36. Of Him
and through Him are all things 1 Cor. 8. 6. One God of whom are all things. Or
things be of God of His Word warranting and Authorizing. So we are commanded to
try the spirits whether they be of God (1 John. 4. 1.) So in this sense, sin,
tentation, lust, Corruptions of the world are not of God Iam. 1. 13. 1 John. 2.
16. Again, things are ordained of God, either by the order of His Counsel or
Providential will, either effectively by way of Production or Direction, or
Permissively by way of non-impedition: Or they are ordained by the order of His
Word and Preceptive will* The former is Gods Rule, the latter is ours: The
former is alwise accomplished, the latter is often contradicted: The former
orders all actions even sinful, the latter only that which is good and
acceptable in the sight of God* By the former Israel rejected Samuel, by the
latter they should have continued Samuels Government, and not sought a King: By
the former, Athaliah usurped the Government, by the latter, she should have
yielded obedience and resigned the Government to the posterity of Ahaziah: By
the former all have a physical subordination to God as Creatures, subject to
His All-disposing will; by the latter, Those whom He approves have a moral
subordination to God, as obedient subjects to His Commanding will. Now
Magistrates are of God and ordained by Him both these ways, Tyrants but one of
them. I say, Magistrates, the higher Powers, to whom we owe and must oune
subjection are of God both these ways, both by His purpose and Providence, and
that not merely eventual but effective and executive of His Word, disposing
both of the Title and Right, and Possession of the power, to them whom He
approves, and bringing the People under a conscientious subjection, And by His
Word and warrant. So Adonijah the Usurper (though he had the pretense of
Hereditary right, and also possession by Providence) was forced to oune King
Solomon in these terms upon which only a Magistrate may be ouned: The
Kingdom, says he, was mine, and all Israel set their faces on me that I
should reign, howbeit the Kingdom is turned about and become my brothers for it
was his from the Lord, 1 King. 2. 15. He had both Providence turning about the
Kingdom to him, and also the Warrant of the Lords Approbative and preceptive
will. But Tyrants and Usurpers are only of God and ordained of God, by His
overruling purpose and permissive Providence, either for performing His holy
purpose toward themselves; as Rehoboams professing he would be a Tyrant, and
refusing the Lawful desires of the people was of God 2 Chronicles. 10. 15. Or for a
judgment and vengeance upon them that are subject to them, Zech. 11: 6: whereby
they get a power in their hand, which is the Rod of the Lords Indignation, and
a Charge and Commission against a Hypocritical Nation Isa. 10. 5. 6. This is
all the power they have from God, who gives Jacob to the spoil and Israel to
the Robbers, when they sin against Him Isa. 42. 24. This does not give these
Robbers any right, no more than they whose Tabernacle prosper, into whose hand
God brings abundantly Job. 12. 6. Thus all Robbers, and the great Legal
Robbers, Tyrants, and their Authorized Murderers, may be of God, to wit, by His
Providence. Hence those that are not ordained of Gods preceptive will, but
merely by His Providential will, their Authority is not to be ouned: But
Tyrants and Usurpers are not ordained of Gods Preceptive, but merely by His
Providential will. The Minor needs no proof: yet will be cleared by many
following Arguments. The Major will be afterward more demonstrated. Here I
shall only say, They that have no other ordination of God impowering them to be
Rulers, than the devil has, must not be ouned: But they that have no other
than the ordination of Providence, have no other ordination of God impowering
them to be Rulers than the devil has: Ergo they that have no other than the
ordination of Providence must not be ouned.

2. But let us next consider, what is comprehended in the Ordination of that
Authority which is to be ouned as of God: And it may be demonstrated there are
two things in it, without which no Authority can be ouned as of God, viz.
Institution and Constitution: So as to give him, whom we must oune as Gods
Minister, Authority both in the Abstract and Concrete, that is, that he should
have Magistracy by Gods Ordination, and be a Magistrate by and according to the
will of God. All acknowledge that Magistracy has Gods Institution, for the
Powers that be are ordained of God: which contains not only the Appointment of
it, but the qualification and form of it. That Government is appointed by
Divine Precept all agree, but whether the Precept be Moral Natural, or Moral
Positive, Whether it was appointed in the State of Innocence, or since disorder
came in the world, Whether it be Primario or Secundario, from the Law of nature
is not agreed upon, It may possibly be all these ways; Government in the
General may be from the Law and light of Nature appointed in Innocence, because
all its relative duties are enjoined in the fifth Command, and all Nations
Naturally have an esteem of it, Without which there could be no order,
distinction, or Communion in humane Societies, But the Specification or
Individuation may be by a Postnate Positive and Secundary Law, yet Natural too,
for though there be no reason in Nature why any man should be King and Lord over
another, being in some sense all Naturally free but as they yield themselves
under Jurisdiction: The exalting of David over Israel is not ascribed to
Nature, but to an act of divine bounty which took him from following the Ewes
and made him feeder of the People of Israel, Psalm. 78. 70, 71: yet Nature
teaches that Israel and other People should have a Government, and that this
should be subjected to. Next, not only is it appointed to be, but qualified by
Institution, and the Office is defined, the End prescribed, and the measures
and Boundaries thereof are limited, as we shall hear. Again the forms of it,
though Politically they are not stinted, that People should have such a form
and not another: yet Morally, at least Negatively, whatever be the form, it is
limited to the Rules of equity and justice, and must be none other than what
has the Lords Mould and Sanction. But there is no Institution any of these
ways for Tyranny. Hence, that Power that has no Institution from God, cannot
be ouned as His ordinance: But the Power of Tyrants is that Power, being
contrary in every respect to Gods Institution, and a mere deviation from it,
and eversion of it. Ergo -- To the Minor it may be replied; Though the Power
which Tyrants may exerce and Usurpers assume, may be in Concret^ contrary to
Gods Institution, and so not to be ouned: yet in abstracto, it may be
acknowledged of God. Its but the abuse of the Power, and that does not take
away the use. We may oune the Power, though we do not oune the abuse of it. I
ans. 1. I acknowledge the distinction as to Magistrates is very pertinent: for
it is well said by the Congregation in a Letter to the Nobility, Knox Hist. of
Scot. lib. 2. That there is a great difference betwixt the Authority which is
Gods ordinance, and the persons of these who are placed in Authority; the
Authority and ordinance of God can never do wrong, for it commands that vice
be punished and virtue maintained; But the Corrupt Person placed in this
Authority may offend -- Its certain higher Powers are not to be resisted but
some persons in Power may be resisted. The Powers are ordained of God, but
Kings commanding unjust things are not ordained of God to do such things. But
to apply this to Ty^ants, I do not understand: Magistrates in some Acts may be
guilty of Tyranny, and yet retain the Power of Magistracy; but Tyrants cannot
be capable of Magistracy, nor any one of the Scripture Characters of Righteous
Rulers. They cannot retain that which they have forefeited, and which they have
overturned; And Usurpers cannot retain that which they never had. They may act
and enact some things materially just, but they are not formally such as can
make them Magistrates, no more then some unjust actions can make a Magistrate a
Tyrant. A Murderer, saying the ^ife of one and killing another, does not make
him no Murderer: Once a Murderer ay a Murderer, once a Robber ay a Robber, till
he restore what he has robbed: So once a Tyrant ay a Tyrant, till he make
amends for his Tyranny, and that will be hard to do. 2. The Concrete does
specificate the Abstract in actuating it, as a Magistrate, in his exercising
Government makes his Power to be Magistracy; a Robber in his robbing, makes his
Power to be Roberie; an Usurper in his usurping makes his Power to be
Usurpation; So a Tyrant in his Tyrannizing can have no Power but Tyranny. As
the Abstract of a Magistrate is nothing but Magistracy, So the Abstract of a
Tyrant is nothing but Tyranny. Its frivolous then to distinguish between a
Tyrannical power in the Concrete, and Tyranny in the Abstract; the power and
the abuse of the power: for he has no power as a Tyrant, but what is abused.
3. They that objects thus, must either mean, that power in its general Notion
is ordained of God, but this particular Power ab^sed by Tyrants, and assumed by
Usurpers, is not ordained: Or they must mean, that the very Power of Tyrants
and Usurpers is ordained of God, but the way of holding and using it is not of
God. If the first be said, they grant all I plead for: for tho the Power in
general be ordained, yet what is this to Tyrants and Usurpers? would not this
Claim be ridiculous for any man to say, God has ordained Governments to be,
therefore I will challenge it? God has ordained Marriage, therefore any may
cohabit together as man and wife, without formal Matrimony? If the Second be
alleged, that the Power of these prevailing Dominators is ordained, but not
their holding and using of it: This is Nonsense, for how can a Power be
ordained and the use of it be unlawful? For, the abuse and use of Tyrannical
Power is all one and reciprocal: an Usurper cannot use his Power but by
Usurpation. Again is it not plain, that the Abstract and the Concrete, the act
or habit, and the subject wherein it is, cannot have a contrary Denomination?
if Drunkenness and Thieft, Lying or Murder, be of the Devil; then the Drunkard,
the Thief, the Liar, and the Murderer, are of the Devil too: So if Tyranny and
Usurpation, or the use or abuse of Tyrants and Usurpers, be of the Devil; Then
must the Tyrants and Usurpers also be of him: None can say, the one is of the
Devil, and the other of God. Wherefore it is altogether impertinent to use such
a Distinction, with application to Tyrants or Usurpers, as many do in their
pleading for the ouning of our Oppressors: for they have no power, but what is
the abuse of power.

3. As that Authority which is Gods Ordinance must have His Institution: So it
must have His divine Constitution from Himself and by the people. Wherever then
there is Authority to be ouned of men, there must be these tuo, Constitution
from God and Constitution from the people. For the first, God has a special
Interest in the Constitution of Authority, both Immediately and Mediatly.
Immediately, He declares such and such forms of Government to be Lawful and
Eligible, and does order whom and who and how people shall erect Governors.
And so, He confers Royal Graces and Enduements and Gifts for Government on
them, as on Joshua and Saul: So they become the Lords Anointed, placed and set
on the Throne of the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 29. 23. and honored with Majesty as His
deputies and vicegerents, having their Croun set on by God Psalm. 21. 3. But in
regard now He does not by any special Revelation determine, who shall be the
Governors in this or that place; Therefore He makes this Constitution by
mediation of men; giving them Rules how they shall proceed in setting them up.
And seeing by the Law of Nature He has enjoined Government to be, but has
ordered no particular in it with application to singulars, He has committed it
to the positive transaction of men, to be disposed according to certain General
Rules of Justice. And it must needs be so, for 1. without this Constitution,
either all or none would be Magistrates: if He has ordained Civil Power to be,
and taken no order in whom it shall be, or how it shall be conveyed, any might
pretend to it; and yet none would have a right to it, more than another. If
then He ^ath affixed it to a peculiar having and holding, by virtue whereof
this man is enstated and entitled to the office, and not that man, there must
be a Law for Constituting him in Authority, which will discover in whom it is.
2. If it were not so, then a resisting of a particular Magistrate would not be
a resisting of the ordinance of God, if a particular Magistrate were not
Constitute of God, as well as Magistracy is Institute of God: for still it
would be undetermined, who were the Power; and so it would be left as free and
Lawful for the resister to take the place, as for the resisted to hold it; the
institution would be satisfied if any possessed i^: therefore there must be
Constitution to determine it. 3. No Common Law of Nature can be put into
practice, without particular Constitution regulating it. That Wives and
Children oune their superior relations, is the Law of Nature; but there must be
such a relation first fixed by humane transaction, before they can oune them;
there must be Marriage Authorized of God, there must be Children begotten, and
then the Divine Ordination of these relative duties take place. So the Judges
of Israel for 450 years were given of God, Act. 13. 20. not all by an immediate
express designation, but a mediate Call from God by men, as Iephthah Judge. 11.
6. 11. Inferior judges also are Magistrates appointed by God, yet they have
their Deputation from men. Our Savior speaks of all Magistrates, when he
applies that of the 82. Psalm to them, I said ye are Gods; and shows how they
were Gods, because unto them the Word of God came, John. 10. 35. that is, by
His Word and Warrant He Authorized them, not by immediate designation in
reference to the most of them, but the Word of God comes to them, or His
Constitution is past upon them, who are advanced by men according to His Word.
When men therefore do act according to the Divine Rule, in the Moulding and
Erecting of Government and Governors, there the Constitution is of God, though
it be not immediate. And where this is not observed, whatever power (so named
or pretended) there may be, or what-soever persons there be that take upon them
to be the power, and are not thereto appointed or therein instated, and do
exerce such a power as God has not legitmated, they are not a power ordained
of God. Hence, whatsoever power has no Constitution from God, eather Immediate
or Mediate, cannot be ouned: But the Authority of Tyrants and Usurpers, is a
power that has no Constitution from God, either Immediate or Mediate: Ergo it
cannot be ouned. The Major is cleared above. The Minor is also undeniable: For,
either they must pretend to an Immediate Constitution by revelation, that James
Duke of York, a vassal of Antichrist, had by all his plots and pranks Merited
the Crown of Britain, and therefore must be Constitute King: And this I hope
they will not pretend to, except the Pope has gotten such a Revelation from
Pluto's Oracle: Or they must have recourse to the Mediate Constitution by men:
And if so; Then, either this Mediate Constitution of God is left undetermined,
indefinitely and absolutely giving way to any that will assume what power they
please and can: And then, I confess, Tyrants may have a Constitution; but this
confusion cannot be of God: Or else, it is fixed by a Rule, regulating the
succession or Constitution of the Governors, and obliging the people to oune
the Government so constituted, with exclusion and disallowance of any other.
And so, if in that Constitution there be a Substantial Deviation from the Rule,
as when incompetent or unallowed persons be the advancers of themselves, or
others, into that place by illegal and sinistrous means, in as much as in that
case there is the Divine disapprobation, it may be said there is no Ordinance
of God, but a Contradiction and Contraordination to Gods Order. Gee's Magist.
Origin. chap. 5. Sect. 4. subject 3. page 135. This will shake off this of
ours, and all other Tyrants and Usurpers, that come into the Government, and
hold it not according to Gods Rule.

4. It is clear also in the second place, that the Authority which we can oune
out of conscience, must have Constitution by the people. The special way by
which men should be called into the place of Sovereign power, may perhaps not
be found so expressly defined in Scripture, as men's Call to the other Ordinance
of the Ministry is; yet in this two things are essentially necessary to the
Constitution of a Magistrate, The peoples consent and compact either formal or
virtual. And without these we can oune conscientious subjection and Allegiance
to no man living. That the first is necessary will be evident, from the Law of
Nature and Nations, and from Scripture. First the light and Law of Nature
dictates, that the Right and Interest of Constituting Magistrates is in the
Elective vote or suffrage of the people. This will Appear. 1. If we consider,
The Original of Government among men, especially after they were so multiplied,
that there was a necessity of a reduction into diverse Communities; which,
whatever was before the flood, yet after it, behoved to be by a Coalition with
consent under an Elective Government. The Scripture makes it more than
probable, that the first partition of Commonwealths was in Pelegs days, in
whose time the earth was Divided Genesis 10. 25. occasioned by the Confusion of
Languages at Babel which did dissolve their union and scatter them abroad upon
the face of all the eath Genesis 11. 9. Then was it that we may conceive, as
Buchanan says de Iure Regni apud Scot. the time was, when men dwelt in
cottages and caves, and as strangers did wander to and fro without Laws, and
such as could converse together of the same language assembled together as
their humors did lead them, or as some common Utilitie did allure them* A
certain instinct of Nature did oblige them to desire Converse and Society. But
this confusion of Languages, and Communion of Language, in several divided
Parcels, could not incorporate these several Parties into Communities; that
behoved to be the effect of some other cause: and what should that be, but the
joint will, consent and aggreement of the severally Languaged? It could not be
by Consanguinity; for there is no direction from Nature for a confinement of
that into such and such degrees, to make out the bounds of a Commonwealth, or
Possibility of knowing all with in such degrees; besides all within these
degrees might not be of the same Language. Now the Scripture says, they were
divided every one after his tongue, after their families, in their Nations Genesis
10. 5. Next it could not be by Cohabitation: for how that must go to be the
boundaries of a Commonwealth, inclusively or exclusively, is not defined by
nature, nor can it be otherwise determined than by humane choice. Then, it
could not be by men's belonging to such a Sovereign: for after that Division and
Confusion, they could not all be under one Sovereign, nor under the same that
they were subject to before; and a Sovereign cannot be before the aggregation
of the Subjects whereof he is head, they must first be a Commonwealth before
they can belong to it. Again it cannot be founded upon the Right of fatherhood:
for in that scattering, such a Right could not be uninterruptedly preserved:
And then Noah should also have been the Universal Magistrate, which he could
not be in these multiplied secessions. And further if it be refounded on the
Right of fatherhood; either every Company had one Common Father over all, or
every Father made a Commonwealth of his oun Children: The Latter cannot be
said, for that would multiply Common-wealts in infinitum: Neither can the first
be said, for if they had one Common Father, either this behoved to be the
Natural Father of all the Company, which none can think was so happily ordered
by Babels confusion: Or else the eldest in age, and so he might be incapable
for Government, and the Law of Nature does not direct that the Government
should alwise be astricted to the eldest of the Community: Or else finally he
behoved to be their Political Father, by consent. For before this consent, they
were uningaged as to common order of Government; none of the Community having
any legal Claim to Soveraignity more than the rest. When therefore they were
forced to conclude upon Association for their Mutual Preservation, they must be
thought to act rationally, and not to make their condition worse but rather
better by that conclusion, and, if they found it worse, to resume their radical
Right which they had conferred upon men, subject to Law not to Tyrannize over
them: And in this case, certainly they had the power of choosing what Kind of
Government suited most to their advantage, and would best preserve their
Liberties, and how far this should be extended, and who should be assumed into
this Combination; still with a reservation of the Privilege to their oun
safety, if their Associates should not do their duty: And so they might also
reserve to themselves a Liberty, to alter the form when they found it
productive of more prejudice than advantage, and never to leave their condition
remedieless; And to pitch upon this way of succession and not another, the way
of free election of every successor, or of definite election limited to one
line, or to the nearest in line, And e contra with a reserve still of their
primeve Privileges, to secure themselves from the inconveniences of that
determination, or to change it; And to make choice of such a family and line
and not another, and whether the eldest alwise of that family or the fittest is
to be chosen: And however it be, yet still by the peoples consent: And in all
this to have respect to some good, great, and Necessary Ends, which if they
should be disappointed of, and find these means useless or destructive to, they
were to be loosed from their obligation to use or to oune them. See Ius populi
vindicat. chapter 5. page 80. etc. 2. If we consider how Nature determines the
peoples Interest in the constitution of Governors: whence comes it that this
man and not that man, this race and family and not that, is invested with that
Title? It will be found there is no Title on earth now to the Crowns to
families, to persons, but the peoples suffrage: for the Institution of
Magistracy in general does, not make James Stewart a King, no more than John
Chamberlain: Neither do qualifications make one, otherwise there might be many
better than is this day extant, for there are many men better qualified: And
there is no Prophetical or immediate Callings to Kingdoms now: And as for
Conquest without consent, and having no more for a Title, it is no better than
Royal Latrocinie. It is certain God would not Command us to obey Kings, and
leave us in the Dark that we should not know him that has a real call to
(...): And if he have not the peoples Call, where shall we find another? It
remains therefore they must have it from the people, who have it to give
Radically and virtually; having a power to preserve themselves, and to put it
in the hands of one or more Rulers, that they may preserve themselves by them.
All men are born alike as to Civil power (no man being born with a Croun on his
head) and yet men united in Society may give it to this man and not to that
man, therefore they must have it virtually; for they can not give what they
have not. And as Cities have power to choose their Magistrates, so many Cities
have power to creat an Universal Ruler over them all. The people also have
power to Limit the Magistrates power, with conditions; so that the present Ruler
shall not have so much prerogative as his predecessor, as Royalists cannot
deny, therefore they must have given that power which they can Limit See Lex
Rex Quest. 4. page 10. etc. Secondly the Scripture also gives Light in this
particular. 1. In giving directions and Rules about their Orderly calling their
Governors; Impowering them, to take wise men, and understanding, and known
among their tribes, to be made Rulers D^ut. 1. 13. To make Judges and Officers
in all their gates Deuteronomy. 16. 18. To set one among their brethren King over them
and not a stranger Deuteronomy. 17. 15. To what purpose are these Rules given them, if
they had no interest to choose their Magistrates? Would God command them to set
a King over them, if they had not power to do it? And to set such a man over
them and not such an one, if they had no influence in making one at all? And
accordingly that wise Statist says very well 2 Samuel 16. 18. Hushai to A^salem,
Nay, but whom the Lard and this people and all the men of Israel choose, his
will I be, and with him will I abide. Which will also hold in the Negative,
whom the Lord and the people and all the men of the Kingdom do not choose, his
we will not be, nor with him will we abide. 2. The Scripture expressly
attributes the making of Kings to the people. All the people of Judah took
Azariah and made him King, instead of his Father Amaziah, whom they had
executed 2 King. 14. 21. They came with a perfect heart to make David King in
Hebron 1 Chronicles. 12. 38. So they made Ioash King 2 Chronicles. 23. 11. 3. Even these
that were particularly designed of God and chosen to be Rulers, yet were not
formally invested with power, before the people conferred it upon them. Gideon
was called of God to it, but was not Judge till the people said, Rule thou over
us, both thou and thy Son, giving him an hereditary right for his Children,
Judge. 8. 12. Saal was appointed to be King, and therefore Samuel honored him,
because he was marked out of God to be King, 1 Samuel 9. 24. and anointed him
with oil 1 Samuel 10. 1. after which he was gifted and qualified for Government,
God gave him another heart verse. 9. yet all this did not make him King, till
the people met for his inauguration verse. 17. etc. and Crowned him and made him
King in Gilgal 1 Samuel 11. ult. David was anointed by Samuel, and yet was a
persecuted fugitive for several years, and never acknowledged formally King,
till the men of Judah came and anointed him 2 Samuel 2. 4. for if he had been
King before, then there were two Kings in Israel at one time, and David failed
of his Royal duty in not punishing the Murderer Saul; whereas himself says, he
would not touch the Lords (...). Therefore the people made all these Kings, and
that by choice and consent, without which they were no Kings. Hence I argue, If
the consent and choice of the people be so essentially necessary to the making
of Kings; then they who set up themselves against the consent of the body of
the Land, and without the choice of any, must be Usurpers, not to be
acknowledged for Lawful Kings: But the former is true as is proven above: Ergo
-- Now Plain it is that this Duke set up himself against the consent of the
body, being excluded from the Government by the Representatives of England, and
generally hated of all; who disdaining to wait upon the formal choice of any,
but after he had paved his passage to the Throne upon his Brothers blood, did
usurp the Title without all Law.

5. The second thing necessary for the Legal Constitution of a King by the
people, is their Compact with him: which must either be Express or Tacit,
Explicit or Implicit. Two things are here to be proven, that will furnish an
Argument for disouning both the Brothers. First, That there must be a
Conditional reciprocally obliging Covenant between the Sovereign and the
Subjects, without which there is no such relation to be ouned. Secondly That
when this compact is broken in all or its chiefest conditions by the Sovereign,
the peoples obligation ceases. The first. I shall set down, in the words of a
famous Author, our Renouned Country man Buchanan in his Dialogue de Iure Regni
apud Scotos. Mutua igitur Regi cum Civibus est pactio etc. There is then (or
there ought to be) a Mutual compact between the King and his subjects etc. That
this is indispensibly necessary and essential to make up the Relation of
Sovereign and Subjects, may be proved both from the Light of Nature, and
Revelation. First it may appear from the Light of Natural reason. 1. From the
Rise of Government, and the Interest people have in erecting it by consent and
choice (at is showed above) If a King cannot be with out the peoples making,
then all the power he has must either be by compact or gift: If by compact,
then we have what we proposed: And if by gift, then if abused they may recall
it or if they cannot recover it, yet they may and ought to hold their hand, and
give him no more that they may retain, that is no more honor or respect, which
is in the honourer before the honored get it. Can it be imagined, that a
people acting rationally would give a power absolutely without restrictions to
destroy all their oun rights? Could they suppose this boundless and Lawless
Creature, left at Liberty to Tyrannize, would be a fit mean to procure the the
ends of Government? for this were to set up a rampant Tyrant to rule as he
lists, which would make their condition a great deal worse then if they had
no Ruler at all, for then they might have more Liberty to see to their safety.
See Ius populi chapter 6. page 96. 97. 2. This will be clear from the nature of
that Authority, which only a Sovereign can have over his Subjects; which
whatever be the Nature of it, it cannot be absolute, that is against Scripture,
Nature, and Common sense, as shall be proven at more length. That is to set up
a Tyrant, one who is free from all conditions, a roaring Lion and a ranging
Bear to destroy all if he pleases. It must be granted by all, that the
Sovereign Authority is only fiduciarie, entrusted by God and the people with a
great Charge: A great Pledge is impauned and committed to the Care and Custody
of the Magistrate, which he must take special care of, and not abuse; or waste,
or alienate or sell (for in that case Royalists themselves grant he may be
deposed) He is by Office a Patron of the Subjects Liberties, and Keeper of the
Law both of God and Man, the Keeper of both Tables. Sure he has no power over
the Laws of God but a Ministerial power, he may not stop and disable them as
he pleases; Of the same nature is it, over all other Parts of his Charge. He is
rather a Tutor, than an Inheritor and proprietor of the Commonwealth, and may
not do with his pupils interest what he pleases. In a word the Nature and whole
significancy of his power lies in this, that he is the Nations public Servant,
both Objectively in that he is only for the good of the people, and
Representatively in that the people has impauned in his hand all their power
to do Royal Service. The Scripture eaches this, in giving him the Titles of
Service, as Watchman etc. allowing him Royal wages for his Royal work Romans 13.
he is Gods Minister attending continually on this thing, There is his work, for
this cause pay you tribute also, There is his wages and maintinance. He is
called so in that transaction with Rehoboam; The old men advised him to be a
Servant unto the People, then they should be his Servants 1 King. 12. 7. There
was a conditional bargain proposed: As to be a Servant, or Tutor, or Guardian
upon Trust, always implies Conditions and Acconntableness to them that entrust
them. 3. It must needs be so otherwise great absurdities would follow. Here
would be a voluntary contracted Relation, obliging as to relative duties, to a
man that ouwed none correlative to us, and yet one whom we set over us. It were
strange, if there were no Condition here; and no other voluntarly suscepted
Relations can be without this, as between Man and Wife, Master and Servant etc.
This would give him the disposal of us and Ours, as if both we and what we have
were his oun, as a man's goods are, against which he does not sin whatever he do
with them. So this would make a King that could not sin against us; being no
ways obliged to us, for he can no otherwise be obliged to us but upon Covenant
conditions; he may be obliged and bound in duty to God otherwise, but he cannot
be bound to us otherwise: And if he be not bound then he may do what he will,
he can do no wrong to us to whom he is no ways bound. This also is point blank
against the Law of God, which is the Second way to prove it, by the Light of
Revelation or Scripture. 1. In thevery directions about making and seting up of
Kings, the Lord shows what conditions shall be required of them Deuteronomy. 17. 15.
etc. and in all directions for obeying them, the qualifications they should
have are rehearsed as Romans 13. 3, 4. Therefore none are to be set up but on
these conditions, and none are to be obeyed but such as have these
qualifications. 2. In His promises of the succession of Kings, He secures their
continuation only Conditionally, to establish the Kingdom if they be constant
to do His Commandments and Judgments 1 Chronicles. 28. 7. There shall not fail a
man to sit upon the Trone yet so that they take heed to their way to walk in
Gods Law, as David did 2 Chronicles. 6. 16. Now He was not otherwise to perform
these promises, but by the action and suffrage of the people seting him up,
(which He had appointed to be the way of calling Kings to Thrones) if therefore
the Lords promise be conditional, the peoples actions also behoved to be
suspended upon the same conditions. 3. We have many express Covenants, between
Rulers and Subjects in Scripture. Iephthah was fetched from the Land of Tob, and
made the head of the Gileadites by an explicit mutual stipulation, wherein the
Lord was invocated as a Witness, Judge. 11. 6, 8, 9, 10, 11. So all the Elders
of Israel came to make David King, and King David made a League with them in
Hebron before the Lord, and then they anointed him over Israel 2 Samuel 5. 3. he
made there a Covenant with them before the Lord 1 Chronicles. 11, 3. He was no King
before this Covenant, and so it was a Pactional Oath between him and the
Kingdom, upon terms according to the Law Deuteronomy. 17. he was only a King in
fieri; one who was to be King, but now actually inaugurate a Covenanted King
upon terms that satisfied them. Its true they came to recognosce his Right
from the Lord; But so did they recognosce Rehoboams Right, and came to Shechem
to make him King 1 King. 12. 1. and yet when he would not enter in Covenant
terms with them, to satisfy their just demands, the people answered the King,
saying, what portion have we in David, neither have we inheritance in the Son
of Iesse, to your tents O Israel verse. 16. They refused to acknowledge such an
Usurper, and we find no Prophets ever condemning them for it. So when Iehoash
or Ioash was Crowned, Iehojada made a Covenant between the Lord and the King
and the people, that they should be the Lords people, between the King also and
the people 2 King. 11. 17. 2 Chronicles. 23. 11, 16. From all these Reasons and
Scriptures, It is clear there must be a Mutual Compact. between the Subjects
and every Sovereign they oune subjection to, which if he refuse, and usurp the
Sword, they are under an Anterior obligation to substract their Allegiance, and
to make use of their Sword, if they be in capacity, to pull it out of his hands
and use it against him. And of this we are put in mind by the Motto of our old
Coronation pieces, which have these Words about the Sword. pro me, si mereor in
me, that is, for me but if I deserve against me: And surely to him that has it
now in his hands, it may be said, tu meruisti and adhuc meres. We see then, the
Allegiance that this Usurper alleges is his due, wants a bottom, to wit a
compact with the people. Whence I argue, If there must of necessity be a
compact between the King and the people when, he is advanced to the Government;
then he that advances himself, without and against this compact, is an Usurper
not to be ouned: But the former is true: Ergo he that advances himself without
and against this compact, is an Usurper not to be ouned. And who more
Notoriously deserving such a signature, than James the 7/2 who has made horns
of his oun strength, or the Popes Biills, to push his Brother out and himself
in to the Throne, upon no terms at all, or any security for Religion and
Liberty. One Objection is to be removed here: Can the Customs of the Jews be
binding to all Nations? The Kings of Judah made such Covenants, shall therefore
all Kings do so? Ans. why not this Custom, as well as Crowing, which they used
likewise? These Rules are not Typical or Cermonial, nor only so Judicial as to
be peculiarly Iudaical, but are matters of moral equity, bearing a standing
reason founded upon that Law Deuteronomy. 17. 15. etc. Limiting the Prince to stand to
conditions. If we cast at Divine Laws for Rules of Government, where will we
find better Laws? It is recorded of the first of the British Kings who was
Christian, that writing to Eleutherius Bishop of Rome (before Antichrist took
that seat) for the Roman Laws, he received this Answer; By Divine Clemency ye
have received the Law and faith of Christ, you have the Old and New Testaments,
out of them in Gods Name by Counsel of your State take Laws, and Govern your
Kingdom. And of another, that he began his Laws thus, God speak all these
words etc. And so repeated the Laws of God. The Second thing I undertook to
prove, is that Assertion of Buchanan ubi supra, de Iure Regni. Qui prior a
Conventis recidit etc. There being a paction between the King and Subjects, he
who first recedes from what is Covenanted, and does Counteract what he has
Covenanted, he looses the contract; and the bond being loosed which did hold
fast the King with the people, whatever right did belong to him by virtue of
that compact, he looses it, and the people are as free as before the
stipulation. Which is also asserted by the Author of Ius populi chapter 6. page
112. It is no less clear, that when the Sovereign does not perform the
principal main and most necessary conditions, condescended and aggreed upon, de
jure he falls from his Soveraignity: and page 117. when the Prince does
violate his compact, as to all its conditions, or as to its chief main and most
necessary condition, the subjects are de jure free from subjection to him, and
at Liberty to make choice of another. This is so clear that it needs no labor
to prove it, that upon this head we were loosed from all Allegiance to the
former Tyrant, who was admitted upon terms of an explicit Covenant, the
conditions whereof he did as explicitly break. There are two cases wherein
Subjects are loosed from Covenanted Allegiance to their Princes. 1. When the
Prince remitts the obligation of the Subjects, and refuses Allegiance upon that
basis; then he can no more demand it by virtue of that compact. He that remitts
and will not have that Allegiance, that the Subjects Covenanted upon such and
such conditions to him, these Subjects should not give it that they so
Covenanted, for they should not prostitute it to a Refuser and Remitter: But
Charles the Second remitted and would not have that Allegiance, which we
Covenanted upon such and such conditions viz. upon the terms of the Covenant,
which he cassed, and annulled, and made Criminal to oune: Ergo to him we should
not have given it, which we so Covenanted. 2. When the Prince did enter into a
Mutual Covenant with the people upon Mutual conditions, and does not only cease
to perform the conditions, but simply denies all obligation to do it, and
makes it a quarrel to insinuate so much, yea persecutes all who dare assert the
obligation of that Covenant; and yet demands Allegiance, not upon the
obligation of that Covenant which he has remitted, but absolutely upon the
grounds of his prerogative. In this case it will be evident also, the subjects
are not bound either to oune their formerly Covenanted Allegiance to him, Or
that which he demands on other grounds. Grotius de Iure belli is clear as to
this Lib. 1. Cap. 4. Number. 12. Si ex Clausula posita in ipsa delatione Imperii,
ut si Rex hoc aut hoc faciet subditi omni obedientiae vinculo solvuntur, tunc
quoque Rex in privatam personam recidit. If there be such a Clause or condition
in the very devolution of the Government upon a Prince, as if he do so and so
the subjects shall be loosed from all bonds of obedience, then when he does so
he becomes a mere private person. Grotius there supposes the power is
transferred upon a resolutive condition, that is if he transgress the condition
the power shall be resolved into its first fountain: much more if it be
transferred expressly also upon a suspensive condition, that he shall continue
to maintain the ends of the Covenant, defend Religion and the Liberties of the
Subjects, in the defense whereof we shall oune Allegiance to him, otherwise not
in that case if he do not maintain these ends, plain it is our obligation
ceases; for how can it stand upon a conditional obligation, when his
performance of the condition sists? But whatever be the conditions Mutual, it
flows Natively from the Nature of a Mutual compact, that qui non praestat
officium promissum cadit beneficio hac lege dato, he who does not perform the
conditions aggreed upon has no right to the benefit granted upon condition of
performance of these conditions; especially if he perform not, or violate
these conditions upon supposition whereof he would not have gotten the
benefit: It were very absurd to say, in a Mutual conditional compact one party
shall still be bound to perform his conditions, though the other perform none
but break all. Were it the act of rational Creatures to set up a Sovereign,
upon conditions he shall not play the Tyrant, and yet be bound to him tho he
Tyrannize never so much? We have the Nature of Mutual compacts in the Spies
Covenant with Rahab Josh. 2. 20. If thou utter this our business, then we will
be quite of thine Oath, which thou have made us to swear: if she should break
condition, then the obligation of the Oath on their part should cease. But next
all the stress will ly in proving that the Covenant, on such and such
conditions between a Prince and Subjects, does equally and mutually oblige both
to each other: for if it equally oblige both, then both are equally disengaged
from other by the breach on either side, and either of them may have a just
claim in Law against the other for breach of the conditions. But Royalists and
Court-slaves allege, that such a Covenant obliges the King to God; but not to
the people at all; so that he is no more accountable to them, than if he had
made none at all. But the contrare is evident: For [1] If the compact be
Mutual, and if it be infringed on one side, it must be so in the other also;
for in contracts, the parties are considered as equals, whatever inequality
there may be betwixt them otherwise: I speak of contracts among men. [2] If it
be not so, there is no Covenant made with the people at all: And so David did
no more Covenant with Israel. than with the Chaldeans: for to all with whom the
Covenant is made it obliges to them. Otherwise it must be said, he only made
the Covenant with God, contrary to the Text; for he made it only before the
Lord as a Witness, not with Him as a party. Ioashs Covenant with the Lord is
expressly distinguished from that with the people. [3] If it be not so, it were
altogether nonsense to say, there were any Covenant made with the King, on the
other hand: for he is supposed to be made King on such and such terms, and yet
by this after he is made King he is no more obliged unto them, than if there
had been no compact with him at all. [4] If he be bound as King, and not only
as a man or Christian, then he is bound with respect to the people; for with
respect to them he is only King: But he is bound as King, and not only as a man
or Christian, because it is only with him as King that the people Covenant, and
he must transact with them under the same consideration. Next, that which he is
obliged to, is the specifical act of a King, to defend Religion and Liberty,
and Rule in Righteousness; And therefore his Covenant binds him as King. Again,
if he be not bound as King, then as a King he is under no obligation of Law or
Oath, which is to make him a Lawless Tyrant, yea none of Gods subjects. It
would also suppose that the King as King could not sin against the people at
all, but only against God: for as King he could be under no obligation of duty
to the people, and where there is no obligation there is no sin; by this he
would be set above all obligations to love his neighbor as himself, for he is
above all his neighbors, and all mankind, and only less than God; and so by
this doctrine he is loosed from all duties of the Second Table, or at least he
is not so much obliged to them as others. But against this it is Objected: both
Prince and people are obliged to perform their part to each other, and both
are obliged to God, but both are not accountable to each other; there is not
mutual power in the parties to compel one another to perform the promised
duty; the King has it indeed over the people, but not the people over the
King, and there is no indifferent Judge Superior to both to compel both, but
God. Ans. 1. What if all this should be granted? yet it does not infringe the
proposition: what if the people have not power to compel him? yet Iure he may
fall from his Soveraignity, though de facto he is not deposed: he loses his
right to our part, when he breaks his part. 2. There is no need of a Superior
Arbiter: for as in contracting they are considered as equal, so the party
keeping the contract is Superior to the other breaking it: 3. There may be
Mutual Coactive Power, where there is no Mutual relation of Superiority and
Inferiority: yea in some cases Inferiors may have a Coactive Power by Law, to
compel their Superiors failing in their duty to them; As a Son wronged by his
Father may compel him to reparation by Law; And independent Kingdoms, nothing
inferior to each other, being in Covenant together, the wronged may have a
Coactive power to force the other to duty, without any Superior Arbiter. 4. The
bond of suretyship brings a man under the obligation to be accountable to the
Creditor, though the surety were never so high and the Creditor never so low:
Solomon says in General without exception of Kings, yea including them because
he was a King that spoke it Prove. 6. 1, 2. My son if thou be Surety for thy
friend -- thou art snared with the words of thy Mouth. Now a Kings power is but
fiduciary; And therefore he cannot be unaccountable for the power concredited
to him. And if the Generation had minded this, our Stewarts should have been
called to an account for their Stewardship ere now. Hence I argue, If a
Covenanted Prince, breaking all the Conditions of his compact, does forfeit his
right to the Subjects Allegiance, then they are no more to oune him as their
Sovereign: But the former is proved, that a Covenanted Prince breaking all the
conditions of his compact does forfeit his right to the Subjects Allegiance:
Ergo -- And Consequently when Charles the Second, expressly bound by Covenant
to defend and promote the Convenanted Reformation and Liberties of the Kingdom,
to whom only we were bound in the terms of his defending and promoting the
same, did violently and villainously violate and vilify these conditions, we
were no more bound to them. Somewhat possibly may be Objected here. 1. If this
be the sense of the Covenant, then it would seem that we were not bound to oune
the King, but only when and while he were actually promoving and carrying on
the ends of the Covenant. Ans. It does not follow, but that we are obliged to
preserve his Person and Authority in these necessary intervalls, when he is
called to see to himself as a man; for we must preserve him as a mean, because
of his aptitude and designation for such an End, albeit not always formally
prosecuting it: we do not say, that we are never to oune him, but when actually
exercised in prosecuting these ends: but we say, we are never to oune him, when
he is Tyrannically and Treacherously abusing his Authority for destroying and
overturning these ends, and violating all the conditions of his compact. It may
be Obj. 2. Saul was a Tyrant, and a breaker of his Royal Covenant, and
persecuter of the Godly, and Murderer of the Priests of the Lord, usurper upon
the Priests Office, and many other ways guilty of breaking all conditions: And
yet David and all Israel ouned him as the Anointed of the Lord. Ans. 1. Saul
was indeed a Tyrant, rejected of God, and to be ejected out of his Kingdom in
His oun time and way, which David a Prophet knowing would not anticipate. But
he was far short, and a mere Bungler in acts of Tyranny in comparison of our
Grassators: he broke his Royal Covenant in very gross particular acts, but did
not cass and rescind the whole of it, did not burn it, did not make it Criminal
to oune its obligation, nor did he so much as profess a breach of it, nor
arrogate an Absolute prerogative, nor attempt arbitrary Government, nor to
evert the fundamental Laws and overturn the Religion of Israel, and bring in
Idolatry, as Ours have done: He was a Persecuter of David upon some private
quarrels, not of all the Godly upon the account of their Covenanted Religion:
He Murdered 85 Priests of the Lord, in a transport of fury, because of their
kindness to David; but he did not make Laws adjudging all the Ministers of the
Lord to death, who should be found most faithful in their duty to God and His
Church, as Ours have done against all Field Preachers: He Usurped upon the
Priests Office, in one elicit act of Sacrificing; but he did not usurp a
Supremacy over them, and annex it as an inherent right of his Crown. 2. He was
indeed such a Tyrant, as deserved to have been dethroned and brought to condign
punishment, upon the same accounts that Amaziah and Uzziah were deposed for
afterward: And in this the people failed in their duty, and for it they were
plagued remarkably; shall their Omission be an Argument to us? 3. As the
question was never put to the people, whether they ouned his Authority as
Lawful or not? So we do not read, either of their Universal ouning him, or
their positive disouning him: However, That's no good Argument, which is drawn
a non facto ad faciendum; because they did it not, therefore it must not be
done. 4. They ouned him; but how? as the Minister of God, not to be resisted or
revolted from under pain of damnation? (as all Lawful Magistrates ought to be
ouned Romans 13. 2, 4.) This I deny: for David and his six hundred men resisted
him resolutely; And though the body of the Nation did long Lazily lie and couch
as Asses under his burden, yet at length, weary of his Tyranny, many revolted
from under him, and adjoined themselves to David at Ziklag, while he kept
himself close because of Saul the Son of Kish 1 Chronicles. 12. 1. who are commended
by the Spirit of God for their valor verse. 2. etc. and many out of Manasseh
fell to him, when he came with the Philistims against Saul to battle verse. 19.
This was a practical disouning of the Tyrant, before the Lord deposed him. 5.
David did indeed pay him and his Character some deference, as having been the
Anointed of the Lord; yet perhaps his honoring him with that title, the Lords
anointed 1 Samuel 24. 1 Samuel 26. and calling him so often his Lord the King
cannot be altogether Justified, no more than his using that same language to
Achish King of Gath. 1 Samuel 29. 8. I show before how titles might be allowed:
but this so circumstantiate, does not seem so consistent with his imprecatory
prayer, for the Lords avenging him on him. 1 Samuel 24. 12. and many other
imprecations against him in his Psalms; in some of which he calls the same man,
whom here he styles the Lords anointed, a Dog; as Saul and his Accomplices are
called Psalm. 95. 6, 14. and the evil violent and wicked man Psalm 140. 1, 4. and
the vilest of men Psalm. 12. ult. However it be, there can be no Argument from
hence, to oune the Authority of Tyrants and Usurpers.

6. Though this Necessary conditional compact, which must always be in the
constitution of Lawfu^ Rulers, be not always express and explicit, so that a
written Authentic Copy of it cannot be always produced; yet it is alwise to be
understood implicitly at least transacted, in the Rulers admission to the
Government, wherein the Law of God must regulate both parties; and when he is
made Ruler, it must natively be understood that it is upon terms to be a
Father, feeder, and Protector, and not a Tyrant, Murderer, and Destroyer. All
Princes are so far pactional, that they are obliged, by the high and absolute
Sovereign from whom they derive their Authority, to reign for the Peace and
profit of the people: this is fixed unalterably by the Laws of the Supreme
Legislator, and solemnly engaged unto at the Coronation: and whosoever declines
or destroys this fundamental condition, he degrades and deposes himself. It is
also not only the Universal practice, but necessary for the Constitution and
Conservation of all Commonwealths, to have fundamental Laws and Provisions
about Government, both for the upholding and transmitting and transfering it as
occasion calls, and preventing and punishing violations thereof, that there be
no invasion or intrusion upon the Government, and if there be any entrance upon
it not according to the Constitution, that it be illegitimated, and the Nations
Liberties always secured. This does infer and regulate a conditional compact
with all that are advanced to the Government, albeit it should not be
expressed. For it is undeniable that in the erection of all Governors, the
grand Interests of the Community must be seen to by Legal Securities for
Religion and Liberty, which is the end and use of fundamental Laws. Now how
these have been unhinged and infringed, by the introduction and present
establishment by Law of that Monster of the prerogative, enacted in Parliament
Anno 1661. the Apologetick Relation does abundantly demonstrate, Sect. 10.
Concerning the Kings Civil Supremacy, enhancing all the Absoluteness that ever
the Great Turk could arrogate, and yet far short of what has been Usurped
since, and impudently proclaimed to the world, especially by him who now
domineers, in his Challenges of Sovereign Authority, prerogative Royal, and
Absolute Power, which all are to obey without reserve, whereby the whole basis
of our Constitution, and Bulwark of our Religion, Laws, and Liberties, is
enervated, and we have security of no Law but the Kings lust. Hence I argue,
Those Princes, that, contrary to their virtual compact (at least) at their
coming to the Crown, have overturned all fundamental Laws, cannot be ouned: But
our Princes have contrary to their virtual compact (at least) at their coming
to the Crown overturned all fundamental Laws: Ergo they cannot be ouned. The
Major is plain: for they that overturn fundamental Laws are no Magistrates;
thereby all the ends of Government being subverted, and the subverter cannot be
ouned as a Father or friend, but an open enemy to the Commonwealth, nor looked
upon as Magistrates doing their duty, but as Tyrants seeking themselves with the
destruction of the Commonwealth.: And in this case the compact, the ground of
the Constitution, being violated, they fall from their right, and the people
are Liberated from their obligation, and they being no Magistrates the people
are no subjects, for the relation is mutual, and so is the obligation Ius
populi chap. 9. page 183. The Minor is manifest, both from the matter of fact,
and the Mischiefs framed into Laws, by the Sovereign Authority, Prerogative
Royal, and Absolute Power foresaid: whereby what remains of our fundamental
Constitutions, either in Religious or Civil Settlements, unsubverted as yet,
may be subverted when this Absolute Monarch pleases. Which Absolute Authority
we cannot in conscience oune, for these Reasons, taken both from Reason and
Scripture. First its against Reason. 1. A power contrare to Nature cannot be
ouned: Absolute power is such: for that which takes away, and makes the people
to give away, their Natural power of preserving their lives and Liberties, and
sets a man above all rule and Law, is contrare to Nature; such is Absolute
power, making people resign that which is not in their power to resign, an
absolute power to destroy and Tyrannize. 2. A power contrare to the first rise
of its Constitution cannot be ouned: Absolute power is such: for, The first
rise of the Constitution is a peoples seting a Sovereign over them, giving him
Authority to administer justice over them; But it were against this, to set one
over them with a power to rage at random, and rule as he lists: Its proven
before, a King has no power but what the people gave him, but they never gave,
never could give an absolute power to destroy themselves. 3. That power which
is against the ends of Government cannot be ouned: Absolute power is such: for,
that which will make a peoples condition worse then before the Constitution,
and that mean which they intended for a blessing to turn a plague and scourage
to them, and all the subjects to be formal slaves at the Princes devotion, must
needs be contrare to the ends of Government: But Absolute power is such: for,
against the exorbitance thereof no means would be left to prevent its
obstructing all the fountains of Justice, and commanding Laws and Lawyers to
speak, not justice righteousness and reason, but the lust and pleasure of one
man, and turning all into Anarchy and confusion: Certainly it could never be
the intention either of the work or workers, at the Constitution of Government,
to set up a power to enslave the people, to be a Curse to them; but their ends
was to get comfort, safety, and Liberty, under the shadow of Government. 4.
That power which invalidates, and is inconsistent with the Kings compact with
the people, cannot be ouned: Absolute Power is such: for, the tenor of that is
alwise to secure Laws and Liberties, to rule according to Law; but to be
Absolute invalidates and is inconsistent with that: That which were an
engagment into Contradictories cannot consist with that compact; but to engage
to be absolute, and yet to rule by Law, is an engagment into Contradictories,
which no people could admit for a security: Its inconsistent with this compact,
to give the King Absolute Power to overturn Religion and Liberty, and to assume
it which was never given, were to invalidate this compact, and to make himself
no King; but to restore unto the people the power they conferred upon him, for
the defense of Religion and Liberty. 5* That power which is not from God, nor
of God, cannot be ouned: But Absolute Power is not of God; because it is a
power to Tyrannize and Sin, which if it were of God He should be the Author of
Sin; for if the Moral Power be of God, so must the acts be; but the acts of
Absolute Power, being Lawless, cannot be from God: Ergo neither the Moral Power
to commit these acts. 6. That Ruler who cannot be Gods Minister for the peoples
good cannot be ouned: (for that is the formal reason of our consfiencious
subjection to Rulers Romans 13. 4, 5.) But Absolute Sovereigns are such as cannot
be Gods Ministers for the peoples good; for if they be Gods Ministers for good,
they must administer justice, preserve peace, rule by Law, take directions from
their Master; and if so, they cannot be absolute. 7. A Tyrant in actu signato
and exercito cannot be ouned: But an Absolute Prince is such; being a power
that may play the Tyrant if he pleases, and jure as King: And so if Kings be
actu primo Tyrants, then people are actu primo Slaves; and so Royal Power
cannot be a blessing to them: yea a Lawless breaker of all bonds, promises, and
Oaths, cannot be ouned as Lawful Power: But Absolute Power is such: for, it
cannot be limited by these Obligations, at least people cannot have any seurity
by them. 8. A Lawless Power is not to be ouned: An Absolute Power is a Lawless
power: Ergo not to be ouned. The Major is plain. Cicero says Lib. 2. de
officio Eadem constituendarum Legum causa fuit, quae Regum The reason of making
Laws was the same, as of the creation of Kings. And Buchanan de jure Regni
very excellently; when the lust of Kings was in stead of Laws, and being vested
with an infinite and immoderate power, they did not contain themselves within
bounds -- the insolency of Kings made Laws to be desired; for this cause Laws
were made by the people, and Kings constrained to make use, not of their
Licencious wills in judgment, but of that right and privilege which the people
had conferred upon them, being taught by many experiences, that it was better
that their Liberty should be concredited to Laws, than to Kings; better to have
the Law which is a dumb King, than a King who is not a speaking Law. If then
Laws be necessary for the making of Kings, and more necessary than Kings, And
the same cause requirs both, then a King without Laws is not to be ouned. Rex
must be Lex loquens; a King must be a speaking and living Law, reducing the Law
to practice: So much then as a King has of Law, so much he has of a King; and
he who has nothing of the Law, has nothing of a King. Magna Charta of England
says, the King can do nothing but by Law, and no obedience is due to him but
by Law. Buchanan rehearses the words of the most famous Emperors, Theodosius
and Valentinianus to this effect, Digna vox Majestate regnantis, legibus se
alligatum Principem fateri; and revero Imperio majus ost, submittere legibus
Principatum. It is, say they, a word worthy of the Majesty of a King, to
confess he is a tied Prince to the Laws, and indeed it is more to submit a
Principality to the Laws, than to enjoy an Empire. But now that an absolute
power must be a Lawless power, is also evident; for that's a Lawless power that
makes all Laws void, needless and useless: but such is absolute power: for, it
cannot be confined to the observance of Laws. 9. That power which is
destructive to the peoples Liberties cannot be ouned: Absolute power is such:
for, such a Licencious freedom as is absolute, cannot consist with the peoples
Liberties; for these he may infringe when he pleases: Now these, in their oun
Nature, and in all respects, being preferable to the Kings prerogative, And it
being no prerogative which is not consistent with, yea in its oun nature
adapted to, the precious Interests of Religion and Liberty, when the Kings
Absolute Authority is stated in contradictory terms to these, we cannot oune
that Authority: for now he has another Authority than could be given him for
the preservation of these Interests, in the preservation whereof he can only
have an Authority to be ouned, seeing he claims a power to destroy them if he
please. 10. If we should oune Absolute Authority; then we should oune a Royal
prerogative in the King to make and dispense with Laws: Now that cannot be
ouned: for, it would infer that the King had a Masterly Dominion over his
subjects, to make Laws, and inflict Penalties without their consent. And plain
it is, they that make Kings must have a Coordinate power to make Laws also; but
the people in their Representatives make Kings, as is proven. Next a
prerogative to dispense with Laws, except such Laws as are in their oun nature
dispensable, without prejudice to any Law of God or Liberties of men, cannot be
ouned: for any power to dispense with Reason and Law, not grounded on any other
reason but mere will and absolute pleasure, is a brutish power. It cannot be
jus Coronae, a right annexed to the Crown, to do so: for a King as a King illud
tantum potest quod jure potest can do nothing but what he may do by Law. Nay
this is not only a Brutish power, but a Blasphemous power, making him a Kind of
God on earth illimited, that can do what he pleases: And to dispute it further,
were to dispute whether God has made all under him slaves by their oun
consent; Or whether he may encroach on the prerogative of God, or not. By this
prerogative, he arrogates a power to dispense with the Laws of God also, in
pardoning Murderers etc. which no man has power to do: the Law of God being
so peremptorly indispensable Genesis 9. 6. whosoever sheddeth man's blood by man shall
his blood be shed. Numb. 35. 30. 31. Who so kills any person, the murderer
shall he put to death -- more over ye shall take no satisfaction for the life
of a murderer, but he shall be surely put to death. These pardons are acts of
blood to the Community. If the Judgment be Gods, as it is Deuteronomy. 1. 17. and not
for man but for the Lord 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. then no King can arrogate a power to
dispense with it, no more then an inferior Judge can dispense with the Kings
Laws: for the King is but a Minister, bearing the Sword not in vain, but as a
revenger to execute wrath upon them that do evil Romans 13. 4. They are but
bastard Kings who give out sentances out of their oun mouth, contrary to Gods
mind. And if he may do acts of grace by Prerogative above Law, then may he also
do acts of Justice (so pretended) by the same Prerogative; and so may murder
Innocents, as well as pardon Murderers, he may condemn the just as well as
justify the wicked, both which are alike abomination to the Lord Pro. 17. 15.
This power cannot be ouned in any man. 11. To oune Absolute power, were to
recognosce the King as the proper and sole Interpreter of the Law. This
Buchanan shows to be very absurd: Cum regi Legum interpretationem etc.when you
grant the interpretation of Laws to a King; you give him such a License, that
the Law should not speak what the Lawgiver means but what is for the
Interpreters Interest; so that he may turn it to all actions, as a Lesbian
rule, for his oun advantage; And so what he pleases the Laws shall speak, and
what he will not it shall not speak. Now the Kings absolute pleasure, can no
more be the sense of the Law, than it can be the Law it self: He is King by
Law, but he is not King of Law: No mortal can make a sense to a Law, contrare
to the Law; for it involves a Contradiction; the true meaning is only the Law.
This also would take away the use of all Laws; for they could not declare what
were just and unjust, but as the King pleased; their genuine sense could not be
the rule. 12. If we oune the Law to be above the King, then we cannot oune the
King to be absolute: But the former is true: For, he must be under it several
ways: (1) under its Directive power; that will not be denied. (2) under its
Constitutive power: he is not a King by Nature, but by Constitution and Law:
therefore the Law is above the King; because its only from the Law that there
is a King, and that such a man and not another is King, and that the King must
be so and so qualified, and they that made him a King may also unmake him by
the same Law. (3) under its Limiting and Restrictive power, as a man he cannot
be absolute, nor as a King by Law. (4) under its Coactive power. A Law maker,
said King James the 6. should not be a Law breaker: but if he turn an
overturner of the fundamental Laws, that Law or Covenant that made him King,
does oblige to unmake him. Whatever power he has it is only a borrowed,
fiduciary power, as the Nations Public servant: and that which was lent him in
Pledge or paun, may be reclaimed, when abused by him. Especially if he turn
parricide, Kill his brother, murder his nobles, burn Cities, then he may and
ought to be punished by Law. Otherwise, God should have provided better for the
safety of the part, than of the whole, though that part be but a mean for the
safety of the whole: for if he turn Tyrant in his absoluteness, the people must
be destroyed, if they may not repress him; thus he is secured, and the whole
exposed to ruin. Yea, if he be a man as well as a King, he must be under rule
of Law; and when he transgresses, either his transgressions are punishable by
men, or they are not transgressions with men, See many Arguments to this
purpose in Lex Rex Quest. 14. 19. 22. 23. 24. 26. 27. But Secondly I prove it
by Scripture 1. Even as King he is regulated by Law, not to multiply horses,
nor wives, nor money, but to keep the words of the Law, and not lift up himself
above his brethren, Deuteronomy. 17. 16, 17, 19, 20. he must observe to do according
to the Law, and not turn from it to the right hand or to the left Josh. 1. 7.
Ergo he must not be absolute. 2. He is certainly under that Law, Math. 7. 12.
what so ever ye would that men should do to you do ye even so to them: which is
the universal fundamental Law. If then he would have us keeping in our line of
subordination to him, he must keep his line, and so cannot be absolute. 3. What
is Gods dwe and peculiar Prerogative, can be ouned in no Mortal: But Absolute
power is Gods due and peculiar Prerogative. He alone does whatsoever pleases
Him Psalm. 115. 3. He alone works all things after the Counsel of His oun
will Ephesians. 1. 11. Acts or Commands founded upon the sole pleasure of the Agent,
are proper to God. Its Gods will and not the Creatures, that can make things
good or just. Its Blasphemy therefore to ascribe absolute power to any
Creature. 4. That which the spirit of God condemned as a point of Tyranny in
Nebuchadnezzar, that is no prerogative to be ouned: but the Spirit of God
condemned this in him, proceeding from absolute power, that whom he would he
slew, and whom he would he kept alive, whom he would he set up, and whom he
would he put down, And his heart was lifted up Dan. 5. 19. 20. 5. That which
God condemns and threatens in Tyrants in the Word in General, cannot be ouned:
but Absolute power, God condemns and thereatens in the word in general; that
they turned Judgment into Gall, and said, have we not taken to us horns by our
oun strength? Amos. 6. 12. 13. 6. The Word of God speaks nothing of the Kings
Absolute prerogative, to make Laws as he will. It is plain the Kings of Judah
had it not; but the Sanhedrin had a great part of the Nomothetick power, and of
the punitive power in a special manner: the Princes and people had it by
Ieremahs acknowledgment Ier. 26. 14. And Zedekiah confesses to them; the King
is not he that can do any thing against you Ier. 38. 5. 7. we find the King in
Scripture had not an absolute power, to expone or execute the Law as he would:
Saul made a Law 1 Samuel 14. 2^. Cursed be the man that eats any food until
evening. But expening it, and thinking to execute it after a Tyrannical manner,
he was justly resisted by the people, who would not let him kill innocent
Jonathan. 8. Nor had he the sole power of Interpreting it: for inferior Judges
were Interpreters, who are no less essential Judges than the King, who are set
to Judge for the Lord, and not for the King 2 Cron. 19. 6. and therefore they
were to expone it according to their oun conscience, and not the Kings. They
were to speak righteousness and Judge uprightly Psalm. 58. 1. hence called Gods,
as well as Kings Psalm. 82. 1. There was no essential Difference between a King
of Gods approving and a Judge; there being but one Law to both Deuteronomy. 17. 9. he
was subject to judgment as well as others: for being but a brother, even while
on the throne, who was not to lift up his heart above his brethren, Deuteronomy. 17.
ult. When his Cause was to be judged, his person though never so great was not
to be respected; nor were they to be afraid of the face of man, for the
judgment was Gods Deuteronomy. 1. 17. therefore the Judges were to give out sentence
in judgment, as if the Lord were to give it out: There was no exception of
Kings there. Yea, we find according to common Law, they judged and punished
offending Kings, as shall be made appear. 10. If they were under Church
Censures, then they were not absolute: but we find Kings were under Church
Censures; not only rebuked sharply to their face, of which we have many
instances; but also subjected to Church discipline, as Uzziah shut up for his
Leprosy. And certainly at all times this must be extended to all: for the King
is either a brother, or not: If not, then he should not be King, according to
the Scripture Deuteronomy. 17. 15. then also he is not a Christian, nor can he say the
Lords Prayer: If he be, then if a brother offend, he is subject to the Church
Math. 18. there is no exceptions of Kings there. The Objection from Eccles, 8.
3. 4. -- he does whatsoever pleases him where the word of a King is there is
power, and who may say unto him, what do thou? is of no significancy here.
For. 1. This Argument will enforce absolute obedience, if the power be to be
taken absolutely* for it is obedience that is there commanded: and so we must
not only oune the absolute Authority, but obey it without reserve, which never
any yet had the impudence to plead for, until James the unjust claimed it in a
Scots Proclaimation: but we answer, It is better to obey God than man, 2. If he
may do whatsoever pleases him, then he may turn Priest, then he may kill whom
he pleases, and take possession; and yet for Saules Usurpation Samuel could say
more than what do thou? even to tell him, he had done foolishly, and his
Kingdom should not continue 1 Samuel 13. 13. 14. And for Ahabs Tyranny, El^ah
could tell him, the dogs shall lick thy blood even thine 1 King. 21. 19. And
Ezekiel, thou profane wicked-Prince of Israel Ezekiel. 21. 25. 3. The meaning is
then only this; that a righteous King, his just power may not be controlled; he
is armed with power that may not be resisted, for he bears not the Sword in
vain, and therefore we must not stand in an evil matter against them I conlude
then this Argument, with the words of an Ingenious Author, upon this same
subject, both in Thesi and Hypothesi: whosoever shall offer to rule Arbitrarly,
does immediately cease to be King de jure. seeing by the fundamental, Common and
Statute-Laws of the Realm, we know none for Supreme Magistrate and Governor
but a limited Prince, and one who stands circumscribed and bounded in his power
and Prerogative. Ill effects of animosities. Page 17.

7. From what is said this is the result, that it is essentially necessary to a
Moral power and Authority, to have a right and title, without which we can oune
none, but as a Tyrant sine Titulo. For what is Authority, but a right to rule?
if then it have not a right, it is not Authority. This will be undeniable, if
we consider, that as Private dominon, or Property, consists in a right to
enjoy; So Public dominion, in a right to rule. Some things indeed are exposed
to the common and arbitrary use of every man, and also at the beginning, by
reason of the fewness of mankind, Dominion was not reduced to distinct
Property; yet now, upon the Multiplication of Occupants, of necessity it must
be stated by peculiar appropriation, from the Law of Nature, and by the Grant
of the Supreme King, who has given the earth to the Children of men Psalm. 115.
16, not to be catched up as the food of beasts, which the stronger seize, and
the weaker get only what the other leave them, but divided by right as an
Inheritance, by Him who separated the Sons of Adam and set the bounds of the
People Deuteronomy. 32. 8. Especially Public Dominion cannot be without a foundation
for its relation to the subjected, and must be so tied up, that it may be said,
this man is to command and these are to obey. I show that Authority is from God
both by Institution and Constitution; so that the Subjects are given to
understand, such an one is singled out by God to sustain this Authority, by
prescribing a rule for men's entry into the Authoritative relation, whereby He
communicates that power to them which is not in others, and which otherwise
would not be in them. Hence it is that Orderly admittance that must give the
right, and upon men's having or not having such an entrance to it depends the
reality or nullity of the power they challenge. Where therefore there is no
Lawful Investure, there is no Moral power to be ouned; otherwise John of Leyden
his Authority might have been ouned: the unlawfulness of such a power consists
in the very tenore it self, and if we take away the use or holding of it, we
take away the very being of it: it is not then the abuse of a power Lawfully to
be used, but the very use of it is unlawful. But in the Usurpation of this Man,
or Monster rather that is now mounted the Throne, there is no Lawful investure
in the way God has appointed, as is showed above. Ergo there is no Moral power
to be ouned. To clear this alitle further, it will be necessary to remove the
ordinary Prentences, pleaded for a Title to warrant the ouning of such as are
in power. Which are three chiefly viz. Possession, Conquest, and Hereditary
Succession. The first must be touched more particularly, because it has been
the originate error, and spring of all the stupid mistakes about Government,
and is the pitiful plea of many even Malcontents, why this Man's Authority is
to be ouned, asserting that a person attaining and occupying the place of power
(by whatsoever means) is to be ouned as the Magistrate. But this can give no
right: for. 1. If Providence cannot signify Gods approbative ordination, it can
give no right; for without that there can be no right: But Providence cannot
signify His approbative Ordination: because that, without the warrant of His
Word, cannot signify either allowance or dissallowance, it is so various, being
often the same to Courses directly contrary, and oftentimes contrary to the
same Course: sometimes favoring it, sometimes crossing it, whether it be good
or bad: And the same Common Providence may proceed from far different Purposes,
to one in Mercy, to another in Judgment; And most frequently very
disproportionable to men's ways: Providence places sometimes wickedness in the
place of Judgment, and iniquity in the place of righteousness Eccless. 3. 16.
that is not by allowance. By Providence it happens to the just according to the
work of the wicked, and to the wicked according to the work of the righteous
Eccless. 8. 14. No man knows either love or hatred by all that is before
them, all things come alike to all, there is one event to the righteous and to
the wicked Eccel. 9. 1. It were a great debasing of the Lords anointed to give
him no other warrant then sin has in the world, or the falling of a Sparrow.
2. Either every Providential Possession, in every ease, gives a title: Or God
has Declared it as a Law, that it shall be so in this particular matter of
Authority only. The first cannot be said: for, that would justify all robbery:
Nor the second, for where is that Law found? Nay it were impious to allege it;
for it would say, there is no unjust Possessor or Disorderly occupant, but if
he were once in the Possession, he were right enough: And then Usurpation would
be no sin. 3. If none of the Causes of Magistracy be required to the producing
of this Possessory power, then it cannot give or have any right; for without
the true Causes it cannot be the true effect, and so can have no true right to
be ouned: But none of the Causes of Magistracy are required to the production
of this; neither the Institution of God, for this might have been if Magistracy
had never been instituted; Nor the Constitution of men, for this may usurp
without that. 4. That which must follow upon the right, and be Legitimated by
it, cannot be ouned as the right, nor can it give the title: But the Possession
of the power, or the Possessory exercise thereof, must follow upon its right,
and be legitimated by it. Ergo -- A man must first be in the relation of a
Ruler, before he can rule; and men must first be in the relation of subjects,
before they obey. The Commands of Public Justice, to whom are they given but
to Magistrates? They must then be Magistrates, before they can be ouned as the
Ministers of Justice: he must be a Magistrate before he can have the power of
the Sword, he cannot by the power of the Sword make himself Magistrate. 5. That
which would make every one in the Possession of the Magistracy, a Tyrant, can
not be ouned: But a Possessory occupation giving right, would make every one in
Possession of the Magistracy a Tyrant, can not be ouned: But a Possessory
occupation giving right, would make every one in Possession a Tyrant; for, that
which enervats and takes away that necessary Distinction between the Kings
personal Capacity and his Legal Capacity, his natural and his moral power, will
make every King a Tyrant (seeing it makes every thing that he can do as a man,
to be Legally done as a King) But a Possessory occupation giving right, would
enervate and take away that distinction: for how can these be distinguished in
a mere Possessory power? the man's Possession is all his legal power; and if
Possession give a right, his power will give legality. 6. What sort or size of
Possession can be ouned to give a right? Either it must be partial or plenary
possession: Not partial, for then others may be equally entitled to the
Government, in competition with that partial possessor, having also a part of
it: Not plenary, for them every interruption or Usurpation on a part, would
make a dissolution of the Government. 7. Hence would follow infinite
absurdities: this would give equal warrant in case of vacancy to all men to
step to, and stickle for the throne, and expose the Common wealth as a booty to
all aspiring spirits; for they needed no more to make them Sovereigns, and lay
a tie of subjection upon the consciences of people, but to get into possession:
And in case of Competition, it would leave people still in suspense and
uncertainties whom to oune, for they behoved to be subject only to the
Uppermost, which could not be known until the Controversy be decided: It would
cassate and make void all preobligations, Cautions, and restrictions from God
about the Government: it would Cancel and make vain all other titles of any, or
Constitutions, or provisions, or Oaths of Allegiance: yea to what purpose were
Laws, or pactions made about ordering the Government, if possession gave right,
and laid an obligation on all to oune it? yea then it were sinful to make any
such provisions, to fence in and limit the determination of providence, if
providential possession may authorize every intruesive acquisition to be ouned:
Then also in case of competition of two equal pretenders to the Government,
there would be no place left for arbitrations: If this were true, that he is
the power that is in possession, the difference were at an end; no man could
plead for his oun right then: In this also it is inconsistent with it self,
condemning all resistance against the present occupant, yet justifying every
resistance that is but successful to give possession. 8. That which would
oblige us to oune the Devil and the Pope, cannot be a ground to oune any man:
But if this were true, that possession gave right, it would oblige us to oune
the Devil and the pope. Satan we find claiming to himself the possession of the
worlds Kingdoms Luke 4. 6. which as to many of them is in some respect true,
for he is called the God of this world, and the Prince of this world John. 14.
30. 2 Cor. 4. 4. Are men therefore obliged to oune his authority? or shall they
deny his, and acknowledge his lieutenant, who bears his name, and by whom all
his orders are execute, I mean the man that Tyranizes over the people of God?
for he is the Devil that casts some into prison Revel. 2. 10. Again the Pope,
his Captain General, lays claim to a Temporal power and Ecclesiastic both,
over all the Nations, and possesses it over many; and again, under the Conduct
of his vassal the Duke of York, is attempting to recover the possession of
Britain: Shall he therefore be ouned? This Cursed Principle disposes men for
Popery, and contributes to strengthen Popery and Tyranny both on the stage,
to the vacating of all the promises of their dispossession. 9. That which would
justify a Damnable sin, and make it a ground of a duty, cannot be ouned: But
this fancy of ouning every power in possession would justify a damnable sin,
and make it the ground of a duty: for, Resistance to the powers ordained of God
is a damnable sin Rom, 13. 2. but the Resisters having success in providence
may come to the possession of the power, by expelling the just occupant; and by
this opinion that possession would be ground for the duty of subjection for
Conscience sake. 10. If a self-created dignity be null and not to be ouned,
then a mere possessory is not to be ouned: But the former is ttue: as Christ
says, John. S. 54. If I honor myself my honor is nothing. 11. That which God
has disallowed cannot be ouned: But God has expressly disallowed possession
without right Ezekiel. 21. 27. I will overturn, overturn, overturn it until He
come whose right it is, Hos. 8. 4. They have set up Kings and not by me. Math.
26. 52. All they that take the sword shall perish with the sword; by this the
Usurper of the Sword is differenced from the true ouner. 12. Many Scripture
examples confut this; showing that the possession may be in one, and the power
with right in another. David was the Magistrate, and yet Absalom possessed the
place 2 Samuel 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. chap. Shebah also made a revolt and Usurped
the possession in a great part, and yet David was King 2 Samuel 20. 2. Adonijah
got the start in respect of possession, exalting himself, saying, I will be
King: yet the Kingdom was Solomon's from the Lord. 1 King. 1. chapter The house of
Ahaziah had not power to keep still the Kingdom 2 Chronicles. 22. 9. and Athaliah
took the possession of it, yet the people set up Ioash 23. 3. Next we have many
examples of such who have invaded the possessor, Witness Iehoram and
Iehoshaphat their expedition against Mesba King of Moah, Elisha being in the
expedition 2 King. 3. 4, 5. Hence we see the first pretense removed. The Second
is no better; which Augustine calls Magnum Latrocinium a Great Robbery; I mean
conquest; or a power of the Sword gotten by the Sword: which that it can give
no right to be ouned, I prove. 1. That which can give no signification of Gods
approving will, cannot give a Title to be ouned: But mere conquest can give no
signification of Gods approving will, as is just now proven about possession:
for then the Lord should have approven all the unjust conquests that have been
in the world. 2. Either conquest as conquest must be ouned, as a just Title to
the Crown; and so the Ammonites, Moabites, Philistims etc. prevailing over Gods
people for a time; must have reigned by right: or as a just conquest, in this
case conquest is only a mean to the conquerours seizing and holding that power,
which the State of the war entitled him unto, And this ingress into Authority
over the conquered is not grounded on conquest but on justice, and not at all
privative but Inclusive of the consent of the people; and then it may be ouned;
but without a compact, upon conditions of securing Religion and Liberty, the
posterity cannot be subjected without their consent: for, what ever just
quarrel the conqueror had with the present Generation, he could have none with
the Posterity, the Father can have no power to resign the Liberty of the
Children. 3. A King as King, and by virtue of his Royal Office, must be ouned
to be a Father, Tutor, Protector, Shepherd, and Patron of the people: But a
mere conqueror without consent cannot be ouned as such. Can he be a Father and
Patron to us against our will, by the sole power of the sword? a Father to
these that are unwilling to be Sons? an head over such as will not be members?
and a defender through violence? 4. A King as such is a special gift of God,
and blessing not a judgment: But a conqueror as such is not a blessing but a
judgment, his native end being not Peace but fire and sword. 5. That which
has nothing of a King in it, can not be ouned to make a King: But conquest
has nothing of a King in it; for it has nothing but violence and force,
nothing out what the bloodyest villain that was never a King may have, nothing
of Gods approving and regulating Will, nothing of Institution or constitution;
and a plain repugnancy to the Ordination of God, for God has said, thou shall
not kill; conquest says, I will kill, and Prosper, and reign. 6. A Lawful Call
to a Lawful Office may not be resisted: But a Call to conquest, which is
nothing but ambition or revenge, ought to be resisted; because not of Gods
preceptive will, otherwise He should be the Author of sin. 7. That power which
we must oune to be the Ordinance o^ God, must not be resisted Romans 13. 2. But
conquest may be resisted in defense of our King and Country: Therefore it must
no be ouned to be the Ordinance of God. 8. That which God condemns in His Word
cannot be ouned: But Dominion by the sword God condemns in His Word Ezekiel. 33.
26. ye stand upon your sword -- and shall possess the Land, Amos 6. 13. ye
rejoice in a thing of naught which say, have we not taken horns to us by our
oun strength. Habhak. 2. 5, 6 -- Woe to him that increases that which is not
his, how long etc. 9. We have many examples of invading Conquerours: as Abraham
for the rescue of Lot pursued the Conquering Kings unto Dan. Genesis 14. 14.
Jonathan smote a Garrison of the Conqueering Philistims 1 Samuel 13. 3. The Lord
ouning and authorizing them so to do. The people did often shake off the yoke
of their Conquerours in the history of the Judges: But this they might not do
to their Lawful Rulers. What is objected from the Lords people Conquering
Canaan etc. is no Argument for conquest: for He, to whom belongs the earth and
its fullness, disponed to Israel the Land of Canaan for their Inheritance, and
ordained that they should get the possession thereof by conquest: It follows
not, therefore that Kings now, wanting any word of promise or divine Grant to
any Lands, may ascend to the Thrones of other Kingdoms than their oun, by no
better title than the bloody sword. See Lex Rex Quest 12. The Third pretense,
of Hereditary Succession remains to be removed: which may be thus disproven.
1. This clashes with the former, though commonly asserted by Royalists. For
either Conquest gives a right, or it does not: If it does, then it looses all
allegiance to the heirs of the Crown dispossessed thereby: If it does not give
a right, then no Hereditary Succession founded upon conquest can have any
right, being founded upon that which has no right: And this will shake the
most part of Hereditary Successions that are now in the world. 2. If Hereditary
Succession have no right, but the peoples consent; then of it self it can give
none to a man that has not that consent: But the former is true. For, it is
demanded, how does the Son or Brother succeed? by what right? It must either be
by divine promise; Or by the Fathers will; Or it must come by propogation from
the first Ruler, by a right of the Primogeniture: But none of these can be. For
the first, we have no immediate Divine Constitution tying the Crown to such a
race, as in David's Covenant: It will be easily granted, they fetched not their
Charter from Heaven immediately, as David had it, a man of many peculiar
prerogatives, to whose line the promise was astricted of the Coming of Messiah,
and Jacobs Prophecy that the Scepter should not depart from Judah until His
coming Genesis 49. 10. was restricted to his family afterward: Wherefore he could
say, The Lord God of Israel chose me before all the house of my father to be
King over Israel for ever, for He has chosen Judah to be the Ruler, and of the
house of Judah the house of my father, and among the sons of my father He liked
me to make me* King over Israel, and of all my Sons He has chosen Solomon 1 Chronicles. 28. 4. 5. All Kings cannot say this; neither could Saul say it, though
immediately called of God as well as David: yet this same Promise to David was
Conditional, if His Children should keep the Lords ways 2 Chronicles. 6. 16. Next
it cannot be said this comes from the will of the father; for according to the
Scripture, no King can make a King, though a King may appoint and design his
son for succession, as David did Solomon, but the people make him. The father
is some way a Cause why his son succeeds, but he is not the Cause of the
Royalty conferred upon him by line: for the question will recur, who made him
a King? and his father? and grand father? till we come up to the first father.
Then, who made him a King? not himself: therefore it must be refounded upon the
peoples choice and constitution: And who appointed the lineal succession, and
tied the Crown to the line, but they? It is then at the best, the Patrimony of
the people, by the fundamental Law of the Kingdom, conferred upon the successor
by consent. And generally it is granted, even where the succession is lineal,
he that comes to inherit, Does it not jure hereditario but vi legis, he does
not succeed by heritage but by the force of Law; the Son then has not his
Kingdom from his father but by Law, which the people made and stand to, as long
as it may consist with the reasons of public advantage, upon which they
condiscended to establish such a family over them. Neither can it be said, It
is by a right of Primogeniture propogated from the first Ruler; for this must
either be Adam the first of the world; or Fergus v. G. the first of this
Kingdom. It could not come from Adam as a Monarch and father of all: For that
behoved to be, either by order of Nature, or his volun^ary assignment: It could
not be transferred by order of Nature; for besides the difficulty to find out
Adams successor, in the universal Monarchy, and the absurdity of fixing it on
Cain (who was a Cursed vagabond, afraied of every man, and could not be an
universal Monarch yet Adams first born) It will be asked, how this passed from
him unto others? whether it went by father-hood to all the Sons, fathers to
their Posterity? which would multiply as many Common wealths, as there have
been fathers since: Or if it went by Primogeniture only to the first born, that
he alone could claim the power which would infer the necessity of an universal
Monarchy, without multiplication of Commonwealths. If it was by his voluntary
assignment, to whom and in what proportion he pleased; then the universal
Monarchy died with himself, and so could not be conveyed at all: for, either he
behoved to give each son a share, to be conveyed dounwards to their children in
that proportion; or whole and solid to one: So also the former dilemma recurs,
for if the first be said, it will make as many little Kingdoms as there have
been sons of Adam; if the second, the world should be but still one Kingdom.
But however it be, this could never be the way that God appointed, either for
raising a Magistratical power where it is wanting, or deriving a right to any
in being; Considering the multiplication, division, confusion, and Extinction
of families that have been. If it be from Fergus the first of this line; then
either it comes from him as a King, or as a Father: not the first, for the
reason above hinted: nor as a father; for a father may defraud his son of the
heritage, a King cannot deprive his son of the Crown; a father may divide his
heritage, a King cannot divide the Kingdom among his sons; It must then be at
length refounded on the peoples Consent 3. If even where lineal succession is
Constituted by Law, for eviting the inconveniences of frequent elections,
people are not tied to admit every first born of that line; then that birth
righr, where there is no more, cannot make a King: But the former is true; for
they are tied only conditionally, so he be qualified, and have a head to sit at
the helm, and not a fool or monster, neither are they free to admit Murderers
or Idolaters by the Laws of God and of the Land: It is not birth then, but
their admission being so qualified, that makes Kings. Hence. 4. That which
takes away the peoples birthright, given them of God to provide for their
liberties in the fitest Government, that is not to be ouned: But to make birth
alone a tile to the Crown, takes away the peoples birthright given them of God
of providing for their liberties in the fitest Government, and fetters their
choice to one destructive to these. Certainly where God has not bound the
conscience, men may not bind themselves nor their posterity: But God has never
fettered men to a choice of a Government or Governing line, which contrary to
the intention of the Oath may prove destructive to the ends thereof. Nor can
the fathers leave in legacy by Oath, any chains to fetter the after wits of
posterity to a choice destructive to Religion and liberty. Israel was bound by
Covenant not to destroy the Gibeonites; but if they had risen to cut off Isael,
who can doubt but they were loosed from that obligation? for to preserve
Cutthroats was contrary to the intention of the Oath: so when either Monarchy,
or the succeeding Monarch, proves destructive to the ends of Government, the
Choice, Law, or Oath of our fathers, cannot bind us. 5. If we are tied to the
hereditary succession, not for the right the successor has by birth, but for
our Covenanted allegiance to them whose successor he is; then cannot his
birthright be the ground of our Allegiance, And consequently hereditary
succession cannot make a King: But the former is true; for in hereditary
Crowns, the first family being chosen by the suffrages of the people, for that
Cause the hereditary Prince comes to the Throne, becanse his first father, and
in him the whole line, was chosen: The hereditary successor has no privilege
or prerogative, but from him who was chosen King. Therefore the obligation to
the son, being no greater than the obligation to the father, which is the
ground of that, if the father then was ouned only because he was chosen and
qualified for Government, the Son cannot be ouned for any other Cause, but as
chosen in him, and also qualified and admitted with Consent. We cannot choose
the father as qualified, and tie our selves to the Successors, be what they
will. 6. If a King be not born heir of a Kingdom, then is he not King by birth;
But he is not born heir of a Kindom: for, a mean cannot be born to inherit the
end, the King is but a mean for the Kingdoms preservation. If the Kingdom be
his by birth as an inheritance, why may he not upon necessary occasions sell
his inheritance? but if he sell it, then all confess he is no more King. 7. If
that which makes a King cannot be transmitted from father to son; then
succession by birth cannot make a King: But the former is true. The Royal
faculty of Governing cannot be transmitted: Solomon asked it from God, he had
it not from his father: nor can he be born to the honor of a King, because not
born with either the gift or honor to be a Judge. God makes high and low, not
birth. Nor can the Call and Constitution of a King according to the will of God
be transferred from father to son, for that cannot be in Gods way without the
intervening Consent of the people, that cannot make him a born King. 8. If no
Dominion can come by Nature, as is proven before, then can no man be a born
King: Nature and birth cannot give them a Scepter in their hand; nor Kingly
Majesty they must have that alone from God and the people, and may only expect
honor from their oun good Government: Kings (as Plutarch says) must be like
dogs that are best hunters, not these who are born of best dogs. 9. The
peculiar Prerogative of Jesus Christ must not be ascribed to any other: But
this is His peculiar Prerogative, to be a born King of whom it might be truly
faid, Where is He that is born King of the Jews? And for this end was He born,
who came out of the womb with a Crown on His Head, which no Creature can bear.
10. In Scripture we find that a King was to be so and so qualified, not a
stranger, but a reader of Gods Word etc. Deuteronomy. 17. 15. etc. he was not
qualified by naked birth. Hence, if all the qualifications requisite in an heir
cannot make a King qualified according to the Institution of God, then his
being heir cannot make him King: But the first is true; an heir may be an heir
without these qualifications. 11. We find in the Scripture, the people were to
make the Kings by that Law Deuteronomy. 17. thou shall choose him whom the Lord
chooses: yea neither Saul nor David were Kings, till the people met to make
them: Therefore birth never made them Kings, even though the Kingdom was tied
to David's line. That was only a Typical designment by special Promise, because
Christ was to come of that line; it was therefore established in David's family
for Typical reasons, that cannot be now alleged. 12. We find in the disposal
of Government among brethren, this birth-order was not seldom inverted; as when
Iacoh was preferred before Esaw, Judah before all the elder sons of Jacob.
Ephraim before Manasseh, Solomon before Adonijah. Hence if this Gentleman now
regnant, have no better pretenses than these now confuted, we cannot recognosce
his right to reign: yea though this last were valid, yet he cannot plead it, it
being expressly provided in our Laws against the succession of a Papist. But
there is one Grand Objection against all this. The Jews and other Nations are
commanded to bring their necks under the yoke of the King of Babylon and to
serve him, and yet he had no other right to these Kingdom, then the Lords
Providential disposal, because the Lord had given all these Lands into his
hand, Ier. 27. 6, 7, 12. Ans. 1. He was indeed an unjust Usurper, and had no
right but the Lord providential gif^; which sometimes makes the tabernacles of
Robbers prosper into whose hand God brings abundantly Job. 12. 6. and gives
Iacoh sometimes for a spoil and Israel to the Robbers Isai. 42. 24. and gives
power to the Beast to continue forty and two Months, and to have power over
all kindreds and tongues and Nations Revel. 13. 5, 7. His Tyranny also was very
great extensively, in respect of his oppressions and usurpations by Conquest:
but it was not so great intensively, as our Robbers and Spoilers may be charged
with; he was never such a Perverter of all the ends of Government, nor a
treachrous overturner of all Conditions, he was never a Persecuter of the
Jewish Religion, he never oppressed them upon that account, nor endeavored its
extirpation, he never enacted such mischiefs by Law. The Lord only made use of
him to bring about the holy ends of the Glory of His Justice and Wisdom, in
which respect alone he is called His Servant, as else where His ^od and hammer,
having given him a charge against an Hypocritical Nation to trample them down
in His holy Providence, and accordingly there was no resistance could prevail,
they must be trampled upon, no help for it; but no subjection was required,
acknowledging his Magistratical right by divine Ordinance, but only a
submissive stooping to the holy disposal of divine Providence; no ouning was
exacted either of the equity of that power, or of fealty to the administrator.
2. This behoved to be a particular Command, by Positive Revelation given at
that time, not binding to others in the like Condition; which I refer to the
judgment of the objectors: put the case, and make it run parallel, If the King
of England were in league with the King of France, and breaking that league
should provoke that aspiring Prince, growing potent by many Conquests, to
discover his designs, make preparations, and give out threatenings for the
Conquest of England and all Britain; were the people of England bound to
surrender themselves as Servants and tributaries to him, for 70 years or for
ever, under pain of destruction, if they should not? This were one of the most
ridiculous inferences, that ever was pleaded: nay it would make all refusal of
subjection to invaders unlawful. 3. I will draw an Argument from this to
confirm my Plea: for these Commands of subjection to Babylon, were not
delivered until after the King of Judah had surrendered to Nebuchadnezzar, and
entered into Covenant with him to be subject to him 2. King. 24. chap. in
keeping which Covenant the Kingdom might have stood, and after he had Rebelled
against him and broken that Covenant, when lo he had given his hand; after
which he could not prosper, or escape, or be delivered, Ezekiel. 17. 14, 15, 18, 2 Chronicles. 36. 13. Then the Commandment came, that they should disoune their oune
King Zedekiah, now forefeiting his right by breach of Covenant, and be subject
to Nebuchadnezzar. Whence I argue, If people are commanded to disoune their
Covenant Breaking Rulers, and subject themselves to Conquerours; then I have
all I plead for: But the former is true, by the truth of this objection: Ergo
also the Latter. There is a 2 Obj. from Romans 13. 1. let every soul be subject
to the higher powers, the powers that be are ordained of God: yet the Roman
Emperor, to which they were to be subject, was an usurper. Ans. 1. It cannot
be proven that the Apostle intends here the Roman Emperor as the higher
power: There were at this time several Competitions for the Empire, about which
Christians might have their oun scruples whom to oune; the Apostle does not
determine their litigations, nor interest himself in parties, but gives the
General Standart of Gods Ordinance they had to go by. And the best Expositors
of the place do alle^ge, the question and doubt of Christians then, was not so
much in whom the Supremacy was? as whether Christians were at all bound to obey
Civil power, especially Pagan? which the Apostle resolves, in giving general
directions to Christians, to obey the ordinance of Magistracy, conform to its
original, and as it respects the end for which he had and would set it up, but
no respect is there had to Tyrants. 2. It cannot be proven that the Supreme
power then in being was usurpative: there being then a Supreme Senate, which
was a Lawful power; nor that Nero was then an usurper, who came in by choice
and consent, and with the good liking of the people. 3. The Text means of
Lawful powers, not unlawful force, that are ordained of God by His Preceptive
will not merely by His Providential disposal, and of conscientious subjection
to Magistracy, not to Tyranny, describing and characterizing the powers there,
by such qualifications as Tyrants and Usurpers are not capable of. But I mind
to improve this Text more fully hereafter, to prove the quite contrary to what
is here objected.

8. From the Right of Magistracy, flows the Magistratical Relation; which is
necessary to have a bottom, before we can build the relative duties thereof.
This brings it under the fifth Commandment, which is the Rule of all relative
duties between Inferiors and Superiors, requiring honor to be given to
Fathers, Masters, Husbands etc. and to rightful Magistrates, who are under such
political relations, as do infer the same duties; and prohibiting not only the
omission of these duties, but also the committing of contrary sins; which may
be done, not only by contrary acts, as dishonouring and rebelling against
Fathers, Magistrates etc. but also by performing them to contrary objects, as by
giving the Fathers due to the Fathers opposite, and the Magistrates due to
Tyrants who are their opposites. Certainly this Command prescribing honor,
does regulate to whom it should be given; And must be understood in a
consistency with that duty, and Character of one that has a mind to be an
inhabitant of the Lords holy Hill Psalm. 15. 4. in whose eyes a vile person is
contemned but he honors them that fear the Lord. So that we sin against the
fifth Command, when we honor them that we are obliged to contemn by another
Command. Hence I argue, If ouning or honoring of Tyrants be a breach of the
fifth Command; then we cannot oune their Authority: But the former is true:
Ergo the latter. I prove the Assumption. A honoring the vile to whom no honor
is due, and who stand under no relation of Fathers as Fathers, is a breach of
the fifth Command: But the ouning of Tyrants Authority is a honoring the vile
to whom no honor is due, and who stand under no relation of Fathers, and is
yet a honoring them as Fathers: Ergo the ouning of Tyrants Authority is a
breach of the fifth Command. The Major is clear: for if the honoring of these
to whom no honor is due, were not a breach of the fifth Command; that precept
conld neither be kept at all, nor broken at all. It could not be kept at all:
for, either it must oblige us to honor all indefinitely, as Fathers, and other
relations, which cannot be: or else it must leave us still in suspense and
ignorance, who shall be the object of our honor; and then it can never be
kept: or finally it must astrict our honoring to such definite relations, to
whom it is due; and then our transgression of that restriction, shall be a
breach of it. Next if it were not so, it could not be broken at all: for if
prostituting and abusing honor be not a sin, we cannot sin in the matter of
honor at all; for if the abuse of honor be not a sin, then dishonor also is
not a sin, for that is but an abuse of the duty, which is a sin as well as the
omission of it. And what should make the taking away of honor from the proper
object to be sin, and the giving it to a wrong object to be no sin? Moreover if
this Command do not restrict honor to the proper object; we shall never know
who is the object: how shall we know who is our Father, or what we owe to him,
if we may give another his due? The Minor also is manifest: for if Tyrants be
vile, then no honor is due to them, according to that Psalm. 15. 4. And yet it
is a honoring them as Fathers if they be ouned as Magistrates; for Magistrates
are in a politic sense Fathers: But certain it is that Tyrants are vile, as
the Epithets and Characters they get in Scripture prove. But because, in
contradiction to this, it may be said; though Fathers be never so wicked, yet
they are to be honored because they are still Fathers, And though Masters be
never so vile and froward, yet they are to be subjected unto 1 Pet. 2. 18-20.
and so of other relations, to whom honor is due by this Command, therefore
though Tyrants be never so vile they are to be ouned under these relations,
because they are the higher Powers in place of Eminency, to whom the Apostle
Paul commands to yield subjection Romans 13. and Peter to give submission and
honor 1 Pet. 2. 13, 17. Therefore it must be considered, that as the relative
duty of honoring the relations to whom it is due, must not interfere with the
moral duty of contemning the vile, who are not under these relations; So this
general Moral of contemning the vile, must not ca^sate the obligation of
relative duties, but must be understood with a Consistency therewith, without
any prejudice to the duty it self. We must contemn all the vile that are not
under a relation to be honored, and these also that are in that relation in so
far as they are vile. But now Tyrants do not come under these Relations at all
that are to be honored by this Command. As for the higher Powers that Paul
speaks of Romans 13. they are not those which are higher in fo^ce, but higher in
Power, not in potentia but in potestate, not in a Celsitude of prevalency but
in a precellency of dignity, not in the pomp and pride of their prosperity and
possession of the place, but by the virtue and value of their office, being
ordained of God not to be resisted, the Ministers of God for good, terrors to
evil doers, to whom honor is due, those are not Tyrants but Magistrates. Hence
it is a word of the same root which is rendered Authority, or an Authorized
Power 1 Timothy 2. 2. And from the same word also comes that supreme to whom Peter
commands subjection and honor 1 Pet. 2. 13. Now these he speaks of have the
Legal Constitution of the people, being the ordinance of man to be subjected to
for the Lords sake. and who sends other inferior Magistrates for the punishment
of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well, who are to be honored
as Kings or Lawful Magistrates: this cannot be said of Tyrants. But more
particularly, to evince that Tyrants and Usurpers are not to be honored
according to this Command, and that it is a breach of it so to do; let us go
through all these Relations of Superiority that come under the obligation of
this Command, and we shall find Tyrants and Usurpers excluded out of all.
First, they cannot come under the Parental relation: We are indeed to esteem
Kings as Fathers, though not properly but by way of some Analogy, because it is
their office to care for the people, and to be their Counselors, and to defend
them, as Fathers do for Children: but Roaring Lions and Ranging Bears, as
wicked Rulers are, Prove. 28. 15. cannot be Fathers. But Kings cannot properly
be ouned under this Relation, far less Tyrants (with whom the Analogy of
Fathers cannot consist) there being so many notable disparities betwixt Kings
and Fathers. 1. A Father may be a Father to one Child; but a King cannot be a
King or Politic Father to one only, but his Correlate must be a Community; a
Tyrant can be a Father to none at all in a Politic sense. 2. A Father is a
Father by Generation to all coming out of his loins; a King not so, he does not
beget them, nor does their relation flow from that; a Tyrant is a destroyer not
a Procreator of people. 3. A Father is the cause of the Natural being of his
Children; A King only of the Politic well being of his subjects; but Tyrants
are he cause of the ill being of both. 4. A Father once a Father, as long as
his Children live, retains still the relation, tho he turn mad and never so
wicked; A King turning mad may be served as Nebuchadnezzar was, at least all
will grant in some cases the subjects may shake off the King; and if in any
case, it is when he turns Tyrant. 5. A Fathers relation never ceases, whither
soever his Children go; but subjects may change their relation to a King, by
coming under another King in another Kingdom; a Tyrant will force all lovers of
freedom to leave the Kingdom where he Domineers. 6. A Fathers relation never
changes, he can neither change his children nor they change their Father; but a
King may naturalize new subjects, and subjects may also change their Sovereign,
Royalists will grant a State or Commonwealth way make a King, and there is
great reason sometimes that a Monarchy be turned into a Commonwealth; but a
Tyrant changes those that are under him, expells the natives, brings in
foreigners, and all good Patriots do pant for a Change of him every day. 7. A
Father has no power of life and death over his Children; a King has it over
his subjects according to Law; a Tyrant Usurps it over the innocent against
Law. 8. A Father is not a Father by consent of his Childeren; as a King is by
consent of his subjects; a Tyrant is neither a Father with it nor without it.
9. A Father is not made by the Children; as a King is by his subjects as was
showed; a Tyrant is neither a Natural, nor by compact, but a self created
power. 10. A Father is not chosen conditionally upon compact, as a King is by
the free suffrages of the Community; A Tyrant in this Differs from a King that
he is not chosen, and in Tyranny from a Father. 11. Children wanting a Father
cannot choose whom they will to be their Father; as subjects wanting a King may
choose whom they will, and what form they please; but though they can, yet if
they be rational, they will never choose a Tyrant, nor a Tyrannical form of
Government. 12. Children cannot restrict their Fathers power to what degrees
they please; as subjects may limit their Kings, at their first erection; but a
Tyrant though he ought yet he will not be limited, and if he might he should be
restrained. 13. Children cannot set bounds how long they will have their
Fathers to continue; Subjects may condescend upon the time, in making Laws how
long such an one shall be their Sovereign, ad vitam or ad culpam, according as
the fundamental Law is made at first; Tyrants ought every day to be repressed,
that they should not continue at all. Yet giving and not granting, that a King
were to be ouned under the relation of a Father; though every man be bound to
oune and mantain his Fathers parental Authority, yet let the case be put, that
the Father turns a Robber, murderer, an avowed enemy to God and the country, is
his person and Authority in that case to be ouned, to the dishonor of God, and
hurt and hazard of the country? or ought he not rather to be delivered up even
by the Son to Justice? Much more then will it follow, that a King who turns the
more dangerous because the more powerful Robber, and Legal Murderer, and enemy
to God and the country, cannot be ouned; seeing the relation betwixt Father and
Son is stronger and stricter, as having another Original, than can be betwixt
King and subjects, and stands unremoved as long as he is Father, though turning
such they ought to contribute (in moral duty, to which their relative duty must
cede) that he should no more be a Father, nor no more a living man, when dead
by Law. Secondly, They cannot come under the herile or Masterly relation,
though Analogically also sometimes they are styled so, and subjects are called
Servants, by reason of their subjection, and because it is the Office of Kings
to command and subjects to obey, in this there is some Analogy. But Kings
cannot properly be ouned under this relation, as Masters over either persons or
goods of subjects, far less Tyrans, yea Kings assuming a Masterly power turn
Tyrants. Now that the Magistratical relation is not that of a Master, is clear
from many disparities and absurdities, whether we consider the state of hired
Servants or Slaves. For hired Servants, the difference is vast betwixt them and
subjects. 1. The hired Servant gets reward for his service, by compact; the
subjects none, but rather gives the Royal reward of Tribute to the King for his
service; the Tyrant exacts it to maintain his Tyranny. 2. The hired Servant is
maintained by his Master; the subjects maintain the King; the Tyrant Robbes it
from them by force. 3. The hired Servant bargains only for a time, and then may
leave him; the subject cannot give up his Covenanted allegiance, at that rate
and for these reasons as the servant may his service; a Tyrant will make nor
keep no such bargain. 4. The hired Servant must have his Masters profit mainly
before his eyes, and his oun only secundarly; but the Magistrates power is
primarly ordinated to the public good of the Community* and only
consequentially to the good of himself. 5. The Master has a greater power over
the hired Servant, to make and give out Laws to him, which if they be Lawful
he must obey; than the King has over the Nation, to which he is not the sole
Lawgiver, as is showed. 6. The hired Servant his subjection is Mercenary and
servile; but the subjects subjection is civil, free, voluntary, liberal, and
^oving to a Lawful King. Again for Slaves, the difference between them and
subjects is great. 1. Slavery being against Nature, rational people would never
choose that life if they could help it; but they gladly choose Government, and
Governors. 2. Slavery would make their condition worse then when they had no
Government, for Liberty is alwise preferable; Neither could people have acted
rationally in seting up Government, if to be free of oppression of others they
had given themselves up to slavery, under a Master who may do what he pleases
with them. 3. All Slaves are either taken in war, or bought with money, or born
in the house where their parents were slaves, as Abraham and Solomon had of
that sort; But subjects are neither captives, nor bought, nor born slaves. 4.
Slavery is not Natural, but a penal fruit of sin, and would never have been if
sin had not been; But Government is not so, but Natural and necessary. 5.
Slaves are not their Masters brethren; subjects are the Kings brethren; over
whom he must not lift up himself Deuteronomy. 17. 20. 6. Masters might purchase and
sell their slaves, Abimelech took sheep and men servants and gave them unto
Abraham Genesis 20. 14. Jacob had maid servants and men servants and Asses Genesis
30. 43. no otherwise than other goods, Solomon got to himself servants and
maidens, and servants born in his house Eccles. 2. 7. a King cannot do so with
his subjects. 7. Princes have not this power to make the people slaves, neither
from God, nor from the people: From God they have none, but to feed and to lead
them 2 Samuel 5. 2. to rule them so as to feed them 1 Chronicles. 11. 2. Psalm. 78. 71,
72. From the people they have no power to make slaves, they can give none such.
8. Slavery is a Curse: It was Canaans Curse to be a servant of servants Genesis 9.
25. but to have Magistrates is a promised blessing Ier. 17. 27. 9. To be free of
Slavery is a blessing, as the redemption from Egypts bondage is every where
called, and the year of redemption was a Iubile of joy, so the freedom of
release every seven years a great privilege Ier 34. 9. but to be free of
Government is a judgment Isai. 3. 4, 5. its threatened, Israel shall abide
without a King and without a Prince Hos. 3. 4. In the Next place they cannot be
ouned as Masters or Proprietors over the goods of the subjects; the in the case
of necessity, the King may make use of all goods in common, for the good of the
Kingdom: For 1. The introduction of Kings cannot overturn natures foundation;
by the Law of Nature property was given to man, Kings cannot rescind that. 2. A
man had goods ere ever there was a King; a King was made only to preserve
property, therefore he cannot take it away. 3. It cannot be supposed that
rational people would choose a King at all, if he had power to turn a greater
Robber to preserve them from lesser Robberies and oppressions: would rational
men give up themselves for a prey to one, that they might be safe from becoming
a prey to others? 4. Then their case should be worse by erecting of Government,
if the Prince were proprietor of their goods, for they had the property
themselves before. 5. Then Government should not be a blessing but a curse, and
the Magistrate could not be a Minister for good. 6. Kingdoms then should be
among bona fortunae, the goods of fortune, which the King might sell and
dispone as he pleased. 7. His place then should not be a function, but a
possession. 8. People could not then, by their removes or otherwise, change
their Sovereigns. 9. Then no man might dispose of his oun goods without the
Kings consent, by buying or selling, or giving alms, nay nor pay tribute, for
they cannot do these things except they have of their oun. 10. This is the very
Character of a Tyrant, as described 1 Samuel 8. 11. he will take your sons etc.
Zeph. 3. 3. her Princes are roaring Lions, her Judges are evening Wolves. 11.
All the threatenings and rebukes of oppression condemn this, Isai. 3. 14. 15.
Ezekiel. 45. 9. Mic. 3. 2, 3. Ahab condemned, for taking Naboths vineyard. 12.
Pharaoh had not all the Land of Egypt, till he bought it Genesis 42. 20. So the
Land became Pharaohs not otherwise. Yet giving and not granting that he were
really a Master in all these respects; Notwithstanding if he turn to pursue me
for my life, because of my fidelity to my Master and his both, and will
withdraw me from the service of the Supreme Universal Master, I may Lawfully
withdraw my self from his, and disoune him for one, when I cannot serve two
Masters. Sure he cannot be Master of the conscience. Thirdly, They cannot come
under the conjugal relation, though there may be some proportion between that
and subjection to a Lawful Ruler, because of the Mutual Covenant transacted
betwixt them; but the Tyrant and Usurper cannot pretend to this, who refuse all
Covenants. Yet hence it cannot be inferred, that because the wife may not put
away her husband. Or renounce him, as he may do her in the case of Adultery,
therefore the people cannot disoune the King in the case of the violation of
the Royal Covenant. For the Kings power is not at all properly a husbands
power. 1. The wife by nature is the weaker vessel; but the Kingdom is not
weaker than the King. 2. The wife is given as an help to the man; but here the
man is given as an help to the Commonwealth. 3. The wife cannot limit the
husbands power; as subjects may limit their Sovereigns. 4. The wife cannot
prescribe the time of her continuing under him; as subjects may do with their
Sovereigns. 5. The wife cannot change her husband; as a Kingdom can do their
Government 6. The husband has not power of life and death; but the Sovereign
has it over Malefactors. Yet giving and not granting, his power were properly
Marital; if the case be put, that the man do habitually break the Marriage
Covenant, or take another wife, and turn also Cruel and intolerable in
compelling his oun wife to wickedness; and put the case also, that she should
not get a Legal divorce procured, who can doubt but she might disoune him, and
leave him? for this case is excepted out of that Command 1 Cor. 7. 10. let not
the wife depart from her husband, meaning for mere difference in Religion, or
other lesser causes; but Adultery does annual the Marriage relation, See Pool
Synopsis Critic. in Locum. So when a Prince breaks the Royal Covenant and turns
Tyrant, or without any Covenant committs a rape upon the Commonwealth, that
pretended relation may and must be disouned. Hence we see, there is no relation
can bring a King or Ruler under the object of the duty of the fifth Command,
except it be that of a fiduciary Patron or Trustee and Public Servant: for we
cannot oune him properly either to be a Father, or a Master, or a husband.
Therefore what can remain, but that he must be a fiduciary Servant? Wherefore
if he shall either treacherously break his trust, or presumptously refuse to be
entrusted, upon terms and conditions to secure and be accountable for (before
God and man) Religion and Liberty, we cannot oune his usurped Authority. That
Metaphore which the learned Buchanan uses, de Iure Regni, of a Public and
Politic Phisician, is not a relation different from this of a fiduciary
Servant; when he elegantly represents him as entrusted with the preservation
and restoration of the health of the politic body, and endued with shill and
experience of the Laws of his Craft. If then he be orderly called unto this
charge, and qualified for it, and discharges his duty faithfully, he deserves,
and we are obliged to give him the deference of an honored Physician: But if
he abuse his Calling and not observe the rules thereof, and in stead of curing
go about wilfully to kill the body he is entrusted with, he is no more to be
ouned for a Physician but for a Murderer.

9. If we inquire further into the nature of this Relation between a King
(whose Authority is to be ouned) and his subjects; we can oune it only as it is
Reciprocal in respect of Superiority and Inferiority, that is, whereby in some
respects the King is Superior to the people, and in some respects the people is
Superior to him. The King is Superior and Supreme as he is called 1 Pet. 2. 13.
in respect of formal Sovereignty, and executive Authority, and Majestic Royal
dignity, resulting from the peoples devolving upon him that Power, and
constituting him in that relation over themselves, whereby he is higher in
place and power than they, and in respect of his Charge and conduct is worth
ten thousands of the people 2 Samuel 18. 3. and there is no formally regal
Tribunal higher than his; And though he be Minor universis yet he is Major
singulis, greater than any one, or all the people distributively taken; And
though he be a Royal Vassal of the Kingdom, and Princely Servant of the people;
yet he is not their deputy, because he is really their Sovereign, to whom they
have made over their Power of governing and protecting themselves irrevocably,
except in the case of Tyranny; and in acts of Justice, he is not countable to
any, and does not depend on the people as a deputy. But on the other hand, the
people is superior to the King, in respect of their fountain power of
Sovereignty, that remains radically and virtually in them, in that they make
him their Royal Servant, and him rather than another and limit him to the Laws
for their oun good and advantage, and though they give to him a Politic Power
for their oun safety; yet they keep a Natural Power which they cannot give
away, but must resume it in case of Tyranny; And though they cannot retract the
power of Justice to govern righteously, yet it is not so irrevocably given away
to him, but that when he abuses his power to the destruction of his subjects,
they may wrest a sword out of a mad man's hand, though it be his oun sword and
he has a just power to use it for good, but all fiduciary power abused may be
repealed. They have not indeed Soveraignity or power of life and death
formally; yet in respect they may constitute a Magistrate with Laws, which if
they violate they must be in hazard of their lives, they have this power
eminently and virtually. Hence in respect that the Kings Power is and can be
only fiducial, by way of trust reposed upon him, he is not so superior to the
people, but he may and ought to be accountable to them in case of Tyranny;
which is evident from what is said, and now I intend to make it further appear.
But first I form the Argument thus; We can oune no King that is not accountable
to the people: Ergo we cannot oune this King. To clear the Connection of the
antecedent and consequent, I add; Either he is accountable to the people, or
he is not: If he be accountible to all then he is renouncible by a part, when
the Collective body either will not, or cannot exact an account from him, when
the Community is defective as to their part, it is the interest of a part, that
would but cannot do their duty, to give no account to such as they can get no
account from for his Maleversations, This is all we crave: If he be not
accountable, then we cannot oune him, because all Kings are accountable: for
these reasons. 1. The Inferior is accountable to the Superior: the King is
inferior, the people superior: Ergo the King is accountable to the people. The
proposition is plain; if the Kings superiority make the people accountable to
him, in case of transgressing the Laws; then, why should not the peoples
superiority make the King accountable to them, in case of transgressing the
Laws? especially seeing the King is inferior to the Laws: because the Law
restrains him, and from the Law he has that whereby he is King; the Law is
inferior to the people, because they are as it were its parent, and way make or
unmake it upon occasion: and seeing the Law is more powerful than the King, and
the people more powerful than the Law, we may see before which we may call the
King to answer in Judgment, Buchan Iure Regni apud Scot. That the King is
inferior to the people is clear on many accounts: for these things which are
institute for others sake, are inferior to those for whose sake they are
required or sought; a horse is inferior to them that use him for victory; A
King is only a mean for the peoples good; A Captain is less then the Army, a
King is but a Captain over the Lords Inheritance 1 Samuel 10. 1. He is but the
Minister of God for their good Romans 13. 4. Those who are before the King, and
may be a people without him, must be superior to him who is a posteriour and
cannot be a King without them: let the King be considered either Materially as
a Mortal man, he is then but a part inferior to the whole; or formally under
the reduplication as a King, he is no more but a Royal Servant, obliged to
spend his life for the people, to save them out of the hand of their enemies 2 Samuel 19* 9. A part is inferior to the whole, the King is but a part of the
Kingdom: A Gift is inferior to them to whom it is given, a King is but a gift
given of God for the peoples good: That which is Mortal and but accidental, is
inferior to that which is eternal and cannot perish Politically; a King is but
mortal, and it is but accidental to Government that there be a succession of
Kings; but the people is eternal, one generation passes away and another
generation comes Eccles. 1. 4. especially the people of God, the portion of
the Lords inheritance, is superior to any King, and their ruin of greater
moment than all the Kings of the world; for if the Lord for their sake smite
great Kings, and slay famous Kings, as Sihon and Og Psalm. 137. 17-20. if he
give kings and famous kingdoms for their ransom Isai. 43. 3, 4. then His
people must be so much superior than kings, by how much His Justice is active
to destroy the one, and His Mercy to save the other. All this proves the people
to be superior in dignity, And therefore even in that respect its frivolous to
say, the king cannot be accountable to them, because so much superior in Glory
and Pomp; for they are superior every way in excellency; And though it were not
so, yet Judges may be inferior in rank considered as men, but they are superior
in Law over the greatest as they are Judges, to whom far greater than they are
accountable. The low and mean condition of them to whom belongs the power of
Judgment does not diminish its dignity: when the king then is Judged by the
people, the Judgment is of as great dignity as if it were done by a superior
king; for the Judgment is the sentence of the Law, 2. They are superior in
power: because every constituent cause is superior to the effect, the people is
the constituent cause, the king is the effect, and has all his Royalty from
them, by the Conveyance God has appointed; so that they need not fe^ch it from
Heaven, God gives it by the people, by whom also his power is limited and, it
need be, diminished from what they gave his Ancestors: Hence, if the people
constitute and limit the power they give the King, then they may call him to an
account, and judge him for the abuse of it: But the first is true as is proven
above: Ergo -- The Major is undeniable, for sure, they may judge their oun
Creature, and call him to an account for the power they gave him, when he
abuses it, though there be no Tribunal formally Regal above him, yet in the
case of Tyranny and violating his Trust there is a Tribunal virtual eminently
above him, in them that made him and reposed that Trust upon him, as is said.
3. The fountain power is superior to the power derived: The people, though they
constitute a King above them, yet retain the fountain power, he only has the
derived power: Certainly the people must retain more power eminently, than they
could give to the King, for they gave it, and he receives it, with limitations,
if he turn mad or incapable they may put Curators and Tutors over him; if he be
taken captive, they may appoint another to exercise the power, if he die then
they may constitute another, with more or less power; So then if they give a
way all their power, as a slave sells his Liberty, and retain no fountain
power or radical right, they could not make use of it to produce any of these
acts: They set a King above them only with an executive power for their good,
but the radical power remains in the people, as in an immortal spring, which
they communicate by succession to this or that Mortal man, in the manner and
measure they think expedient; for otherwise if they gave all their power away,
what shall they reserve to make a new King, if this man die? What if the Royal
line surcease, there be no Prophets now sent to make Kings: And if they have
power in these cases, why not in the case of Tyranny? 4. If the King be
accountable by Law, for any act of Tyranny done against one man, then much more
is he accountable for many against the whole state: But the former is true; a
private man may go to Law before the ordinary Judges for wronging his
inheritance, and the King is made accountable for the wrong done by him. Now
shall the Laws be like Spiders webs, which hold flies, but let bigger beasts
pass through? Shall Sentence be past for petty wrongs against a man, and none
for Tyrannizing over Religion, Laws, and Liberties of the Kingdom? Shall none
be past against parricide or fratricide, for killing his Brother, Murdering the
Nobles, and burning Cities? Shall petty Thieves be hanged for stealing a
Sheep, and does the Laws of God or man give impunity, for robbing a whole
Country of the nearest and dearest Interests they have to Crowned heads for the
fancied Character of Royalty, which thereby is forfeited? 5. If there be Judges
appointed of God independently, to give out and execute the Judgment of the
Lord on all offenders, without exception of the highest; then the King also
must be subject to that Judgment: But there are Judges appointed of God
independently, to give out and execute the Judgment of the Lord on all
offenders, without exception of the highest. Two things must be here proved;
first, that in giving Judgment they do not depend on the King, but are the
immediate vicars of God: Secondly that the King is not excepted from, but
subject to, their Judgment, in case he be Criminal. First they cannot depend
upon the King, because they are more necessary then the King; and it is not
left to the Kings pleasure whether there be Judges or not. There may be Judges
without a King, but there can be no King without Judges, nor no Justice but
Confusion; no man can bear the peoples burden alone Numb. 11. 14, 17, If they
depended on the King, their Power would die with the King; the streams must dry
up with the fountain: but that cannot be, for they are not Ministri regis but
regni, they are not Ministers of the King but of the Kingdom, whose honor and
promotion, though by the Kings external call, yet comes from God, as all honor
and promotion does Psalm. 75. 7, The King cannot make Judges whom he will by his
absolute Power, he must be tied to that Law Deuteronomy. 1. 13. To take wise men and
understanding and known: Neither can he make them dura ite beneplacito: for if
these qualifications remain, there is no allowance given for their removal.
They are Gods and the Children of the Mos^ High, appointed to defend the poor
and fatherless, as well as he, Psalm. 82. 3, 6. They are ordained of God for the
punishment of evil doers, in which they must not be resisted, as well as he
Romans 13. 1, 2. by me (says the Lord) rule... all the Judges of the earth Prove.
8. 16. To them we must be subject for Conscience sake, as being the Ministers
of God for good; they must be obeyed for the Lords sake, as well as the King;
though they are sent of him, yet they Judge not for man but for the Lord 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. hence they sit in his room, and are to act as if he were on the
bench: the King cannot say, the Judgment is mine, because it is the Lords:
neither can he limit their sentance (as he might, if they were nothing but his
deputies) because the Judgment is not his: nor are their Consciences
subordinate to him, but to the Lord immediately; otherwise if they were his
deputies, depending on him; then they could neither be admonished, nor
condemned for unjust Judgment, because their sentence should neither be
righteous nor unrighteous, but as the King makes it; And all directions to them
were capable of this exception, do not so or so except the King command you,
crush not the poor, oppress not the fatherless, except the King command you:
yea then they could not execute any Judgment, but with the Kings License, and
so could not be rebuked for their not executing Judgment. Now all this is
contrary to Scripture, which makes the sentence of the Judges undeclinable when
just Deuteronomy. 17. 11. the Lords indignation is kindled, when He looks for Judgment
and behold oppression, for righteousness and behold a Cry Isai. 5. 7. neither
will it excuse the Judges to say, the king would have it so; for even they that
are subservient, to write grievousness, to turn aside the needy from Judgment
etc. are under the woe, as well as they that prescribe it Isai. 10. 1, 2. The
Lord is displeased when Judgment is turned away back ward, and Justice stands a
far of -- and when there is no Judgment, what ever be the Cause of it Isai. 59.
14, 15. The Lord threatens He will be avenged on the Nation, when a man is not
found to execute Judgment Ier. 5. 1, 9. And promises if they will execute
Judgment and righteousness, and deliver the spoiled out of the hand of the
oppressor, He will give them righteous Magistrates Ier. 22. 3, 4. but if they do
not, He will send desolation ibid. He rebukes those that turn Judgment to
wormwood and leave of righteousness in the earth Amos. 5. 7. He resents it when
the Law is slacked and Judgment does not go forth freely without overawing or
overruling restraint Habb. 1. 4. Can these Scriptures consist with the Judges
dependence on the kings pleasure, in the exercise and execution of their Power?
Therefore if they would avoid the Lords displeasure, they are to give Judgment,
though the King should countermand it. Secondly, that the King is not excepted
from their Judgment, is also evident from the General Commands Genesis 9. 6. whosoever
sheddeth man's blood ^y man shall his blood be shed: there is no exception of
Kings or Dukes here, and we must not distinguish where the Law distinguishes
not. Numb. 35. 30, 31. whosoever kills any person the murderer shall be put to
death, by the mouth of witnesses -- ye shall take no satisfaction for the life
of a Murderer which is guilty of death, but he shall be surely put to death.
What should hinder then Justice to be awarded upon a Murdering King? Shall it
be for want of witnesses? It will be easy to adduce thousands: Or shall this be
satisfaction for his life, that he is a Crowned King? the Law says there shall
no satisfaction be taken. The Lord speaks to under Judges Levit. 19. 15. Ye
shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, thou shall not respect the person of
the poor, nor honor the person of the Mighty. If Kings be not among the
Mighty, how shall they be classed? Deuteronomy. 1. 17. Ye shall not respect persons in
judgment, but you shall hear the small as well as the great, you shall not be
afraid of the face of man, for the judgment is Gods: if then no man's face can
outdare the Law and Judgment of God, then the Kings Majestic face must not do
it, but as to the demerit of blood he must be subject as well as another. Its
no Argument to say, the Sanhedrin did not punish David for his Murder and
Adultery. Ergo now it is not Lawful to punish a King for the same: a reason a
non facto is not relevant. David did not punish Ioab for his Murder, but
Authorized it, as also he did Bathsheba's Adultery; will that prove that
Murders connived at, or commanded by the King, shall not be punished? or that
Whores of State are not to be called to an account? Neither will it prove that
a Murdering king should not be punished, that David was not punished: because
he got both the sin pardoned, and his life granted from the Lord, saying to
him, by the mouth of the Prophet Nathan, Thou shall not die: But as for the
demerit of that fact, he himself pronounced the sentence out of his oun mouth 2 Samuel 12. 15. As the Lord lives, the man that has done this thing shall surely
die. So every king condemned by the Law, is condemned by his oun mouth; for the
Law is the voice of the king: why then do we so much weary our selves
concerning a Judge? seeing we have the kings oun Confession, that is the Law.
Buchanan. de jure regni. And there needs be no other difficulty, to find a
Tribunal for a Murdering king, than to find one for a Murderer; for a Judgment
must acknowledge but one name, to wit of the Crime; if a king then be guilty of
Murder, he has no more the name of a king but of a Murderer, when brought to
Judgment; for he is not Judged for his kingship, but for his Murder; as when a
Gentleman is Judged for Robbery, he is not hanged, neither is he spared,
because he is a Gentleman, but because he is a Robber. See Buchanan. ubi supra.
6. If the Peoples Representatives be superior to the king in Judgment, and may
execute Judgment without him, and against his will, then they may also seek
account of him, for if he has no Power but from them, and no Power without
them to act as king (no more than the eye or hand has Power to act without the
body) then his Power must be inferior, fiduciary, and accountable to them: But
the former is true, The Peoples Representatives are superior to the king in
Judgment, and may execute Judgment without him, and against his will. In
Scripture we find the Power of the Elders and heads of the People was very
great, and in many cases superior to the king: which the Learned Dr Owen
demonstrates in his Preliminary Exercitations on the Epist. to the Heb. and
proves out of the Rabbis, that the kings of the Jews might have been called
to an account, and punished for transgressing of the Law. But in the Scripture
we find. (1) They had a Power of Judgment with the Supreme Magistrate, in
matters of Religion, Justice and Government. Hamor and Shechem would not make a
Covenant with Jacobs Sons, without the consent of the men of the City Genesis 34.
20. David behoved to consult with the Captains of thousands, and every Leader,
if it seemed good to them to bring again the Ark of God. 1. Chron. 13. 1, 2, 3.
So also Solomon could not do it without them 1 King. 8. 1. Ahab could not make
peace with Benhadad against the consent of the People 1 King. 20. 8. The men of
Ephraim complain that Iephthah* the Supreme Magistrate, had gone to War against
the Children of Ammon without them, and threatened to burn his house with fire,
which he only excuses by the Law of necessity Judge. 12. 1, 2, 3. The Seventy
Elders are appointed by God, not to be the Advisers only and helpers of Moses,
but to bear a part of the burden of ruling and governing the People, that Moses
might be eased Numb. 11. 14, 17. Moses upon his sole pleasure had not power to
restrain them, in the exercise of Judgment given of God. They were not the
Magistrates depending deputies, but in the act of Judging they were independent,
and their Consciences as immediately subjected to God as the Superior
Magistrate, who was to add his approbative suffrage to their actings, but not
his directive nor imperative suffrage of absolute pleasure, but only according
to the Law; he might command them to do their duty, but he could do nothing
without them. (2) They had Power, not derived from the Prince at all, even a
Power of life and death. The rebellious Son was to be brought to the Elders of
the City, who had Power to stone him Deuteronomy. 21. 18, 24. They had Power to
punish Adultery with death Deuteronomy. 22. 21. They had Power to cognosce, whom to
admit into and whom to seclude from the Cities of refuge: So that if the King
had commanded to take the life of an innocent man, they were not to deliver him
Josh. 20. per tot. But besides the Elders of Cities, there were the Elders and
heads of the People, who had judicial Power to cognosce on all Criminal
Matters, even when Joshua was Judge in Israel we find they assumed this Power,
to judge of that matter of the two tribes and the half Josh. 22. 30. And they
had Power to make Kings, as Saul and David, as was showed: and it must needs
follow, they had Power to unmake them in case of Tyranny. (3) They had Power to
conveen, even without the indiction of the Ruler, as in that Josh. 22. they
convene without him: and without advice or knowledge of Samuel, the Ruler, they
conveen to ask a King 1 Samuel 8. And without any head or superior, they convene
and make David King, notwithstanding of Isbosheths hereditary right. Without
and against Tyrannous Athaliah her consent, they convene and make Ioash King,
and cared not for her Treason, Treason 2 King. 11. But now the king alone
challenges the Prerogative-power of calling and dessolving Parliaments as he
pleases, and condemns all meetings of Estates without his warrant, which is
purely Tyrannical: for in cases of necessity, by the very Law of nature, they
may and must convene. The Power is given to the king only by a positive Law,
for orders sake; but otherwise, they have an intrinsical Power to assemble
themselves. All the forecited Commands, Admonitions, and Certifications, to
execute Judgment, must necessarly involve and imply and Power to convene,
without which they could not be in a Capacity for it: Not only unjust
Judgment, but no I^dgement, in a time when Truth is fallen in the streets and
equity cannot enter, is charged as the sin of the State; therefore they must
convene to prevent this sin, and the wrath of God for it: God has committed
the keeping of the Commonwealth, not to the king only, but also to the peoples
Representatives and heads. And if the king have Power to break up all
Conventions of this nature, then he has Power to hinder Judgment to proceed,
which the Lord Commands: And this would be an excuse, when God threatens
vengeance for it, we could not execute Judgment, because ehe King forbad us.
Yet many of these forementioned reproofs, threatenings, and certifications were
given, in the time of Tyrannous and Idolatrous kings, who no doubt would
inhibite and discharge the doing of their duty; yet we see, that was no excuse,
but the Lord denounces wrath for the omission. (4) They had Power to execute
Judgment, against the will of the Prince. Samuel killed Agag against Saul's
will, but according to the Command of God 1 Samuel 15. 32. Against Ahabs will and
mind Elijah caused kill the Priests of Baal, according to Gods express Law 1
King. 18. 40. It is true it was extraordinary, but no otherwise than it is this
day, when there is no Magistrate that will execute the Judgment of the Lord;
then they who have Power to make the Magistrate may and ought to execute it,
when wicked men make the Law of God of none effect. So the Princes of Judah had
power, against the kings will, to put Jeremiah to death, which the king
supposes, when he directs him what to say to them Ier. 38. 25. They had really
such a Power, though in Ieremiahs case it would have been wickedly perverted,
See Lex Rex Q. 19. 20. (5) They had a power to execute Judgment upon the king
himself: as in the case of Amaziah and Uzziah, as shall be cleared afterward.
I conclude with repeating the Argument: If the king be accountable, whenever
this Account shall be taken, we are confident our disouning him for the present
will be justified, and all will be obliged to imitate it: If he be not, then we
cannot oune his Authority, that so presumptously exalts himself above the
People.

10. If we will further consider the nature of Magistracy; it will appear what
Authority can conscienciously be ouned, to wit, that which is (...) Potestas,
not (...) Potentia; Authorized Power, not Might or force; Moral Power, not
merely Natural. There is a great difference betwixt these two: Natural Power is
common to brutes, Moral Power is peculiar to men; Narural Power is more in the
Subjects, because they have more strength and force; Moral Power is in the
Magistrate, they can never meet adequately in the same subject; Natural power
can, Moral only may warrantably exercise rule; Natural power is opposed to
impotency and weakness, Moral to illicitness or unlawfulness; Natural power
consists in strength, Moral in righteousness; Natural power may be in a Reut of
Rogues making an uproar, Moral only in the Rulers; they cannot be distinguished
by their acts, but by the Principle from which the acts proceed; in the one
from mere force, in the other from Authority. The Principle of Natural power is
its oun might and will, and the end only self; Moral has its rise from
positive Constitution, and its end public safety. The strength of Natural
power lies in the Sword, whereby its might gives Law; the strength of Moral
power is in its Word, whereby reason gives Law, unto which the Sword is added
for punishment of Contraveners: Natural power takes the Sword Math. 26. 52.
Moral bears the Sword Romans 13. 4. In Natural power the Sword is the Cause; in
Moral it is only the Consequent of Authority: In Natural power the Sword
legitimates the Scepter; in Moral the Scepter legitimates the Sword: The Sword
of the Natural is only backed with Metal, the Sword of the Moral power is
backed with Gods warrant: Natural power involves men in passive subjection, as
a traveller is made to yield to a Robber; Moral power reduces to Conscientious
subordination. Hence the power that is only Natural not Moral, Potentia not
Potestas, cannot be ouned: But the power of Tyrants and Usurpers is only
Natural not Moral, Potentia not Potestas: Ergo it cannot be ouned. The Major
cannot be denied; for it is only the Moral Power that is ordained of God, unto
which we must be subject for Conscience sake. The Minor also; for the Power of
Tyrants is not Moral, because not Authorized nor warranted nor ordained of God
by His preceptive Ordinance, and therefore no Lawful Magistratical Power. For
the clearer understanding of this let it be observed, there are four things
required to the making of a Moral or Lawful Power; the matter of it must be
Lawful, the Person Lawful, the Title Lawful, and the Use Lawful. 1. The matter
of it, about which it is exerted, or the work to be done by it, must be Lawful
and warranted by God; and if it be unlawful, it destroys its Moral being. As
the Popes power in dispensing with Divine Laws, is null and no Moral Power: And
so also the Kings power, in dispensing with both Divine and humane Laws is
null. Hence, that power which is in regard of matter unlawful, and never
warranted by God, cannot be ouned: But absolute power, which is the power of
Tyrants and Usurpers (and particularly of this of ours) is in regard of matter
unlawful and never warranted by God: Ergo -- 2. The Person holding the power
must be such as not only is capable of but competent to the tenure of it, and
to whom the holding of it is allowed; and if it be prohibited, it evacuates the
Morality of the power. Korah and his Company arrogated to themselves the Office
of the Priesthood, this power was prohibited to them, their power then was a
nullity. As therefore a person that should not be a Minister, when he usurps
that office is no Minister: So a person that should not be a Magistrate, when
he usurps that Office, is no Magistrate. Hence, a person that is incapable and
incompetent for Government, cannot be ouned for a Governor: But the D. of Y.
is such a person, not only not qualified as the Word of God requires a
Magistrate to be, but by the Laws of the Land declared incapable of Rule
because he is a Papist, a Murderer, an Adulterer etc. 3. There must be in Moral
Power, a Lawful Title and Investure, as is showed above; which if it be
wanting, the Power is null, and the person but a Scenical King, like John. of
Leyden. This is essentially necessary to the being of a Magistrate; which only
properly distinguishes him from a private man: for when a person becomes a
Magistrate, what is the change that is wrought in him? what new habit or
endewment is produced in him? he has no more natural power than he had before,
only now he has the Moral Power, right, and Authority to Rule, Legally
impowering him to Govern. Let it be Considered, what makes a subordinate
Magistrate, whom we may oune as such: It must be only his Commission from a
Superior Power, otherwise we reject him: If one come to us of his oun head,
taking upon him the style and office of a Bailif, Sheriff, or Judge, and
command our Persons, demand our purses, or exact our Oaths; we think we may
deny him, not taking our selves to owe him any subjection, not ouning any bond
of conscience to him; why? because he has no lawful Commission. Now if we
require this qualification in the subordinate, why not in the Supreme? Hence,
that Magistrate that cannot produce his Legal Investure, cannot be ouned: But
the D. of Y. cannot produce his Legal Investure, his admission to the Crown
upon Oath and Compact, and with the consent of the subjects, according to the
Laws of the Land, as is showed above: Ergo -- 4. There must also be the Lawful
Use of the Power; which must be not only legal for its composure, but right for
its practice; its Course and Process in Government must be just, Governing
according to Law, otherwise it is mere Tyranny: for what is Government, but the
subjecting of the Community to the rule of Governors, for Peace and Orders
sake, and the security of all their precious Interests? and for what end was it
ordained, and continued among men, but that the stronger may not domineer over
the weaker? And what is Anarchy, but the playing the Rex of the Natural power
over the Moral? Hence, that Power which is contrary to Law, evil and
Tyrannical, can tie none to subjection: But the power of the King, abused to
the destruction of Laws, Religion and Liberties, giving his power and strength
unto the beast, and making war with the Lamb Revel. 17. 13, 14. is a power
contrary to Law, evil and Tyrannical: Ergo it can tie none to subjection:
wickedness by no imaginable reason can oblige any man. It is Objected by some
from Romans 13. 1. There is no power but of God: The Usurping power is a power:
Therefore it is of God, and consequently we owe subjection to it Ans. 1. The
Original reading is not Universal, but thus (...) for there is no power if not
from God: which confirms what I plead for, that we are not to oune any
Authority, if it be not Authorized by God. The words are only relative to
higher powers, in a restricted sense, and at most are but indefinite, to be
determined according to the matter; not all power simply, but all Lawful power.
2. It is a fallacia a dicto secundum quid: There is no power but of God, that
is no Moral Power, as Universal negatives use to be understood, Heb. 5. 4. no
man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God; which is
clear, must not be understood for the negation of the fact, as if no man at all
does or ever did take unto himself that honor, for Korah did it etc. but, no
man takes it warrantably, with a Moral right and Gods allowance, without Gods
call: So also the universal imperative, in that same Text, must not be taken
absolutely without restriction; for if every soul without exception were to be
subject, there could be none left to be the higher powers; but it is understood
with restriction to the relation of a subject. So here no Power but of God, to
be understood with restriction to the relation of a Lawful Magistrate. It it
also to be understood indiscriminately, in reference to the diverse species,
sorts, and degrees of Lawful Power, Supreme and subordinate, whether to the
King as Supreme, or to Governors etc. as Peter expresses it: Or whether they
be Christian or Pagan: It cannot be meant of all universally, that may pretend
to power, and may attain to prevailing Potency; for then by this Text, we must
subject our selves to the Papacy now intended to be introduced; and indeed if
we subject our selves to this Papist, the next thing he will require will be
that. 3. To the Minor proposition, I Answer. The usurping power is a power: It
is Potentia, I grant; that it is Potestas, (...), or Authority, I deny.
Therefore it is of God, by His Providence, I concede; by His Ordinance; I deny.
Consequently we owe subjection to it, I deny. We may be subject passively, I
grant; Actively, out of conscience I deny. But some will Object. 2. Though the
Power be Usurped, and so not Morally Lawful, in all these respects; yet it may
do good, its Laws and administrations may be good. Ans. I grant, all is good
that ends well and has a good beginning. That cannot be good which has a bad
principle, bonum ex integra causa. Some Government for constitution good, may
in some acts be bad; but a Government for constitution bad, cannot for the acts
it puts forth be good. These good acts may be good for matter, but formally
they are not good, as done by the Usurper: They may be comparatively good, that
is better so then worse; but they cannot be absolutely, and in a Moral sense
good: for to make a Politic action good, not only the matter must be
warrantable, but the Call also. It may indeed induce subjects to bear and
improve to the best, what cannot be remedied; but cannot oblige to oune a
Magistratical Relation.

II. The Nature of the power thus discovered, lets us see the Nature of that
relative duty, which we owe and must oune as due to Magistrates, and what sort
of ouning we must give them; which to inquire a little into, will give light to
the question. All the duty and deference the Lord requires of us, toward them
whom we must oune as Magistrates, is comprehended in these two expressions,
honor required in the fifth Command, and subjection required in Romans 13. 1.
etc. 1 Pet. 2. 13. etc. Whomsoever then we oune as Magistrates, we must oune
honor and subjection as due to them: And if so be we cannot upon a
conscientious ground give them honor and subjection, we cannot oune them as
Magistrates. The least deference we can pay to Magistrates is subjection, as it
is required in these words; Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers, and
submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake. But this
cannot be given to Tyrants and Usurpers: Ergo no deference can be paid to them
at all, and consequently they cannot be ouned. That this subjection, which is
required to the higher Powers, cannot be ouned to Tyrants, will be apparent, if
we consider. 1. The Subjection required is orderly subjection to an orderly
power, that we be regularly under him that is regularly above: But Usurpation
and Tyranny is not an Orderly Power, orderly placed above us: Therefore we
cannot be ordely under it. This is gathered from the Original Language, where
the powers to be subjected to are (...), ordained of God, and (...), the
Ordinance of God, and he that resists the Power is (...), Counter-ordered, or
contrary to his orderly duty: So the duty is (...) be subject. They are all
words coming from one root, which signifies to Order: So that subjection is to
be placed in order under another relative to an Orderly Superiority: But to
occupy the seat of dignity unauthorized, is an Ataxie, a breaking of order, and
bringing the Commonwealth quite out of order. Whereby it may appear, that in
relation to an Arbitrary Government, there can be properly no (...), no orderly
subjection. 2. The thing it self must import that relative duty which the fifth
Command requires; not only a passive stooping endurance, or a ^eigned
Counterfeit submission, but a real Active duty including obedience to Lawful
Commands; and not only so, but support and maintinance; and that both to the
acts of his administration, and to his standing and keeping his station,
assisting him with all our abilities, both humane and Christian; And not only
as to the external acts of duties, but the inward motions of the heart, as
consent, Love, Reverence, and Honor, and all sincere fealty and Allegiance.
But can a subjection of this extent, be paid to a Tyrant or Usurper? Can we
support those we are bound to suppress? Shall we love the ungodly, and help
those that hate the Lord? Can we consent, that we and our posterity should be
slaves? Can we honor them who are vile, and the vilest of men, how high soever
they be exalted? 3. The ground of this subjection is for conscience sake, not
for wrath, that is, so far and so long as one is constrained by fear, and to
avoid a greater evil, to stoop to him, but out of conscience of duty, both that
of Piety to God who ordained Magistracy, and that of equity to him who is His
Minister for good, and under pain of damnation if we break this orderly
subjection Romans 13. 2, 5. But can it be imagined that all this is due to a
Tyrant and Usurper? Can it be out of conscience, because he is the Lords
Minister for good? the contrary is clear, that he is the Devils drudge serving
his Interest; Is resistance to Tyrants a damnable sin? I hope to prove it to be
a duty. 4. If subjection to Tyrants and Usurpers will inveigle us in their
snares, and involve us in their sin and judgment, then it is not to be ouned to
them: But the former is true: Therefore the Latter. In the foregoing head I
drew an Argument, for withdrawing from and disouning the Prelatick Ministers,
from the hazard of partaking in their sin, and of being obnoxious to their
judgment, because people are often punished for their Pastors sins; Aaron and
his sons polluting themselves, would have brought wrath upon all the people,
L^v. 10. 6. because the Teachers had transgressed against the Lord, therefore
was Jacob given to the Curse and Israel to reproaches Isai* 43. 27, 28. and all
these Miseries Lamented by the Church were inflicted for the sins of her
Prophets and the iniquites of her Priests, Lam. 4. 13. the reason was, because
they ouned them, followed them, countenanced them, complied with them, or
connived at them, or did not hinder or else disoune them. The same Argument
will evince, the necessity of withdrawing our subjection from and disouning
Usurping and Tyrannical Rulers, when we cannot hinder their wickedness, nor
give any other Testimony against them, to avert the wrath of the Lord. If the
defections of Ministers will bring on the whole Nation desolating judgments;
then much more have we reason to fear it, when both Magistrates and Ministers
are involved in, and jointly carrying on, and carressing and encouraging each
other in promoting, a woeful Apostasy from God: when the heads of the house of
Jacob, and Princes of the house of Israeel, abhor judgment and pervert all
equity, the heads Judge for reward, and the Priests teach for hire, and the
Prophets divine for money, and yet lean upon the Lord and say, Is not the Lord
among us? none evil can come upon us: Then we can expect nothing but that Zion
for their sake shall be plowed as a field and Jerusalem become heaps and the
Mountain of the house as the high places of the forest, Mich. 3. 9, 11, 12.
Certain it is that subjects have smarted sore for the sins of their Rulers: for
Saul's sin in breaking Covenant with the Gibeonites, the Land suffered three
years famine 2 Samuel 21. 1. and the wrath of the Lord could not be appeased,
till seven of his sons were hanged up unto the Lord. What then shall appease
the wrath of God, for the unp^ralelled breach of Covenant with God in our day?
For David's sin of numbering the people, 70000 men died by the Pestilence. 2 Samuel 24. 5. For Ieroboams sin of Idolatry, who made Israel to sin, the Lord
threatens to give Israel up because of the sins of Jeroboam 1 King. 14. 16.
only they escaped this Judgment, who withdrew themselves and fell into Judah.
For Ahabs sin of letting go a man whom the Lord had appointed to utter
destruction, the Lord threatens him, thy life shall go for his life, and thy
people for his people 1 King. 20. 42. Because Manasseh King of Judah did many
abominations, therefore the Lord threatened to bring such evil upon Jerusalem
and Judah that whosoever heard it his ears should tingle etc. 2 King. 21. 11,
12. and not withstanding of his repentance, and the Reformation in the days of
Josiah, notwithstanding the Lord turned not from the fierceness of His great
wrath, wherewith His anger was kindled against Judah, because of all the
provocations that Manasseh had provoked Him withal 2 King. 23. 26. which was
accomplished by the hands of the Chaldeans, in Iehojakims time. Surely at the
Commandment of the Lord came this upon Judah, to remove them out of His sight,
for the sins of Manasseh according to all that he did, and also for the
innocent blood which he shed... which the Lord would not pardon 2 King. 24. 3,
4. And Jeremiah further threatens, that they should be removed into all
Kingdoms of the earth, because of Manasseh for that which he did in Jerusalem
Ier. 15. 4. Certainly these passages were recorded for our Learning Romans 15. 4.
and for our examples, to the intent we should not do as they did 1 Cor. 10. 6.
and for our admonition verse. 11. Whence we may be admonished, that it is not
enough to keep our selves free of public sins of Rulers; Many of those then
punished, were free of all actual accession to them; but they became accessory
to and involved in the guilt of them, when they did not endeavor to hinder
them, and bring them to condign punishment for them, according to the Law of
God which respects not persons; or at least, because they did not revolt from
them, as Libnah did: There might be other provocations on the peoples part, no
doubt, which the Lord did also punish by these Judgments; ^ut when the Lord
specifies the sin of Rulers, as the particular procuring Cause of the Judgment,
it were presumption to make it the Occasion only of the Lords punishing them:
for plain it is, if these sins of Rulers had not been committed, which was the
ground of the threatening and execution, the Judgment would have been
prevented; And if people had bestirred themselves as became them, in repressing
and restraining such wickedness, they had not so smarted; And when that sin so
threatened and punished was removed, then the Judgment it self was removed or
deferred. It is just and necessary, that the subjects being Jointly included
with their Rulers in the same bond of fidelity to God, be liable to be punished
for their Rebellion and Apostasy, when they continue under the bond of
subjection to them. But how deplorable were our Condition, if we should stand
obnoxions to divine Judgments, for the Atheism, Idolatry, Murders, and
Adulteries of our Rulers, and yet be neither Authorized nor Capacitated to
hinder it, nor permitted to withdraw our selves from subjection to them? But it
is not so; for, the Lords making us responsable for their debt, is an
impowering us either to repress their wickedness when He gives us Capacity, or
at least to save our selves harmless from their Crimes, by disouning them; that
being the only way of standing no longer accountable for their faults.

12. It remains to Consider the Ends, for which Government was institute by
God, and constitute by men: from whence I Argue, That Government that destroys
the Ends of Government, is not to be ouned: But Tyranny, and especially this
under which we houl, destroys all the Ends of Government: Ergo it is not to be
ouned. The Minor I prove thus. That Government that destroys Religion and
Safety, destroys all the Ends of Government: But this Popish and arbitrary
Absolute power, destroys Religion and Safety: Ergo -- It is evident both from
the Laws of Nature and Revelation, that the Ends of Government are the Glory of
God, and the good of Mankind. The first is the Glory of God, the ultimate end
of all Ordinances; to which whatever is opposite, is not to be ouned by them
that fear Him: whatever power then is destructive to Religion, and is applied
and employed against the Glory of the Uuniversal King, and for withdrawing us
from our fealty and obedience to Him, is nothing but Rebellion against the
Supreme Lord and Lawgiver, and a Traitorous Conspiracy against the Almighty;
and therefore not to be ouned: And they are enemies to Religion, or strangers
to it, who are not sensible this has been the design of the present
Government, at least these 27 years, to overturn the Reformed Covenanted
Religion, and to introduce Popery. Hence, seeing a King at his best and highest
elevation is only a mean for preserving Religion, and for this end only chosen
of the people to be Custos utriusque tabulae, keeper of both Tables of the Law,
he is not to be regarded but wholly laid aside, when he not only moves without
his sphere, but his motion infers the ruin of the ends of his erection, and
when he imployes all his power for the destruction of the Cause of Christ, and
advancement of Antichrists, giving his power to the beast; he is so far from
deserving the deference of the power ordained of God, that he is to be looked
upon and treated as a Traitor to God, and Stated enemy to Religion and all
Righteousness, The Second End of Government is the good of the people, which is
the Supreme and Cardinal Law; Salus Populi est Suprema Lex. Which cannot be
denied, if it be considered. 1. For this only the Magistrate is appointed of
God to be His Minister, for the peoples good Romans 13. 4. and they have no
goodness but as they conduce to this end; for all the power they have of God is
with this Proviso, to promote His peoples prosperity. (It were blasphemy to
say, they are His Authorized Ministers for their destruction) to which if their
Conduct degenerate, they degrade themselves, and so must be disouned. He is
therefore; in his institution, no more than a mean for this end; and himself
cannot be either the whole or half of the end, for then he should be both the
end and the mean of Government; and it is contrary to Gods mould to have this
for his end, to multiply to himself silver and gold, or lift up himself above
his brethren Deuteronomy. 17. 17, 20. if therefore he has any other end than the good
of the people, he cannot be ouned as one of Gods moulding. 2. This only is the
highest pitch of good Princes ambition, to postpone their oun safety to the
peoples safety. Moses desired, rather than the people should be destroyed, that
his name should be razed out of the Book of life. And David would rather the
Lords hand be on him and his fathers house, than on the people that they should
be plagued 1 Chronicles. 21. 17. but he that would seek his oun ambitious ends with
the destruction of the people, has the spirit of the Devil, and is to be
carried toward as one possessed with that malignant spirit. 3. Originally
their power is from the people, from whom all their dignity is derived; with
reserve of their safety, which is not the donative of Kings, nor held by
concession from them, nor can it be resigned or surrendered to the disposal of
Kings; since God has provided, in His universal Laws, that no Authority make
any disposal, but for the good of the people. This cannot be forfeited by the
usurpation of Monarchs, but being alwise fixed in the essential Laws of
Government, they may reclaim and recover it when they please. Since then we
cannot alienate our safety, we cannot oune that Authority which is inconsistent
with it. 4. The attaining this end was the main ground and motive, of peoples
deliberating to constitute a Government; and to choose such a form, because
they thought it most conducible for their good; and to admit such persons as
fittest Instruments for compassing this end; and to establish such a
Conveyance, as they thought most contributive for this end: When therefore
Princes cease to be what they could be constitute for, they cease to have an
Authority to be ouned; but ceasing to answer these ends of Government, they
cease to be what they could be constitute for. 5. For no other end were
Magistrates limited with Conditions, but to bound them that they might do
nothing against the peoples good and safety: Whosoever then breaking through
all legal limitations, shall became injurious to the Community, lists himself
in the number of enemies, and is only to be looked upon as such. 6. For this
end all Laws are ratified or rescinded, as they conduce to this end, which is
the soul and reason of the Law: then it is but reason, that the Law
establishing such a King, which proves an enemy to this, should be rescinded
also. 7. Contrary to this end no Law can be of force; if then either Law or
King be prejudicial to the Realm, they are to be abolished. 8. For this end,
in cases of necessity Kings are allowed sometimes to neglect the Letter of the
Laws, or private Interests, for the safety of the Community; but if they
neglect the public safety, and make Laws for their oun Interests, they are no
more Trustees but Traitors. 9. If it were not for this end, it were more
eligible to live in deserts than to enter into Societies: When therefore a
Ruler, in direct opposition to the ends of Government, seeks the ruin not only
of Religion, but also of the peoples safety, he must certainly forfeit his
right to reign. And what a vast as well as innocent number, have, for Religion
and their adherence to their fundamental rights, been ruined, rooted out of
their families and Possessions, oppressed, persecuted, Murdered, and destroyed
by this and the deceased Tyrant, all Scotland can tell and all Europe has
heard. If ever the ends of Government were perverted and subverted in any
place, Britain is the stage where this Tragedy has been acted.

13. I may argue from the Covenant, that to oune this Authority is contrary to
all the Articles thereof. 1. That Authority which overturns the Reformation of
Religion in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government, which we are sworn
to preserve against the Common Enemies thereof, in the first Art. cannot be
ouned: But the present pretended Authority overturned (and continues more to
overturn) the Reformation of Religion etc. Ergo it cannot be ouned: for against
what common enemy must we preserve it, if not against him that is the chief
Enemy thereof? and how can we oune that Authority, that is wholly employed and
applied for the destruction of Religion? 2. If we are obliged to exstirpate
Popery, without respect of persons, lest we partake in other men's sins; then
we are obliged to exstirpate Papists without respect of persons, and
consequently the head of them. (For how otherwise can Popery be exstirpated?
or how otherwise can we cleanse the Land of their sins?) But in the 2d Art. we
are obliged to exstirpate Popery without respect of persons, lest we partake
in other men's sins: Ergo we are obliged to exstirpate Papists without respect
of Persons and consequently the Crowned Jesuit, and therefore cannot oune him;
for how can we oune him, whom we are bound to exstirpate? 3. If we be engaged
to preserve the Rights and Liberties of Parliaments, and the Liberties of the
Kingdoms, and the Kings Authority only in the preservation and defense of the
true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms; then we cannot oune his Authority,
when it is inconsistent with, opposite to, and destructive of all these
precious Interests, as now it is with a witness: But in the 3. Art. we are
engaged to preserve the Rights and Privileges of Parliaments, and the
Liberties of the Kingdoms, and the Kings Authority only in the preservation and
defense of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms: Ergo. All
allegiance that we can oune to any man, must stand perpetually thus qualified,
in defense of Religion and Liberty; that is, so far as it is not contrary to
Religion and Liberty, and no further, for if it be destructive of these, it is
null. If we should then oune this man, with this restricted allegiance, and
apply it to his Authority (as we must apply it to all Authority that we can
oune) it were to mock God and the world, and oune Contradictions: for can we
maintain the Destroyer of Religion, in defense of Religion? And the Destroyer
of all our rights and Liberties, and all our legal securities for them, in the
preservation of these rights and Liberties? that were pure Nonsense. 4. If we
be obliged to endeavor, that all Incendiaries and Malignants etc. be brought
to condign punishment, then we cannot oune the Authority of the head of these
Incendiaries and malignant Enemies: But in the 4. Art we are obliged to
endeavor that all Incendiaries and Malignants etc. be brought to Condign
Punishment: Ergo -- The Connection of the Major cannot well be doubted: for is
it imaginable, that the head of that unhallowed Party, the Great malignant
Enemy who is the spring and gives life unto all these Abominations, shall be
exempted from punishment? or ouned for a Sacred Majesty? shall we be obliged
to discover, and bring to Justice, the little petty Malignants, and this
implacably stated Enemy to Christ escape with a Crown on his head? Nay, we are
by this obliged, if ever we be in case, to bring these stated Enemies to God
and the Country to condign punishment, from the highest to the Lowest: And this
we are to do, as we would have the anger of the Lord turned away from us, which
cannot be without hanging up their heads before the Lord against the sun, as
was done in the matter of Peor Numb. 25. 4. For has not he and his Accomplices
made the Kingdom a Curse? and we with our oun consent have made our selves
obnoxious to it, if we do not procure, each in our Capacities, and pursue these
Traitors and Rebels, that the Judgment of the Lord be executed upon the
accursed. 5. No wilful o^poser of Peace and union between the Kingdoms is to be
ouned; but according to the 5. Art. we are obliged to ende^vour that Justice be
done upon him: But this man and his brother have been wilful opposers of Peace
and union between the Kingdoms, all true Peace and union, except an union in
Confederacy against the Lord; for they have taken Peace from both the Kingdoms,
and destroyed and annulled that which was the bond of their union, viz. the
Solemn League and Covenant. 6. If we are obliged to assist and defend all those
that enter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuing
thereof, and never to suffer our selves to be divided, to make defection to the
contrary part etc. According to the 6 Art. Then we must not oun the Butcher of
our Covenanted Brethren, who has imbrued ^is hands in their blood, in the
maintaining and pursuing thereof, and would have us withdrawn into so
detestable a defection; for we cannot both oune him as he requires to be ouned,
and as God requires every Magistrate to be ouned (so as not to resist him under
pain of damnation Romans 13. 2) and assist our Brethren too in resisting his
Murders; and our ouning of him were a dividing of our selves from our Brethren
that oppose him, into a defection to the Contrary part, whereof he is head and
Patron. Lastly in the Conclusion, we are obliged to be humbled for the sins of
these Kingdoms, and to amend in a real Reformation: Whereof this is one to be
mourned for, that after the Lord had delivered us from the yoke of this
Tyrannical family, we again joined in affinity with the people of these
abominations, and took these serpents into our bosom again which has bit us
so sore, and wherewith the Lord has scourged us severely. And if it was our
sin to engage with them at first, then it is our sin to continue under their
subjection: And is not consistent with that Repentance, that the Lords
Contendings call for, to continue ouning that Power which was our sin to oune
at first.

III. In the Third place, I promised to confirm my Thesis from more express
Scripture Arguments. Therefore I shall endeavor to gather them as briefly as
may be 1. from Scripture Inferences, nearly and natively Consequential. 2. from
Scripture Assertions. 3. from Scripture Precepts. 4. from Scripture Practices.
5. from Scripture Promises. 6. from Scripture Threatenings. 7. from Scripture
Prayers.

First, I shall offer some Arguments deduced by way of immediate Inference,
from the grounds laid before us in Scripture about Government: wherein I shall
confine my self to these Particulars.

1. Let us Consider the Characters of a Magistrate, laid down in Scripture; and
we may infer, if Tyrants and Usurpers are not Capable of these Characters, then
they cannot be ouned for Magistrates. For if they be not Magistrates, they
cannot be ouned as Magistrates: but if they be not capable of the Characters of
Magistrates, they are not Magistrates: Ergo if they be not capable of the
Characters of Magistrates, they cannot be ouned as Magistrates. To find out the
Characters of Magistrates, I need seek no further than than full place Romans 13.
Which usually, is made a Magazine of Objections against this Truth; but I trust
to find store of Arguments for it from thence, not repeating many that have
been already deduced therfrom. We find in this place many Characters of a
Magistrate, that are all incompatible with a Tyrant or Usurper. 1. He is the
higher power verse 1. (...) Authorities Supereminent, signifying such a
Precellency as draws toward it a recognition of honor: But this is not
Competent to Tyrants and Usurpers; for they are the vilest of men* let them be
never so high exalted, Psalm. 12. ult. and if they be vile then they are to be
contemned Psalm. 15. 4. and no more to be regarded then Herod was by Christ,
when he called him a Fox Luke 13. 32. But more particularly let us consider
what is the (...), highness, or dignity of Magistrates, set forth in Scripture.
They are styled Gods not to be reviled Exodus 22. 28. among whom God Judges
Psalm. 82. 1. so called because the Word of God came unto them John 10. 35. But
Tyrants are rather Devils, as one of them is called Lucifer Isai. 14. 12. and
they that persecute and imprison the People of God, because acted by the Devil,
and acting for him, do bear his name Revel. 2. 10. They are Devils that cast
the Lords witnesses into prison. The Magistrates Judgment is Gods Judgment
Deuteronomy. 1. 17. because it is not for man but for the Lord 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. and
therefore Solomon is said to have sat on the Throne of the Lord 1 Chronicles. 29.
23. But it were blasphemy to say, that Tyrants Judgment, usurping the place
without His warrant, and giving forth Judgment against His Laws and Cause and
People, is the Lords Judgment, or for Him, or that they sit on the Throne of
the Lord. A Throne of iniquity is not the Throne of the Lord, for He has no
fellowship with it; The Tyrants Throne is a Throne of iniquity, Psalm. 94. 20.
Magistrates are truly to be subjected to and obeyed, as Principalities and
Powers Tit. 3. 1. it is a sin to speak evil of them, verse. 2. for it is
presumption to despise Dominion and speak evil of Dignities 2 Pet. 2. 10. Jude.
8. Bu^ Tyrants are very Catechrestically and abusively Principalities and
Powers, no otherwise then the Devils are so termed Ephesians. 6. 12. and there is no
argument to oune or obey the one more than the other: for if all Principalities
and Powers are to be subjected to and ouned, then also the Devil must, who get
the same Title. To speak Truth of Tyrants indignities, cannot be a speaking
evil of Dignities; for Truth is no evil, nor is Tyranny a Dignity. Hence they
that are not capable of the Dignity of Rulers, are not to be oune^ as such: But
Tyrants are not capable of the Dignity of Rulers, as these places prove: Ergo
-- Against this it is Objected, that Paul did apply this Character to the
Tyrannical High Priest Ananias, whom, after he had objurgated for mani^est
injustice, he honors with that Apology, that he wist not that he was the high
Priest, for it is written, thou shall not speak evil of the ruler of thy people
Act. 23. 5. Ans. Though all should be granted that is in this Objection* yet
our Argument would not be enervated: for grant we should not speak evil of
Tyrants, that does not evince that we should hold them as Rulers; for we should
bless our persecuters, Romans 10. 14. and speak evil of no man Tit. 3. 2. that
does not say, we should hold every man, or our persecuters, to be Rulers. The
meaning must be, he knew not that he was the high Priest, that is, he did not
acknowledge him to be either high Priest or Ruler, he could acknowledge or
observe nothing like one of that Character in him: for as the high Priests
Office was now null and ceased, so this Ananias was only an usurper of the
Office, in place of Ismael or Joseph, who had purchased it by money: And Paul
had learned from his Master Gamaliel, Iudicem, qui honoris consequendi causa
pecunias dederit, revera neque Iudicem esse, neque honorandum, sed Asini
habendum Loco. Tit. Talmud. de Synedrio. That a Judge who has given money for
purchasing this honor, is neither a Judge, nor to be honored as such, but to
be held in place of an Ass. And it was common among the Jews to say, if such
be gods, they are silver gods not to be honored, as is quoted by Pool Synopsis
Criticorum etc. in locum. And that this must be the sense of it is plain; for
he could not be ignorant that he was there in place of a Judge, being called
before him, and smitten by him Authoritatively, whom therefore he did threaten
with the judgment of God; it were wicked to think, that he would retract that
threatening which he pronunced by the Spirit of God. And therefore this place
confirms my Thesis: If a Tyrannical Judge, acting contrary to Law, is not to be
known or acknowledged to be a Ruler, but upbraided as a whited wall; Then a
Tyrant is not to be known or acknowledged as such: But the former is true, from
this place: Therefore also the latter. Paul knew well enough he was a Judge,
and knew well enough what was his duty to a Judge, that he should not be
reviled; but he would not acknowledge this Priest to be a Judge, or retract his
threatening against him.

2. He is of God and ordained of God: I proved before, Tyrants are not capable
of this; yea it were blasphemy to say, they are Authorized or Ordained of God,
by His Preceptive Will. Hence take only this Argument. All Rulers that we must
oune are ordained of God, do reign and are set up by God Prove. 8. 15. (for that
and this place are parallel) But Tyrants do not reign nor are set up by God
Hos. 8. 4. They are set up (says the Lord) but not by me: Ergo we cannot oune
them to be ordained of God. 3. Whosoever resists this power ordained of God
resists the Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation verse. 2. This cannot be ouned of a Tyrant, that it is a
damnable sin to resist him, for it is duty to resist and also repress him, as
is proven already, and shall be afterward. Hence, whatsoever Authority we oune
subjection to we must not resist it: But we cannot oune that we must not resist
this Authority: therefore we cannot oun it at all. Again, That cannot be the
power not to be resisted, which is acquired and improved by resisting the
Ordinance of God: But the power of Usurpers and Tyrants is acquired and
improved by resisting the ordinance of God: Ergo their power cannot be the
power not to be resisted. The Major is manifest: for when the Apostle says,
the resisting of the power bring damnation to the resister, certainly that
resistance cannot purchase Dominion instead of damnation: And if he that
resists in a lesser degree, be under the doom of damnation: then certainly he
that does it in a greater degree, so as to complete it, in putting himself in
place of that power which he resisted, cannot be free. The Minor is also
undeniable; for, if Usurpers acquire their power without resistance forcible
and sensible, it is because they that defend the power invaded are wanting in
their duty; but however Morally the Tyrant or Usurper is always (...), or in
contrary order to a Lawful Power. 4. Rulers are not a terror to good works but
to the evil, and they that do that which is good shall have praise of the same
verse. 3. This is the Character and duty of righteous Magistrates, though it be
not always their Administration: But an Usurper and Tyrant is not capable or
susceptible of this Character, but on the contrary is and must be a terror to
good works and a praise to the evil: for, he must be a Terror to them that
would secure their rights and Liberties in opposition to his encroachments,
which is a good work; and he must be a fautor, Patron, and Protector of such,
as encourage and maintain him in his Usurpation and Tyranny, which is an evil
work: And if he were a terror to the evil, then he would be a terror to himself
and all his Accomplices, which he cannot be. Therefore, that power which is not
capable of the duties of Magistrates, cannot be ouned: But the Power of Tyrants
and Usurpers is such: Ergo -- We find in Scripture, the best Commentare on this
Character, where the duties of a Magistrate are described. They must justify
the righteous and condemn the wicked Deuteronomy. 27. 1. They must, as Job did,
deliver the poor that cry and put on righteousness as a clothing -- and be
eyes to the blind and feet to the lame, and a Father to the poor -- and break
the Jaws of the the wicked Job 29. 12-17. Their Throne must be established by
righteousness Prove. 16. 12. a King sitting on the Throne of Judgment must
scatter away all evil with his eyes -- then Mercy and Truth will preserve him
and his Throne is upholden by Mercy Prove. 20. 8, 28. But Tyrants have a quite
contrary Character: The Throne of iniquity frames Mischief by a Law, and
condemns the innocent blood Psalm. 94. 20. 21. They judge not the fatherless,
neither does the cause of the widow come unto them Isai. 1. 23. They build
their house by unrighteousness, and their chambers by wrong, and use their
neighbors service without wages Ier. 22. 13. They oppress the poor and crush
the needy Amos 4. 1. They turn judgment to Gall and the fruit of righteousness
to hemlock, and say, have we not taken horns to as by our oun strength Amos 6.
12, 13. These contrary Characters cannot consist together. 5. He is the
Minister of God for good verse. 4. not by Providential Commission, as
Nebuchadnezzar was, and Tyrants may be eventually, by the Lord making all
things turn about for the good of the Church; but he has a Moral Commission
from God, and is entrusted by the people to procure their Public and Politic
good at least. Now this, and Tyranny and Usurpation, are together
inconsistible: for if Tyrants and Usurpers were Ministers for good, then they
would restore the public and personal Rights, and rectify all wrongs done by
them; but then they must surrender their Authority, and resign it, or else all
rights cannot be restored, nor wrongs rectified. Hence, these that cannot be
ouned as Ministers of God for good, cannot be ouned as Magistrates: But Tyrants
and Usurpers, (and in particular this Man) are such as cannot be ouned as
Ministers of God for good: Ergo -- Again, If Magistracy be alwise a blessing,
and Tyranny and Usurpation alwise a Curse, then they cannot be ouned to be the
same thing, and the one cannot be ouned to be the other: But Magistracy or the
right-ful Magistrate, is alwise a blessing; Tyranny and Usurpation or the
Tyrant and Usurper, alwise a curse: Ergo -- That the former is true, these
Scriptures prove it. God provides him for the benefit of His people 1 Samuel 16.
1. a just Ruler is compared to the light of the morning, when the sun rises,
even a morning without Clouds 2 Samuel 23. 4. So the Lord exalted David's Kingdom,
for His people Isreal's sake 2 Samuel 5. 12. because the Lord Loved Israel for
ever, therefore made He Solomon King to do judgment and Justice 1 King. 10. 9.
when the righteous are in Authority the people rejoice -- the King by Judgment
stabilisheth the Land -- Prove. 29. 2, 4. The Lord promises Magistrates as a
special blessing Isai. 1. 26. Ier. 17. 25. and therefore their continuance is
to be praye^ for, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godlyness
and honesty 1 Timothy 2. 2. And they must needs be a blessing, because to have no
Ruler is a Misery; for when Israel had no King every man did that which was
right in his oun eyes Judge. 17. 6. and the Lord threatens it ar a Curse to take
away the stay and the staff -- the mighty man and the man of war, the Judge and
the Prophet etc. Isai. 3. 1, 2 etc. and that the Children of Israel shall abide
many days without a King, and without a Prince Hos. 2. 4. But on the other
hand Tyrants and Usurpers are always a Curse, and given as such: It is
threatened among the Curses of the Covenant, that the stranger shall get up
above Israel very high -- and that they shall serve their enemies which the
Lord shall send against them -- and He shall put a yoke of iron upon their
neck, until He has destroyed them Deuteronomy. 28. 43, 48. As a roaring lion and a
ranging bear so is a wicked Ruler over the poor people Prove. 28. 15. and
therefore, when the wicked bears rule the people mourn Prove. 29. 2. The Lord
threatens it as a Curse, that he will give Children to be their Princes, and
babes shall rule over them Isai. 3. 4. and if unqualified Rulers be a curse,
much more Tyrants. They are the rod of His anger, and the staff in their hand
is His indignation, His axe and saw and rod Isai. 10. 5, 15. It is one thing to
call a man Gods instrument, His rod, axe, sword, or hammer; another thing to
call him Gods Minister: there is a wide difference betwixt the instruments of
Gods Providence, and the Ministers of His Ordinance; those fulfill His Purposes
only, these do His precepts. Such Kings are given in the Lords anger Hos. 13.
11. therefore they cannot be ouned to be Ministers of God for good. 6. He
bears not the sword in vain for he is the Minister of God, a revenger to
execute wrath upon ^im that does evil verse. 4. The Apostle does not say, he
that bears the sword is the Ruler, but he is the Ruler that bears the
sword. This is not every sword; for there is the sword of an enemy, the sword
of a robber, the sword of a common traveller, but this as a faculty of
Political rule and Authoritative judgment. It is not said, he takes the sword
(as the Lord expresses the Usurpation of that power, Math. 26. 52.) but he
bears the sword, has it delivered him into his hand by God, by Gods warrant
and allowance, not in vain; to no end or without reason, or without a
Commission, as Pareus upon the place expones it. He is a revenger to execute
wrath, not by private revenge, for that is condemned Paulo ante Romans 12. 19.
not by providential recompense, for when a private person so revengeth, it is
the providential repayment of God; but as Gods M^nister, by Him Authorized,
commissionated, and warranted to this work. Now this cannot agree with a Tyrant
or Usurper, whose sword only legitimates his scepter, and not his scepter his
sword, who takes the sword rather then bears it, and uses it without reason or
warrant from God, in the execution of his lustful rage upon him that does well,
and has no right to it from God. Hence, he that bears the sword no other way
but as it may be said of a Murderer, cannot be a Magistrate bearing the sword:
But a Tyrant and Usurper bears the sword no other way but as it may be said
of a Murderer: Ergo -- So much for the Characters of a Magistrate, which are
every way inapplicable to Tyrants and Usurpers, and as inapplicable to this of
ours as to any in the world.

2. If we consider the Scripture Resemblance^ importing the duty of
Magistrates, and the Contrary Comparisons holding forth the sin, vileness and
villainy of Tyrants and Usurpers; we may infer, that we cannot oune the last to
be the first. First, from the benefit they bring to the Common wealth,
Magistrates are styled. 1. Saviors* as Othniel the son of Kenaz is called
Judge. 3. 9. and Ieho^haz in his younger years 2. King. 13. 5. and all good
Judges and Magistrates Neh. 9. 27. But Tyrants and Usurpers cannot be such, for
they are destroyers whom the Lord promises to make go forth from His people
Isa. 49. 17. The Chaldea^ Tyrant is called the destroyer of the Gentiles Ier.
4. 7. and the destroyer of the Lords heritage Ier. 50. 11. wherefore they can
no more be ouned to be Magistrates, than Abaddon or Apollyon can be ouned to be
a Savior. 2. From their Pater^al love to the people, they are styled fathers*
and therefore to be honored according to the fifth Command. So Deborah was
raised up a Mother in Israel Judge. 5. 7. Kings are nursing fathers by office
Isai. 49. 23. But that Tyrants cannot be such I have proved already; for they
can no more be accounted fathers, than he that abuses or forces our mother.
3. From the Protection and shelter that people find under their Conduct, they
are called Shields Psalm. 47. Ult. The Princes of the people, the Shields of the
earth, belong unto God. But Tyrants cannot be such, because they are the
subverters of the earth. 4. From the Comfort that attends them, they are
resembled to the morning light and fruitful shours of rain 2 Samuel 23. 4. They
waited for me as for the rain, says Job. 29. 23. But Tyrants cannot be
resembled to these, but rather to darkness, and to the blast of the terrible
ones Isai. 25. 4. as a storm against the wall, If darkness cannot be ouned to
be light, then cannot Tyrants be ouned to be Magistrates. 5. From their Pastoral
Care and Conduct and duty, they are feeders. The Judges of Israel are commanded
to feed the Lords people 1 Chronicles. 17. 6. David was brought to feed Jacob His
people, and Israel His Inheritance Psalm. 78. 71. But Tyrants are wolves not
Shepherds. 6. By office they are physicians or healers Isai. 3. 7. That Tyrants
cannot be such is proven above. Secondly on the other hand, the vileness,
villainy, and violence of Tyrants and Usurpers, are held forth by fit
resemblances, being Compared to these unclean creatures. 1. Tyrants are wicked
Dogs, as they who compass about Christ Psalm. 22. 16, 20. Saul is called Dog
there, and in that Golden Psalm Psalm. 59. 4. Saul and his Accomplices, watching
the house to kill David, make a noise like a dog and go round about the City.
2. They are pushing Bulls Psalm. 22. 12. and crushing Kain of Bashan, that
oppress the poor Amos. 4. 1. they have need then to have their horns cut s^ort.
3. They are roaring Lions. that are wicked Rulers over the poor People Prove.
28. 15. Zeph. 3. 3. So Paul calls Nero the Lion, out of whose mouth he was
delivered. 2 Timothy 4. 17. 4. They are ranging bears Prove. 28. 15. So the Persian
Monarch is emblemized Dan. 7. 5* 5. They are Leviathan the peercing Serpent and
Dragon Isai. 27. 1. and have great affinity in name and Nature with the
Apocalyptick Dragon: So also Isai. 51. 9. the Egyptian Tyrant is called Dragon.
And Nebuchadnezzar swallowed up the Church like a Dragon Ier. 51, 34. See also
Ezekiel. 29. 3. 6. They are wolves ravening the prey Ezekiel. 22. 27. evening wolves
that gnaw not the bones till the morrow Zeph. 3. 3. 7. They are Leopards: So
the Grecian Tyrants is called Dan. 7. 6. and Antichrist Revel. 13. 2. 8. They
are foxes: So Christ calls Herod Luke 13. 32. 9. They are Devils who cast the
Lords people into Prison Revel. 2. 10, 13. Now can we oune all these abommable
Creatures to be Magistrates? Can these be the fathers we are bound to honor in
the fifth Commandment? They must be esteemed sons of dogs and Devils that
belive so, and oune themselves sons of such fathers.

If we further take notice, how the Spirit of God describes Tyranny, as
altogether Contradistinct and opposite unto the Magistracy He will have ouned;
we may infer hence Tyrants and Usurpers are not to be ouned. What the
Government instituted by God among His people was, the Scripture does both
relate in matter of ^act, and describes what it ought to be de jure, viz. That
according to the Institution of God, magistrates should be established by the
Constitution of the people, who were to make them Judges and Officers in all
their gates, that they might Judge the people with just Judgment Deuteronomy. 16. 18.
But foreseeing that people would affect a change of that first form of
Government, and in imitation of their neighboring Nations would desire a King,
and say, I will set a King over me like all the Nations that are about me Deuteronomy.
17. 14. The Lord, intending high and holy ends by it, chiefly the procreation
of the Messiah from a Kingly race, did permit the change, and gave directions
how he should be molded and bounded, that was to be ouned as the Magistrate
under a Monarchial form: To wit, that he should be chosen of God, and set up
by their suffrages, that he should be a brother and not a stranger, that he
should not multiply horses, nor wives, nor money (which are Cautions all
calculated for the peoples good, and the security of their Religion and
Liberty, and for precluding and preventing his degeneration into Tyranny) and
that he should write a Copy of the Law in a book. according to which he should
Govern verse. 15. ad ^in. cap. yet the Lord did not approve the change of the
form, which that luxuriant people was long affecting, and at length obtained.
For long before Saul was made King, they proffered an Hereditary Monarchy to
Gideon, without the boundaries Gods Law required; Which that brave Captain,
knowing how derogatory it was to the Authority of Gods Institution, not to be
altered in form or frame without His order, generously refused, faying, I will
not rule over you, neither shall my son rule over you, the Lord shall rule over
you Iud. 8. 23. But his bastard, the first Monarch and Tyrant of Israel,
Abimelech, by sinstrous means being advanced to be King by the traitorous
Schechemites, Iotham and other of the Godly disouned him: which, by the Spirit
of God, Iotham describes Parabolically, significantly ho^ding out the Nature of
that Tyrannical usurpation, under the Apologue of the trees itching after a
King, and the offer being repudiate by the more generous sort, embraced by the
bramble: Signifying that men of worth and virtue would never have taken upon
them such an arrogant Domination, and that such a Tyrannical Government in its
Nature and tendency was nothing but an useless, worthless, sapless, aspiring,
scratching, and vexing shadow of a Government, under subjection to which there
could be no peace nor safety. But this was rather a Tumultuary interruption
than a Change of the Government, not being universally either desired or ouned;
therefore after that the Lord restored the pristine form: Which continued
until, being much perverted by Samuels sons, the people unanimously and
peremptorly desired the change thereof, and whether it were reason or not would
have a King; as we were fondly set upon one, after we had been delivered from
his fathers yoke: And the Lord gave them a King with a Curse, and took him
away with a vengeance, Hos. 13. 11. as He did our Charles the Second. Yet He
permited it, but with a Protestation against and conviction of the sin, that
thereby they had rejected the Lord 1 Samuel 8. 7. and with a demonstration from
Heaven, which extorted their oun confession, that they bad added unto all their
sins this evil to ask a King 1 Samuel 12. 17, 18, 19. And to deter and disswad
from such a Conclusion, He appoints the Prophet to show them the manner of the
King that should reign over them 1 Samuel 8. 9. to declare before hand, what sort
of a Ruler he would prove, when they got him; to wit, a mere Tyrant, who would
take their sons and appoint them for himself, for his Chariots, and for
horsemen, and to run before his Chariots, and make them his sowldiers, and
laborers of the ground, and Instrument-makers, and household servants, and he
would take their fields and vineyards -- the best of them, and give unto his
servants, in a word to make all slaves; and that in the end when this should
come to pass, they should cry out because of their King, but the Lord would not
hear them verse. 11-18, All which, as it is palpable in it self, so we have
sensibly felt in our experience to be the Natural description of Tyranny, but
more tolerable than an account of ours would amount to. It is both foolishly
and falsely alleged, by Royalists or Tyrannists, that here is a grant of
incontroulable absoluteness to Kings to Tyrannise over the people without
resistance, And that this manner of the King is in the Original Mishphat, which
signifies right or Law, So that here was a permissive Law given to Kings to
Tyrannise, and to oblige people to passive obedience, without any remedy but
tears, And therefore it was registered and laid up before the Lord in a book 1 Samuel 10. 25. But I answer. 1. If any thing be here granted to Kings, it is
either by Gods Approbation, directing and instructing how they should govern;
or it is only by permission and providential Commission to them, to be a plague
to the people for their sin of choosing them, to make them drink as they have
brewed, as sometimes He gave a Charge to the Assyrian rod to trample them down
as the mire of the streets: If the first be said, Then a King that does not
govern after that manner, and so does not make people cry out for their
oppression, would came short of his duty, and all behoved to Tyrannize and make
the people cry out; then a King may take what He will from his subjects, and be
approved of God: this were blasphemously absurd, for God cannot approve of the
sin of oppression. If the Second be said, then it cannot be an universal Grant,
or otherwise all Kings must be ordained for plagnes; And if so, it were better
we wanted such nursing fathers. 2. Though Mishphat signifies right or Law, yet
it signifies also, and perhaps no less frequently, Manner, Course, or Custom:
And here it cannot signify the Law of God, for all these Acts of Tyranny are
contrary to the Law of God; for to make Servants of subjects is contrary to the
Law of God Deuteronomy. 17. 20. forbidding to lift up himself so far above his
brethren, but this was to deal with them as a proud Pharaoh; to take so many
for Chariots and horsemen, is also contrary to the Law Deuteronomy. 17. 15. he shall
not multiply horses: to take their fields and vineyards, is mere Robbery,
contrary to the Moral and Judicial Law, whereof he was to have alwise a Copy
verse. 18. And contrary to Ezekiel. 46. 18. The Prince shall not take of the
peoples inheritance etc. This would justify Ahabs taking Naboths vineyard,
which yet the Lord accounted Robbery, and for which Tyrants are called
Companions of Thieves Isai. 1. 23. and Robbers Isai. 42. 24. into whose hands
the Lord sometimes may give His people for a spoil in Judicial providence, but
never with His Approbation and grant of right: to make them cry out, ^s
oppression, which the Lord abhors Isai. 5. 7, 8. And if this be all the remedy,
it is none; for it is such a Cry, as the Lord threatens He will not hear. 3. It
is false that this manner of the King was registered in that Book mentioned 1 Samuel 10. 25. for that was the Law of the Kingdom, accordingly the Copy of which
the King was to have for his instruction, containing the fundamental Laws,
point blank contrary to this which was the manner of the King: There is a great
difference between the Manner of the Kingdom, what ought to be observed as Law,
and the Manner of the King what he would have as lust. Would Samuel write in a
Book the rules of Tyranny, to teach to oppress, contrary to the Law of God? He
says himself he would only teach both King and people the good and the right
way, Sam. 12. 23, 25. 4. Nothing can be more plain, than that this was a mere
disswasive against seeking a King; for he protests against this Course, and
then lays before them what sort of King he should be, in a description of many
acts of Tyranny, and yet in end its said verse. 19. Nevertheless the people
refused to obey the voice of Samuel, and said, Nay but we will have a King. Now
what else was the voice of Samuel, than a disswasion? I am not here levelling
this Argument against Monarchy in the abstract, that does not lie in my road.
But I infer from hence. 1. If God was displeased with this people for asking
and ouning a King, who was only Tyrannus in fieri, and disswades from the
choice by a description of his future Tyranny; Then Certainly He was displeased
with them when they continued ouning him, when a Tyrant in facto esse,
according to that description: But the former is true, Therefore also the
latter. The Consequence is clear; for Continuing in sin is sin; but continuing
in ouning that Tyrant which was their sin at first, was a continuing in sin:
Ergo -- The Minor is confirmed thus: Continuing in counteracting the Motives of
Gods disswasion, especially when they are sensibly visible, is a Continuing in
sin: But their Continuing in ouning Saul after he became a Tyrant, was a
Continuing in counteracting the Motives of Gods disswasion, when they were
sensibly visible. I do not say, because it was their sin to ask Soul, therefore
it was not Lawful to oune him, while he ruled as a Magistrate; And so if
Charles the second had ruled righteously, it would not have been sin to oune
him: but after the Lord uses disswasives from a choice of such a one, and these
are signally verified, if it was sin to make the choice, then it must be sin to
keep it. 2. If it was their sin to seek and set up such a one before he was
Tyrant, who yet was admitted upon Covenant terms, and the manner of it
registered; Then much more is it a sin to seek and set up one, after he
declared himself a Tyrant, and to admit him without any terms at all, or for
any to consent or give their suffrage to such a deed: But the former is true:
Therefore the latter: and Consequently, to give our consent to the erection of
the D. of Y. by ouning his Authority, were our sin. 3. If it be a sin to oune
the manner of the King there described, then it is a sin to oune the present
pretended Authority, which is the exact transumpt of it: But it is a sin to
oune the manner of the King there described, or else it would never have been
used as a disswasive from seeking such a King. 4. To bring our selves under
such a burden which the Lord will not remove, and involve our selves under such
a misery wherein the Lord will not hear us, is certainly a sin verse. 18. But
to oune or choose such a King, whose manner is there described, would bring our
selves under such a burden and misery, wherein the Lord would not hear us:
Ergo it were our sin.

4. We may add the necessary Qualifications of Magistrates, which the Lord
requires to be in all, both Superior and Inferior: And thence it may be
inserred, that such pretended Rulers who neither have nor can have these
Qualifications are not to be ouned as Magistrates, no more than such are to be
ouned as Ministers who have no qualifications for such a function. We find
their essentially necessary qualifications particularly described. Iethros
Counsel was Gods Counsel and Command; That Rulers must be able men, such as
fear God, men of Truth, hating Covetousness Exodus 18. 21. Tyrants and Usurpers
have none nor can have any of these qualifications, except that they may have
ability of force, which is not here meant; but that they be Morally able for
the discharge of their duty: Surely they cannot fear God; nor be men of Truth,
for then they would not be Tyrants. It is Gods direction, that the man to be
advanced and assumed to Rule, must be a man in whom is the Spirit Numb. 27. 18.
as is said of Joshua: what Spirit this was, Deuteronomy. 34. 9. explains, He was full
of the Spirit of Wisdom, that is, the Spirit of Government; not the Spirit of
infernal or Iesuitical Policy, which Tyrants may have, but they cannot have the
true Regal Spirit, but such a Spirit as Saul had when he turned Tyrant, an evil
Spirit from the Lord. Moses says: they must be wise men and understanding and
known among the tribes, Deuteronomy. 1. 13. for if they be Children or fools, they are
plagues and punishments Isai. 3. 2, 3, 4. etc. not Magistrates, who are alwise
blessings. And they must be known men of intergrity, not known to be knaves or
fools, as all Tyrants are always. The Law of the King is, Deuteronomy, 17. 15. he
must be one of the Lords choosing. Can Tyrants and Usurpers be such? No they
are set up, but not by Him Hos. 8. 4. he must be a brother and not a stranger,
that is, of the same Nation and of the same Religion: for though infidelity
does not make void a Magistrates Authority, yet both by the Law of God and man,
he ought not to be chosen who is an enemy to Religion and Liberty: Now it were
almost treason, to call the Tyrant a brother; and I am sure it is no reason,
for he disdains it, being absolute above all. That good Kings Testament
confirms this, the God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke, he that rules
over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God 2 Samuel 23. 3. But Tyrants and
Usurpers cannot be just; for if they should render every one their right, they
would keep none to themselves, but behoved to resign their Robberies in the
first place, and then also they must give the Law its course, and that against
themselves. These Scriptures indeed do not prove, that all Magistrates are in
all their Administrations so qualified, nor that none ought to be ouned but
such as are so qualified in all respects. But as they demonstrate what they
ought to be, so they prove that they cannot be Magistrates of Gods ordaining
who have none of these qualifications: But Tyrants and Usurpers have none of
these qualifications. Much more do they prove that they cannot be ouned to be
Magistrates, who are not capable of any of these qualifications: But Usurpers
are not capable of any of these qualifications. At least they conclude, in so
far as they are not so qualfied, they ought not to be ouned but disouned: But
Tyrants and Usurpers are not so qualified in any thing: therefore in any thing
they are not to be ouned but disouned: for in nothing they are so qualified as
the Lord prescribes.

Secondly, I shall offer some reasons from Scripture Assertions.

1. It is strongly Asserted in Elihu's speech to Job, that he that hates right
should not govern. Where he is charging Job with blasphemy, in accusing God of
injustice; of which he vindicates the Almighty, in Asserting His Soveraignity
and Absolute Dominion, which is inconsistent with injustice: and shows both
that if He be Sovereign He cannot be unjust, and if He be unjust He could not
be Sovereign: which were horrid Blasphemy to deny. And in the demonstration of
this, he gives one Maxim in a question, which is equivalent to an universal
negative Job. 34. 17, 18. Shall even he that hates right govern? and wilt thou
condemn him that is most just? Is it fit to say to a King, thou art wicked? and
to Princes, ye are ungodly? In which Words, the Scope makes it clear, that if
Job made God a hater of right, he should then deny His Government; and if he
took upon him to condemn Him of injustice, he should blasphemously deny Him to
be King of the World. For it is not fit to say to any King, that he is wicked,
or so ungodly as to be a hater of right; for that were treason, Lese-Majestie,
and in effect a denying him to be King: much less is it fit to say to Him that
is King of Kings. Here then it is affirmed, and supposed to hold good of all
Governors, that he that hates right should not govern, or bind, as it is in
the Margent; for ^abash signifies both to bind and to Govern, but all to one
sense, for Governors only can bind subjects Authoritatively, with the bonds of
Laws and Punishments. I know the following Words are alleged, to favor the
incontroulableness and absoluteness of Princes, that it is not fit to say to
them, they are wicked. But plain it is, the words do import treason against
Lawful Kings, whom to call haters of right were to call their Kingship in
question; as the Scope shows, in that these words are adduced to Justify the
Soveraignity of God by His Justice, and to confute any indirect charging Him
with injustice because that would derogate from His Kingly Glory, it being
impossible He could be King and unjust too. So in some Analogy, though every
act of injustice do not unking a Prince; yet to call him wicked, that is
habitually unjust, and a hater of Justice, were as much as to say, he is no
King, which were intolerable treason against Lawful Kings. But this is no
treason against Tyrants: for Truth and Law can be no treason; now this is the
language of Truth and Law, that wicked Kings are wicked; And they that are
wicked and ungodly ought to be called so, as Samuel called Saul, and Elijah
Ahab etc. However it will hold to be a true Maxim, whether we express it by
way of Negation or Interrogation. Shall even he that hates right Govern? But
are not Tyrants and Usurpers haters of right? shall therefore they Govern? I
think it must be answered, they should not Govern. If then they should not
Govern, I infer, they should not be ouned as Governors. For if it be their sin
to Govern (right or wrong, its all one case, for they should not Govern at all)
then it is our sin to oune them in their Government: for it is alwise a sin to
oune a man in his sinning.

2. The Royal Prophet, or whoever was the Penman of that Appeal for Justice
against Tyranny Psalm. 94. 20. does tacitly Assert the same truth, in that
Expostulation, shall the Throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee, that
frames mischief by a Law? which is as much as if he had said, the Throne of
iniquity shall not, no cannot have fellowship with God; that is, it cannot be
the Throne of God that He has any Interest in, or Concern with, by way of
approbation: He has nothing to do with it, except it be to suffer it a while,
till He take vengeance on it in the end. And shall we have fellowship with that
Throne, that God has no fellowship with, and that is not His Throne but the
Devils, as it must be, if God does not oune it? Much may be argued from hence,
but in a word: A Throne which is not of God nor ordained of God, but rather of
the Devil, cannot be ouned (for that is the reason of our subjection to any
power, because it is of God and ordained of God Romans 13. 1. And that is the
great dignity of Magistracy, that its Throne is the Throne of God 1 Chronicles. 29.
23.) But a Throne of Tyranny and usurpation is a Throne which is not of God,
nor ordained of God, but rather of the Devil: Ergo -- the Minor is proved: A
Throne of iniquity etc. is a Throne which is not of God, nor ordained of God,
but rather of the Devil: But a Throne of Tyranny and usurpation is a Throne of
iniquity: Ergo it is not of God and so not to be ouned.

3. The Lord charges it upon Israel as a transgression of His Covenant, and
trespass against His Law, that they had set up Kings and not by Him and had
made Princes and He knew it not Hos. 8. 4. and then taxes them with Idolatry,
which ordinarily is the Consequent of it, as we have reason to fear will be in
our case. He shows there the Apostasy of that people, in changing both the
Ordinances of the Magistracy and of the Ministry, both of the Kingdom and of
the priesthood, in which two the safety of that people was founded: So they
overturned all the order of God, and openly declared they would not be governed
by the hand of God, as Calvin upon the place expounds it. Whereas the Lord had
commanded, if they would set up Kings they should set none up but whom He
choosed Deuteronomy. 17. 15. yet they had no regard to this, nor consulted Him in
their admission of Kings, but set them up and never let Him to wit of it,
without His knowledge, that is, without consulting Him, and without His
approbation, for it can have no other sense. I know it is alleged by several
Interpreters, that here is meant the tribes secession from the house of David,
and their setting up Jeroboam. I shall confess that the ten tribes did sin in
that erection of Jeroboam, without respect to the Counsel or Command of God,
without waiting on the vocation of God, as to the time and manner, and without
Covenanting with him for security for their Religion and Liberty: But that
their secession from David's line, which by no precept or promise of God they
were astricted to, but only conditionally, if his Children should walk in the
ways of God, Or that their erecting of Jeroboam was materially their sin, I
must deny; and assert, that if Jeroboam had not turned Tyrant and Apostate from
God (for which they should have rejected him afterward and returned to the
good Kings of David's line) he would have been as Lawful a King as any in Judah,
for he got the Kingdom from the Lord the same way, and upon the same terms that
David did, as may be seen expressly in 1 King. 11. 38. It must be therefore
meant, either generally of all Tyrants whom they would set up without the Lords
mind, as at first they would have Kings on any terms, though they should prove
Tyrants, as we have seen in Saul's case. Or particularly Omri whom they set up,
but not by the Lord 1 King. 16. 16. And Abab his Son, And Shallum, Menahem,
Pekah etc. who were all set up by blood and treachery, the same way that our
Popish Duke is now set up, but not by the Lord, that is by His approbation.
Hence I argue, those Kings that are not ouned of God, nor set up by Him, must
not be ouned by us (for we can oune none for Kings but those that reign by Him
Prove. 8. 15. and are ordained of Him Romans 13. 1.) But Tyrants and Usurpers are
not ouned of God as Kings, nor are set up by Him: Ergo -- Again if it be a sin
to set up Kings and not by God, then it is a sin to oune them when set up: for,
that is a partaking of and continuing in the sin of that erection, and has as
much affinity with it, as resetting has with thieft; for if they be the
thieves, they are the ressetters who receive them and oune them.

4. The Prophet Habakkuk, in his Complaint to God of the Chaldean Tyranny,
Asserts that God has made the righteous, as the Fishes of the Sea, as the
Creeping things, that have no Ruler over them, Habak. 1. 14. Now how were they
said to be without a Ruler, when the Chaldean actually commanded and absolutely
ruled over them? yea how can the Fishes and Reptiles have no Ruler over them?
If Domineering be ruling, they want not that; when the weaker are over-mastered
by the stronger, and by them made either to be subject: ar to become their
prey. But the meaning is, these Creatures have no Ruler over them by order of
nature: And the Jews had then no Ruler over them by order of Law, or
ordination from God, or any that was properly their Magistrate by Divine
Institution, or humane orderly constitution. We see then it is one thing for a
people to have an arbitrary or enthra^ing Tyranny, another to have true
Magistracy or Authority to be ouned over them, without which Kingdoms are but
as Mountains of prey, and Seas of Confusion. Hence I argue, If the Jews,
having the Chaldean Monarch tyrannising over them, had really no Ruler over
them, then is a Tyrant and Usurper not to be ouned for a Ruler: But the former
is true: therefore also the Latter.

5, Our Savior Christ delivers this as a Commonly received and a true Maxim,
John. 8. 54. He that honors himself his honor is nothing. The Jews had
objected that He had only made himself Messiah, verse. 53. To whom He answers by
way of concession, if it were so indeed then His Claims were void, If I honor
my self my honor is nothing: And then claims an indubitable title to His
dignity, It is my Father that honors me. Here is a two fold honor
distinguished, the one real the other suppositious and null, the one renounced
the other ouned by Christ, Self-honour and honor which is from God. Hence I
argue, A self created dignity is not to be ouned: the Authority of Tyrants and
Usurpers is a self created dignity: Ergo -- this was confirmed above.

Thirdly I shall offer some other considerations confirming this truth, from
those Scriptures which I class among precepts. And these I find of diverse
sorts touching this subject.

1. I show before that the greatest of men, even Kings, are not exempted from
punishment and Capital punishment, if guilty of Capital Crimes: for where the
Law distinguishes not, we ought not to distinguish. There is one special and
very peremptory Law, given before the Law for regulating Kings, which by that
posterior Law was neither abrogated nor limited even as to Kings, Deuteronomy. 13.
6-9. If thy Brother (and a King must be a Brother Deuteronomy. 17. 15.) -- entice the
secretly saying let us go and serve other Gods -- Thou shall not consent unto
him nor hearken unto him neither shall thine eye pity him. How famous Mr Knox
improved this Argument, is showed in the third Period. That which I take notice
of here is only, that Kings are not excepted from this Law, but if they be open
Intycers to Idolatry, by force or fraud, Persecution or Tolleration, as this
Idolater now reigning is palpably doing, they are obnoxious to a legal
animadversion. As it cannot be supposed, that Secret Intycers should be liable
to punishment, and not open Avouchers of a desire and design to pervert all the
Nation to Idolatry: that a private perverter of one man, though never so nearly
and dearly related, should be pursued and brought to condign punishment, and a
public Subverter of whole Nations, and Introducer of a false and blasphemous
Idolatrous Religion, should escape Scot-free. Let the punishment inflicted be
in a Judicial way, and of what measures it pleases the Judge to determine, I
shall not controvert here; Only I plead, that Idolatrous Tyrants are not
excepted from this Law: and infer, that if they ought to be punished they ought
to be deposed; And if they ought to be deposed, they cannot be ouned, when
undenyably, guilty of this Capital Crime, as was urged above. To this I may
add that part of that Prophetical Kings Testament; who being about to leave
the world, under some Challenges of Mal-administration in his oun Government
(for which he took himself to the well ordered everlasting Covenant, for pardon
and encouragment) after he had shown what Rulers should be, he threatens, by
Antithesis, Tyrannical^pretenders, in these severe words, which do also imply a
precept, and a direction how to deal with them 2 Samuel 23. 6, 7. But they of
Belial shall be all of them as thorns thrust away, because they cannot be taken
with hands, but the man that shall touch them must be fenced with iron and the
staff of a spear, and they shall be utterly burnt with fire in the same place.
Let these words be understood as a threatening against all the wicked in
general, who ars to bequenched as the fire of thorns; or particularly of the
Promoters of Antichrists Kingdom, in opposition to Christ's, as some
Interpreters judge; it will not weaken but confirm my Argument, if Kings who
are ringleaders of that gang be not excepted. I know some do understand this of
Rebels against righteous Rulers: which though indeed it be a truth, that they
that are such should be so served, and roughly handled with iron and the staff
of a spear; yet it is not so consonant to the scope and connection of this
place, showing the Characters of righteous Rulers and of usurping Tyrants,
making an opposition between Rulers that are just ruling in the fear of God,
and those that are Rulers of Belial, promising blessings upon the Government of
the one and contempt and Rejection to the other, and showing how both should be
carried toward: Neither does it aggree with the words themselves, where the
supplement in our translation is redundant; for it is not in the Hebrw, the
sons of Belial, only They of Belial, clearly relative to the Rulers of whom he
was speaking before. And indeed the word Belial, in its Etymology is not more
applicable to any than to Tyrants; for it comes from beli, non, and Hhall
supra, because they will have none above them, or from beli non and Hhol jugum,
because they cannot suffer a yoke, but cast away the yoke of Laws and the yoke
of Christ, saying, let us burst His bands etc. Nor is it always aggreeable to
truth, to understand it only of Rebels against righteous Rulers, that they can
never be taken with hands: For as very rarely righteous Rulers have any
Rebels, to be the objects of their rigor and rage; So when there are any,
discreet and wise Rulers will find many ways to take and touch them, and quash
or quiet them. But it is alwise true of Tyrants, for they can never be taken
with hands, neither in a friendly manner, taken by the hand and transacted with
in any bargain as other men, for they that would do so will find them like
pricking and jagging briars, which a man cannot handle without hurt to himself;
Nor can they be any other way repressed or restrained or touched, but by hands
fenced with iron, that is, with the sword of necessity, or ax of Justice. And
this is insinuated as duty, so to endeavor to exstirpate and eradicate such
thorns, as pester the Commonwealth: but if it cannot be done, it must be duty
and wisdom both not to meddle with them, nor oune them, no more than Iotham, who
would not subject himself nor come under the shadow of the bastard bramble. I
confess it is commonly taken as a threatening of the Lords Judgment against
these Sons of Belial: And so it is. But it teaches also what men are called
to, when they have to do with such, to wit, to take the same course with them
as they would to clear the ground of thorns and briars. And that it is
restricted to the Lords immediate way of taking them off, is not credible: For,
it can have no tolerable sense to say, they shall be thrust away because they
cannot be taken with the Lords hands: Neither is there need, that He should be
fenced with iron etc. And let iron etc. be taken tropically for the Lords sword
of vengeance; yet how can it be understood, that He must be fenced there with?
or that He will trust them away, as a man must be fenced against thorns? What
defense needs the Lord against Tyrants? It is only then intelligible, that the
Lord in His righteous Judgment will make use of men and legal means, and of
those who cannot take them with hands, in His Judicial procedure against them.
Hence I argue, If Tyrants are to be dealt with as thorns, that cannot be taken
with hands, but to be thrust away by violence, Then, when we are not in case to
thrust them away, we must let them alone, and not meddle nor make with them, and
so must not oune them, for we cannot oune them withount meddling, and without
being pricked to our hurt: But the former is true: Ergo -- Of this same nature,
another threatening confuting the pretense of Princes impunity, may be
subjoined out of Psalm. 82. 6, 7. I have said ye are Gods, and all of you are
Children of the most High, but ye shall die like men and fall as one of the
Princes. From which words, the learned Author of the History of the Douglasses,
Mr David Hume of Gods craft, in his discourse upon Mr Craigs Sermon upon the
words, does strongly prove, that the Scope is to beat off all Kings, Princes,
and Rulers, from the conceit of impunity for their Tyrannical Dominations; that
they must not think to Domineer and do what they list, and overturn the
foundations or fundamental Laws of Kingdoms, because they are gods; as if they
were thereby incontrolable, and above all Law and punishment: no, they must
know, that if they be guilty of the same transgressions of the Law, as other
Capital offenders, they shall die like other men, and fall as Princes who have
been formerly punished. It is not to be restricted to a threatening of
Mortality; for that is unavoidable, whether they Judge justly or unjustly, and
the fear thereof usually has little efficacy to deter men from Crimes
punishable by Law: Neither can it be understood only of the Lords immediate
hand taking them away, exclusive of men's legal punishment; for expressly they
are threatened to die like Common men, and to be liable to the like punishment
with them: Now common men are not only lyabl to the Lords immediate Judgment,
but also to men's punishment. Hence, if Tyrants and overturners of the
foundations of the earth, must be punished as other men, then when they are
such they cannot be looked upon as righteous Rulers, for righteous Rulers must
not be punished: But the former is true: Ergo -- According to these Scriptures,
which either express or imply a precept to have no respect to Princes in
Judgment when turning Criminalls, we find examples of the peoples punishing
Amazia etc. which is recorded without a challenge, and likewise Athalia.

2. There is a Precept given to a humbled people, that have groaned long under
the yoke of Tyranny and oppression, enjoining them, as a proof of their
sincerity in humiliation, to bestir themselves in shaking off those evils they
had procured by their sin. Isai. 58. 6. Is not this the fast that I have
ch^sen, to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let
the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke? which are all good works
of Justice and Mercy, and more acceptable to God than high flown pretenses of
humiliation, under a stupid submission; and hanging down the head as a bulrush.
We see it then a duty to relieve the oppressed, and to repress Tyranny, and
break its yoke. If it be Objected (1) That these are Spiritual bonds and yokes,
that are here commanded to be loosed and broken; or if any external be meant,
they are only the yokes of their exactions and usuries. For Ans. I grant, that
it is the great duty of a people humbling themselves before the Lord, to break
off their sins by righteousness and their iniquity by showing mercy to the poor
Dan. 4. 27. but that this is the only duty I deny; or that this is the genuine
and only sense of this place, cannot be proved, or approved by the Scope; which
is, to press them to those duties they omitted, whereby the poor oppressed
people of God might be freed from the yokes of them that made them to houl, and
to bring them to the conviction of those sins for which the Lord was contending
with them, whereof this was one, that they exacted all their Labors, or things
wherewith others were grieved (as the Margent reads) or suffered the poor to be
oppressed. (2) If it be alleged, that this is the duty proper to Rulers to
relieve the oppressed etc. I Answer, It is so; but not peculiar to them: yet
most commonly they are the oppressors themselves, and cast out the poor, which
others must take in to their houses. But the duty here is pressed upon all the
people, whose sins are here cried out against ( verse. 1.) upon all who
professed the service of God, and asked the ordinances of Justice ( verse. 2)
upon all who were fasting and humbling themselves, and complained they had no
success ( verse. 3.) the reasons whereof the Lord discovers ( verse. 4. 5.)
whereof this was one, that they did not loose those bands, nor break these
yokes, nor relieved the oppessed; And those works of Justice ( verse. 6.) are
pressed upon the same grounds, that the works of mercy are pressed upon ( verse.
7.) sure these are not all nor only Rulers. Hence I argue, If it be a duty to
break every yoke of oppression and Tyranny, then it is a duty to come out from
under their subjection: But the former is true: therefore aso the latter.

3. In answer to that grand objection of the Jews subjection to
Nebuchadnezzar, I show what little weight or force there is in it. And here I
shall take an Argument from that same Passage. The Lord commands His people
there, to desert and disoune zedekiah who was the possessor of the Government
at present, and says, it was the way of life to fall to the Chaldeans Ier. 21.
8, 9. which was a falling away from the present King. Either this commanded
subjection to the Chaldeans is an universal precept; or it is only particular
at that time. If it be universal, obliging people to subject themselves to
every Conqueror, then it is also universal obliging people to renounce and
disoune every Covenant Breaking tyrant, as here they were to fall away from
Zedekiah: If it be only particular, then the ouners of of Tyranny have no
advantage from this passage. And I have advantage, so far as the ground of the
precept is as moral, as the reason of that punishment of zedekias, which was
his perfidie and perjurie. Hence, if the Lord has commanded to disoune a King
breaking Covenant, then at least it is not insolent or unprecedented to do so:
But here the Lord has commanded to disoune a King: Ergo --

Fourthly we may have many Confirmations of this truth, from Scripture
practices approven.

1. I was but hinting before, how that after the death of that brave Captain
and Judge Gideon, when Abimelech the son of his whore, did first aspire into a
Monarchy, which he persuaded the silly Schechemites to consent to, by the same
Argument which Royalists make so much of, for asserting the necessity of an
Hereditary Monarchy [ whether is it better for you either that all the sons of
Jerubbaa^ -- reign over you or that one reign over you.] and by bloody cruelty
did usurp a Monarchical or rather Tyrannical Throne of Domination, founded upon
the blood of his seventy brethren (as we know, whose Throne is founded upon the
blood of all the brethren he had) Jotham, who escaped, s^^rned to put his trust
under the shadow of such a bramble, and they that did submit, ^ound his parable
verified, a mu^^al fire reciprocally consuming both the usurping King and his
traitorous subjects: Neither did all the Godly in Israel submit to him. See
Pool Synops. Critic. on the place Iud. 9. Here is one express example of
disouning a Tyrant and Usurper.

2. I show before, how after the Period of that Theocracy, which the Lord had
maintained and managed for some time in great mercy and Majesty in and over His
people, they, itching after novelties and affecting to be neighbour-like,
rejected the Lord in desiring a King; And the Lord permiting it, gave them a
King in His wrath (the true Original and only Sanction of Tyrannical Monarchy)
when the Characters of his Tyranny, presaged by Samuel, were verified in his
aspiring into a great deal of absoluteness, especially in his cruel persecuting
of David; not only the 600 men that were David's followers stood out in open
opposition to him, but in the end, being weary of his Government, many brave
and valiant men, whom the Spirit of God commends and describes very honorably,
fell off from Saul, even while he was actually Tyrannising, before he was dead
1 Chronicles. 12. 1. etc. They came to David to Ziklag while he yet kept himself
closs because of Saul the son of Kish (N. B. now he is not honored with the
name of King) they were armed with bows and could use both the right hand and
the left. And of the Gadites, there separated themselves unto David men of
might fit for the battle, that could handle shield and buckler, whose ^aces
were as the faces of lions verse. 8. And the Spirit came upon Amasai chief of
the Captains, saying, Thine are we David and on thy side thou son of Iesse.
Here was a formed Revolt from Saul unto David before he was King, for after
this he was made King in Hebron, and there could not be two Kings at once.
Hence I argue, if people may separate themselves from and take part with the
Resister, against a Tyrant; then they may disoune him (for if they oune him
still to be the Minister of God, they must not resist him Romans 13. 2.) But here
is an example that many people did separate themselves from Saul and took part
with the Resister David: Ergo -- Here two of the first Monarchs of Israel were
disouned, Abimelech and Saul.

3. The first Hereditary Successor was likewise disouned, as was hinted above
likewise. The ten tribes offer to Covenant with Rehoboam, in terms securing
their Rights and Liberties. They desired nothing on the matter, but that he
would engage to rule over them according to the Law of God; To which when he
answered most Tyrannically, and avowed he would Tyrannise over them, and
oppress them more than any of his Predicessors, they fell away from him, and
erected themselves into a new Commonwealth 1 King. 12. 16. So when Israel saw
that the King hearkened not unto them, they answered, what portion have we in
David? neither have we inheritance in the son of Iesse, to your tents O Israel,
now see to thine oun house David 2 Chronicles. 10. 16. Now, however the event of
this declared Revolt proved sorrowful, when they and their new King made
defection unto Idolatry, yet if they had stated and managed it right, the Cause
was good, justifyable, and commendable. For (1) We find nothing in all the Text
condemning this (2) On the Contrary its expressly said, the Cause was from the
Lord, that He might perform His saying which He spoke by Ahijah 1 King. 12. 15.
2 Chronicles. 10. 15. And (3) When Rehoboam was preparing to pursue his pretended
right, he was reproved and discharged by Shemajah, ye shall not go up nor fight
against your brethren, for this thing is from me 1 King. 12. 24. 2 Chronicles. 11.
4. (4) Whereas it is alleged by some, that this was of God only by His
providence, and not by His Ordinance; the contrary will appear, if we consider,
how formally and Covenant-wise the Lord gave ten tribes to Jeroboam 1 King. 11.
35, 37, 38. I will take the Kingdom out of his sons hand, and I will give it
unto thee, even ten tribes; And I will take thee, and thou shall reign
according to all that thy soul desires, and shall be King over Israel; And it
shall be, if thou wilt hearken unto all that I command thee, and will walk in
my ways and do that which is right in my sight, to keep my statutes and my
commandments, as David my servant did, that I will be with thee and build thee
a sure house, as I built for David, and will give Israel unto thee. Where we
see, the Kingdom was given unto him on the same Terms and conditions, that it
was given to David. He may indeed give Kingdoms to whom He wi^, by Providential
grant, as unto Nebuchadnezzar and others; but He never gave them a Kingdom upon
these Conditions, and by way of Covenant, that does always imply and import
His Word, Warrant, and ordinance (5) If we consider the Cause of the Revolt, we
will find it very just: for after the decease of the former King, they enter
upon terms of a Compact with the successor, upon a suspensive condition, to
engage into fealty and Allegiance to him as subjects, if he would give them
security for their Liberties and Privileges. A very Lawful, Laudable and
necessary transaction, founded upon Moral equity, and upon the fundamental
Constitutions of that Government, and suitable to the constant practice of
their Predicessors in their Covenanting with Saul and David. As for that Word 1
King. 12. 19. So Israel Rebelled against the house of David: It is no more then
in the margent, they fell away or revolted; And no more to be condemned, then
Hezekiahs Rebellion 2 King. 18. 7. The Lord was with him, and he Rebelled
against the King of Assyria. That was a good Rebellion. Hence, If it be Lawful
for a part of the people to shake off the King, refuse subjection to him, and
set up a new King of their oun, when he resolves to play the Tyrant, and rule
them after his oun absolute power; then it is a duty, when he actually plays
the Tyrant, and by his absolute power overturns Laws and Religion, and claims
by Law such a prerogative: But the former is true: Ergo -- See Ius Pepuli
vindic. chap. 3. Page 52.

4. This same Jeroboam, when he turned Tyrant and Idolater, was revolted from
and deserted by the Priests and the Levites, and after them out of all the
tribes of Israel, by all such as set their heart to seek the Lord God of
Israel; because that King, degenerating into Tyranny and Idolatry, had put them
from the exercise of their office and Religion (as our Charles did, and
ordained him Priests for the Devils and for the Calves: So they returned to
Rehoboam, being induced by his administration of the Government, which for a
time was better then he promised, for three years he walked in the ways of
David and Solomon 2 Chronicles. 11. 13-17. Hence I argue, If Idolatrous Tyrants may
be deserted, then they may be disouned; for when they desert them, they disoune
them abroad, in coming under another Government; and if they may be disouned
abroad, it is the same duty at home, though may be not the same Policy or
Prudence.

5. Another example of the like nature we have in the reign of Baasha, who
succeeded to Nadab Ieroboams son, whom he slew and reigned in his stead (the
same way that the Duke came to the Throne) For he could not keep his subjects
within his Kingdom, but behoved to build Ramah, that he might not suffer any to
go out or come in to Asa. King of Judah, a good Prince, 1 King 15. 17. yet that
could not hinder them, but many strangers out of Ephraim and Manasseh and
Simeon fell to him in abundance, when they saw that the Lord his God was with
him 2 Chronicles. 15. 9. Hence, If people may choose another King, when they see the
Lord is with him, then they may disoune their Country King, when they see the
Devil is with him.

6. When Jehoram the son of Ahab reigned over Israel, we have an express
example of Elisha's disouning him 2 King. 3. 14. 15. And Elisha said unto the
King of Israel, what have I to do with thee? -- As the Lord of hosts lives,
before whom I stand, surely were it not that I regard the presence of
Jehoshaphat the King of Judah, I would not look toward thee nor see thee, Here
he declares so much contempt of him, and so little regard, that he disdains him
a look. And if he would not regard him, nor give him honor, then he did not
oune him as King; for all Kings are to be honored, that are ouned to be Kings
really. It may be alleged by some: that Elisha was an extraordinary man, and
this was an extraordinary action, and therefore not imitable. I shall grant it
so far extraordinary, that it is not Usual to carry so to persons of that
figure, and that indeed there are few Elisha's now, not only for his Prophetic
Spirit which now is ceased, but even in respect of his Gracious Spirit of zeal,
which in a great measure is now extinguished: He was indeed an extraordinary
man, and this Action did demonstrate much of the Spirit of Elias, to have been
abiding with him. But that this was unimitable, these reasons induce me to
deny. (1) Prophets were subject to Kings as well as others, as Nathan was to
David (1 King. 1. 32, 33.) every soul must be subject to the higher powers that
are of God (2) All the Actions of Prophets were not extraordinary, nor did they
every thing by extraordinary inspiration; that was peculiar to Christ, that He
could Prophecy and do extraordinary acts when He pleased, because He received
the Spirit not by measure, and it rested upon Him. (3) this particular Action
and carriage was before he called for the Minstrel, and before the hand of the
Lord came upon him verse. 15. Ergo this was not by inspiration. (4) The ground
of this was Moral and Ordinary, for hereby he only showed himself to be a
person fit to abide in the Lords Tabernacle, and an upright walker in whose
eyes a vile person is contemned, Psalm. 15. 4. and a just man, to whom the
unjust is an abomination Prove. 29. 27. What further can be aledged against this
instance, I see not. And I need draw no Argument by Consequence, it is so plain.

7. This same Jehoram, after many signal demonstrations of the power of God
exerted in the Ministry of His Servant Elisha, which sometimes did extort his
acknowledgment and made him call the Prophet his father, 2 King. 6. 21. yet
when in the strait siege of Samaria he was plagued with famine for his
Idolatry, in so much that the pitiful Mothers were made to eat their oun tender
Children; became so insolent a Tyrant, that being incensed into a madness of
outrageous malice against the Prophet Elisah, that he swear, God do so to him
and more also if the head of Elisha the son of Shaphat should stand on him that
day, accordingly he sent a messenger to execute it. But the Prophet, from a
Principle of Nature and Reason and Law, as well as Grace, and by the Spirit of
a man as well as of a Prophet, stood upon his defense, and encouraged those
that were with him to keep out the house against him, saying, See ye how this
son of a Murderer (a proper style for such a Monster of a King) has sent to
take away mine head... 2 King. 6. 32. This is a strong Argument for self
defense, but I improve it thus: If Tyrants may be opposed as sons of Murderers,
and Murderers themselves, and no otherwise to be accounted then under such a
vile Character, then can they not be ouned as Kings: But here is an example for
the first: Ergo --

8. This man's brother in Law, of the same name, Iehoram the son of Iehoshaphat,
who had the Daughter of Ahab to wife, and therefore walked in the way of the
house of Ahab, gives us another instance. He turned Apostate and Tyrant, and
Abimelech-like (or if you will Yorklike) slew his brethren, and diverse also of
the Princes of Israel; Moreover he made high places in the Mountains of Judah,
and caused the Inhabitants of Jerusalem to commit ^ornication, and compelled
Judah thereto: For which Cause of his intolerable insolency in wickedness,
Libnah one of the Cities of Priests in Judah, Revolted from him 2 King. 8. 22.
because he had forsaken the Lord God of his fathers 2 Chronicles. 21. 10. which was
the motive and impulsive Cause of their disouning him, and is not to be
detorted to that restricted Cavil of Royalists, understanding it only as the
Meritorous or procuring Cause of his punishment and loss sustained thereby; for
it is not so said of the Edomites who revolted at the same time, as it is
mentioned in another Paragraph; Neither of the Philistims and Arabians and
Ethiopians, whose spirit the Lord stirred up against him; These were also a
punishment to him: Nor would it found very suitably to be said, that they
opposed him because he had forsaken the Lord God of his fathers: for that would
insinuate some influence that his Apostasy had on them, as certainly it could
not but have on the Lords Priests that dwelt in Libnah, who understood by the
Law of God, what was their duty to do with Intycers or Drawers or Drivers to
Idolatry: And when they were not in capacity to execute the Judgment of the
Lord, this was the least they could do, to Revolt. Here then is an example of a
Peoples Revolt from a Prince, and disouning Allegiance to him because of
Apostasy and Tyranny.

9. In this Kingdom of Judah, after long experience of a Succession of
Hereditary Tyranny in many wicked Kings, the people after they had long smarted
for their lazy Loyalty in their stupid abandoning, forgetting, and foregoing
this Privilege of disouning Tyrants, and keeping them in order, began at
length to bestir themselves in their endeavors to recover their lost
Liberties, and repress Tyrants Insolences on several occasions. Wherein,
though sometimes there were extravagances, when Circumstances did mar the
Justice of the Action, and some did go beyond their sphere in tumultuary
precipitations; yet upon the matter it was Justice, and in conformity to a
Moral Command. One impregnable witness of this we have, in the pious Plot of
Iehojada the Priest, who being but a Subject, as all Priests were (as the
deposition of Abiathar by King Solomon 1 King. 2. 27. proves) entered into an
Association with the inferior Rulers, to choose and make a new King; and
notwithstanding that the Idolatress and She-Tyrant Athaliab, who had the
Possession of the Government, cried Treason, Treason at the fact, they had her
forth without the ranges, and slew her 2 King. 11. 14-16. This was according to
the Law Deuteronomy. 13. And approven by all Interpreters, even Mr Pool in his
Synopsis Critic. though alias Superlatively Loyal, yet approves of this, and
says, she was an incurable Idolatress, and therefore deserved to be deposed by
the Nobles of the Kingdom: And quotes Grotius in Loc. saying [she reigned by
mere force and no right, and therefore justly repressed by force, for the
Hebrews were to have Brethren for their Kings but not Sisters, Deuteronomy. 17. 15.]
Hence if Tyrants may be forcibly repressed, then may they peaceably be
disouned: But this example comfirms that: Ergo --

10. The Sacred History proceeds in the Relation, how this same Joash, the Son
of Ahaziah, after he degenerated into Murdering Tyranny, was slain by Jozachar
and Jehozabad 2 King. 12. 20, 21. But that was by his oun Servants in private
Assassination; therefore they are called Murderers by Amaziah his Son 2 King.
14. 5, 6. but upon the matter it was the Justice of God, which he deserved (if
it had been duly execute) for the blood of the Sone of Jehojada the Priest 2 Chronicles. 24. 25. So Amon the Son of Manasseh, for his walking in the way of his
Father in Idolatry and Tyranny, and forsaking the Lord God of his Fathers, was
slain in his oun house by his Servants, who conspired against him; But though
this was Justice also upon the matter, and consonant to the Command for
punishing Idolaters and Murderers, yet because defective in the manner, and
done by them that took too much upon them, in a perfidious way of private
Assassination and Conspiracy, therefore the People of the Land punished them
for it 2 King. 21. 23. 24. But the repressing and punishing of Amaziah is a
more unexceptionable instance. The people made a Conspiracy against him in
Jerusalem, and he fled to Lachish, but they sent after him to Lachish and slew
him there 2 King. 14. 19. after the time that he turned away from following the
Lord 2 Chronicles. 25. 27. Which was according to the Command Deuteronomy. 13. which has
no exception of Kings in it. This Action was not questioned either by the
people, or his Successor, as the formentioned Conspiracies were. His son Uzziah
succeeding, who did right and consulted the Lord (2 Chronicles. 26. 4, 5.) did not
resent nor revenge his Fathers death; which certainly he would have done, by
advice of Zechariah who had understanding in the visions of God, if it had been
a transgression. The famous and faithful Mr Knox does clear this passage beyond
Contradiction in his conference with Lithingtoun Hence I take an Argument a
fortiori. If people may conspire and concur in executing Judgment upon their
King turning Idolater and Tyrant; Then much more may they Revolt from him: But
this example clears the Antecedent, Ergo.

11. The same power and privilege of peoples punishing their Princes, was
exemplified in the Successor of him last mentioned, to wit, in Uzziah the son
of Amaziah, called Azariah 2 King. 15. when he degenerated into the ambition of
arrogating a Supremacy, in causes Ecclesiastic and Sacred as well as Civil,
his heart was lifted up to his destruction, for he transgressed against the
Lord his God, and went into the Temple of the Lord to burn Incense. In which
Usurpation he was resisted by Azariah the Priest, and with him fourscore
Priests of the Lord that were valiant men, who withstood him, and told him it
did not appertain to him to take upon him so much, and bade him go out of the
Sanctuary, or else it should not be for his honor. Which indeed he stomacked
at as an affront, to be controled and resisted; but in thinking to resent it he
was plagued of the Lord with leprosy; which the Priests looking upon, they
thrust him out from thence: And thereafter sequestered him from all Supremacy,
both that which he had before in things Civil, and that which he was affecting
in matters Sacred; for he was made to dwell in a Several house, being a leper,
(the Law including (and here execute upon) the King as well as the beggar) and
to resign the Government into his son Jothams hands 2 Chronicles. 26. 16-21. Where
it appears he was not only excommunicated by a Ceremonial punishment, but also
deposed Judicially. Whether he voluntarly dimited or not, it is to no purpose
to contend: its evident, that by the Law of God, the actual exercise of his
power was removed, whether with his will or against it, it is all one; And that
he was punished both by God and by men is undeniable. Yea in this, his
punishment was very gentle, and far short of the Severity of the Law; for by
the Law he should have been put to death, for intermedling with these holy
things, interdicted to all but to the Priests under pain of death Numb. 3. 10.
Numb. 18. 7. The stranger that comes nigh shall be put to death: All were
strangers that were not Priests. Whence I argue, If a Prince, for his
Usurpation beyond his line in things Sacred, may by the Priests be
excommunicated, and by the people deposed; then may a Prince, not only Usurping
a Supremacy (as Charles did) but an absolute power of overturning all things
Sacred and Civil (as James does) and oppressing his subjects in all their
Liberties, be disouned, a fortiori, for that is less than deposing or
dethroning: But this Example clears the Antecedent: Ergo -- See Knox discourse
to Lethingtoun: Lex Rex Quest. 44.. 15. page 461. Ius popul. chap. 3. page 56.

12. What if I should adduce the Example of a Kings Rebellion against, and
Revolt from a Superior King, to whom he and his Fathers both acknowledged
themselves subject? Surely our Royalists and Loyalists would not condemn this;
and yet in justifying it, they should condemn their beloved principle of
uncontroled subjection to uncontrolable Sovereigns possessing the Government.
Ahaz became Servant to the Assyrian Monarch 2 King. 16. 7. yet Hezekiah his
son, when the Lord was with him, and he prospered -- Rebelled against the King
of Assyria and he served him not 2 King. 18. 7. Hezekiah was indeed a King: but
he was not Sennacheribs King; he acknowledges himself his vassal, and that he
offended in disouning him verse. 14. which certainly was his sin against the
Lord, to make such an acknowledgment: for if his Fathers transaction with the
Assyrian was sin, then it was duty to break the yoke; if the Lord was with him
in that rebellion, then it was his sin to acknowledge it to be his offense; And
to make good this ackowledgment, it was certainly his sin to commit Sacrilege
in robbing the House of God, to satisfy that Tyrant. By way of Supplement, I
shall add that instance of repressing a mad and furious Tyrant, which all will
acknowledge to be Lawful. Nebuchadnezzar was both stricken of God with madness,
and for that was depelled from the Kingdom, according to the heavenly Oracle,
The Kingdom is departed from thee and they shall drive thee from men, Dan. 4.
31-33. Calvin says upon the place, he was ejected as usually is done to
Tyrants, by the Combination of the nobles and people, Pool Synopsis Critic. in
Locum. Thus he was unkinged for a time, both by the just Judgment of God, and
by the intermediation of the just Judgment of men; and could not be ouned to
be King at that time, when his nails were like birds Claws, and he could not
tell his oun fingers: They could not oune him to be the Governor then of so
many Kingdoms, when he could not Govern himself. Hence, though this is an
instance of Heathens, yet because they acted upon a rational ground, it may be
argued: If Kings, because of Natural madness when they cannot govern
themselves, may not be ouned; Then also because of Moral madness, when they
will not govern but to the destruction of Kingdoms, may not be ouned: But the
former is true: Therefore also the Latter. The same reason against the
Government of Asses, will also militate against the Government of Tigers, the
first is more eligible then the last.

Fifthly, This may be confirmed from Several promises in Scripture.

1. There are many Gracious and precious promises of Reformation of the
Magistracy, and Restitution of good Rulers, as a great blessing from God to
Mankind and to the Church Isai, 1. 26. I will restore thy Judges as at the
first, and thy Counselors as at the beginning, afterwrrd tho^ shall he called
the City of righteousness. If Judges must first be restored before the City can
be a City of righteousness, then they must be restored before we can oune the
Government thereof: for that Government under which it cannot be a City of
Righteousness, cannot be ouned: since it is no Government but a Rebellion and
Combination of Thieves, see verse. 23. I do not here restrict the promise, as it
is a Prophecy, to its exact fulfillment, as if no Government were to be ouned
but what answers this promise, of the restitution of the primitive order of
Magistrates; but I plead, that when the Princes are rebellious and Companions of
Thieves, the Government is not to be ouned, till Judges be so far restored, as
to reduce righteousness in some measure, which cannot be under Tyranny. And in
the general I may plead, that none is to be ouned as a Magistrate but who some
way is found in a promise; for there is no Ordinance of God, no duty, no
blessing, no good thing, either to be done or enjoyed, but what is in a
promise: but Tyranny, or ouning of Tyrants, or subjection to Usurpers, is not
nor cannot be in a promise. We have many other promises about Magistrates, as
that the Lord will be for a Spirit of Judgment to him that sits in
Judgment, Isai. 28. 6. A Tyrant cannot be capable of this happiness, nor we
under Tyranny, nor any while they oune them. Kings shall be the Churches
nursing Fathers and their Queens her nursing Mothers Isai. 49. 23. Kings are
not always so, but all Kings to be ouned are such as can be so, at least they
are never to be ouned when they turn destroyers of what they should nourish:
But Tyrants can never be Nourishers. It is promised to the Lords people, if
they will hearken diligently unto the Lord, and keep the Sabbath, then shall
there enter into their gates Kings and Princes Ier. 17. 24, 25. And if they
will execute Judgment and righteousness, and deliver the spoiled out of the
hand of the oppressor etc. they shall obtain the same blessing Ier. 23. 3, 4.
But it is never promised, neither does it ever come to pass in Providence, that
these duties procured Tyrants. There are many other promises to the same
purpose, from whence may be concluded, the Lord will not always leave His
people to houl under ineluctable Tyranny, but will accomplish their deliverance
in His oun time and way, though we are not to look to Miracles. Whence I argue.
1. Since all the Ordinances of God, and Rulers in a special manner, are
appointed and promised as blessings, these cannot be ouned for His Ordinance,
which are not Blessings but Curses. 2. That which would vacate and evacuate all
the promises of Magistracy, cannot be a Doctrine of God: But this that obliges
to oune Tyrants and Usurpers, as long as they are up, would vacate and evacuate
all these promises of Magistracy: For except the Lord work Miracles (which are
not in the promise) and do all without means, they cannot be accomplished. For
if any means be used, they must be such as will infer disouning of Tyrants; for
Magistrates cannot be restored except Tyrants be removed, and whatever way they
be removed without Miracles, by others or their oun Subjects, they must still
be disouned, and that before they be removed; for if they be to be ouned
before, their removal, if they exist, cannot make them to be disouned:
dispossession cannot take away their right, if they have it before.

2. There are many promises of breaking the yoke of Tyrants Isai. 10. 27. His
burden shall be taken away from off thy shoulder and his yoke from off thy
neck. And in that promise of the Churches deliverance and enlargment, wherein
they are Prophetically urged and stirred up to some activity in cooperating
with the providence, Isai. 52. 1, 2. they are called to awake and put on
strength and their beautiful garments -- and to shake themselves from the dust
-- and to rise and loose themselves from the bands of their neck, that were
captives. Here is not only a promise of deliverance, or a ground of
encouragment what the Church may expect, but a promise of and direction for
their being active in delivering themselves, as men, from the encroachments
that were made on their humane Liberties, that they should loose themselves
from these bands; Whose bands? from their bands that ruled over them, and made
them to houl, and the Lords Name to be blasphemed ( verse. 5.) Here Is a promise
of breaking the bands of Rulers, by them who houled under their subjection. And
it also includes a precept, that people should not stay any longer under these
yokes, than they can shake them off or slip from under them. Hence we see we
are not to lie stupidly sleeping, or sinking in the Ditch, expecting the
accomplishment of the promise of Deliverance, but are to endeavor actively, in
dependence upon the Lords Assistance, to deliver our selves. Hence we may
argue. 1. A promise by way of Command, that a people under bands of oppressing
Rulers shall rouse themselves up to loose themselves from them, implies and
infers a promise and a duty of disouning those Rulers (for otherwise they
cannot be loosed from their subjection.) But here is a promise by way of
Command, that a people under bands of oppressing Rulers shall rouse themselves
up to loose themselves from them: Ergo -- 2. If the removal of Tyranny and
Usurpation be promised as a blessing, then those can never be ouned to be the
Ordinance of God; for the removal of that can never be a blessing: But in these
promises we see, the removal of those is promised as a blessing: Therefore they
can never be ouned.

Sixthly, To the same purpose we may cite some Threatenings, that will confirm
the same Truth.

1. There are many Threatenings against Tyrants themselves. There are two
mentioned Ier. 22. that seem patly to quadrate, and near of a piece, with our
Misrulers; both because of the demerit of the Threatening, and the likeness of
the Judgment Threatened. The ground of it was building their house by
unrighteousness and their chambers by wrong verse. 13. And severally they are
Threatened: Iehojakim with the burial of an Ass unlamented verse. 18, 19. Coniah
with a life without prosperity, and a death without issue to succeed verse. 30.
The first of these is verified in the Elder of our Royal Brothers, the last is
like to be of both. But that which I take notice of is, first, the demerit,
building their house by unrighteousness, on which Whitehall is built with a
witness: and particularly it is noted of Iehojakim, as his Crimson sin (to
which his Son Iehojakim or Coniah served himself heir) that he burnt Ieremia^
Roll, or Causes of wrath; So did our Dominators burn the Causes of wrath (a
book written by the Commission of the General Assembly) and the Covenants. Then
I note these words verse. 15. Shall thou reign because thou closest thy self in
Cedar etc. It is certainly not fit for us to say, he shall reign, of whom the
Lord says, he shall not reign: but when we oune the Authority of those whom
the Lord threatens they shall not reign, we say, they shall reign: for we say,
they have a rig^t to reign, and oune our selves obliged to do all that is
required in our Capacity, to perpetuate their reign. There is a terrible
Threatening against Zedekiah Ezekiel. 20. 25-27. Thou profane (or as some
translate it; Thou worthy to be killed, Pool. Synops. Critic. in Locum.) wicked
Prince of Israel -- Thus says the Lord God, Remove the Diadem, take off the
Crown, this shall not be the same, exalt him that is low, and abase him that is
high, I will overturn, overturn, overturn it, and it shall be no more until he
come whose right it is, and I will give it him. Than which nothing can be more
applicable to our Princes, who are profane, and the patterns and patrons of it,
whose Diadem the Lord will remove; and if He threaten it, ^wo to them that
contribute to hold it on. We see here, a profane and wicked Prince threatened
to be overturned must not be ouned, because he has no right: But our
Excommunicate Tyrant, is a profane and wicked Prince threatened to be
overturned: Ergo -- There is another dreadful Threatening against Tyrants Am^s
4. 1, 2. Hear this word ye Kine of Bashan, which oppress the poor, which crush
the needy -- The Lord God has sworn by His Holiness, that lo the days shall
come upon you^, that He will take you away with hooks, and your posterity with
fish hooks. Shall we oune these, against whom the Lord has engaged His
Holiness by Oath so solemnly, that He will fish them with hooks? We may fear if
there be such a tie as Allegiance between them and us, that that same hook
which fishes them may also catch us; as it is said of Pharaoh and his subjects,
when he is hooked, then his fish stick unto his scales, and he and they are
left in the wilderness Ezekiel. 29. 4, 5. that is as Grotius expounds it, whoever
are of his Community shall be consorts in his Calamity, Pool Critic. in Locum.
If we then oune them we must be of their Community, and so partake of their
Judgments.

2. There are many Threatenings against illimited Loyalty, and those who had
more of that than Religion: for this Ephraim was broken in Judgment, because he
willingly walked after the Commandment Hos. 5. 11. And because the Statutes of
Omri were kept, and the works of the house of Ahab, therefore the Lord
threatens to make them a desolation Mic. 6. ult. And among other Threatenings
against the men of such universal Loyalty, that is notable Hos. 10. 3. Now ye
shall say, we have no King, because we feared not the Lord, what then should a
King do to us? It is the just punishment of wicked Loyalty, that prefers the
fear and favor of Kings to the fear and favor of God, that at length they are
brought to that pass, that either they have no Kings at all to look to, or else
they have such of whom it may be said, they are no Kings in effect, for they
cannot act the part of Kings to them that trust in them. Hence. 1. If to have
really no Kings be a punishment, then such Kings as are a punishment cannot be
ouned to be Kings; for to have them cannot be a punishment, if the want of them
be a punishment. 2. If those that have the name of Kings, that can do no good,
be no Kings; Then Tyrants that can do no good but a great deal of hurt, must be
reckoned no Kings also: But here its threatened, people that had Kings, that
had the name but could do no good, should reckon they had no Kings: Therefore
much more may Tyrants be reckoned to be no Kings, who can do no good but a
great deal of hurt.

Seventhly, This Truth is confirmed from Scripture Prayers: Whereof there are
many against Tyrants, none for them. Hence we argue, If we are not to pray for
Tyrants then we are not to oune them; for we are to pray for all that are in
Authority 1 Timothy 2. 2, But we are not to pray for Tyrants: Ergo we are not to
oune them. The Minor now must be proved. And this leads me to another
subordinate Question, which has also been a head of suffering to some serious
Seekers of God in our Land of late.

The profane Emissaries of this and the late Tyrant, sent out with bloody
Commissions to hunt after the Lords hidden Ones, in order to murder all whom
they might meet with, that made Conscience of adhering to every part of the
present Testimony; among other trapping Questions to discover their prey, they
used to put this to them as a discriminating Shibboleth, and Tessera of ouning
the present Tyranny, will you say, God save the King? And for refusing this,
many have been cruelly murdered in the Fields; And many before their bloody
Judicatories, have for this been arraigned and condemned, and executed to the
death. Wherefore to this somewhat must be said. 1. By way of Concession. 2. By
way of Vindication, of Scrupling it and Suffering upon it.

First, In the General, it will be necessary to premit by way of Concession. 1.
It is duty to pray, supplicate, and interceed for all men 1 Timothy 2. 1. not
Collectively considered, nor Distributively for every one universally without
exception, but indefinitely and indiscriminately, pro generibus singulorum for
all sorts and sexes, of whatsoever Nation or Religion, Jew or Gentile,
Christian or Infidel, not excluding any for these distinctions: And not only
so, but pro singulis generum also Conditionally, if they be among those all
whom the Lord will have to be saved verse. 4. If they be among those all for
whom the Mediator gave himself a ransom to be testified in due time verse. 5,
6. If they have not sinned the sin unto death, for which we are not bidden pray
1 John. 5. 16. Which, because we know not particularly who are guilty of it,
Charity will oblige us to take into our Prayers many that may never be the
better of them; Yet it is necessary that we pray in Faith, for what, or
whomsoever we pray; at least, if I may so call it, we must have a negative
Faith, a belief that they have not sinned that sin unto death; which we cannot
have of all, there being some whose demonstrations of desperate displayes of
affronted wickedness, and hatred of Godliness, may give ground to doubt of it,
as Christians had of Julian the Apostate. 2. We are obliged to love our
Enemies, to Bless them that Curse us, to do good to them that hate us, to pray
for them that despitefully use and persecute us Math. 5. 44. Accordingly Our
Master, who commanded this, did give us a Pattern to imitate, when He prayed,
Father forgive them for they know not what they do Luke 23. 34. And His
faithful Martyr Stephen, prayed for his Murderers, Lord lay not this sin to
their charge, Act. 7. ult. We are to pity them, and not to seek vengeance
against them, for any injuries they can do to us. Yet, as this does not
interfere with a holy and zealous Appeal to God, for righting and resenting and
requiting the wrongs done to us, that He may vindicate us and our Cause, and
make them repent of their injuries done to us, to the Glory of God, and
Conviction of Onlookers, and Confusion of themselves, which may well consist
with Mercy to their Souls: So all we can pray for them in their opposition to
us, is in order to their repentance, but never for their prosperity in that
Course. And we may well imitate, even against our enemies, that prayer of
Zecharia's, The Lord look upon it and require it 2 Chronicles. 24. 22. But we are
never to pray for Christ's stated Enemies, as to the bulk of them, and under
that formality as His Enemies: for we must not love them that hate the Lord 2 Chronicles. 19. 2. but hate them, and hate them with a perfect hatred, Psalm. 139.
21, 22. We are to pray for the Elect among them, but only to the end they may
escape the vengeance, which we are obliged to pray for against them. 3. We are
not to exsecrate our enemies, or use imprecations against any, out of blind
zeal, or the passionate or revengefull motions of our oun hearts: Our Lord
rebuked His Disciples for such preposterous zeal Luke 9. 55. Ye know not what
manner of Spirit ye are of. But against the Stated and Declared Enemies of
Christ, as such and while such, we may well take a pattern from the imprecatory
Prayers of the Saints recorded in Scripture; such as do not peremptorly
determine about the eternal State of particular persons: which determinations,
except we be extraordinarly acted by the same Spirit, whose Dictates these are,
are not to be imitated by us. We find several sorts of Imprecations in the
Psalms, and other Scriptures: Some are imitable, some not: Some are
Prophetical having the force of a Prophecy, as David's Psalm. 35. 4. Let them be
confounded -- that seek after my Soul -- Let Destruction come upon him Psalm.
55. 15. Let them go down quick to hell. And Jeremiah chap. 17. 18. Let them be
confounded that persecute me -- destroy them with double destruction. Without
this Prophetical Spirit, determining the application of these threatenings to
particular persons, we may not imitate this peremptoriness. Some are Typical of
Christ's Mediatory devoting His Enemies to destruction; who as He interceeds for
His friends, so by virtue of the same Merits (by them trampled upon) He pleads
for vengeance against His enemies: Which Mediatory vengeance, is the most
dreadful of all vengeances ( Heb. 10. 29.) So also Psalm. 40. He whose ears were
opened, and who said lo I come -- verse. 6. 7. that is Christ) does imprecate
shame and Confusion and desolation verse. 14. 15. As also Psalm. 109. the
Psalmist personates Christ, complaining of and imprecating against His enemies,
particularly Judas the Traitor verse. 8. It must be dreadful to be under the
dint of the Mediators Imprecations; And also dreadful to clash with Him in His
Intercessions, that is, to apprecate for them against whom He imprecates, or
pray for them against whom He intercedes. But some Imprecatio^s against the
enemies of God, are imitable such as proceed from pure zeal for God, and the
Spirit of Prayer, as that Psalm. 109. ult. Put them in fear O Lord that the
Nations may know themselves to be but men. Psalm. 83. 16. -- fill their faces
with shame that they may seek thy Name. This is to be imitated in general
against all the enemies of God Psalm 129. 5. Let them all be confounded that
hate Zion; without condescending on particular persons, except obviously and
not odiously desperate, and presumptively Christ's implacable Enemies. 4.
Touching Magistrates it is a great duty to pray, that God would give us
Magistrates, as He has promised for the Comfort of His Church Isai. 1. 26.
Isai. 49. 2. Ier. 30. 21. Promises should be motives and foments of Prayer. We
ought to pray against Anarchy as a Plague, and with all earnestness beg of God,
that the mercy of Magistracy may aga^n be known in Britain, of which it has
been long deprived. 5. And when we have them, it is a necessary Duty to pray
for them; for Kings and for all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet
and peaceable life in all Godliness and honesty 1 Timothy 2. 2. Where it is
specified, what sort we should pray for, and to what end. As we are not to pray
for all men absolutely; for some, as they are declared to be out of the
precincts of of Christ's Mediation, so they must be out of our Prayers: So there
may be some in actual Rule, that may be excepted out of the verge of the
Christians Prayers, as was said of Julian the Apostate. But he that is a
Magistrate indeed, and in Authority, the subjects are to pray and to give
thanks for him, not as a man merely, but as a Magistrate. Yea though they be
Heathen Magistrates, Ezra. 6. 10. We may pray for all in Authority, two ways;
As Men, and as Kings. As Men, we may pray for their Salvation, or Conversion,
or taking them out of the way, if they be enemies to Christ's Kingdom, according
as they are stated; and upon Condition, if it be possible, and if they belong
to the Election of Grace. Though for such as are opposites to the coming of
Christ's Kingdom, as it is a contradiction to the second petition of the Lords
Prayer [ Thy Kingdom come] So in the experience of the most eminent wrestlers,
they have found less faith and less encouragement in praying for them, than for
any other sort of men. It is rare that ever any could find their hands, in
praying for the Conversion of our Rulers. And though we pray that the Lord
would convince them, yea and confound them, in mercy to their souls; yet this
must never be wanting in our Prayers for Tyrants, as men, that God would bring
them down, and cause Justice overtake them, that so God may be Glorified, and
the Nation eased of such a burden. But if we pray for them as Kings, then they
must be such by Gods approbation, and not mere possessory Occupants, to whom we
owe no such respect nor duty. For whatever the Hobbists, and the time-serving
Casuists of our day, and even many good men (though woefully laxe in this point)
homolating both Doctrinally and Practically their heathenish notions, say to
the contrary; I hope it be in some measure made out, that Tyrants are no more
the Ordinance of God, nor to be ouned as His Ministers and Vicegerents, than
the Devil the Prince of this World for the Lords Anointed, or Baals Priests for
true Ministers. If we pray for them as Kings, we must pray for their peace,
prosperity, and preservation, that their Government may be blessed with
success, their designs not frustrated, nor their desires disappointed. This we
cannot pray for Tyrants. 6. Albeit we may pray for the Peace of the Nation, and
for the Government thereof, so far as it may conduce to our oun and the
Churches Tranquillity, that we may live a peaceable and Godly life under it; yet
this cannot be extended to the peace of Tyrants, for whom the best Prayer that
we can bestow is, that the Lord would bridle and restrain them, that they may
not m^r the Churches peace. That Command, Ier. 29. 7. Seek the Peace of the
City, whither soever I have caused you to be carried Captives, and pray unto
the Lord for it, for in the peace thereof shall you have peace, is apparent to
have been but of a temporary nature, upon occasion of their Captivity there,
until the 70 years should be expired, having it also declared by God, that
their oun peace was bound up in that of Babylons: For after that time they are
taught the contrary carriage toward that City, to depart, and pray against it,
and exult and rejoice in its ruin; O Daughter of Babylon, happy shall he be
that rewards thee as thou have served us, that dasheth thy little ones against
the Stones, Psalm. 137. 8, 9. The voice of them that flee out of the Land of
Babylon, to declare in Zion the vengeance of the Lord, the vengeance of His
Temple Ier. 50. 28. And Ier. 51. 35. The violence done to me and to my flesh be
upon Babylon, shall the inhabitant of Zion say, and my blood be upon Chaldea,
shall Jerusalem say. Certainly this is not the season to seek the Peace of
Mystical Babylon, but to pray for the destruction thereof and all its
supporters: Which we cannot do, if we pray for them that improve, employ, and
apply all their power to support it, lest we pray contradictions; as many do,
who pray against Babels brats and yet pray for the King: but the Comfort is
this, that Nonsensical Prayers will do little good, little hurt, but to
themselves that pray them.

Secondly, To vindicate the Scruplers and Refusers of such Compelled and
extorted Devotion, in praying for Tyrants, I shall offer these Considerations.

1. The imposed form of it (which as it is found in the Original from whence it
is taken, is only Paraphrastically expounded, God save the King; and most
Catechrestically applied to Tyrants, being in the native sense of the words of
this signification, Let the King Live; which is a very improper Wish for men of
death, of whom God says, they shall die, and the Law says, they should die,
for their Murders and Capital Crimes) must be taken either as an Adulatory
Complement; or a Congratulatory honor; or a precatory benediction. The first,
as it is extorted most illegally, so it can be rendered neither Civilly, nor
Sincerly, nor Christianly: but all ingenuus men would think it a base
imposition, to be forced not only to subject themselves to their Tyrannical
Oppressors, but to flatter them as if they were not such. Whatever they may
force the mouth to speak dissemblingly, they can never compel the heart to
think, such wishes are due to them; and so they can never be Cordial, nor
consistent with Candor; and to interpose the Holy and Dreadful Name of God, in
a dissembling Complement, to flatter base men, is a horrid mocking of God, and
a heinous taking His Name in vain, contrary to the Third Command. If it be a
Congratulation (as always it is used in Scripture, and in all cases formerly;
being never imposed on men by way of Compulsion, before this set of Tyrants
started up, that know they can get no deference of honest men, but by
extortion) It is the more abominable; not only for the Hypocrisy that is in
it, but the Blasphemy, in giving thanks for the Promoter of the Devils
Interest, and the Destroyer of Christ's, and the Liberties of Mankind. What have
we to Congratulate him for, but for overturning our Laws and Liberties, and
oppressing us in most grievous Tyranny? Besides to give the vilest of men when
exalted any Congratulatory honor, is contrary to the fifth Command, as is
showed above. And it were a forsaking of the Law, thus to praise the wicked,
since they that keep the Law will contend with them Prove. 28. 4. If it be a
Benediction, we cannot bestow it upon one whom our Father Curses, our Mother
Curses, and all our Brethren. It is no less preposterous to bless whom the Lord
declaredly Curses, than to Curse whom he blesses. The Curse of the Lord is in
the house of the wicked Prove. 3. 33. we cannot then bless that house. Nor can
we bless them that our Mother curses, and cries for vengeance against, as she
did against Nebuchadnezzar Ier. 51. 34, 35. Nor them against whom the blood of
our dead Brethren has a Moral Cry, How long O Lord holy and true do thou
not Judge and avenge our blood, Revel. 6. 10. And the vexed Spirits of our
Brethren, yet houling under the same yoke, are putting up before the Throne of
Grace, the same continued Cry, with incessant importunity, How long how long
shall the wicked triumph how long shall they break in pieces thy people? O God
to whom vengeance belongs? Psalm. 94. 1-4. Yea God has said it, and we must
not contradict it in our practice, against all Tyrants that wrest Judgment,
and say unto the wicked thou art righteous, him shall the people, curse Nations
shall abhor him, Prove. 2. 24. And this must stand registered as the everlasting
Claise of all Zions haters, to which all her Lovers must say, Amen, that they
shall be as the grass upon the house tops and never have the benefit of the
Churches benediction Psalm. 129. 8. Neither do they which go by say, the
blessing of Lord be upon you, we bless you in the Name of the Lord. This one
word may be a sufficient Supercedeas from blessing any of the enemies of God,
or of the Church, while acting in a declared opposition to God for the
destruction of His people and interest.

2. Either this -- Save the King, as they mouth it, and demand the repetition
of it, is a Prayer; or it is not. If not, it must be a dreadful profanation of
the name of God, to be commanded to speak to Him, and yet not to pray. If it be
a Prayer, we would expect another way of dealing with us, if rhey really
desired the benefit of our Prayers, than a threatening us with death if we did
it not. And if they did desire it as Darius did, that we might offer sacrifices
of sweet savours unto the God of Heaven, and pray for the life of the King and
of his sons Ezra. 6. 10. we could not refuse to pray for him, so far as might
consist with that Prayer of the same Darius, in that same decree verse. 12. that
God may destroy all Kings and people, that shall put to their hand to alter and
destroy the House of God. We can pray no Prayer inconsistent with this, And to
pray that God would save this King, and yet destroy all Kings that put to their
hand against His House, were to pray Contradictions. But they know they deserve
no Prayers, and must force them if they get them. And all the world knows, that
Compelled Prayers are no devotion; and if they be no devotion, they must be
sin: Imposed Prayers, are not the Prayers that God will hear and accept; And if
we have not the faith of acceptance in them, they must be sin, for whatever is
not of faith is sin, Romans 14. ult. All Prayers which God will hear, must
proceed from the heart voluntarely and fervently, in Spirit and in Truth, with
the whole heart. But imposed and compelled Prayers cannot be such; especially
when they are not only by them imposed, but prescribed as to the form of them.
Which sets and forms prescribed by men, and such men as usurp a Supremacy over
the Church, cannot be subjected to, according to the Word of God, and the
Principles of our Reformation.

3. That infallible Proposition of the Apostle, Whatsoever is not of faith is
sin, must be urged yet a little further: And that with a reference, both to the
Person required to be prayed for, and to the matter of the duty more generally.
First if we cannot pray for this man, neither as a Christian, nor as a King,
then we cannot satisfy this imposed demand; for it will not satisfy to pray
for him as a Heathen: But we cannot in faith pray for him, either as a
Christian, or as a King* Not as a Christian; for besides that he is an
excommunicate Apostate (by a sentance which we believe stands yet rate in
Heaven, Pronounced by a faithful Servant of Christ) and a Papist, which as such
can no more be prayed for than the Pope as Pope;; for whom, and all the limbs
of Antichrist; the only prayer that Protestants can pray, is, that the Lord
would consume him with the Spirit of His Mouth and destroy with the brightness
of His coming 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8. (we cannot reconcile the prayers of some, that
pray against the Pope and his supporters, and upholders of his tottering
Kingdom, and yet for this his Antichristian vassal) His rage and resolution in
prosecuting a war against Christ and His followers, is such, that if we may
make Comparisons, our faith will have little more ground to pray for James, than
Christians of old could find for Julian, the the Apostate. Nor as a King, for
that we cannot do, because he is none with Gods approbation, and may not do,
for a very heathen could teach us to pray, that God would destroy all Kings
that put to their hand to alter and destroy the House of God, Ezra. 6. 12. And
besides, in the Second place, with respect to the matter of the duty in
general: That cannot be in faith which wants a warrant in the Word, either by
precept, promise, or practice: But to pray for wicked Tyrants and Enemies of
God, wants a Warrant in the Word, either by precept, promise, or practice.
There is no precept for it, either General on particular, neither express, nor
any to which this is reducible. And who dare add without a precept in the
Worship of God, either for matter, or manner, or end, what He has not
commanded? for such presumption; Nadab and Abihu were destroyed Levit. 10. 1,
2. because they did that which the Lord had not commanded. What Command can
there be for praying for that, which is against the preceptive Will of God? But
it is against the preceptive Will of God, that there should be Tyrants:
Therefore to pray that these may be preserved in the World, cannot fall under a
Command of God. There is no promise for it, which is the foment and foundation
of Prayer: We can pray for nothing that we have not a promise for, either
General or Particular: But we have none, nor can have any, for the preservation
of a plague to us, as Tyrants are. There is no Practice for it in Scripture, to
pray for Kings that put to their hand to destroy the House of God. Samuel did
indeed mourn for Saul* but the Lord reproved him for it, How long wilt thou
mourn for Saul, seeing I have rejected him from being King over Isrrel? 1 Samuel
16. 1. belike this reproof was for his praying for Saul's preservation as King,
for otherwise we may mourn for wicked wretches, for their sin and Misery both.
But hence, if the Lord reprove His Servant for mourning for a King whom He
disoun^d, then we may not pray for such a King whom the Lord disounes, as He
disounes all Tyrants, for they are set up and not by Him! But the Antecedent is
true in that example of Samuel: Therefore also the Consequent, that we may not
pray for them as Kings, whom the Lord disounes.

4. Moreover to confirm this yet further: That Prayer is not of Faith, and so
sin, which is contrary to the Precepts of God, and his promises, and the
practices of the Saints: But praying for wicked Kings their preservation, is
contrary to these precepts, promises, and practices etc. Ergo -- It is contrary
to some Divine precepts, both Affirmative, and Negative. There is an
Affirmative precept, prescribing what Prayer should be used under the
Domination of Tyrants, that they should weep and say, Spare thy people O Lord,
give not they Heritage to reproach, that the heathen should rule over them,
wherefore should they say among the people where is their God Joel. 3. 17. If
it be a reproach to be under Heathen Rulers, and if we should pray that they
may not Rule, but that Our God may show Himself where He is, and who He is, in
delivering His people from their Domination; Then it is contrary to this, to
pray for the preservation of Tyrants, that do rule over them to their
destruction and reproach: For it is contradictory to pray, that they may not
Rule, and that they may be preserved in Ruling. There is a negative precept,
prohibiting the salutation of Heretics and Enemies of the Gospel, which will
condemn this salutation of Heretical Kings: for in the Original God save the
King is no more than a solemn salutation, or apprecatory Wish that he may
prosper. 2 Epist. John. verse. 10, 11. If there come any -- and bring not this
Doctrine -- neither bid him God speed, for he that bids him, God speed, is
partaker of his evil deeds. God speed, in the Greek, is the same with God save,
in the Hebrew. If then we must not say, God save a Heretic, neither must we
say God save an Hertical King, or a Popish Tyrant, a sworn enemy to the Gospel
of Christ, and the coming of His Kingdom. This is also inconsistent with that
Rule and Directory of our prayers, commonly called The Lords prayer, not only
because it cannot be reduced to any of its petitions (which are comprehensive
of all that we are warranted to pray for) but because it is contradictory to
the Second which is, Thy Kingdom come. The Coming of Christ's Kingdom in our
Land cannot consist with the preservation of the Tyrants reign, which is Satan's
rule: for Antichrists ^ Satan's Kingdom, and Christ's, cannot be promoted both at
once. It may be also demonstrated, that it is inconsistent with all the
petitions of that perfect form of prayer. With the first, Hallowed be thy Name;
for when they who rule over His people make them to houl, then His Name
continually every day is Blasphemed Isai, 52. 5. yea much profaned in the
frequent repeating that imposition. With the Second, Thy Kingdom come for when
He takes unto Him His great power and Reigns, then is the time He, will destroy
them that destroy the earth, Revel. 11. 17, 18. It is against the third, Thy
will be done -- for it is against His preceptive will that there should be a
Throne of iniquity, it shall not have fellowship with Him; as it would have, if
according to His will. And therefore Habbakkuk pleads from the Lords Holiness
and Righteousness against Tyrants, Habbak. 1. 13, 14. It is against the fourth,
Give us this day our daily bread, to pray for them that rob us of it, whom the
Lord has set over us for a plague, to domineer over our bodies, and all the
means of life Neh. 9. 37. The Saints there make a Complaint of Kings, and pray
to remove them, not to save them: The Church also prays against base Rulers on
this account, because under them they get their bread with the peril of their
lives Lam. ^. 8, 9. It is against the fifth, Forgive us our debts or sins; for
if we pray for taking away the guilt of sin, we must also pray for removing the
punishment; whereof this is one, to be under Tyrants: And if it be sin which
brings on such a judgment, then it is sin to pray for the keeping of it on and
continuing thereof: And though we should forgive their sin against us, yet we
ought to complain against their sins against God, and the Church, in defiling
it, and shedding the blood of the Saints Psalm. 79. 1-7. It is against the
sixth, Lead us not into Temptation and deliver us from evil: for their
Government is a continued tract of Temptation, they being a snare on Mizpah and
a net spread upon Tabor Hos. 5. 1. And if we pray to be delivered from all
evil, then we must pray to be delivered from Tyranny, which is a great evil. It
is against the Conclusion also for thine is the Kingdom -- and Glory: Tyrants
being stated in opposition to the Glory of God. Again, in the next place, it is
against many promises of giving good Rulers, and of breaking the yoke of
Tyrants (as I cited several above) Neiether of which can consist with the
preservation of Tyrants, if such a Prayer should be answered according to the
idol of the heart of the supplicants: for if God should save this man as long
as we may pray for him as a King, then all the promises of a Change and
Revolution are precluded. Lastly, it is contrary to the constant tenor of the
Saints prayers against thee Enemies of God. Deborah prayed upon the destruction
of a Tyrant, So let all thine enemies perish O Lord Judge. 5. ult. Iotham prayed
against that bastard King, let fire come out from Abimelech and devour the men
of Shechem, and -- let fire come out from the men of Shechem and devour
Abimelech, Judge. 9. 20. David prays against Saul, whom he calls Cush the
Benjamite in the title of Psalm. 7. alluding to Kish his Father, or because he
was no better than an Ethiopian a Cushite Amos 9. 7. and could no more change
his manners than an Ethiopian can change his skin Ier. 13. 23. See Pool Synops.
Critic. in Locum. Where it is proven that this was Saul; against him he prays
that the Lord would awake to Judgment Psalm. 7. 6. and that He would break the
arm of the wicked and the evil man Psalm. 10. 15. that He would not slay them
(to wit suddenly or in a common way) lest the people forget, but scatter and
bring them down and consume them in wrath, that they may not be, that it may be
known God rules in Jacob to the ends of the earth Psalm. 59. 11, 13. This is a
Psalm against Dogs verse. 6. what Dogs? Saul and his men watching David, See the
Title. As also it is against Saul that he prays, that the Lord would not grant
his desires nor further his devices, and as for the head of them that compassed
him about (which was Saul) let the mischief of their oun lips cover them Psalm.
140. 8, 9. There is also a prayer that the Saints may execute vengeance and the
judgment written upon Tyrants, and bind them with chains Psalm. 149. 7, 8, 9.
The Church is brought in praying for vengeance against the Babylonian Tyrant,
Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon has devoured me -- the violence done to me
and my flesh be upon Babylon shall the Inhabitant of Zion say Ier. 51. 34, 35.
Paul imprecates any man that does not love the Lord Jesus, let him be Anathema
Maranatha 1 Cor. 16. 22. and sure no Tyrant, persecuter and subverter of
Christ's Kingdom, can be a Lover of Christ. The Martyrs under the fifth seal
slain for the Word of God, and the Testimony which they held, are brought in
crying against the Tyrants that murdered them, How long! O Lord, Holy and True,
do thou not judge and aveange our blood, Revel. 6. 9, 10. Which though it be
to be understood of a Moral Cry of blood, as Abels blood cried against Cain;
yet ought to be a pattern of our prayers against such Bloody Enemies, imbrewing
their hands in the blood of our Brethren, for which we ought to pray that the
Lord would haste to make inquisition. Durham Observes from this place, that
Gods people in a holy way may pray for vengeance upon persecuters.

5. Let us consider the person and matter, for whom and for what this prayer is
extorted. Either it is for the personal salvation of James the Papist: or the
Royal preservation of James the Tyrant. It will not satisfy to pray, that if
it be possible, and if it were the Lords will, he might be taken to Heaven,
that so we might be quit of him. Neither were it Lawful to pray that, except we
prayed first, that he might repent of this his wickedness, if perhaps it might
be forgiven him, as Peter directed Simon M^gus to pray for himself Act. 8. 22.
for it is unlawful to pray for the salvation of a Papist, except upon
supposition of his repentance and relinquishing Popery. We must pray nothing
but according to the Will of God; and it is not the Will of God, that they that
have and keep and will not part with the Mark of the beast, should be saved,
for he is adjudged of God to drink of the wine of His wrath Revel. 14. 9, 10.
So we cannot pray for him as a Christian, which he is not; Nor as a Papist,
except that he may get repentance. Nor can we pray for him as a King, which he
is not; nor as a Tyrant, except that he may repent of and relinquish his
Tyranny and Usurpation: for Tyrants as such cannot be saved, no more than
Papists as such; for Tophet is ordained of old yea for the King it is prepared
-- Isai. 30. 33. We cannot then pray for his salvation, except we pray for his
repentance, and relinquishing all his sins, and so we must pray for his
relinquishing his Kingship, and that he may cease to be King; for that is his
sin, that he has made himself King without God, and against the Laws of the
Land. And now while he continues such, we must complain in prayer, not for his
Misgovernment only, but for that he Governs, and desire to be delivered from
him. See Gees Magistrates Original page 258. But now considering what a Man,
and what a King he has been, guilty of Murder, Adultery, Idolatry, under
sentence of the Law both of God and Man; We can pray no otherwise for him, than
for a Murderer, Adulterer, or an Idolater. We cannot pray for him as Clothed
with Authority, or that the Lord may bless his Government for that is his sin
and our Misery that he is a Governor: And his Throne is a Throne of iniquity,
which we dare not pray may have fellowship with God. Can we pray that God would
bless him on a Throne of iniquity? Could we pray, that the Lord would bless a
Drunkard in his drunkenness, abusing his enjoyments? Or a Thief in Stealing
his, though he used his purchase never so soberly? What if prevailing Robbers
by Land, or pirates by sea, preying upon all passengers, should require this as
the sign of subjection to them, and only condition whereupon such as they
apprehended and overcame should be suffered to live, that they should pray for
preservation and prosperity to them? Would not this be wickedness thus to pray
for Thieves and Robbers? And are not Tyrants the greatest of Thieves, that rob
and destroy twenty for one of private Robbers? And do they not require this as
such a sign on such a Condition?

6. Lastly, then the plea will be reduced to this, that it is exacted as a
Badge of Loyalty, and Sign, Tessera, and Sbibboleth of ouning the Authority.
Which I have at this length endeavored to prove, cannot be conscienciously
Ouned by us, in these circumstances. And even by this Argument: That Authority
which we cannot pray for we cannot oune: But we cannot pray for this Tyrannical
Authority: Ergo -- The Minor I trust is in some measure made manifest, by what
is said above. And so I conclude this Head, with that form of prayer, that I
use for the King. O Lord God to whom vengeance belongs, show thy self; lift
up thy self thou Judge of the Earth, render a reward to the proud. Lord how
long shall the wicked? how long shall the wicked Triumph? Shall the Throne of
iniquity have fellowship with thee, that Frames Mischief by a Law? The Mighty
and Terrible God, destroy all Kings and people, that put to their hand to alter
and destroy the House of God. Overturn, Overturn, Overturn this Throne of
Tyranny, and let it be no more, until he come whose right it is.

HEAD III. The Refusing to Swear and Subscribe the many unlawful imposed Oaths,
for which many have suffered great Cruelties; Chiefly that of Abjuration which
was the Cause of Several their Suffering to Death, Vindicated.
ANother Great Head of Grievous Sufferings in this fatal Period, has been,
that during this Stated War between Christ and His Enemies in Scotland, He has
no wanted Witnesses, who in their Wrestlings for the Word of God and the
Testimony which they held, thought it their duty to refuse all illegally
imposed and wickedly required Transactions with His Declared Enemies, and
tampering any manner of way with them, in taking or subscribing any of their
conscience-conzening Impositions of deceitful and destructive Bonds and Oaths,
obtruded by men who have cast off all sense of a Deity or regard to Humanity,
upon the Consciences of poor people, to debauch them and cast them down from
the only excellency, or integrity, that was left them: Whereby (though they
have missed of their design as to some, who through grace have escaped the
snares of these fowlers, and in resisting have overcome through the blood of
the Lamb) they have prevailed to inveigle the Generality, even of the
Professors of this Generation, into such a degree of defection and wretched
Compliance with all their snares, that as it Prognosticates universal
desolation ineluctable (if it be not prevented by Repentance, as universal as
the Compliance has been) So it proclaims the infamy of the Complyers perjurie,
as indeleble as their perfidie with whom they have complied. The Consideration
of which woeful Apostacy, in its various steps by which it has been propogated
and promoted, ought to deter and demur all the fearers of God, that would not
partake of its threatened punishment, from venturing any more to come near the
brink, or border of such precipices, and paths of the destroyer, when so many
have stumbled, and fallen, and been hooked, and snared, and taken; yea not so
much as to look near them, lest they be left to follow their look, but to stand
aloof from every appearance of Transacting with these Man-Catchers, yea
Conscience-Catchers, who are so cunning to ensnare and destroy; as their
predicessors, to whose sins and Judgments also they serve themselves heirs, are
described by the Holy Ghost Ier. 5. 26. -- 29. They lay wait as he that sets
snares, they sct a trap, they catch men -- their houses are full of deceit,
therefore they are become great and waxen rich -- shall I not visit for these
things says the Lord? Many and manifold have been the snares, traps and gins,
laid in the way of Professors of this Generation and Nation, by these
Mischief-hatchers, these keen and cunning persecuters, the party now regnant or
rather raging, in madness and malice against Christ and all that are Loyal and
zealous for His Interest against their Encroachings thereon; Where by they have
caught and cozened many out of their Conscience, and have broken the neck of
some, the Peace of others, and the heart of not a few. Yea no Nation can be
instanced, wherein so many Oaths and Bonds, have been imposed on peoples
Consciences, so nawseating for naughtyness and number as well as noxious in
their nature, in an Age, as have been in Scotland within these 27 years past;
on design to wast all remainder of Conscience, or sense of Religion among
people, that so having worn out the awful impression of it, they might
introduce what they would, upon a people involved in the same Apostasy with
themselves: And either to incorporate all with themselves in the same
Combination against the Lord, or to exstirpate all Dissenters, who should
discover any tenderness of Conscience, in not going along with them in the same
excess of riot. And to the end they might have the greater concurrence and
countenance, with the help of hells Policy, they contrived them in such terms,
as might engage many to take them, and load the Recusants with odious
obliquies, either as silly Scruplers, or seditious Schismatics, or Rebels.
For this has been all alongs their grand project, to Level their designs
against Religion, not directly and formally under that notion, but obliquely to
the destruction of the Lovers and Professors of it, under the Nickname of
fanatical Enemies to Government. Of these ensnaring Engines levelled to these
ends, some have been more patent and open, others more laten^ and hidden; both
have made a prey of people, the last chiefly. For a snare, the more latent and
hidden it be, and the more varnished over with the vermilion of pretended
honesty and innocence, it is the more dangerous; and will be ^o accounted by
all the Circumspect and Cautious, as in its design more destructive, and in its
effects when discovered more dolorous, than that which is more open and
manifest. A hook, the bra^er that it is busked; and the better that it is
baited, the surer and more successful it is to catch the simple fish; if it
want its busking, they will not so readily bite at it. In vain is a net spread
in the sight of any bird: yet, though this is a Truth, such silly birds have
the bulk of us been, such silly doves without a heart, and so senslessly
stupefied, as to suffer our selves to be blind-folded and hood-winked into
snares, of such a manifest baseness, as none could be readily supposed might
fall into, who did not brutishly abandon all common sense of Reason, besides
Religion: As the Test, and Oaths of arbitrary Allegiance, Bands of Conformity
and irregular Regulation etc. Some again, and these Alas! too many, have been
ensnared with snares of a more smooth, soft, and subtle Complexion, and
poisoned with gilded arrows, colored over with the specious pretexts of the
enemies relenting Condescendency and tenderness, stooping now to universal and
general terms, obviously thought capable of a very good Construction, and
daubed over with the untempered mortar of the frequency of the almost
universally unscroupled subscription of very good and Conscientious men, and
the rarity of Recusants lying under the reproach of some few, wild, fantastical
fools. These well busked hooks have caught many; of which sort have been many
banded Indemnities, and easily swallowed Oaths thereunto appended. Though the
present indeed is contrived without gins of this sort, and now all these snares
of Oaths and Bands are as illegally taken away as they were before imposed;
upon the same design, to catch silly fish by other methods; not with hooks as
before, but with a large spread net, to hale the whole School to Antichrists
shore; And to put to proof and practice the vastness of that Leviathan
Prerogative of Absolute power, to dispense with all Oaths; especially because,
in all of them even the most monstrous, people might think there was some tie
Obliging them to maintain the Protestant Religion, therefore to obliterate
that, and bury it in oblivion, all now are taken away; But the guilt of them
still remains upon the Land, and the grievous Cry of sufferings for refusing
them still continues; And therefore the iniquity of them must be looked unto
and lamented, and that with an eye to the account and reckoning must be
rendered for them, to a Greater Judgment than that of Creatures. But among all
these destructive and diabolical devices, there have been none more charming
and cheating, than that Cunningly Contrived Oath of Abjuration, as it is
called, enjoined to be taken by all within the Kingdom, by a Proclamation about
it Representing a late Declaration, emitted by that party whose sufferings I am
vindicating (as a Manifesto of their Grievances, and necessities to fall upon
severe Resolutions toward their Enemies) under* the most odious Character,
that the malice of men helped with hells hatred could devise; And requiring all
to Abjure it in the most peremptory manner, and under the severest penalty,
that ever was heard. This Oath, I say, was contrived with such cunning, and
followed with such keenness, that it has involved more under its obligation,
and engaged more to subscribe it, than any other that went before it: because
it has been painted over with such pretexts, as never any before was capable
of. The pressing of it has been so impartial, upon all traveling in the
Country etc. And their acceptance of the Pass annexed to it thought so
necessary, as without it no business could be gone about. Its subscription so
universally unscrupled, even by the Generality of great Professors and
Ministers too; the thing abjured represented so odious, as no honest man could
refuse to renounce; And the matter renounced, under its best aspect and
Construction, esteemed only a paper Declaration, of a party very despicable,
wherein the Principles, profession, or Confession of the Church seems no way
concerned; and if any way concerned, yet the Concern appearing so small, as few
or none durst state their Sufferings upon that head. Yet I believe, if either
such as have taken it, or others that may have the tentation of the like
hereafter, will impartia^ly ponder it; so much iniquity may be discovered in
it, as may oblige the one to mourn in the sense of its sinfullness, and the
other to beware of its danger. And so much the rather would I offer this to
Consideration, that I know one who was woefully wheedled into it, that found the
bitter effects of this poisoned pill in his wounded Conscience, after
reflections on the deed, in such a measure that he despaired of ever recovering
Peace. And this man had as much, and more to say, to justify his deed, than any
that ever took it; having it with all the advantages that ever it could be
tendered with: for, being urged thereunto before the Iusticiary, he expressly
refused to disoun that Declaration, and the Principles whereupon it was
founded, and told them that it was misrepresented in the Proclamation: And when
they yielded to an abstract disouning of it in so far as the Proclamation
represents it, or if so be it might be so represented, he gave in a sense in
writ, wherein he would take it; showing that upon supposition the Declaration
did assert such things as was represented, he would disoune it: And after the
sense was accepted as satisfactorie, he refused to swear after the ordinary
manner, following the Clerks blind manuduction, but behoved to have it written
down: And when it was written, with express specification of that Apologetical
Declaration, he refused to swear it, till it was altered and corrected, And the
Word pretended put in the stead of it: which done, before he subscribed it, he
protested it might be constructed in no other sense, than the genuine meaning
of the words he delivered in, and that it might not be reckoned a Compliance
for fear of his life: yet not withstanding of all this, he lost the Jewel of
inward peace, and knew the terror of the Lord for many days. Therefore I shall
chiefly insist on discovering the iniquities of this last Oath, called the
Abjuration Oath, both because it is the smoothest, and more generally taken
than any other, and approven by many that condemns the rest, and the refusing
it has been punished by death, and most illegally pressed upon all, under the
penalty thereof, as none of the rest was; And because as all other Oaths
successively imposed, were so contrived that the last did alwise imply and
involve the substance of the former, So it will appear that the iniquity of
none of the preceding Oaths was altogether wanting in this. But to the end,
both the Complication of the iniquities of this Oath may be evidenced, and the
Continued strain of all the Oaths (which have also been heads of suffering,
though not to this degree) may be discovered; I shall touch somewhat of all the
sorts of them, And show that their iniquity cleaves to this last Oath: And then
come to canvass this Oath it self, After I have premitted some General
Concessions.

First, In a few Words some General Concessory propositions may be premitted.

1. That Oaths both Assertory and promissory are Lawful, will not be denied but
by Quakers etc. It is clear, Swearing is a Moral duty, and so material, that
oftentimes it is used for the whole Worship of God Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Thou shall fear
the Lord thy God, and shall serve Him, and Swear by His Name Deuteronomy. 10. 20. --
To Him shall thou cleave and Swear by His Name. The reason is, because by
whomsoever we swear, Him we profess to be our God, and invocate Him as witness
of our hearts uprightness, and honest meaning in the thing sworn, according as
it is understood by both parties, and as aveanger if we prove false. Hence
every Oath which does not bind us faster to serve and cleave to Him, is but a
breach of the Third Command. Again it is not only Commanded as a duty, but
qualified how it should be performed Ier. 4. 1, 2. Where it is required of a
people returning to the Lord, to Swear in Truth, in Judgment, and in
Righteousness. Hence every Oath which is not so qualified, and does not consist
with a penitent frame, is sin. It is likewise promised in the Covenant, that
Believers shall speak the language of Canaan, and swear to the Lord Isai 19.
18. every Oath then that is not in the language of Canaan, is unsuitable to
Believers, that is to say, Consentaneous to the Word of God, and Confession of
our faith. Again, He that swears in the earth shall swear by the God of Truth
Isai. 65. 16. and therefore that Oath which is not according to Truth, is
dishonorable to the God of Truth. If all the Oaths imposed upon Scotland these
many years, were examined by these Touch-stones, they would be found all
naught. So giving Bands for security, which for obligation are equivalent to
promissory Oaths, are also Lawful materially: but with the same qualifications,
otherwise they are sinful.

2. This duty when suitably discharged, truly, judiciously, righteously, in
the fear of God, according to His. Will, is in many cases very necessary. Not
only in vows, in which God is the party, in matters morally necessary, to
keep the righteous Judgments of God, Psalm. 119. 106. Nor only in National
Covenants for Reformation, and promoting the Interest of Christ, whereof we
find many Instances in Scripture, in Moses, Joshua, Asa, Hezekiah, Josiah,
Ezra, Nehemiah, their making and renewing such Covenants by Oath, coming under
the dreadful Curse of it if they should break it. And this may make our hearts
meditate Terror, for the universal unparalelled Breach of Solemn Covenants with
God, that exposes the Nation to the Curse of it. But also in humane
Transactions, whereunto God is invocated as a Witness; as in National
Transactions, at choosing and inaugurating their Magistrates, for security of
Religion and Liberties, as we have many examples in Scripture. Seldom indeed
do such bonds hold Tyrants, but it is this Generations indeleble brand and
bane, that without this they have come under the yoke of ineluctable slavery,
and have entailed it upon posterity. As likewise in Contracts and mutual
Compacts of Friendship or stricter Association, when Edification or other
Sa^faction or security Calls for it, as Jacob swear to Laban, David to Jonathan
etc. In which the matter must be clear, and mutually understood, and honestly
meant, without (equivocation and mental Reservation, and all ambiguity, as also
possible and likely to continue so: for otherwise, it were but a mocking of God
and man, to swear a thing we either cannot or will not perform, according to
the meaning of him in whose favors the Oath is given. But withal we ought to
be sparing in such things, except where the matter of the Oath or Band is
weighty and necessary, and not multiply them needlessly upon formality or
Custom: for if there were suitable Confidence in one another, there would not
be need for so many of these securities. And specially in Relative stipulations
betwixt man and wife etc. Where an indissolvable relation is entered into. And
in a particular manner, even in things Civil, when we are called thereunto by a
Lawful maigstrate, for deciding of Contraversies, or our oun vindication, or to
Confirm our Obligation to some duty, An Oath for Confirmation is an end of all
strif^ Heb. 6. 16. But alwise in this the matter must be Lawful, according to
the will of God, and true, and certainly known, and also necessary, weighty,
useful, worthy of such Confirmation, for the Glory of God, and the good of our
Neighbor, that His Holy Name be not taken in vain; for otherwise if the matter
be false, God is made Witness of a lie; if uncertain, Conscience Conde^ns us
that we know not, nor care not, what we call God Witness to; if unlawful, then
God is called to approve what He has comdemned, and so to contradict Himself
which is horrid Blasphemy. With all which Cases, if we compare and examine all
these Delusory Oaths, and hell-devised Impositions on Consciences in these
days, obtruded to debauch and ensnare them; Not one of them, levelling all at
one design, how smoothly soever conceived, can be taken without a wound and
wramp to the Conscience.

3. Of all these Cases, only two are applicable to our imposed Transactions
with our wicked Rulers, to wit, in the matter of friendly Contracts, or in the
matter of Judicial Appearances before them, and Swearing and Banding before
them, and to them. In both which, there must be a sort of Confederation with
them. In Contracts with them it will not be doubted: And in Judicial submitting
to their Authoritative Impositions of such Securities, it is evident, there
must be also a Confederation with them, not only in acknowledging their
Authority, but in coming under mutual exacted stipulations; wherein, by taking
these Oaths and Bands, we give them security of orderly ^ubjection, as members
of the Community whereof they are Judges, and get their security of
acquittance, and that we shall not be molested nor prosecuted among the
Recusan^s. Now concerning this Confederation, I shall concede in two cases it
may be ouned, and Consequentially Oaths and Bands may be given to men of their
stamp. 1. A Confederation which is more Discretive or Discriminative may be
allowed to them; that is, such bargains wherein they and we are kept still
divided as two parties, and not under one Incorporation, as in Contracts of
Conhabitation, liveing under them as Tenants, buying and selling, and the like.
But we cannot enter into a Confederation unitive with them, which may make us
one body or party. 2. A Confederation which is necessary and unavoidable; when
either an unavoidable strife or contention does arise between them and us,
whereupon we are compelled to answer in Law, and can no otherwise be decided
but by our Oath of Confirmation, which is an end of all strife; or when we are
falsely accused of some odious and heinous Crime, as of Murder or Adultery: It
is then Lawful and necessary to vindicate our selves, by giving all these Legal
Confirmations that we are free of these things; for otherwise to lie under the
imputation of such enormities, were shamefully scandalous to Religion. But we
cannot allow any Transactions of this sort, which are elective and voluntary,
to make or pursue either peace or pleas with them, when our oun Interest or
benefit draws us thereunto, but ere we go to Law or give Oaths and Bonds to
and before the unjust and perfidious, and such also as we cannot oune as
Magistrates, we would rather take wrong and suffer our selves to be defrauded,
as the Apostle advises 1 Cor. 6. 1, 7. It was not unlawful, as Expositors show
from that place, for the Corinthians to answer in Law for their oun
vindication, being pursued by a Heathen, but it was utterly a fault to go
voluntarly one with another. And if to pursue a brother was a fault, then much
more to go to Law with an Apostate, with whom there should be less meddling. And
if to go before the unjust Magistrates, as these Heathen Judges were at Corinth
who yet were Magistrates, was utterly a fault, then much more to go before such
as have neither rightful nor righteous Authority at all: Which yet must be
acknowledged, if we take Oaths and Bands before them; for none can exact these
but acknowledged Magistrates. Hence it is apparent, it would be an Elective
Confederation with these wicked Usurping Judges, when brought before them to
take their tendered Oaths and Bands, not as parties pursued before them, but as
transacting with them, with whom as well as before whom we must give these
Confirming Securities: And so not only must we acknowledge them to be Gods,
among whom the Lord ^itteth, whose Holy Name is interposed in such Solemn
Transactions, but also we must swear and enter in bands to them as they
require. This indeed is necessar when called before them against our will, and
accused of horrid Crimes; as was always in the imposition of the Oath of
Abjuration audaciously imputed to the Refusers, that they asserted Murdering
Principles, and ouned it Lawful to kill all that served the King; In such a
Case, to declare with the most solemn Asseverations, for vindication of Truth,
that we disoune not only all such Assertions, but all such thoughts as that it
is Lawful to kill all that serve the King, or any that serve him because they
serve him, or because they have injured us any manner of way, and to declare
our abhorrence of all Murder and Assassinations. But to swear such things to
them, when we are altogether innocent, would be a granting that we were legally
suspect, by offering a legal purgation. And so all the Subjects of Scotland
should take upon them to purge themselves from a suspicion of Murder, which
were odious. And to abjure a Declaration as asserting such things, when it
asserts no such thing, is a Swearing to a lie.

4. All Solemn Securities of Oaths, or Bonds that are Sacred Promises, are
stricti juris of most strict and indispensible obligation, as Mr Durham on the
Third Command shows in many cases: No man's loss or private prejucice can make
it void (though we swear to our oun hurt we must not change Psalm. 15. 4.) Nor
indifferency in the matter, if once engaged in (for then our Souls are bound
Numb. 30. 2.) Nor deceit of others, if the deceit be circumstantial only, as in
the Gibeonites case: Nor the exstortion of it by fear or violence, if the
matter be Lawful: Nor rashness and sin in the manner, if Lawful in the matter,
as with the Gibeonites: Nor another meaning afterward devised, not according
to the Imposers mind, nor our oun at first who took it (that's but a swearing
deceitfully Psalm. 24. 4.) Nor any good meaning or design in reversing the Oath
( Saul was punished for breaking his Oath with the Gibeonites, out of zeal 2 Samuel 21. 2.) Nor though the Oath be conceived by Creatures, (as by the Altar or
Temple etc. Math. 23. 20-22. Nor when the thing becomes impossible, if that
possibility could have been foreseen or prevented: Nor any other secret
meaning, by equivocation or mental reservarion, which are abominable: Nor any
Dispensation from Pope Or King: Nor any other posterior Oath. None of these
things can make an Oath void, but if we have bound our selves God will require
it; for who so despises an Oath, by breaking the Covenant, when lo he has
given his hand be shall not escape, God will recompense it Ezekiel. 17. 18, 19.
They are null indeed and of no force, when they become bonds of iniquity tying
to things unlawful or impossible; or when the thing sworn is not in our oun
power Numb. 30. 5. Or when there is deceit in it, not in Circumstantialls only,
but in Essentialls; Or when it hinders a greater good; when the case Materially
alters; or when the party sworn to relaxeth us. All these do condemn the
horrid breach of the Sacred and Solemn League and Covenant, and Confutes the
perverting and wresting the words of it in the third Article, as if it did
oblige to Allegiance to Tyrants; for in that case the obligation is unlawful,
and there is a deceit in essentialls, and the case materially alters (for in
the Covenant we are bound to the King, not to a Tyrant) and the party sworn to
has relaxed us long ago, by annulling the Covenant yet all these things prove,
that the Covenant is still in force: And that all the Oaths and bonds
contradictory to it, are sinful: and yet, tho it be sinful to take them, and
sinful to keep them, it is nevertheless perjury to break them, especially to
them whose erroneous conscience is bound by them, under a Notion of their
Lawfulness. And in a special manner, it is here conspicuous, how deceitful a
jugle that sinful shift of many has been, that they could subscribe an
unlawful bond under a penalty; As for example, to answer to their Courts, or to
go to Church, or separate from the persecuted Meetings of the Lords people,
under such a penalty, which they thought to pay the penalty would clear them
of, as if it were only an Alternative band. The iniquity of this Juggle will
appear, if we consider, such Bonds cannot be Alternative: for Alternatives are
always disjunctive, binding equally either to this or that; and the one
Alternative is no more determinately enjoined by the Imposer, than the other.
And so, if these Bonds were Alternative, it should be in the binders choice,
whether to Answer the Court, go to Church, to separate Meetings; Or pay so much
money. But it is not so, for the Stipulation and promise is determinate to the
obligation, for which the bond is required, and the penalty is annexed, as a
punishment of the breach of that obligation. And that fancy of cluding the bond
by paying the penalty, would quite enervate all security among men, in their
mutual compacts of that nature; and under that pretense, they might give a
satisfactory Compliance to the most wicked imposed obligation imaginable^ to
subscribe the Turks Alcoran, with a reserved intention only to pay the imposed
penalty. Which Reservation is so far from being suitable to that Christian
Simplicity the Gospel requires, that it does not answer that Moral honesty that
our concern in the good of humane Society calls for. Its incumbent on all that
expect to Dwell in Gods Holy hill, to have this requisite qualification for
one, though they swear to their oun hurt they will not change it, and they must
be far from swearing deceitfully: And Consequently, if they bind themselves by
a promise, which a Christian should be no less tender of than of his Oath, they
must keep it. And besides, to condescend that that penalty or fine should be
paid, by our selves or friends in our behalf, were to condescend that these
Enemies should be enriched by our oun or the spoil of our friends, upon the
account of the forfeiture of our promise; which seems such a dishonest and
dishonorable thing, that an honest heart would disdain it. And though this
should be flouted as foolish preciseness, to choose rather to lie still and
suffer in such a case; yet it may be considered that Christ's Cross, even with
reproaches, is alwise a better Choice, than the works Ease, purchased at any
price which is a hire for Christ's enemies.

5. All Divines and Casuists do grant, that an Oath must be taken in his sense
and meaning who tenders it, and in whose favors it is conceived: because Oaths
and Bonds are for security, and therefore whosoever would deal honestly and
Christianly in taking an Oath, must take in the sense that it is understood by
such as impose it: Otherwise the Holy Name of God should be taken in vain, and
the swearers and promisers shall deal deceitfully, in frustrating the end of
the Oath or bond, and the design of the tenderers thereof. And therefore, as
Reason and Religion requires, that all Oaths or Bonds be so conceived and
enunciated, that all concerned may understand them, and if there be any doubt
how far they bind, the Imposers should explain the same, as Abraham did to his
servant: So Conscience requires, that they be always taken in the Imposers
sense, and as they discover their sense and sentiments of them, and not
according to the meaning that we may think the words Capable of; Nor yet
according to the wheedling explications that they may give or allow, which are
as deceitful and insnaring as the things themselves. Nor is it to be looked
upon as a favor to get a Liberty to put a sense upon them, contrary to their
known meaning; for that is but a Liberty to mock God, to mock others, and our
selves too, and nothing but a snare to the Conscience. And to put a Gloss upon
printed Oaths or Bonds, which in strict Construction they will not bear, and
then to subscribe them inte^ninis as offered, is not only an intangling our
selves into the bond of sinful Oaths and Bonds, but to stumble the Godly, and
harden the wicked in the present, and to mock posterity in future ages; who
shall see the Oaths in terminis subscribed, but not the sense they were taken
in, See Apolog. Relat. Sect. 14. It is known by manifold experiences that it is
dangerous to hearken to their overtures who study to ensnare us, but far more
hurtful and hateful to propound overtures to them. For they interpret it a
Ceding and giving ground, and when they see a man beginning to yield, then they
will seem to be very condescending, even to accept of little at first that they
may draw him on to more: like cuning Anglers, sometimes recoyling and drawing
back the well baited and busked hook, to invite the poor unwary fish to pursue,
and sometimes leting it run away with the hook, when it begins to bite kindly:
So when thy find a man offering and ready to accept of Accommodations, they
will be very yielding and easy, but with a design to hook him. But Conscience
can find no safety at present, nor satisfaction afterward in accommodations
with them. For it is plain to all that are not blinded with Ignorance, or
partiality, or a Judicial stroke, that our Imposers are such sons of Belial as
cannot be taken with hands, or by the hand; And if we reflect upon the matters
upon which these Accommodations are to be offered or accepted, they are not
things upon which we may come and go, upon our discretion, as we do with our
oun particulars, or with Problems to be disputed, or ambiguous propositions
capable of different senses; but matters so and so circumstantiate, as do
require the positive determinate Judgment of the Conscience, Concerns of Truth
and falsehood, duty and sin, which cannot admit of Accommodation, or
dispensation, or Reservation, or any other sense than the Imposers and they
that state their Inquisition about such things do oune, and are observably
known to have and maintain about them. Otherwise, all other forged
Accommodations are but tampering tricks, juggling with juglers, deceiving the
deceivers, in such a way as does not well consist with the simplicity of the
Gospel, or the doves innocence: for what is that but a swearing or promising
deceitfully! Psalm. 24. 4. a conceiving and uttering from the heart words of
falsehood Isai. 59. 13. a false Oath Zech. 8. 17. which are hateful to God, who
will be a swift Witness against (...) swearers Mal. 3. 5. Neither will they be
so easily deceived, for they will readily yield to accommodations, or any
tolerable sense that we can put upon their snares; for they reckon that a
yielding in part, and are glead to find us so far justifying their acts and
impositions, as by our offer practically to declare they bear a good sense, and
they will come many ways to our hand to get us kooked so.

Secondly, These things being premitted, I shall offer Reasons why it was
necessary in point of Conscience, to Refuse all the Oaths hitherto tendered,
and Consequently Conscientious Sufferers upon this Account will be vindicated.
And first some General Reasons against all of them together, and Then a Word to
each sort of them.

1. There is one General Argument, that will Condemn coming in any terms of
Oaths or Bonds with that party, that have broken the Covenant, overturned the
Reformation, and destroyed the people of the Lord: Because such Transactions
with them (as is hinted above) are a sort of Confederacy with the known Enemies
of Truth and Godliness, importing a voluntary subjection to them, Compliance
and Incorporation with them, as members of the same Community, whereof they are
acknowledged to be head. Now all such sort of Confederacy with such malignant
Enemies of God and of the Church, is unlawful, as Mr. Gillespie demonstrates in
his Useful Case of Conscience, concerning Associations and Confederacies with
Idolaters, or any known Enemies of Truth and Godliness. Though Civil Compacts
for common Commerce may be allowed, as Abram was confederate with Aner, Eshcol,
and Mamre Genesis 14. 13. Jacob Covenanted with Laban by way of Lawborrowes Genesis
31. 44. But Sacred Confederations of this sort, are unlawful from these
Arguments. 1. The Law of God condemns them Exodus 23. 32. Thou shall make no
Covenant with them, nor with their gods, they shall not dwell in thy Land, lest
they make thee sin against me -- Where not only Religious Covenants are
discharged in a tolleration of their Idolatry, but familiar Conversation also,
they shall not dwell in thy Land. If then we must not suffer them, if in
Capacity, sure we must far less be imposed upon by them; if we are not to be
familiar with heathens, far less with Apostates, that calls themselves
Christians: for the Apostle lays much more restraint from communion with them,
than with Pagans 1 Cor. 5. 10, 11. The reason of the Law, lest they make thee
sin, as long therefore as there is that hazard of sinning, the Law obliges to
that caution. So Exodus 34. 12-16. Take heed to thy self lest thou make a
Covenant with the inhabitants of the Land -- lest it be a snare -- but ye shall
destroy their Altars -- lest thou make a Covenant with them -- and they go a
whoring after their gods and thou take of their daughters unto thy sons -- Here
again, all Sacred Transactions are discharged, upon a Moral and perpetually
binding ground, and all Toleration is prohibited, and Conjugal Affinity. Such
compliance brought on the first desolating Judgment, the flood on the old world
( Genesis 6. 1, 2, 3.) when the Godly conformed and incorporated themselves, and
joined in affinity with that ungodly crew, from whom they should have separated
themselves. Likewise Deuteronomy. 7. 2, 3, 4, 5. -- Thou shall make no Covenant with
them, nor show mercy unto them, neither shall thou make marriages with them --
for they will turn away thy son from following Me -- so shall the anger of the
Lord be kindled against you -- but thus shall ye deal with them, ye shall
destroy their Altars. Where all Transactions with a people devoted to
destruction are discharged, even that of tolleration of Malignant enemies;
according to which precept, David resolves to destroy early all the wicked of
the Land, and cut off all wicked doers from the City of the Lord Psalm. 101. 8.
Mark this All, of what degree or quality so ever, without respect of persons.
And lest it should be thought this is meant only of these seven Nations there
enumerate, the Law is interpreted by the Spirit of God of many other Nations;
where Solomon is condemned for joining in affinity with other wicked people,
besides these 1 King. 11. 1, 2. So that it is to be understood generally:
against Confederacies with all, to whom the Moral ground is applicable, and the
danger of insnaring the people of God. It is clear likewise, we must have
nothing to do with the wicked, but to treat them and with them as enemies Psalm.
139. 21, 22. with whom as such there can be no Confederation; for that supposes
always the enmity is laid aside, but that can never be between the Professors
of Religion and the professed Enemies thereof: but that must always be the
language of their Practice, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, for the Lord
has heard me Psalm. 6. 8. The command is peremptory and perpetual, for sake the
foolish, Prove. 9. 6. make no friendship with them, Prove. 22. 24. Say not a
Confederacy to them Isai. 8. 12. Where it is clear from the opposition in that
Text, betwixt Confederating with the wicked and the fear of God, that the one
is not consistent with the other. There is an express discharge to yoke or have
any fellowship with them 2 Cor. 6. 14. to the end -- for what fellowship has
righteousness with unrighteousness? -- what Concord has Christ with Belial? --
wherefore come out from among them and be separate -- 2. Many fad and sharp
reproofs for such Transactions and Confederations, do conclude the same thing
Iud. 2. 1, 2, 3. -- Isaid -- ye shall make no league with the Inhabitants of
this Land, you shall throw down their Altars, but you have not obeyed my voice,
why have you done this? Wherefore -- I will not drive them out from before you
-- It cannot be expected, the Lord will drive out these enemies, if we swear
subjection and Allegiance, and come under Confederations with them; for thereby
we contribute actively to their settlement and establishment, and bring our
selves not only under the misery, but the guilt of strengthening the hands of
evil doers. So Ier. 2. the people of God are reproved, for making themselves
home born slaves; how? by Outlandish Confederacies verse. 18. Now what have
thou to do in the way of Egypt, to drink the waters of Sihor? or what have thou
to do in the way of Assyria? -- The Chaldee Paraphrase has it, Nunc ergo quid
vobis contrahendo Societatem cum Pharaone rege Egyptiorum? -- and quid vobis
percutiendo faedus cum Assyria. -- What have you to do Associate with Pharaoh
King of Egypt? and what have you to do to make a Covenant with the Assyrian? So
may we say, what have we to do to take their Oaths and Bonds, that are as great
enemies as they were. Ephraim is reproved for mixing himself among the people
Hos. 7. 8. by making Confederacies with them; what follows? he is a Cake not
turned, hot in the neither side, zealous for earthly things, but cold and raw
in the upperside, remiss in the things of Christ. And this we have seen in our
experience to be the fruit of such bargains, or bonds, or Oaths, that they that
were engaged in them, have alwise in some measure fallen from their former
fervor for Christ. Nay we shall find, that such Transactions are seldom or
never recorded in the Book of God without a reproof, or some greater Mark of
Gods displeasure put upon them; which doubtless ^s set purposely as beacons,
that we may beware of them. And therefore. 3. We may take notice of many
disallowed and condemned examples, on which the Lord sets marks of wrath, as
Ahabs Covenant with Benhadad, 1 King. 20. 32. to the end: Asa's Covenant with
Benhadad, which the Prophet calls a foolish deed 2 Chronicles. 16. from begin. to
verse. 10. proceeding from an evil heart of unbelief; as all such Transactions
are overawed Complyances. Iehosaphats with Abab has the same Censure, though
he kept himself free of Ahabs Idolatry, and Ahab seemed to have been penitent
before he joined with him, and his relation to him was very near, the enemy of
both was an Infidel, the cause was good to recover a city of refuge, the manner
of his proceeding was Pious consulting the Prophets, and his end good; yet all
this did not justify that wickedness, related 2 Chronicles. 18. and reproved 2 Chronicles. 19. 2. Iehu the Prophet is sent to him, Should thou love them that hate
the Lord? therefore is wrath upon thee from before the Lord. After this, when
he joined himself with Ahaziah, who did very wickedly, the Lord brake his works
2 Chronicles. 20. 35. to the end: which made him afterward mend his fault, for he
would not again join with him, when he sought the like Association 1 King. 22.
49. So Amaziah's bargain with the Israelites, when the Lord was not with them,
is condemned by the Prophet, admonishing him to disjoyne himself from them 2 Chronicles. 25. 7-10. And Ahaz his bargain with Tiglath-Pilnasser the Assyrian 2 Chronicles. 28. 16. etc. is plainly disallowed. 4. The complaints, Confessions, and
Lamentations of the Lords people, mourning over this sin, demonstrate the evil
of it Ezra, 9. 14. Should we again break thy Commandments, and join in affinity
with the people of these abominations? would not thou be angry with us, till
thou had consumed us, so that there should be no remnant nor escaping? Psalm.
106. 35. They were mingled among the heathen and learned their works. All these
commands, Reproofs, Examples, and complaints, are written for our learning; and
being seriously laid to heart, will sufficiently scare all the fearers of God,
to Join but stand aloof from all complyances, conjurations, or confederacies
with the enemies of God, directly or indirectly, formally or interpretatively,
for fear of partaking of their sins and receiving of their plagues. I insist
the more largely on this Argument, both because it will conclude that for which
these proofs are adduced, to condemn all bonding or bargaining with Malignant
Enemies; And because it will vindicate the aversion of this poor persecuted
Remnant, from associating in expeditions of war, with promiscuous subverters
and perverters of the cause, on which it were not so proper to my purpose to
dilate any discourse in a distinct head, while I must confine my self only to
the heads of Sufferings. Only because it may be Objected, and it will be
profitable to consider it, that these Scriptures disprove only voluntary and
elective confederations with the wicked, but cannot condemn necessitated
subscriptions of Lawful Obligations, when the matter is not sinful; Nor come
they home to the case of Prisoners, who are constrained to transact and treat,
and have to do with the men in power: Otherwise, if all bonds were unlawful,
then Prisoners might not procure Liberty for longer or shorter time, upon bond
and bail to answer again when called; Which yet is generally approven, and
practiced without scruple, and seems not to want a precedent in Scripture, in
that Jason gave such security Act. 17. 9. I shall therefore subjoin here some
considerations, by way of Answer to this. 1. These Scriptures disprove all
Covenants Exodus 23. 32. All confederacies Isai. 8. 12. all concord or
aggreement with the men of Belial 2 Cor, 6. 15. and, without distinction of
voluntary or overawed Transactions, all Unitive aggreements of whatsoever sort
are discharged, and can no more be restricted to the particulars there
specified, as if any other Covenant, confederacy, or concord might be Lawful
that were not a joining in Marriage, an assotiating in war, or communion in
Worship with them, than the Moral grounds of these Prohibitions can be so
restricted: for the hazard of sin and snares, the hurt of faithless fears, from
whence they flow, and the hatefulness of such unequal Conjunctions, which are
the grounds and reasons of these Laws, as may be seen in these forecited
places, cannot be restricted to the particulars specified. But now all the
tendered Oaths and Bonds of our Adversaries, when subscribed as they require,
yea even those Transactions of Prisoners for procuring their Liberty, on terms
of engaging to re-enter themselves according to aggreement with their
persecuters, are Unitive Covenants or Conditional aggreements, giving solemn
securities for their respective obligations, upon terms wherein both parties
accord: for these bonds are given to them, and not only before them, as was
said. They are confederacies of the Subjected, seeking the peace and favors of
their superiors, which when overawed are sinful to be made with wicked
Enemies of Religion, as well as when unconstrained, for Ahaz his transaction
with the Assyrian, was forced out of fear, and yet it is called a sinful
confederacy, not to be homologated by any of the fearers of the Lord Isai. 8.
12. They are concords and aggreements with the unrighteous sons of Belial, and
not about common matters, but matters wherein Religion and Righteousness are
nearly concerned: Can any think that these Commands are given with exception of
Prisoners? And that if any Isralite was Prisoner to these Nations, he might
make a Covenant with them for his Liberty, upon an engagment to render himself
Prisoner to them again? Then he might give bond to Gods devoted enemies, to
bind up his hands from prosecuting the war with them, which all Israel was
obliged to do: for if they might Covenant subjection to them, then it would
have been their sin to rebel, as it was Zedekiahs sin to rebel against
Nebuchadnezzar, because it was breach of Covenant: And so there might be a
case, wherein the Israelites, notwithstanding of all these Prohibitions, would
be obliged not to destroy, nor break down their Altars, to wit, if they made
such a bargain with them for their Liberty, to surrender themselves as their
subjects. Now we read, many times they were brought under subjection, and that
as a punishment of their leaguing with them, and yet they broke the yoke, when
they cried unto the Lord, and never submitted any longer than they were able to
deliver themselves. Whence it is plain, that they never bound themselves to
such subjection by Oath, bond, or promise, for that would have been no mercy
which was purchased by Treachery. 2. It is a voluntary compact with the men in
power, to procure Liberty upon bond to answer again, and cannot be called
necessitated; or if it be, it is but a necessitated sin. It must be voluntary,
because it is an act of the will, and the will cannot be forced; Its the
Consent of the will, and the Consent cannot but be voluntary, in so far as it
is a Consent; and by this, whereas before their so procured Liberty they were
prisoners by Constraint, now when they must return to prison, they are
prisoners by Consent: Its the prisoners Choice, whether he will come out upon
these terms or not, and every Choice in so far as it is a Choice, is elective
and voluntary: Its put to the man's choice whether he will continue under the
Cross, and continue his Testimony for the cause, or surcease from it for a
time, the Latter in the case is chosen. Its the prisoners desire and petition,
to transact with them in these terms for Liberty without which no benefit of
any such bond can be procured, and every desire is voluntary. Yea it is a
formal Compact and Capitulation with them, binding and obliging these bonders
by their oun word and writ, at least to be at their Call and Command, not by
Compulsion and force now, but by the Moral obligation of their oun compact: Now
every such compact is voluntary. And therefore, if all voluntary Covenants,
Confederacies, and Aggreements be discharged in Scripture, then this bond of
Compearance also must be discharged. The Judgment of famous Mr Rutherfoord, of
a draught of a petition to have been presented to the Committee of Estates, by
those Ministers who were prisoners in the Castle of Edinburgh, will confirm
what is said: we find it in the Third part of his Letters Numb. 63. where are
these words, I am straightened as another suffering man, but dare not petition
this Committee. 1. Because it draws us to Capitulate with such as have the
advantage of the mount, the Lord of disposing for the present, and to bring the
matters of Christ to yea and no (you being prisoners, and they the powers, is a
hazard. 3. This Aggreement with the Enemies for Liberty, upon these terms, is
sinful. For it is not only an acknowledgment of a wicked power, in ouning and
transacting with them as Judges, who can free them and bind them as prisoners
by Law, which is disproved above: But it is a binding themselves over to a
pacqued, perverse, and Law-perverting Judicatory, not as prisoners by forcible
constraint, but a willing consent, ackowledging the Legality of their
imprisonment, and obliging themselves to observe it when demanded: yea it is a
Covenanted and bonded obedience to a wicked Law; for it is a wicked Law, to
exact from a Sufferer for Truth, his re-entrie to prison, for no crime but his
duty. As also it is a justifying of a wicked sentence, for it is a wicked
sentence, that an innocent man shall return to prison when they please; which
is justified when they bind themselves to obey it. This is nowise like a man's
going to the Gibbet on his oun feet; for the man does not bind himself to do
that, neither is it exacted of him as an obedience to a Law, nor is it given
forth as a part of his sentence, Only he chooses it for his oun ease: But if
all these did concur, it were unlawful for a Martyr for Righteousness to obey
such a Law, or voluntarly to submit to such a wicked sentence. Neither is it of
any pertinency to urge, that it is Lawful for a man to submit so far to a
Robber, as to bind himself to return to him against such a day with another
purse to him: For this is a necessitated bargain, to give what a man has and
promise more to save his life, and is like a man's casting his goods out at sea
to save the ship; The other is not so but elective: This is only a Choice of
the least of two evils of suffering, but the other is a choice of one of two
evils which is sin, which cannot come under a Christians election at all: This
is a compact with the Robber, which is still discretive, and nowise unitive of
the Robber and him, in any bargain of concord or consederacy or acknowledged
subjection, only a passive surrender to his greater force as an enemy; But the
other is unitive, as between Rulers and Ruled: This is not any obedience to a
Law, nor is the man's purse required to be given or promised under that notion,
as the other is, I shall here also subjoin some more of that foresaid Letter of
Mr Rutherfoords, In the 2 place, says he, A speaking to them in writ, and
passing in silence the sworn Covenant and the cause of God, which is the very
present Controversy, is contrary to the practice of Christ and the Apostles,
who being accused or not accused avouched Christ to be the Son of God, and the
Messiah, and that the dead must rise again, even when the Adversary mistated
the question; Now plain it is, that neither in the bonds nor petitions, is
there any word of the cause or Testimony suffered for. 4. As it is sinful, so
it is very scandalous in several respects; in that at least it has the
appearance of evil, which Christians should abstain from 1 These. 5. 22. and
seems to be a voluntary subjecting themselves to their Impositions (at least of
that to return to prison again) a willing acknowledgment of their unjust
Usurpations; a spontaneous consenting to their Mischiefs framed into a Law, and
exacted under the Notion of a Law; A gratifying of the enemies of Religion, and
pleasing them more than any thing a prisoner can do, except he should wholly
deny the cause; and therefore chiefly always this overture is most acceptable
from those that durst give any Testimony, because they look upon it as some
indication of their fainting or falling from it, or of their wearying of the
Cross of Christ, of which they are very glad; And an offending and making sad
the hearts and condemning the practice, of some truly tender and zealous
Confessors of Christ, who have had strong tentations to make such transactions,
and durst not yield so far for a world; yea it is certainly an Argument of
faithless fear, and impatient wearying of the Cross because of the fury of the
Oppressor, which the Lord taxes, when the Captive hasteneth that he may be
loosed, and that he should not die in the pit, nor that his bread should fail,
which is a dishonor to Him who has promised to bear their charges, and has
given them many encouragments to trust, that He will open a door in His oun
time and way, see Isai. 51. 13, 14. Of this Rutherfoord adds in that
forecited Letter, Silence of the cause of God which Adversaries persecute,
seems a tacit deserting of the cause, when the state of of the Question is
known to beholders, and I know the Brethren intend not to leave the cause. And
a little after, says he, The draught of that petition which you sent me, speaks
not one word of the Covenant of God, for the adhering to which you now suffer,
and which is the Object of men's hatred, and the destruction whereof is the
great work of the times; and your silence in this nick of time) appears to be a
not confessing of Christ before men, and you want nothing to begen an uncleanly
deliverance, but the profession of silence: which is professed by all, that
petition for such a bond, when their address and transaction speaks no more in
favors of the cause, than if they denied it. It is plainly a coming out of
prison without a Testimony, which cannot consist with faithful and zealous
suffering for Christ, and is far from the choice of Christ's Witnesses, who
overcame by the blood of the Lamb and the Word of their Testimony, recorded
Heb. 11. 35. -- who were tortured not accepting de^iverance, that they might
obtain a better resurection. 5. As it is Scandalous, so it is very inconvenient
and unsuitable for the Confessors of Christ. In that not only they may be
ignorant, and much troubled to know, what underhand ^ealings their friends may
use sometimes to procure that Liberty without acquainting them, and how
odiously their Act of deliverance may be worded and registered to the prejudice
of the cause, which they dare not testify against afterward when they do know
it, for fear of many inconveniences. But also it cannot be vindicated from
being a dishonorable shifting, and putting off, or casting off the Call of a
Testimony; and confessing either an inconstancy, or impatience or unreadiness,
or want of resolution, to confess or profess the Testimony for Christ, without
some respyte to gather new defenses for it: Whereas Christ's Witnesses should be
ready always to give an Answer, to every man that asks them, a reason of the
hope that is in them 1 Pet. 3. 15. And besides they involve themselves into the
encumbrances of a doubtful suspense about the event, whereas if they keep their
first resolution and condition with cheerfullness, aloof from such bargains,
they know the utmost they have to fear or hope from men. But now, as it is Hard
for them to come off without some sinful engagment, and to continue any measure
of faithfulness when they are out, for fear of being soon called again; so they
bring themselves into many sad difficulties, how to behave, and cast themselves
into many tentations unadvoidably. However except of late, a precedent of this
practice can hardly be instanced among the Sufferers of Christ in former times,
but on the contrary many have refused such offers. I shall only name one; In
the persecution of Qeen Mary of England, Dr Sands Prisoner at London, had the
offer of Liberty, upon the terms of such a bond, finding bail to appear when he
should be called, but refused it absolutely; and when a Gentleman without his
knowledge, having procured it by giving a thousand pound Bond for him, brought
him forth and required his consent and observance of the obligation, he would
not consent to give any security, and denied his resolution to observe it in
the least; whereupon the Gentleman very courteously told him, he would stand to
his hazard. This was far more like the innocence of the dove, but this new
prudence resembles more the wisdom of the serpent. Finally as for Iasons
business, which is so much harped upon by these Bonders. (1) These were Rulers
that he had to deal with all, and not raging Tyrants (2) They were indifferent
Arbiters between Jason and the Lewd fellows that troubled him, and not both
Judge and party; he gave no security to his persecuters, as these Bonders do,
but to the true Judges of the cause, who impartially took cognizance of it,
from whom Jason might and did expect right (3) This was before he was Prisoner,
being as free as his accusers, and having the Law as free for him as it was for
them; whereby he could vindicate himself and abide the Law, and be absolved by
it: which does not answer the case of Prisoners, actually engaged in and called
to a Testimony for Christ, when there is no Law but what is established in
opposition to Christ. (4) In the Original it is, when they got satisfaction
from him, that is, when he so cleared himself, that they could not fasten any
transgression upon him, then they absolved him.

2. All these Oaths and solemn Securities that have been imposed in these
times, are dreadful and heinous breaches of the Third Command, by taking His
Name in vain in the worst sort, whereby the takers cannot be holden guiltless.
For it is impossible such Oaths and Bonds; however they be constructed, can
ever be taken with these requisite qualifications necessary to be observed in
all Oaths (and consequently in all Solemn promises or Bonds) that are mentioned
once for all Ier. 4. 2. where one that swears must do it, in Truth, in
Judgment, and in Righteousness. 1. They cannot be taken in Truth, which is a
necessary qualification in all Oaths; according to the definition of a true
Oath; Which is, a Solemn Invocation of God, for Confirmation of some true.
Lawful, grave, and weighty, Useful, and worthy business, wherein He is attested
and appealed unto, that He, as the only Searcher of hearts, may give His
Testimony to the Truth of the thing, and punish the Swearer if he swear not in
Truth. And this Swearing in Truth does import and require, both Sincerity of
the heart, filled with Reverence and the awful apprehension of a present God;
And Simplicity of the mind, well informed of the genuine meaning of the Oath,
that we have clear uptaking of it, and take it not implicitly but with our oun
understanding; And also singleness and honesty of the intention, that it be not
to deceive, by putting any other sense than the imposer has, or will allow when
he understands it: So the meaning must be clear, and such as may be obviously
gathered from the Words, and according as they are supposed to be understood by
others, especially them that exact the Oath; for if they mean one thing and we
another, Gods Name is profaned, and the end of the Oath frustrate, and so all
equivocations and mental reservations are condemned; As all Divine treating on
Oaths teach, and worthy Mr Durham particularly* on the Third Command, who
Asserts, that though we could devise some other meaning, that might seem to
make for us; yet if that was not meant at first tendering, but otherwise
understood by him that did take it, it will not absolve from the guilt of
perjurie; for an Oath is stricti juris* and will not admit on any respct or
account of interpretations, prejudicial to the Native Truth of it, lest it
should be found to be (according to Psalm. 24. 4.) a swearing deceitfully. And
afterward he says, Much less will it exempt a man from guilt, that in
swearing he had a meaning of the words, contrary to what in common sense they
bear, and in the construction of all indifferent persons sine juramento or
extra, but it should be plain, single, and clear. And Pareus says in Catech
Urs. Part. 2. quest. 102. Sancitum est Iuramentum, ut sit vinculum veritatis
inter homines, and Testimonium quod Deus sit Author and Desensor veritatis. An
Oath has the Divine Sanction, that it might be a bond of verity among men, and
a Testimony that God is the Author and defender of Truth, Now none of these
Oaths and Bonds can be taken in Truth; for if they may be safely taken in any
sense: it must be such as the Oath in the design of the Imposers cannot bear,
and which the Imposers never intended, nor would they ever have allowed, if
they had understood it; which industriously the Takers have a care they should
not understand, and so they must take it in that sense cum animo fallendi which
cannot be in Truth, but most derogatory both to the Truth and simplicity of the
Gospel. And they are all unclear and ambiguous, which cannot be taken in Truth,
because they have no Truth in them, as Dr. Sanderson says De Iur. Promiss.
Oblig. Prael. 6.. 10. a Proposition of an ambiguous and indefinite sense,
before the matter be distinguished, is not a true proposition; yea nor a
proposition at all: for a proposition, as its definition clears, should
signify either a truth or a falsehood, without any ambiguity: And therefore,
says he, such Oaths should be supected, that there is some deceit lurking, and
every pious and prudent man should refuse them, offered under such terms, cited
by Apol. Relat Sect. 10. Page 118. and Sect. 14. Page 267. In fine, None of
them can be taken in Truth: since they are all a denying the Truth, as will be
evident by the induction of all of them; Which how it can consist with the fear
of God, or sincerity of the heart, cannot be imagined, and if conscience be
called in to Judgment it will condemn the taking them. 2. They cannot be taken
in Judgment, that is, with knowledge and deliberation; minding and
understanding what it is we swear or subscribe, as Mr Durham explains it in the
place above cited. For first, they cannot be taken in Judgment, because they
are all ambiguous, the terms of them being capable of diverse senses, not
explained by the Imposers^ And if they were explained in their sense, then they
could not be taken in Righteousness; And so at best they are uncertain: And
that is dreadful, to invock the Majesty of God to be a Witness to
uncertainties, for that is to swear with an evil conscience and contempt of
God, to dare to call Him in as a Witness of that which is in suspense, whether
it be Truth or a lie; And such a swearer must make it a matter indifferent,
whether he make God a Witness of a Truth or of a lie in the case. Vide Pareum
Loc. supra citat. Page 654 Sect. 4. Dr Sanderson ubi supra, gives these reasons
further against all ambiguous Oaths: because of him who tendereth the Oath: for
the proper end of an Oath is, that he in whose favors it is taken should have
some certainity of that whereof he doubted before, but there can be no
certainity out of words which have no certain sense: Next, because of him who
swears, who if he take such an Oath in these terms, either stumbleth his
neighbor, or spreads a net for his oun feet; for to what else should such
collusion tend, but either that by our example others may be induced to take
it, whereby they are stumbled; Or that afterward, by virtue of that Oath, some
thing may be required of us, which is either unlawful or hurtful, and this is
to lay a snare for our selves! Therefore let every prudent man beware of
suffering himself to be deceived by these wiles, and of thinking so much either
of the favor or of the ill will of any other, as to swallow the bait under
which he is sure there is a hook: It is expedient, that in the matter of Oaths
all things be done aright, and that the sense be clear to all, and that is
jurare Liquido to swear with a clear conscience Apol. Relat. Page 267. But
next, they cannot be taken in Judgment; because they are all imposed and
extorted under a sever penalty, and some of them of death, and so must be taken
out of fear. Such Oaths are by many famous Divines judged unlawful, especially
Public Oaths imposed by Authority, and under color of Law; these are worse
than a man's private Oath given to a Robber, ^for fear of Death, if the matter
be unlawful: for, whether the matter be Lawful or unlawful, such Oaths coacted,
exacted, and imposed by Law, cannot be taken in Judgment; for if they be taken
out of respect to the Law, then it is the persons suffrage to the equity of
that Law, and an approbation of the imposition; Which in the present case
cannot be done, by any man of conscience, for whether the Oaths be Lawful or
not, the Authority imposing them is naught, and the Law wicked and can never be
approven; And if they be extorted out of fear, then they cannot be taken with
deliberation, or voluntary and unviolented choice, unconstrained light or
liberty, which are all the ingredients of Judgment. 3. They cannot be taken in
Righteousness, that is according to the Law of equity as well as piety, neither
wronging God nor others by our Oaths. Lawful Oaths should be in themselves
vincula aequitatis, as well as veritatis. And Pareus says loco supra citato,
Iuramenta licita tantum ea sunt -- quae suscipiuntur de rebus veris, certo
cognitis, licitis; possibilibus, gravibus, necessariis, utilibus, dignis.
Lawful Oaths are only these which are engaged into about things true, certainly
known, lawful, possible, weighty, necessary, useful and worthy. And if that be
true, then are all the Oaths and Bonds taken these many years, but fetterings
into bonds of iniquity; which when the consciences of the Takers will reflect
on them, will become Galls of bitterness, and found to have none of these
qualifications, but on the contrary to be about matters false, uncertain,
unlawful, impossible, frivolous, fruitless, useless, and unworthy, to the worst
degree of baseness; and which is worst of all, dreadfully sinful, and horrid to
be thought on to interpose the Name of God upon, making Him the Approver of
what His Soul hates, and a Witness of that which He will be an Avanger of, as
will appear by the particular consideration af all of them.

3. Let it be considered, that though (as the pleaders for these transactions
do impertinently allege) the same words in other cases might be subscribed in
a more abstract sense, as being capable of a good construction: yet Complexly
considered in the form and frame of all the Oaths and Bonds we have been
troubled with, they cannot be subscribed in any sense; and if in any, that must
be the Impoposers sense, which in them all is always pernicious. 1. They
cannot be taken in any sense though never so good, if we consider the absolute
illegality of their arbitrary imposition. It will be confessed that Oaths
should be very tenderly imposed upon consciences, not only lest the Name of God
be prostitute to profanation, in matters light and trivial, or dubious and
uncertain; but lest a Tyrannical Jurisdiction be exercised over the Souls of
men, which are not subject to any power that Mortals can claim. So it cannot be
denied, but that the Constitution of our Government requires, and Reason as
well as Religion says it is necessary, that no Ruler has right to enjoin an
Oath which is not first enacted into a Law; And it was always accounted a good
plea for refusing Oaths, when there was no Law for them; And some have been
charged with Treason, for exacting Oaths without a Statute ordaining them:
Which might be brought in as a Charge against all the Imposers of Our Oaths,
the most part of which have been exacted and extorted without any color of
Law; some of them being never ordained by any Act of Parliament, and others of
them before they could obtain such a Mischief framed into an Act for them, and
all of them neither ever legally administered nor righteously enacted, by such
who had power to make Acts; for as for the pacqued Parliaments that made them,
no conscientious Man could ever oune such a Company of perjured Traitors, to be
their Parliamentary Representatives. Yet abstracting from that, I say, the
Oaths that have been imposed without and against Law could never be taken in
any sense, without consenting to their treasonable breach of Law, for which
they have forfeited their lives to Justice, when ever there shall be a
Judicatory to revise their administrations: And these that have been imposed by
a pretended Law, could never be taken without justifying of that Law that
ordained them, which has been nothing but a mischief framed into a Law by a
Throne of iniquity. 2. They cannot be taken in a good sense, with a safe
conscience; considering either what is plain in them, or what is more
ambiguous. What is plain and capable but of one sense, that is always either
constraining to a clear Sin, to renounce some part of the Covenanted
Reformation, in profession or practice; Or Restraining from a clear duty, that
we should not do that which we may or ought to do. There is nothing in all of
them plain but what obliges to one of these two. Again what is ambiguous in
them, as it ought to be refused for its ambiguity; so when it is explained
according to the Imposers mind and meaning, the sense will be found always
pernicious, though the words may be plausible. As when they require an
obligation to Allegiance, or Loyalty, or peaceableness, or Orderlyness, and
other smooth words signifying excellent things in an abstract Notion, these
will be found to carry quite another sense, if we inquire into the Imposers
meaning, in which only Oaths and Bonds must be taken. The only way to find out
their meaning, is to consider either their Acts or Actings, or their designs
and intentions, as they are discoverable by any man of Prudence or
consideration. If we consult their Acts or Actings, practically and only
legally explaining them, for a commentary; then by Allegiance, we can
understand nothing else but an ouning of their Absolute Tyranny; by Loyalty,
nothing but an absolute and implicit Obedience of their absolute Commands,
without reserve (as the late Proclamation for the Tolleration expounds it) by
peaceableness, nothing but a stupid subjection to them, leting them do what
they please without resistance or control; and by Orderlyness, nothing but a
disorderly Compliance and Conformity with them, in going along with the
Corruptions and Defections of the time, for their Acts and Actings expound them
so. If we consider their designs and intentions, according to which they are
all uniformly calculate and equally levelled; He is blind who has not seen,
they have been driving all this time at these designs (to which all these Oaths
and Bonds have been adapted and successfully subservient, and by which they
have been promoted to the present pass) to overturn gradually all the degrees
of our Covenanted Reformation, to establish Tyranny and advance it unto greater
degrees of Absoluteness, and to introduce Popery and slavery; So that by
Allegiance and Loyalty, can be meant nothing else but an obligation to oune
and obey, and never to oppose the design of advancing Tyranny; And by
Peaceableness and Orderlyness, nothing else can be intended, than an obligation
never to oppose either the present Settlement, or future establishment of
Popery and arbitrary power, upon the ruins of the Reformation and our Civil
and Religious Rights and Liberties. Whence, they that can take these Oaths and
Bonds in any other sense, and plead for the inoffensiveness of the terms, in a
more abstract notion, and sense alleged more legal, without regard to that of
the Imposers practically explained by their administrations, and so looking
more to the briberies of their blinded reason and wordly Interest, than to the
Dictates of conscience, please themselves with such notions and quibling
evasions, do but Mock God, deceive the world, illude the enemies, and delude
themselves. And all these debatings for Accommodations and Expositions in
another sense, are but foull fairdings of conscience-beguiling Compoundings in,
and pitiful priggings for, a base Compliance. But it is usual for a guilty Son
of Adam to sow fig leaves.

4. Let it be considered, that all these Oaths and Bonds that the Land has
been debauched with these 27 years, are all condemned by and contradictory to
anterior binding Orders, the Acts of the General Assembles, requiring no Oaths
in the common cause to be taken without the Churches consent, as was cleared in
the Historical part, upon the fifth Period page 82. And that especially they
are condemned as being contradictory to, and violatory of prior Oaths of
continuing indispensible Obligation; being designed, pressed, and imposed on
purpose to delete the same out of the minds and memories of the present
Generation: I mean the National and Solemn League and Covenants, and other
former Nationally binding Public Engagments. Which, because they are not only
broken and burnt, but declared Criminal to be ouned, and because the ouning of
their obligation is ordinarily inserted in the Indytments of our Martyrs, I must
touch upon them more particularly. It was cleared above Head. 1. Arg. 11. from
the Form, the Object, and from the Ends of the Covenant, which are all Moral
and of indispensible obligation, that it is of perpetual and unalterably
binding force, obliging the present and all future Generations, as well as that
which did first come under the bond of it. And to confirm this, I shall add
more particularly these many consideration. 1. The National Engagments are
National promises, plighting and pledging the Nations public faith, for the
preservation and propagation of Religion and Liberty, to succeding posterity;
which if succeeding Generations may reverse, then the faith of men, and the
faith of Nations, can be of no force above a century of years; nay nor after
the decease of them that personally made the promise: And so every new Ruler,
every new Parliament, yea every person coming up to succeed the Father in any
Capacity, might be free not to stand to it, which were very absurd. Certainly
that promise of the Jewish Nobles and Rulers, not to exact Usury of their
Brethren, but to restore and not require it of them, did not only oblige
themselves, but would bring their posterity under the curse, if they should
exact the same debt there remitted Neh. 5. 12, 31. And does not a National
promise of preserving the Reformation, bind as much to the curse of the breach
of it? 2. They are National vows, avowing and avouching and devoting
themselves and their posterity to be the Lords people, and to keep His Statutes
and promove His Interests; which do bind the posterity. Jacobs vow at Bethel,
that the Lord should be his God Genesis 28. 21. did oblige all his posterity,
virtually comprehended in him; He found Him in Bethel and there He speak with
Us, says the Prophet many hundred years after H^s. 12. 4. The Israelites vow,
to destroy the Canaanites, did oblige all their posterity Numb. 21. 2. Not only
by virtue of the Lords Command, but by virtue of their vow; as we are obliged
to preserve the Reformation, not only by virtue of the Lords Command, but by
virtue of our Covenants. Vows are bonds to the Soul, which must stand Numb.
20. 2, 4. And whereas it is said, that as a woman's father or husband might
disanull her vow, and so the Magistrate might abrogate the Covenant: Besides
the impertinency of this Comparison, as might be easy to demonstrate, it may
be refelled by giving and not granting that he might do so; yet if the father
and husband shall hold their peace, then all her vows shall stand, and her
bonds wherewith she bound her soul shall stand verse. 4, 7. but so it was, that
the Supreme Magistrate did give his Consent to the National Covenant, and the
Successor did swear the Solemn League and Covenant, and received the Crown on
the terms thereof, to preserve and promote Religion and Liberty; and therefore
her vows must stand, they cannot be made void afterward; for it is a snare to
devour that which is holy, and after vows to make enquiry Prove. 20. 25. So we
find the Rechabites were obliged to observe the vow of their forefather Ionadab
Ier. 35. 6, 14. And if the fathers vow obliges the Children* shall not the
Nations vow oblige the posterity? 3. They are National Oaths which do oblige
posterity: Esaws Oath to Jacob, resigning his birthright, did oblige his
posterity never to recover it Genesis 25. 33. Joseph took an Oath of the Children
of Israel, to carry up his bones into Canaan, Genesis 50. 25. which the posterity
going forth of Egypt in after ages, found themselves straightly sworn to observe
Exodus 13. 19. and accordingly buried them in Shechem, Joshua. 24. 32. The Spies
swore to preserve Rahab alive and her house, Joshua. 2. 12, etc. which was
without the Consent of the Magistrate, and yet Joshua found himself obliged to
observe it Joshua. 6. 22. Moses swore unto Caleb to ensure him an inheritance
Joshua. 14. 9. and upon this ground he deman^s it as his right verse. 12. which
he could not do, if Successors might reverse their Predicessors Lawful Oaths.
The Lord will in a special manner resent and revenge the posterities breach of
the Oath of their fathers Covenant Ezekiel. 16. 59. Thus says the Lord God, I
will even deal with thee as thou have done, which have despised the Oath in
breaking the Covenant, which was the Covenant of their fathers. 4. They are
National Covenants, wherein King, Parliament, and people do Covenant with each
other, for the performance of the respective Duties of their several stations,
either as to the work of Reformation, or as to the preservation of each others
mutual Rights and Privileges: So that they are National Covenants made by men
with men; and these we find do oblige the posterity. Isreal's Covenant with the
Gibeonites did oblige the posterity Josh. 9. 15, 19. and for the breach of it
many ages after the posterity was plagued 2 Samuel 21. 1. Zedekiah was bound by
his Predecessors Covenant, though it was such as made the Kingdom base, yet in
keeping it it was only to stand, Shall he break the Covenant and be delivered?
Thus says the Lord, as I live* surely mine Oath that he has despised, and my
Covenant that he has broken, even it will I recompense upon his oun h^ad Ezekiel.
17. 12, 14, 15, 19. The Apostle says even of humane Covenants, Though it be
but a Man's Covenant yet if it be confirmed no man disanulleth or adds
thereunto Gal. 3. 15. that is, cannot do so Lawfully, much less can one man
disanull a Nations Covenant. 5. They are National Attestations of God as a
Witness, for the perpetuity as well as fidelity of these Sacred Engagments. All
such Covenants, wherein the Holy Name of God is invocated as Witness, are ouned
of God as His (hence the Covenant betwixt David. and Jonathan is called the
Covenant of the Lord 1 Samuel 20. 8. and Zedekiahs fault was the breach of the
Lords Covenant Ezekiel. 17. forecited. So likewise that Covenant mentioned Ier.
34. 8, 9, 10. wherein the Princes and People did swear to let their Hebrew
Servants go free, is called Gods, Covenant. (...). 18. and upon this account
sorer* Judgments are threatened verse. 19, 20. And I will give the men that
have transgressed my Covenant, which have not performed the Words of the
Covenant which they had made before me -- into the hands of their enemies.
Certainly this did oblige the posterity, at least not to recall these Servants,
and it was always Morally obliging. So our National Covenant, sworn with hands
lifted up to the Most high God, being materially also binding, cannot be
abrogated by the posterity, except the Lord renounce His Interest in them; as
long as the Witness lives then, who claims them as His, they cannot be made
void. Especially considering. 6. They are National Covenants made with God, as
the other party Contracting, in the matters of God, which none can dispense
with, or grant Remissions in; and therefore they must perpetually bind, until
He loose them. And if even the posterity break them, the Lord will make them
that hate them to reign over them, and He will bring a Swosd upon them to
aveange the quarrel of His Covenant, Levit. 26. 15, 17, 25. Such were all the
National Covenants of the Lords people renewed by Joshua, Asa, Iehoshaphat,
Hezekiah, Josiah, Ezra, Nehemiah, for the breaches of which the Lord plagued
the posterity. It was for breach of their fathers Covenant with God, that the
ten tribes were carried away Captive 2 King. 17. 15. etc. We have already
experienced the threatened Judgments for Covenant Breaking, and may look for
more. 7. They are for their matter National Covenants about things Moral
objectively, obliging to join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant
that shall not be forgotten. Ier. 50. 5. I might easily demonstrate all the
Articles of the Covenant to be Morally obliging, but they are demonstrate
sufficiently above Head. 1. Arg. 11. Therefore they are perpetually binding. 8.
They are for their Ends National Covenants inviolably obliging: which cannot be
made void, though they should be broken, because the ends of them are always
to be pursued as is proved above Head. 1. Therefore they are perpetual. 9. They
are for their formality National Covenants, most Solemnly Sworn and subscribed
by all ranks, with uplifted hands, with bended knees, with solemn invocating
the Name of God, with solemn preaching, prayer, and praise, rendering
themselves and the posterity obnoxious to the Curse if they should break it.
Now the Solemnities of the Oath do aggravate the heinousness of the breach of
it, as is clear from Ier. 34. 19. Ezekiel. 17. 18. quoted above: the reason is,
because of their greater deliberation in the action, and because of the greater
scandal accompanying the violation thereof. Hence as they are National Oaths
and Covenants so solemnized, they are National Adiurations under the pain of a
National Curse, not to break them Nationally; Which do make the posterity
obnoxious to it: as Joshua adjuring Israel, saying, Cursed be the man that
rises up and builds this City Jericho Josh. 6. 26. Which was fulfilled many
generations after, in the days of Ahab, upon Hiel the Bethelite 1 King. 16.
Ult. So the Curse of introducing abjured Prelacy, and Popery, if it be let in,
will be impendent on the Nation. All National Covenants have a Curse annexed,
in case of a breach when ever it shall be: So in Nehemiahs Covenant, they clave
to their Brethren, and entered into a Curse, and into an Oath, to walk in Gods
Law, which was given by Moses the Servant of God, and to observe and do all the
Commandments of the Lord our Lord, and His Judgments and Statutes,
particularly not to enter into affinity with their Malignant enemies Neh. 10.
29, 30. Which certainly did oblige the posterity, because the thing was Moral,
So in our Covenants we are bound to the same things, and nothing but these: And
therefore the posterity is liable to the Curse of perjurie for the breach
thereof. 10. They are for their Legality, National Laws, being Solemnly
Ratified by the Parliament and by the King, and made the foundation of their
Compact with him at his Inauguration; whereby they became the fundamental Laws
of the Government, and among the very Leges and regulae regnandi: which, though
they be rescinded by a wicked Law, yet make the Rescinders chargable not only
of Perjurie, in breaking a Covenant, but of Treason and Tyranny in breaking and
altering the Constitution of the Government; and render them liable to the
Curse thereof: for they cannot rescind that, nor escape its vengeance: whereof
we have a speaking pledge already, in that the Rescinder of these Covenants was
so terribly rescinded, and cut off by the hands of unnatural violence; God
thereby fulfilling that threatend Judgment of Covenant breakers, that he that
has broken His Covenant shall be brought to destruction, and bloody and
deceitful men shall not live out half their days Psalm. 55. 20. ult. So Charles
the Second got not leave to live out half the days, that he projected to
himself. 11. They are National Engagments of an Hereditary Nature, like that of
Israel Deuteronomy. 29. 14, 15. which did oblige not only the present, but the absent,
not only them that stood there that day before the Lord their God, but the^
that were not there that day. Grotius de jur. ^el. Lib. 2. cap. 6. gives these
Marks of Hereditary Covenants (1) When the subject is of a permanent Nature,
and as long as manet idem Corpus: therefore as long as Scotland is Scotland,
whose people in their personal Capacity, whose Parliaments in their
Parliamentary Capacity, whose King in his princely Capacity, did all solemnly
and Sacredly engage in the Covenant, it must be real and perpetually obliging.
(2) when there is such a Clause in the Covenant as that it should be perpetual:
There are many Clauses in the Solemn league to this purpose, in Art. 1. are
these words, that we and our posterity after us may as brethren live in faith
and l^ve and the Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us: in the 5. Art,
we shall each one of us according to our place and interest endeavor that the
Kingdoms may remain conjoined in a firm peace and union to all posterity. (3)
when it is such as is made for the good of the Kingdom: The Covenant expresses
its end for the perpetual good of the Kingdom, having before our eyes the Glory
of God, the advancement of the Kingdom of -- Christ, the honor and happiness
of the King and his posterity, and the true public Liberty, Safety, and Peace
of the Kingdoms; wherein every ones private condition is included: and again it
is added, for preservation of our selves and our Religion from utter ruin and
destruction. All this is a public National good. (4) The matter is Moral,
about materially binding duties, and therefore it must be hereditary and of
perpetual obligation. 12. Lastly, They are National obligations, taking on
public duties, by way of virtual Representation of the posterity. And they
that think it irrational, that the father should represent and involve the
family, must resolve us how the Religious and Civil Covenants of Israel and
Iud^h made in Moses, Joshua's, David's, Asa's, Ioash's, Hezekiahs, Iosiahs, and
(...) days, did comprehend and bird as well the absent as the pre^ent, and
their posterity, yet unborn; as also, how the Laws and Contracts continually
passed by some do take in others, not personally consenting; yea how comes it
to pass, that every succeeding generation is ^ound to the Laws, and must be
obedient to the Kings, that they did not make themselves; no reason can be
given, but because they are virtually represented by and included in their
fathers. Now if these Arguments prove our National Covenants to be perpetually
binding and cannot be dispensed with, the^ must these posterior Oaths that are
made in a diametrical opposition to the Covenants, and are condemned by the
Covenants, be false and unlawful Oaths: But the first is proved: Therefore
these Oaths so opposite to and condemned by the Covenants are false and
unlawful. That they are opposite to the Covenant, will appear in the induction
of all of them. And that, what ever they be imposed by this party, they are
condemned by the Covenants, wherein we are obliged to make no such Transactions
with them, will appear if we consider these and the like expressions, that we
shall neither directly nor indirectly, suffer our selves to be divided, by
whatsoever suggestion, allurement, or terror, from this blessed Conjunction,
nor shall cast in any let or impediment that may stop or hinder any such
resolution, as shall be found to conduce for so good ends. Which are the Words
of the National Covenant, clearly condemning Oaths and Bonds given to
Malignants, which are divisive of them that adhere to, and Unitive with them
that oppose the Covenant, and impeditive of resolutions to prosecute the ends
thereof. So in the Solemn League and Covenant Art. 4. We are obliged to oppose
all such as make any faction or parties amongst the people, contrary to this
League and Covenant: but by these Oaths and Bonds such factions are made etc.
And by Art. 6. we are obliged to assist and defend all those that enter into
this Covenant (contradicted by all the later Oaths and Bonds) and not to suffer
our selves directly or indirectly by whatsoever combination -- to be divided --
from this blessed union -- whether to make defection to the contrary part, or
to give our selves to a detestable indifferency etc. Which we do, when we
divide our selves from these that refuse these Oaths, and makes defection unto
the party that impose them. And in the Solemn Acknowledgment of sins and
Engagment to duties, We are sworn. 6. to be so far from conniving at, complying
with, or countenancing of Malignancy, Injustice etc. that we shall not only
avoid and discountenance these things etc. but take an effectual course to
punish and suppress these evils. All which we counteract and contradict, when
we take any of these Oaths or Bonds.

In the Second place, by a Particular induction of the several kinds of these
Oaths and Bonds, the iniquity of each of them will appear; and the Complex
iniquity of the smoothest of them, the Oath of Abjuration compared with every
one of them, will be manifest. And consequently the honesty and innocence of
Sufferers for Refusing them, will be discovered.

I. The first in order, which was a Copy to all the rest, was the Declaration,
ordained to be subscribed by all in public Charge, office or Trust within the
Kingdom: Wherein they do affirm and declare, they judge it unlawful to
Subjects, upon pretense of Reformation or any other pretense whatsoever, to
enter into Leagues and Covenants, or take up arms against the King -- and that
all these Gatherings -- petitions, protestations -- that were used -- for
carrying on of the late troubles, were unlawful and seditious; And particularly
that these Oaths -- the National Covenant -- and the Salemn League and
Covenant, were and are in themselves unlawful Oaths. Here is a Confederacy
required against the Lord, at which the Heavens might stand astonished; an
unparalelled breach of the Third Command. Which could no more be taken in Truth
and Righteousness, than an Oath renouncing the Bible: but it has this
advantage of the rest; that it is some what plain, And the iniquity legible on
its front. 1. That it is a renouncing of Solemn and Sacred Covenants,
perpetually binding to Moral and indispensable duties, the wickedness whereof
is evident from what is said above. 2. It makes perjurie of the deepest dye,
the necessary sine qua non qualification of all in public Office: who cannot
be presumed capable of administrating Justice, when they have avowed themselves
perjured and perfidious, and not to be admitted among heathens let be
Christians, nor trusted in a matter of ten shillings money, according to the
Laws of Scotland. 3. It renounces the whole Work of Reformation, and the way of
Carrying it on, as a Pretense and trouble unlawful and seditious: Which if it
be a Trouble, then the Peace they have taken in renouncing it, must be such a
Peace as is the plague of God upon the heart, filling it with senslessness and
stupidity in His just Judgment, because of the palpable breach of Covenant; or
such a Peace, as is very consistent with the Curse and vengeance of God,
pursuing the quarrel of a broken Covenant. 4. It condemns the taking up arms
against the King, which shall be proven to be duty Head 5. Besides, that hereby
the most innocent means of seeking the redress of Grievances, that Religion,
Risings, Law, and practice of all Nations allows, is condemned. Yet in effect,
for as monstrous as this Oath is, the Complexe of its iniquity is couched in
the Oath of Abjuration; in which many of these Methods of Combinations, Risings
and Declarations of war against the King, and Protestations against his
Tyranny, which were used in the late Troubles for carrying on the Reformation,
are abjured; in that a Declaration is renounced in so far as it Declares war
against the King, and asserts it Lawful to kill them that serve him: Which yet,
in many cases in the Covenanted Reformation here renounced, were acknowledged
and practiced as Lawful, besides that it has many other breaches of Covenant
in it, as will be showed.

II. The next Net they contrived to catch Consciences, was the Oath of
Allegiance and Supremacy: Wherein they that took it, for testification of their
faithful obedience to their most gracious and redoubted Sovereign, Charles King
of Great Britain -- do affirm, testify, and Declare -- that they acknowledge
their said Sovereign, only supreme Governor of this Kingdom, over all persons,
and in all Causes; And that no foreign Prince -- has any jurisdiction, power,
or superiority over the same; and therefore do utterly renounce all foreign
power -- and shall at their utmost power defend, assist, and maintain his Majs.
jurisdiction foresaid -- and never decline his power -- The iniquity of this
Oath is very vast and various. 1. It is a Covenant of Allegiance with a King,
turned Tyrant and enemy to Religion, Subverter of the Reformation, and
overturner of our Laws and Liberties; and therefore demonstrate to be sinful
both from the first General Argument against Oaths, and from Head. 2. 2. It
cannot be taken in. Truth, Righteousness, or Judgment: beause the words are
general and very comprehensive, and ambiguous, capable of diverse senses: when
he is affirmed to be supreme over all Persons and in all Causes, and to be
assistest, and maintained, in that jurisdiction. Who can be sure in swearing
such an Oath, but that he may thereby wrong others, wrong Parliaments in their
Privileges, wrong the Church in her Liberties, and which is worse, wrong the
Lord Jesus Christ who is Supreme alone in some Causes? Can an Oath be taken in
Truth and Righteousness, to assist him in all encroachments, upon Causes, that
are not subordinate to him? and in invading all those Privileges of Subjects,
which are Natural, Civil, Moral, and Religious? for if he be supreme in all
Causes, then all these depend upon him and be subordinate to him. And can it be
taken in Judgment, and with a clear mind, when it may be debated and doubted
(as it is by some) whether the obligation of it is to be considered, as
circumstantiate and specificate to the present Object of it, supposing him a
Tyrant? or in a more abstract notion, as it might be tendered in the sense of
its first Authors, as it was taken in King James the 6. his days, And as they
plead for taking the English Oath of Allegiance, as it was accepted by the
Puritans in Queen Elizabeth's dayes^ whether it obliges to a King in Idea, and
in a more general consideration, as one who is said never to die? Or with
reference to such an one as we have, a morta^ man, and an immortal enemy to all
those precious Interests, for preservation of which he only received his
Kingship? Whether it must be taken in that of the Imposers, practically
explained by their administrations? or in any other sense, alleged more Legal?
These would be clear, before it can be taken with the due qualifications of an
Oath. 3. As for the Civil part of it or Ecclesiastical, no other explanation
needs to be inquired after, than what they give forth in their Acts on
record: The Act of Supremacy (to be seen in the Historical Representation of
the Sixth and last Period page 111. senses the Ecclesiastical part of it: And
the Act for acknowledgment of his Majesty's prerogative does sufficiently
sense, explain, and expound the Civil part; Declaring, That it is inherent in
the Crown, and an undoubted part of the Royal prerogative -- to have the sole
choice and appointment of all Officers of State -- the power of calling,
holding, and dissolving Parliaments, and all Conventions and Meetings of
Estates -- the power of Armies, making of peace and war, treaties and leagues
with foreign Princes or States, or at home by the subjects among themselves --
and that it is high treason in the subjects -- upon whatsoever ground, to rise
-- in Arms -- or make any treaties or leagues -- among themselves, without his
Maj. Authority first interponed thereto; That it is unlawful to the subjects,
of whatsoever quality or function, to convocate -- themselves, for holding of
Councils to treat, consult, or determine in any matters Civil or Ecclesiastic
(except in the ordinary Judgments) or make leagues or bonds upon whatsoever
color or pretense, without his Maj. special consent -- That the league and
Covenant, and all treaties following thereupon, and acts or deeds that do or
may relate thereunto, are not obligatory -- and that none -- should presume,
upon any pretext of any Authority whatsoever, to require the renewing or
swearing of the said league and Covenant etc. Whereby it appears, that all this
screwing up the prerogative to such a pitch, is by the Oath of Allegiance to
defend all this jurisdiction justified; and so, these palpable encroachments on
the privileges of the Scots Parliaments, that, by the fundamental
Constitutions of the Government, always had a share in making Laws, and Peace
and War; These robberies of our Natural privileges of defending our selves by
Arms, in case of the Kings Tyranny and oppression, and of Convocating for
Consultations about the best means thereof; And these Invasions upon our
Ecclesiastical privileges, in keeping General Assemblies for the affairs of
Religion Prorenata, always strenously contended for as a part of the
Testimony; yea all these rescindings, repealings, and condemnings of the Way
and Manner, Methods and Measures, of promoting the Covenanted Reformation, are
by this Oath explained and by this Act acknowledged to be parts of that
supremacy and Jurisdiction to be defended and maintained: As like wise, by many
wicked Acts since promulgated, which promote the Supremacy to a vast degree of
Absoluteness, which all do interpret what that Supremacy is which is sworn to
be maintained, to wit, pure Tyranny established by Law. See the many grievous
Consequences of this laid out at large, in Apol. Relat. Sect. 10. 4. Here is
absolute Allegiance sworn to an Absolute power, Paramount to all Law, engaging
to faithful obedience to their Sovereign, as Supreme over all Persons and in
all causes -- and to defend, assist, and maintain his said jurisdiction, and
never to decline his power; there is no restriction here on obedience, nor
Limitation on the power, nor definition of the Causes, nor circumscription of
the cases, in which that assistance etc. is to be given, whether they be Lawful
or not. Now absolute allegiance to an absolute power cannot be sworn by any man
of Conscience, nor ouned by any man of reason, as is proven Head. 2. Arg. 6. It
cannot be Lawful in any sense, to swear such an Oath to any Mortal, nay not to
a David nor Hezekiah: because to swear unrestricted and unlimited Allegiance to
any man, were a manifest mancipating of Mankind, not only to an Ass-like
subjection, but to a servile obligation to maintain and uphold the Persons and
Government of mutable men, be what they will, turn to what they will; it is
known the best of men may degenerate: And by this no remedy is left to redress
our selves, b^t our heads, hearts, and hands all tied up under an engagment to
defend, assist, and maintain whosoever does hold the Government, manage it as
he pleases. This reason will also conclude against the English Oath of
Allegiance, though it be a great deal more smoothly worded, and seems only to
require a rejection of the Pope and legal subjection to the King; yet that
comprehensive Clause makes it border upon absoluteness, I will bear faith and
true allegiance to his Maj. heirs and successors, and him and them will defend
to the uttermost of my power, against all Conspiracies and attempts whatsoever.
There are no Conditions here at all, limiting the Allegiance, or qualifying the
Object; but an arbitrary imposition of true Allegiance and defense, in all
cases, against all attempts (even that of repressing their Tyranny not
excepted) not only of their persons but of their Dignities, if this be not an
illimited Allegiance to an absolute power, I know not what it is. 5. Here is an
acknowledgment of the Ecclesiastical Supremacy resident in the King: which is
the most blasphemous Usurpation on the prerogatives of Christ and privileges
of His Church, that ever the greatest Monster among men durst arrogate: yea the
Roman beast never claimed more; And in effect, it is nothing else but one of
his Names of Blasphemy twisted out of the Popes hands by K. Henry the Eight,
and handed down to Q. Elizabeth, and wafted over to and James the 6th. for that
was the Original and conveyance of it. The iniquity whereof is discovered above
Head. 1. Arg. 3. But further may be aggravated in these particulars (1) It is
only a change of the Pope but not of the Poped^m; and nothing else but a
shaking off the Ecclesiastical Pope, and submitting to a Civil Pope, by whom
Christ's Head-ship is as much wronged as by the other: And hereby a door is
opened for bringing in Popery (as indeed by this Strategem it is brought now
to our very doors) for by the Act of Supremacy he has power to settle all
things concerning Doctrine, Worship, discipline, or Government, by his Clerks
the Bishops, having all the Architectonick power of disposing, ordering, and
ordaining these, as he in his Royal wisdom thinks fit. (2) By this, Church and
State are confounded (whereof the Distinction is demonstrate above) making the
Magistrate a proper and Competent Judge in Church matters, not to be declined;
whereby also he has power to erect new Courts, Mongrel-Judicatories, half Civil
half Ecclesiastic, which have no Warrant in the Word. (3) By this, many
palpable and intolerable encroachments made upon the Liberties and privileges
of the Church of Christ are yielded unto; as that there must be no Church
Judicatories or Assemblies, without the Magistrates consent, but that the power
of convocating and indicting Assemblies do belong only to him, and the power of
delegating and constituting the members thereof, that he may dissolve them when
he pleases; that his presence or his Commissioners is necessary unto each
National Assembly; that Ministers have no proper decisive suffrage in Synods,
but only of advice; that the Church Judicatories be prelimited, and nothing
mus^ be treated there which may be interpreted grating upon the prerogative,
nor any thing whatsoever but what he shall allow and approve, without which it
can have no force nor validity; yea by this a door should be opened unto the
utter destruction and overthrow of all Church Judicatories, seeing he is made
the fountain of all Church power. (4) By this, the Magistrate is made a Church
member as he is a Magistrate, and so all Magistrates as such are Church members,
even heathens. And yet (5) By this he is exempted from subjection to the
Ministry, because they are made accountable to him in their administrations,
and in the discharge of their function are under him as Supreme. Yea (6) By
this the Magistrate is made a Church Officer, having the disposal of the
Churches Government. And not only so, but (7) By this he is made a Church
Officer of the highest degree, being supreme in all Causes, to whom Ministers
in the discharge of their Ministry are subordinate. And so (8) By this the
Church of the new Testament is made imperfect, so long as she wanted a
Christian Magistrate, wanting hereby a Chief Officer; yea and the Apostles did
amiss in robbing the Magistrate of his power (9) By this the Magistrate might
exerce all Acts of jurisdiction, immediately by himself; seeing he can do it as
supreme by his Commissioners in Ecclesiastic affairs. (10) Finally By this
Oath the King is made the head of the Church, being supreme over all persons
and in all Causes, unto whom all Appeals and references must ultimately be
reduced, even from Church Judicatories. Those things are only here touched they
are more apodeictically confirmed above, and may be seen made out at large in
Apol. Relat. Sect. 12. But I proceed. 6. It is contrary unto the Solemn League
and Covenant; into whose place after it was broken, burnt, buried, and
rescinded, since they have remitted the subjects allegiance by annulling the
Bond of it, they substitute and surrogate this in its place: And therefore none
can comply with the surrogation of the second, except he consent to the
abrogation of the first Oath. All the Allegiance we can oune according to the
Covenant, stands perpetually and expressly thus qualified, viz. in defense of
Religon and Liberty, according to our first and second Covenants, and in its
oun nature must be indispensably thus restricted: Therefore to renew the same,
or take an Oath of Allegiance simply, purposely omitting the former
restriction, when the powers are in manifest Rebellion against the Lord, is in
effect a disouning of that limitation, and of the Sovereign prerogative of the
Great God, which is thereby reserved; and as much as to say, whatever Authority
command us to do, we shall not only stupidly endure it, but actively concur
with and assist in all this Tyranny. See Naph. Prior edit. Page 177. 178.
Vindicated at length by Ius Populi. chap. 11. By all this the iniquity of the
Scots Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy may appear, and also that of the English
Oath of Allegiance, even abstract from the Supremacy, is in some measure
discovered; though it is not my purpose particularly to speak to that: yet this
I will say, that they that plead for its precision from the Supremacy annexed,
seem not to consider the full import of its terms; for under the dignities,
superiorities, and Authorities, there engaged to be upheld, the Ecclesiastical
Supremacy must be included; for that is declared to be one of the dignities of
the Crown there, as well as here; and hither it was brought from thence. And
therefore those Scots men that took that Oath there, and plead that though the
Oath of Allegiance in Scotland be a sin, yet it is duty to take the Oath in
England, seem to me to be in a great deceit; for the object is the same, the
subject is the same, the duty expected, required, and engaged into is the same,
and every thing equal in both. Yet all this iniquity here Couched, is some way
Comprehended in and employed by the Oath of Abjuration: for the Civil part is
imported, in abjuring a Declaration, for its declaring war against the King;
Where it is clear, he is ouned as King, and all part with them that declare war
against him being renounced, it is evident the Abjurers must take part with him
in that war, and so assist and defend him; for being subjects, they must not be
neutral, therefore if they be not against him they must be for him, and so
under the bond of allegiance to him: The Ecclesiastical Supremacy is inferred
from that expression of it, where some are said to serve him in Church as well
as in State, which implies an Ecclesiastical subordination to him as Supreme
over the Church.

III. The Tenor of some other Bonds was more smooth and subtle, as that of the
Bond of Peace; several times renewed and imposed, and under several forms; but
always after one strain: engaging to Live Peaceably, Whereby many were caught
and cheated with the seeming sai^ness of these general terms: but others
discerning their fa^laciousness, refused and suffered for it. This in the
General is capable of a good sense: for no Christian will refuse ^o Live
Peaceably, but will endeavor, if it be possible, as much as lies in them, to
Live Peaceably with all men Romans 12. 18. that is, so far to follow Peace with
all men, as may consist with the pursuit of holiness (...). 12. 14. But if we
more narrowly consider such Bonds, we shall find them Bonds of iniquity. for.
1. They are Covenants of Peace, or Confederacies with Gods enemies, whom we
should count our enemies, and hate them because they hate Him Psalm. 139. 21. It
is more suitable to answer, as Iehu did to Ioram 2 King. 9. 22. -- What Peace,
so long as the whoredoms of thy Mother Iezebel, and her witchcrafts are so
many? than to engage to be at Peace with those, who are carrying on Babylons
Interest, the Mother of harlots and witchcrafts. 2. This cannot be taken in
Truth, Judgment, and Righteousness, because of the fallacy and ambiguity of
the terms: for there are diverse sorts of Peace and Peaceableness; some kind is
duty, some never. It must then be rightly qualified, for we can profess and
pursue no Peace of Confederacy with the enemies of God, not consistent with the
fear of the Lord, otherwise we cannot expect to have the Lord for a Sanctuary,
but for a stone of stumbling Isai. 8. 8. 12-14 -- No Peace obstructing the
Gospel or Testimony, or abstracting from the duty of the day; No Peace tending
to sinful security Ier. 8. 11. No Peace leading to slavish stupidity; No Peace
prompting to preposterous prudence, in palliating sin, or daubing defections
with untempered mortar; No Peace inconsistent with Truth* they must go together
Zech. 1. 19. No Peace that may not be followed with Holiness Heb. 12. 14. But
it must be so qualified, that it be in the Lord, in Truth, in duty,
contributing for the good of the Church Psalm. 122. 8, 9. and the fruit of that
Wisdom, which is first Pure and then Peaceable Iam. 3. 17. Now all that know
the Imposers of these Bonds, will acknowledge that is not the Peace they are
seeking. 3. If we further enquire into their meaning of Living Peaceably, and
seek a determinate sense of it from their Acts and Actings, It is plain they
mean such a Peaceable Living, as gives obedience to their wicked Laws, and is a
Compliance to their established Courses: And it must be such a Peaceable
living, as is opposite to their sense of Sedition, Rebellion, Schism, etc.
Which they interpret every seasonable duty to be: And it must be such a
Peaceable living, as they were presumed not to have been observant of before:
and what ever it be, must be opposite to that with which they were charged as
turbulent, and so contrary to all the duties of our Covenanted profession, as
going to meetings, withdrawing from the Curats etc. Which they interpret not to
be Peacable living. 4. This is contrary to our Covenants, which oblige us to a
constant contending with and opposition to them. Yet all this is engaged into
in the Oath of Abjuration, which abjures all war against the King, and all
doing injury to them that serve him, and consequently to Peace and living
Peaceably with them.

IV. Of Affinity to this were many other Bonds of Regularity, frequently
renewed and generally imposed, and that with unparalelled illegality and
rigor; Sometimes by hosts of Savage Highlanders; Sometimes by Circuit-Courts,
and by Heretors upon their Tenants, and with such unheard of involvements, that
the Master or Heretor was obliged for himself, his Wife, Children, Servants,
Tenants, and all under him, to live Orderly: Which in some was more bluntly
expressed, in others more flatly explained, that they should keep the Public
Ordinances, that is, hear the Curats, and not go to any Seditious Conventicles
(so they called the Persecuted Meetings of the Lords people for the Worship of
God) and in others yet more impudently exacted, that they should not harbor,
intertain, or correspond with any that went to these Meetings, but discover and
assist to the apprehending of them. There were several forms of them from time
to time, some longer some shorter; but all of them, first and last, were to the
same sense and scope. And the most favorably worded had much wickedness in
them: for. 1. They are Covenants of Order, and coming under the same Rule with
themselves, which is nothing but their lusts and Mischiefs framed into Law, not
according to the Rule of the Word of God, but the iniquious Laws of men. 2.
They could not be taken in Truth, Judgment, and Righteousness: for either they
were ambiguous, or their plain sense obliged to manifest iniquities, to
conform with all their enacted corruptions. 3. They are clear breaches of
Covenant, which obliges to another Kind of Orderlyness, and to follow other
Rules, and take none from them in the Matters of God. 4. They are impossible,
and absurd; obliging Masters to bind for all under them, that could neither lie
in their power, nor in their duty, to restrain their Liberty in these Lawful
things, and to constrain and compel their consciences to sin. 5. They are
unnatural and cruel, obliging the Takers to partake with them in their
persecution of the Godly. 6. They were engagments to hear Curats, which is
proved to be sin Head 1. throughout. 7. They were engagments to withdraw from
the Meetings of the Lords people, proved to be duty. Head 4. Yet the Oath of
Abjuration is some way equivalent to this, in that it obliges the Abjurers to
renounce Disorderlyness in their sense, and to do no harm to the timeserving
Orderly Clergy or Laity, serving and prosecuting their wicked Orders.

V. Some other Bonds of that nature, and Oaths frequently put to Suffering
people when taken Prisoners, did require peaceableness and Orderlyness, in this
Style, that they should either tacitly or expressly condemn Some Risings in
Arms, as at Pentland, Bothwel etc. to be Rebellion against the King, and a sin
against God, and engage never to rise in Arms against the King, or any
commissionate by him, upon any pretense whatsoever. The iniquity whereof is
manifest: for 1. This is a Covenant equivalent to a league Offensive and
Defensive with them, obliging never to offend or oppose them, not to defend nor
rescue our Brethren against and from their murdering violence. 2. This could
not be taken in Truth, Judgment, and Righteousness: for, who can tell how far
that may extend, upon any pretense whatsoever? this may oblige us to make a
stupid surrender of our lives, when the King turns so Tyrannical as to send his
Cutthroats to demand them, or Authorizes his bloody Papists to Massacre us,
them we must not resist upon this pretense. 3. It is contrary to our Covenants,
that allow Resistance in some cases, and oblige to assist and defend all that
enter under the bond thereof. 5. This infers an ouning of the present
Authority, as the irresistible Ordinance of God, and an obligation of living
peaceably in subjection under it; disproved above: To which I shall add a part
of that forecited Letter of Mr Rutherfoords the 63. in number of the third part
of his printed Letters, which are a clear vindication of the principles and
practice of our conscientious Sufferers on this point [There is a promise and
real purpose (says he) to live peaceably under the Kings Authority; But (1)
you do not so answer heartily and imgenuously the mind of the Rulers, who to
your knowledge mean a far other thing by Authority than you do; for you mean
his just Authority, his Authority in the Lord -- in the maintenance of true
Religion, as in the Covenant, and confession of faith -- is expressed from the
Word of God; they mean his supreme Authority and absolute prerogative above
Laws, as their Acts clear and as their practice is, for they refused to such as
were unwilling to subscribe their bond, to add, Authority in the Lord, or just
and Lawful Authority, or Authority as it is expressed in the Covenant; but this
draught of a petition yields the sense and meaning to them, which they crave.
(2) That Authority for which they contend, is exclusive of the sworn Covenant;
So that except ye had said, ye shall be subject to the Kings Authority in the
Lord, or according to the sworn Covenant, you say nothing to the point in hand,
and that sure is not your meaning (3) whoever promises so much of peaceable
living under his Maj. Authority, leaveing out the exposition of the 5. Command
-- may upon the very same ground subscribe the bond refused by the Godly, and
so you pass from the Covenant, and make all these bypast Actings of this Kirk
and State these years bypast to be horrid Rebellion, and how deep this guilt
draws consider. 5. This would infer, though the King should send and kill us,
we must not resist, nor defend our oun lives: yet being an Oath against the
Sixth Command, which enjoineth Natural self preservation, it should be
intrinsecally sinful; and its all one to swear to non-preservation of self, as
to swear to self Murder. 6. I hope to make it appear in the 5. Head, that this
is against the practice of Nations, the Law of Nature, and the Word of God. Yet
all this Complex iniquity is clearly comprehended in the Oath of Abjuration, in
terminis ab^uring all war against the King.

VI. There were some other Oaths, frequently obtruded upon people, for refusing
which they have suffered great cruelties, that can hardly be described by any
name, Nor can their imposition have a parallel in any age or place, for
illegaltty, inhumanity, arbitrariness, and odiousness. These were the Oaths of
Inquisition or Super inquirendis: Whereby people were pressed to answer the
Inquisitors, according to all their knowledge of things, they were interrogate
upon, and delate and discover Intercommuned persons in their Wanderings, or
such whose names were in their Porteous Rolls etc. And power was given to
single Soldiers, to press these Oaths upon whom they pleased. The iniquity of
which is monstrous: for. 1. This was the worst Kind of Combination with these
blood-hound, to abett and assist, them in their pursuing after the Lords
people: Which is worse than to be bare consenters to such wickedness, or to be
onlookers to their affliction in the day of their Calamity, but like that sin
charged upon Edom, that they delivered up those of His that did remain in the
day of distress Obad. verse. 13. 14. for these that took Oaths, obliged
themselves to do all they could to deliver up the Remnant that escaped; and if
they did not, no thanks to them, if they could not, their sin was in their
willingness: if they would not, and yet swore would contribute their help
toward it, by telling of all they knew, that was horrid perjury and false
swearing. 2. This could be no ways capable of the qualifications of an Oath;
not only because the matter is wicked and unnatural, to discover may be the
husband or Children or nearest relations, to please men or save their oun life,
which was a great tentation, and therefore in it there could be no delibaration
in swearing: but also for the doubtful perplexity confounding the mind, that
they either could not or durst not tell of all they knew, and yet swear to do
it. 3. It is against the Covenant, which obliges to discover Malignant enemies,
and assist our Covenanting Brethren, and not to discover them, and assist
Malignant enemies: which is a perfect inverting the fourth and sixth Articles
of the Covenant. 4. It is contrary to clear precepts in Scripture, to assist
and defend our Brethren, to make our shadow as the night in the midst of the
noon day, and hide the Outcast, and bewray not him that wandereth Isai. 16. 3.
5. The illegality of this imposition makes it very absurd, that every pitiful
Officer or Soldier should be empowered to impose and exact Oaths, and impannel
and examine Witnesses, about alleged Criminals. Yet the monstrousness of this
Oath serves to aggravate the Oath of Abjuration; in that the Abjurers do
renounce their part of and disoune the Declarers of that abjured Declaration,
and so do as much as from them is required, to give them up for a prey to their
hunters; yea they declare them Murderers in that they abjure their Declaration
as asserting Murder, And consequently they must be obliged to discover them to
their acknowledged Judges.

VII. The Abominable Test comes next: which needs no other refutation, than to
rehearse it: the substance whereof was, a Solemn Swearing, that they Ouned and
sincerely professed the true Protestant Religion, contained in the confession
of faith, recorded in the first Parl. of K. Iaemes the 6 -- and that they would
adhere thereunto all the days of their life -- and never consent to any change
or alteration contrary thereto -- but renounce all Doctrines, principles,
practices, whether Popish or Fanatical, contrary thereto -- And they swear that
the King is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, over all persons in all
causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, -- and promise to bear faith and true
allegiance to the Kings Maj. his heirs and Lawful successors, and to their
power shall assist and defend all rights, jurisdictions, prerogatives --
belonging to them -- And affirm -- it -- unlawful for subjects upon pretense
of Reformation, or any other pretense whatsoever, to enter into Covenants -- or
to convocate, conveen, or assemble -- to treat, consult, or determine in any
matter of State, Civil or Ecclesiastic, without his Maj. special command -- or
to take up Arms against the King, or these Commissionate by him -- And that
there lies no obligation on them, from the National Covenant, or Solemn League
and Covenant -- to endeavor any change or alteration in the Government, either
in Church or State, as it is now established by the Laws of the Kingdom -- and
they shall never decline his Maj. power and jurisdiction -- And finally they
swear, that this Oath is given in the plain genuine sense and meaning of the
words, without any equivocation, mental reservation, or any manner of evasion
whatsoever -- This is the Complement of a wicked Conspiracy, couching in its
Capicious bosom the Complication of all their Mischiefs, comprehending all and
explaining all the former: which indeed cannot be taken with any equivocating
evasion, that can escape either the Stigma of nonsense and self contradiction,
or the censure of Atheism and irreligion, or the sentence of Divine vengeance
against such baffling the Name of God. The best sense that can be put upon it,
is that which a poor Sot expressed, when it was tendered to him, prefacing thus
before he took it, Lord have mercy upon my Soul. For. 1. It is not consistent
with itself: there being such contradictions between that confession of faith
and the following part, that no man can reconcile: Some whereof may be
instanced as follows. (1) In the 11. Art. of that confession, entitled, of
Christ's Ascension it is said, that Christ is the only Head of the Church and
Just Lawgiver, in which Honors and Offices if man or Angels presume to intrude
themselves, we utterly detest and abhore them as blasphemous to our Sovereign
and Supreme Governor Christ Jesus; and a little before in that same Article, it
is said, this Glory Honor and prerogative He alone among the Brethren shall
possess: And in the 16. Art. of the Kirk, Christ is the only Head of the same
Kirk. And yet in the Test the King is affirmed to be the only supreme in all
causes Ecclesiastical. (2) In the 14. Art. among good works are reckoned these,
to obey Superior powers and their charges (not repugning to the Commandment of
God) to save the lives of Innocents, to repress Tyranny, to defend the
oppressed; And among evil works these are qualified, to resist any that God
has placed in Authority [while they pass not over the bounds of their Office]
And Art. 24. it is confessed, that such as resist the supreme power, doing that
which pertains to his charge, do resist Gods Ordinance -- while the Princes and
Rulers vigilantly travel in the execution of their Office. And yet in the Test,
true Allegiance is engaged into without any such limitations; And it is
affirmed to be unlawful, upon any pretense whatsoever, to convocate etc. or to
take up Arms against the King. (3) In the 14. Art. Evil works are affirmed to
be, not only those that expressly are done against Gods Commandment, but those
also that, in matters of Religion and Worshipping of God, have no other
assurance but the invention and opinion of men: And Art. 18. among the Notes of
the true Church, Ecclesiastical Discipline uprightly ministered, as Gods Word
prescribes, whereby vice is repressed, and virtue nourished, is one: In Art.
20. the voice of God and constitution of men are opposed. And yet in the Test,
they swear never to endeavor any change or alteration in the Government of the
Church -- as it is now established; whereof many things must be altered, yea
the whole form and frame of it, if these propositions be true, as they are.
(4) In the Test, they swear never to consent to any change or alteration,
contrary to that confession, and that all principles and practices contrary
thereto are Popish and fanatical (for so they divide them into one of these
disjunctively) then must all the following principles in their Test be
renounced as such; seeing they are contrary to that confession in some
propositions or Articles; And that the Government established by that
confession was Presbyterian, and this established by the Test is Episcopal. 2.
It comprehends all the former Oaths and Bonds, which are cleared above to be
sinful. Yet for as wicked as it is, it must be some way homologated by the Oath
of Abjuration, excepting the contradiction that is in it: Seeing all these
oppositions against the King, sworn aginst in the Test, are abjured and
renounced in that Oath of Abjuration, in renouncing all Declarations of war
against the King; for if any war can be undertaken against him, all these Kinds
of opposition must be allowed, that are in the Test sworn against.

VIII. In the last place, I shall come to consider more particularly the Oath
of Abjuration it self; for refusing of which the sufferings were more severe
(being extended even to death or banishment) though the words be more smooth
than in any of the former, which are these I -- do abjure, renounce, and
disoune a late pretended Declaration, affixed on several Mer^at Crosses etc. in
so far as it declares War against the King, and assert it Lawful to kill any
that serve his Maj. in Church, State, Army, or Country. That the taking of this
Oath is a step of Compliance, dishonorable to God, derogatory to the days
Testimony, contradictory to the many reiterated Confessions of Christ's Worthy
(though poor and despised) Witnesses, sealed by their blood, bonds, and
banishments, encouraging and gratifying to the Enemies of God, hardening to
backsliding Brethren, offensive to the Generation of the Righteous, stumbling
to all, leaving a stain and sting upon the Conscience of the Subscriber, I
shall endeavor to make out by these Considerations.

1. Considering the party who imposed it; it must be looked upon as a
Confederacy with them, being tendered upon all the Subjects, as a Test of their
incorporating themselves with and declaring themselves for their head, and
syding with them and him, in this their Contest and Contention with a poor
Remnant of the Lords people, persecuted and murdered by them for Truth and
Conscience sake, who issued forth that Declaration against them, here abjured.
Therefore let the party be considered, imposing the Oath with such rigor, and
prosecuting the Refusers with ravenous rage, murdering and torturing all who
did not comply with them, declaring a Ware more formally and explicitly
against Christ as King, and all that will dare to assert their Allegiance to
Him, under an open displayed banner of defyance of Him and His, than ever
Mortals durst espouse and avouch: The head of that Treacherous and Truculent
faction, both he who was first declared against in that Declaration, and he who
has by bloody and treacherous Usurpation succeeded to him, being such a
Monster for Murder and Mischief, Tyranny, Oppression and Perfidy, that among
all the Nimrods and Nero's that past ages can recount, we cannot find a
parallel, by all Law Divine and humane incapable of Government, or any Trust, or
so much as Protection, or any Privilege, but to be pursued by all as a Common
enemy to mankind: And his Underlings, Agents and Accomplices, devoted to his
lust, and serving his wicked designs, in their respective offices and places of
trust under him, which by his nomination and sole appointment they have been
erected to, and established in, with the stain and indelible Character of
perjurie, the only qualification of their being capable of any advancement,
occupying by usurpation intrusion and violence the public places of
judicatories, and carrying all so insolently and arbitrarly, and with an
effrontry of wickedness and despite of all Reason, Religion, or Justice, that
they cannot but be looked upon as the most pestilent and pestiferous Plague
that ever pestered a People: The taking then of this Oath, by them projected as
a Pest to infect Consciences with, and pervert them to wicked Truth-deserting
and Law-perverting Loyalty, and imposed as a Test of Compliance with them, and
coming off from that little flock whom they design to devour and destinate to
destruction; must be in their oun esteem, as well as of the Generation of the
Righteous, to their satisfaction and the others sorrow, a real incorporating
with them, an ouning of their usurped power as Judges to administer Oaths,
giving them all obedience they required for the time to their Authority, and
all the security they demanded for the Subscribers Loyalty, an approving of
all their Proceedings in that matter, and transacting, tampering, and
bargaining with these Sons of Belial, out of fear: whereby a right is purchased
to that common badge of their ouned and professed friends, who (upon taking
that Oath) had from them a privilege and allowance to travel and traffic
(where and how they will) through the Country, denied to all other that wanted
that Badge; I mean the Pass or Testificate they got from them thereupon, which
was the Mark of that secular beast of Tyranny, no less pernicious to the world
than Popery has been to the Church; and which was given to all the Takers of
that Oath, as a Mark of Tessera that they were no enemies to the Government, as
they call it. O base and unworthy Liverie, for the suffering Sons of Zion to
put on the Signature of the Society of her devourers. Hence, if Covenants and
Confederacies, declaring we are on their side, cannot be made with the Enemies
of Religion, then this Oath could not be taken Lawfully: But the former is
proved above: Ergo the latter follows. This will yet more appear.

2. If we consider the Party that set forth that Declaration, whom the
Proclamation against it represent so odiously and invidiously whom the Oath
imposed obliges us to condemn; being so represented, as if they were
maintainers of Murdering Principles, and perpetators of Assassinating
villainies, inconsistent with Peace or any good Government, and therefore to be
exterminated and destroyed out of the Land, whom therefore they prosecute and
persecute so cruelly to the effusion of their blood, under color of Law. 1.
The takers of this Oath must have formally, under their unhappy hand, disouned
and renounced them, and all part or interest in them, or Society or Sympathy
with them; who yet are known to be the Suffering people of God, more earnestly
contending, witnessing, wrestling for the faith and Word of Christ's patience,
and have suffered more for their adherance to the Covenanted Reformation of the
Church of Scotland, and for their opposition to all its deformations and
defections, than any Party within the Land: yet them have they rejected as
their Companions, though with some of them sometimes they have had sweet
Company and Communion in the House of God, by abjuring and condemning their
deed which duty and necessity drove them to. 2. Hereby they have presumptuously
taken upon them, to pass a Judgment upon the deed of their Brethren, before
their Murdering Enemies; And that not a private discretive Judgment, but a
public definitive sentence (in their Capacity) by the most solemn way of
Declaring it, that can be, by Oath and subscription under their hand; whereby
they have condemned all the Sufferings of their Brethren, who sealed their
Testimony in opposition to this Compliance with their blood, and finished it
with honor and joy, as foolish and frivolous profusion of their oun blood, Nay
as just and legally inflicted and executed upon them, as being Rebels, of
Murdering Principles and practices: For this cannot be vindicated from a more
than indirect justifying of all the Murdering Severity executed upon them. 3.
And hereby they have unkindly and unchristianly listed themselves on the other
side against them, and taken part rather with their enemies than with them; for
thus they used to plead fort it, when they pressed this Oath upon them that
scrupled it; When any War is declared against the King, any of his Maj.
Soldiers may question any man whom he is for, and if he be not for the King,
he may act against him as an enemy, and if they will not declare for the King
and disoune the Rebels, they are to be reputed by all as enemies. Which,
whatever weakness be in the arguing, plainly discovers, that they take the
abjuring of that Declaration in that juncture, to be a man's Declaring of what
side he is for, and that he is not for the Emitters of that Declaration, but
for the King and his party: which in the present state of affairs, is a most
dreadful ouning of Christ's Enemy, and disouning of His Friends. Hence, a
disouning of the Lords persecuted people, and condemning their practice, and an
ouning of their Persecuters and espousing their side of it, is a sinful
Confederacy: But the taking of this Oath is such, as is evident by what is
said: Ergo it is a sinful Confederacy.

3. Considering the Nature, Conditions, and Qualifications of so solemn and
serious a piece of Gods Worship, and way of invocating His Holy Name, as an
Oath is: It will appear, that the taking of this imposed Oath of Abjuration,
was a dreadful and heinous breach of the Third Command, by taking His Name in
vain, in the worst sort, and so cannot be holden guiltless. I prove it thus: An
Oath which cannot be taken in Truth, Judgment, and Righteousness, is a breach
of the Third Command: But this is an Oath which cannot be taken in Truth,
Judgment, and Righteousness: Which is evident; for. 1. It cannot be taken by
any Conscientious man in Truth, in sincerity of the heart, simplicity (...)
mind, singleness and honesty in the intention, not putting any other sense than
the imposer has, and which is the clear sense of it sine juramento and extra.
For, if he take it according to their meaning, then he should swear it unlawful
ever to declare War against the King, and consequently never to rise in Arms
against him upon any pretense whatsoever: for, if we may rise in Arms for our
oun defense, we make and must declare a defensive War. And indeed, in themselves
as well as in their sense and meaning who imposed them, these two Oaths, never
to rise in Arms against the King, and this of Abjuration, are one and the
same. Then also should he swear it unlawful, at any time, upon any occasion, or
for any Cause, to kill any such as serve the King in Church, State, Army, or
Country, either in Peace or War: for that is their thought, and sensus vel
juramenti ipsius vel extra juramentum: And in part, for their exemption and
immunity from all condign punishment, this Oath was contrived. But in fine, how
can this Oath be taken in Truth; when it is not apparent, either that the
declaring of a War against the King, or killing some for some causes (which
shall afterward be made appear to be Lawful) that serve him, are to be abjured
and disouned? or that the Declaration does assert any such thing? And indeed it
will be found to be a denying the Truth, and a subscribing to a manifest
falsehood, invoking God to be Witness thereto. 2. This Oath cannot be taken in
Judgment, that is, with knowledge and deliberation etc. All the terms of it
have much obscure ambiguity, Declaring a war, and killing any who serve the
King, may be constructed in several senses, good and bad, but here they are
indefinitely expressed, and universally condemned. Particularly that [ in so
far as] has several faces, and can never be sworn in Judgment; For, if it
denote a Causality, and signify as much as quia or quatenus, then all
Declarations of war against any that have the name of King whatsoever, upon
whatsoever grounds, and all killing of any serving him, though in our oun
defense, must be universally condemned, for a quatenus ad omne valet
Consequentia: If it import a restriction, excluding other things in the
Declaration, but obliging to abjure only that; then it implies also an
affirmation, that these two things are contained in it, which will not appear
to the Judgment of them that will seriously ponder the Declaration it self: If
again it be a Supposition or Condition, and to be interpreted for if so be,
then all that the Judgment can make of it is that it is uncertain, and so the
Conscience dare not invoke God as a Witness of that which is uncertain whether
it be a Truth or a lie. 3. This Oath could not be taken in Righteousness: for
the matter is not true, certainly known, Lawful, possible, weighty, necessary,
useful, and worthy: It is not true, that the Declaration imports so far as as
it is represented in the Oath of Abjuration: Neither is it certainly known, but
by collating these two together the Contrary will appear: Neither is it Lawful
(if it were true that such assertions were in it) to abjure all Declarations of
war against the King, and to swear it unlawful ever to kill any if he be once
in the Kings service, in Church, State; Army, or Country: Nor is it possible to
reduce this Assertory Oath into a promissory one Lawfully, as most part of such
Oaths may and do necessarely imply; for when I swear such a thing unlawful, it
implies my promise, by virtue of the same Oath, never to practice it; But it is
not possible (as the case stands) for a man to bind up himself in every case
from all declared war against the King, or from killing some employed in his
service; what if there be a necessary call to join in arms with the Lords
people, for the defense of their Religion, lives, and Liberties, against him?
what if he command a Massacre? shall not a man defend himself? Nor endeavor to
kill none of that murdering Crew, because they are in his service? Was ever a
fool so fettered? Nor is it of such weight, as to be the occasion of involving
the whole Country in perjury or persecution, as by that Oath was done: Nor was
it necessary, in this man's time, to make all abjure a Declaration out of date,
when the object of it Charles the Second was dead, and no visible party
actually in arms to prosecute it; Nor was it ever of any use or worth, except
it were implicitly to gratify their greedy lusting after the blood of
Innocents, or the blood of silly Souls cheated by their snares, by involving
them in the same sin of perjury and Conscience-debauching false-swearing,
whereof they themselves are so heinously guilty. But let them, and such as have
taken that Oath, and not fled to Christ for a Sanctuary, lay to heart the doom
of false swearrers, the flying roll of the Curse of God shall enter into their
house Zech. 5. 4. Love no false Oath for all these are things that I hate says
the Lord Zech. 8. 17. The Lord will be a swift Witness against false swearers
Mal. 3. 5. And let them sist their Conscience before the Word, and set the Word
to the Conscience, and these Considerations will have some weight.

4. If we consider this Particular Oath it self, and the words of it more
narrowly, we shall find a Complication of iniquities in it, by examining the
sense of them as the Imposers expound them. 1. Not only that Declaration, but
all such in so far as they declare and assert such things, are here renounced;
and hereby many honest and faithful Declarations are disouned, that declare the
same things. It is indeed pleaded by some, that profess to be presbyterians, as
it was also pretended by some of the pressers of the Oath themselves, but in
order to pervert and cheat the Conscience; that here is not required a
disouning of the Apologetical Declaration simpliciter, but only secundum quid,
or rather of a pretended one of their supposing, in so far as it imports such
things: But this is frivolous, for that pretended one is intended by the
Imposers to be the Real Apologetical Declaration, which they will have to be
disouned, and cannot be distinguished from it: And though all these Assertions
cannot be fastened upon that Apologetical Declaration, but it is evident that
it is invidiously misr^presented; yet that same is the pretended one which they
require to be abjured in so far as it asserts such things, which it does not:
And if it be secundum quid to be disouned, then that must either be secundum
that Assertion of killing any etc. Which is not to be found in it, and so it is
not to be disouned at all; or it must be secundum the Declaration of war
against the King; And so that quid or formal reason of disouning it, will
oblige to disoune all Declarations of war against the King, which cannot be
disouned. Others again Object, that it is not required to be disouned formally,
but only conditionally, taking and confounding in so far for if so be: But to
any thinking man it is plain, this cannot be a supposition, nor yet a simple
restriction (as they would give it out) but an assertion that such things are
indeed imported in it; for so the Imposers think and say: And if it might pass
current under that notion, as a supposition, being equivalent to if so be, then
under that sophistical pretext, I might renounce the Covenant, or the most
indisputed Confession or Declaration that ever was, in so far as it contained
such things; And so this equivocation might elude all Testimonies whatsoever,
and justify all prevarications. 2. This must condemn all defensive wai of
subjects against their oppressing Rulers, in that a Declaration is abjured in
so far as it declares war against the King: to press and persuade people to
which, it was usually urged by the Imposers, that when a war is declared by
Rebels against the King, then all the subjects are obliged to disoune the
Rebels, or else be repute for such themselves: And, when it was alleged the
war was ceased, because the Object declared against was ceased, Charles the
Second being dead, otherwise if a man be obliged to give his opinion about a
war declared against a King deceased and gone, then by the same parity of
reason he must be obliged to give his opinion of that war of the Lords of the
Congregation (as they were called) against Queen Mary in the beginning of the
Reformation; It was still replied by them, that the Rebellion continued, and
all were guilty of it that did not abjure that Declaration: Whence it is
evident, they mean that every thing which they call Rebellion must be disouned,
and consequently all Resistance of Superiors upon any pretense whatsoever, as
many of their Acts explain it: yea and it was plainly told by some of them, to
some that scrupled to rake the Oath because they said they did not understand
it, that the meaning was to swear never to rise in arms against the King.
Against this it has been objected by several, that this was always denied by
Presbyterians, that ever they declared war against the King, but only for
defense of their lives and Liberties, never against the King expressy,
purposedly, and designedly, but only against him per accidens when he happened
to be the adverse party: But this distinction will not be a Salvo to the
Conscience; For the object declared against, is either a King or not; if he be
not, then a Declaration of war against him is not to be abjured; if he be King,
then he is either declared against as King qua Rex and perse, or as an
oppressor, or an Abuser of his power; the first indeed is to be disouned, for a
King as King or Lawful Magistrate must not be resisted Romans 13. 2. But the
second, to declare war against a King as an oppressor and abuser of his power
and subverter of the Laws, has been ouned by our Church and State many a time,
and they have opposed and declared war as purposedly against him as he did
against them, and as really and formally as he was an oppres^or: sure he cannot
be an oppressor only per accidens, nor does he declare war against the subjects
only pes accidens: However this has been ouned always by Presbyterians, that
war may be declared against him who is called King. And therefore to abjure a
Declaration in so far as it declares war against the King, will condemn not
only that Declaration upon the heads wherein its honesty and faithfulness
chiefly consists, but all other most honest and honorable Declarations, that
have been made and emitted by our worthy and renouned Ancestors, and by our
Worthies in our oun time, who have formally, avowedly, and explicitly, or
expressly, purposedly, and designedly declared their opposition to Tyranny and
Tyrants, and their Lawful and laudable designs to repress, depress, and
suppress them, by all the ways and means, that God, and Nature, and the Laws
of Nations allow, when they did ipso jure depose and exauctorate themselves
from all Rule, or privilege, or prerogative of Rulers, and became no more Gods
ministers but Beelzebubs vicegerents, and Monsters to be exterminated out of
the Society of Mankind. The honestest of all our Declarations of defensive war,
have always run in this strain; And others, insinuating more preposterous
Loayltie, have been justly taxed for asserting the Interest of the Tyrant, the
greatest enemy of the declarers, and principal object of the declared war;
which disingenuous juggling and foysting in such flattering and falsifying
distinctions in the State of the Quarrel, has rationally been thought one of
the procuring Causes or Occasions of the discomfiture of our former
Appearances, for the Work of God and Liberties of our Country, 3. This must
infer an ouning of his Authority as Lawful King; when the Declaration disouning
him is abjured in so far as it declares war against his Majesty, for in this
Oath he is styled and asserted to be King, and to have the Majesty of a Lawful
King, and therefore must be ouned as such by all that take it: which yet I have
proved to be sinful above Head. 2. Against this it has been quibbled by some,
that that Declaration does not declare war against the King expressly as King,
but only against Charles Stewart, by them declared to be no King who set forth
the Declaration. But this will not salve the matter; for then (1) It is a
subscribing to a lie, in abjuring a Declaration in so far as it did declare a
thing, which it did not, if that hold. (2) The enemies impose the abjuring and
disouning of it, in so far as it declares war against their King, who had none
other but Charles Stewart at that time, who was the King in their sense; and an
Oath cannot be taken in any other sense, contradictory to the Imposers, even
though by them allowed, without an unjustifiable equivocation. (3) Though he
had been King, and had not committed such acts of Tyranny as might actually
denominate him a Tyrant, and forefeit his Kingship; yet to repress his illegal
arbitrariness and intolerable enormities, and to repel his unjust violence,
and reduce him to good order, Subjects, at least for their oun defense, may
declare a war expressly, purposedly and designedly against their oun
acknowledged King: This ought not in so far to be disouned; For then all our
Declarations emitted, during the whole time of prosecuting the Reformation, in
opposition to our King: would be disouned: And so with one dash unhappily the
whole Work of Reformation, and the way of carrying it on, is hereby tacitly
and consequentially reflected upon and reproached, if not disouned. 4. It must
infer an ouning of the Ecclesiastical Supremacy, when it asserts that some do
serve the King in Church as well as in State: there is no Distinction here, but
they are said to serve him the same way in both. And it is certain they mean
so, and have expressed so much in their Acts, that Church men are as
subordinate, and the same way subject to the Kings Supremacy, as Statsmen are.
The absurdity and blasphemy of which, is discovered above. 5. This condemns all
killing of any that serve the King, in Church, State, Army, or Country: for a
Declaration is abjured in so far as it asserts it Lawful to kill any such; And
so by this Oath, there is an impunity secured for his Idolatrous priests, and
Murdering varlets, that serve him in the Church; for his bloody Counselors,
and Gouned Murderers, that serve his Tyrannical designs in the State; for his
bloody Lictors and Executioners, the Sword men, that serve him in the Army,
whom he may send when he pleases to murder us; and for his bloody Iust-asses,
Informers, and Intelligencing Sycophants, the Ziphites, that serve him in the
Country: All these must escape bringing to con^ign punishment, contrary to the
4. Art. of the Solemn League and Covenant, and shall be confuted Head. 6.
Against this it is excepted by the Pleaders for this Oath, that it is only a
declared abhoring of Murdering principles, which no Christian dare refuse; And
it may be taken in this sense safly, that it is to be abjured in so far as it
asserts it Lawful to kill all that are to be employed by his Maj. or any
because so employed, in Church, State, Army, or Country; Which never any did
assert was Law-ful: But though Murdering principles are indeed always to be
declaredly abhorred, and all Refusers of that Oath did both declare so much,
and abhorred the thoughts of them; yet this evasion is naught, for (1) The
Declaration asserts no such thing, neither for that cause nor for any other,
but expressly makes a distinction, between persons under the Epithet of bloody
cruel Murderers, and these only whom it threateneth to animadvert upon. (2) The
only reason of their declared intent of prosecuting these, whom they threaten
to bring to conding punishment, was because they were so employed by the Tyrant
in such service, as shedding the blood of Innocents, Murdering people where
they met them; And so that's the very reason for which they deserve to be
killed, and therefore foolish, impertinent, and very absurd to be alleged, as
a qualification of the sense of that impious Oath.

5. If we consider the Proclamation enjoining this Oath, and narrating and
explaining the Occasions and causes of it, all these reasons against it will be
confirmed; and it will further appear, that the Proclamation it self is
indirectly approved. For though it might be sustained: in the abstract, that we
may and must renounce such Declarations founded on Principles inconsistent with
Government, and bearing such inferences as are specified in that Proclamation:
yet complexly considering what they mean by Government, and what sort of
Society that is, the Security whereof is said to be infringed by that
Declaration, And what is the Scope of that Narrative; A renouncing of a paper
contradictory thereto, must be in so far a tacit approbation of that
Proclamation. For that Oath which renounceth what is contrary to such a
Proclamation, does justify the Proclamation: But this Oath renounces what is
contrary to the Proclamation, and that only: Ergo it justifies the
Proclamation. It is entitled, as it was really designed, for discovering such
as oune or will not disoune the foresaid Declaration, by them falsely
nicknamed, a late treasonable Declaration of war against his Majesty, and the
horrid principle of Assassination. And the body of it discovers such hell-bred
hatred of and malice against that poor party, destinated in their design to
final and total destruction, and lays down such Contrivances for their
discovery and ruin, that the heads and hearts of the Inventors and Authors may
seem to be possessed and inspired with the Devils immediately assisting
Counsel, and the Clerks pen that drew it up to have been dipped in the Stygian
lake and the Gall and venom of hell: Representing the Emitters and Abetters
and Spreaders of that Declaration, and all who have been joined in any of their
Societies, and all who either will oune or scruple to disoune the said
Declaration, in the manner by them tendered and imposed, (which are the
Generality of the most tender and conscientious Christians in the Land) under
all the vilest and most abominable and odious terms, their malice could invent;
as if they were Insolent and desperate Rebels, associated under a pretended
form of Government, who had formerly endeavored to disguise their bloody and
execrable principles, but now had pulled off the mask, and who think it a duty
to kill and Murder all who do any manner of way serve the present Rulers, or
bear charge under them; who maintain principles inconsistent with all
Government and Society, and tending to the destruction of the lives of their
Loyal and honest subjects; Treacherous and assassinating principles etc. who
now have declared their hellish intentions, and for the better performance of
their mischievons designs, do lurk in secret, and are never discerned but in
the acts of their horrid assassinations, and passing up and down among the
Kings Loyal subjects, take opportunity to murder and assassinate, like
execrable Rebels; And Calling that Declaration, an execrable and damnable
Paper etc. All which are execrable and damnable lies, and forgeries of the
father of them, and a Charge which all their Sophistry can never make out in
any particular: Yet by them amplified to a swelling hight of heinousness; And
among other circumstances, aggravated from their frequent refusing the
reiterated Offers of their Clemency, by which they understand their contempt of
their presumptuous, Christ-defying, and Church-destroying Indulgences, and
their not submitting to their insnaring and base Indemnities, or their
conscience-cheating Bonds and Oaths by them so finely busked. From these
impudently pretended premises, in their falsely forged viperous Narative, they
lay down their bloody Methods and Measurs for prosecuting that poor people,
with all rigor of Savage Severity; Ordaining, that whosoever shall oune that
Declaration, and the principles therein specified (which is a lager Dilatation
of their meaning, than their pretended restriction [ in so far as etc.] and
gives a further discovery of the intent of the Oath, that gives a Covert stroke
to all the principles of our Reformation which are reductively specified in
that Declaration) or whosoever shall refuse to disoune the same -- shall be
execute to the death; And commanding all subjects to concur, and do their
utmost endeavor, to seek, search, delate, and apprehend all such, under the
severest penalties of the Laws; And to difference the good from the bad
(meaning their oun Associates and friends, from Christ's followers) by
discriminating signs, Declaring it their pleasure, and requiring all past the
age of sixteen years, not to presume to travel without Testificates of, their
Loyalty and good principles, by taking the Oath of Abjuration; whereupon they
are to have a Testificate which is to serve for a free Pass, with certification
to all that shall adventure to travel without such a Testificate, shall be
holden and used as Concurrers with the said Rebels; Commanding all Heretors
etc. to give up the lists of the names of all under them, before the Curate;
Declaring, if any shall refuse to concur in such service, shall be holden as
guilty of the foresaid crimes and punished accordingly; And strictly
prohibiting, all to harbor, lodge, or intertain any, unless they have such
certificates under the same pain; And for encouragment to any that shall
discover or apprehend any to be found guilty as above said, ensuring to them
the sum of 500 Merks Scots for each of them. This is that hell-hatcht
Proclamation, so grievous for its effects, so dreadful for its designs, so
monstrous for its absurdities, that the like has not been seen: Whereby not
only the countries Interest and Trade has been prejudged, by compelling all to
have a pass in time of peace, and these to be procured at exorbitant rates,
oppressing poor people; Not only common Hostlers and Innkeepers are made
Judges, empowered to impose Oaths upon Passengers for their passes, that they
be not forged; but many consciences coozened, cheated, wounded, and ensnared,
and the whole Land involved in sin. But they that took this Oath have approved
and justified this detestable, execrable, bloody Proclamation, the supurious
spawn of the Devils venom against Christ followers: For, they gave all the
Obedience to it that was required of them in their Capacity, And obedience
justifies the Law enjoining it: They have done all was required, or could be
done by them, to answer the design of it in their circumstances; And
consequently by doing the thing prescribed, they have justified the grounds
upon which the prescript was founded, and the methods by which it was
prosecuted, which has a dreadful Medley of iniquity in it. Hence (1) They
have subscribed to all these Odious Characters wherewith they branded that poor
persecuted party, and have condemned them as Insolent, desperate Rebels,
Murderers, bloody Assassins etc. (2) In disouning that Declaration, they have
disouned the principles therein specified, and consequently all the Testimony
against this Usurping faction of Overturners of the Work of Reformation, Active
and passive, that have been given and sealed by the eminent Servants of God,
since this Catastrophe, the principle of Defensive Arms, and our Covenants,
and several others which are therein specified. (3) They have given their
consent to all the concurrence there required, for seeking, searching,
delating, and apprehending of these people, and to all the cruel villainies
committed against them. (4) They have taken on their prescribed discriminating
Sign of Loyalty, and of being repute by them men of good principles, that is,
their friends, men for the times: Which is so sinful and scandalous, that it is
shameful to hint at them, and yet shameful to hide them.

6. If we consider the Apologetical Declaration it self, which is so
bespattered, and so odiously represented, and so rigorously enjoined to be
abjured; who will more narrowly look into it, and ponder and perpend the
purpose and Scope of it, will see nothing that can be abjured conscienciously
in it, but the whole of it, laying aside prejudice and invidious Critical
Censoriousness, capable of a fair and acceptable Construction. The Motives
leading them to set it forth, being only their desires and just endeavoures to
prosecute, and secure themselves in the prosecution of, Holy Commanded Duties,
and to keep a standing Testimony, against the Insolency of those that are
given up of God, to lay out themselves in promoving a Course of profanity and
persecution, notwithstanding of all their viperous threatenings. Their Measures
being none other, than the commendable precedents and Examples of zealous and
tender hearted Christians, who have done the like, and our National and Solemn
Covenants, lying with their binding force indispensable upon all of us, and
obliging us to endeavor all that's there declared, as being bound for ever to
have common friends and foes with our Covenanted Reformation, to all which they
declare and avouch their resolved adherence, And their oun former Declarations,
Disouning their Allegiance to, and Authority of a Man who had ipso jure
forfeited all Authority, by his intolerable Tyranny, Perjurie, and perfidious
breach of Trust, reposed and devolved upon him by Covenant, and by his
overturning all the fundamental constitutions of the Government, perverting,
inverting, and everting all Laws, all Liberties all Privileges of Church and
State, all establishments of our Covenanted Work of Reformation, all Securities
of our life and enjoyments whatsoever, Usurping to himself an absolute
Tyrannical Civil Supremacy, inconsistent with the safety or freedom of the
people, and a monstrous blasphemous Ecclesiastical Supremacy; Upon which
considerations, to endeavor to make good their freedom and emancipation from
that yoke which they had cast off, they behoved to resolve upon defensive
resistance, against him and his bloody emissaries; Which war being declared
before, they only in this Declaration testified their unanimous approbation of*
adherence to, and resolutions for prosecuting the same, against him and his
accomplices, such as lay out themselves to promove his wicked and hellish
designs: By which war they do not mean a formed stated and declared Insurection
with hostile force, to break the Peace of the Nation, and involve all in blood,
but a resolved avowed constant Opposition to the Murdering violence, injustice,
oppression, and persecution of this wicked faction, now raging rather than
reigning, who have declared and still prosecute a declared war against Christ,
bearing down His Work and Interest in the Land; And a constant endeavor, in
opposition to them, to pursue the ends of our Covenants, in standing to the
defense of the Glorious Work of Reformation, and their oun lives; And in the
defense thereof, to maintain the cause and Interest of Christ against His
enemies, and to hold up the Standard of our Lord Jesus Christ, (meaning the
Gospel and the Word of our Testimony,) whereunto they looked upon themselves as
bound and obliged by their holy Covenants, being therein dedicated to the Lord
in their persons, lives, Liberties, and fortunes, for defending and promoving
this Glorious Work of Reformation, notwithstanding of all opposition, that is
or may be made thereunto, and sworn against all neutrality and indifferency in
the Lords Matters: Whereunto they beseech, invite, and obtest, all them who
wish well to Zion to a concurrence and concerting the same cause and Quarrel.
In maintaining of which opposition against such wicked Enemies, because by them
they were restlessly pursued and hunted, and Murdered wherever they were found,
neither could find any harbor or hiding place in any Corner of the country,
for Searchers, Informers, and Justigators, who still stirred up the country to
raise the hue and Cry after them, and caused them to be delivered up, and
del^ted them to the Courts of their Murdering enemies, whereby much innocent
blood was shed; Therefore, to stop their Career of violence, and deter them
from such Courses, they found it necessary to threaten them with more active
and vigorous opposition, and that they might expect to be treated as they
deserved. Wherein they are far from ouning assassinating principles, or
practicing assassinations; for they give only open and plain warning, and
advertisement to the world, of their necessitated endeavors to defend
themselves, and prevent the Murder of their Brethren: And can no way be
charged, with asserting it Lawful, to kill all employed in the Kings service in
Church, State, Army, or Country, as the Proclamation in viperous invective
Calumny misrepresents the Declaration, but on the contrary do jointly and
unanimously declare, they detest and abhor that hellish principle of killing
such as differ in judgment from them, and they are firmly and really purposed,
not to injure or offend any whomsoever, but such as are directly guilty of, or
accessory to the Murder of their Brethren: whom yet they mind not to
assassinate or kill tumultuarly, but to prosecute them with all the legal
formalities, that Justice in their Capacity, and the times disorder and
distracted condition, will allow; Expressly declaring, that they abhor,
condemn, and discharge all personal attempts upon any pretext whatsomever,
without previous deliberations, common consent, certain probation of sufficient
witnesses, or the guilty persons confession. Neither could it ever be supposed,
that they threaten all employed in the Kings service with this sort of
handling, but some select and expressly distinguished Kind of Notorious
villains, men of death and blood, openly avowing and vaunting of their Murders:
and these they distinguished into several Classes, according to the respective
aggravations of their wickedness: In the first, they place those that Murder by
Command, under pretext of an usurped Authority, as Councillors, Justiciary,
and Officers of their forces, or bands of Robbers and not all nor any of these
neither but the cruel and bloody. In the second Class, they threaten such as
are actually in arms against them of an inferior rank; And such Gentlemen, and
Bishops, and Curats, as do professedly and willingly serve them to accomplish
and effectuate their Murders, by obeying their commands, making searth for
these poor men, delivering them up, instigating, informing, and witnessing
against and hunting after them: and not all these neither, but such as cruelly
prosecute that service, to the effussion of their blood. Neither do they
threaten all equally, nor any of them peremptorly, but that continuing after
the publication of this their Declaration obstinately and habitually in these
courses (Plainly declaring they intended no hurt to them if they would hold up
their hands) they would repute them as enemies to God and the Reformation, and
punish them as such, according to their power, and the degree of their offense;
Withal leaving room for Civil and Ecclesiastical satisfaction, before Lawful
and settled Judicatories, for the offenses of such persons, as their power may
not reach etc. And as unwilling to be necessitated to such severe Courses, and
earnestly desirous they be prevented, they admonish them with sorrow and
seriousness, of the sin and hazard of their wicked Courses; and protest, that
only Necessity of self preservation, and zeal to Religion, lest it should be
totally rooted out by their insolency, did drive them to this threatening
Declaration, and not because they* were acted by any sinful spirit of revange.
This is all that is contained in that Declaration. And if here be any thing
there so odious and execrable, to be so solemnly abjured, renounced, and
abhorred in the persence of God, for the pleasure of and in obedience to the
will of His and our enemies, let all unbyassed Considerers impartially weigh,
or any awakened Conscience speak, and I doubt not but the swearing and
subscribing this Oath will be cast and condemned. I shall say nothing of the
necessity, or convenience, or expediency, or formality of this Declaration: but
the Lawfulness of the matter complexely taken is so undeniable, that it cannot
be renounced without condemning many very Material Principles of our
Reformation: Only Success and Incapacity is wanting to justify the manner,
whole proceedure, formality, and all the Circumstances of the business; If
either the Declarers themselves, or any other i^ powered with strength and
countenanced with success to make good the undertaking, had issued out such a
Declaration in the same terms, and had prevailed and prospered in the Project,
many that have now abjured it would approve and applaud it. But passing these
things that are extrinsick to the consideration in hand, it is the matter that
they required to be abjured and condemned, it is that the enemies quarrelled
at, and not the inexpediency or informalities of it: And it must be taken as
they propound it, and abjured and renounced by Oath as they represent it: And
therefore the iniquity of this subscription will appear to be great, in two
respects: First in denying the Truth: Secondly in subscribing to, and swearing
a Lie. 1. They that have taken that Oath have denied and renounced the matter
of that Declaration; which is Truth and duty, and a Testimony to the Cause of
Christ, as it is this day Stated and Circumstantiate in the Nation, founded
upon former (among us uncontroverted) precedents and Principles of Defensive
Wars, disouning Tyranny, and repressing the insolency of Tyrants and their
Accomplices; the whole matter being reducible to these two Points, Declaring a
resolved endeavor of breaking the Tyrants yoke from off our neck, thereby
asserting our oun and the posterities Liberty and freedom from his
insupportable and entailed slavery; And a just Threatening to curb and restrain
the insolency of Murderers, or to bring them to condign punishment: Whereof as
the first is no ways repugnant, but very consonant to the Third Article; So
the Second is the very duty obliged unto in the Fourth Article of our Solemn
League and Covenant. But all this they have denied by taking that Oath. 2. By
taking that Oath, they have sworn and subscribed to a Lie, taking it as they
represent it, abjuring it in so far as it declares etc. and asserts it is
Lawful to kill all employed in the service of the King, in Church, State, Army,
or Country: which is a manifest Lie, for it asserts no such thing. Neither will
any other sense put upon the words in so far as salve the matter; for as
thereby the Takers of the Oath shall deal deceitfully, in frustrating the end
of the Oath, and the design of the Tenderers thereof; And to take an Oath
quatenus, eatenus, in so far, will not satisfy as Voetius Judges de Pol.
Eccl. P. 213. So let them be taken which way they can, either for in quantum,
or quatenus, or si modo, it is either a denying the Truth, or subscribing a
Lie: And Consequently, these poor people suffered for Righteousness that
Refused it.

HEAD. IV. The Sufferings of people for frequenting Field Meetings Vindicated.
HItherto the Negative Heads of Sufferings have been vindicated: now follow the
Positive, founded upon Positive duties, for doing, and not denying, and not
promising and engaging to relinquish which, many have suffered severely. The
first both in order of nature and of time, that which was first and last, and
most frequently, most constantly, most universally, and most signally sealed by
Sufferings, was that which is the clearest of all, being in some respect the
Testimony of all Ages, and which clears all the rest, being the Rise and Root,
Cause and Occasion of all the rest; to wit, the Necessary duty of hearing the
Gospel, and following the pure and powerful faithfully dispensed Ordinances of
Christ, banished out of the Churches to private houses, and persecuted out of
houses to the Open Fields, and there pursued and opposed, and sought to be
suppressed, by all the fury and force, rigor and rage, Cruelty and Craft,
policy and power, that ever wicked men, madded into a Monstrous Malice against
the Mediator Christ and the Coming of His Kingdom, could contrive or exert: yet
still followed and frequented, ouned and adhered to, by the Lovers of Christ
and serious seekers of God, even when for the same they were killed all day
long, and counted as sheep for the slaughter, and continually oppressed,
harrassed, hunted, and cruelly handled, dragged to Prisons, banished and sold
for slaves, tortured, and Murdered. And after, by their fraudulent favors of
ensnaring Indulgences and Indemnities, and a Continued tract of Impositions and
Exactions, and many Oaths and Bonds, they had prevailed with many, and even the
most part both of Ministers and Professors, to abandon that necessary duty; And
even when it was declared Criminal by Act of Parliament, and interdicted under
pain of death, to be found at any Field Meetings; they nevertheless persisted
in an undaunted endeavor, to keep up the Standart of Christ, in following the
Word of the Lord wherever they could have it faithfully preached, though at the
greatest of hazards: And so much the more, that it was prosecuted by the rage
of enemies, and the reproach and oblequies of pretended friends, that had
turned their back on the Testimony, and preferred their oun ease and Interests
to the cause of Christ; and with the greater fervor, that the Laborers in that
Work were few, and like to faint under so many difficulties. What the first
Occasion was that constrained them to go to the fields, is declared at length
in the Historical Deduction of the Testimony of the Sixth Period; to wit,
finding themselves bound in duty, to Testify their Adherence to and
Continuance in their Covenanted profession, their Abhorrence of Abjured
Prelacy, and their Love and Zeal to keep Christ and His Gospel in the Land;
after they had undergone and endured many hazards and hardships, oppressions
and persecutions, for Meeting in the houses, where they were so easily
attrapped, and with such difficulty could escape the hands of these Cruel Men;
they were forced to take the Fields, though with the unavoidable inconveniences
of all Weathers without a shelter: yet proposing the advantages, both of
Convenience for Meeting in greater Numbers, and of Secrecy in the remote
recesses of Wild Moors and Mountains, and of Safety in betaking themselves to
inaccessible Natural Strengths, safest either for flight or resistance, And
withal having occasion there to give a Testimony for the Reformation with
greater freedom. And to this very day, though many have a pretended Liberty to
meet in houses, under the security of a Man's promise whose principle is to keep
no faith to Hereeicks, and under the shelter and shadow of an Antichristian
Toleration; yet there is a poor people that are out of the Compass of this
favor, whom all these forementioned reasons do yet oblige to keep the fields,
that is both for Convenience, Secrecy, and Safety; they dare not trust those
who are still thirsting insatiably after their blood, nor give them such
advantages as they are seeking to prey upon them, by shuting themselves within
houses; And morover they take themselves to be called indispensably, in the
present Circumstances, to be as public, or more than ever, in their Testimony
for the Preached Gospel, even in the open Fields. Now this would be a little
cleared: And to essay the same, I would offer first, Some Concessions. Secondly
some Postulata or Supposed Grounds. Thirdly some more Special Considerations
which will conduce to clear the case.

First, That we may more distinctly understand what is the duty here pleaded
for, and what is that which these people Suffer for, here Vindicated; let these
Concessions be premised.

1. Now under the Evangelical Dispensation, there is no place more Sacred than
another, to which the Worship of God is astricted, and which He has chosen for
His House and Habitation, whither He will have His people to resort and attend,
as under the Legal and Typical Dispensation was ordered: there was a place
where the Lord caused His Name to dwell Deuteronomy. 12. 5, 11. But now, neither in the
Mountain nor at Jerusalem the Father will be Worshipped, but every where and
any where in Spirit and in Truth John. 4. 21, 23, 24. And the Apostle wills
that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands, without wrath and doubting 1 Timothy 2. 8. We abhor therefore the English and Popish Superstition of
Consecrated places, and assert that all are alike in this respect, houses or
fields.

2. In the Constitute case of the Church, or when ever it can be obtained,
Order, Decency and Convenience does require that there be appointed places,
sequestrate and appropriate for the Meetings of the Lords people, according to
that General Rule, Let all things be done decently and in order 1 Cot. 14. ult.
And in that case private Conventicles, set up in a Schismatical Competition
with Public Churches, are not to be allowed. But even then, Private Meetings
for prayer and conference, are necessary, Lawful, and Laudable. But now the
Church is broken by a Crew of Schismatical Intruders, who have occupied the
places of Public Assemblies, and thrust out the Lods Ministers: It is these we
scare at, and not the place.

3. Suppose a Magistrate should interdict and Discharge the publik place of
Worship, and restrain from the Churches, but leave all other places free to
meet in; or if he should prohibit the houses, but leave freedom for the
fields; or discharge the fields, and give Liberty in houses; in that case we
would not contend for the place out of contempt: though it were duty then to
witness against such a Sacrilegious Injury done to the Church, in taking away
their Meeting places; yet it were inexpedient to stickle and strive for one
Spot, if we might have another: then when only excluded out of a place, and not
included or concluded and restricted to other places, nor otherwise robbed of
the Churches privileges, we might go to houses when shut out of Churches, and
go to fields when shut out of houses, and back again to houses when discharged
thence. But this is not our case, for we are either interdicted of all places;
or if allowed any, it is under such confinements as are inconsistent with the
freedom of the Gospel; and besides, we have to do with one from whom we can
take no orders to determine our Meetings; nor can we acknowledge our Liberty to
depend on his Authority, or favor, which we cannot oune nor trust, nor accept
of any Protection from him. Neither is it the place of fields or houses, that
we contend for; Nor is it that which he mainly opposes: but it is the freedom
of the Gospel faithfully preached, that we are seeking to promove and improve,
and he is seeking to suppress. The contest betwixt him and us is the Service of
God in the Gospel of His Son, that we profess without ouning him for the
Liberty of its exercise: And therefore as an Enemy to the Matter and Object of
these Religious Exercises, which are the eyesore of Antichrist, he prosecutes
with such rage the manner and Circumstances thereof.

4. Even in this case, when we are persecuted in one place we flee unto
another, as the Lord allows and directs Math. 10. 23. And if occasionally we
find a house, either public, or a Church, or a private dwelling house that may
be safe or convenient, or capacious of the numbers gathered, we think it
indifferent to meet there or in the Fields: But in the present circumstances,
it is more for the convenience of the people, and more Congruous for the days
Testimony, to keep the Fields in their Meetings, even though it irritate the
incensed Enemies. Which that it may appear.

Secondly, I shall offer some Postulata or Hypotheses to be considered, or
endeavor to make them good, and infer from them the necessity and expediency
of Field Meetings at this time in these circumstances: which consequently
vindicate the Sufferings that have been thereupon Stated formerly, and are
still continued.

1. It is necessary at all times that Christians should meet together, whether
they have Ministers or not, and whether the Magistrate allow it or not. The
Authority of God, their necessity, duty, and Interest, makes it indispensable
in all cases. It is necessary for their Mutual help, two are better than one
for if they fall the one will lift up his fellow, Eccles. 4. 9, 10. It is
necessary for their Mutual encouragment in an evil day, to speak often one to
another, which the Lord has promised to take special notice of Mal. 3. 16, It
is necessary for cherishing Mutual Love, which is the New Commandment, and the
badge of all Christ's Disciples John. 13. 34, 35. a principle which they are all
thaught of God. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 9. It is necessary for nurissing Union to
communicate together, in order to their being of one mind and of one mouth, and
that they receive one another Romans 15. 5, 6, 7. 1 Cor. 1. 10. standing fast in
one Spirit, striving together for the faith of the Gospel Phil. 1. 27. It is
necessary for serving one another in Love Gal. 5. 13. bearing one another
burdens, and so fulfilling the Law of Christ Gal. 6. 2. submitting to one
another Ehphs. 5. 21. 1 Pet, 5. 5. teaching and admonishing one another Col. 3.
16. comforting one another 1 Thessalonians. 4. ult. edifying one another 1 Thessalonians. 5.
11. exhorting one another Heb. 3. 13. It is necessary for considering one
another, and provoking unto love and to good works; And for this end, they must
not forsake the assembling of themselves together, as the manner of some is,
for that were to sin wilfully Heb. 10. 24, 25, 26. Must these things depend on
the Magistrates Allowance? or can they be done without meeting together in
private or public? The same reasons do alike conclude, for the necessity of
both. If then there must be Meetings for these ends necessary at all times,
then when they cannot do it within door, they must do it without.

2. There is a necessity for Meeting for preaching and h^aring the Gospel; the
enjoyment whereof has always been the greatest design and desire of Saints,
who could not live without it; therefore they loved the place where the Lords
Honor dwelt Psalm. 26. 8. This was the one thing they desired of the Lord, and
that they would seek after, to behold the beauty of the Lord Psalm. 27. 4. for
this they panted, and their Soul thirsted Psalm. 42. 1, 2. without which every
Land is but a thirsty Land, where there is no water, where they cannot see the
power and the Glory of God as they have seen it in the Sanctuary Psalm. 63. 1,
2. O how amiable are His Tabernacles? one day in His Courts is better than a
thousand else where Psalm. 84. 1, 10. No gladness to them like that of going to
the House of the Lord Psalm. 122. 1. A Christian can not possibly live without
Gospel Ordinances, no more than Children can want the breasts, or the poor and
needy want water when their tongue fails for thirst; they are promised it in
high places, and in the wilderness, when they can get it no where else Isai.
41. 17, 18. There is an innate desire in the Saints after it, as new born habes
they desire the sincere milk of the Word 1 Pet. 2. 2. So that any that is
offended with them for this, must be offended with them for being Christians,
for as such they must have the Gospel cost what is will. It is the greatest
desire of the Spouse of Christ, to know where He feeds and where to find the
Shepherds tents, where they may rest at noon Cant. 1. 7, 8. And not only in
their esteem is it necessary; but in it self, the Church cannot bear the want
of it, for where there is no vision the people perish Prove. 29. 18. and when
there is no open vision, the Word of the Lord is then very precious 1 Samuel 3.
1. No wonder then that the Lords people make such ado for it, in a famine of
it, that they go from sea to sea, to seek it Amos 8. 11, 12. and that they are
content to have it at any rate, though with the peril of their lives because of
the sword of the Wilderness Lam. 5. 9. Seeing they cannot live without it.
Would men be hindered by Law, from seeking their natural food? nay they would
fight for it before they wanted it, against any that opposed them. If then they
cannot get it with peace, they must have it with trouble: And if they cannot
get it in houses, they must have it wherever it is to be found, with freedom,
and the favor of God.

3. It is necessary that the Meetings be as publik, as they can be with
Conveniencie and Prudence; yea simple hazard should no more hinder their
Publickness and Solemnity, than their being at all. Especially in an evil time,
when wickedness is encouraged and established, and conformity thereto pressed,
Truth banished, and a Witness for Christ suppressed, Corruption in Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline, and Government connived at, countenanced, and advanced,
the Word of God is become a reproach, and men have no delight in it, Apostasy
is become universal, and both Magistrates and Ministers generally turned
promoters of it, which is the true Description of our times: Then the Meetings
of the Lords people, that endeavor to keep clean Garments, should be more
frequent, public, and avowed. The reasons are. 1. Then the Call of God, by His
Word and Works, is more clamant, for public and solemn humiliation. in order
to avert public imminent judgments and impendent stroks from God. It is not
enough to reform our selves privately and personally, and to keep our selves
pure from such Courses by an abstraction and withdrawing from them as is proved
Head. 1. (where this is improved as an argument against hearing the Curats) Nor
is it enough to admonish, exhort, reprove, and testify against such as are
involved in these Courses: But it is necessary, for them that would be
approven, to adhere to the Truth, and serve God after the right manner, and to
mourn, sigh and cry for all the abominations of the time, so as to get the Mark
of Mourners on their foreheads Ezekiel. 9. 4. and they that do so, will be found on
the Mountains like doves in the valleys all of them mourning every one for his
iniquity Ezekiel. 7. 16. and not only to by humbled every family apart, but there
must be a great Mourning as the Mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of
Megiddon Zech. 12. 11. to the end. That is a Solemn public Mourning there
promised. There must be a gathering themselves together, though a Nation not
desired, before the decree bring forth, before the day pass as the chaff, and
the fierce anger of the Lord come upon them, if they would have any possibility
of their hiding Zeph. 2. 1, 2, 3. The Trumpet then must be blown in Zion, to
sanctify a fast, to call a solemn Assembly, Gather the people, Sanctify the
Congregation, Assemble the Elders, Gather the Children -- Joel. 2. 15, 16. As
was exemplified in Ezra's time, when there were great Congregations of people
assembled publicly, weeping very sore, then there was hope in Israel Ezra. 10.
1, 2. and when that Messenger of the Lord came up from Gilgal to the people of
Israel, and reproved them for their Defections and Compliance with the
Canaanites, they had such a solemn day of humilation, that the place of their
Meeting got a name from it, they called the name of that place Bochim, that is,
Weepers Judge. 2. 4, 5. And when the Ark was at Kirjath-jearim all the house of
Israel lamented after the Lord -- and they gathered together to Mizpeh and drew
water and poured it out before the Lord 2 Samuel 7. 2, 6. I show before, that
there is reason to fear that the sins of a few, especially of Magistrates and
Ministers, will bring wrath upon the whole body of the people, as is plain from
these Scriptures Levit. 10. 6. Isai. 43. 27, 28. Lam. 4, 13. Mic. 3. 11, 21.
showing the sins of Ministers may procure universal Destruction. And 2 Samuel 24.
25. 2 King. 21. 11. Ier. 15, 4. proving the sins of Magistrates may procure it:
And Number. 3. 14, 15. Josh. 22. 17, 18. Demonstrating that the sins of a party of
the people, may draw wrath upon the whole. Now the only way the Scripture
points out to evite and avert such public judgments, is to make our resentment
of these indignities done to our God, our Mourning over them, and our witness
against them, as public as the sins are, at least as public as we can get
them, by a public pleading for Truth Isai. 59. 4. for the defect whereof He
hides His face, and wonders that there is no man, no Intercessor verse. 16. that
is none to plead with God, in behalf of His born down Truths: There must be in
order to this, a public seeking of Truth, which if there be any found making
conscience of, the Lord makes a gracious overture to pardon the City Ier. 5. 1.
we cannot think there were no mourners in secret there, but there was no
public Meeting for it, and public ouning the duty of that day: There must be
valor for the Truth upon the earth Ier. 9. 3. a public and resolute ouning of
Truth: There must be a making up the hedge and standing in the Gap for the
Land, that the Lord should not destroy it Ezekiel. 22. 30. a public Testimony in
opposition to defection: There must be a pleading with our Mother Hos. 2. 2.
which is spoken to private persons in the plural number Commanding all that
would consult their oun safety, publicly to condemn the sins of the whole
Nation, that they may escape the public punishment thereof, as it is expounded
in Pool Synops. Critic. in locum. By this means we must endeavor to avert the
wrath and anger of God, which must certainly be expected to go out against the
Land, which has all the procuring causes, all the Symptoms, Prognostics, and
Evidences of a Land devoted to destruction, that ever a Land had. If then there
must be such Public Mourning, and such Solemn Gathering for it, such public
pleading for Truth, Seeking of Truth, valor for Truth, making up the hedge,
and pleading with our Mother, there must of Necessity be public Meetings for
it: for these things cannot be done in private, but must be done by way of
Testimony. Which I make a 2. Reason. The Nature and End of Meeting for Gospel
Ordinances is for a public Testimony for Christ and His Truths and Interest,
against Sin and all dishonours done to the Son of God. So that the only end, is
not only to bring to Christ and build up Souls in Christ, but it is to Testify
also for the Glory of Christ, whether Souls be brought in and built up or not.
The Preached Gospel is not only the Testimony of Christ 1 Cor, 1. 6. but a
Testimony for Christ; in which sense, The Testimony of Jesus is said to be the
Spirit of Prophecy Revel. 19. 10. so called, Durham expounds it, for its
bearing Witness to Christ, in which respect Ministers are often called
Witnesses. It is also the Testimony of Israel (not only given to Israel, but
given by Israel) unto which the tribes go up, the tribes of the Lord Ps. 122.
4. Whenever therefore or howsoever the Testimony of the Church is
contradicted, that's not a Lawful Meeting of the tribes of the Lord. It is also
the Testimony of the Preachers for Christ, against them that will not receive
them, Mark. 6. 11. And a Witness unto all Nations to whom they preach. Math.
24. 14. And of all the Witnesses that hold it and suffer for it Rev. 6. 9. And
the same which is the Word of Christ's Testimony, is the Word of theirs Rev, 12.
11. by which they overcome, and for which they love not their lives. Wherever
then the Gospel is preached, it must be a Testimony: But it cannot be a
Testimony, except it be Public, at least as public as it can be, as we find
all Christ's Witnesses were in the Old and New Testaments. 3. The Motive or
principle prompting the Lords people to a frequenting of Gospel Ordinances, is
a public Spirit stirring up to a public Generation Work, whereof this is the
Scope, to promote the Kingdom of Christ, and not only to obey the Lords Command
enjoining the duty, to enjoy the Lord the end thereof, or to edify their oun
Souls; But to partake in and promote this Great Work of the Day, for the Glory
of God and the Churches good. For the Gospel is not only a Banner of Love over
His Friends, but Christ's Standart of war against His Enemies Isai. 59. 19.
under which, all that countenance it, are called to list themselves as His
Soldiers called, and chosen, and faithful: And it is required of His
Soldiers, that they be valiant for the Truth upon the earth, Discovering a
Gallant greatness and generosity of a Public Spirit, having their designs and
desires not limited to their oun interests, even Spiritual, but aiming at no
less than Christ's Public Glory, the Churches public good, the Saints public
Comfort, having a public Concern for all Christ's Interests, Publik Sympathy
for all Christ's Friends, and a public declared Opposition to all Christ's
Enemies: This is a Public Spirit, the true Spirit of all Christ's zealous
Lovers and Votaries: Which, when He is a missing, will prompt them to go about
the City, in the streets, and in the broad ways, to seek Him whom their Soul
loves Cant. 3. 2. and not only in their beds, or secret corners, but they must
go to the streets, and to the fields, and avow their seeking of Christ, even
though the Watchmen should smite them, and the keepers of the walls take their
vails from them Cant. 5. Which obliges them not only to take Him in to their
oun Cottages, and intertain Him in their hearts, and give Him a Throne there,
but also to endeavor to enlarge His dwelling, and propagate His Courtly
residence through the World, that the Kingdoms of the earth may become the
Kingdoms of the Lord; and if they cannot get that done, yet that He may have
the Throne in ^her Mothers house, and take up His abode in the Church, or
Nation they belong to, that there His Ordinances be established in purity,
peace, plenty, and power, according to His oun Order; And if that cannot be,
but that their Mother play the harlot, and He be provoked to give up house with
her, and by her Childrens treachery the Usurping Enemy be invited in to His
place and Habitation, and take violent possession of it, and enact His
extrusion and expulsion by Law; yet they will endeavor to secure a place for
Him among the Remnant, that He may get a lodging among the afflicted and poor
people that trust in the Name of the Lord -- that they may feed and Lie down
and none make them afraid Zeph. 3. 12, 13. that the poor of the flock that wait
on Him may know that it is the Word of the Lord, Zech. 11. 11. they will lay
out themselves to strengthen their hands. This is the Work of the public
spirited Lovers of the Gospel, which has been and yet is the great work of
this our day, to carry the Gospel, and follow it, and keep it up through the
Land, as the Standart of Christ, against all opposition, from mountain to hill,
when now Zion has been Laboring to bring forth as a woman in travel, and made
to go forth out of the City, and to dwell in the field Mic. 4. 10. Therefore
seeing it is the public Work of the day, and all its followers must have such
a public spirit, it follows that the Meetings to promote it must be as
public as is possible. 4. The Interest and privilege of the Gospel, to have
it in freedom, purty, power, and plenty, is the public Concern of all the
Lords people, preferable to all other Interests, and therefore more publicly,
peremptorly and zealously to be contended for, than any other Interest
whatsoever. It is the Glory of the Land 1 Samuel 4. 21. without which, Ichabod
may be the name of every thing; and every Land, though never so pleasant, will
be but a dry and parched Land, where no water is, in the esteem of them that
have seen the Lords Glory and power in the Sanctuary Psalm. 63. 1. Where as its
name is Hephzibah and Beulah Isai. 62. 4. and Iehovah-Shammah Ezekiel. 48. ult.
where God is enjoyed in His Gospel Ordinances; And the want and reproach of the
Solemn Assemblies, is a matter of the saddest mourning to the Lords people
Zeph. 3. 18. Therefore while the Ark abode in Kerjath-jearim the time was
thought very Long, and all the house of Israel Lamented after the Lord 1 Samuel
7. 2. then they heard of it at Ephratah and found it in the fields of the Wood
Psalm. 132. 6. But it has been longer than twenty years in our fields of the
Woods, and therefore we should be Lamenting after it with greater
concernedness; especially remembering, how we were privileged with the Gospel,
which was sometimes publicly embraced and countenanced by Authority, and
ensured to us by Laws, Statutes, Declarations, Proclamations, Oaths, Vows, and
Covenant-engagments, whereby the Land was dedicated and devoted unto the Son of
God, whose Conquest it was. And now are not all the people of God obliged to do
what they can, to hinder the recalling of this dedication, and the giving up of
the Land as an offering unto Satan and Antichrist? And how shall this be, but
by a public Contending for this privilege, and a resolving they shall sooner
bereave us of our hearts blood, than of the Gospel in its freedom and purity?
But this we cannot contend for publicly, if our Meetings be not public. 5.
The nature and business of the Gospel Ministry is such, that it obliges them
that exercise it to endeavor all publickness, without which they cannot
discharge the extent of their Instructions: their very names and titles do
insinuate so much. They are Witnesses for Christ, and therefore their Testimony
should be public, though their Lot oftentimes be to Witness in Sackcloth: They
are Heralds, and therefore they should Proclaim their Masters Will, though
their Lot be often to be a voice crying in the Wilderness, as John the Baptist
was in his field Preachings: They are Ambassadors, and therefore they should
maintain their Masters Majesty, in the Public port of His Ambassadors, and
be wholly taken up about their Sovereigns business: They are Watchmen, and
therefore they should keep and maintain their post their Masters has placed
them at: Nay they are Lights and Candles, and therefore cannot be hid Math. 5.
14, 15. The Commands and Instructions given them, infer the nec^ssity of this:
They must cry aloud, and not spare, and left up their voice like a Trumpet, and
show the Lords People their transgressions and sins Isai. 58. 1. They are
Watchmen upon Ierusalems walls, which must not hold their peace, day nor night,
nor keep silence, nor give the Lord rest, till He establish and till He make
Jerusalem a praise in the earth Isai. 62. 6, 7. They are Watchmen, that must
command all to hearken to the sound of the Trumpet Ier. 6. 17. They must be
valiant for the Truth upon the earth Ier. 9. 3. They must say, thus says the
Lord even to a rebellious Nation, whether they will hear or forbear, and not be
afraid of them Ezekiel. 2. 5, 6. They must cause the people to know their
abominations Ezekiel. 16. 2. and the abominations of their Fathers Ezekiel. 20. 4.
And what their Master tells them in darkness, that they must speak in the
Light, and what they hear in the ear, that they must Preach upon the house tops
Math, 10. 27. These things cannot be done in a Clandestine way. And therefore
now when there is so much necessity, it is the duty of all faithful Ministers,
to be laying out themselves to the utmost in their Pastoral function, for the
suppreffing of all the evils of the time, not withstanding of any prohibition
to the contrary, in the most public manner, according to the examples of all
the faithful servants of the Lord, both in the Old and New Testaments; Though
it be most impiously and Tyrannically interdicted, yet the Laws of God stand
unrepealed, and therefore all who have a Trumpet and a Mouth should set the
Trumpet to their Mouth, and sound a certain sound; not in secret for that will
not alarm the people, but in in the most public manner they can have access
to. And it is the duty of all to come and hear and obey their Warnings and
Witnessings, command who will the contrary. It was for mocking, despising His
Words, and misusing His Prophets, that the wrath of the Lord arose against His
people, the Jews, until there was no remedy 2 Chronicles. 36, 16. Therefore from
all that is said, it must be Concluded, that Meetings for Gospel Ordinances
must be as public as can be: And if so, then that they should be in houses,
safety will not permit to us; to go to the streets or Market places, neither
safety nor prudence will admit: Therefore we must go to the fields with it,
cost what it will.

4. Seeing then there must be Meettngs, and public Meetings, And seeing we
cannot and dare not in Conscience countenance the Curats Meetings; we must
hear, oune, embrace, and follow such faithful Ministers as are clothed with
Christ Commission, Righteousness, and salvation, and do keep the Words of the
Lords patience, and the Testimony of the Church of Scotland in particular. This
I think will not, or dare not be denied, by any that oune the Authority of
Christ (which none can deny or instruct the contrary, but our Ministers that
ventured their lives in preaching in the fields have had a certain seal to
their Ministry, and is sealed sensibly in the conviction of many, and
confession of more) That Christ's Ministers and Witnesses, employed about the
Great Gospel Message, clothed with His Authority, and under the obligation of
His Commands lying upon them, must preach, and the people must hear them, not
withstanding of all Laws to the contrary. Divines grant that the Magistrate can
no more suspend from the exercise, than he can depose from the Office of the
Ministry; for the one is a degree unto the other. See Apollon. de jure Majest.
circa Sacra. Part. 1. Page 334. etc. Rutherf. Due right of Presb. Page 430.
etc. For whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto men more than
unto God, the Consciences of the greatest enemies may be appealed unto Act. 4.
19. They must not cease, wherever they have a Call and Occasion, to Teach and
Preach Jesus Christ Act. 5. ult. Necessity is laid upon them, yea woe unto them
if they Preach not the Gospel 1 Cor. 9. 16. In all things they must approve
themselves, as the Ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions, in
necessities, etc. by honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report, as
deceivers and yet true, as unknown and yet well known -- 2 Cor. 6. 4, 8, 9.
They must preach the Word, be instant in season, and out of season, reprove,
rebuke, exhort, with all long suffering and doctrine 2 Timothy 4. 2. Dare any say
then, that a Magistrates or Tyrants Laws can exauctorate a Minister? or silence
him by his oun proper elicite acts, as King or Tyrant, or formally and
immediately? Will Mischiefs framed into a Law, warrant such iniquity? or an act
of a King of Clay rescind the Mandats of the King of Kings? or exempt people
from obedience due thereunto? Or will the Bishops Canons, who have no power
from Christ, or the Censures of them, that stand condemned themselves by the
Constitutions of the Church and Acts of the General Assemblies, have any weight
in the case? And yet these are all that can be alleged, except odious and
invidious Calumnies, the ordinary Lot of the most faithful, against the present
preachers in the fields, which are sufficiently confuted in their late
Informatory Vindication, and need not here be touched. Seeing therefore they
have given up themselves unto Christ as His servants, they must resolve to be
employed for Him to the outmost of their power, and must not think of laying up
their Talent in a Napkin; especially now when there is so great necessity, when
Defection is yet growing, covered, countenanced more and more, Division nothing
abated, but new oil cast daily into the flames of devouring Contentions; the
people generally drouned in the deluge of the times snares and sins, and like
to be over whelmed in the inundation of black Popery, now coming in at the
opened sluice of this wicked Toleration, with the Congratulations of Addressing
Ministers; when now the Harvest is great and the Laborers are few: Great then
is the necessity, and double must the woe be that abides such Ministers, as
are silent at such a time: And great and inexcusable is the sin of the people,
if they do not come out, and countenance faithful Ministers, the Messengers of
the Lord of hosts, from whom they should seek the Law Mal. 2. 7. especially
when there are so many, that have palpably betrayed their Trust; and so few
that are faithful in the necessary Testimony of the day. Seeing then faithful
Ministers must preach, and people must hear, where can they meet with
convenience, and safety, and freedom, except either under the shelter of this
wicked Toleration, which they dare not do, or else go to the fields?

5. It must be obtained also, that the Ministers have a right to Preach, in
this unfixed manner, wherever they have a Call; their relation now, in this
disturbed state of the Church, being to be considered more extensively, than in
its settled condition. For understanding which, we must distinguish a three or
fourfold relation, that a Minister of the Gospel stands into. First, He is a
Minister of Christ, and Steward of the Mysteries of God 1 Cor. 4. 1. having his
Commission from Christ as his Master: And this relation he has universally,
wherever he is. Secondly, he is a Minister of the Catholic Church, though not
a Catholic Minister of it; which is his primary relation; for that is the
Church, in which Ministers are set 1 Cor. 12. 28. and to which they are given
Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. Thirdly, He is a Minister of the particular Church whereof he
is a Member; and so in Scotland a Minister is a Minister of the Church of
Scotland, and is obliged to lay out himself for the good of that Church.
Fourthly; he is a Minister of the particular Congregation, whereunto he has a
fixed relation in a constitute case of the Church: This last is not essential
to a Minister of Christ, but is subservient to the former relations: but when
separated from such a relation, or when it is impossible to be held, he is
still a Minister of Christ, and His Call to preach the Gospel stands and binds.
See Mr Durhams Degression on this particular on Revel. chap. 2. page 89. etc.
in quarto. For tho he be not a Catholic Officer, having an equal relation to
all Churches, as the Apostles were; Nevertheless he may exerce Ministerial Acts
Authoritatively, upon occasions warrantably calling for the same, in other
Churches, as Heralds of one King, having Authority to charge in His Name
wherever it be; especially in a broken state of the Church, when all the
restriction his Ministerial relation is capable of, is only a tie and call to
officiate in the service of that Church whereof he is a Member; and so he has
right to preach every where, as he is called, for the edification of that
Church. The reasons are. 1. He has power from Christ the Master of the whole
Church; and therefore, wherever the Masters Authority is acknowledged, the
Servants Ministerial Authority cannot be denied; at least in relation to that
Church whereof he is a Member as well as a Minister. 2. He has Commission from
Christ, principally for the edification of Christ's body, as far as his
Ministry can reach, according to the Second relation. 3. His relation to the
whole Church is principal, that which is fixed to a part is only subordinate,
because it is a part of the whole. 4. His Commission is indefinite to preach
the Gospel, which will s^it as well in one place as in another. 5. The same
great ends of the Churches greater good and edification, which warrands fixing
of a Minister to a particular charge in the Churches peaceable state, will
warrant his officiating more largely in her disturbed state, 6. Else it would
follow that a faithful Minister, standing in that relation to a disturbed and
destroyed Church, and all his gifts and graces were useless in that case, which
notwithstanding are given for the good of the Church. 7. Yea by this, when his
fixed relation cannot be kept, it would follow, that he ceased to be a
Minister, and his Commission expired; so that he should stand in no other
relation to Christ, than any private person so qualified, which were absurd:
for by Commission he is absolutely set apart for the work of the Ministry, so
long as Christ has work for him, if he continue faithful. 8. This has been
the practice of all the Propogators of the Gospel from the beginning, and of our
Reformers in particular; without which they could never have propogated it so
far: And it was never accounted the Characteristick of Apostles, to preach
unfixedly; because in times of persecution, Pastors and Doctors also might have
Preached wherever they came, as the Officers of the Church of Jerusalem did,
when scattered upon the persecution of Stephen Act. 8. 1. did go every where
preaching the Word ver. 4. Since therefore they may and must Preach in this
unfixed manner, they must in this broken State look upon all the Godly in the
Nation, that will oune and hear them, to be their Congregation, and embrace
them all, and consult their convenience and universal advantage, in such a way
as all equally may be admitted, and none excluded from the benefit of their
Ministry. And therefore they must go to the fields with it.

6. The Lord has so signally ouned, successfully countenanced, and singularly
sealed Field-Preaching in these unfixed exercises, that both Ministers and
people have been much encouraged against all opposition to prosecute them, as
having experienced much of the Lords power and presence in them, and of the
breathings of the enlivening, enlarging, enlightening, and strengthening
Influences of the Spirit of God upon them. The people are hereby called, in
this case of defection, to seek after those waters that they have been so often
refreshed by: For in this case of defection, God being pleased to seal with a
palpable Blessing on their Souls, the Word from Ministers adhering to their
principles, they may safely look on this as a Call from God to hear them, and
follow after them so ouned of the Lord. And it being beyond all doubt, that the
Assemblies of the Lords people to partake of pure Ordinances, with full freedom
of Conscience in the fields, has been signally ouned and blessed of the Lord,
and has proven a mean to spread the knowledge of God beyond any thing that
appeared in our best times; And in despite of this ^ignal Appearance of God,
and envy at the good done in these Meetings, all endeavors being used by
wicked men to suppress utterly all these Rendevouzes of the Lords Militia, both
by open force and cunning Midianitish wiles; Ministers cannot but look upon it
as their duty, and that the Lord has been preaching from Heaven, to all who
would hear and understand it, that this way of preaching, even this way, was
that wherein His Soul took pleasure, and to which He has been and is calling
all who would be co-workers with Him this day, to help forward the Interest of
His Crown and Kingdom. Many hundreds of persecuted people can witness this, and
all the Martyrs have sealed it with their blood, and remembered it particularly
on the Scaffolds, that they found the Lord there, and that He did lead them
thither, where He made them to ride upon the high places of the earth, and to
eat the increase of the fields, and to suck honey out of the rock, and that in
their experience, under the Spirits pouring out from on high, they found the
wilderness to be a fruitful field, and in their esteem, their feet were
beautiful upon the Mountains that brought good tidings, that published peace,
that brought good tidings of good, that published salvation, that said unto
Zion, thy God reigns. And all the Ministers that followed this way, while
they were faithful, and had but little strength, and kept His Word, and did not
deny His Name, found that verified in their experience, which is said of
Philadelphia Revel. 3. 8. that they had an open door which no man could shut.
The Characters whereof, as they are expounded by Mr Durham, were all verified
in these Meetings: where 1. The Ministers had a door of utterance upon the one
side opened to them; and the peoples ears were opened to welcome the same, in
love to edification, simplicity, and diligence, on the other. 2. This had real
changes following, many being made humble, serious, tender, fruitful etc. 3.
The Devil raged and set himself to oppose, traduce, and some way to blast the
Ministry of the most faithful more than any others; just as when Paul had a
greater door and effectual opened to him, there were many adversaries 1 Cor.
16. 9. 4. Yet the Lord has been observably defeating the Devil and Profanity
in every place, where the Gospel came, and made him fall like lightening from
Heaven, by the preaching of the Word. 5. And the most experimental proof of all
was, that hereby ground was gained upon the Kingdom of the Devil, and many
Prisoners brought off to Jesus Christ. And therefore seeing it is so, this mnst
certainly be a Call to them who are yet laboring in that Work, which others
have left off, to endeavor to keep this door open with all diligence, and reap
the corn when it is ripe, and when the Sun shines make hay, and with all
watchfulness, lest the wicked one sow his tares, if they should fall remiss.

7. As for the Circumstance of the place, of this unfixed manner of celebrating
the Solemn Ordinances of the Worship of God, in a time of persecution: This
cannot be quarrelled at by any, but such as will quarrel at any thing. But even
that is better warranted, than to be weakened with their quarrels. For before
the Law, Mountain-Worship was the first Worship of the World, as Abrams
Iehovah-jireh Genesis 22. 14. Iac^bs Bethel (or House of God in the open fields)
Genesis 28. 17, 19. his Peniel Genesis 32. 30. his El-Elohe-Israel Genesis 33. ult. do
witness: Under the Law, they heard of it at Ephratah they found it in the
fields of the Wood Psalm. 132. 6. After the Law, field-preaching was the first
that we read of in the New Testament, both in John his preaching in the
wilderness of Judea, being the voice of one crying in the wilderness, and the
Master Usher of Christ Math. 3. 1, 3. and in His Ambassadors afterwasds, who
on the Sabbath sometimes, went out to a river side were prayer was wont to be
made, As Lydia was converted at Paul's field preaching Act. 16. 13, 14. And
chiefly the Prince of Preachers, Christ Himself, preached many a time by the
syds of the Mountains, and the the sea side: That Preaching Math. 5. was on a
Mountain verse. 1. And this is the more to be considered, that our Lord had
Liberty of the Synagog^es to Preach in, yet he frequently left them, and
preached either in private houses, or in the fields; because of the opposition
of His Doctrine by the Jewish Teachers, who had appointed that any who ouned
Him should be excommunicate: And therefore in the like case, at it is now, His
Servants may imitate their Master: for though all Christ's Actions are not
imitable; such as these of His Divine Power, and the Actions of His Divine
Prerogative (as His taking of the ass without the ouners liberty) and the
Actings o^ His Mediatory Prerogative, which He did as Mediator; but all His
Gracious Actions, and Moral upon Moral grounds, and Relative upon the grounds
of Relative Duties, are not only imitable, but the perfect Pattern of
imitation. Therefore that superstitious and ridiculous Cavil, that such
Meetings in fields or houses are Conventickles, gathering separate
Congregations, is not worth the taking notice of: for this would reflect upon
Christ's and His Apostles w^y of preaching, and the constant method of
propogating the Gospel in times of persecution, in all ages ^ince, which has
always been by that way which they call keeping of Conventickles. Its absurd
to say, it is a gathering of separate Congregations, it is only a searching or
seeking after the Lords sheep, that are made to wander through all the
Mountains, and upon every (...), and (...) which is scattered by corrupt
Sheeph^^^* and the cruelty of the beasts of the field Ezekiel. 34. 5, 6. and
preaching to all who will come and hear the Word of Truth, in such places where
they may get it done most safely, and may be most free from distraction and
trouble of their enemies, who are waiting to find them out, that they may hail
them to Prisons or kill them.

8. As for the Circumstance of the Time, that is specially alleged to be
unseasonable, especially when there is a little breathing, and some relaxation
from the heat of Persecution, to break the peace, and awaken sleeping Dogs by
such irritating Courses, is thought not consistent with Christian prudence.
This is the old pretense of them that were at ease, and preferred that to duty.
But as we know no peace at this time, but a peace of Confederacy with the
enemies of God, which we desire not to partake of, and know of no relaxation of
Persecution against such as continue to witness against them: So let what has
been said above in the 3. Hypothesis* of the necess^ty of publickness in our
Meetings at such a time as this is, be considered; And let the Scripture be
consulted, and it will appear, not only that in preaching the Gospel there must
be a Witness and Testimony kept up (as is proved above) and not only that
Ministers must preach the Word, and be instant in season and out of season 2 Timothy 4. 2. But that such a time as this, is the very Season of a Testimony. For
in the Scripture we find, that Testimonies are to be given in these Seasons
especially. 1. When the enemies of God, beginning to relent from their
stiffness and severity, would compound with His Witnesses, and give them some
Liberty, but not total; as Pharaoh would let the Children of Israel go, but
stay their flocks: And now our Pharaoh will give some Liberty to serve God, but
with a Reservation of that part of the matter of it, that nothing be said to
alienate the hearts of the Subjects from his arbitrary Government. But Moses
thought it then a season to testify (though the bondage of the people should
be thereby continued) that there should not a hoof be left behind; for says
he, we know not with what we must serve the Lord, until we come (...) Exodus 10.
24, 25, 26. So must we Testify for eve^^ closly* the Interest of Christ this
day. 2. When there* to ^l^ration of Idolatry, and Confederacy with Idolaters,
and suspending the execution of penal Laws against them, or pardoning of those
that should be punished: In such a season as this, that Messenger that came
from Gilgal gave his Testimony at Bochim against their toleration of Idolatrous
Altars, and Confederacy with the Canaanites Judge. 2. 1, 2. He is called an
Angel indeed, but he was only such an one as Ministers are, who are called so
Rev. 2. 1. for Heavenly Spirits have brought a Heavenly Message to particular
persons, but never to the whole people, the Lord has committed such a treasure
to earthen Vessels 2 Cor. 4. 7. and this came from Gilgal not from Heaven. So
the Man of God testified against E^i, for his toleration of wicked Priests, tho
they were his oun Sons 1 Samuel 2. 2^. etc. So Samuel witnessed against Saul, for
his toleration and indemnity granted to Agag 1 Samuel 15. 23. So the Prophet
against Ahab, for sparing Benhadad 1 King. 20. 42. The Angel of Ephesus is
commended for this; and he of pergamus and he of Thyatira is condemned, for
omitting this Testimony, and allowing a toleration of the Nicolaitans and
Iezebel Revel. 2. 2, 14, 20. In such a Case of universal Compliance with these
things, and the peoples indulging themselves under the shadow of the protection
of such a Confederacy, the Servants of the Lord that fear Him must not say a
Confederacy, tho they should be accounted for signs and wonders in Israel Isai.
8. 12, 13, 18. But now Idolatrous Mass-Altars are set up, none thrown down,
penal Statutes against Papists are stopped and disabled, and the Generality of
Ministers are Congratulating, and saying a Confederacy in their Addresses for
the same. 3. When the Universal Apostasy is come to such a hight, that error is
prevailing, and few syding themselves in an avowed opposition against it; as
Elijah chose that time, when the people were halting between two opinions 1
King. 18. 21. And generally all the Prophets and Servants of Christ, consulted
always the peoples necessity for the timing of their Testimonies: And was
there ever greater necessity than now, when Popery is coming in like a flood?
4. (...) men are chief in power; as when Haman was (...) Mordecai would not
give him one bow though all (...) people of God should be endangered by such a
provocation Esther. 3. 2. And when Tyrants and Usurpers are set up without the
Lords approbation, then they that have the Lords Trumpet should set it to their
mouth Hos. 8. 1, 4. Is not this the case now? 5. When upon the account of this
their Testimony, the Lords people are in greatest danger, and enemies design to
Massacre them, then if they altogether hold their peace at such a time, there
shall enlargment and deliverance arise another way, but they and their fathers
house shall be destroyed, who are silent then, as Mordecai said to Esther Est:
4. 14. And who knows not the cruel designs of the Papists now? 6. When
iniquity is Universally abounding, and hypocrisy among Professors, then the
Servants of the Lord must cry aloud and not spare Isai. 58. 1. as the ^ase is
this day. 7. When the Concern of Truth, a (...) Glory of God, is not so
illustriously vindicated as He gives us to expect it shall be; then the
Watchmen must not hold their peace, and they that make mention of the Name of
the Lord, must not keep silence Isai. 62. 6, 7. especially when His Name and
Glory is blasphemed, baffled, and afronted, as at this day with a Witness. 8.
When Ministers generally are involved in a course of defection, and do not give
faithful warning, but daub over the peoples and their oun defections; then the
Prophets must Prophecy against the Prophets Ezekiel. 13. 2, 10. etc. As alas this
day there is a necessity for it. 9. When public Worship is interdicted by Law,
as it was by that Edict prohibiting public Prayer for thirty days in Daniels
time: They could not interdict all Prayer to God; for they could forbid nothing
by that Law, but that which they might hinder and punish for contraveening; but
mental Prayer at least could not be so restrained, And certain it is, they
intended only such Prayer should be discharged, as might discover Daniel: But
might not the wisdom of Daniel have eluded this interdiction, by praying only
secretly or mentally? No: whatever Carnal wisdom might* Mee^te, his honesty did
oblige him in that case of Conf^^re par^hen he knew the writing was signed, to
go into hie clossly. ^d to open his windows, and to kneel upon his kn^, to
cleatimes a day -- as he did aforetime Dan. 6. 10. Nowny agaireason can be
given for his opening his windows? Was it only to let in the air? or was it to
see Jerusalem out at these windows? The Temple he could look toward, as well
when they were shut. No other reason can be assigned, but that it was necessary
then to avouch the Testimony, for that indispensable Duty then interdicted. And
is not public preaching indispensable Duty too? which is declared Criminal,
except it be confined to the mode their wicked Law tolerates; which we can no
more homologate, than omit the duty. 10. When it is an evil time, the evil of
sin is incumbent, and the evil of wrath is impendent over a Land; then the Lion
has roared who will not fear? the Lord God has spoken, who can but Prophecy?
Amos. 3. 8. There is no contradiction here to that word, while has been
miserably perverted in our day, to palli^use or ^il silence of time-servers
Amos. 5. 13. The prudent shall keep^ silence in that time for it is an evil
time: Whereby we cannot understand a wily withdrawing our witness against the
times evils: for there they are commanded to bestir themselves actively, in
seeking good, hating the evil, loving the go^d, and establishing Judgment in
the gate verse. 14, 15. but we understand by it a submissive silence to God,
without fretting (according to that Word Ier. 8. 14. for the Lord our God has
put us to silence -- and Mic. 7. 9.) Calvin upon the place expounds it, The
prudent shall be affirighted at the terrible vengeance of God; Or they shall be
compelled to silence, not willingly (for that were unworthy of men of courage
to be silent at such wickedness) but by the force of Tyrants giving them no
leave to speak. Sure then this is such a time, wherein it is prudence to be
silent to God, but not to be silent for God, but to g^ve public witness
against the evils of sin abounding, and public warning of the evils of
punishment imminent. 11. Then is the (...) of it, when worldly wisdom thinks it
unseasonable* (...) men cannot endure ^ound Doctrine, but after (...) lusts
they heap to themselves teachers, ha^in^ (...); and turn away their ea^s from
the Truth^ (...) ^each the Word, and be instant is indeed in it (...), because
profitable and necessary; but it is out of season as to the Preachers or
Hearers external interest, and in the esteem of Worldly Wiselings 2 Timothy 4. 2,
3, 4. See Pool Synops. Critic. in Locum. So in our day; men cannot endure free
and faithful dealing against the sins of the times, but would have smooth
things and deceits spoken unto them* like those Isai. 30. 10. And nothing can
be more (...) to speak plainly (so as to give every thing its (...)) either of
the sins of the times, or of the snares of the times, or of the miseries and
evils of the times, or of the duties of the times or of the dangers, and the
present Crisis of the times: Which no faithful Minister can forbear. Therefore
so much the more is it seasonable, that it is generally thought unseasonable.
12. In a word, whenever (...) Testimony of the Church, or any part of it, is
(...); then is the season to keep it, and contend for it, and to hold it fast,
as our Crown Revel. 3. 10, 11. It must be then a word spoken in due season, and
good and necessary ( Prove. 15. 23.) at this time, to give a public Testimony
against all wrongs done to our blessed Lord Jesus, all the encroachments upon
His prerogatives, all the invasions of the Churches privileges, all the
overturnings of our Covenanted Reformation, and this openly designed
introduction of Popery and Slaverie. But now how shall this Testimony be given
by us conveniently? or how can it be given at all, at this time, in our
Circumstances, so as both ^he matter and manner of it may be a most significant
Witness-bearing to the merit of it, except we go to the fields? Who can witness
significantly against Popery and Tyranny: and all the evils to be spoken
against this day, under the protection of a Papist and Tyrant, as
house-Meetings under the Covert o^ this Tol^eration are stated? for if these
Meetings be private and secret, then the Testimony is not known; if they be
public, then they are exposed to a Prey. Now by all these general Hypoth^s^s,
it is already in some measure evident, that Field-Meetings are very expedient.
But I shall add some more particular Considerations, to inculcate the same
more clossly.

In the Third Place, besides what is said, to clear the Lawfulness and
necessity of a public Testimony against the evils of the present time, Some
Considerations may be added to prove the Expediency of this way and manner of
giving a Testimony, by maintaining Field-Meetings in our present Circumstances.

1. The keeping of Field-Meetings now, is not only most convenient for
Testifying, but a very significant Testimony in it self, against this Popish
Toleration; the wickedness of whose Spring and Original, and of its Nature and
Terms, Channel and Conveyance, End and design, is showed in the Historical
Narrative thereof, and cannot be denied by any Presbyterian, whose constant
principle is that there should be no Toleration of Popery, Idolatry, or
Heresy, in this Reformed and Covenanted Church. Reason and Religion both will
conclude, that this is to be witnessed against, by all that will adhere to the
Cause or Reformation overturned hereby, and resolve to stand in the Gap against
Popery to be introduced hereby, and that will approve themselves as honest
Patriots in defending the Laws and Libertys of the Country subverted hereby*
And besides, if it be considered with respect to the Granter; it is palpable
his design is to introduce Popery, and advance Tyranny, which can be hid from
none that accept it, the effectuating whereof has a n^cessary and inseparable
connection with the acceptance of the Liberty; and is so far from being
avertible by the Accepters, that it is chiefly promoted by their acceptance,
and the design of it is to lay them by from all opposition thereto. If it be
considered with relation to the Accepters, it is plain it must be taken as it
is given, and received as it is conveyed, from its fountain of Absolute power,
through a channel of an Arbitrary Law-disabling and Religion-dishonouring
Toleration, which is semper mali; and with consent to the sinful ^mpositions,
with which it is tendered; concerning and affecting the Doctrine of Ministers,
that they shall Preach nothing which may alienate the subjects from the
Government; Against all which there is no access for a Protestation, consistent
with the improvement of the Liberty, for it is granted and accepted on these
very terms; that there shall be no Protestation; for if there be, that will be
found an alienating of the hearts of the subjects from the Government, which by
that Protestation will be reflected upon. If it be considered with respect to
the Addressers for it, who formally say a Confederacy with, and Congratulate
the Tolerator for his Toleration, and all the Mischiefs he is machinatinating
and effectuating thereby; then seeing they have Presumptuously taken upon them
to send it in the name of all Presbyterians, it concerns all honest men,
zealous Christians, and faithful Ministers of that persuasion and denomination,
in honor and Conscience, to declare to the world by some public Testimony,
that they are not Consenters to that sinful, shameful, and scandalous
Conspiracy, nor of the Corporation of these flattering Addressers who have
betrayed the Cause, with which all will be interpreted Consenters, that are not
Contradicters. Further this Tolleration is sinful as is cleared above Peri^ 6.
And to accept of it is contrary to our Solemn Covenants and Engagments, where
we are bound to exstirpate Popery, preserve the Reformation, defend our
Liberties, and never to accept of a Toleration eversive of all these precious
Interests we are sworn to maintain. And it is heinously scandalous, being in
effect a succumbing at length and yielding up the Cause, which has been so
long controverted and so long contended for, at least an appearance of ceding
and lying by from contending for the Interests of Christ, of condemning our
former Wrestlings for the same, of purchasing a Liberty to our selves at the
rate of burying the Testimony in bondage and oblivion, of hardening and
confirming open Adversaries in their wicked invasions on our Religion, Laws,
and Liberties, of being weary of the Cross of Christ, that we would fain have
ease upon any terms, and of weakening the hands yea condemning the Practice and
peremptoriness of these that are exampted from the benefit or rather the snare
of it, and suffer when others are at ease. It is also attended with many
Inconveniences; for either such as Preach under the Covert of it, must forbear
declaring some part of the Counsel of God, and give no Testimony seasonable
this day; or else if they do, they will soon be discovered and made a prey.
Hence seeing there must be a Testimony against this Toleration, it is certainly
most expedient to give it there, where the Meeting is without the reach and
bounds of it, and interdicted by the same Proclamation that tenders it, and
where the very gathering in such places is a Testimony against it: for to
Preach in houses constantly and leave the fields, would now be interpreted an
Homologating the Toleration that commands Preaching to be so restricted;
especially when an Address is made in name of all that accept the benefit of
it, from which Odium we could not vindicate our selves, if we should so make
use of it.

2. The keeping of Field Meetings now is a Testimony against that wicked Law
that discharges them, and interdicts them as Criminal; yea in some respect a
Case of Confession: for if Daniels case, when public prayer was discharged
under pain of death, was a Case of Confession, as all grant; then must also our
case be, when public Preaching is discharged under the some penalty: for it is
equivalent to an Universal discharge of all public Preaching, when the manner
of it is discharged, which we can only have with freedom and safety in way of
public Testimony, which can be none other in our Circumstances but in the
fields, Again if the Law be wicked that discharges them, as certainly it is,
and is demonstrated from what is said already, then it must be sin to obey it;
but it were an obeying of it to quite the fields.

3. The ^eeping of Field-Meetings now is a Testimony against Tyranny and
Usurpation, encroaching upon our Religion, Laws, and Liberties, and presuming
to restrict and bound the exercise of the Ministerial function, and discharge
it altogether except it be modified according to the Circumstances prescibed by
a wicked Law, which cannot be allowed a^ competent to any man whose Authority
is not acknowledged, for reasons given in Head. 2. Therefore though there were
no more, this is sufficient to call all Ministers to give Testimony against
such an Usurpation, by resfusing to obey any such Act. and Preaching where God
gives a Call. For otherwise, to submit to it, would be an acknowledging of his
Magist^atical power to discharge these Meetings, and to give forth sentences
against faithful Ministers.

4. The keeping of Field-Meetings now is a Testimony for the Honor, Headship
and Princely Prerogative of Jesus Christ, which has been the Great Word of His
Patience in Scotland, and by an Unparalelled, insolence encroached upon by
Usurpers in our day, and in effect ^enied by such as took a new holding for the
exercise of their Ministry from their Usurped power. Now in these Meetings,
there is a Practical Declaration of their holding their Ministry and the
exercise thereof from Christ alone, without any dependence upon, (...) to, or
license and warrant from His Usurping Enemies; and that they may and will
Preach in public without Authority from them. If then it be Lawful and
expedient to maintain the Interests of a King of Clay, against an Usurper; then
much more must it be Lawful and expedient, to maintain the quarrel of the King
of Kings, when wicked men would banish Him and His Interests out of the Kingdom
by their Tyrannical cruelty, and cruel mercy of a destructive Toleration.

5. The keeping of Field-Meetings now is a Testimony for the Gospel and the
Ministry thereof; which is always the dearest and nearest privilege of
Christians, and in the present Circumstances, when our Lives and our all are
embarked in the same bottom with it, and sought to be destroyed together with
it, by a party conspiring against Christ, it is necessary duty to defend both
by resisting their unjust violence; especially when Religion and the Gospel is
one and the chief of our fundamental Land-rights, and the Cardinal Condition of
the established Policy, upon which we can only oune men for Magistrates by the
Law of the Land: And this Testimony by defense of the Gospel and of our oun
lives, cannot be given expediently any where but in the Fields. It is also a
Testimony for the freedom and Authority of the Gospel-Ministrie, and for their
holding their unremovable Relation to the Church of Scotland, which is
infringed by these Tyrannical Acts, and maintained by these exercises: which is
a privilege to be contended for, above and beyond all other that can be
contended for or defended, especially to be maintained against those that have
no power or Authority to take it away. There will no man quite any of his goods
upon a sentence coming from an incompetent Judge; And shall Ministers or people
be hectored or fooled from such a privilege by them that have no such power?

6. The keeping of Field-Meetings now is a Testimony for our Covenants, the
ouning whereof is declared Criminal by that same Law that discharges these
Meetings; in which we are sworn to preserve the Reformation in Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline, and Government, and to defend all the Churches Liberties,
and to oppose all their Opposites, and endeavor their exstirpation: And in the
Solemn Acknowledgment of sins and Engagment to duties, we are sworn, because
many have of late labored to supplant the Liberties of the Kirk, to maintain
and defend the Kirk of Scotland, in all her Liberties and Privileges, against
all who shall oppose and undermine the same, or encroach thereupon under any
pretext whatsoever. Since then the ouning of these Meetings and the Covenants
are both discharged together, and the ouning of the Covenant does oblige to a
public opposition against the dischargers, and an avowed Maintinance of the
Churches privileges, whereof this is in a manner the only and chief Liberty
now left to be maintained, to keep Meetings where we may testify against them,
without dependence on their Toleration; it must follow, that these Meetings are
to be maintained, which only can be in the fields* with convenience.

7. To give over these Field-Meetings now, would be an hardening and
encouraging of these Enemies in their wicked design of banishing all these
Meetings out of the Land; which manifestly would be defeat, by a resolute
refusal of all to submit to their discharging of them; and they that do submit,
and give them over, do evidently contribute to the effectuating that wicked
design, which is certain does not nor will not terminate upon a simple
suppression of that sort, but further is intended to exstirpate all Meetings
for Gospel Ordinances, in which there is any Testimony against them. To Comply
therefore with such a forbearance of them at this time, would lay a stone of
stumbling before them, to encourage them in these their designs; when they
should see their Contrivance so universally complied with, wherein they might
boast that at length they had prevailed, to put quite away that eyesore of
theirs Field-Meetings.

8. To give over these Field-Meetings now, were a stumbling to the poor
ignorant people; who might think that now it appears that Work was but of men,
and so has come to naught, and would look upon it as an evidence of fainting,
and succumbing at last in the matter of the Testimony, as being quite overcome;
and that indeed all have embraced and accepted this present Toleration, and
were all alike sleeping under the shade, and eating the fruits of such a
bramble.

9. Finally, To give over these Field-Meetings now, would be very scandalous to
the posterity, and to Strangers, who shall read the History of our Church, to
find that as Prelacy came in without a joint Witness, and the monstrous,
Blasphemous, and Sacrilegious Supremacy was erected without a Testimony in its
season; So black Popery it self and Tyranny was introduced by a Toleration,
which laid them all by from a Testimony against these; who formerly had
valiantly, resolutely, and faithfully contended against all lesser Corruptions,
but at last, when that came, and stricter prohibitions of all public Meetings
but under the Covert thereof were emitted, then all were persuaded to comply
with that Course. How astonishing would it be to read, that all these
Contendings, sealed with so much precious blood, should come to such a pitiful
Period! But I hasten to the Next, which is the Second Positive Ground of
Suffering.

HEAD. V. The Principle of and Testimony for Defensive Arms Vindicated.
THis Truth is of that sort, that can hardly be illustrated by demonstration;
not for the darkness thereof, but for its self evidencing clearness, being
scarcely capable of any further elucidation, than what is offered to the
rational understanding by its simple proposition. As first Principles can
hardly be proven, because they need no probation, and cannot be made clearer
than they are, and such as cannot consent to them, are incapable of conceiving
any probation of them: So this Truth of Self-preservation being Lawful, because
it is congenite with and irradicated in every nature, that has a Self which it
can preserve, can scarcely be more illustrated that it may do so, than that it
can do so. And therefore to all who have a true respect to their oun, as well
as a due concern in the Interest of Mankind, and zeal for the Interest of
Christ, it might seem superfluous to make a doubt or debate of this: Were it
not that a Generation of men is now prevailing, that are as great Monsters in
Nature, as they are Malignant in Religion, and as great perverters of the Law
of Nature, as they are Subverters of Municipal Laws, and Everters of the Laws
of God: Who for ouning this principle, as well as using the practice, of
Defensive Resistance for self preservation against Tyrannical violence, have
set up such Monuments of rage and cruelty, in the Murder of many innocent
people, as was never read nor heard of before. It has been indeed the practice
of all Nations in the World, and the greatest of men have maintained this
principle in all ages: But the bare* Asserting the principle, when extorted by
severe Inquisitions, was never a Cause of taking the lives of any, before this
was imposed on the poor Suf^erers in Scotland, to give their judgment, Whether
or not such Appearances for Defense (as the Tyranny of Rulers had forced people
to) were Reb^llion and a Sin against God; Which they could not in Conscience
assert; and therefore, tho many that have suffered upon this head, have been as
free of the practice of such Res^stence as any, yet because they would not
condemn the principle they have been Criminally processed, Arraigned, and
Condemned to the death. And against this Truth they have been observed to have
a special kind of indignation, either because the light of it, which cannot be
^id, has some heat with it to se^rch them; or because they fear the impression
of this in the hearts of people more than others, knowing that they deserve the
practical expression of it by the hands of all. But the reason they give why
they are so offended at it is, that they look upon it as the Spring of all the
errors of Presbyterians, and a Notion that destroys them: Which indeed will be
found to have a necessary connection with many of the Truths that they contend
for this day, as it has been the necessary method of de^ending them. What
practices of this kind has been, and what were the occasions inducing or
rather enforcing to these Defensive Resistences here to be vindicated as to the
principle of them, is manifested in the Historical Representation: Showing,
that after the whole body of the Land was engaged under the bond of a Solemn
Covenant, several times renewed, to defend Religion and Liberty; and in special
manner the Magistrates of all ranks, the Supreme whereof was formally admitted
to the Government upon these terms; he with his Associates, conspiring with the
Nobles to involve the whole Land in perjury and Apostasy, overturned the whole
Covenanted Work of Reformation; and thereby not only encroached upon the
Interest of Christ and the Churches Privileges, but subverted the fundamental
Constitution of the Kingdoms Government, and pressed all to a submission unto
and compliance with that Tyranny and Apostasy, erected upon the ruins
thereof: Yet the Godly and Faithful in the Land, sensible of the indispensable
obligation of these Covenants, resolved to adhere thereunto, and suffered long
patiently for adherence unto the same, until being quite out wearyed by a
continued tract of Tyrannical oppressions, arbitrarly enacted by wicked Laws,
and illegally executed against their oun Laws, and cruelly prosecuted even
without all color of Law, in many unheard of barbarities; when there could be
no access for or success in complaining or getting redress by Law, all
Petitions and Remonstrances of Grievances being declared seditious and
treasonable, and interdicted as such; they were forced to betake themselves to
this last remedy of Defensive Resistance, intending only the preservation of
their Lives, Religion, and Liberties; which many times has been blessed with
success, and therefore zealously contended for, as an inamissible Privilege;
by all well affected to the Cause of Christ and Interest of their Country,
because they found it always Countenanced of the Lord; until the cause was
betrayed by the Treachery and abandoned by the Cowardice of such, as were more
Loyal for the Kings Interests than zealous for Christ's and the Countries; for
which the Lord in His holy Jealousy discountenanced many repeated endeavors
of this nature, Cuting us off and putting us to shame and would not go forth
with our Armies. But because the duty is not to be measured by, and has a more
fixed Rule to be founded upon, than providence; therefore the Godly did not
only maintain the principle in their confessions and Testimonies, but prosecute
the practice in carrying arms, and making use of them in the defense of the
Gospel and of themselves, at Field-Meetings; which were always successfully
prosperous, by the power and presence of God. This Question is sufficiently
discussed, by our famous and learned invincible Patrons and Champions for this
excellent privilege of Mankind, the unanswerable Authors of Lex Rex, the
Apologetical Relation, Napthali, and Ius populi Vindicatum. But because facile
est inventis addere, I shall subjoine my mite. And their Arguments being
various and volumniously prosecute, and scattered at large through their books,
I shall endeavor to collect a Compend of them in some order. The two first
speak of a Defensive war, managed in a Parliamentary way: And the two last, of
Resistance against the abuse of a Lawful power, when there is no access to
maintain Religion and Liberty any other way; which does not come up so closs to
our case, nor is it an adequate Antithesis to the Assertions of our
Adversaries, who say, that it is no ways Lawful, in any case or upon any
pretense whatsoever, to Resist the Sovereign power of a Nation, in whomsoever
it be resident, or which way soever it be erected. I shall consider it more
complexely and extensively, and plead both for Resistance against the abuse of
a Lawful power, and against the Use and Usurpation of a Tyrannical power, And
infer not only the Lawfulness of Resisting Kings, when they abuse their power
(as is demonstrate unanswerably by these Authors) but the expediency and
necessity of the duty of Resisting this Tyrannical power, whenever we are in
a Capacity, if we would not be found treatherous Covenant-breakers, and
betrayers of the Interest of God, and the Liberties of the Nation, and of our
Brethren together with the posterity, into the hands of this Popish and
Implacable Enemy, and so bring on us the Curse of Meroz, and the Curse of our
Brethrens blood, crying for vengeance on the heads of the shedders thereof, and
upon all who being in case came not to their rescue, and the Curse of
posterity, for not transmitting that Reformation and Liberty, whereof we were
by the valor of our forefathers put and left in possession. I shall not
therefore restrict my self to the State of the Question, as propounded
ordinarily viz. Whether or not, when a Covenanted King does really injure,
oppress and invade his Subjects Civil and Religious Rights, or unavoidably
threatens to deprive them of their dearest and nearest Liberties, and sends out
his Emissaries with armed violence against them, and when all redress to be
had, or hope by any Address or petition is rendered void or inaccessible, yea
addressing interdicted under severe penalties as treasonable; Then and in that
case, may a Community of these Subjects defend themselves, and their Religion
and Liberties, by arms in resisting his bloody Emissaries? But to bring it
home to our present case, and answer the Laxness of the Adversaries position of
the uncontrollableness of every one that wears a Crown, I shall State it thus:
Whether or not is it necessary duty, for a Community (whether they have the
Concurrence of the primores or Nobles, or not) to endeavor, in the Defense of
their Lives, Religion, Laws, and Liberties, to Resist and Repress the
Usurpation and Tyranny of Prevailing Dominators, using or abusing their power
for subverting Religion, invading the Liberties, and overturning the
foundamental Laws of their Country? I hold the Affirmative, and shall essay to
prove it, by the same Arguments that conclude this Question, as usually stated.
Which will more than evince the Justifyableness of the Sufferings upon this
Head. In prosecuting of this Subject, I shall first premit some Concessory
Considerations to clear it. And Secondly bring Reasons to prove it.

First for clearing of this Truth, and taking off Mistakes, these Concessions
may be considered.

1. The Ordinance of Magistracy which is of God is not to be Resisted, no not
so much as by disobedience or nonobedience, nay not so much as mentally by
cursing in the heart Eccles. 10. 20. but a person clothed therewith, abusing
his power, may be in so far Resisted. But Tyrants, or Magistrates turning
Tyrants, are not Gods Ordinance; and there is no hazard of damnation for
refusing to obey their unjust commands, but rather the hazard of that is in
walking willingly after the Commandment, when the Statutes of Omri are kept. So
that what is objected from Eccles. 8. 2-4. I counsel thee to keep the Kings
Commandment etc. is answered on Head. 2. And is to be unsterstood only of the
Lawful commands of Lawful Kings.

2. Rebellion is a damnable sin: except where the word is taken in a laxe
sense, as Israel is said to have Rebelled against Rehoboam, and Hezekias
against Sennacherib; which was a good Rebellion, and clear duty, being taken
there for Resistance and Revolt. In that sense indeed some of our Risings in
Arms might be called Rebellions, for it is Lawful to Rebel against Tyrants.
But because the word is usually taken in an evil sense, therefore would have
been offensive to acknowledge that before the Inquisitors, except it had been
explained. But Rebellion against Lawful Magistrates is a damnable sin,
exemplarly punished in Korah and his Compan^, who rebelled against Moses; and
in Shebah and Absalom who rebelled against David; for to punish the Just is not
good nor to strike Princes for equity Prove. 17. 26. And they that resist shall
receive to themselves damnation Romans 13. 2. So that this Objection brought from
this place, as if the Apostle were commanding there subjection without
Resistance to Nero, and such Tyrants, as it is very impertinent, It is fully
answered above Head. 2. Here it will be sufficient to reply. 1. He is hereby
vindicating Christianity from that reproach, of casting off or refusing
subjection to all Magistrates, as if Christian Liberty had destroyed that
Relation, or that they were not to be subject to Heathen Magistrates. Whereupon
he binds this duty of subjection to Magistrates for conscience sake in general.
And it is very considerable, what Buchanan says in his book de jure regni,
that Paul did not write to the Kings themselves, because they were not
Christians, and therefore the more might be born with from them, tho they
should not understand the duty of Magistrates: But imagine, that there had been
some Christian King, who had turned Tyrant and Apostate, to the Scandal of
Religion; what would he have written then? Sure if he had been like himself, he
would have denied that he should be ouned for a King, and would have
interdicted all Christians Communion with him, and that they should account him
no King, but such as they were to have no fellowship with, according to the Law
of the Gospel. 2. He speaks of Lawful Rulers here, not Tyrants, but of all such
as are defined and qualified here, being powers ordained of God, terrors to
evil works, Ministers of God for good. Yea but says Prelates, and their
Malignant Adherents, these are only Motives of subjection to all powers, not
qualifications of the powers: I answer, they are indeed Motives, but such as
can be extended to none but to these powers that are so qualified. 3. He speaks
of Lawful powers indefinitely in the plural number, not specifying any Kind or
degree of them, as if only Kings and Emperors were here meant. It cannot be
proven that the power of the sword is only in them. Neither was there a
plurality of Kings or Emperors at Rome to be subject to: if he meant the Roman
Emperor, he would have designed him in the singular number. All the reasons of
the Text aggree to inferior Judges also, for they are Ordained of God, they
are called Rulers in Scripture, and Gods Ministers, revengers by Office, who
judge not for man but for the Lord; And inferior Magistrates also are not to be
resisted, when doing their duty 1 Pet. 2. 13. yet all will grant, when they go
beyond their bounds and turns little Tyrants, they may be with-stood. 4. He does
not speak of Nero, concerning whom it cannot be proven, that at this time he
had the Sovereign power, as the learned Mr Prin shows: Or if he had, that he
was a Tyrant at this time: and if he meant him at all, it was only as he was
obliged to be de jure, not as he was de facto. All men know, and none condemns
the fact of the Senate, that resisted Nero at length, without transgressing
this precept. Yea I should rather think, the Senate is the power that the
Apostle applies this Text to, if he applied it to any in particular. 5. The
subjection here required, is the same with the honor in the fifth Command,
whereof this is an exposition; and is opposite to the Contraordinatness here
condemned: Now subjection takes in all the duties we owe to Magistrates, and
Resistance all the contraries forbidden; but unlimited obedience is not here
required, so neither unlimited subjection.

3. We may allow Passive subjection in some cases, even to Tyrants; when the
Lord lays on that yoke, and in effect says, He will have us to lie under it a
while, as He Commanded the Jews to be subject to Nebuchadnezzar: of which
passage, adduced to prove subjection to Tyrants Universally, Buchanan ubi supra
infers, that if all Tyrants be to be subjected to, because God by His Prephet
Commanded His people to be subject to one Tyrant; Then it must be likewise
concluded, that all Tyrants ought to be killed, because Ahabs house was
Commanded to be destroyed by Iehu. But passive subjection, when people are not
in capacity to resist, is necessary. I do not say Passive obedience, which is a
mere Chimaera, invented in the brains of such Sycophants, as would make the
world slaves to Tyrants. Whosoever suffers if he can shun it, is an enemy to
his oun being: for every natural thing must strive to preserve it self against
what annoyeth it; and also he sins against the order of God, Who in vain has
ordained so many Lawful means for preservation of our being, if we must suffer
it to be destroyed, having power to help it.

4. We abhor all war of subjects, professedly declared against a Lawful King,
as such; all war against Lawful Authority, founded upon or designed for
maintaining Principles inconsistent with Government, or against Policy and
Piety; Yea all war without Authority. Yes, when all Authority of Magistrates
supreme and subordinate is perverted and abused, contrary to the ends thereof,
to the oppressing of the people, and overturning of their Laws and Liberties,
people must not suspend their Resistance upon the Concurrence of men of
Authority, and forbear the Duty in case of necessity, because they have no^ the
peers or Primores to lead them: for if the ground be Lawful, the call clear,
the necessity cogent, the capacity probable, they that have the Law of Nature,
the Law of God, and the fundamental Laws of the Land on their side, cannot want
Authority, though they may want Par^iaments to espouse their quarrel. This is
cleared above Head. 2. Yet here I shall add. 1. The people have this
privilege of nature, to defend themselves and their Rights and Liberties as
well as Peers, and had it before they erected and constituted Peers or
Primores. There is no distinction of quality in interests of Nature, though
there be in Civil order: but self defense is not an act of Civil order. In such
Interests, people must not depend upon the priority of their superiors, nor
suspend the duties they owe to themselves and their neighbors, upon the
manuduction of other men's greatness. The Law of Nature allowing self defense,
or the defense of our Brethren, against unjust violence, adds no such
restriction, that it must only be done by the conduct or concurrence of the
Primores or Parliaments. 2. The people have as great Interest to defend their
Religion as the Peers, and more, because they have more souls to care for than
they, who are far fewer. And to be violented in their Consciences, which are as
free to them as to the Peers, is as unsupportable to them: yea both are equally
concerned to maintain Truth, and rescue their Brethren suffering for it, which
are the chief grounds of war; and if the ground of the defensive war be the
same, with them and without them, what reason can be given making their
Resistance in the one case Lawful, and not in the other? Both are alike obliged
to concur, and both are equally obnoxious to Gods threatened Judgments for
suffering Religion to be ruined, and not relieving and rescuing Innocents. It
will be but a poor excuse for people to plead, they had no Peers to head them.
What if both King and Nobles turn enemies to Religion? (as they are at this
day) shall people do nothing for the defense of it then? Many times the Lord
has begun a Work of Reformation by foolish things, and has made the least of
the flock to draw them out Ier. 49. 2. and 50. 45. and did not think fit to
begin with Nobles, but began it when powers and Peers were in opposition to it:
and when He blessed it so at length, as to engage the public Representatives
to oune it, what was done by private persons before, they never condenmed. 3.
The people are injured without the Nobles; therefore they may resist without
them, if they be able: for there can be no Argument adduced to make it unlawful
to resist without them, which will not equally make it unlawful to do it with
them. 4. Its true the Primores are obliged beyond others, and have Authority
more than others to concur; but Separately they cannot act as Representatives
judicially: They have a Magistratical power, but limited to their particular
Precincts where they have Interest, and cannot extend it beyond these bounds;
And so, if they should concur, they are still in the capacity of subjects, for
out of a Parliamentary Capacity they are not Representatives. 5. All the power
they can have is Cumulative not Privative, for deterior conditio Domini per
Procurationem fieri non debet. Why then shall the Representatives betraying
their Trust, wrong the Cause of the people, whose Trustees they are? Nay, if it
were not Lawful for people to defend their Religion, Lives, and Liberties
without the concurrence of Parliaments, then their case should be worse with
them than without them; for they have done it before they had them, and so they
had better be without them still. 6. People may defend themselves against the
Tyranny of a Parliament, or Primores, or Nobles: Ergo they may do it without
them; for if it be Lawful to resist them, its. Lawful to wave them, when they
are in a Conspiracy with the King against them.

5. We disallow all war without real indeclinable Necessity, and great and
grievous wrongs sustained: and do not maintain it is to be declared or
undertaken, upon supposed Grounds, or pretended Causes: And so the Question is
impertinently stated by our Adversaries, Whether or not it be Lawful for
Subjects, or a party of them, when they think themselves injured, or to be in a
capacity, to Resist or Oppose the Supreme power of a Nation. For the Question
is not, if when they think themselves injured they may Resist? but when the
injuries are real: Neither is it every realitie of injuries will justify their
Resistance, but when their dearest and nearest Liberties are invaded,
especially when such an invasion is made, as threatens in^luctable subversion
of them. Next we do not say, that a parties esteeming themselves in a Capacity,
or their being really in a Capacity, does make Resistance a duty; except
caeteris Paribus they have a Call as well as a Capacity, which requires real
Necessity, and a right to the action, and the things contended for to be real
and legal Rights, really and illegally encroached upon: their Capacity gives
them only a Convenience to go about the duty, that is previously Lawful upon a
Moral ground. No man needs to say, who shall be Judge? the Magistrate or
people? For. 1. All who have eyes in their head may judge whether the sun shine
or not; and all who have common sense may judge in this case. For when it comes
to a Necessity of Resistance, it is to be supposed, that the Grievances
complained of, and sought to be redressed by arms, are not hid but manifest;
it cannot be so with any party only pretending their suffering wrong. 2. There
is no need of the formality of a Judge, in things evident to Natures eye, as
Grassant Tyranny undermining and overturning Religion and Liberty must be.
Nature, in the acts of necessitated Resistance in such a case, is Judge, party,
Accuser, Witness, and all. Neither is it an act of Judgment, for people to
defend their oun: Defense is no act of jurisdiction, but a privilege of
Nature. Hence these common sayings, vim vi repellere omnia jura permittunt; And
defendere se est juris Naturae: Defensio vitae necessaria est, and a jure
Naturali profluit. 3. Be Judge who will, the Tyrant cannot be Judge in the
case: for in these Tyrannical Acts, that force the people to that Resistance,
he cannot be acknowledged as King, and therefore no Judge: for its supposed,
the Judge is absent, when he is the party that does the wrong. And he that does
the wrong, as such, is inferior to the innocent. 4. Let God be Judge, and all
the World, taking cognizance of the evidence of their respective Manifesto's of
the State of their Cause.

6. We condemn Resing to revenge private injuries; whereby the Land may be
involved in blood, for some petty wrongs done to some persons, great or small:
And abhor revengful Usurping of the Magistrates sword, to avenge our selves for
personal injuries. As David's killing of Saul would have been 1 Samuel 24. 10, 12,
13. 1 Samuel 26. 9, 10. To Object which in this case, were very impertinent: for
it would have been an act of offense in a remote defense, if Saul had been
immediately asaulting him, it could not be denied to be Lawful: and it would
have been an act of private revenge, for a personal injury, and a sinful
preventing of Gods promise of David's succession, by a scandalous Assassination.
But it is clear, then David was Resisting him, and that is enough for us; and
he supposes he might descend into battle and perish 1 Samuel 26. 10. not
excluding, but that he might perish in battle against himself resisting him. We
are commanded indeed not to resist evil, but whosoever shall smite us on the
one check, to turn to him the other also, Math. 5. 39. and to recompense to no
man evil for evil Romans 12. 17. But this does not condemn self defense, or
Resisting Tyrants violently, endangering our Lives, Laws, Religion, and
Liberties, but only resistance by way of private revenge and retaliation, and
enjoins patience, when the clear call and dispensation do inevitably call into
suffering; but not to give way to all violence and Sacrilege, to the
subverting of Religion and Righteousness. These Texts do no more condemn
private persons retaliating the Magistrate, than Magistrates retaliating private
persons, unless Magistrates be exempted from this precept, and consequently be
not among Christ's followers: Yea they do no more forbid private persons to
resist the unjust violence of Magistrates, than to resist the unjust violence of
private persons. That Objection from our Lords reproving Peter Math. 26. 52.
Put up thy sword for all they that take the sword shall perish by the sword,
has no weight here: for this condemns only making use of the sword, either by
way of private revenge, or usurping the use of it without Authority (and so
condemns all Tyrants) which private subjects do not want to defend themselves,
their Religion and Liberty; or using it without necessity, which was not in
Peter's case, tum quia valebat Christus se ipsum defendere, tum quia volebat se
ipsum tradere, Pool Synops. Critic. in Locum. Christ could easily have defended
himself, but he would not; and therefore there was no necessity for Peter's
rashness; it condemns also a rash precipitating and preventing the Call of God
to acts of Resistance: But otherwise it is plain, it was not Peter's fault to
defend his Master, but a necessary duty. The reason our Lord gives for that
inhibition at that time, was two fold; one expressed Math. 26. 52. for they
that take the sword etc. Which do not belong to Peter, as if Peter were hereby
threatened; but to those that were coming to take Christ, they usurped the
sword of Tyrannical violence, and therefore are threatened with destruction by
the sword of the Romans: so is that commination to be understood of Antichrist,
and the Tyrants that serve him Rev. 13. 10. he that kills with the sword must
be killed with the sword, which is a terrible word against persecuters. The
other reason is John. 18. 11. -- The Cup which my Father has given me shall I
not drink? Which clearly resells that Objection of Christ's non-resistence. To
which it is answered, that suffering was the end of His voluntary suscepted
humiliation, and His errand to the World, appointed by the Father, and
undertaken by Himself; which is not the Rule of our practice: Tho it be true,
that even in His Sufferings He left us an ensample that we should follow His
steps 1 Pet. 2. 21. In many things, as He was a Martyr, His Sufferings were the
purest Rule and Example for us to follow, both for the matter, and frame of
Spirit, submission, patience, constancy, meekness etc. but not as He was our
Sponsor, and after the same manner, for then it were unlawful for us to flee,
as well as to resist, because He would not flee at that time.

7. As we are not for Rising in Arms for triffles of our oun things, or small
injuries done to our selves, but in a case of necessity for the preservation of
our Lives, Religion, Laws, and Liberties, when all that are dear to us as men
and as Christians are in hazard: So we are not for Rising up in Arms, to force
the Magistrate to be of our Religion, but to defend our Religion against his
force. We do not think it the way that Christ has appointed, to propogate
Religion by Arms: Let Persecuters and Limbs of Antichrist take that to them;
but we think it a Privilege which Christ has allowed us, to defend and
preserve our Religion by Arms: especially when it has been established by the
Laws of the Land, and become a Land-right, and the dearest and most precious
Right and Interest we have to contend for. It is true Christ says, John. 18.
36. My Kingdom is not of this world; if my Kingdom were of this world, then
would my Servants fight that I should not be delivered to the Jews. But this
Objection will not conclude, that Christ's Kingdom is not to be defended and
preserved even by Resistance, of all that would impiously and sacrilegiously
spoil us of it in this world, because it is not of this world: for then all
were obliged to suffer it to be run down, by slaves of Hell and Satan, and
Antichrists vassals, Papists and Malignants: Yea Magistrates were not to fight
for it, for they are among His Servants, if they be Christians. But the good
Confession He Witnesses here before Pilat, is that He has a Kingdom, which as
it is not in opposition to any Cesarean Majesty; So it must not be usurped
upon by any King of Clay, but is specifically distinct from all the Kingdoms of
the world, and subordinate to no earthly power, being of a Spiritual Nature;
whereof this is a demonstration, and sufficient security for earthly Kingdoms,
that His Servants as such, that is, as Christians, and as Ministers, were not
appointed by Him to propogate it by Arms, nor to deliver Him their King at
that time, because He would not suffer His Glorious design of Redemption to be
any longer retarded: but this does not say, but tho they are not to propogate
it as Christians, and as Ministers, by carnal weapons; yet they may preserve it
with such weapons as men. Hence that old saying may be vindicated, preces and
lachrimae sunt arma Ecclesiae, Prayers and tears are the Arms of the Church. I
grant they are so, the only best prevailing Arms, and without which all others
would be ineffectual, and that they (together with Preaching and Church
Discipline etc.) are the only Ecclesiastical or Spiritual Arms, of a Church as
a Church, but the Members thereof are also Men, and as men they may use the
same weapons that others do, And ye my flock the flock of my Pasture are men
says the Lord Ezekiel. 33. 31. Yea from this I shall take an Argument: It it be
Lawful for private Subjects, without the concurrence of Parliaments, to resist
a Tyrant by Prayers and tears; Then it is Lawful also to resist him by
violence; But the former is true, as our Adversaries grant by this Objection,
and I have proved it to be duty to pray against Tyrants Head 2. Ergo -- The
Connection is founded upon these reasons. 1. This personal Resistance by
violence, is as consistent with that Command Romans 13. 1, 2. Let every soul be
subject unto the higher Powers -- whosoever therefore resists the Power
resists the Ordinance of God; as Resistance by Prayer is with that 1 Timothy 2.
1, 2. I exhort -- that -- Supplications -- be made -- for Kings and for all
that are in Authority. If the Prince be good, the one as is unlawful as the
other; and a sinful resistance of the Ordinance of God (to pray against him) no
less than the other (to fight against him) Therefore when he becomes a Tyrant
and destroyer of the Lords Inheritance, and an Apostate, as I may not pray for
him except conditionally, but against him as an Enemy of Christ; so I may also
fight against him as such. 2. As Adversaries themselves will grant, that
Resistance by Prayers and tears is more powerful and effectual than the other;
So the Laws of the Land make the one treasonable as well as the other; and that
deservedly, when the Prince is doing his duty, but when he turns Tyrant,
neither can justly be condemned.

These things being premitted, I shall come shortly to the purpose, and
endeavor to prove this Truth,, That it is a necessary duty for a Community
(whether they have the Concurrence of the Primores, Nobles and Representatives
or not) to endeavor, in the defense of their Religion, Lives, Laws, and
Liberties, to Resist and Repress the Usurpation and Tyranny of prevailing
Dominators, using or abusing their Power, for subverting Religion, invading the
Liberties, and overturning the foundamental Laws of their Country. Wherein I
shall be but short, because this Truth is sufficiently confirmed by all the
Arguments of the Second Head. Yet I may only hint at many other; And prosecute
them in this Order. First I shall produce some Arguments from the Law of Nature
and Nations. Secondly from the Common practice of all Christian people. Thirdly
from express Scriptures.

I. The Arguments of the first Class are very multifarious: I shall reduce them
to a few, as Compendiously as may be, and only give the strength of them in a
Syllogistical form, without expatiating save where the matters requires.

1. The greatest Antagonists of this Truth, through the clearness thereof are
forced to assert and grant such particulars, as will by Consequence justify
this plea. 1. Barclay contra Monarchum. is cited by the Apol. Relat. and Ius
Populi asserting, that if a King will alienate and subject his Kingdom, without
his Subjects consent, or be carried with a hostile mind to the destruction of
his people, his Kingdom is actually lost, and the people may not only Lawfully
resist, but also depose him. Grotius de jure belli lib. 1. cap. 4. asserts the
same, and adds, if he but attempt to do so he may be resisted. The Surveyer of
Nap^tali grants the same page 23, 24. Yea this has been granted in open Court,
by the Council of Scotland, that in case of the Kings alienating his Kingdoms,
he may be Resisted. Hence (1 If vendition or alienation of Kingdoms, or
attempts of it, do annull a Kings Authority; Then an alienation of them from
Christ, to whom they are devoted by Covenant, and selling them to Antichrist,
as is attempted by this King, gives the people a right to Resist him: But the
former is here conceded: Ergo -- (2) We need say no more to apply the other,
that carrying a hostile mind to the destruction of the people does forfeit his
Kingdom, and gives the people right to Resist, than that a Papist is alwise
known to carry a hostile mind to the destruction of Protestants, and all the
designs declared these 27 years have been demonstrative efforts of it. 2. Dr
Fern acknowledges, that personal defense is Lawful against the sudden,
illegal, and inevitable assaults of the Kings Messengers, or of himself in so
far as to ward off his blows, or hold his hands. As also he allows private
persons Liberty, to deny subsidies and tribute to the Prince, when he
imployeth it to the destruction of the Commonwealth. Hence (1) If one man may
defend himself against the sudden, illegal, and inevitable assaults of the King
or his Messengers; Then may many men, in defense of their Lives and Liberties,
defend themselves against the surprising Massacres, the sudden assaults, and
much more the devised and deliberate assaults of a Tyrants bloody Emissaries,
which are illegal and inevitable, as all their furious and bloody on-sets have
been: But the former is here acknowledged: Ergo -- (2) If people may deny
subsidies to a King when he employeth it, to the destruction of the
Commonwealth; Then (as this justifies the denial of the Cess, imposed for
destruction of the Church and banishing of the Gospel, So) this gives them
right to Resist him (for if he be the power ordained of God not to be resisted,
then for this Cause tribute must be paid, for they are Gods Ministers Romans 13.
6. and if tribute must not be paid then he is not the power ordained of God,
and so may be resisted) But the former is here allowed; Ergo -- 3. Bodin de
Repub. lib. 2. cap. 5. grants, if a King turn Tyrant, he may Lawfully, at his
subjects request, be invaded, resisted, condemned, or slain by a foraign
Prince. Hence, if foraign Princes may Lawfully help a people oppressed by their
oun Sovereign; then people may Resist themselves, if they be able and hold in
their pains: But the former is here granted: Ergo -- The Consequence cannot be
denied, for foraigners have no more Power or Authority over another Sovereign,
then the people have themselves. 4. Arnisaeus de Author Princip. c. 2. n. 10.
grants, that if the Prince proceed extrajudicially, without order of Law, by
violence, every private man has power to resist. So the Surveyer of Naphtali
ubi supra grants so much of a woman's violent resisting attempts, against the
honor of her chastity, and tending to ensnare her in sin, whereof her
non-resistence makes her guilty. Hence (1) If every extrajudicial violence of a
Prince may be Resisted; Then also all Contrajudicial violence against Law or
reason must be opposed, for that is more grievous, and all their violences
wherein they do not act as Judges must be resisted, and that is all together,
for in none of them they can act as Judges: But the former is here granted:
Ergo -- (2) If a woman may defend her Chastity against the K. lest her
non-resistence make her guilty (Oh if all women had been of this mind, the
Country would not have been pestered so with the Kings bastards) Then may a
Nation, or any part of it, Resist a Tyrants attempts upon the honor of their
Religion, entycing them to fornication with the Mother of harlots, lest their
non-resistence make them guilty: But the former is here yielded: Ergo -- 5.
That same Arnisaeus cap. 4. says, Of the former (to wit, he who is called a
Tyrant in title) it is determined by all without any difficulty, that he may
be Lawfully repulsed, or if by force he be gotten into the Throne, he may
warrantably be thence removed, because he has not any Jot of power which is
not illegitimate, and unto which resistance is forbidden for the fear of God
and for conscience sake, and therefore he is no further to be looked at than as
an enemy. This is so pat and pertinent to the present possessor of the
Government, that no words can more particularly apply it. 6. Grotius de jure
belli Lib. 1. c. 4. grants, the Law of not resisting does not bind when the
danger is most weighty and certain. And we do not plead for it in any other
case. And further he says, The Law of non-resistence seems to have flowed
from them, who first combined together into society, and from whom such as did
command did derive their power: Now if it had been asked of such, whether they
would choose to die, rather than in any case to resist the Superior with Arms?
I know not if they would have yielded thereto, unless with this addition, if
they could not be resisted but with the greatest perturbation of the
Commonwealth and destruction of many Innocents. And afterward he has these
words, Attamen indiscriminatim dam^are aut singulos, aut partem minorem, quae
ultimo necessitatis praesidio sic utatur, ut interim and communis boni
respectum non deseruit, vix ausim. From which we need make no inference, the
Concession is so large, that it answers our case. 7. The Surveyer of Naphtali,
in the place above cited, grants Legal self defense against the Sovereign, by
way of plea in Court, for safety of a man's person or estate -- as also in the
case of most habited, notour, and Complete Tyranny against Law, to the
destruction of the body of a people, and of all known Legal Liberties, and the
being of Religion according to Law -- And in case of his not being in his
natural and right wits -- Hence (1) If it be Lawful to resist the King by a
Plea in Law, for an Estate (yea the Law will allow, by actual force, if he come
to take possession of it illegally) Then it must be Lawful for their lives and
estates, Liberties and Religion, to resist him by force, when the Legal
resistance is not admitted: But the former, is yielded here: Ergo -- The reason
of the Connection is: The Municipal Law permits the one, and the Law of Nature
and Nations (which no Municipal Law can infringe) will warrant the other: He
has no more right to be both Judge and Party in this case, more than in the
other: And he can no more act as Sovereign in this case, than in the other. (2)
If it be Lawful to resist habited, notour, and Complete Tyranny against Law, to
the destruction of the body of a people, and of all known legal Liberties, and
the being of Religion, according to Law; Then we desire no more to conclude the
duty of resisting this Tyranny exerced this 27 years habitually, which the
desolation of many hindered families, the banishment of many hundreds to
slavery, the rivers of blood etc. have made Notour to all Scotland at least,
and the perversion of all the fundamental Laws, and all Civil and Religious
Liberties, yea the subversion of every remaining Model of Our Religion, as
Reformed and Covenanted to be preserved, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government, and designs to introduce Popery and establish Arbitrary Government,
have made Complete: But the former is here granted, Ergo -- (3) If in the case
of his being out of his wits, he should run upon an innocent man to kill him,
or attempt to cut his oun throat, it were then Lawful to resist him* yea a sin
not to do it; Then when in a rage, o^ deliberately, he is seeking to destroy
many hundreds of the people of God, he may be resisted: But the former is
clear: Ergo -- 8. King James the Sixth, in his Remonstrance for the right of
Kings, against the Oration of Cardinal Perron, has these words, The public
Laws makes it Lawful, and free for any private person, to enterprise against an
Usurper of the Kingdom. Then shall it not be duty, to enterprise against a man,
who by the Laws of the Land is not capable of a right to reign, who has got
into the Throne by the means of Murder, and can pretend no right but that of
Succession, which I proved to be none, Head. 2. However we see by these
Concessions of Adversaries, that the Absolute subjection they talk of will not
hold, nor the prerogative be so incontrollable in every case, as they would
pretend, and that in many cases, Salus populi has the Supremacy above it, And
that also in these cases the people must be Judges, whether they may resist or
not.

2. From the Law of Nature I may argue. 1. If God, the fountain of all power
and Author of all Right, has given unto man both the power and the right of,
and reason to manage self defense, and has no ways interdicted it in His Word
to be put forth against Tyrants; Then it is duty to use it against them upon
occasion: But the former is true: Ergo -- 2. If this power and right were
restrained in man against the unjust violence of any, it would either be by
Policy, or Grace, or some express prohibition in the Word of God: But none of
these can be said: Ergo -- Policy cannot destroy nature, but is rather
cumulative to it; A man entering into a Politic Incorporation, does not lose
the privilege of nature: If one particular nature may defend it self against
destroying violence out of Society, then must many of these Natures combined
in Society have the same right, and so much the more that their relative
duties superadde an obligation of mutual assistence. Grace does not restrain
the right of sinless nature, though it restrains corruption: but self defense
is no corruption: Grace makes a man more a man than he was. And nothing can be
more dishonorable to the Gospel, than that by the Law of Nature it is Lawful
to resist Tyrants, but we are bound by Religion from withstanding their
Cruelty: The Laws of God do not interf^^e ^ne with another. 3. That Law which
allows comparative re-offending, so as to kill rather than be killed,
teaches Resistance: But so the Law of Nature allows, except we be guilty or
Murder in the culpable omission of self defense. The reason is, because the
love of self is nearer and greater, as to temporal life, than the love of our
Neighbor; that being the measure of this: Therefore it obliges rather to kill
than be killed, the exigence of necessity so requiring. 4. If nature put no
difference between the violence of a Tyrant than of another man; then it
teaches to Resist both alike: But it puts no difference, but rather
aggravates that of a Tyrant; being the violence of a man, the injustice of a
member of the Commonwealth, and the cruelty of a Tyrant. And it were absurd to
say, we might defend our selves from the lesser violence, and not from the
greater. 5. If particular Nature must yield to the good of Universal nature;
then must one man, though in greatest power, be Resisted, rather than the
Universal Commonwealth suffer hurt: But the former is true; for that dictates
the necessity of the distracted father to be bound by his oun sons, lest all
the family be hurt: Ergo the greatest of men or Kings, when destructive to the
Commonwealth, must be Resisted; for he is but one man, and so but particular
nature. 6. That which is irrational, and reflects upon Providence, as putting
men in a worse condition then Brutes, is absurd and contrary to the Law of
Nature: But to say, that the Brutes have power to defend themselves by
resisting what annoyes them, and deny this power to men, is irrational and
reflects upon Providence, as putting men in a worse condition than Brutes:
Therefore it is absurd, and contrary to the Law of Nature.

3. From the Institution of Government I may argue thus: That power and
Government which is not of God may be Resisted: The Tyrants power and
Government, in overturning Laws, subverting Religion, bringing in Idolatry,
oppressing Subjects, is not of God: Ergo it may be Resisted: The Major is
clear, because that is only the reason why he is not to be resisted, because
the Ordinance of God is not to be resisted Romans 13. 2. But they that resist a
man destroying all the Interests of mankind, overturning Laws, subverting
Religion etc. do not resist the Ordinance of God. And if it were not so, this
would tend irremedilessly to overthrow all Policies, and open a gap to all
disorder, injustice, and cruelty, and would give as great encouragment to
Tyrants to do what they lift, as thieves would be encouraged, if they knew no
body would resist them or bring them to punishment.

4. From the Original Constitution of Government by men, It may be argued thus:
If people at the first erection of Government acted rationally, and did not put
themselves in a worse case than before, wherein it was Lawful to defend
themselves against all injuries, but devolved their rights upon the fiduuciary
Tutory of such, as should remain still in the rank of men, that can do wrong,
who had no power but by their gift, consent, and choice, with whom they
associated not to their detriment but for their advantage, and determined the
form of their Government, and time of its continuance, and in what cases they
might recur to their primeve Liberty, and settled a succession to have Course
not jure hereditario but jure and vi legis, for good ends; Then they did not
give away their birthright of self defense, and power of resistance, which
they had before to withstand the violence, injuries, and oppressions of the men
they set over them, when they pervert the form and convert it to Tyranny, but
did retain a power and privilege to resist and revolt from them, and repel
their violence when they should do violence to the Constitution, and pervert
the ends thereof: But the former is true. Ergo -- The Minor is cleared Head. 2.
And the Connection is confirmed from this; if the Estates of a Kingdom give the
power to a King, it is their oun power in the fountain, and if they give it for
their oun good, they have power to judge when it is used against themselves,
and for their evil; and so power to limit and resist the power that they gave.

5. From the way and manner of erecting Governors by Compact, the necessity
whereof is proven Head. 2. Many arguments might be deduced; I shall reduce them
to this form: If people must propose Conditions unto Princes, to be by them
acquiesced in and submitted unto at their Admission to the Government, which
thereupon becomes the fundamental Laws of the Government, and Securities for
the peoples rights and Liberties, giving a Law Claim to the people to pursue
the Prince, in case of fai^ing in the main and principal thing Covenanted, as
their oun Covenanted Mandatarius who has no Ius or Authority of his oun, but
what he has from them, and no more power but what is contained in the
Conditions, upon which he undertaketh the Government; Then when either an
Usurper will come under no such conditions, or a Tyrant does break all these
conditions, which he once accepted, and so become stricto jure no Prince, and
the people be stricto jure Liberated from subjection to him, they may and must
Defend themselves and their fundamental Rights and Privileges, Religion and
Laws, and Resist the Tyanny overturning them: But the former is true Ergo --
The Connection is clear: And the Minor is proved Head. 2. And at length
demonstrated and applied to the Government of Charles the Second by Ius Populi.
cap. 6. See Arg. 4. and 5. Head. 2.

6. From the Nature of Magistracy it may be argued thus. That power which is
properly neither Parental, nor Marital, nor Masterly, and Despotick, over the
Subjects Persons and goods, but only fiduciary and by way of trust, is more to
be Resisted than that which is properly so: But that power which is properly
so, that is Parental power, and Marital, and Masterly, may be Resisted in many
cases: Ergo that power which is not so properly, but only fiduciary is more to
be Resisted. That a Kings power over his subjects is neither Parental, nor
Marital, etc. is proven Head. 2. And the Major needs no Probation. The Minor is
clear by Instances. 1. If Children may in case of necessity resist the fury of
their father, seeking to destroy them; then must private subjects Resist the
rage and Tyranny of Princes, seeking to destroy them, and what is dearest to
them; for there is no stricter obligation Moral between King and people, than
between Parents and Children, nor so strict; and between Tyrants and people
there is none at all: But the former cannot be denied: Ergo -- 2. If Wives may
Lawfully defend themselves against the unjust violence of enraged Husbands;
then must private subjects have power to Resist the furious assaults of enraged
Tyrants, for there is not so great a tie betwixt them and people, as between
man and wife; yea there is none at all: But the former is true: Ergo -- 3. If
Servants may defend themselves against their Masters; then must private
subjects defend themselves against a Tyrant or his Emissaries: But the former
is true: Ergo -- 4. If the Kings power be only fiduciary, and by way of Paun,
which he has got to keep; then when that power is manifestly abused, to the
hurt of them that entrusted him with it, he ought to be Resisted by all whom he
undertook to protect: But the former is true: Ergo the latter.

7. From in the Limited power of Princes it may be thus argued: If Princes be
limited by Laws and Contracts, and may be resisted by Plea's in Law, and have
no absolute power to do and command what they will, but must be limited both by
the Laws of God and man, and cannot make what Laws they will in prejudice of
the peoples Rights, nor execute the Laws made according to their pleasure, nor
conser on others a Lawless license to oppress whom they please; Then when they
turn Tyrants, and arrogate a Lawless Absoluteness, and cross the Rules and
transgress the Bounds prescribed by Gods Law and man's Law, and make their oun
lust a Law, and execute the same arbitrarly, They must be Resisted by force,
when a legal resistance cannot be had, in defense of Religion and Liberty: But
all Princes are limited etc. Ergo -- The Minor is proved Head. 2. And the
Connection may be thus confirmed in short: That power which is not the Ordinance
of God may be resisted: But an absolute illimited power, crossing the Rules and
transgressing the bounds prescribed by Gods Law and man's, is not the Ordinance
of God: Ergo it may be Resisted.

8. Further from the Rule of Government it may be argued several ways. 1. That
power which is contrary to Law, evil and Tyrannical, can tie none to
subjection, but if it oblige to anything, it ties to Resistance: But the power
of a King against Law, Religion, and the Interests of the subjects, is a power
contrary to Law, evil and Tyrannical: Ergo -- The Major is plain, for
Wickedness can tie no man but to resist it: That power which is contrary to Law
evil and Tyrannical is Wickedness. 2. That power and those Acts, which neither
King can exerce nor command, nor others execute, nor any obey, must certainly
be Resisted: But such is the power and Acts that oppress the subjects, and
overturn Religion and Liberty: Ergo -- The Minor is evident from Scriptures
condemning oppression and violence, both in them that command, and in them that
execute the same, and also them that obey such wicked commands. The Major is
clear from Reason: both because such power and such Acts as cannot be
commanded, cannot be executed, cannot be obeyed Lawfully, are sinful and
wicked; and because it cannot be a Magistratical power, for that may always be
exerced and executed Lawfully. And what a man cannot command, the resisting of
that he cannot punish: But acts of oppression against Law, Religion, and
Liberty, a man cannot command. Ergo the Resisting of these he cannot punish. 3.
That Government or Administration, which is not subordinate to the Law and Will
of God, who has appointed it, must be Resisted; But that Government or
Administration, which undermines or overturnes Religion and Liberty, is not
subordinate to the Law and Will of God: Ergo -- The Major is clear: for nothing
but what is the Ordinance of God, subordinate to His Law and Will, is
irresistible Romans 13. 2. The Assumption is undeniable.

9. From the Ends of Government, which must be acknowledged by all to be, the
Glory of God, and the Good of Mankind: yea all that have been either wise or
honest, have always held that Salus Populi est Suprema Lex, The Arguments may
run thus, in short. 1. That Doctrine which makes the Holy one to cross His oun
ends in giving Governors, must be absurd and Unchristian, as well as
irrational: But such is the Doctrine that makes all Kings and Tyrants
irresistible upon any pretense whatsoever. Ergo -- The minor I prove: That
Doctrine which makes God intending His oun Glory and the peoples good, to give
Governors both as Fathers to preserve and as Murderers to destroy them, must
make the Holy one to cross His oun ends; for these are Contradictory: But the
Doctrine that makes all Kings and Tyrants irresistible etc. is such: For by
Office they are Fathers to preserve, and by Office also they must be Murderers,
vested with such a power from God actu primo, if they be irresistible when they
do so; seeing every power that is irresistible is the Ordinance of God. Hence
also when a Blessing turns a Curse it is no more the Ordinance of God, but to
be resisted: But when a King turns a Tyrant, overturning Religion and Liberty,
then a Blessing turns a Curse: Ergo -- 2. Means are to be Resisted, when they
are not useful for but destructive to the ends they were appointed for: But
Governors overturning Religion and Liberty, are Means not useful for, but
destructive to the ends for which they were appointed, Seeing then they are
neither for the Glory of God, nor the good of Mankind. Ergo -- 3. If all powers
and Prerogatives of men, are only means appointed for and should veil unto the
Supreme Law of the peoples Safety, and all Laws be subordinate to and
corroborative of this Law, and when cross to it are eatenus null and no Laws,
and all Law-formalities in Competition with it are to be laid aside, and all
Parliamentary privileges must yield to this, and King and Parliament both
conspiring have no power against it, and no Sovereign power by virtue of any
resignation from the people can comprize any Authority to act against it; Then
it is duty to obey this Supreme Law, in Resisting all powers and Prerogatives,
all Laws and Law-formalities, and all conspiracies whatsoever against this
Supreme Law, the Safety of the people: But the former is true, as was proven
Head. 2. Ergo -- 4. That power which is obliged and appointed to command and
rule, Justly and Religiously, for the good of the people, and is only set over
them on these conditions, and for that end, cannot tie them to subjection
without Resistance, when the power is abused to destruction of Laws: Religion,
and people: But all power is so obliged and appointed: Therefore whenever it
is so abused it cannot tie people to subjection, but rather oblige them to
Rejection of it.

10. From the Obedience required to Government, It may be argued thus. 1. If we
may flee from Tyrants, then we may Resist them: But we may flee from Tyrants:
Ergo we may Resist them. The Connection I prove (1) If all grounds of Justice
will warrant the one as well as the other, then if the one be duty so is the
other: But the former is true: For the same justice and equity that warrands
declining a Tyrants unjust violence by flight, will warrant Resistance when
flight will not do it; The same Principle of self defense, that makes flight
duty when Resistance is not possible, will aso make Resistance duty when flight
is not possible; The same Principle of Charity to Wives and Children, that
makes flight Lawful when by Resistance they cannot avoid Tyranny, will make
Resistance duty when by flight they cannot evite it; The same Principle of
Conscience to keep Religion free, that prompts to flight when Resistance will
not save it, will also prompt to Resist when flight is not practicable. (2) If
to flee from a just power, when in Justice we are obnoxious to its sword, be to
resist the Ordinance of God and so sin; then to flee from an unjust power must
be also a Resisting of the abusing of it, and so duty, for the one is
Resistance as the other, but the difference of the power resisted makes the one
Lawful the other not: Again, if Royal power may be resisted by interposing seas
and miles, why not also by interposing walls and arms? both is resistance, for
against a Lawful Magistrate that would be resistance. (3) If a Tyrant has
irresistible power to kill and destroy the people, he has also irresistible
power to cite and summond them before him; and if it be unlawful to resist his
murders, it must be as unlawful to resist his summonds. (4) For a Church or
Community of Christians persecuted for Religion, to flee with Wives and
Children, strong and weak, old and young, to escape Tyrannical violence, and
leave the Land, were more unlawful than to Resist: For what is not possible as
a Natural means of preservation, is not a Lawful mean; but this were not a
possible mean: Neither is it warranted in Natures Law, or Gods Word, for a
Community or Society of Christians, that have Gods Right and man's Law to the
Land and the Covenanted Privileges thereof, to leave the Country and Cause of
Christ, and all in the hands of a Tyrant and Papist, to set up Idolatry upon
the ruins of Reformation there. A private man may flee, but flight is not
warranted of them as of a private single man. 2. If it be duty to disobey, its
duty to Resist Tyrants, in defense of Religion and Liberty: But it is duty to
disobey them. Ergo -- The Connection only will be stuck at which is thus
strengthened: If subjection be no more pressed in Scripture than obedience,
then if non-obedience be duty, non-subjection must be so also, and consequently
Resistance: But subjection is no more pressed in Scripture than obedience: For
all Commands of subjection to the Higher powers as Gods Ministers, under pain
of damnation, do only respect Lawful Magistrates, and in Lawful things and do
include obedience; and non-obedience to the power so qualified is a resisting
of the Ordinance of God, as well as non-subjection: If then obedience to
Magistrates be duty, and non-obedience sin, and obedience to Tyrants sin and
non-obedience duty; Then by Parity of reason, subjection to Magistrates is duty
and non-subjection is sin, and also subjection to Tyrants is sin and
non-subjection duty.

11. From the Resistance allowed in all Governments, it may be argued thus: If
it be duty to defend our Religion, Lives, and Liberties, against an invading
army of Cutthroat Papists, Turks, or Tartars, without or against the
Magistrates warrant; Then it must be duty to defend the same against invading
homebred Tyrants, except we would subscribe our selves home-born slaves: But
the former is true: Ergo -- The Minor cannot be doubted; because the Magistrates
power cannot be privative and destructive to defense of our Religion, Lives,
and Liberties; nor can it take away Natures birthright to defend these; or
make it fare the worse than if we had no Magistrates at all, now if we had no
Magistrates at all we might defend these against Invaders, and whether we have
Magistrates or not we are under Moral obligations of the Law of God to endeavor
the defense of these: But this needs not be insisted on. The Connection of the
Proposition is clear: If Princes be more Tyrannical in invading Religion and
Liberties themselves, than in suffering others to do it, or hindering them to
be opposed; And if their invasion be more Tyrannical, hurtful, and dangerous
than the invasion of Strangers; Then if it be duty to resist Strangers invading
these Interests, it is more duty to Resist homebred Tyrants invading the same:
But the former is true: Therefore the latter. Resisting in the one case is no
more Resisting the Ordinance of God than in the other.

12. From the Motives of Resistance we may draw this Argument, which might be
branched out into several, but I shall reduce it to this Complexe one: If when
we are in a Capacity, we cannot acquit our selves in the duties that we owe to
our Covenanted Religion, and our Covenanted Brethren, and Posterity, and our
selves, nor absolve and exoner our selves from the sin and Judgment of Tyrants,
who overturn Religion, oppress our Brethren, impose slavery on our selves, and
entail it upon Posterity, by a Passive subjection, submission to, and not
opposing these mischiefs; Then Resistance is necessary: But the former is true:
Ergo -- The Connection is clear: for there cannot be a Medium; if we cannot
discharge these duties by subjection, submission, and not opposing; then we
must do them by non-subjection, non-submission, and opposing; since they must
be done some way. The Assumption is thus confirmed. 1. The duties we owe to
Religion, when it is corrupted, declined from, and overturned, are not only to
Reform our oun hearts and ways, and keep our selves Pure from the Corruptions
established, and to rebuke and witness against the Complyers with the same, and
so by work, doing and suffering, keep and contend for the Word of our
Testimony; But further, when by the Constitution of the Kingdom Religion is
become a fundamental Law, and consequently the Magistrate overturning it, is
violating and everting the main grounds and ends of the Government, and turning
grassant and ingrained Tyrant, especially when it is not only so Authorized and
Confirmed by Law, but Corroberated by solemn vows and Covenants made and sworn
unto God by all ranks of people, to maintain and defend this Religion with
their lives and fortunes -- and resist all contrary errors and corruptions
according to their vocation; and the uttermost of that power that God puts in
their hands, all the days of their lives, As also mutually to defend and
assist one another. (as in the National Covenant) And sincerely, really, and
constantly endeavor -- the Preservation of the Reformed Religion in Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline, and Government, the extirpation of Popery, Prelacie etc
-- and to assist and defend all those that enter into the same bond in the
maintaining thereof -- (as in the Solemn League) Then to defend and maintain
that Religion and themselves Professing it; when it is sought to be razed; This
must be an Interest as necessary to be defended, as that of our bodies which is
far inferior, and as necessary a duty, as to defend our Natural and Civil
Liberties from perpetual slaverie, and as preferrable thereunto, as Christ
Interest is to man's, and as the end of all self preservation is to the means of
it, the preservation of Religion being the end of all self preservation: But
this duty cannot be discharged without Resistance, in a mere Passive subjection
and submission; Otherwise the same might be discharged in our universal
submission to Turks coming to destroy our Religion. Certainly this Passive way
cannot answer the duty of Pleading for Truth Isai. 59. 4. seeking the Truth
Ier. 5. 1. being valiant for it Ier. 9. 3. making up the hedge, standing in the
Gap etc. Ezekiel. 22. 30. which yet are necessary incumbent duties according to
our Capacity; Therefore we cannot answer the duties we owe to Religion in a
mere Passive way. 2. The duty we owe to our Covenanted Brethren, is to assist
and defend them, and relieve them when oppressed, as we are bound by our
Covenants, and antecedently by the Royal Law of Christ, the foundation of all
Righteousness among men toward each other, Math. 7. 12. All things whatsoever
ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them -- We would have them
helping us when we are oppressed, so should we do to them when it is in the
power of our hands to do it, and not forbear to deliver them for fear the Lord
require their blood at our hand, Prove. 24. 11, 12. But this cannot be done by
mere subjection with out Resistance. 3. There is no way to free our selves of
the sin and judgment of Tyrants by mere Passive subjection: We find in the
Scriptures, people have been so involved and punished for the sins of Tyrants;
As the people of Judah for Manasseh 2 King. 21. 11. etc. Ier. 15. 4. whose sins
if they had not been committed, the judgments for them had been prevented, and
if the people had hindered them they had not smarted; But being jointly
included with their Rulers in the same bond of fidelity to God, and made
accountable as joint Principals with their Kings for that debt, by their Mutual
as well as Several engagments to walk in His Ways, they were liable to be
punished for their Rebellion and Apostasy, because they did not hinder it.
Hence somewhat must be done to free our selves of their sin and to escape
their Judgments: But this can be nothing else but opposition to them by
Resistance; or else if we make any other opposition, it will make us more a
prey to their fury.

II. Secondly this Truth is Confirmed from the Common Practice of the people of
God, even under Persecution. Whence I shall draw an Argument ab Exemplis, which
to condemn were impious, and to deny were most impudent. And for forms sake,
it may run thus: What the people of God under both Testaments have frequently
done, in time of Persecution, for defending, vindicating, or recovering their
Religion and Liberties, may and ought to be done again in the like
Circumstances, when these are in the like hazard: But under both Testaments,
the people of God frequently in times of Persecution have defended, vindicated,
or Recovered their Religion and Liberties by defensive Arms, Resisting the
Sovereign powers that sought to dostroy them: Ergo this may and ought to be
done again when these Religious Civil and natural privileges, are in the like
hazard to be destroyed by the violent encroachments of the Sovereign powers.
The Proposition cannot be denied, except by them that do profess themselves
enemies to the people of God, and condemn their most frequently reiterated
practices most solemnly and signally ouned of God, to the confusion of their
enemies, to the conviction of the World, that the Cause for which they
contended was of God, and to the encouragment of all the Patrons of such a
Cause, to hope that when it is at the lowest it shall have a Revival and
Glorious Issue. It is true sometimes they did not Resist, when either they were
not in a Capacity, or did not see a Call to such an Action, but were
extraordinarly Spirited of the Lord for Passive Testimonies under a suffering
dispensation: But it is as true, that many times they did Resist, when the Lord
capacitated, called, and Spirited them for Active Testimonies. And therefore,
if their Suffering under these Circumstances may be imitated by a people so
stated; Then also their Actions under these other Circumstances may be
imitated, by a people in the like case. And by an impartial Scrutiny it will be
found, that the examples of their endeavored Resistance will be little
inferior, if not superior in number or importance, to the examples of their
submissive Sufferings in all ages: Which will appear in the Probation of the
Assumption, by adduction of many Instances, which I shall only cursorly glean
out of that plentiful harvest that Histories afford.

1. I need only to glance at that known and famous History of the Maccabees, of
undoubted verity, though not of Cannonical Authority. In which, according to
Scripture Predictions, we have a notable account of Heroic Interprizes,
Atchievments, and Exploits, performed by them that knew their God, and tendered
His Glory and their Religion and Countries Liberties, above the Common
Catechrestick notions of incontrollable irresistible Royalty, and absolute
implicit Loyalty, that have abused the world in all ages. We have there an
account of the noble and successful Resistance of a party of a few Godly and
zealous Patriots, without the concurrence of Civil Authority, or countenance of
the Ephori or Primores regni, against a King universally acknowledged and
subjected unto, that came in Peaceably, and obtained the Kingdom by fl^tt^ries,
with whom the greatest part and those of the greatest note took part, and did
wickedly against the Covenant and Nations Interest, and were corrupt by
flatteries: Yet a few Priests, with the concurrence of some common Countrymen,
did go to arms against him and them; And the Lord did wonderfully assist them
for a considerable time, as was foretold by Daniel. 11. This fell out under the
persecution of Antiochus Epiphanes, and was happily begun by Mathias a Godly
Priest, and his five Sons, who being commanded under severe Certifications to
Worship according to the then Law and the Kings wicked lust, did valiantly
resist that abomination, and went to defensive arms: which while living he
Patronized, and when adying did encourage his sons to it by a notable Oration,
showing what case his Country was in, and what a duty and dignity it was to
redeem and deliver it. This was vigorously prosecuted by Judas Maccabeus,
expressly for the quarrel of Religion and Liberty, against that mighty Tyrant
and all his Emissaries.

2. To come to the History of the Gospel Dispensation: It is true, in that time
of the Primitive Persecutions under Heathen Emperors, this Privilege of Self
Defense was not much improved or contended for by Christians, who studied more
to play the Martyrs than to play the Men, because in these Circumstances the
Lord was pleased to Spirit for and call them unto, and accept off their hands,
passive Testimonies; while they were incorporate under a Civil relation with
the Heathens, in subjection to Governors who did not by open Tyranny overturn
their Civil Liberties, only did endeavor to eradicate Religion, which at that
time had never become their Right by Law; while they were scattered and out of
Capacity, and never could come to a separate formed Community by joint
Concurrence and Correspondence, to undertake a Declared Resistance; while
Religion was only a propagating through the Nations, and the Lord
Providentially did preclude the least appearance that might be of propagating
it by any formed force, being the Gospel of Peace designed to save and not to
destroy: Yet even then, Instances are not wanting of Christians Resisting their
Enemies, and of Rescuing their Ministers etc. As these are found on record. 1.
How some inhabiting Mareots, with force rescued Dyonisi^^ of Alexandria, out of
the hands of such as were carrying him away, about the year 235. 2. How about
the year 310. the Armenians waged war against Maximus, who was come against
them with an Army, because of their Religion. 3. How about the year 342. the
Citizens of Alexandria defended Athanasius their Minister, against Gregorius
the intruded Curate, and Syrianus the Emperors Captain, who came with great
force to put him in. 4. How about the year 356. the people of Constantinople
did in like manner stand to the defense of Paulus, against Constantius the
Emperor, and killed his Captain Hermogenes: And afterward in great Multitudes
they opposed the intrusion of the Heretic Macedonius. 5. How, when a wicked
Edict was sent forth to pull down the Churches of such as were for the Clause
of one Substance, the Christians that maintained that Testimony resisted the
bands of Soldiers, that were procured at the Emperors Command by Macedonius,
to force the Mantinians to embrace the Arrian Heresy: But the Christians at
Mantinium, kindled with an earnest zeal toward Christian Religion, went
against the Soldiers with Cheerful minds and valiant Courage, and made a great
slaughter of them. 6. How about the year 387. the people of Cesarea did defend
Basil their Minister. 7. How for fear of the people, the Lieutenant of the
Emperor Valens, durst not execute those 80 Priests who had came to supplicate
the Emperor, and were commanded to be killed by him. 8. How the Inhabitants of
Mount Nitria espoused Cyril^s quarrel, and assaulted the Lieutenant and forced
his Guards to flee. 9. How about the year 404. when the Emperor had banished
Chrysostom, the people flocked together, so that the Emperor was necessitated
to call him back again from his Exile. 10. How the people resisted also the
transportation of Ambrose by the command of Valentinian the Emperor; And
chused rather to lose their lives, than to suffer their pastor to be taken away
by the Soldiers. 11. How the Christians, oppressed by Baratanes King of
Persia, did flee to the Romans to seek their help. And Theodosius, the
Emperor, is much praised for the war which he commenced against Chosroes King
of Persia, upon this inducement, that that King sought to ruin and exstirpate
those Christians in his Dominions, that would not renounce the Gospel.

3. But when Religion was once embraced in imbodyed Corporations, and
established by Law, and became a peoples common Interest and Liberty, in a
Capacity to defend it with their lives and other Liberties, and when it was
propagated through the Nations: Then the Lord did call for other more Active
Testimonies, in the preservation and defense of it: Of which we have many
Instances in Histories. About the year 894. The Bohemian Christians Resisted
Drahomica their Queen, who thought to have destroyed them and reintroduced
Paganism. About the year 1420. they maintained a long defensive war against
the Government, and the Popes Legates, under the managment of their brave
Captain Zizca; which was further prosecuted after him by the remaining
Thaborites. And again in this Century, anno 1618. They maintained a Defensive
war against the Emperor Ferdinand the Second, electing and erecting a new King
in opposition to him, Frederick Palatine of the Rhine, in which Cause many
received the Crown of Martyrdom: and this was also espoused by King James the
6. who sent to aid his Son in Law against the Emperor.

4. If we look to the Histories of the Waldenses, these constant Opposers of
Antichrist, we will find many Instances of their Resistance. About the year
1194. very early, while Waldo (from whom they had their name) was alive, they
began to defend themselves by Arms, after the bloody Edict of Aldephonsus King
of Arragon; an Edict so like to many of ours emitted this day, that as it would
seem our Enemies have taken the Copy of it, so it were very seemly for the
people grieved with such Edicts to imitate the Copy of the Waldenses their
practice, in opposition to them. Anno 1488. they resist by Arms Albert de
Capitaneis sent by Pope Innocent the 8. in Pragola and Frassaniere, and through
out Piedmont; where for the most part the offspring of the old Waldenses had
their residence, where very evidently, through many successions of ages, they
showed themselves to be the true Successors of their Worthy Progenitors,
valiant for the Truth. That's a famous Instance of their Resistance, in opposing
vigorously the Lord of Trinity, in that same Piedmont, at which time they so
solemnly asked their Ministers, Whether it were not Lawful to defend themselves
against his violence? Who answered affirmatively. And accordingly they did it
with wonderful success at that time, and many times thereafter. Especially it
is notour; in the memory of this present age, how anno 1655. a vigorous
defensive war was prosecuted against the D. Savoy, by their Captains Gianavel,
Iahier etc. which was espoused by many Protestant Princes. And no further gone
than the very last year, it is known how they resisted the Arms of the Tiger,
and the French that helped him, and that their Simplicity in trusting Popish
promises was their ruin.

5. If we look over the Histories of the Albigenses, we find many Instances of
their Defensive Resisting their Oppressing Superiors. About anno 1200. They
defended themselves at Beziers and Carcasson, against the Popes Legate and his
Crossed Soldiers, under the Conduct, first of the Earl of Beziers, and then
of the Earl of Foix, and Earl Remand of Thoulouse, and were helped by the
English who then possessed Guienne bordering upon Thoulouse: which resistance
continued several years. Afterward anno 1226. they maintained a Resistance
against the King of France.

6. In Spain, we find the people of Arragon contesting with Alphonso 3d. and
associating themselves together against him. And they tell Pedro 3d. their
King, that if he would not contain himself within the limits of the Laws, they
would pursue him by Arms, about anno 1283. As also other Spaniards, who rose
in Arms several times against Pedro the 1 King of Castile.

7. It was this which brought the Cantons of Helvetia into this State of
freedom, wherein they have continued many years. For about the year 1260. they
levied war against their oppressing nobles. And anno 1308. they joined in
Covenant to defend themselves against the house of Austria: and anno 1315. they
renewed it at Brunna, in which at length the rest of the Cantons joined, and
formed themselves into a Commonwealth.

8. If we take a glance of the Germans, we will find at the very Commencement
of the Reformation, as soon as they got the name of Protestants, they Resisted
the Emperor Charles the fifth. The Duke of Saxon, the Land Grave of Hesse, and
the City of Magd^burgh, with Advice of Lawyers, concluded That the Laws of the
Empire permitted Resistance of the Emperor in some cases, that the times were
then so dangerous, that the very force of Conscience did lead them to Arms,
and to make a League to defend themselves, though Caesar or any in his name
should make war against them -- for since he attempteth to root out Religion,
and subvert our Liberties, he gives us cause enough to resist him with a good
conscience: The matter standing as it does, we may (say they) Resist, as may be
showed both by Sacred and Profane Histories -- And so they undertook and
stated the war upon the account of Religion and Liberty.

9. If we but cast an eye over to the Hollanders, we will find how much they
stand obliged to this practice of Defensive Arms; having thereby recovered
both Religion and Liberty, and established themselves into a fiourishing State.
We find even in the time of D. de Alva's Persecution, they began to defend
Haerlem and Valenciennes in Henault, and went on till under the conduct of
William of Nassaw Prince of Orange, they declared the King of Spain to have
fallen from the Government of those Countries: and so effectually shook off the
yoke of Spanish Tyranny.

10. If we go to the French Hugenots, we will find many Instances among them,
and many brave Heroes raised up, to maintain the principle and prosecute the
practice thereof, of older and later date. The History of the Civil wars of
France is stored with their Trophies; and the Memories of Condie and Coligni
will ever be fragrant. There were many Resistences there, both before and since
the Parisian Massacre. It is sad, that the present Protestants there are so far
degenerate from the Spirit of their Ancestors.

11. The many practices of the Hungarians, Resisting the encroachments of the
house of Austria, prove the same. And when Mathias denied the free exercise of
Religion unto the Protestants of Austria, they took up Arms in their oun
defense, and sent a Protestation unto the Estates of Hungary, requiring their
Assistence, conform to their League. And now this present war there founded
upon this plea.

12. The Polonians have often times levied war against their Kings: and we are
furnished by Clark in his Martyrol. with a late Instance of their Resistance
against the Sovereign Powers, at Lesita in Poland anno 1655.

13. The Danes and Swedes have not been wanting for their parts in taking
course with their Christierns, Kings of that name, whom they resisted and
punished. And generally, wherever the Reformation was received, we find this
principle espoused and the practice of it prosecuted. Nay there has been no
Nation in the world, but it will be found, they have either resisted or killed
Tyrants.

14. The most Deserving and Celebrated Monarchs in the world, have espoused the
quarrel of oppressed Subjects. Not only such as Tamerlanc, whose observable
Saying is noted, when he advanced against Bajazet, I go (says he) to chastise
his Tyranny and to deliver the afflicted people. And Philip and Lewis of
France, who assisted the Barons of England against King John. And Charles the
Great, who upon this ground undertook a war against the Lombards in Italy. But
even Constantine the Great, has it recorded for his honor, that he employed
his power and force against L^cinius, upon no other Motive but because he
banished, tortured, and destroyed those Christians in his Dominions, that would
not abandon their Religion. And Q. Elizabeth is commended, for assisting the
Dutch to maintain their Religion by force, when they could not enjoy it by
favor. And King James the 6. gave public aid to the Protestants in Germany
and Bohemia against the Emperor. Against whom also Gustavus Adolphus marched,
that he might deliver the oppressed Cities from the bondage that Ferdinand had
brought them into. Yea King Charles the first, this man's Father, pretended at
least to help the Protestants in France at Ree and Rochel: And though he
himself was avowedly Resisted by the Parliaments of both Ringdoms, yet he was
forced to Declare in his Acts of Oblivion and Pacification, The Scots late
taking up Arms against him, in defense of their Religion, Laws, and
Privileges, to be no Treason nor Rebellion -- See Apol. Relat. Sect. 11. page
149. And tho the late Charles the Second condemned all the Risings of the
people of Scotland for defense of Religion and Liberty, and their lives and
privileges, which his oun Tyranny forced them into; yet he justified the
present Revolt of Heathens and Mahumetan Subjects from the young King of Bantam
in Iava Major in the East Indies, who, when he got the Government in his hands
by his Fathers Resignation, killed his subjects, and caused them to be killed
without any cause, which was the reason of their revolt ftom him, and defending
the Father against the son: This defensive war of these Subjects was justied by
the said Charles, in his sending Ammunition etc. for their relief. These, and
many more Instances that might be adduced, are sufficient evidences of the
Righteousness and Reason of such Resistences, when the Greatest of Princes have
undertakent he Patrocinie of them.

III. From Scripture-Proofs, I shall but briefly gather some of the many that
might be pressed, which being put together to me seem impregnable. I shall
reduce them to these heads. 1. I shall aduce some practices of the Lords
people, frequently reiterated, never condemned, always approven, confirming
this Point. 2. Some severe Reprehensions for their omission of this duty, in
the season thereof. 3. Some promises both of Spiriting for the duty, and of
Countenancing it, when undertaken. 4. Some precepts commanding such
Atchievments. 5. Some prayers supplicating for them. All which put together
will make a strong Argument.

First, For practices of this kind, there is nothing more common in Scripture
History.

1. I shall begin at the first war that is recorded in the World: wherein some
loss fell to the Godly at first, but afterward by the virtue and valor of
their Brethren they were vindicated, and the victory recovered with honor. Lot
and his family living in Sodom was taken Prisoner, by Chedarlaomer and his
Confederates Genesis 14. 12. but Abraham hearing of it, armed his trained
servants, and pursued them to Dan, and rescued him verse. 14-16. thereby
justifying that Rebellion of the Cities of the plain, by taking part and
vindicating the Rebels. Hence, he that may rescue subjects from the violence
of any Tyrannizing Domination by arms, may also rise with these subjects to
oppose that violence: But here is an example of that in Abraham -- Ergo --

2. After the Lords people were possessed of Canaan, and forgetting the Lord
did enter into affinity with these interdicted Nations, some of them were left
to prove Israel, that the Generations of the Children of Israel might know to
teach them war. Judge. 3. 1, 2. And when they did evil in the sight of the Lord,
He sold them into the hand of Chushan-rishathaim King of Mesopotamia, whom they
served and were subject to eight years ver. 8. but when they cried unto the
Lord, their Rebellion, shaking off that yoke, was successful under the Conduct
of Othniel ver. 10. And after a relapse unto the like defection, they became
subject to Eglon King of Moab, whom they served eighteen years verse, 14. but
attempting the same remedy by arms, under the Conduct of Ehud, they recovered
their Liberty. And after his death, falling into that sin again which procured
the like Misery, they became subject to Iabin King of Canaan, who twenty years
mightily oppressed them Judge. 4. 1-3. but by the Lords Commandment, under the
Conduct of Deborah and Barak, they Rebelled and prevailed. Whence, If the Lords
people, serving a Sovereign Domineering power, may shake off the yoke of their
subjection; then it is duty to defend themselves and Resist them, for there is
no other way of shaking it off: But these examples prove the former: Ergo --
Object. If any Cavil that these were not their oun Kings, to whom they owed
Allegiance, but only invading Conquerours, whom they might resist. 1 Ans. (1)
Yet they were the Sovereign powers for the time: And therefore, if Royalists
and Loyalists grounds hold good, they ought upon no pretense whatsoever to have
been Resisted: And tho possibly they might not be by Compact their oun Kings,
yet by Conquest they were, as much as that would make them, and by their oun
Consent, when they paid them Kings due, viz, tribute. (2) No more are they our
oun Kings, who either intrude themselves into an Arbitrary Domination over us
(without any terms of a Compact, upon a pretense of hereditary succession) or
being our Covenanted Kings overturn all the Conditions of their Compact, and
degenerate into Tyrants: To such we owe no Allegiance, more than Israel did to
these Dominators. (3) I retort that old recocta Crambe, who should be Judge,
whether they were their oun Lawful Kings or not? For they acted as Kings, and
thought themselves their absolute Lords, and gave themselves out to be such;
And yet we find an approved Rebellion against them. Mr Gee in his Magistrates
Original chap. 8. Sect. 4. Page 268. improves these Instances to the same
purpose, And adds Neither (as far as my observation goes) can any immediate or
extraordinary Command or Word for what they so did be pretended to, or pleaded
from the Text, for many of them, or for any save Barak or Gideon.

3. Yet Gideons example, tho he had an extraordinary Call, cannot be pretended
as unimitable on the matter; for that was ordinary, tho the Call and Manner was
extraordinary. He, with the Concurrence of a very few men, did break the yoke
of subjection, to Midian Judge. 6. and 7. Ch: And having called his Brethren out
of all mount Ephraim, into a conjunction with him in the pursuit of his
victory; When he demanded supply of the Princes of Succoth, and of the men of
Penuel, and they denied it, he served them as Enemies. Whence, If a small party
may with Gods Approbation deliver themselves, and the whole of their Community,
from the bondage of their oppressing Dominators whom they had served several
years, and may punish their Princes that do not come out to their help, in a
Concurrence with them and encouragement of them in that attempt; Then must it
be duty to defend themselves against their Oppressors that rule over them, and
all ought to concur in it; or else there would not be justice in punishing them
that were defective in this work: But we see the former from this Example Ergo
-- Object. If it be said, Gideon, and the rest of the extraordinary raised
Judges, were Magistrates, therefore they might defend and deliver their Country,
which a private people that are only subjects may not do. I ans. (1) They were
subject to these Tyrants that oppressed them, who were then the Sovereign
powers of that time, and yet they shook off their yoke by defensive arms. (2)
They were not the^ Magistrates, when they first appeared for their Countries
defense and deliverance, neither in that did they act as such, but only as
Captains of Rebels, in the esteem of them that had power over them. It is
clear Gideon was not Ruler, till that Authority was conferred upon him after
the deliverance. See Judge. S. 22. etc. Yet he did all this before.

4. When his bastard Abimelech Usurped the Government, and was made King by the
men of Schechem; At length God sending an Evil Spirit between him and his
Accomplices that set him up, not only was he Resisted by the treacherous
Shechemites (which was their brand and bane, in the righteous Judgment of God,
for their aiding him at first in killing his Brethren) Judge. 9. 23; 24. etc.
but also he was opposed by others of the men of Israel, as at Thebez, where he
was slain by a woman verse. 50. ad fin. Whence, If an Usurping Tyrant,
acknowledged as King by the Generality, may be disouned by the Godly, and
threatened with Gods vengeance to consume both him and h^s Accomplices that
comply with him; and if he may be opposed and Resisted not only by those that
set him up, but also by others that were in subjection to him, and at length be
killed by them without resentment of the rest of the Nation; Then must it be
duty for a people, who had no hand in the erection of such a Dominator, to
defend themselves against his force: But the former is true by this Example:
Ergo --

5. When Israel fell under the Tyranny of Ammon, oppressing them eighteen
years, they did by Resisting these Supreme powers shake off their yoke, under
the Conduct of Iephthah. And being challenged sharply by the men of Ephraim,
who it seems claimed the Prerogative of making war, and therefore came to
revenge and reduce Iephthah and his Company to order, Casting herein belike a
Copy to our regular Loyalists, who are very tenacious of this Plea of the
Ephraimites, that at least without the Primores Regni no war is to be made; yet
we find Iephthah did not much regard it, but stoutly defended himself, and slew
of them 42000 men known by their Shibboleth Judge. 12. If people then when
questioned for defending themselves, by them that claim a Superiority over them
and should deliver them, may defend themselves both without them and against
them; then it is a peoples duty and privilege: But the former is true by this
Example.

6. They were then made subject to the Philistims 40 years, whom the men of
Judah acknowledged for their Rulers: yet Samson, that rackle-handed Saint,
never ceased from pelting them upon all Occasions; and when challenged for it
by the men of Judah, saying, know thou not that the Philistims are Rulers
over us? what is that that thou have done? Samson objects nothing against their
being Rulers; but notwithstanding prosecutes his purpose of vindicating
himself, in defense of his Country, As they did unto me, says he, so have I
done unto them Judge. 15. 11. Hence, If Saints may avenge themselves upon them
whom the Country calls Rulers, and when enabled by God may do to them as they
did to them; then must it be duty for them to defend themselves against them:
But the Antecedent is true by this Example.

7. When Saul, in the pursuit of the Philistims, had charged the people with a
foolish Oath (like unto many of the ensnaring Oaths that Monarchs use to impose
upon people) not to eat any food until the evening, Jonathan his son tasted but
a little honey and lo he must die; Which Saul confirmed with another peremptory
Oath, God do so to him and more also if he should not die? Whereupon the
people, as resolute on the other hand to save him, Resisted the rage of that
Ruler, and swore as peremptorly that not one hair of his head should fall to
the ground: So the people rescued Jonathan that he died not 1 Samuel 14. 44, 45.
Hence, If people may Covenant by Oath to Resist the Commands, and Rescue a man
from a Tyrants Cruelty; then it is duty to defend themselves against him: The
Antecedent is true here.

8. Afterward when the manner of the King, presaged by Samuel was verified in
Saul's degeneration into many abuses of Government; this privilege of
Resistance was not wholly mancipated, but maintained by David's defensive
Appearance with his little Army He took Goliahs sword not for ornament, or only
to fright Saul, but to defend himself with it, and was Captain first to four
hundred men 1 Samuel 22. 2. had a mind to keep out ^eilah against him with 600
men 1 Samuel 23. 13. and afterward a great host came to him to Ziklag, while he
kept himself closs because of Saul the son of Kish 1 Chronicles. 12. 1. throughout*
where they left Saul, and came and helped David against him. This is proved at
length by Lex Rex quest 32. Page 340.

9. The City Abel, whither Shebah the Traitor had fled, did well to Resist Ioab
the Kings General, coming to destroy a whole City for a Traitors sake, and not
offering peace to it (according to the Law Deuteronomy. 20. 10.) and defended
themselves by Gates and Walls, not withstanding he had a Commission from the
King 2 Samuel 20. And after the Capitulating, they are never challenged for
Rebellion.

10. The ten tribes revolted from the House of David, when Rehoboam claimed an
Absolute power, and would not acquiesce to the peoples just conditions 1 King.
12. 2 Chronicles. 10. Which is before justified Head. 2. Hence, if it be Lawful for
a part of the people to shake off the King, refuse subjection to him, and set
up a new one, when he but resolves to play the Tyrant; then it must be duty to
resist his violence, when he is Tyrannizing: But the Antecedent is clear from
this Example. This is vindicated at more length by Ius Pop. Chapter 3. Page 52.

11. The Example of Elisha the Prophet is considerable 2 King. 6. 32. Elisha
sat in his house, and the Elders with him; And the King sent a man before him,
but ere the Messengers came to him, he said to the Elders, see how the son of a
Murderer has sent to take away mine head; look when the Messenger comes, shut
the door, and hold him fast at the door; is not the sound of his Masters feet
behind him? Here was violent Resistance resolved against both the man and the
Master, tho the King of the Land for the time. And this calling him the son of
a Murderer; and resisting him, is no more extraordinary (tho it was an
extraordinary man's Act) than it is for a plaintiff to lybel a true crime
against a wicked person, and for an oppressed man to close the door upon a
Murderer, Lex Rex Quest. 32. Page 346. Hence, if a King or his Messenger coming
to use unjust violence against an innocent Subject, be no more to be regarded
than a Murderers Emissarie, but may be resisted by that innocent Subject; Then
must a Community of such innocent Subjects defend themselves against a Tyrant
or his Emissaries, coming against them on such a wicked errand: The Antecedent
is here clear.

12. The City Libnah revolted from under Iehorams Tyranny 2 Chronicles. 21. 10. P.
Martyr on the place says, they revolted because he endeavored to compel them
to Idolatry. This is justified above Head. 2. Hence, if it be Lawful for a
part of the people to revolt from a Tyrannical Prince, making defection from
the true Religion; then it is duty to defend themselves against his force: The
Antecedent is here plain.

13. When Athaliah usurped the Monarchy, Iehojada the priest strenghtened
himself, and made a Covenant with the Captains etc. to put her down, and set up
Ioash 2 King. 11. 2. Chron. 23. and when she came and cried, Treason, Treason,
they regarded it not, but commanded to kill her and all that help her. Whence,
if those that are not Kings may Lawfully kill an Usurpress, and all her
helpers, then may a people resist them: But Iehojada though no Magistrate did
it.

14. The repressing and punishing Amaziah the son of Ioash is an undeniable
Instance, vindicated by Mr Knox; see above Per. 3. Page 38. After the time that
he turned away from following the Lord, the people made a Conspiracy against
him in Jerusalem, and he fled to Lachish, but they sent and slew him there 2
King. 14. 19. 2 Chronicles, 25. 27. Hence, a fortiori, If people may conspire and
concur in executing Judgment upon their King turning Idolater and Tyrant, then
much more must they defend themselves against his violence.

15. The same power of peoples Resisting Princes, was exemplified in Uzziah or
Azariah, when he would needs be supreme in things Sacred as well as Civil 2
King. 15. 2 Chronicles. 26. fourscore priests, that were valiant men, withstood him,
and thrust him out of the Temple, deturbarunt eum, says Vatablus, expulerunt
eum says Ar. Mont. vid. Pool Synopss. in Loc. See this vindicated by Mr Knox.
Per. 3. Page 33. above. Hence, If private Subjects may by force resist and
hinder the King from transgressing the Law, then must they resist him when
forcing them to transgress the Law of God.

16. After the Return from the Babylonish Captivity when the Jews were setting
about the Work of building the Temple, which they would do by themselves, and
not admit of any Association with Malignants (upon their sinister
misinformation, and Sycophantick Accusation, that they were building the
rebellious and bad City, and would refuse to pay the King toll, tribute, and
custom) they were straightly discharged by Artaxerxes to proceed in their Work,
and the inhibition was execute by force and power Ezrah. 4. But by the
encouragement of the Prophets, Haggai and Zechariah, countermanding the Kings
decree* they would not be hindered, the eye of their God being upon them, tho
Tatnai the Governor of those parts, Shetharboznai, and their Companions, would
have boasted them from it, with the Usual Arguments of Malignants, who has
commanded you to do so and so? Ezrah. 5. 3-5. And yet this was before the
decree of Darius was obtained in their favors, Ezrah. 6. Hence, if people may
prosecute a duty without and against a Kings command, and before an allowance
by Law can be obtained; Then may a people resist their Commands and force Used
to execute them: But here the Antecedent is manifest.

17. When Nehemiah came to Jerusalem, and invited the Jews to build up the
Walls of the City, they strengthened their hands for that good work against
very much opposition: And when challenged by San^allat the Horonite, Tobiah the
Servant the Ammonite, and Gesh^m the Arabian. Great Kings-men all of them, who
despise and ^oasted them, what is this that ye do? will ye rebeli against the
King? say they. He would not plead Authority, tho in the general he had the
Kings warrant for it: Yet he would not give them any other satisfaction, than
to intimate, whether they had that or not, having the Call of God to the Work,
they would go on in the duty, and God would prosper them against their
opposition, Nehem. 2. 19, 20. And accordingly, not withstanding of all Scoffs
and Plots and Conspiracies to hinder the building, yet they went on, and were
encouraged to remember the Lord, and fight for their Brethren etc. and to build
with weapons in their hands, N^h. 4. and brought it to an end, notwithstanding
of all their Practices to fright them from it, chap. 6. Hence, If neither
Challenges of Rebellion, nor Practices of Malignant Enemies who pretend
Authority, nor any discouragements whatsoever, should deter people from a duty
which they have a Call and Capacity from God to prosecute, and if they may
promove it against all opposition by defensive arms; Then, when a people are
oppressed and treated as Rebels, for a necessary duty, they may and must
defend themselves, and maintain their duty, notwithstanding of all Pretenses of
Authority against them.

18. I shall add one Instance more, which is vindicated by jus populi, from
the History of Esther. Because Mordecai refused to do homage to a Hangman (
Haman I should say) a cruel Edict was procured from Ahasuerus, to destroy all
the Jews, written and sealled with the Kings ring, according to the Laws of
the Medes and Persians, becoming a Law irrevocable and irreversible Esther. 3.
12, 13. Yet the Lords Providence, always propitious to His People, brought it
about so, that Haman being hanged, and Mordecai advanced, the Jews were Called
and Capacitated, as well as Necessitated, to resist that armed Authority that
decreed to Massacre them, and that by the Kings oun Allowance, Esther. 9. When
his former decree drew near to be put in execution, in the day that the Enemies
of the Jews hoped to have power over them, it was turned to the Contrary that
no man could withstand them. Here they had the allowance of Authority to resist
Authority: And this was not a Gift of a new right by that Grant, which they had
not before; only it was corroborative of their radical right to defend
themselves, which is not the Donative of Princes, And which they had power to
exerce and use without this, tho may be not the same Capacity: for the Kings
warrant could not make it Lawful in point of Conscience, if it had not been so
before. Hence, If people may have the Allowance of well advised Authority, to
resist the decree and force of unlawful Authority; then may a people maintain
right Authority, in defending themselves against the injuries of pretended
Authority: But by this Instance we see, the Jews had Ahasuerus his Allowance
to resist the decree and force of his oun ill-advised Authority, tho
irreversible. And hence we see, that Distinction, in this Point, is not
groundless, between resisting the Authority of Supreme powers, and the abuses
of the same.

Secundly, We have in the Scripture both tacit and express Reproofs, for lying
by from this duty in the season thereof.

1. In Jacobs Swan-Song or Prophetical Testament, wherein he foretells, what
should be the fate and future condition of each of the Tribes, and what should
be remarked in their carriage influencing their after Lot in their generations,
for which they should be commended or discommended, approved or reproved;
Coming to Issachar, he Prophetically exprobates his future Ass-like stupiditie,
that indulging himself in his lazy ease and lukewarm security, he should
mancipate himself and his Interests into a servile subjection unto his
Oppressors Impos^itions, even when he should be in a Capacity to shake them
off, and free himself by Resistance, Genesis 49. 14, 15. Issachar is a strong Ass
couching down between two burdens. This is set down by the Holy Ghost, as the
brand and bane, not of the person of Issachar Jacobs Son, but of the Tribe, to
be inured upon them, when they should be in such a concition by their oun
silliness: Hence I argue, If the Holy Ghost exprobrate a people for their
stupid subjection to prevailing Tyranny, when they do not improve their
Ability, Capacity, and Right to maintain and defend their Liberties and
Privileges; Then this implies a Commanded duty to defend them, according to
their Capacity, from all unjust invasion: But the former is true here:
Therefore also the later.

2. In Deborahs Song after their victorious Resistance, the people are severely
upbraided for not concurring in that Expedition Judge. 5. 16, 17, 23. and Meroz
is particularly cursed for not coming to the help of the Lord, to the help of
the Lord against the Mighty. This is Recorded as a resting Reproof, against all
that will withdraw their helping hand from the Lords people, when necessitate
to appear in defensive Arms for the preservation of their lives and Liberties.
On the other hand, Zebulon and Naphtali are commended for jeoparding their
lives in the high places of the fields, and are approved in that practice of
fighting against the Kings of Canaan, that then ruled over them verse. 18, 19.
Hence, if people be Reproved and Cursed for staying at home to look to their
oun Interests, when others jeopard their lives for their Countries defense and
freedom from Tyranny and Oppression; Then this implies its a duty to concur in
so venturing: But here, Rubeen, Dan, Asher, and Meroz, are Reproved and Cursed
for staying at home, when Zebulon and Naphtali jeoparded their lives etc. Ergo.

Thirdly, we have in the Scriptures many promises of the Lords approving and
countenancing the duty of Defensive Arms even against their Oppressing Rulers.

1. In that forecited Testament of the Patriarch Jacob, in that part of it
which concerns Gad, he Prophecies that Tribe should have a lot in the world
answering his name, and be engaged in many Conflicts with Oppressing
Dominators, who at first should prevail over him, but at length God should so
bless his endeavors to free himself from their oppressions, that he should
overcome. There is an excellent Elegancy in the Original, answering to the
Etymology of the name Gad which signifies a Troop, reading thus in the Hebrew,
Gad a Troop shall overtroup him, but he shall ouertroup them at the last Genesis
49. 19. And Moses homologating the same Testimony, in his blessing the Tribes
before his death, shows that he should make a very forcible and successful
Resistance, and should execute the Justice of the Lord over his Oppressors
Deuteronomy. 33. 20. 21. Wherein is implied a promise of Resistance to be made against
Oppressing Conquerours, who should acquire the supreme rule over them for a
time: And the success of that Resistance for overcoming, necessarly supposes
Resistance. Hence, where there is a promise of success at last to a peoples
Conflicts against prevailing Tyranny, there is implied an Approbation of the
duty, and also a promise of its performance wrapped up in that promise: But
here is a promise etc. Ergo --

2. In that Threatening against Tyrants, showing how they shall be thrust away
and burnt up with fire, there is couched a promise, and also an employed Precept
of Resisting them 2 Samuel 23. 6. The Sons of Belial shall be all of them as
thorns thrust away -- with hands fenced with iron etc. which clearly implies
Resistance, and more than that. Rejection and Repression. Hence, If it be
threatened as a Curse against Rulers of Belial. and promised as a Blessing,
that they shall be so roughly handled; then this implies a duty to resist them,
who cannot be otherwise taken: But here this is threatened etc.

3. When the Lord shall have mercy on Jacob and choose Israel, It is promised
Isai. 14. 2, 3. that they shall take them Captives whose Captives they were,
And they shall rule over their Oppressors -- This necessarly implies and infers
a Promise of Resistance against these Oppressing Rulers, in the time off their
Domineering, as well as revenge after their yoke should be broken; And some
thing of men's action as well as Gods Judgment in breaking that yoke: for they
could not take them Captives, nor Rule over them, except first they had
resisted them whose Captives they were: There is Resisting of the Supreme
Power, subjection whereunto was the bondage wherein they were made to serve.
Hence; If it be promised, that a Captivated and subjugated people shall break
the yoke and free themselves of the bondage of them that had them in
subjection; then it is promised in that case, they must resist the Supreme
Powers; for such were they whose Captives they were: The Antecedent is here
express.

4. There are promises that the Lords people, when those that rule over them
are incensed against the Holy Covenant, and when many of their Brethren that
should concur with them shall be frighted from their duty by fear, or corrupted
with flattery, shall be made strong to do exploits, tho in such Enterprises
they may want success for some time, and fall by the sword and flame and by
captivity and spoil many days Dan. 11. 30-34. Which is very near Parallel, to
the case of the Covenanted people of Scotland their appearing in Defensive
exploits against their Covenant Breaking Rulers these many years bygone. This
was very eminently fulfilled, in the History of the Maccabees, before
r^hearsed. Hence, If it be promised that a people shall be strong to do
exploits, in Resisting the Arms of their Rulers, opposing their Covenant, and
overturning their Religion and Liberties; Then it must be approven that such a
Resistance is Lawful, even tho it want success: But this is here promised. To
the same purpose it is promised, that after the Lords people have been long
kept as Prisoners under the bondage of Oppressing Rulers, they shall by a
vigorous Resistance be saved from their Tyranny Zech. 9. 13-17. when the Lord
shall bend Judah for him and raise up Zions Sons against the Sons of Greece --
So it was in their Resistences and victories, against the Successors of
Alexander, who had the rule over them for a time. And so it may be again, when
the Lord shall so bend His people for Him. Hence, If the Lord promises to fit
and Spirit His people for Action against their Oppressing Rulers, and to Crown
their Achievements when so fited and Spirited with Glorious success; Then it
is their duty, and also their honor, to Resist them: But here that is plainly
promised.

5. There are promises of the Lords making use of His people, and strengthening
them to break in pieces the power of His and their Enemies, and His defending
and maintaining them against all their power and projects, when they think most
to prevail over them. As is promised, in the threatened Catastrophe of the
Babylonian Usurpation Ier. 51. 20-24 -- Thou art (says He to Israel, of whom
He speaks as the rod of His Inheritance in the preceding verse) my battle ax
and weapons of war, and with thee will I break in pieces etc. Whenever this
has been or shall be accomplished (as it may relate to the vengeance to be
execute upon the New Testament Babylon) it clearly implies their breaking in
pieces Powers that were Supreme over them. Hence, If the Lord will make use of
His peoples vindictive Arms against Babylon ruling over them, then He will
Justify their Defensive Arms against Babylon Oppressing them: Here it is
promised etc. So Mic. 4* 11. to the end, Many Nations shall be gathered to
defile and look upon Zion, and then the Lord shall give Allowance and
Commission to His people to arise and thresh etc. What time the accomplishment
of this is referred to, is not my concern to inquire: It seems to look to the
New Testament times, wherein the Lords people shall be first in great straits,
and then enlarged: But to restrict it to the Spiritual Conquest over the
Nations by the Ministry of the Word (tho I will not deny but that may be
included) seems too great a straitening of the Scope, and not so apposite to
the Expressions, which certainly seem to import some forcible action of men,
and more than the Peaceable Propagation of the Gospel. It is usually referred
to the latter days of that Dispensation, when both the Jewish and Gentile Zion
shall be totally and finally delivered from Babylon or Antichristian Tyranny,
before or about which Period, the Enemies of Christ and of His people shall
attempt their Ultimus Conatus to destroy the Church groaning under their
bondage; but when they are all well mustered in a General Randezvous, the Lords
people shall have a gallant game at the chase. But whenever the time be of
fulfilling the promise, it ensures to the people of God the success of their
Defensive Arms against them, that pretended a Domination over them. And it
looks to a time, when they should have no Rulers of their oun, but them under
whose subjection they had been long groaning, and now brought to a very low
pass: yet here they should not only resist but thresh them. Hence, If in the
latter days the people of God are to be honored, and acted forth with such a
Spirit and Capacity to thresh and beat down these powers under which they have
been long groaning; Then when the Lord puts them in such Capacity to attempt
it, they should be ambitious of such a honor: But here it is promised etc. The
same may be inferred from the Prophets vision Zech. 1. 19, 20. He sees four
Carpenters Resisting the four horns: the horns scattered Judah, so that no
man did lift up his head; but the Carpenters came to fray them, to cast out the
horns of the Gentiles, which lifted up their horn over the Land of Judah.
These horns had the Supreme power over Judah for a time, while they were in no
Capacity to resist them; But as soon as the Lord furnishes them with Capacity
and Instruments empowered to resist them, they do it effectually. The
Carpenters are certainly the Lords people themselves; for here they are
opposite to the Gentiles, which all were except the Lords people. Hence, If the
Lord promises, when reconciled to His people, to furnish them with Instruments
to fray and scatter the power of Tyrants, who have long born down their head;
Then when they are so furnished, they may resist them: But the Lord here
promises that etc. This is more plainly promised also Zech. 10. 5. etc. Then
they shall be as mighty men which shall tread down their Enemies -- And the
pride of Assyria shall be brought down -- Hence, If the Lord, when He shall
have Mercy on His people, will bless their Resistance so, as to bring down the
pride and Scepter of them that had the Supreme power over them; Then, in hope
of such a blessing, they may attempt such a duty, when the Call is clear.

Fourthly, we have also Precepts, from whence we may consequentially conclude
the Approven duty of Defensive Arms against Oppressing Rulers.

1. The Children of Israel are Commanded to vex the Midianites and sinite
them, for says the Lord, they vex you with their Wyles Numb. 25. 17, 18. And
to avenge themselves Numb. 31. 2. Which did not only oblige the people, when
they had Moses for their Magistrate to lead them forth; but in the days of
Gideon, when they were under their rule whom they were to avenge themselves
upon. Hence, If people must vex their Enemies, and avenge themselves of them,
by a war offensive, when ensnared by their Craftiness; much more may they
resist them by a war Defensive, when invaded by their Cruelty. 2. There is a
Command to pu^ish every City or party, making Apostasy into Idolatry Deuteronomy. 13.
12-15. Upon this Moral Ground was Isreal's war against Benjamin Judge. 20. And
their bringing Amaziah into Condign punishment, which is vindicated by Mr Knox.
See above Per. 3. page 41, 42. Hence, If people are to bring to condign
punishment Idolatrous Apostates seeking to Intyce them; Then much more ought
they to resist such Tyrants seeking to Enforce them to such Apostasy.

3. There is a precept, not only to defend, but also to rescue and deliver our
Brethren when in hazard Prove. 30. 11, 12. We must not for bear to deliver them
when drawn to death: which will at least infer the duty of assisting them when
forced to defend themselves; for, If it be a duty to to rescue them from any
prevailing power that would take their lives unjustly, much more is it duty to
defend them and our selves both against their Murdering violence: But it is
duty to rescue them etc.

4. All that would learn to do well, are commanded Isai. 1. 17. to relieve the
Oppressed: which is not spoken to Magistrates only, many of whom were the
Oppressors, the Princes were rebellious and Companions of thieves verse. 23. So
also Isai. 58. 6. It is required of a people that would be accepted of God in
their humiliations, to let the Oppressed go free, and to break every yoke.
Hence, If it be duty to relieve the Oppressed by breaking the yoke of them that
Oppress them; Then it is duty to defend them and our selves both against them
that would oppress us more: But the former is here commanded: Therefore etc,

5. There is a Command for a spoiled Oppressed people, when the Lord is
reconciled to them and Sympathises with them, to deliver themselves from their
Rulers servitude Zech. 2. 7. Deliver thy self O Zion which dwell with the
daughter of Babylon. Which comprehends all the ordinary Active means of peoples
delivering themselves, from oppressing powers that rule over them: And
consequently Defensive Resistance; for it cannot only be restricted to flight
included ( verse. 6.) the promise annexed ( verse. 9.) imports more, when they
that spoiled them shall be a spoil to their servants: Whereby it is insinuated,
they were so to deliver themselves, as not only to free themselves from their
servitude, but to bring their Masters under subjection. Hence, If the Lords
people, being subject to Tyrants ruling over them for the time, may deliver
themselves from their Oppressing Masters, then may they resist them and Defend
themselves: The Antecedent is express here in the Command.

6. There is a Command given by Christ to His Disciples, to provide themselves
with Defensive weapens, necessary for their Defense against them that would
pursue after their lives; as well as with other things necessary for their
sustenance Luke 22. 36 -- Now he that has a purse let him take it and likewise
his scrip, and he that has no sword let him sell his garment and buy one.
Before, when he had sent them out upon an extraordinary Commission, as it were
to serve their Apprentship in the Work of the Gospel, He did not allow them
such sollicitous care to provide themselves, because He would give them a proof
of His sufficiency to sustain and protect them, without the ordinary means of
their oun Diligence. But now, when He was about to withdraw His bodily presence
from them, and would warn them of the Discouragements they were to expect in
the Prosecution of their more continued Work, which they had a Commission for
not to be retracted, He would not have them to expect Provision and Protection
by a Course of Miracles, but to provide themselves with means for their
sustenance, and also for their Defense against the violence of men; which
chiefly was to be expected from their Rulers, who would persecute them under
the notion of Transgressors of the Laws of their Kingdoms and Countries. He was
not indeed to make much use of them, at that time, for Himself; Who was then to
finish the Work of Redemption by Suffering: Only, that what was written might
be accomplished in Him, He would make so much use of them, as voluntarely to be
involved under the censure and reproach of Rebellion, being taken among men in
Arms, that He might be reckoned among Transgressors verse. 37. Therefore when
they told him, they had two swords, He said, It is enough verse. 38. I need not
stand upon that Impertinency of a Conceit, that these were Spiritual swords:
Which deserves no Confutation, being fitter to be put among Quakers delirious
distractions, than to be numbered among the notions of men of understanding:
for then the Purse and the Scrip must be Spiritual too; And these Spritual
things must be bought by sellings of Garments; And yet they would be such
Spiritual tools, as would have a sharp edge for cutting off of Carnal ears, and
such as would be both visible and sensible; And two of them would be enough.
They were then ordinary Material swords, which the Lord Commands His Followers
to provide themselves with, for their defense as Men, in cases of necessity,
and, when they should be in a Capacity, to improve them against their Murdering
Persecuters, against whom He gives His Royal Grant of Resistance; that the
world may know, His Subjects, tho they have more Privileges Spiritual, yet
they have no less humane Privileges than other men: Albeit at that Period of
His determined Suffering, He would not allow the present use of them. Hence, If
the Lords people should provide themselves with Arms of defense, tho they
should be reputed Transgressors for so doing; Then may they use these Arms of
Defense, against them that Persecute them under that Notion: But the Antecedent
is clear: Therefore etc.

Fifthly, We may infer the same Truth from some of the Prayers of the Saints,
wherein they glory in the confident expectation of the Lords strengthening
them, and favoring and approving their helpers, and in the experience of the
Lord Assisting them, while in the mean time constitute in a formed Appearance
of Resistance. I shall only hint these.

1. In that prayer Psalm. 44. 5. They glory in hope that through the Lord they
will push down their enemies etc. yet now they were under the power of
Tyrannizing Dominators which they were Resisting: for verse. 9. they complain
they were put to shame, because the Lord went not forth with their Armies, and
they which hated them spoiled them -- And for His Sake were killed all day
long: Hence they plead, that the Lord would awake -- and not forget their
affliction and oppression. Whereby it is evident, they were under the yoke of
Tyrannizing powers, and Resisting according to their might. Which, by
whomsoever or upon what occasion soever the Psalm was compiled, shows, that no
want of Success in Resisting Tyrants, can mar the Saints faith in pleading for
the Lords Assistence and Approbation of the Duty. Hence, they that in faith may
pray for and boast of their treading down their Tyrannizing powers. that rise
up against them, may also in faith attempt the Resisting of them in their oun
defense: But here the Lords people did the former.

2. We find David under Saul's persecution, while he had a party of 600. men to
defend himself against his rage, in the Psalms which he composed upon that
occasion, not only complaining of Oppressors, but encouraging himself in the
faith that God would be with them that assisted him, in his essay of defending
himself, and imprecating destruction to Saul and his Accomplices; that the Lord
would cut them off in His Truth, and let him see his desire upon them Psalm. 54.
4, 5. ult. And Psalm. 57. 4. And Psalm, 57. throughout, And Psalm. 140. 7, 9. He
imprecates against the head of them that compassed him about, and consequently
against Saul. Whence I argue. 1. If the Lords people, conflicting with and
encompassed with Oppressing Rulers as so many Lions and Dogs, may pray and
praise for the help of those that assist them, in their endeavors of
Self-preservation from them; then may they make use of their help for their
Defense, for which they pray and praise: But here we see the Lords people did
the former: Therefore they may do the latter. 2. If we may pray against Kings,
and for preservation from them; Then may we Defend our selves against them, and
endeavor the means of that preservation for which we pray. The Connection is
before cleared: yet here I add; That which will give a Dispensation from our
duty of praying for them, will also dispense from the duty of being passively
subject to their will; And consequently will allow defending our selves from
their violence: But here we see Tyranny and Treachery, and designed Mischief
will give a Dispensation from our duty of praying for them, tho that be duty as
indispensable as subjection. Again, if any thing demur us from Resisting of
Princes, it must be respect to their Majesty, and the Character of the Lords
anointing upon them: But we see, no respect to that will demur a Believer from
praying in faith against them: Therefore no such respect will hinder, but that
he may defend himself against his violence. And indeed, if we consider it
right, if the impression of any Majesty God has put upon Princes should bind
up our hands from any Resistance, it will restrain from prayer-resistence: for,
if that impression have any force at any time, it must be when a man is most
solemnly stated before God, and speaking to God as a Christian, rather than
when he is acting as a man with a man like himself: And as prayer-resistence is
the more formidable and forcible Resistance than any other (as this Saul, and
many other Kings, have found by their woeful experience) so it is more
restricted than other Resistance; for, we may defend our selves against many
whom we must not pray against, to wit, our private enemies, for whom we are
commanded to pray; yet no body will deny but we may resist their violence: And
likewise, we are commanded to pray for Kings, when invested with Gods
Authority: But when their degeneration looses us from that obligation to pray
for them, and allows us to pray against them when they turn Enemies to God (as
we see in the prayers of the Psalmist) Then also we may more warrantably resist
them by Defensive Arms.

3. Among the Halle-luyahs, in the end of Psalms, there is one Calcula^e for
the prevailing time of the Church, when the Lord shall take pleasure in His
people. In that time of the Saints being joyful in Glory, when they may glory
in the rest and security the Lord will vouchafe upon them, they are
Prophetically and very Pathetically excited to praise prayer-wise Psalm. 149. 6.
to the end. Let the high praises of God be in their mouth, and a two edged
sword in their hand -- to bind their Kings with chains -- to execute upon them
the Judgment written; this h^nour have all the Saints, Halle-lujah. This was
their praise and honor, when they were brought in to execute vengeance upon
the Kings and Nobles of (...). This also in David's time was the ambition and
also the attainment of the Saints, in their Triumphant victories over many of
their Oppressors round about them. But it looks to a further and more famous
execution of vengeance upon the Tyrants of the earth, when they shall have long
kept under the Church of God, and at length the Lord shall give His people a
Capacity to break their yoke: which, when ever it shall be, shall be their
honor. Hence, If it be the honor of the Saints, when the Lord puts them in
Capacity, to execute vengeance upon their Enemies, tho they be Kings that
Oppress them; Then it may be their ambition to seek it, at least they may
resist them. Thus from several Scripture Practices, Reproofs, Promises,
Precepts, and prayers, this Truth may be proven: from which Scriptures, though
other precious Truths are more Natively deduced, yet this Truth by unstrained
and unconstrained Consequence may be also clearly inferred.

HEAD. VI. The Sufferings of Some, upon the account of Extraordinary executing
of Judgment upon Notorious Incendiaries and Murdering public Enemies by
private persons in the circumstances wherein they were stated, vindicated.
SUrely (says Solomon) Oppression makes a wise man mad, as on the other hand,
a gift destroys the heart. Which, whensover there is a Concurrence and
verification of both together, makes it very incident, and no ways to be
admired, that either some Actions of the Oppressed be Censurable; Or that there
be found many to Censure them, either out of ignorance, or prejudice, at a far
off glance, which a nearer and narrower inspection of circumstances, through a
Prospect of Charity, would not so readily condemn. When the Oppression of
Tyrants comes to such a hight and pinch of Extremity, that it not only
threatens a Community with desolation, but induces a necessity of unavoidable
dissolution, and reduces a people to such a paroxisme of Desperation and
consternation (in respect of humane deliberation bringing them to their wits
end) that either they must succumb as slaves, and mancipate consciences,
persons, Liberties, properties, and all they are or have, to the lust of raging
Tyrants and their revening Emissaries; or surrender themselves, and their
posterity, and which is dearer the Interest of Religion, to be destroyed: Then
it is no wonder, that they be sometimes necessitated in such an extremity;
extremis malis extrema adhibere remedia, and forced to fall upon such
expedients to prevent their utter extermination, as at other times common
Order, and ordinary Justice would make extravagant. Yea it is no marvel, tho
they fall into several real Extravagances, which are not to be justified nor
extenuated; but rather it is to be acknowledged, as a Miracle of the Lords
Mercy, that in such a case they are restrained from more scandalous Excesses of
that nature. Yet even then, such as live at ease, free of oppression, who are
blinded with prejudice at the Oppressed, and bribed with the Indulgence and
Lenity of the Oppressors toward themselves, will look upon these Actions as
transports of madness, and effects of extravagant zeal, while they weigh them
only in the scales of Ordinary Justice, and do not ponderate them in the
balance of Necessitated Virtue; nor perpend the circums^ances which made those
extraordinary Acts of Judgment, which materially are Lawful at all times to be
executed by some, to be then necessary Acts of Justice to be inflicted by them
in such a case. But if either the Oppressors themselves; Or such who are
blinded and bribed with their gifts and killed with their kindness, not only
into an omission of concurring, but into a condemning of such extraordinary
Attempts of taking off those Destroyers; Or if On-lookers at a Distance, would
seriously consider, and ingenuously declare their opinion in a particular
application of the case to themselves, what they would do in such
circumstances: I doubt not, but as Charity should oblige them to be sparing of
their Censures, in a case whereof they have no experience; So Justice, in
resolving this point for themselves, would constrain them to justify such
extraordinary necessitated Practices for self preservation, in preventing
perishing by destroying their Destroyers, and move them rather to admire their
Patience, who have suffered so much and so long those beasts of prey to devour
them, than to censure their precipitancies, in being constrained to endeavor
to deliver themselves at last from, and put an end to their Cruelty who did
most annoy them. Yea (as Naphtali says very well) It were impossible that
rational men, after the feeling of so sore grievances, and the teaching of so
many and sad experiences, should still couch under the burden, and submit
themselves to the yoke of such vile Apostate Upstarts and bloody Villains, and
not rather acquit themselves like men, by pulling off these vizards, under
which they mask their Villainies and clock their violence; and plucking them out
of that Sanctuary of Loyalty, and Refuge of Authority, which they do not more
pretend than profane by all their horrid Rebellion against God, and cruel
Murders executed upon the Lords people, to the effect that in the righteous and
deserved punishment of these wicked men, both the sin of the Land might be
sisted, and the fierce Anger of the Lord averted, Naph. Prior edit. Page 134.
Nevertheless such Lawful, and (as one would think) laudable Attempts, for
cutting off such Monsters of Nature, beasts of prey, burdens to the earth, as
well as Enemies to the Commonwealth, are not only condemned as Murders and
horrid Assassinations, but Criminally and Capitally punished as such. And upon
this account, the Sufferings of such, as have left a Conviction upon the
consciences of all that knew them, of their honesty, integrity, soundness, in
the principles, and seriousness in the practice of Religion, have been several,
singular, and signally severe; and ouned of the Lord to the admiration of all
Spectators: Some being cruelly tortured and executed to the death, for essaying
such execution of Judgment, as Mr Mitchel; others for accomplishing it, as Mr
Hackstoun of Rathillet, and others, who avowed their accession to the cutting
of that Arch-Traitor Sharp, Prelat of St Andrews; And others for not
condemning that and the like Acts of Justice, tho they were as innocent of the
facts as the Child unborn. The foregoing Historical Representation of the
matters of fact, does clear the Circumstances of the Actions: which, if ever
any of that nature performed by private men without public Authority, could be
justified, will at least demur the condemning of them. For, the men, or rather
monsters, thus removed, had not only been perjured Apostates from, and conjured
Enemies against God, in a Conspiracy with the Devil to destroy the Reformation
and the Remnant that professed it, affronted Blasphemers, perfidious Betrayers
of the Country, and Enemies to the Commonweath, Malignant Incendiaries, and
habitual Murderers of many of the Lords people, who for many notorious Crimes
had forfeited their lives to Justice; But were insolently prosecuting their
Murdering designs, informing the Council, and instigating them against innocent
people to destroy them utterly, procuring from them bloody Orders to spare none
but cut off all who might fall into their hands, and vigorously and vigilantly
with all violence pursuing their Murdering Mandats, both in their oun persons,
and by villains whom they hounded out as Intelligencers to get and to give
notice where any of those people might be detected, whom they vowed (and avowed
a design) to destroy, when in the heat and hight of their rage they were cut
off. The Actors were no ways subject to them, nor any other way related than
declared and Independent Enemies are to one another, having renounced all
relation to them and their Masters as Magistrates or their superiors; and were
in no terms of peace with them, but maintaning an hostile opposition, and
carrying without cessation, arms to resist them; and when they got that
advantage over them, that these Enemies were seeking against them, they
declared solemnly to them, and dyed declaring it to the world, that they were
not moved out of private revenge for personal injuries they had done against
themselves, but being touched with the zeal of God, love to their Country,
respect to Justice trampled upon by Tyrants, and for saving themselves,
rescuing their Brethren, and preventing their Murdering them, because there
were none that would or could execute Justice upon them legally, therefore they
were forced to put forth their hands against them as enemies, with whose
preservation their oun could not consist. Their Circumstances were such, that
they were redacted to the greatest of Extremities, precluding all other humane
possibility of preserving themselves and their Brethren from the destruction
intended, and declaredly resolved, and restlessly sought and prosecuted, by
these Murderers: being persecuted to the death by them, daily chased, hunted,
waylaid, turned out of their oun habitations, intercommuned, discharged and
denied all harbor in any house, under the hazard of the same pains that
themselves were liable to, which was death by the present Law, and so forced to
hide in Caves and Dens; out of which they durst not come forth, if it were but
to seek bread for themselves, without eminent danger of their lives; the
Country raising the hue and cry after them, whenever they were seen, whereby
many were killed as soon as they were apprehended: Hence they could neither
escape in the Land, nor by flight out of the Land, all passages by sea and Land
being stopped, and none suffered to go any where, without strict examination what
they were, which was impossible for them to elude: And many other specialities
of misery and danger were ingredients in their Circumstances, that no words
can represent to them that are altogether strangers to them. Wherefore in such
a strait and pinch of Perplexity, when they could not otherwise escape the fury
of these firebrands, nor demur and deter the rest of them from an uncontrolled
pursuit after the lives of Innocents, nor otherwise avert the wrath of God
against the Land for the impunity of such vermin; And seeing there was no
access to address themselves to Magistrates, who by Office are obliged to bring
such villains to condign punishment, And none were found in public Authority
but such as patronized and Authorized them, whom in Conscience they could not
acknowledge, and in prudence durst not make application to them for fear of
their lives; What could they do? what was left them to deliberate, but to fall
upon this Extraordinary Course; wherein if they have stumbled into some
extravagancies, as to the manner, who can think it strange, considering the
Case? But as that is not the debate; so as for such Acts of vengeance as are
peccant in the matter, and were not circumstantiate as above rehearsed, being
disouned in their public Declarations, and the Actors excluded from their
Communion for whom I plead; it were iniquous to impute the scandal of them to
that Suffering people. It is only the so Circumstantiate, necessitated,
extraordinary execution of Judgment, upon notoriously gross and grassant
Incendiaries, Tyrants, and terrible Murdering Enemies, when there is no living
for them, that I vindicate. And tho the handling of this tender and
quick-sented subject may seem odious to some, and my Discourse upon it as
pregnant with an oblique design; to obivate such unmerited surmises, I must
say, it is only the wiping off of such Reproaches as reflect on Religion, the
vindication of preterite extraordinary practices of this nature, the
investigation of present duty with respect to future Emergencies, and the
restraining all Extravagancies incident in this Head, that I intend. However
this may be exploded by this generation as odious and un-couth Doctrine, yet in
former Periods of this Church it has been maintained with Courage, and
asserted with Confidence. How the Ancient Scots, even after they received the
Christian faith, served their Tyrants and Oppressors, how in the beginning of
the Reformation the killing of the Cardinal, and of David Rizio, were and are
generally to this day justifed, and what was the Judgment and pleading of our
Reformers for practicing this principle against Idolaters etc. needs not be
here repeated: Mr Knox's Judgment in particular is before declared, and will
be further discovered, if we consider how he resented his slackness, in putting
people to execute Judgment in these words, insert in Second Part of the Cloud
of Witnesses Page 60. For God (said he) had not only given me knowledge, and a
tougne to make known the impiety of the Idol, but had given me Credit with
many, who would have put in execution Gods Judgments, if I would only have
consented thereto: but so careful was I of the common Tranquillity, and loath
was I to offend some, that in secret conference with zealous men, I traveled
rather to slacken that fervency God had kindled in them, than to animate and
encourage them to put their hands to Gods Work; wherein I acknowledge my self
to have done most wickedly, and from the bottom of my heart I do ask God
pardon, that I did not what in me lay to have suppressed that Idol in the
beginning. But the preceding Historical Representation does abundantly
demonstrate this is no Noveltie, to assert, That when the ruin of the
Country, suppression of Religion, destruction of the Remnant professing and
suffering for it, and the Wrath of God is threatened in and for the impunity of
Idolaters and Murderers, that by the Law of God and Man should die the death,
and supposing always such as are in public Office not only decline their
duty, but encourage those destroyers, yea Authorize them themselves; we may not
only maintain defensive Resistance according to our Capacity, but endeavor
also vindictive and Punitive force in executing Judgment upon them in cases of
necessity, as before Circumstantiate. And ^ am the more confident to assert it,
that what I say cannot be condemned, till first what our Reformers have proven
be confuted. However to endeavor to make it some what clear, I shall first
premit some Assertions, to clear the State of the Question: And then give some
Reasons for it when clearly Stated.

First, It will be needful for clearing our way, to show what length we may
warrantably go in this matter of executing Judgment, in our private Capacity,
in extraordinary Cases of necessity, by setting down some propositions negative
and positive: Signifying what we disoune, and what we oune in this point.

I. What we disoune, may appear in these Assertions.

1. No necessity not Circumstance supposible whatsoever, can justify the Murder
of the Righteous or Innocent, or vindicate the unlawful taking away of their
life directly or indirectly, immediately or mediately, which in thought as well
as deed we must abhor, as a horrid breach of the Sixth Command. The Guilt
whereof may be incurred several ways; As by killing them Immediately, as Cain
did his brother Abel; or Commanding them to be killed, as Saul commanded Doeg
to kill the Lords Priests; or Contriving their Murder, as David did Uriahs, and
Iezebel Naboths; or Counselling thereunto, as the people advised the Princes to
the murder of Jeremiah, and all that cried Crucify Jesus were Murderers of
Christ; Or by procuring it, as Haman was guilty of the intended murder of the
Jews; Or Concurring therein, as Ioab was guilty of Uriahs death as well as
David, and Judas of Christ's by betraying him; Or by the Patrocinie thereof,
defending and sparing the Murderers; when called by Office to punish them, as
David was guilty in not punishing Ioab, Ahab in patronizing the Murder of
Naboth; Or by Consenting thereunto, as Saul consented to the death of Stephen;
or by knowing and permitting, and conniving at it, as is condemned Prove. 24.
11, 12. Whether this be done under color of Law, as Pilate Murdered our Lord,
Herod killed James; or without all color, by Absolute power, as Herod the
Ascalonite murdered the Infants; or whether it be done by purpose, as Ioab
murdered Abner and Amasa; or without previous purpose, yet with knowledge of
the Action in the perpetrating of it, as men may do in passion when provoked
beside their purpose, or in a Tumult without intending it before hand, yet that
is Murder, Barabas committed Murder in the Insurection. For, as for Casual
killing contrary to intention without knowledge, that's no breach of the
Command. And, whatever may be said of necessitated delivering up the Innocent,
pursued by a potent Enemy, to deliver the City from his fury; or of prefering
our oun life to our innocent neighbor, in a case when both cannot be
preserved, and by preserving the one Lawfully the other happens to lose his
life; I do not meddle with these Cases. But since this is taken for granted by
Casuists, I infer, if it be Lawful that an innocent man die in case of
necessity, that others may be preserved; Then much more is it Lawful, that the
nocent woe are guilty of murdering the Righteous all these ways above
specified, and actually prosecuting their murdering designs by these methods,
should rather be made to die than the Righteous be destroyed. But of this sort
of Murder, taking away the life of the Righteous, none has the impudence to
accuse that Reproached people.

2. Tho a man kill an innocent unwittingly and unwillingly, besides his
knowledge and against his will; yet he may be guilty of sinful homicide, if he
was obliged to know that he was in hazard of it, and neglected to consider,
lest a man might be killed by what he was doing: as if a man should shoot at
random, when he does not know but some may be killed thereby; or if one were
hewing with an axe, which he either knew or might have known to be loose, and
the head not well fastened to the helve, did not advertise those about him of
it, if by flying off it happened to kill any person, he were not innocent, but
if he knew not without any inadvertency, then he were guiltless, Deuteronomy. 19. 5.
See Durham on 6. Com. So if a man built a house without battlements, he should
bring blood upon his house, if any man fell from thence Deuteronomy. 22. 8. But of
this the question is not.

3. Tho a person be not altogether innocent, nor to be reckoned among the
Rigtheous; but suppose him wicked and profane, and engaged in an evil Course,
dishonorable to God, prejudicial to the Church and Kingdom, and very injurious
to us: Yet it may be Murder to kill him, if he be not guilty of Crimes that
deserve death by the Law of God: for the life of man is not subjected to the
arbitrament of any, but His who is the Author of life and death: Its necessary
to all to obey the Law, Thou shall not kill, without exception, but such
killing as is approven by the Author of the Law, as says Ames^de Consciencia
cap, 31. quest. 2, Hence, this people so much reproached with extravagant
Actions, do abundantly clear themselves of that imputation of being of the mind
to kill all that differ from them, which was the impudent forgerie of the
father of lies, in their Informatory Vindication Head. 2. Page 54. We
positively disoune (say they) as horrid Murder, the killing of any because of a
different persuasion or opinion from us, albeit some have invidiously cast this
odious Calumny upon us. And it is as clear, they that took the Oath of
Abjuration swore a lie, when they abjured the Apologetical Declaration, in so
far as it asserted it was Lawful to kill all employed in the Kings service,
when it asserted no such thing, as is showed above Head. 3. To think so much,
let be to declare it, far more to practice such a thing against all that served
the King, or any merely because they served him, or because they are in a
wicked Course, or because they have oppressed us, were abominable: for these
things simply do not make men guilty of death, to be punished Capitally by men
according to the Law of God. But when they are stated in such opposition to us,
and serve the Tyrants Murdering Mandats by all those ways above specified;
then we may by the Law of God and Nature and Nations destroy, slay, and cause
to perish, and avenge our selves on them that would assault us and are seeking
our destruction, as it was Lawful for the Jews to do with Hamans Emissaries
Esther. 8. 11, 13. and 9. 1, 2, 5. This Charge then cannot reach the Case.

4. Tho Murderers, and such as are guilty of death by the Law of God, must be
punished by death, for he that sheddeth man's blood by man must his blood be
shed: Yet it may be Murder for a man to kill another, because he thought him so
Criminal, and because he thought it his duty, being moved by a pretended
Enthusiastical Impulse, in imitation of the extraordinary Actions of such as
were really moved by the Spirit of God. As when James and John would have
commanded fire to come down to consume the Samaritans, the Lord rebuked them,
saying, ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are of, for the Son of man is not
come to destroy men's lives but to save them Luke 9. 54-56. Such impulses had
need to be well examined, for ordinarily they will be found not consistent with
a Gospel Spirit, which is always averse from act of Cruelty. Blind zeal
sometimes may incite men to fearful work: yea the persecuters have often most
of that Spirit, as our Lord foretells, the time comes that whosoever kills
you shall think that ^e does God service John. 16. 2. Paul in his Pharisaical
zeal breathed out slaughter against the disciples. And Satan can drive men
under several colors, to act such things, as he did the Bours in Germany, and
John of Leyden and his followers, whose practices are deservedly detested by
all that have any spark of Christianity or humanity: for if this were espoused
as a Principle, there would be no security for men's lives. But hence it cannot
be concluded, that God may not animate some to some rare Enterprises, for the
cutting off of Tyrants and their bloody Emissaries, Incendiaries, Destroyers of
innocent people, and putting an end to and stoping the Career of their Murders,
in a time of real extreme necessity, the matter of the action being
unquestionably Lawful, their ends and intentions really good and commendable,
there being also a deficiency of others to do the work, and themselves in some
probable Capacity for it. See Ius Popul. Cap. 20. Page 410. Neither can it be
denied, but true zeal may sometimes incite people to such exploits, for the
preservation of Religion and Liberty, their oun lives and Brethren, all like to
be destroyed by the impunity of beasts of prey. This will be found very
consistent with a Gospel Spirit: And though this Principle be asserted, and
also put in practice, all persons notwithstanding thereof would have sufficient
security for their life, except such as has really forefeited their lives by
all Law of God and man. Those that are led by Impulses, may pretend the
imitation of extraordinary examples and abuse them; yet hence it will not
follow, that in no case these extraordinary Examples may be imitated. Shall the
examples of good Magistrates, executing Justice on Idolaters and Murderers, be
altogether unimitable, because Tyrants abuse them in persecuting the innocent?
If this arguing were good, it would make all virtuous Actions in the world
unimitable; for these may be abused by pretenders. See Ius Popul* ubi supra
Page 412. But it cannot be charged upon the Sufferers upon this head, that they
had nothing to give as the reasons of their Actions but pretexts of
Enthusiasmes.

5. Tho a man be really so Criminal, as tha^ he deserves death by the Law of
God and man; yet it may be murder to kill him, if we do not certainly know it,
and can prove it, and convict him of it upon Trial: for no man must be killed
indicta or incognita causa. Thus even Magistrates may Murder Murderers, when
they proceed against them without probation or cognition according to Law, far
more private persons. Thus the Abiezrites would have murdered Gideon, not only
unjustly for his duty of throwing down the Altar of Baal, but illegally,
because they would had him brought out that he might die without any further
Trial Judge. 6. 29, 30. So likewise the Jews that banded and bound themselves
under a curse to kill Paul before he was tried, would have Murdered him, not
only unjustly for his duty, but illegally before he was tried Act. 23. 12. But
this does not condemn the Actions of those Sufferers, in maintaining the
necessary execution of Judgment, upon persons who are Notorious Murderers, yea
professing a trade and prosecuting habitually a tract of continued Murdering
the people of the Lord.

6. Tho it should be certainly known, and sufficiently proven, that a man is a
Murderer etc. Yet it were Murder for an inferior, under a relation of
subjection to him, to kill him, as long as that subjection were acknowledged:
for whenever the common and mutual right or relation, either Natural, Moral,
Civil, or Religious, to the prejudice or scandal of the Church or State or
particular persons, is broken by killing any person, that is Murder; tho the
person killed deserve to die. As if a Subject should kill an acknowled King, a
Son by Nature or in Law should kill his Natural or legal father, a Servant
should kill his Master, breaking these relations, while their right and tie
were acknowledged (as some of them must still be acknowledged as long as the
Correlates continue in being, to wit, that of a father is not broken by his
becoming a Murderer) and to the danger, detriment, and scandal of the Church
and State; That were properly Assassination: for Assassines are they, who being
subject to others, either out of their oun head for their oun ends, or by
command of their Superiors, kill their Superiors, or such as they command
them to kill, as Alstedius describes them Theolog. Cas. cap. 18. de homicid.
reg. 55. Therefore David would not kill Saul, because he acknowledged him to be
the Lords Anointed, to whom he was under a relation of subjection; and because
he was his Master and Father in Law; And because it would have tended to the
hurt of the Kingdom, and involved it in Combustions and Contentions about the
succession, and prejudged his oun right, as well as to the scandal of the
people of God, tho Saul deserved otherwise to be capitally punished. So
Ishbosheth was killed by Baanah and Rehab 2 Samuel 4. 7. So Iozachar and
Iehozabad who killed Ioash 2 King. 12. 21. were punished as Murderers chap. 14.
6. because they were his servants, and did assassinate him to whom they were
subject. So the servants of Amon were punished by the people, as Conspirators
against their King and Master 2 King. 21. 23, 24. though Amon deserved to have
been punished as well as Amaziah was. Hence generally it is observed by some,
that tho right be given to equals or Superiors to bring their nearest
relations to condign punishment, when they turn entycers to Idolatry Deuteronomy. 13.
6. Yet no right or jus, upon any cause or occasion whatsoever, is given to
inferiors, as Children etc. to punish their fathers. See Pool. Synop. Critie.
in Locum. However it be, this cannot condemn the taking off of Notorious
Murderers, by the hand of such as were no way subject nor related to them, but
as enemies, who in extreme necessity executed righteous Judgment upon them,
without prejudice of the true necessary and chief good of the Church and
Commonwealth, or of any particular persons just right and security, as Napthali
qualifies it Page 22. 23. Prior edit.

7. Tho the matter of the Action were just, and the Murderer such a person as
we might punish, without any breach of relative obligations or duties; Yet the
manner may aggravate it to some degree of Murder; if it be done Secretly, when
it may be execute publicly; or suddenly and precipitantly, when it may be done
deliberately, without rushing upon such an Action, or hurrying the Murderer to
eternity, as this also might have had some weight with David not to murder Saul
secretly and suddenly in the Cave, or when he was sleeping, So Ishbosheth and
Io^sh and Amoa were murdered; Or if it be done subtly, when it may be
performed in more plain and fair dealing; or teacherously, under color of
friendship; or cruelly without regard to humanity; and especially when the
Actors are at peace with the person, whose blood they shed, as Ioab shed the
blood of war in peace 1 King. 2. 5. in killing Abner and Amasa so craftily and
cruelly; and Absalom made his servants Assassinate Amnon 2 Samuel 13. 28, 29. But
this cannot be charged upon them, who executed righteous Judgment, as
publicly, deliberately, and calmely, as the extraordinary exigence of pressing
necessity, in extremity of danger, could allow, upon notorious Murderers, with
whom they were in open and avowed terms of hostility.

8. Tho the manner also be inculpable; yet if the principle and motive of
killing, even those that deserve to die be out of malice, hatred, rage, or
revenge, for private or personal injuries, it is Murder. For the affection and
intention does make one and the same action of taking away the life, homicide
or no homicide, as Lex Rex says Quest. 31. Page 338. If a man out of hatred
deliberately take away another man's life, he is a Murderer eatenus; but if
that same man had taken away the others life, by the flying off of his axe
head, he neither hating him before nor intending to hurt him, he is no
Murderer by Gods express Law, allowing Cities of refuge for the one, and not
for the other Deuteronomy. 4. 42. Deuteronomy. 19. 4. etc. private revenge is indignity to
God, whose it is to take vengeance Deuteronomy. 32. 35. Romans 12. 19. Dearly beloved
avenge not your selves, for vengeance is the Lords. For which cause Jacob
curses Simeon and Levi their Murder of the Schechemites, for in their anger
they slew a man Genesis 49. 6, 7. So David would not put forth his hand against
Saul, for his oun private and personal quarrel. So Ioab killed Abner, and
Absalom Amnon. But this does not make the execution or Judgment, out of zeal
for God, respect to Righteousness, love to the Nations Interest, and care to
preserve the persecuted people of God from imminent destruction, upon public
Enemies Incendiaries, that are trampling upon all these precious Interests, and
threatening the utter ruin of them, and in a particular manner their
destruction who thus prevent them.

9. Tho the motive or cause were upon a public account, yet it may be Murder
to have a wrong End in it: as either to intend simply the destruction of the
person on whom they execute Judgment, as the end to which all their Action is
directed, or to make their oun advantage or honor the end of the Action. Thus
David would not kill Saul, because it might have been thought he did it to
obtain the Kingdom, of which he was rightful successor: And deservedly he
punished the Amalekite, that brought news of his killing Saul; and Baanah and
Rechab, for their killing Ishbosheth, thinking thereby to advance themselves at
David's Court. So also Ioab murdered Amasa to secure himself in the Generals
place. And Iehu, though upon the matter he executed righteous Judgment, his
end was only himself, it is condemned as murder. But when the execution of
righteous Judgment is both formally intended by the Actors, and natively and
really does conduce to the Glory of God, the preservation of the Remnant
threatened to be destroyed by these Murderers, the suppressing of impiety,
doing of Justice, turning away wrath, and removing of present and preventing of
future judgments, then it may be duty Naph. Page 23. Prior edit.

10. Tho the end also were not culpable; yet it may be Murder to kill Criminals
by transgressing the sphere of our vocation, and usurping upon the Magistrates
sword: for he by Office is a Revenger, to execute wrath upon him that does evil
Romans 13. 4. none must make use of the sword of vindictive Justice, but he to
whom the Lord gives it, therefore they that came to take Christ are condemned
and threatened for this Math. 26. 52. all they that take the sword shall perish
with the sword. The God of Order has assigned to every man his station and
calling, within the bounds whereof he should keep, without transgressing by
defect or excess, let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was called
1 Cor. 7. 20. and study to be quiet and do his oun business 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11.
Therefore David would not kill Saul, because he would have done it beside his
calling. And therefore the killing of Ioash and Amon was murder, because the
Assassines did transgress their vocation. But when Notorious Incendiaries do
not only transgress their vocation, but the Limits of humane society, and turn
open enemies to God and man, destroying the innocent, making havoc of the
Lords heritage, and vaunting of their villainies and boasting of their
wickedness, and thereby bringing wrath upon the Land if such effrontries of
insolence should pass unpunished, and when there is no Magistrate to do that
work of Justice, but all in that p^ace are airt and part with them, patrons and
defenders of them, yea no Magistrate that can be acknowledged as a Minister of
God to be applied unto; in that case, it is no a transgression of our vocation,
nor an Usurpation upon the Magistrates, where there is none, to endeavor to
avert wrath, by executing righteous Judgment. Otherwise if for fear, or
suspicion of the accidental hazard of private men's Usurping the Office or doing
of the duty of Public persons, every virtuous Action which may be abused shall
be utterly neglected, Impiety shall quickly gain Universal Empire, to the
extermination of all goodness Naph. Page 24. Prior edit. To clear this, it must
be considered, that a man's calling is two fold; his particular calling,
whereunto in the ordinary course of things he is regularly confined; and his
general calling, not circumscribed by particular rules, which from the common
obligation of the end for which all callings are institute, in the clear
exigence of an extraordinary emergent, according to the general rules of
righteousness, bind to an aggreeable practice: Therefore circumstances may
sometimes so diversity Actions, that what in the ordinary and undisturbed
state of things would be accounted an excess of our particular calling, and an
Usurpation, in an extraordinary occurrence may become a necessary duty of our
general calling.

11. Tho it were no Usurpation beyond our calling; yet it may be murder, to
kill any without the Call of God in a case of necessity, either in tute^a vitae
proxima, or though it be remota when the hazard is unavoidable. Every thing
must have Gods Call in its season to make it duty, so also the time of killing
Eccles. 3. 3. For want of this, David would not kill Saul. Lex Rex says
excellently to this Quest. 31. page 329, 330. David might have killed Saul when
he was sleeping, and when he cut of the lap of his garment, but it was unlawful
for him to kill the Lords anointed, as it is unlawful to kill a man because he
is the image of God Genesis 9. 6. except in case of necessity -- David having Saul
in his hand, was in a remote posture of defense, the unjust invasion then was
not actual, nor unavoidable, nor a necessary mean in humane prudence for self
preservation; for King Saul was not in an actual pursuit of the whole Princes,
Elders, Community of Israel; Saul did but seek the life of one man David, and
that not for Religion, or a National pretended offense, and therefore he could
not in conscience put hands on the Lords Anointed, but if Saul had actually
invaded David for his life, David might in that case make use of Goliahs sword
(for he took not that weapon as a Cipher to boast Saul) and rather kill then be
killed: Thus he. By a Call here we do not mean an express or immediate Call
from God, such as the Prophets might have to their extraordinary executions of
Judgment, as Samuel and Elijah had to kill Agag and Baals Prophets: but either
the allowance of man, then there is no question about it; Or if that cannot be
had, as in the case circumstantiate it cannot, Then the Providential and Moral
Call of extreme necessity, for preservation of our lives, and preventing the
murder of our Brethren, may warrant an extraordinary executing of righteous
Judgment upon the Murderers. Men may have a Call to a necessary duty, neither
every way mediate nor immediate, as the Call of running together to quench a
fire in a City, when Magistrates through wickedness or negligence will not or do
not call people forth unto that work; they have not man's call, nor an immediate
call from Heaven, yet they have a Lawful Call from God: So they do not intrud
upon the Magistrates Office, nor want they a call to this execution of
Judgment, who do materially that work for that exigent which Magistrates by
Office were bound to do, being called thereto by God, by Nature, and the call
of inevitable Necessity, which knows no h^mane Law, and to which some Divine
positive Laws will cede. Ius populi cap. 20. page 423.

12. Tho this be a principle of reason and natural Justice, when all the
forementioned circumstances are clear, that it is Lawful for private persons to
execute righteous Judgment, upon notorious Incendiaries and Murdering public
Enemies, in cases of necessity: yet it might be a sinful breach of the Sixth
Command, to draw extraordinary examples of it to an ordinary practice in
killing all who might be found Criminal, and would deserve death by the Law, as
all that have served under a banner of Tyranny and violence, displayed against
God and His people, to the ruin of the Reformation, wasting of the Country,
oppression of many honest families, and destruction of many innocent people,
are and would be found guilty of Murder; as the Chief Captain would have truly
alleged Paul to have been a Murderer, if he had been the Egyptian which made
an uproar, and led out four thousand men that were Murderers Act. 21. 38. As
for the vulgar and ordinary sort of those Vermin of Varlets, it is of no
advantage for oppressed people to foul their fingers upon them, when their
slaughter would not put a stop to, but rather increase, the destruction of the
people of God; and were unlawful to prevent and anticipate the due and Legal
execution of Justice, where there is any prospect or expectation of its running
in its right channel. But for the chief and principal Ringleaders, and common
public and habitual Incendiaries, and Masters of the ^rade of Murdering the
Lords people, when there is no other way of being rid of their rage, and
preserving our selves and preventing the destruction of our Brethren, we may in
that case of necessity make public examples of them, in an extraordinary
Procedure against them, that may be most answerable to the Rules of the
ordinary Procedure of Justice, and in imitation of the Heroic Actions recorded
and justified in the Word of God, in the like extraordinary cases; which are
imitable, when the matter of their Actions is ordinary, that is, neither
preternatural nor Supernatural tho the occasion was singular, just and
necessary, both by Divine precept, and as a mean to good and necessary ends,
and when there is no other to do the work, nor any prospect of access to
Justice in its ordinary and orderly course, nor possibility of suspending it
till that can be obtained. We need not then any other call than a Spirit of
holy zeal for God, and for our oun and our Brethrens preservation, in that
pinch of extremity. We do not hold these extraordinary Actions for regular and
ordinary Precedents, for all times and persons universally: which if people
should fancy, and heed more the glory and fame of the Action, than the sound
and solid Rule of the Scriptures, they may be tempted and carried to fearful
extravagances. But they may be Warrants, for private persons in their doing of
these things, in an extreme necessity, to which at other times they are not
called. And when the Lord, with Whom is the residue of the Spirit, does breath
upon His people more or fewer, to the exciting of more than ordinary zeal, for
the execution of Justice upon such Adversaries, we should rather ascribe Glory
and Praise to Him, Whose hand is not shortened, but many times chooses the
weak and foolish things of the world to confound the mighty and the wise, than
condemn His Instruments for doing such things Naph. page 24, 25. Prior Edit.

All these cases, which are all I can think on at present, comprehending all
that may any way infer the guilt of murder, I have collected; to the end I may
conclude this one Argument, and leave it to be considered: If this
extraordinary executing of Judgment, upon Notorious Incendiaries and Murdering
public Enemies, by private persons, in the circumstances above declared,
cannot be reduced to any case that can infer the guilt of murder; Then it
cannot be condemned but justified: But this extraordinary executing of
Judgment etc. cannot be reduced to any case that can infer the guilt of murder
(as will appear by the induction of all of them) Ergo this extraordinary
executing of Judgment etc. cannot be condemned but justified.

II. In the Next place, What we oune may be done warrantably in taking away the
life of men without breach of the Sixth Command, will appear by these
propositions and Assertions, which will bring the matter to the present
Circumstantiate Case.

1. It is certain, tho the Command be indefinitely expressed, it does not
prohibit all killing, but only that which is condemned in other explicatorie
Commands. Our Lord Jesus repeating this Command, explains it by expressing it
thus, Math. 19. 18. -- Thou shall not Murder. And if any be Lawful, it is
granted by all, that is, which is unavoidable by the invincible necessity of
Providence, when a man following his duty does that which beside and contrary
his intention and without any previous neglect or oversight in him, proves the
hurt and death of another, in which case he was allowed to flee to the City of
refuge by the Law of God. Whence if that Physical necessity did justify that
kind of killing, shall not a Moral necessity every way invincibly unavoidable
(except we suffer our selves and our Brethren to be destroyed by beasts of
prey) vindicate this kind, in an extraordinary extremity, when the Murderers
are protected under the sconce of pretended Authority? In which case the Law of
God would allow deliberate Murderers should be pursued by the Avenger of blood,
and not to have Liberty to flee to these subterfuges and pretexts of Authority
(mere Tyranny) but to be taken from the horns of such altars, and be put to
death, as Mr Mitchel says in vindicating his oun Action, in a Letter dated
Feb. 1674.

2. It is Lawful to take the life of known and convicted Murderers by public
Justice: Yea it is indispensably necessary by the Law of God, and no mercy nor
pardon of the Magistrate may interpose to spare them; for, Whosoever kills any
person the Murderer shall be put to death by the mouth of Witnesses -- ye shall
take no satisfaction for the life of a Murderer -- but he shall surely be put
to death, He was not to be admitted to the benefit of any refuge: And the
reason is, blood defiles the Land, and the Land cannot be cleansed of the blood
that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it Numb. 35. 30, 31,
32, 33. Hence if it be so necessary to cleanse the Land, then when the
Magistrate is not only negligent in his duty, but turns a Patron and Protector
of such Murderers, and imployes them as his Emissaries to murder and destroy,
it cannot be expected he should cleanse the Land, for then he should free it of
the burden of himself, and begin with himself: Therefore then there must be
more incumbent upon private persons, touched with the zeal of God, than at
another time. And as Mr Knox in his Conference with Queen Mary, says They that
in the fear of God execute Judgment where God has commanded, offend not God
tho Kings do it not: and adduces the examples of Samuel killing Agag, Elias
killing the Prophets of Baal, and of Phineas killing Zimri and Cozbi.

3. It is Lawful for private persons to kill, in Moderamine inculpatae tutulae,
their unjust Assaulters, in defending themselves against their violence, and
that both in Tutela vitae proxima, in the immediate defense of our life against
an immediate assault, in the instant of the assault, and also in tutela remota
in a remote defense of our selves, when that is as necessary as the first, and
there is no other way of escaping the destruction intented by Murderers,
either by flight or resistance; then it is Lawful to preserve our selves by
taking advantages to cut them off.

4. It is Lawful in a just war to kill the enemy; yea in the defensive war of
private subjects, or a part of the Commonwealth, against their oppressing
Tyrants, as is proven Head. 5. Where several of the Arguments used to evince
that Truth will confirm this: as namely those Arguments taken from the peoples
power in Reformation, and those taken from the hazard of partaking of others
sin and Judgment. For if all the Magistrates, Supreme and subordinate, turn
principal patrons and patterns of all abominations, and persecuters and
destroys of the people for not complying with them, then the people are not
only under an obligation to resist them; but seeing otherwise they would by
liable to their sin, in suffering them thus to trample on Religion and the
Interests of God as well as their oun, in order to turn away the wrath of God,
it is incumbent upon them to vindicate Religion, and Reform the Land from these
Corruptions, in an endeavor to bring those Malignant Enemies of God and
Destroyers of the people to condign punishment, that the heads of the people
being hanged up before the Lord against the sun, the fierce anger of the Lord
may be turned away from the Land Numb. 25. 4. In this case, as Buchannan says
of a Tyrant, de jure regni, A Lawful war being once undertaken with such an
enemy as a Tyrant is, every one out of the whole multitude of mankind may
assault with all the calamities of war a Tyrant, who is a public Enemy, with
whom all good men have a perpetual warfare. And tho the war ^e not always
actually prosecute in a hostile manner, yet as long as peace is not concluded
and the war ceased, they that have the just side of the quarrel may take
advantages in removing and taking off (not every single soldier of the
Contrary side, for that would contribute nothing to their prevailing in the
end) but the principal Instruments and promoters of the war, by whose fall the
offending side would suffer great loss, and the defending would be great
Gainers. So Iael killing Sisera Iabins Captain General, is greatly commended.
Now this was the Case of the Sufferers upon this head, as Mr Mitchel one of
them represents it, in his forecited letter I being (says he) a Soldier, not
having laid down my arms, but still upon my oun defense, having no other end
nor quarrel at any man -- besides the prosecution of the ends of the Covenant,
Particularly the overthrow of Prelates and Prelacy; And I being a declared enemy
to him (that is Sharp) on that account, and he to me in like manner, I never
found my self obliged -- to set a sentinel at his door for his safety, but as
he was always to take his advantage, as it appears, so I of him to take any
opportunity offered; Moreover we being in no terms of Capitulation, but on the
contrary, I by his instigation being excluded from all grace and favor,
thought it my duty to pursue him at all occasions.

5. It is Lawful to kill enemies in the rescue of our Brethren, when they are
keeping them in bondage, and reserving them for a sacrifice to the fury of
Tyrants, or leading them forth to the slaughter, or in the time of acting their
Murdering violence upon them, Then, to break Prisons, beat up Garrisons,
surprise the Murderers, and kill them in the rescue of our innocent Brethren,
is very Lawful, according to that Command Prove. 24. 11, 12. and the practice of
Moses, who seeing one of his Brethren suffering wrong, he defended him, and
avenged him that was oppressed, and slew the Egyptian Act. 7. 24. For that is a
certain Truth, which Grotius says in locum, jus naturae dat innocenti and
innocentem tutanti jus in nocentem. Hence it cannot but be Lawful also, in a
case of necessity, when both our selves and our Brethren are pursued
incessantly by destroying Murderers, to avenge our selves on them, and slay
them, when there is no other way to be rid of their violence.

6. It is Lawful to prevent the Murder of our selves or our Brethren, when no
other way is left, by killing the Murderers before they accomplish their wicked
design, if they be habitually prosecuting it, and have many times accomplished
it before. This follows upon the other: And upon this account it had been
duty for Gedaliab to have suffered I^banan to slay Ishmael, and so prevent the
Governors murder, if it had been certainly known that Ishmael was sent by the
King of Ammon to assassinate him Ier. 40. 14, 15. for nothing is there objected
against the Lawfulness of the thing, but only it was alleged that he spoke
falsely. Alstedius asserts this Theol. Cas. de h^micidio reg. 6. page 331.
Licitum est praevenire eum qui vult invadere, and praeveniendo occidere
antequam invadat, si necessarium est praevenire, quia aliter vita propria
defendi non potest nisi preveniendo. It is Lawful to prevent him that would
assault us, and by preventing to kill him before his invasion, if it be so
necessary, to prevent him, that our life cannot be otherwise defended but by
preventing. And hence he justifies that saying, licitum est occidere
insidiantem, It is Lawful to kill him that lies in wait to murder, ibid. This
is all the length that the reproached Sufferers, whom I am vindicating, go in
asserting this principle, as may be seen in their Informatory Vindication Head
2. page 55. where they say, We maintain it as both righteous and rational, in
defense of our lives, Liberties, and Religion, after an orderly and Christian
manner, to endeavor by all means Lawful and possible, to defend our selves,
rescue our Brethren, and prevent their murder, in a martial opposition against
wicked Persecuters, who are seeking to destroy them and us, and imbrue their
hands in our blood, according to the true import of the Apologetical
Declaration. Which is very rational. Especially considering.

7. These Murderers, who are thus to be prevented, are such whom the Law of God
commands to be put to death, and no where allows to be spared being public
Enemies to God and good men, Open Blasphemers, avowed Idolaters, affronted
Adulterers, Notorious Murderers, habitual Tyrants, suppressing Religion,
oppressing the Innocent, and professing a trade of destroying the Lords people.
Surely if God has expressly in His Laws provided, that Blasphemers, Idolaters,
Murderers etc. should not be suffered to live, He never intended men daily
guilty, yea making profession of these Crimes, should be allowed impunity,
either by virtue of their Office, or because there is none in Office to execute
Judgment upon them; but in a case of extreme necessity these Laws will not
only allow but oblige people, daily Murdered by them, for their oun
preservation, for vindication of Religion, for purging the Land of such
wickedness, for turning away the wrath of God, to prevent their prosecuting
their Murdering designs any further, and put a stop to their persecution by
putting an end to their wicked lives. Seeing, as Buchannan says de jure Regni,
It is expressly commanded to cut off wickedness and wicked men, without any
exception of rank or degree, and yet in no place of Sacred Scripture are
Tyrants more spared than private persons. Much less their bloody Emissaries.

Now seeing all these Cases of Killing I have collected, are justifyable in
Scripture, and none of the Sufferers upon this Head whom I am vindicating, have
exceeded in principle or practice the amount of these Assertions, What is said
already may have some weight to demur a censorious condemnation of them. But as
the True Nonconformist well observes, in answer to Dial. 7. page 391. Seeing
the consideration resulting from the Concurrence of all circumstances,
whereupon the right dignoscing of such deeds when actually existent does mostly
depend, does more contribute to the clearing and passing a judgment on a case
of this nature, when the whole contexture is exposed to certain examination,
than to set down general rules directive of such practices (which yet will all
justify this in question) Therefore to clear the case further, all may be
resolved into this State of the Question.

Whether or not private persons, incessantly pursued unto death, and threatened
with ineluctable destruction by Tyrants and their Emissaries, May, to save
themselves from their violence in case of extreme Necessity, put forth their
hand to execute righteous Judgment upon the Chief and principal Ringleaders,
Instruments, and Promoters of all these destructive Mischiefs and Miseries, Who
are open and avowed Enemies to God, Apostates, Blasphemers, Idolaters, Tyrants,
Traitors, Notorious Incendiaries, Atrocious Murderers, and known and convict to
be public Enemies, prosecuting their Murdering Designs notourly and
habitually, and therefore guilty of death by all Laws of God and man; And in
such an extraordinary case, put them to death who have de jure forefeited their
lives to Justice, when there is no access to public Justice, nor prospect of
obtaining it in an orderly way, nor any probability of escaping their intended
destruction, either by flight or resistance, if they be past longer unpunished;
And so deliver themselves from their Murdering Tyranny, while they are under no
acknowledged subjection to them, nor at peace with them, but maintaining a
defensive resistance against them; And in this extraordinary execution of
Justice, being not chargable with ignorance of matters of fact so manifest, nor
mistake of circumstances so palpable, nor with malice rage or revenge against
their persons for private and particular injuries, nor with Enthusiastic
Impulses pretended as their Rule, nor with deceit or Treachery in the manner,
nor with any breach of relation or obligation, nor Usurpation upon or prejudice
to any Lawful Right whatsoever in the matter, nor with any selfish or
sinistrous ends in the design; But forced to perform this Work of Judgment,
when there is none other to do it, out of zeal for the Glory of God, Care of
the Countries good, love to their Brethren, sense of their oun Danger, and
Respect to Justice; to the end, that by the removal of these wicked Destroyers,
their war against the prevailing faction of their Malignant Enemies may be more
successfully maintained, their Religion, Lives, Laws, and Liberties more
securely defended, their Brethren rescued, their Murder prevented, Impiety
suppressed, the Land cleansed from blood, and the wrath of God averted; That
this is the true State of the Question, the preceding Assertions all
comprehended here do make it evident. To which I answer in the Affirmative. And
shall come to give my Reasons.

Secondly, Then I shall offer some Reasons for this, first from some grounds
and Hypotheses of Reason: Then more expressly from Scripture proofs.

I. There may be some Arguments offered from the Dictates of natural reason.
Which I shall but only glance at.

1. I premit the Consideration of the Practice of all Nations, even such from
whom Patterns have been taken for Government, and who have had the most polite
and purest Policy, and have been the severest Animadverters upon all
Extravagants and Transgressers of their vocation: Yet even among them, for
private persons to destroy and rid the Commonwealth of such burdens, and vile
vermin so pernicious to it, was thought a virtue meriting rather Commendation,
than a thing to be Condemned. I shall not here instance the laudable practices
recorded in Scripture: These may be seen in their oun place. Neither do I speak
of ruder Nations, among whom this is a rel^ct of reason, not of ruderness: as
the Oriental Indians have a Custom, whenever any person runs a muck, that is,
in a revengeful fury takes such a quantity of Opium, as distracts them into
such a rage of mad animosity, that they fear not to assault (which is the
common operation of that potion there) and go through destroying whom they can
find in their way: Then every man Arms against him: and is ambitious of the
honor of first killing him: which is very rational, for otherwise no man could
be safe; and it seems to be as rational, to take the same Course with our mad
Malignant mucks, who are drunk with hellish fury, and are running in a rage to
destroy the people of God whom they can meet with. But all the Nations where
the best Policy was established, have been of this mind. In Greece public
rewards were enacted to be given, and honors appointed by several Cities, to
those that should kill Tyrants, from the mightiest of them to the meanest; with
whom they thought there was no bond of humanity to be kept. Hence Thebe is
usually commended for killing her husband, Timoleon for killing his Brother,
because they were pernicious and destructive to the Commonwealth: which, tho
it seem not justifyable, because of the breach of relation of natural
subjection, yet it shows what sentiments the most politic Nations have had of
this practice. As also among the Romans, Cassius is commended for killing his
son, and Fulvius for killing his oun son going to Catiline, and Brutus for
killing his kinsmen having understood they had conspired to introduce Tyranny
again. Servilius Ahalas is commended for killing even in the Court Sp. Melius,
turning his back and refusing to compear in judgment, and for this was never
judged guilty of bloodshed, but thought nobilitate by the slaughter of a
Tyrant, and all posterity did affirm the same. Cicero, speaking of the
slaughter of Caesar, styles it a famous and divine fact, and positum ad
imitandum. Sulpitius Asper, being asked, why he had combined with others
against Nero, and thought to have killed him? made this bold reply, that he
knew not any other way to put a stop to his villainies, and redeem the world
from the infection of his example, and the evils which it groaned under by
reason of his crimes. On the contrary, Domitius Corbulo is reprehended by all,
for neglecting the safety of mankind, in not putting an end to Nero's Cruelty,
when he might very easily have done it: And not only was he by the Romans
reprehended but by Tyridates the Persian King, being not at all afraid lest it
should afterward befall an example unto himself. When the Ministers of Cajus
Caligula, a most cruel Tyrant, were with the like cruelty tumultuating for the
slaughter of their Master, requiring them that killed him to be punished,
Valerius Asiaticus the Senator cried out aloud, I wish I had killed him, and
thereby both composed their clamor and stopped their rage. For there is so great
force in an honest deed (says Buchannan de jure Regni, relating this passage)
that the very lightest show thereof, being presented to the minds of men, the
most furious assaults are allied, and fury will languish, and madness it self
mu^t acknowledge the soveraignity of reason. The Senate of Rome did often
approve the fact, tho done without their order oftentimes by private hands: As
upon the slaughter of Commodus, in stead of revenging it, they decreed that his
Carcass should be exposed and torn in pieces. Sometimes they ordered before
hand to have it done; As when they condemned Didimus Iulianus, they sent a
Tribune to slay him in the Palace: Nay they have gone so far, as in some cases
to appoint reward for such as should kill those Tyrants that trampled upon
their Laws, and murdered virtuous and innocent people; As that sentence of the
Senate against the two Maximim does witness, qui cos occiderit proe^ium
merebitur. Buchannan ubi supra, rehearsing many instances of this nature, gives
reasons of their approvableness. And these I find here and there scattered, in
his book de jure Regni. 1. They that make a prey of the Commonwealth, are not
joined to us by any civil bond or tie of humanity, but should be accounted the
most Capital enemies of God and of all men. 2. They are not to be counted as
within humane society, but transgressors of the limits thereof; Which who so
will not enter into, and contain himself within, should be taken and treated as
wolve^, or other kinds of noisome beasts, which whosoever spares he preserves
them to his oun destruction, and of others, and whosoever kills does not only
good to himself, but to all others, and therefore does merit rather reward than
to be condemned for it. For if any man, divested of humanity, should degenerate
into such Cruelty, as he would not meet with other men but for their
destruction) as the Monsters I am speaking of could meet with none of the party
here treated on, but to this effect) he is not to be called a man, no more than
Satyrs, Apes, or Bears. 3. It is expressly Commanded to cut off, wickedness
and wicked men, without any exception of rank or degree: And if Kings would
abandon the Counsels of wicked men, and measure their greatness rather by
duties of virtue, than by the impunity of evil deeds; they would not be grived
for the punishment of Tyrants, nor think that Royal Majesty is lessened by
their destruction, but rather be glad that it is purged from such a stain of
wickedness. 4. What is here to be reprehended? is it the cause of their
punishment? that is palpable: Is it the Law which adjudges them to punishment?
All Laws were desired as necessary for repressing Tyrants; whosoever does
condemn this must likewise condemn all the Laws of Nations: Is it the person
executing the Laws? where will any other be found to do it, in such
circumstances. 5. A Lawful war being once undertaken with an enemy for a just
cause, it is Lawful not only for the whole people to kill that enemy, But for
every one of them: every one therefore may kill a Tyrant, who is a public
enemy, with whom all good men have a perpetual war-fare. Meaning, if he be
habitually Tyrannical, and destructive to the people, so that there is no
living for good people for him: Otherwise, tho a man by force or fraud acquire
Soveraignity, no such violence is to be done to him, providing he use a
moderate way in his Government, such as Vespasian among the Romans; Hiero in
Syracuse. 6. Treason cannot be committed against one who destroys all Laws and
Liberties of the people, and is a pernicious plague to the Commonwealth.

2. Such is the force of this Truth in the case circumstantiate; that it
extorts the acknowledgment of the Greatest Authors, Ancient and Modern,
Domestic and Foreign, and even of all rational Royalists, (as Mr Mitchel
says in his Postscript to the forecited letter) that it is Lawful for any
private person to kill a Tyrant sine titulo and to kill Tories or open
Murderers as devouring beasts, because the good of his Action does not only
redound to the person himself, but to the whole Commonwealth, and the person
acting incurs the danger himself alone. Tertulltan, though a man loyal to
excess, says, Every man is a soldier enrolled to bear Arms against all
Traitors and public Enemies. The Ancient Ecclesiastical Historian, Sozomene,
relating the death of Julian, and intimating that he was supposed to have been
slain by a Christian soldier, adds, Let none be so rash as to condemn the
person that did it, considering he was ^us courageous in behalf of God and
Religion. Sozom. Hist. Lib. 6. cap. 2. Barcla^us, a great Royalist, says,
Tyrannos ut hosts publ^s, non solum ab universo populo, sed a singulis etiam,
impeti caedique jure optimo posse, tota Antiquitas ceasuit. That Tyrants as
public Enemies may be attacqued, and Lawfully slain, not only by all the
people but every one of them, all Antiquity judged. Grotiue de jure be^i Lib.
1. cap. 4. says, (...) and cui juris gentium requisita non adsint, imperium
arripuerit, ^^que pactio u^a sequuta sit, aut fides illi data, sed sola vi
re^^^tur possessio, videtur manner bellis jus; ac proinde (...) eum (...) quod
in hostem licet, qui a quolibet, etiam pri^ato jure, po^est interfici. Yea King
James the 6. in his R^m^^strancs for the right of Kings, says, The public
Laws makes it Lawful and free for any private person to enterprise against an
Usurper. Divines say the same. Chamier Tom. 2. Lib. 15. cap. 12. Sect. 19.
Cives omnes jus habent insurgendi contra Tyrannos. Aisted. Theolog. Gas. cap.
17. reg. 9. page 321. Tyrannum absque Titulo, qui est invasor, quilibet pr.
vatus potest and debet ^ medio tollere, quia patriam hostiliter invadit. And
cap. 18. reg. 14. page 332. Licitum est privato cuivis occidere Tyrannum, qui
injuste invadit Dominium. But Dr Ames. de Cons^tentia Lib. 5. cap. 31. de
homicidio quest. 4. asserts all that is here pleaded for in terminis Quest. 4.
An aliquando licet occidere hominem Authoritate privata? Resp. Aliquando licet
occidere nulla publica Cognitione precedente, sed tum solum, quando causa
evidenter postulat ut hoc siat, and Authoritas publica non potest implorari: In
isthoc enim casu, privatus public Minister constituitur, tam n^^tu Dei, quam
omnium hominum consensu. He propones the question: If sometimes it be Lawful to
kill a man by private Authority? He answers, It is sometimes Lawful to kill
another without public Cognition, proceeding, but then only when the cause
does evidently require it that it be done, and public Authority cannot be
implored; for in that case any private man is constitute in stead of a public
Minister of Justice, both by Gods allowance, and by the consent of all men.
These propositions carry such evidence in them, that the Authors thought it
superfluous to confirm them, and sufficient to affirm them. And from any
reason that can be adduced to prove any of these Assertions, it will be as
evident that this Truth I plead for is thereby confirmed, as that it self is
thereby strengthened. For it will follow natively, if Tyrants and Tyrants sine
titulo, be to be thus dealt with; then the Monsters of whom the question is,
those Notorious Incendiaries and Murdering public Enemies, are also to be so
served: For either these Authors assert the Lawfulness of so treating Tyrants
sine titulo, because they are Tyrants, or because they want a title: If the
first be said; Then all Tyrants are to be so served; and reason would say, and
Royalists will subscribe, if Tyrants that call themselves Kings may be so
animadverted upon, because of their perniciousness to the Commonwealth by
their Usurped Authority, then the subordinate firebrands that are tho immediate
instruments of that destruction, the inferior emissaries that act it and
actually accomplish it in Murdering innocent people, may be so treated; for
their persons are not more sacred than the other, nor more impunible: If the
second be said, it is Lawful to kill them because they want a title; Then it is
either because they want a pretended title, or because they want a real and
Lawful one: The Latter is as good as none, and it is proved Head. 2. Arg. 7.
that no Tyrants can have any: The former can not be said, for all Tyrants will
pretend some, at least before they be killed.

3. But tho some of these Great Authors neither give their reasons for what
they assert, nor do they extend it to all Tyrants that Tyrannise by virtue of
their pretended Authority, yet it will not be difficult to prove, that all
great and small that murder, destroy, and Tyrannise over poor people, are to be
punished, though they pretend Authority for what they do. And hence, If all
Tyrants, Murderers, and Destroyers of mankind ought to be punished; then when
it cannot be done by public Authority, it may be done by private: But all
Tyrants, Murderers, and Destroyers of mankind, ought to be punished: Ergo --
The Minor is manifest from the General Commands of shedding the blood of every
man that sheds^ it Genesis 9. 6. of putting to death whosoever kills any person
Numb. 35. 30, 31. of respecting no man's person in Judgment Deuteronomy. 1. 17. and
universally all penal Laws are general without exception of any, for under that
reduplication of criminal transgressing those Laws, under that general
Sanction, they are to be judged; which admits of no partial respect: for if the
greatest of men be Murderers, they are not to be considered as great, but as
Murderers; just as the meanest are not to be considered as mean or poor, but as
Murderers. But I need not insist on this, being sufficiently proved Head. 2.
Arg. 9. And through out that Head, proving that Tyrants can have no Authority.
And, if they have no Authority, then Authority (which they have not) cannot
exempt them from punishment. The Connection of the Major Proposition may be thus
urged: When this Judgment cannot be executed by public Authority, either it
must be done by private Authority in case of extreme necessity, or not at all:
for there is no Medium but either to do it by public Authority, or private: If
not at all, Then the Land must remain still defiled with blood, and cannot be
cleansed Numb. 35. 33. Then the fierce anger of the Lord cannot be averted
Numb. 25. 4. for without this executing of Judgment, He will not turn it away
Ier. 5. 1. Then must Murderers be encouraged by their impunity to make havoc
of all according to their Lust, besides that poor Handful who cannot eschape
being their prey, as their Case is circumstantiate. Besides, this is point
blank contrary to these General Commands, which say peremptorely, The Murderer
shall be put to death, but this supposed Case when public Authority will not
or cannot put them to death, says, they shall not be put to death. In this
Case then I demand, whether their impunity is necessary, because they must not
be put to death? or because they cannot be put to death? To say the Latter,
were an untruth: for private persons can do it, when they get access, which is
possible: If the former, then it is clearly contradictory to the Commands,
which say, they must be put to death, excepting no Case, but when they cannot
be put to death. If it be said, they must not be put to death, because the Law
obliges only public Authority to execute Judgment. To this I reply. 1. I
trust to make the Contrary appear from Scripture and by. 2. If the Law obliges
none but those in public Authority to execute Judgment, then when there is no
Judgment execute, it must be the sin of non but those in public Authority:
And if it be only their sin, now comes others to be threatened and punished for
this, that Judgment is not executed? if they must only stand by and be
spectators of their omissions unconcerned, What shall they do to evite this
wrath? Shall they exhort them? or witness against them, But that more than all
this is required is proved before several times, where this Argument of peoples
being punished for the sin of their Rulers has been touched. 3. Then when
there is no Authority, it must be no sin at all that Judgment is not executed,
because it is the sin of none: it can not be sin, except it be the sin of some.
4. What if those in public Authority be the Murderers? who shall put them do
death? By what Authority shall Judgment be execute upon them? Whither public
or private? public it cannot be: for there is no formal public Authority
above the Supreme, who are supposed the party to be punished: If it be by the
radical Authority of the people, which is the thing we plead for, then it is
but private, as that of one party against another: The people are the party
grieved, and so cannot be Judges: At best then this will be extrajudicial
executing of Judgment. And if the people may do it upon the Greatest of
Tyrants, then a part of them who are in greatest hazard may save themselves
from those of Lesser Note, by putting them to death: for if all the people have
right to punish Universal Tyrants, because they are destroyers of all; then a
part has right to punish particular Tyrants, because they are destroyers of
them, when they cannot have access to public Authority, nor the concurrence of
the whole body.

4. Let these Murderers and Incendiaries be considered, either as a part of the
Community with them whom they murder and destroy, or not: If they be a part,
and do belong to the same Community (which is not granted in this case, yet let
it be given) Then when the safety of the whole or better part, cannot consist
with the sparing or preserving of a single man, especially such an one as
prejudges all and destroys that better part; he is rather to be cut off, than
the whole or the better part be endangered: for the cutting off of a Contagious
Member that destroys the rest of the body, is well warranted by Nature,
because the safety of the whole is to be preferred to the safety of a part,
especially a destructive part: But now who shall cut it off? since it must be
cut off, otherwise a greater part of the body will be presently consumed, and
the whole endangered. It is sure the Phisicians duty: but what if he will not?
or can not? or there be no Phisician? then any that can may and must: yea one
member may in that case cut off another. So when either the Magistrate will
not, or dare not, or does not, or there is none to do this necessary work of
Justice, for the preservation of the Community; any member of it may rather
prevent the destruction of the whole, or a greater part, by destroying the
Murdering and destructive Member, than suffer himself and others to be
unavoidably destroyed by his being spared. If they be not within, or belonging
to that Society, then they may be dealt with and carried toward as public
Enemies and Strangers, and all advantages may be taken of them in cases of
necessity, as men would do if invaded by Turks or Tartars.

5. Let it be considered, what men might have done in such a case before
Government was erected, if there had been some public and notour Murderers
still preying upon some sort of men. Certainly then private persons (as all are
in that case) might kill them to prevent further destruction. Hence if this was
Lawful before Government was established, it cannot be unlawful when people
cannot have the benefit of the Government; when the Government that is, instead
of giving redress to the grieved and oppressed, does allow and empower them to
destroy them: otherwise people might be better without Government than with it,
for then they might prevent their Murderers by cutting them off. But so it is
that this was Lawful before Government was established. For let it be adverted,
that the Scripture seems to insinuate such a Case before the flood. Cain, after
he Murdered his brother, feared that every man that found him should slay him
Genesis 4. 14. If he had reason to fear this, as certainly he had, if the Lord had
not removed that by proroguing the execution of vengeance upon him, for his
greater punishment and the worlds more Lasting instruction, and by seting a
mark upon him, and inhibiting under a severe threatening any to touch him; Then
either every man that should have killed him was the Magistrate (which were
ridiculous) or every man was every and any private person universally, which
might have killed him if this inhibition had not past upon it. Anisworth upon
the place says, that among the ancient Romans every one might kill without a
challenge, any man that was Cursed for some public Crime, and cites Dyonis.
Halicarnas. L. 2. And so Cain spoke this from a dictate of Nature and a guilty
Conscience.

6. At the Erection of Government, tho the people resign the formal power of
life and death and punishing Criminals over to the Governor, Constitute by
them; yet as they retain the radical power and right virtually, So when either
the Magistrates neglects their duty of vindicating the innocent and punishing
their destroyers, or impowers Murderers to prey upon them; In that case they
may resume the exercise of it to destroy their destroyers, when there is no
other way of preventing or escaping their destructions: because extremis morbis
extrema remedia. In an extraordinary exigent, when Ahab and Iezebel did undo
the Church of God, Elias with the peoples help killed all Baals Priests against
and without the Kings will, in this case its evident the people resumed their
power, as Lex Rex says Quest. 9, Page 63. There must be a Court of Necessity,
no less than a Court of Justice, when it is in this extremity as if they had no
Ruler, as that same Learned Author says Quest. 24. Page 213. If then the
people may resume that power in cases of necessity which they resigned to the
Magistrate; then a part may resume it, when a part only is in that necessity,
and all may claim an interest in the Resumption, that had an interest in the
Resignation.

7. Especially upon the dissolution of a Government, when people are under a
necessity to revolt from it, and so are reduced to their primeve Liberty, they
may then resume all that power they had before the resignation, and exert it in
extraordinary exigents of necessity. If then a people that have no Magistrates
at all may take order with their destroyers, then must they have the same power
under a Lawful revolt. As the ten tribes, if they had not exceeded in severity
against Adoram R^h^boams Collector, had just cause to take order with that
Usurpers Emissarie, if he came to oppress them: But if he had come to Murder
them, then certainly it was duty to put him to death, and could not be censured
at all, as it is not, in the History 1 King. 12. 18. But so it is that the
people pursued by these Murderers, some of which in their extreme exigences
they put to death; have for these several years maintained a declared Revolt
from the present Government, and have denied all subjection to it upon the
grounds vindicated Head. 2. And therefore they must be considered as reduced to
their primeve Liberty, and their pursuers as their public Enemies, to whom
they are no otherwise related than if they were Turks, whom none will deny it
Lawful to kill, if they invade the Land to destroy the inhabitants.

8. Hence, seeing they are no other than public Enemies, unjustly invading,
pursuing, and seeking them to destroy them; what Arguments will prove the
Lawfulness of Resistance, and the necessity of self Defense, in tutela vitae
proxima, will also prove the Lawfulness of taking all advantages upon them, in
tutela remota* for if it be Lawful to kill an enemy in his immediate assault, to
prevent his killing of them when there is no other way of preserving themselves
from his fury; Then it must be Lawful also, in his remote but still incessant
pursuit, to prevent his Murdering them by killing him, when the^e is no other
way to escape in a case of extreme necessity. But that this was the Case of
that poor people, Witnesses can best prove it; And I dare appeal to two sorts
of them that know it best, that is, all the pursuers, and all the pursued.

9. This is founded, and follows upon the 4 Art. of the Solemn League and
Covenant: Where we are bound with all faithfulness to endeavor, the discovery
of all such as have been or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil
Instruments -- that they may be brought to public trial and receive condign
punishment. Now as this obliges to the orderly and ordinary way of prosecuting
them, when there is access to public Judicatories: so when there is none,
Either this Article obliges to no endeavor at all (which cannot be, for it is
Moral duty to endeavor the punishment of such) or else it must oblige to this
extraordinary Action and execution of Judgment, if to any at all. Especially
considering, how in the sense of the short comings of this duty, it is renewed
in the Solemn Acknowledgment of sins and Engagement to duties That we shall be
so far from conniving at Malignity, injustice, etc. that we shall -- take a
more effectual Course, than heretofore, in our respective Places and Callings,
for punishing and suppressing these evils -- Certainly we were called to one
way of prosecuting this obligation then, when it was first engaged into, and to
another now, when our Capacity and Circumstances are so materially and formally
altered: if the effectual Course then, was by public Authority; then now when
that is wanting, there must be some obligation to take some effectual Course
still, that may suit our Places and Callings, which will certainly comprehend
this extraordinary way of suppressing those-evils, by preventing their growth
in curbing the Instruments and executing Judgment upon them, in a case of
extreme Necessity, which will suit with all Places and all Callings.

II. From the Scriptures, these Arguments are offered. First, Some approven
Examples, and imitable in the like Circumstances, will clear and confirm the
Lawfulness of this extraordinary Work of Judgment executed by private persons,
upon notorious Incendiaries, firebrands, and Murderers, guilty of death by the
Law of God.

1. Moses spyed an Egyptian smiting an Hebrew one of his Brethren, and he
looked this way and that way, and when he saw that there was no man, he slew
the Egyptian and hid him in the sand. Exodus 2. 11, 12. Here Is an uncondemned
Example: whereof the Actor who was the Relator did not condemn himself, tho he
condems himself for faults that seem less odious; yea in effect he is rather
commended by Stephen the Martyr Act. 7. And tho it be extraordinary, in that it
was done by private Authority, not by a Judge, as it was objected to him the
second day: yet it was not unimitable; Because that Action, tho Heroical,
whereof the ground was ordinary, the Rule Moral, the Circumstances commonly
incident, the managment directed by humane prudence, cannot be unimitable: But
such was this Action, tho Heroical. The ground was ordinary, spying his Brother
in hazard, whose Murder he would have prevented. The Rule was Moral, being
according to that Moral precept of rescuing our Brother in hazard Prove. 24. 11,
12. The Circumstances were incident in a case of extreme necessity, which he
managed very prudently, looking this way and that way, and hiding him in the
sand. Therefore it may be imitated in the like Case. It signifies nothing to
say that he was moved by the Spirit of God thereto: for unto every righteous
performance, the motion of the Spirit of God is requisite. This Impulse that
Moses had and others aftermentioned, was nothing but a greater measure of that
assisting Grace, which the extraordinariness of the case and the difficulties
therein occurring did call for; but the intervening of such motions, do not
alter the Rule, so as to make the action unimitable. Impulses are not the Rule
of duty, either under an ordinary or extraordinary exigence; but when they are
subsequent and subservient both to the Rule of duty* and to a man's call in his
present circumstances, they clearly determine to the species of an Heroic
Enterprise; in so much that it is not only the particular deed that we are to
heed for our imitation, but we are to emulate the Grace and Principle of zeal
which produced it, and is thereby so conspicuously relucent for our upstirring
to acts in like manner, as God may give opportunity As is observed by the True
Nonconformist Dial. 7. Page 392. etc.

2. When Israel Joined himself unto Baal-Peor, the Lord said unto Moses, take
all the heads of the people, and hang them up before the Lord against the Sun,
that the fierce Anger of the Lord may be turned away from Israel. And Moses
said unto the Judges, slay every one his men that were joined unto Baal-Peor.
And when Zimri brought the Medianitish Cozbi, in the sight of Moses, and in the
sight of all the Congregat^on, who were weeping before the door of the
Tabernacle; And when Phinehas. saw it, he rose up -- and took a javelin in his
hand, and he went after the man of Israel, into the Tent, and thrust both of
them through -- So the Plague was stayed -- And the Lord spoke unto Moses,
saying, Phinehas has turned my wrath away from the Children of Israel, while
he was zealous for my sake among them -- I give unto him my Covenant of Peace
-- because he was zealous for his God, and made an atonement for the Children
of Israel Numb. 25. 3 -- 13. This Action is here much commended, and recorded
to his commendation Psalm. 106. 30, 31. Then stood up Phinehas and executed
Judgment and so the Plague was stayed and that was counted unto him for
righteousness unto all generations that is -- in justitiam facti coram
hominibus, qui alios potuissent hoc factum pessime interpretari, tanquam
temerarium, intempesti^um, a privato contra Magistratum patratum, crudele nimis
ab negatum poenitentiae spatium, Deus tamen aestimavit tanquam insigniter
justum. Pool Synops. Critic. in Locum. It is certain, this Action was some way
extraordinary; because Phinehas was not a Magistrate, nor one of the Judges
whom Moses commanded to slay every one his men verse 5. Otherwise, if this had
been only an ordinary execution of Judgment by the Authority of Moses,
Phinehas his Action would not have been so much taken notice of, nor so
signally rewarded; but here it is noted as a singular act of zeal, which it
could not have been, if it was only an ordinary execution of the Magistrates
command: yet tho this action was signally Heroical, proceeding from a Principle
of pure zeal for God, and prompted by a powerful motion of the Spirit of God to
that extraordinary execution of Judgment: It is notwithstanding imitable in
the like Circumstances. For, the matter is ordinary, being neither
preternatural nor supernatural, but just and necessary. The end was ordinary,
to turn away the wrath of God, which all were obliged to endeavor. The
principle was ordinary, (tho at the time he had an extraordinary measure of it)
being zealous for the Lord, as all were obliged to be. The rule was ordinary,
to wit, the Command of slaying every man that was joined to Baal-Peor verse. 5.
only this was extraordinary, that the zeal of God called him to this Heroical
Action, tho he was not a magistrate, in this extraordinary exigent, to avert
the wrath of God; which was neither by Moses his command, no^ by the Judges
their obedience, turned away, only by Phinehas's act of another nature, and
his zeal appearing therein and prompting him thereto, the Lord was appease^ and
the plague stayed. In which fervor of zeal, transporting him to the omission
off the ordinary solemnities of Judgment, the Spirit of the Lord places the
righteousness and praise of the Action. Yet the same Call and Motion of zeal
might have empowered others to do the like: the Text speaks of no other Call he
had, but that of zeal verse. 11, 12, 13. ye^ another was obliged to do the same,
upon the ground of that Moral Command Deuteronomy. 13. 6 -- 9. having the ground of
Gods ordinary Judgment, which commands the Idolater to die the death, and
therefore to be imitate of all that prefer the true honor and Glory of God to
the affection of flesh and wicked Princes, as Mr Knox affirms in his
conference with Lithingtoun, rehearsed before Per. 3. Further, let it be
inquired, what makes it unimitable? Certainly it was not so, because he had the
motion and direction of Gods Spirit; for men have that to all duties. It was
not, because he was raised and stired up of God to do it, for God may raise up
Spirits to imitable actions. It was not, because he had an extraordinary Call,
for men have an extraordinary Call to imitable actions, as the Apostles had to
Preach. We grant these Actions are extraordinary and unimitable; which, first,
do deviate from the rule of com; mon virtue, and transcend all rules of common
reason and Divine Word; but this was not such, but an heroic Act of zeal and
fortitude: Next these Actions, which are contrary to a Moral ordinary Command
are unimitable, as the Israelites robbing the Egyptians, borrowing and not
paying again, Abraham's offering his son Isaac; but this was not such: Next
those Actions, which are done upon some special Mandate of God, and are not
within the compass of ordinary obedience to the ordinary rule; are unimitable;
but this is not such: As also Miraculous Actions, and such as are done by the
extraordinary inspiration of the Spirit of God, as Elias his killing the
Captains with their fifties by fire from Heaven; but none can reckon this among
these. See Ius populi at length discussing this point, and pleading for the
imitableness of this Action cap. 20. If therefore the Lord did not only raise
up this Phinehas to that particular act of Justice, but also warrant and accept
him therein and reward him therefore, upon the account of his zeal, when there
was a Godly and zealous Magistrate, able, and whom we cannot without breach of
charity presume, but also willing to execute Justice, how much more may it be
pleaded, that the Lord, who is the same yesterday, to day and for ever, will
not only pour out of that same Spirit upon others, but also when He gives it,
both allow them, tho they be but private persons, and also call them, being
otherwise in a Physical and Probable Capacity, to do these things in an
extremely necessi^ous and otherwise irrecoverable state of the Church, to
which in a more entire condition He does not call them? And particularly, when
there is not only the like or worse provocations, the like necessity of
execution of Justice and of Reformation, for the turning away of wrath and
removing of Judgments, that was in Phinehas's case; but also, when the Supreme
Civil Magistrate, the Primores regni and other inferior Rulers, are not only
unwilling to do their duty, but so far corrupted and perverted, that they are
become the Authors and Patronizers of these abominations Naph. Prior Edit. Page
23.

3. When the Children of Israel served Eglon the King of Moab, and they cried
unto the Lord, He raised them up a Deliverer, Ehud the son of Gera, who made a
dagger, and brought a present unto Eglon, and put forth his left hand, and took
the dagger from his right thigh, and thrust it into his belly Judge. 3. 21. That
this Action was approven will not be doubted, since the Lord raised him up as a
Deliverer, who by this Heroical Action commented it, and since it was a Message
from God. And that it was extraordinary were ridiculous to deny, for sure this
was not the judicial Action of a Magistrate: Neither was Ehud a Magistrate at
this time, but only the Messenger of the people sent with a present. Yet it is
imitable in the like case, as from hence many grave Authors concluded the
Lawfulness of killing a Tyrant without a Title.

4. When the Lord discomfi^ed the host of Iabin, and Sisera his Captain fled
into the house of Heber the Kenite, Iael Hebers wife took a nail of the tent,
and went softly unto him, and smote the nail into his temples Judge. 4. 21. Of
which the Prophetess Deborah says, chap. 5. 24. blessed above women shall Iael
the wife of Heber the Kenite be, blessed shall she be above women in the tent.
Yet not only was Iael no Magistrate, but in subjection to and at peace with
Iabin, tho she killed his Captain. But, nulla hic erat in^ustitia, cum
declaratus esset hostis publicu^, justum erat Bellum, Oppressor erat Populi
Dei; debebat Iael, quasi membrum reipublicae; communem hostem prodere and
perdere. Itaque peccasset Iahel si eum non occidisset. Martyr and al^i cirati
in Pool. Synops. Critic. in Locum, Albeit that Author himself, in his English
Annotations, does cut the knot in stead of loosing it, in denying Deborahs Song
to be Divinely inspired in its first composure, but only recorded as a History
by Divine inspiration, as other Historical Passages not approven, only because
this Heroic fact of Iael is there commended; which is too bold an attempt upon
this part of the holy Canon of the Scripture: Whence we see, what
inconveniences they are driven to, that deny this principle of natural Justice
the Lawfulness of cutting off public Enemies to procure the Deliverance of the
Lords people. Hence, if it be Lawful for private persons, under subjection to
and at peace with the public Enemies of the Lords people, to take all
advantages to break their yoke, and deliver the oppressed from their bondage,
by killing their Oppressors; it must be much more Lawful, for such as
acknowledge no such subjection nor aggreement, to attempt the same in extreme
necessity: But the former is true: Therefore the later.

5. When Samson married the Timnite, and obliged himself by compact, to give
them thirty sheets and thirty change of garmentts, upon their solving his
riddle: The Spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he went down to A^hkelon, and
slew thirty men of them and took their Spoil Iud. 14. 19. And afterward, when
he lost his wife by the cruelty and treachery of those Philistines, he said
unto them, Though you have done this, yet will I be avenged of you, and after
that I will cease, and he smote them hip and thigh with a great slaughter chap.
15. 7, 8. And wen the Jews, who acknowledged the Philistims for Rulers, (...)
to Et^m to expostulate with him, all the satisfaction he gave them was to
avouch, that as they did unto him so he had done unto them and to kill a
thousand more of them verse. 11. etc. These were extraordinary Heroic facts,
not only because they flowed from an extraordinary power wherewith he was
endued, and from an extraordinary Motion and Call, but because of his avenging
his oun private injuries for the public good, in a way both of fortitude and
prudence, without a declared war, provoking the enemies against himself, and
diverting from the people and converting against himself all their fury, in
which also he acted as a Type of Christ; and also because he acted not as a
Magistrate at this time, for by whom was he called or counted a Magistrate? not
by the Philistines, nor by the men of Judah, for they tell him that the
Philistines, were their Lords, and they bound him and delivered him up to them:
Yet in his private Capacity, in that extraordinary exigence, he avenged himself
and his Country against his public enemies, by a Clandestine war: which is
imitable in the like case, when a prevailing faction of Murdering enemies
domineer over and destroy the people of God, and there is no other way to be
delivered from them: for his ground was Moral, because they were public enemis
to whom he might do as they did to him. Hence, If Saints sometimes in cases of
necessity may do unto their public enemies as they have done unto them, in
prosecuting a war not declared against them; then much more may they do so in
cases of necessity, to deliver themselves from their Murdering violence, when a
war is declared: But here is an example of the former: Ergo --

6. When these same Philistims again invaded and overran the Land in the time
of Saul, Jonathan his son and his Armor-bearer fell upon the Garrison of these
uncircumcised, and killed them 1 Samuel 14. 6, 13. This was an Heroic Action,
without public Authority, for he told not his father verse 1. And singular
indeed, in respect of the effect, and were a tempting of the Lord for so few to
assault such a multitude, as it were to imitate Sams^n in his Exploits: but in
this respect, these Actions are only unimitable in consideration of prudence,
not of Conscience, or as to the Lawfulness of the thing: their ground was
Moral, to cut off public enemies. Hence, If it be Lawful to fall upon a
Garrison of public enemies, oppressing the Country, then it must be Lawful to
fall upon one or two, that are the Ringleaders of public Enemies, and main
promoters of their destruction, that are as pernicious, and have no more right
or power, than the Philistims: But such is the Case of those about whom the
question is.

7. When David dwelt in the Country of the Philistims, he and his men went up
and invaded the Gesharites and the Gezrites and the Amalekites: And David smote
the Land, and left neither man nor woman alive 1 Samuel 27. 8, 9. This was
without public Authority, having none from Saul, none from Achish in whose
Country he dwelt, and none of his oun, being no Magistrate. We deny not the
Divine motion, but plead that it is imitable from its Moral ground, which was
that Command to cut off the Amalekites Exodus 17. and the Amorites whose relicts
these Nations were; the same Ground that Saul the Magistrate had to destroy
them. Whence it is Lawful sometimes for others than Magistrates to do that
which is incumbent to Magistrates, when they neglect their duty. All I plead
for from it, is, If it be Lawful for private persons, upon the Call of God, to
cut off their public enemies, when they are obliged by the Command of God to
destroy them, tho they be living quietly and peacably in the Country; then may
it be Lawful, in cases of necessity, for private persons, to cut off their
public enemies, whom they are obliged by the Covenant of God to bring to
condign punishment, and to exstirpate them (as the Covenant obliges in
reference to Malignant Incendiaries) when they are ravening like Lions for
their prey.

8. In the days of Ahab and Iezebels Tyranny, whereby the Idolatrous Prophets
of Baal were not punished according to the Law, Elijah said unto the people,
take the Prophets of. Baal, let none of them escape; and they took them to the
brook Kishon and slew them there 1 King. 18. 40. How Mr Knox improved this
passage we heard before, in the Historical Representation Per. 3. And Ius Pop:
vindicates it, that in some cases private persons may execute Judgment on
Malefactors, after the example of Elias here. Which fact Peter, Martyr in Loc.
defends thus [I say it was done by the Law of God: for Deuteronomy. 18. 20. God
decerned that the false Prophet should die, and chap. 17. the same is said of
private men and women, who would worship Idols: But chap. 13. not only is death
threatened against a seducing Prophet, but a Command is added that no man
should spare his Brethren -- thirdly it is Commanded, that the whole City when
it becomes Idolatrous, should be cut off by fire, and sword: And Levit. 24, 14
-- 16. it is Statute, that the Blasphemer should not live, to which we may add
the Law or equity of Taliation; for these Prophets of Baal caused Iezebel and
Ahab kill the Servants of the Lord. See Ius Pop. cap. 20. Page 425. Upon this
also Mr Mitchel defends his fact ubi supra -- Also Elijah by virtue of that
precept ( Deuteronomy. 13) gave commandment to the people to destroy Baals priests,
contrary to the command of the seducing Magistrate, who was not only remiss and
negligent in executing Justice, but became a Protector and defender of the
Seducers, then and in that case I suppose the Christians duty not to be very
dark:

9. This Idolatrous and Tyrannical house was afterward condignly punished by
I^hu 2 King. 9. And 10 chapt. who destroyed all the Idolaters, who were before
encouraged and protected by that Court chap. 10. 25. This extraordinary fact
was not justified by his Magistratical Authority: for that was as extraordinary
as the fact it self; and conferred as a mean to accomplish the fact. He had no
Authority by the peoples suffrages, nor was he acknowledged as such by the
Court or body of the people, only the Lord gave it extraordinarly. But it is
not the imitation of his assumption of Authority that is here pleaded for, but
the imitation of his fact in extraordinary cases, when not only Tyrants and
Idolaters pass unpunished, but their insolency in Murdering the Innocent is
intolerable. Mr Knox vindicates this at length ubi supra, and shows that it
had the ground of Gods ordinary Judgment, which commands the Idolater to die
the death; And that tho we must not indeed follow extraordinary examples, if
the example repugn to the Law, but where it agrees with and is the execution of
the Law, an example uncondemned stands for a Command, for God is, constant and
will not condemn in ages subsequent what He has approved in His Servants
before. See the Testim. of Period. 3. above, and Ius pop. cap. 20. page 418.

10. When Athaliah, the Mother of Ahaziah, had Tyrannized six years, at length
Iehojada with others made a Conspiracy against her, to depose her and make
Ioash King: which when it was discovered, she cried Treason, Treason, as indeed
it would have been so if she had been the Lawful Magistrate; for it was an
attempt of Subjects against her that had the possession of the Sovereign power.
But I^^^^da commanded the Captains to have her forth without the ranges, and
him that follows her kill with the sword: And they laid hands on her, and she
was slain 2 King. 11. 14 -- 16. That this is imitable in the punishment of
Tyrants, is cleared above. If therefore it be Lawful for Subjects to kill
Usurping Tyrants, and such as follow them to help them, under, whom
nevertheless people might have a life; then it must be Lawful for private
persons to put forth their hand against their Cutthroat Em^ssaries, in a case
of necessity, when there is no living for them.

11. When Amaziah turned Idolater and Tyrant, after the time that he turned
away from following the Lord, they made a Conspiracy against him in Jerusalem,
and he fled to Lachish, but they sent to Lachish after him, and slew him there
2 Chronicles. 25* 27. This fact is before vindicated by Mr Knox Period 3. afterward
Head 2. and Head 5.

12. When Esther made suite to reverse Hamans Letters, the King granted the
Jews in every City, not only to gather themselves together and to stand for
their life, but also to destroy, to slay, and to cause to perish, all the power
of the people and Province, that would assault them, both little Ones and Women
-- and to avenge themselves on their Enemies: And accordingly in the day that
their enemies hoped to have power over them, the Jews gathered themselves to
lay hand on such as sought their hurt, and smote all their enemies with the
stroke of the sword, Esther 8. 11, 13. chap. 9. 1 -- 5. etc. They had indeed
that Law of Nature fortified by the Kings accessory Authority, as Valentin^^^
by his Edict granted the like Liberty, to resist any unjust invader to
depopulate the Lands of his Subjects, ut digno ilico supplicio subjugetur ac
mortem quam ininabatur accipiat -- And the like of Arcadius is extant in Codice
Iustinaneo, titulo, Quomodo liceat unicuique sine judice se vindicare vel
publicam devotionem. But that does not exclude the Lawfulness of such
Resistences in case of necessity, without public Authority: So here, it was
not the Kings commandment that made the Jews avenging themselves Lawful, if it
had not been Lawful before and without it; it gave them only Liberty to improve
that privilege, which they had from God and Nature. Surely their power of
Resisting did not depend on the Kings Commandment, as is proven Head 5. Ergo
neither their power of avenging themselves, to prevent their Murder by their
enemies: Which they could and were obliged to do, if there had been no such
Authority: Ergo it was not only suspended upon the Kings Authority. And as for
Hamans sons and adherents, being Agagites, they were obliged by a Prior Command
to avenge themselves on them, on all occasions, by that Command to destroy
Amalek: Therefore it must be Lawful, even without public Authority, in some
cases of necessity, to prevent the Murder of public Enemies, by laying hands
on them that seek the hurt of all the people of God.

Secundly, There are some Precepts from which the same may be concluded.

1. There is a Command, and the first Penal Statute against Murderers, we read
Genesis 9. 6. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood by man shall his blood be shed. Here the
Command is given in general to punish Capitally all Murderers: but there may be
some that no Magistrate can punish, who are not here exempted, to wit, they
that are in Supreme Authority and turn Murderers, as was said above. Again the
Command is given in general to Man, involving all the Community (where the
Murderer is) in guilt if his blood be not shed: as we find in the Scripture,
all the people were threatened and punished because Judgment was not executed,
and when it was executed even by these that were no Magistrates, the Wrath of
God was turned away, Whereof there are many examples above. Further, if the
Command to shed the blood of Murderers be given before the Institution of
Magistracy, then in case of necessity to stop the Course of Murderers, it may
be obeyed. When there is no Magistrate to execute it: But here it is given
before the Institution of Magistracy, when now there was no Government in the
world, but family-Government, as Grotius on the place says, Cum enim lex haec
^ata est, non dum constituta sunt judicia, itaque natural justaliatus hic
indicatur; quod, aucto humano genere and in gentes distributo, merito solis
judicibus permissum fuit, extra casus quosdam exceptos, in quibus mansit jus
illud (...). When this Law was given public Judgment was not yet constitute,
Therefore the natural right and Law of Taliation is here held forth, which when
mankind was increased and divided into several Nations, was justly permitted
only to Judges, some cases excepted in which that primaeve right did remain.
And if in any, then in this case in question. Hence Lex Rex answers the P.
Prelate essaying to prove that a Magi^^racy is established in the Text, denies
that Ba Adam, by man, must signify a Magistrate, for than there was but family
Government, and cites (...) of the same mind, that the Magistrate is not spoken
of here. Though this Command afterward was given to the Magistrate Numb. 35.
30. yet in a ease of necessity, we must recur to the Original Command.

2. This same Command of punishing Murdering Enemies, is even after the
Institution of Magistrates, in several cases not astricted to them, but
permitted to the people, yea enjoined to them: As (1) Not only Magistrates, but
the people, are Commanded to avenge themselves on their public Enemies, as the
Israelites, after their being ensnared in the matter of Peor; are Commanded to
vex the Midianites and smite them, because they beguiled them, and brought a
Plague upon them Numb 25. 17, 18 and Numb. 31. 2. to avenge themselves on them,
and for this end to arm themselves, and go against them, and avenge the Lord
of Midian: Which they executed with the slaughter of all the males. So likewise
are they Commanded to destroy Amalek. It is true these Commands are given
primarly and principally to Magistrates, as there to Moses, and afterward to
Saul: yet afterward we find, other than Magistrates upon this Moral Ground,
having the Call of God, did execute Judgment upon them, as Gidion and David,
before they were Magistrates, did avenge themselves and the Lord upon them, as
is before cleared. It is also true, that there was some holy severity then to
be extended against particular Nations as such, peculiar to that Dispensation,
which is not pleaded as imitable: but the ground was Moral, and the right of a
peoples saving themselves by the destruction of their enemies; when there is no
other way for it, is Natural. And this is all we plead for here. If people may
vex their enemies, and avenge themselves against them, even without public
Authority, when ensnared by their Craftiness; Much more may they put a stop to
their insolency, by cutting off their principal and most pernicious
Instruments, in case of necessity, when invaded by their Cruelty: But here a
people is Commanded to vex their enemies, and avenge themselves on them, and
accordingly Gideon and David did so, without public Authority, and that upon a
ground which is Moral and Natural: Ergo -- (2) The execution of the punishment
of Murderers is committed to the people: The revenger of blood himself shall
slay the Murderer, what he meets him he shall slay him, Numb. 35. 19, 21. So
that if he met him before he got into any Refuge, he might Lawfully slay him,
and if he did flee to any, he was to be rendered up to the Avengers hands Deuteronomy.
19. 12. that the guilt of innocent blood may be put away from Isra^l verse. 23.
This revenger of blood was not the Magistrate: for he was the party pursuing
Numb. 35. 24. between whom and the Murderer the Congregation was to judge: He
was only the next in blood or kindred. In the Original he is called Goel, the
redeemer, or he to whom the right of redemption belongs, and very properly so
called, both because he seeks redemption and compensation for the blood of his
Brother, and because he redeems the Land from blood guiltiness, in which
other-wise it would be involved. I do not plead that this is always to be
imitated, as neither it was always practiced in Israel: but If a private man,
in a hot pursuit of his Brothers Murderer, might be his avenger, before he
could be brought to Judgment, then much more may this power be assumed, in a
case of necessity, when there is no Judgment to be expected by Law, and when
not only our Brethren have been murdered by them that profess a trade of it,
but others also and our selves are daily in hazard of it, which may be
prevented in cutting them off. I do not see what is here merely Judicial, so as
to be rejected as Iudaical: for sure Murderers must be slain now as well as
then, and there is the same hazard of their escaping now as then, Murder
involves the Land in guilt now as well as then, and in this case of necessity
especially, that Law that gives a man right to preserve himself gives him also
right to be his oun avenger, if he cannot otherwise defend himself. (3) Not
only the execution, the decision of matters of life and death, is committed to
them; as in the case of Blasphemy and Cursing, all that heard were to lay
their hands upon his head, and all the Congregation was to stone him Levit. 24.
14, 16. The manslayer was to stand before the Congregation in Judgment, Then
the Congregation shall judge between the slayer and the avenger of blood Numb.
35. 12, 24. The people claimed the power of life and death, in seeking to
execute Judgment upon those that had spoken Treason against Saul, bring the
men (say they) that we may put them to death 1 Samuel 11. 12. Especially in the
case of punishing Tyrants, as they did with Amaziah. Certainly this is not so
Judicial or Judaical, as that in no case it may be imitated: for, That can
never be abrogated altogether which in many cases is absolutely necessary; but
that the people, without public Authority, should take the power of life and
death, and of putting a stop to the insolency of Destroyers by putting them to
death, is in many cases absolutely necessary; for without this they cannot
preserye themselves against Grassant Tyrants, nor the fury of public enemies
or firebrarnds within themselves, in case they have no public Authority, or
none but such as are on their Destroyers side. (4) Not only the power of
purging the Land, by Divine precept is incumbent on the people, that it may not
lie under blood guiltiness; but also the power of Reforming the Courts of
Kings, by taking Course with their wicked Abetters and evil Instruments, is
committed to them, with a promise that if this be done, it shall tend to the
establishment of their Throne: which is not only a supposition in case it be
done, but a supposed Precept to do it, with an insinuation of the necessity and
expediency of it, that it is as suitable as the taking away of the dross from
silver, in order to the production of a vessel Prove. 25. 4, 5. Take away the
wicked from before the King, and his throne shall be established in
Righteousness: Which is not only there given to Kings, for then it would be in
the second person spoken to them, but to the people to do it before them; as
the people did with Baals Prophets from before Ahab. And Our Progenitors many
times have done with wicked Counselors, as may be seen in the foregoing
Representation, and more fully in the History of the Dowglasses, and in Knox
and Calderwoods Histories. Hence If it be duty to Reform the Court, and to
take away a Kings wicked Sycophants Counselors, Agents and Instigators to
Tyranny; Then it must be Lawful, in some cases of necessity, to restrain their
Insolency, and repress their Tyranny, in executing Judgment upon such of
them, as are most unsupportable, who are made drunk with the blood of
Innocents: But the former is true: Therefore -- (5) For the Omission of the
executing of this Judgment on Oppressors and Muderers, involving the whole
Land in blood guiltiness, which cannot be expiated but by the blood of them
that are so Criminal; Not only Magistrates, but the whole people have been
plagued: As for Saul's murdering the Gibeonites, the whole Land was plagued,
until the man that consumed them, and devised against them to destroy them,
seven of his sons were delivered unto them, to be hanged up before the Lord 2 Samuel 21. 5, 6. So also for the sins of Manasseh. The reason was, because if the
Magistrate would not execute Judgment, the people should have done it: for not
only to the King, but also to his Servants, and to the people that entered in
by the gates, the Command is, Execute ye Judgment, and deliver the spoiled
out of the hand of the Oppressor Jer. 22. 2, 3. tho it be true, this is to be
done by every one in their station, salva justitia, salvo ordine, and pro
modulo vocationis, and it chiefly belongs to Judges and Magistrates: Yet this
is no wrong to Justice, nor breach of Order, nor sinful transgression of
peoples vocation, not only to hinder the shedding of innocent blood, to prevent
Gods executing of what He there threatens, but also to execute Judgment on the
Shedders, to prevent their progress in Murdering Villainy; when Inferior as
well as Superior Magistrates are oppressing and Tyrannizing: Therefore this
seeking and doing and executing judgment is so often required of the people,
in such a Case, when Princes are rebellious and Companions of Thieves, and in
the City where Judgment used to be, now Murderers bear sway Isai. 1. 17, 21.
the Lord is displeased where there is none Isai. 59. 15, 16. Jer. 5. 1. See
this vindicated in Lex Rex quest. 34. page 367. and in jus popul. cap. 10. page
237.

3. That Command concluds the same against Idolaters, Apostates, and Entycers
thereunto Deuteronomy. 13. 6. etc. If thy brother -- or thy friend, which is as thi^
oun soul, entyce the secretly, saying, let us go and serve other gods -- thou
shall not spare nor conceal him, but thou shall surely kill him -- because the
has sought to thrust thee away from the Lord thy God -- And all Israel shall
hear and fear and do no more any such wickedness. And verse. 13. etc. If thou
shall hear say in one of thy Cities -- saying, Certain men, the Children of
Belial, are gone out -- and have withdrawn the Inhabitants of their City,
saying, let us go to serve other gods -- Then shall thou enquire -- and behold
if it be truth, and the thing certain -- thou shall surely smite the
Inhabitants of that City with the edge of the sword, destroying it utterly --
This Cause of the Open Entycers to Idolatry, was not brought to the Judges, as
common Idolaters, and such who were entyced to serve other gods and worship
them, were to be brought to the gates, and to be stoned first by the hands of
the Witnesses, and afterward by all the people Deuteronomy. 17. 3, 5, 7. But this is
another Law: Of which the Jewish Antiquaries, and particularly Grotius out of
Philo and the Rabb. in Loc says, Cum in alijs criminibus soleret reus servari
etc. i. e. Whereas in other crimes the guilty used to be kept after the
sentence a night and a day, that if he could say any more for himself he might,
these were excepted from this benefit; And not only so, but it was permitted to
any to execute Judgment upon them ( viz. Entycers to Idolatry) without waiting
for a Judge: The like was used against the Sacrilegious Robbers of the Temple,
and priests who sacrificed when they were polluted, and those who cursed God by
the Name of an Idol, and those who lay with an Idolatress, chiefly those who
denied the divine Authority of the Law: And this behoved to be before the
people, at least ten, which in Hebrew they called Hheda -- Neither is this to
be admired in so grievous a Crime, when even the manslayer without the place of
refuge might have been killed by the Kins-man of the defunct, And upon Numb.
15. 30. the punishment of presumptuous Blasphemers, he says, Caeteram hic
intelligenda hoc modo etc. i. e. But here these are to be understood thus, that
the guilty shall not be brought to the Judges, but be killed by them that
deprehended them in the Crime, as Phin. has did to Zimri: and proves it out of
Mamonides Pool. Synops. Critic. in Loc. And it must be so: for in this case no
mention is made either of Judges, or Witnesses, or further Judgment about it,
than that he that was tempted by the Entycer should fall upon him, and let the
people know it, that they might lay hands on him also; otherwise evil men might
pretend such a thing when it was not true. But in case of a Cities Apostasy,
and hearkening to Entycers, the thing was only to be sollicitously enquired
unto, and then tho it was chiefly incumbent upon the Magistrate to punish it,
yet it was not astricted to him, but that the people might do it without him.
As upon this Moral Ground, was Isreal's war stated against Benjamin Judge. 20.
13. when there was no King nor Judge, and also when there were Kings that
turned Idolaters and Tyrants, they served them so, as here is Commanded:
Witness Amaziah, as is showed above. Hence not only Moses, upon the peoples
defection into Idolatry in the Wilderness, commanded all on the Lords side,
every man to put his sword by his side -- and s^ay every man his brother and
every man his Companion and every man his neighbor, whereby three thousand
fell at that time by the sword of the Levites Exodus 32. 27, 28. But also Joash,
Gideons father, upon the same Moral Ground, tho he was no Magistrate, could say
to the Abiezrites, Will ye plead for Baal -- he that will plead for him, let
him be put to death while it is yet morning -- Judge. 6. 31. Moreover (as Mr
Mitchel adduces the example very pertinently, we see that the people of Israel
destroyed Idolatry, not only in Judah wherein the King concurred, but in
Ephraim and in Manass^h, where the King himself was an Idolater; and albeit
they were but private persons, without public Authority: for what all the
people was bound to do by the Law of God, every one was bound to do it to the
uttermost of his power and Capacity. Mr Mitchel offers this place to vindicate
his fact of shooting at the prelate. Deuteronomy. 13. 9. Wherein (says he) it is
manifest, that the Idolater or intycer to Worship a false god, is to be put to
death by the hand of those whom he seeks to turn away from the Lord: Which
precept I humbly take to be Moral, and not merely Judicial, and that it is not
at all Ceremonial or Levitical. And as every Moral precept is Universal, as to
the extent of place, so also as to the extent of Time, and persons. The chief
thing Objected here is, that this is a Judicial precept, peculiarly suited to
the Old Dispensation; which to plead for as a Rule under the New Testament,
would favor of Jewish rigidity inconsistent with a Gospel Spirit. Ans. How Mr
Knox refells this, and clears that the Command here is given to all the people,
needs not be here repeated; but it were sufficient to read it in the foregoing
Representation Period. 3. Page 30. as it is also cited by Ius Pop. Page 212.
etc. But these General Truths may be added, concerning the Judicial Laws. 1.
None can say that none of the Judicial Laws, concerning political
Constitutions, is to be observed in the New Testament: for then many special
Rules of Natural and Necessary equity would be rejected, which are contained in
the Judicial Laws of God: Yea all the Laws of equity in the World would be so
cast; for none can be instanced, which may not be reduced to some of the
Judicial Laws: And if any of them are to be observed, certainly these Penal
Statutes, so necessary for the preservation of Policies, must be binding. 2. If
we take not our measures from the Judicial Laws of God, we shall have no Laws
for punishment of any Malefactors by death, juris Divini, in the New Testament.
And so all Capital punishments must be only humane Constitutions; and
consequently they must be all Murders: for to take away the life of man, except
for such Causes as the Lord of our life (to whose Arbitriment it is only
subject) has not approven, is Murder, as Dr Ames says de homocidio
Conscience. Lib. 5. cap. 31. quest. 2. For in the New Testament, tho in the
general the power of punishing is given to the Magistrate, yet it is no where
determined, neither what, nor how Crimes are to be punished. If therefore Penal
Laws must be taken from the Old Testament; the Subject of executing them, as
well as the Object, must be thence deduced, that is, what is there astricted to
the Magistrate must be so still, and what is permitted to the people must
remain in like manner their Privilege; since it is certain, the New
Testament-Liberty is not more restricted as to Penal Laws than the Old. 3.
Those Judicial Laws, which had either somewhat Typical, or Paedagogical, or
peculiar to the then Iudacial State, are indeed not binding to us under that
formality; tho even these Doctrinally are very useful, in so far as in their
general nature, of equity of proportion, they exhibit to us some Documents of
Duty: But those Penal Judgments, which in the matter of them are appended to
the Moral Law, and are in effect but accurate determinations and accommodations
of the Law of Nature, which may suit our Circumstances as well as the Jews, do
oblige us as well as them. And such are these Penal Statutes I adduce; for,
that Blasphemy, Murder, and Idolatry, are heinous Crimes, and that they are to
be punished, the Law of Nature dictates; and how, and by whom, in several
cases, they are to be punished, the Law judicial determines. Concerning the
Moral equity even of the strictest of them, Amesius de Conscienc. lib. 5. de
Mosaicis appendicibus praeceptorum, does very learnedly assert their binding
force. 4. Those Judicial Laws, which are but Positive in their form, yet if
their special internal and proper Reason and Ground be Moral, which pertains to
all Nations, which is necessary and useful to Mankind, which is rooted in and
may be fortified by humane reason, and as to the substance of them approven by
the more intelligent Heathens; those are Moral, and oblige all Christians as
well as Jews: And such are these Laws of punishing Idolaters etc. founded upon
Moral grounds, pertaining to all Nations necessary and useful to Mankind,
rooted in and fortified by humane Reason, to wit, that the Wrath of God may be
averted, and that all may hear and fear and do no more so wickedly; especially
if this Reason be superadded, when the case is such, that innocent and honest
people cannot be preserved, if such wicked persons be not taken order with. 5.
Those Judicial Laws, which being given by the Lords immediate Authority, tho
not so solemnly as the Moral Decalogue, are neither as to their end Mortuae,
dead, nor as to their use Mortiferae, deadly, nor as to their nature,
Indifferent, nor in any peculiar respect restringible only to the Jews, but
the transgressions whereof both by omission and commission are still sins, and
were never abolished neither Formally nor Consequentially in the New Testament,
must be Moral: But such as these Penal Laws I am speaking of, They cannot be
reputed among the Ceremonial Laws, dead as to their end, and deadly as to their
use, or indifferent in their nature: for sure, to punish the Innocent upon the
account of these Crimes, were still sin, now as well as under the Old
Testament; and not to punish the Guilty, were likewise sin now as well as then.
If then the matter be Moral and not abolished, the execution of it by private
persons, in some cases when there is no access to public Authority, must be
Lawful also. Or if it be Indifferent, that which is in its oun nature
Indifferent, cannot be in a case of extreme necessity unlawful, when otherwise
the destruction of our selves and Brethren is in all humane consideration
inevitable. That which God has once Commanded, and never expressly Forbidden,
cannot be unlawful in extraordinary cases, but such are these precepts we speak
of: Therefore they cannot be in every case unlawful. Concerning this case of
the obligation of Judicial Laws, Ames. de Conscienc. lib. 5. cap. 1. quest. 9.
6. Those Laws which are predicted to be observed and executed in the New
Testament times, cannot be Judicial or Judaical, restricted to the Old: But
such is this. In the day, that a fountain shall be opened for the house of
David for sin and for uncleaness; which clearly points at Gospel Times, It is
said, the Lord will cause the Proph^ts and the unclean Spirits to pass out of
the Land: And it shall come to pass. that when any shall yet Prophecy, then
his father and his mother that begat him shall say unto him, thou shall not
live -- and shall thrust him through when he Prophesies Zech. 13. 3. Which
cannot be meant of a Spiritual penetration of the heart: for it is said, he
shall not live; and the wounds of such as might escape, by resistance or
flight, are visible in his hands verse 6. It is therefore to be understood of
Corporal killing Intycers to Idolatry, according to the Law Deuteronomy. 13. 9.
either by delivering them up to the Judges, as Piscator on the place says; Or
as Grotius says, transfodient ut Phineas Zimri Numb. 25. hoc intellige de
Pseudo-propheta populum volente abducere ad cultum falsorum deorum; nam in
tales quemvis Iudaeum Lex armabat, Deuteronomy. 13. quae Lex express addit, in tali
crimine nec filio parcendum. From all which I conclude, If people are to bring
to condign punishment Idolatrous Apostates, seeking to intyce them; Then may
oppressed people, daily in hazard of the death of their Souls by Compliance; or
of their bodies by their Constancy in Duty, put forth their hand to execute
Judgment, in case of necessity, upon Idolatrous Apostates and Incendiaries,
and the principal Murdering Emissaries of Tyrants, that seek to destroy people,
or enforce them to the same Apostasy: But the former is true: Therefore etc.

4. The same may be inferred from that Command of Rescuing and Delivering our
Brother, when in hazard of his life; for omitting which duty. no pretense even
of ignorance will excuse us Prove. 24. 11, 12. If thou forbear to deliver them
that are drawn unto death, and those that are ready to be slain, if thou
say, behold we knew it not; does not He that pondereth the heart consider
it? and He that keeps thy Soul does not He know it, and shall not He render
to every man according to his works? eripe h. e. ex manu invasoris, latronis,
injusti Magistratus etc. idque vel manu, vel lingua defendente, vel quovis alio
modo licito: Solent homines multas excusationes nectere, se nescire illius vel
periculum, vel innocentiam, non tanta authoritate valere ut eum liberent, rerum
suarum satagere, alienis nolle se ingerere etc. hic unam excusationem reliquas
omnes complectentem exempli causa proponit, and refellit: as Commentators say,
Pool Synops. Critic. in locum. This precept is indefinitely given to all:
Principally indeed belonging to righteous Magistrates; But in case of their
omission, And if instead of detending them they be the persons that draw or
send out their destroying Emissaries to draw them to death, then the precept is
no more to be restricted to them, than that verse 2. not to be envious against
evil men, or that verse 10. If thou faint in the day of Adversity thy strength
is small, can be said to be spoken only to Magistrates. Hence, If it be a Duty
to Rescue our Brethren from any prevailing power that would take their lives
unjustly, and no pretense even of ignorance will excuse the forbearance of it;
Then it must be Lawful, in some extraordinary cases, to prevent the Murdering
violence of public Incendiaries, by killing them rather than to suffer our
selves or our Brethren to be killed, when there is no other way in probability
either of saving our selves or Rescuing them: But here the former is Commanded
as a duty: Therefore the Later also must be justified, when the duty cannot
otherwise be discharged.

Now having thus at some length endeavored to discuss this some way odd and
esteemed odious Head: to which Task I have been as unwillingly drawn, as the
Actors here pleaded for were driven to the occasion thereof; whom only the
necessity of danger did force to such Achievements to preserve their oun and
Brethrens lives, in prosecuting the Cause; and nothing but the necessity of
duty, did force me to this Undertaking, to defend their Name from Reproach, and
the Cause from Calumnies. I shall Conclude with a humble Protestation, that
what I have said be not stretched further than my obvious and declared Design
does aim at: which is not to press a practice from these precedents, but to
vindicate a Scripture Truth from invidious or ignorant Obloquies; and not to
specify what may or must be done in such Cases hereafter, but to justify what
has been done in such Circumstances before. Wherein I acknowledge, that tho
the Truth be certain, such things may be done, yet the duty is most difficult
to be done with Approbation. Such is the fury of corrupt passion, far more
fierce in all than the pure zeal of God is to be found fervent in any, that too
much Caution, Tenderness, and Fear, can scarce be adhibite, in a Subject
wherein even the most warrantable provocation of holy zeal is ordinarily
attended with such a concurrence of Self-interest and other carnal Tentations,
as it is impossible without the signal Assistance of special Grace to have its
exercise in any notable Measure or Manner, without the Mixture of sinful allay,
as the True Nonconformist does truly observe ubi supra Page 391. Yet this
Doctrine, tho in its defined and uncautioned Latitude be obnoxious to
accidental abuses (as all Doctrines may be abused by men's corruption, or
ignorance; misapplying the same) is nevertheless built upon such Foundations,
that Religion will oune to be firm, and Reason will ratify their force. And I
hope it is here so circumscribed with Scripture-boundaries, and restricted in
the narrow Circumstantiation of the Case, that as the Ungodly cannot captate
advantage from it, to encourage themselves in their Murdering villainies, seeing
they never were, never can be so Circumstantiate, as the Exigence here defined
requires; So as for the Godly, I may presume upon their tenderness, and the
Conduct of that Spirit that is promised to lead them, and the zeal they have
for the honor of Holiness, with which all real Cruelty is inconsistent, to
promise in their Name, that if their Enemies will repent of their wickedness,
and so far at least Reform themselves as to surcease from their cruel
Murdering violence, in persecuting them to the death, and devouring them as a
prey; then they shall not need to fear from them the danger of this Doctrine,
but as says the proverb of the Ancients, Wickedness proceeds from the Wicked
but their hand shall not be upon them. But if they shall still proceed to
Murder the Innocent, they must understand, they that hold this Truth in
Theorie, will also reduce it to practice. And bloody Papists must know, that
Christians now are more Men, than either stupidly to surrender their throats to
their Murdering swords, or supinely to suffer their villainy to pass
unpunished; and tho their favors have flattered many, and their sury has
forced others, into a faint succumbing and superceding from all Action against
them; Yet all are not asleep: and I hope there are some, who will never enter
in any terms of peace with them, against whom the Mediator has declared and
will prosecute a war for ever, but will still oune and aim at this, as the
highest pitch of their ambition, to be found among His chosen, called, and
faithful ones, who maintain a constant opposition against them. However, tho
the Lord seems in His providence, to put a bar upon all public Appearances
under a display of open war against them; and it is not the design of what is
said here on this and the foregoing Head, to incite or invite to any: Yet
Certainly, even at this present, all that have the zeal of God and love to His
righteous Cause rightly stated in their hearts, will find themselves called not
to supercede altogether from all Actions, of avowed and even violent opposition
against them, whom we are all bound both by the Morality of the duty, and the
Formality of Solemn and Sacred Covenants, to hold out from a violent intrusion
into and peaceable possession of this Land devoted to God, and to put them out
when they are got in either by their fraud or force; And this plea, now brought
to an end, will oblige all the Loyal Lovers of Christ, to an Endeavor of
these. 1. To take Alarms, and to be forewarned and fore-armed, resolute and
ready to withstand the invasion of Popery; that it be neither established by
Law, through the supineness of such, who should stand in the Gap, and resolve
rather to be sacrificed in the spot, by a valiant resisting, than see such an
Abomination set up again; Nor introduced by this Liberty, through the wyles of
such, whose chiefest principle of policy is perfidie, who design by this wide
Gate, and in the womb of the wooden horse of this Toleration, to bring it in
peaceably; Nor intruded by force and fury, fire and sword, if they shall fall
upon their old game of Murders and Massacres. It concerns all to be upon their
Guard, and not only to come out of Babylon, but to be making ready to go
against it, when the Lord shall give the Call. 2. To resist the beginings of
their Invasions, before they be past remeady: And for this effect, to oppose
their gradual erections of their Idolatrous Monuments, and not suffer them to
set up the Idol of the Mass, in City or Country; without attempting, if they
have any force, to overthrow the same. 3. In the mean time, to defend
themselves and the Gospel, against all their Assaults, and to Rescue any out of
their hands upon all occasions, that for the Cause of Christ they have caught
as a prey, and to oppose and prevent their oun and the Nations ruin and
slaverie.

But to Conclude: As it will be now expected, in Justice and Charity, that all
the Vassals and Votaries; Subjects and Servants, of the One Common Lord and
King, Christ Jesus, every where through out His Dominions, who may see this
Representation of the case and Vindication of the cause of a poor wasted and
wounded, persecuted and reproached, Remnant of the now declining, sometimes
Renouned, Church of Scotland, will be so far from standing Esaw-like on the
other side; either as Enemies, rejoicing to look on their Affliction in the day
of their Calamity; or as Neutral, unconcerned with their distressed Condition;
or as Strangers, without the knowledge or sense of their Sorrows and
Difficulties; Or as Gallio's caring for none of these things, or thinking their
case not worthy of Compassion, or their cause of Consideration, or possibly
condemning their Sufferings, as at best but Stated upon slender, subtle, and
nice Points, that are odd and odious, and invidiously represented: It is now
expected, I say, that Christians, not possessed with Prejudice (which is very
improper for any that bear that Holy and honorable Signature) and not willing
to be imposed upon by Misinformations, will be so far from that Unchristian
temper toward them, as to be easily biased with all Reports and Reproaches to
their disadvantage, that if they weigh what is in this Treatise offered, and
truly I may say candidely Represented, without any design of prevarication, or
painting, or daubing, to make the Matter either better or worse than it will
seem to any impartial Observer; they will admit and intertain a more charitable
Construction of them, and not deny them Brotherly Sympathy and Christian
Compassion, nor be wanting in the duty of Prayer and Suppltcation for them,
that at length the Lord would turn His hand upon the little Ones, and bring at
least a third Part, a Remnant of Mourners, through the fire. So to that little
Flock, the poor of the Flock, that wait upon the Lord, and desire to keep His
way; I shall only say, Though I judged Necessity was laid upon me, in stead of
a better, to essay this Vindication of your cause: as stated betwixt you and
your, and your Lords Enemies, the men that now ride over your heads, that say
to your Soul, bow down that we may go over you, I desire not that you should,
yea I obtest that you may not, lay any Stress on the strength of what I have
said; but let its weight lie where it must be laid, on that firm Foundation,
that will bear you and it both, that Stone, that tried Stone, that Precious
Corner Stone, that sure Foundation, Christ Jesus: And search the Scriptures of
Truth, to see whether these things be so or not: And I doubt not, but by that
Touchstone if these Precious Truths be tried, they will be found neither hay
nor stubble, that cannot abide the fire, but as silver tried in a furnace of
earth purified seven times. Do not offend, that they are contemned as small,
and contradicted as odious, but look to the importance of His Glory, whose
Truths and Concerns they are, and from Whom they are seeking to draw or drive
you, who oppose and oppugu these Truths. Stand fast therefore in the Liberty
where with Christ has made you free, and hold fast every Word of His patience,
that you may be kept in this hour of tentation. Let no man take your Crown, or
pull you down from your excellency, which is always the design of your wicked
Enemies, in all their several shapes and shows, both of force and fraud, craft
and cruelty. Beware of their snares, and of their tender Mercies, for they are
cruel; and when they speak fair believe them not, for there are seven
abominations in their hearts. Say ye not a Confederacy, to all them to whom
this people shall say a Confederacy, neither fear ye their fear, nor be
afraied; Sanctify the Lord of Hosts Himself, and let Him be your fear, and let
Him be your dread, And He shall be for a Sanctuary, but for a stone of
stumbling and for a rock of offense, to both the houses of Israel, for a gin
and for a snare to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem. Wait upon the Lord, who hides
His face from the House of Jacob, and look for Him, among His Children, though
now you be reputed for signs and wonders in Israel, from the Lord of Hosts
Which dwells in Mount Zion. Who knows, but therefore will the Lord wait,
that He may be Gracious unto you, and therefore will He be exalted that He may
have Mercy upon you, for the Lord is a God of Judgment, Blessed are all they
that wait for Him. To Whom be all the Glory.

AMEN.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page: Lin: 26 6 for way read may. 34 14 f. bloodh r. blood. ibid. ult. r.
Governors. 36 35 f. he r. the. 52 5 r. hinted. 70 38 f. at r. a. 75 32 r.
accursed. 76 27 r. thought. 94 33 next Christians r. this being. 103 30 r.
Elogium. 147 29 r. ruins. 169 31 f. may r. way. 174 17 r. humble. ibid. 25 f.
mast r. most. ibid. ult. f. tune r. time. 203 8 r. Tyranny. 209 27 r. Christ.
220 7 f. them r. then. 267 18 f. them r. then. 284 23 f. servas r. servos. 286
3 f. upon d. up an. ibid. 20 r. subjects. ibid. 35 f. amittitis r. amittit is.
343 27 f. at r. as. 345 4 f. as r. us. 374 15 r. Israel. 381 36 f. he r. the.
385 7 f. 27. r. 25. 389 23 f. way r. may. 390 16 f. 137. r. 136. 397 19 f. and
r. an. ibid. 31. f. ehe r. the. 432 1 f. ar r. or. 433 ult. f. ars r. are. 435
17 f. trust r. thrust. 451 36 r. Jehojachin. 456 28 f. not odiously r.
notoriously. 467 25 f. stealing his r. his stealing, 494 43 f. divine r.
divines. 542 24 r. if there be any thing here. 551 8 f. by r. be. 563 28 r.
afterward. 598 6 dele. in. 612 35 r. Kingdoms. 641 4. woe r. who. 662 35 f.
proceeding r. preceding.

Besyds these, in some places for Incendaries read Incendiaries, also there are
some other escapes as an s for an f, an e for an c, an u for an n, or the like,
and some others in the pointing which will not mar the sense, and its hoped the
discreet Reader will readiely excuse.

Having come to a conclusion of the six heads proposed to be treated of; I
Judged it conduceing by way of postscript to subjoin a Seventh, in vindication
of these conscientious and truly tender sufferers, who in the dread and aw of
the holy, Sovereign and Supreme Lawgiver, who commands his subjects and
followers to abstain from all appearance of evil, did in obedience to him and
his Royal Law, choose rather to suffer the rage, robberies and violence of
Crwel and bloody enemies, together with Censurs, reproaches, obloquies and
contempt of appostatiseing professors, than to give any aid or encowragement to
the avowed and declared enemies of Christ, that might contribute to the
promoveing their Sacrilegious Tyrannical and hellish projects and practices,
calculat and prosecut against the Gospel and Kingdom of Christ, the Covenanted
reformed Religion of the Church, the Rights, Laws and Liberties of the people,
and to the Introduceing of Antichristian Idolatry, Tyranny and Slaverie, by
paying any of their wicked and wickedly imposed exactions, raised for
furthering their hellish designs, of which, none who pays them can be
Innocent.

HEAD. VII. The Sufferings of many, for Refusing to pay the wicked Exactions of
the Cess, Locality, Fynes etc. Vindicated.
IT will possibly seem impertinent, or at least preposterous at such a time,
when the pressure of these ^urdens is not more pinching to the Generality of
professing people, and in such a retrograde order, as after the discussion of
the foregoing Heads, to subjoyne any disquisition of these Questions, which are
now out of date and doors with many. But considering that the Impositions of
these Burdens are still pressing to some and the difficulties of doubts and
disputes about them still pusling, the sin and scandal of complying with them
still lying upon the Land, not confessed nor forsaken, the leaven of such
Doctrine as daubs and defends the like compliance still entertained, the
Sufferings of the Faithful for refusing them, still contemned and condemned,
and the fears and expectations of more snares of that nature, after this fair
weather is over, still increasing, if I may be so happy as to escape
impertinencies in the manner of managing this disquisition, I fear not the
Censure of the impertinency or needlessness of this Essay. As to the order of
it, it was intended to have been put in its proper place among the Negative
Heads of Sufferings: But knowing of how little worth or weight any thing that I
can say is with the prejudged, and having a Paper writ by two famous Witnesses
of Christ against the Defections of their day, Mr. McWard and Mr. Broun, more
fully and largely detecting the iniquity of the Cess (from which the wickedness
of other exactions also may be clearly deduced) tho at such distance at the
writing of the foregoing Heads, that it could not be had in readiness to take
its due place, and time would not allow the suspending other things until this
should come to hand; I thought it needful, rather than to omit it altogether,
to insert it here. However, tho neither the form of it, being by way of Letter,
nor the method adapted to the design of a moving disswasion, nor the length and
prolixitie thereof, will suffer it to be here transcribed as it is; yet to
discover what were their sentiments of these things, and what was the Doctrine
Preached and Homologated by the most faithful both Ministers and Professors of
Scotland, eight or nine years since, how closely continued in by the
Contendings of this Reproached Remnant, still persecuted for these things, and
how clearly abandoned and resiled from, by their Complying Brethren now at
Ease, I shall give a short Transumpt and Compend of their Reasonings; in a
method subservient to my Scope and with Additions necessary for applying their
Arguments against the other Exactions here adduced in this Head, and bringing
them also under the dint of them, tho not touched by them expressly. I must put
altogether, because it would dilate the Treatise already excressed into a
bigness, far beyond the boundaries I designed for it, to handle them
distinctly; and their affinity, both as to their fountain, nature, and ends, is
such, that what will condemn one of them will condemn all. What and how many
and manifold have been the exorbitant Exactions, as the fruits and soments of
this crwel Tyranny, that the Godly in our Land, have been groaning under these
27 years, and upon what occasions they have been at diverse times, and in
diverse manners and measurs imposed, I need not here relate, the first part of
the Treatise does represent it. The first of these Tyrannical Exactions, were
the Fynes for not hearing the Curats, and other parts of Nonconformity; which,
together with paying the Curats stipends, were too universally at first
complied with: But afterward upon more mature consideration and after clearer
discoveries of the Imposers projects and practices, they were scrupled and
refused by the more tender. And their Sufferings, upon the account of that
Recusancy, have been very great and grievous, to the utter impoverishment and
depopulation of many Families, besides the personal Sufferings of many in long
Imprisonments, which some chose rather to sustain with patience, than pay the
least of those Exactions. Yea, some when ordered to be legally liberate, and
set forth out of Prison, choosed rather to be detained still in bondage, than
to pay the Iaylour-fees, their Keepers demanded of them. Many other wicked
Impositions have been pressed and prosecuted, with great rigor and rage, as
Malitia-money, and Locality, for furnishing Soldiers, listed under a banner
displayed against Religion and Liberty, with necessary provision, in and for
their wicked service; which of late years have been contended against by the
Sufferings of many, and daily growing a Trial to more. But the most impudently
insolent of all these Impositions, and that which plainly paraphrases, openly
expresses and explains all the rest, calculate for the same ends, was by that
wicked Act of Covention, enacted Anno 1678. Declaring very plainly its ends, to
levy and maintain forces for suppressing Meetings, and to show unanimous
affection for maintaining the Kings Supremacy established by Law. Or as they
represent it in their Act, for continuation of it, Act. 3. Parl. 3. Char. 2.
August 20. 1681. Seeing the Convention of Estates holden at Edinburgh in the
month of July 1678 upon weighty Considerations therein specified, and
particularly the great danger the Kingdom was under, by seditious and
rebellious Conventicles, and the necessity which then appeared, to increase the
forces, for securing the Government, and suppressing these rebellious
Commotions, which were fomented by seditious principles and practices, did
therefore humbly and dutifully offer a cheerful and unanimous Supply of 800000
pound Scots -- in the space of five years -- And the Estates of Parliament now
conveened, having taken to consideration, how the dangers from the forsaids
Causes do much increase, in so far as such as are seditiously and rebelliously
inclined, do still propogate their pernicious principles, and go on from one
degree of rebellion to another, till now at last the horrid villainies of
murder, assassination, and avowed rebellion, are ouned, not only as things
Lawful, but as obligations from their Religion -- Do therefore, in a due sense
of their duty of God, to their Sacred Sovereign, and the preservation of
themselves and their posterity, of new make an humble, unanimous, cheerful, and
heartly offer, for themselves, and in name of, and as representing this his
Maj. ancient Kingdom, of a continuation of the foresaid Supply, granted by the
Convention of Estates; And that for the space of five years or ten terms
successive, beginning the first Terms payment at Martin-mas 1683. which yet is
to be continued until Martin-mas 1688. Here is a Sample of their wicked
Demands, showing the nature, quality, and tendency of all of them: Wherein we
may note. 1. That they continue it upon the same Considerations, upon which it
was first granted. 2. That these were, and yet remain to be, the danger of the
Meetings of the Lords people for Gospel Ordinances, by them forced into the
Fields, which they call Rebellious Conventicles; and the necessity of securing
their Usurpation upon the Prerogatives os Christ, Liberties of His Church, and
Privileges of Mankind (which they call their Government) and suppressing the
Testimonies for the Interest of Christ (called by them Rebellious Commotions.)
3. That their motive of continuing it, was their Considerations of some weak
Remainders of former zeal for God, in prosecuting the Testimony for the
Interests of Christ, and Principles of the Covenanted Reformatton (which they
call propogating pernicious Principles) and some weak attempts to oppose and
resist their Rebellion against God, and vindicate the Work, and defend the
people of God, from the destruction they intended against them, and their
Lawful and obliged endeavors to bring the Destroyers and Murderers to condign
punishment (which they call horrid vil^anies of Murder, Assassination, and
av^wed Rebellion.) Here all the Active Appearances of the Lords people,
vindicated in the foregoing Heads, are industriously Represented, under these
odious and invidious Names, as motives to contribute this Supply of means to
suppress them, and to involve all the Contributers in the guilt of condemning
them. 4. That as a Test of their Allegiance unto, and Con^ede^acy with that
Execrable Tyrant (which they call their duty to their Sacred Sovereign) they
enact this as Representatives of the Kingdom, and must be ouned as such by all
the payers. 5. That it is the same Cess, that was granted by the Convention of
Estates, and the Term of its continuation is not yet expired. And hence it is
manifest, that that Act of Convention, tho its first date be expired, and
thereupon many plead for the Lawfulness of paying it now, that formerly
scrupled at and witnessed against it, yet is only renewed, revived, and
corroberated, and the Exaction continued upon no other basis or bottom but the
first State Constitution. Which was, and remains to be a Consumating and
Crimson wickedness, the cry whereof reaches Heaven: Since upon the matter it
was the setting of a day, betwixt and which (exceeding the Gadarens wickedness,
and short of their Civility) they did not beseech Christ and His Gospel to be
gone out of Scotland, but with armed violence declared, they would with the
strong hand drive Him out of His possession; in order to which their Legions
are levied, with a professed Declaration, that having exauctorate the Lords
Anointed by Law, and clothed the Usurper with the spoils of His Honor, they
will by force maintain what they have done, and having taken to themselves the
House of God in possession, they will sacrifice the Lives, Liberties, and
fortunes of all in the Nation, to secure themselves in the peaceable possession
of what they have robbed God; And that there shall not be a Soul left in the
Nation, who shall not be slain, shut up, or sold as slaves, who will oune
Christ and His Interest. All which they could not, nor cannot accomplish,
without the subsidiary Contribution of the peoples help. This is the plain
sense of the Act for the Cess; and, tho not expressed, the tacit and uniforme
intention of all the rest. Yet for as monstrous and manifest the wickedness of
these designs are, so judicially were the bulk of our Seers plagued with
blindness, that many of them were left to plead for the payment of these
Impositions; others, tho they durst not for a world do it themselves, to be
silent, and by their silence to encourage and embolden many to such a
Compliance; presuming with themselves, and without furrher inquiry, that the
zeal of God, and love to His Glory, and the Souls of their Brethren, would
constrain them to speak in so clamant a case, if they did observe any sin in
it. Whereby the Universality was involved in the guilt of these things,
especially deceived by the patrociny and pleadings of such of late, who
formerly witnessed against it. O that it might be given to us to remember Lots
wife, turned into a Pillar of Salt, to season us lest the stink of our
Destruction, and what may follow upon it, be all that the posterity get for a
warning not to tread our paths. As for the few that have suffered upon this
Head, they have been so discruciated with perplexities, in their Conflicts with
the rage of Enemies, and reproach of Friends, and fear of these snares
attending every lot or occupation they could put themselves in, that they have
been made to desire death, as their best refuge, and only retreat wherein they
may find rest from all these rackings: For in no place could they escape the
reach of some of these Impositions, nor the noise of their clamarous
Contendings of Arguments that pleaded for it. But some have had more Love to
Christ and His Interests, than language to plead for Him, and more resolution
to suffer than learning to dispute for His Cause; And where pure zeal for
Christ, and love to His bleeding Interests, in a time when He is crucified
afresh, and put to open shame, and the Concurrence of all is required to help
forward the War against Him, is in integrity and vigor, it will burn with its
flame those knots that it cannot in have loose; And choose rather to lie under
the imputation of being zealous without knowledge, than lose or let go such an
opportunity of witnessing a good Confession; yea when it could do no more,
expire with an Ichabod in its mouth.

But shortly to come to the point. I shall 1. Permit some Concessions. 2.
Propose some parallel Questions. 3. Offer some Reasons to clear it.

1. I shall willingly grant in the General, concerning paying of Exactions,
Impositions, or Emoluments.

1. They are to be paid to these to whom they are due: As Tribute and Custom is
to be paid to the Powers ordained of God, and for this Cause that they are Gods
Ministers attending continually upon this very thing Romans 13. 6, 7. So Stipends
and all outward Encouragments are due to Ministers of the Gospel, who sow
Spiritual things and should reap these carnal things 1 Cor. 9. 11, 12. Fynes
also, and all legal Amercements for Delinquencies against just Laws, must be
paid, Deuteronomy. 22. 19. And whatsoever is due by Law to Officers, appointed by Law
for keeping Delinquents in Custody: As all Debts whatsoever. But Tyrants
Exactions, enacted and exacted for promoving their wicked designs against
Religion and Liberty; Hirelings Salaries, for encouraging them in their
intrusions upon the Church of God; Arbitrary Impositions of pecuniary
punishments for clear Duties; And extorted hirings, of the subordinate
instruments of Persecuters oppressions, are no wise due and cannot be debt, and
therefore no equity to pay them.

2. Its Lawful to pay them, when due and debt either by Law or Contract, even
tho they should be afterward abused and misimproven to pernicious ends. But
these payments for such wicked ends, either particularly specified and
expressed in the very Act appointing them, or openly avouched by the Exactors
are of another nature, than Impositions fundamentally appointed for the public
good; and the after misapplication thereof, made by such as are entrusted
therewith, is no more imputable unto the Land or Payers, than is the theft of a
Collector stealing or running away with the same without making Count or
reckoning to Superiors. It is then a foolish thing to say, that former
Impositions were peacably paid, tho we saw and were convinced that their use
was perverted, and they were used against the good of the Land and Gods people.
For no such thing was laid down as the ground, or declared as the end, of these
exactions; but what fell out was by the personal abuse and perversion of those
in power; which was rheir oun personal fault, and posteriour to the legal
engagment and submission to the payment thereof by the Land in their
Representatives.

3. Its Lawful to pay them sometimes, even when fundamentally and Originally
from the first Constitution of them they were not due, but Illegally or
Usurpatively challenged and exacted, if afterward they were by dedition or
voluntary engagment legally submitted unto by the true Representatives. But not
so, when they were never either Lawfully enacted, or legally exacted, or
voluntarly engaged by the Representatives, except such as represented the
enslavement of the Nation, and betrayed the Country, Religion, Liberty,
Property, and all precious Interests, and declaredly imposed to further the
destruction of all. Nor can any with reason say, that this Case is but like the
Case of the people of Israel under the feet of Enemies, paying to them of the
fruits of their Ground, as was regrated and lamented by Nehemiah Chap. 9. 36,
37. For so they must say, the Exactions now in debate are their
Redemption-money, and by these they purchase their Liberty of Life and Lands,
and oune themselves to be a people under Conquest. And yet they cannot deny,
but they are both exacted and paid as Tests of their Allegiance as Subjects,
and Badges of their Loyalty and Obedience. But this is answered before Head 2.
Conces. 7.. 2. Page If any should object the practice of Christ, tho otherwise
free, yet paying Custom lest He should offend: It is fully solved ibid. Head 2.
Conces. 9. Page Here its sufficient to hint (1) That which made them marvel at
His wise Answer was, that He left the Title unstated, and the Claim unresolved,
whether it belonged to Caesar or not, and taught them in the general to give
nothing to Caesar with prejudice to what was Gods; which condemns all the
Payments we speak of, which are all for carrying on the War against God. (2)
Caesar was no Tyrant nor Usurper at this time, because they had legally
submitted themselves unto several Cesars successively before. (3) It was, lest
He should offend: But here it will be evident, that the offense and scandal
lies upon the other hand, of paying the Exaction: And it is against all
Religion to say, that both the doing and refusing to do the same Act, can give
offense. But (4) make the Case like ours, and I doubt not to call it Blasphemy
to say, that Christ would have paid, or permitted to pay a Taxation,
professedly imposed for levying a War against Him, or banishing Him and His
Disciples out of the Land; Or to fill the mouths of the greedy Pharisees,
devouring widows houses, for their pretense of long Prayers; Or that He would
have paid, or suffered to pay their Extortions, if any had been exacted of
Him, or His Disciples, for His Preaching, or working Miracles; Or if help or
hire had been demanded, for encouraging those that rose to stone Him for His
good deeds.

4. It is Lawful to pay a part to preserve the whole, when it is extorted only
by force and threatenings, and not exacted by Law; when it is a yielding only
to a lesser suffering, and not a consenting to a Sin to shift suffering. The
Objection of a man being seized by a Robber, transacting with him to give him
the one half or more to save the rest and his life, commonly made use of to
justify the paying of these Impositions, while under the power and at the
reverence of such public Robbers, cannot satisfy in this Case. It is thus far
satisfying, that there is a manifest Concession in it, that instead of
righteous Rulers, we are under the power, and fallen into the hand of Robbers,
from whom we are not able to rise up. But there is no paritie. For to bring it
home without halting, and make it speak sense, we must suppose that the Robber,
not only requires a part for himself, and a part for his underling Shavers,
horse-rubbers etc. but a part upon this declared Account, that he may by that
supply be enabled and furnished with all things necessary, for murdering my
Father, Mother, Wife, Children, Kinsmen, and Friends (all whom he has now in
his power) yea, and for doing that besides, which is worse than all these put
together: Whether then shall I, by giving the Robber that part which he seeks,
enable him to do all these mischiefs? Or by refusing, expose my self to the
hazard of being robbed or slain? Let the Conscience of any man answer this (for
nothing can be here alleged against the paritie as now propounded) and then I
fear not but the Objection shall be found a blaze of empty words, blown away by
any breath. But Alas! will this Tattle of a Robber be found relevant in that
day, when the public Robbers shall be proceeded against by the just Judge? Let
them who think so, think also, they see the Court fenced, and the Judge set,
and hear these words sounding in their ears, ye are cursed with a Curse, for ye
have robbed Me. even this whole Nation; And then they are like to lay as little
weight on the Objection, for fear of falling under the weight of the Curse, as
I do.

5. It is Lawful Passively by forcible constraint to submit to the execution of
such wicked Sentences, as impose these burdens, if it be not by way of
Obedience to them: This is suffering and not sinning. Hence it is easy to
refell that Objection: If it be Lawful (which hitherto was never questioned)
for a man, who is sentenced to die, to go to the place of execution, then a man
being under the Moral force of a Law, which is equivalent, may pay Cesses,
Localities, Fines etc. Ans. 1. Might it not be doubted, whether a man's going
upon his oun feet to be execute, had as manifest, and ex natura rei, a
tendency, yea and proper Causuality to advance the design of the enemy, and his
refusing to go had as clear a Testimony against the Clamant wickedness of their
Course, as his refusing to pay their Impositions; Whether, I say in this case a
man might no^, yea ought not to refuse to go to the place of execution. But 2.
Whosoever would conclude any thing from it, to give it either life or legs,
must make it run thus: Let the order run in this form (else there is no
parallel, and so no inference) we appoint all the Opposers of our Course (that
is all the lovers of our Lord Jesus) whom we have for their Rebellious
Randevouzing at Conventicles sentenced as Enemies and Traitors to die, to come
and be hanged by virtue of our sentence; Otherw^se besides the Moral force of
the Law, adjudging them to die, we shall use force, and drag them like Dogs to
the place of execution; And in putting us to this Trouble, they shall fall under
the reproach, that being sentenced to die, they scrupled forsooth, yea refused
to go on their oun legs to the Gibbet. Let this I say be made the Case, which
to me is the exact parallel, and their every Child will know what to Answer, or
to hiss the Objection as pure ridicule. 3. I suppose the Objection speaks of a
righteous and innocent person, who for Righteousness is brought, as a Sheep to
the slaughter (for a Malefactor, who has lost all right to his life, is not to
be understood) Then to make the Case parallel, it must be taken for granted (1)
There is a public Law with the penalty of death statute for the violation
thereof. (2) That the person to be executed, has not only transgressed that
Law, but his disobedience to the Law is notour. (3) That he is processed and
convict of the transgression thereof: Whereupon follows (4) The Sentence, and
then the Execution. Now the Law being wicked, and the man from the fear of God
being constrained to disobey the Law, he can in nothing be justly construed
Active, but in that disobedience or renitence: But in the whole of what befalls
him for this, he being a captive Prisoner, is to be looked upon as passive. Yea
the very Act of going to the place of execution in the present Case, howbeit as
to its Physical entitie, it is of the same kind with the Executioners Motion
that goes along with him, yet in its Moral and Religious being, whence it has
its specification, its wholly the Suffering of a Captive, Well then, ere any
thing can be pleaded from the pretended paritie; seeing there are Laws, made
for paying such Exactions, Cesses, Salaries, and Fynes, for the declared ends
of ruining the people and Interests of Christ. Its necessary, in order to a
just parallel, that the Law must be first disobeyed. (2) The disobedience must
be notour. (3) The delinquent must be processed and pursued, as guilty of the
transgression, and convicted thereof, whereupon Sentence passes against him
for the breach of the Law. Here I grant all with advantage to the Cause: As in
the first Case, so in this, he who is judged guilty of the breach of this
wicked Law, and who is sentenced for that violation, ought to suffer patiently
the spoiling of his goods, and not to decline suffering, if it were unto blood,
striving against this sin.

6. Its Lawful of two evils of Sufferings to choose the least: where both come
in the election, as in the Cases forementioned, and in a man's throwing of his
goods over board in a storm: These and the like are deeds in the present
exigent voluntary and rational, being upon deliberation and choice, where the
least evil is chosen under the notion of good, yea of the best that can be in
the present case, and accordingly the will is determined, and meets and closes
with its proper object: Or one of them only be proposed to be submitted to, but
another lesser evil of suffering is in a man's power to choose and propose, for
purchasing his immunity from a greater; which is not imposed nor exacted of
him, either by a wicked Law, or for wicked ends declared, but voluntarely
offered; As in the Case of parting with some money to a Robber or Murderer to
save the life, when he is seeking only the life; As the ten men that were going
to the House of the Lord said unto Ishmael, slay us not for we have treasures
in the field, for which he forebare and slew them not Ier. 41. 8. In this a man
does nothing, which under such circumstances is not only Lawful (one of the
main ends for which goods are given to him, to wit the preservation of his
life, being thereby attained) but it were a grievous sin, and would conclude
him guilty of self-murder, not to make use of such a mean for preservation of
his life, which God has put in his power, and is in the case called for by His
Precept. But however force may warrant one to do that, which may be done for
shunning a greater evil of loss; yet it is never sufficient to make one do that
which is a greater evil, than all the evil that can be said to be shunned: For
the evil shunned is suffering, but the evil done to shun this, is real and
active Concurrence, in manner, measure, and method, enjoined by Law, in
strengthening the hands of those who have displayed a banner against all the
Lovers of our Lord Jesus Christ; A manifest choosing of sin to shun suffering,
and a saving of life with the prejudice of that in the preservation whereof he
should be ready to lay down all, and be at a point to endure the worst this
wicked world can make him suffer, ere he be found guilty in the matter of a
Compliance of that nature. And tho the rod of the wicked should seem to rest on
his lot, for his refusal, and he be the object of their rage and revenge, for
holding his integrity; yet he shall be honored as a faithful Witness, helped
to endure as seeing Him who is invisible, and amidst all his sufferings and
sorrows, made to rejoice, in the hope that when God shall lead forth these
Workers of iniquity, he shall not be found amongst the Company of these who
have turned aside with them into their crooked Courses, and for that shall be
overturned and crushed with them, under the Curse that is hovering over their
heads,. Its true a man should not cast himself and his family (which if he
provide not for, he is worse than an Infidel) upon sufferings, either
needlessly or doubtfully, when he is not persuaded it is Trurh and Duty he
suffers for, and of value sufficient to countervail the loss he may sustain for
it. But on the other hand, in the present and all like cases it is highly of
the concernment of all men to be careful and circumspectly Cautions, when the
Case comes to be stated upon suffering or not suffering, in examining well
whether the Course whereby a man shuns suffering^ be of God, and not to take
Plausibilities for Demonstrations; seeing the flesh is not only ready to
inculcate that Doctrine, spare thy self, but is both witty of invention to
plead for what will affourd ease, and as unwilling to listen to what would, if
attended unto, expose us to the malice and rage of rigorous enemies: It being
alwise more becoming the Professors of the Gospel, and the Followers of our
Lord Jesus, who must walk to Heaven bearing His Cross, to abstain at all
hazards when the case is doubtful, than to rush forward upon an uncertainty,
when it is not evident they have Gods approbation for what they do. Yea suppose
a person erred to his oun hurt in the first case, through weakness, yet it will
argue much more sincerity and uprightness toward God, and is done with less
danger than in the other. And as many as walk according to this Rule, are like
to have the Peace of the Israel of God, to compense whatever of trouble or loss
they may meet with in the world, when others shall not have this bird of
Paradise to sing in their bosom.

II. But shunning prolixity, to come neare^ the point, because perhaps some may
allege such Cases are not determined in the Scriptures, nor can any Case be
found parallel to these under Consideration, from which we may gather the
determination thereof; Which I think indeed hard to find, because in the
wickedness of former ages such monstrous Exactions had never a Precedent, for
such declared ends, so declaredly impudent. I shall make some Suppositions, and
propose some Questions, all of a piece, and some way parallel to this under
debate, and leave any Conscience touched with the fear of God to answer.

1. Suppose, when our Lord Jesus and His Disciples were tossed upon the waves
by the storm at sea. and he was sleeping, that then Herod or Pilate, or the
Chief Rulers had sent peremptory orders to all men, to supply and furnish with
such things as he had, the men they employed, to capacitate them once for all
and for ever to sink that floating bottom out of sight; and that somewhat
should be given to the Soldiers engaged in that Enterprise, somewhat to the
Pharisees fot persuading them to it, and fynes to be exacted from the
Recusants, and Rewards to be given to such as should keep them in Custody that
should fall in their hands, either of them that refused to pay the Moiety
prescribed, or of such of them as should escape drouning. In this Case would,
or durst any of the Lovers of Jesus comply with any of these demands? and not
rather choose to perish with Him, or in opposition to such wicked attempts? Now
has not the Lord Jesus, and all the Interest He has in the Nation, been
imbarqued as it were in one bottom, and floating like a wrack in the sea? And
have not these called Rulers in this Land, in their rage against the Lords
Anointed, and the handful who adhere to Him, sent their peremptory orders to
pay a Cess for sinking His floating Interests; and to pay the Curats for
persuading to it; and fynes for not concurring in it; And rewards to Iaylors
and others that are appointed to oppress the Recusants? Who durst concur then
in this Compliance, who had love to Christ in exercise, and who had his friends
in the same bottom imbarqued? And besides seeing the Great God had the man of
whom this is required, bound with his oun consent, under a Sacred and Solemn
Oath, and under the penalty of never seeing His face, if he do not venture
life and fortune to preserve that precious Interest, and all who are embarked
with it from perishing. Shall he notwithstanding of this, give what these
enemies to Christ, call for as His Concurrence, to enable them to execute their
wicked Contrivance? Does any man think or dream that the pitiful Plea, of what
they call a Moral force, will clear and acquit him before God from the guilt of
a Concurrence in this Conspiracy, while in the mean time he furnished
whatsoever these Enemies demanded of him with this express Declaro that it was
for this Cause exacted, and for this end imposed? Or can he think to be saved,
when they shall be sentenced who with so much deliberation and despite have
done this thing? O let us consider the after reckoning! And let us not with
pretenses distinguish our selves into a Defection, or distract our selves into
the oblivion of this, that God is righteous to whom the reckoning must be made.

2. Let it be supposed, under Saul's Tyranny, when the Ziphims informed him of
David's hiding himself with them, Or when Doeg informed him of Abimelechs
resetting him, That an order had been given forth to all Israel, with this
Narrative: Whereas that Rebel David had now openly despised Authority, had been
entertained by the Priest, received Goliabs sword from him, and gathered a
Company of armed men together, therefore to the end he and his Accomplices, may
be brought to Justice, We ordain all from Dan to Beersheba, to concur either
personally in this Expedition against him, or to pay Cess to our standing
forces to maintain them in this expedition, or so much to gratify the Ziphims
for their kindness, or to furnish Doeg with a sword, to murder the Priests of
the Lord. Would any that favored David's righteous Cause, have dared to do any
of these? Would these that durst not concur themselves, contribute any
encouragment to the Concurers? Would Saul's Servants that would not fall upon
the Priests of the Lord themselves, have given Doeg one of their swords to do
it, or money to buy one, if it had been demanded? To the same purpose, suppose
a party comes to a Dissenter, with an express order, and this Narrative,
Whereas there is such a Minister, meet with some people, at an execrable
Conventicle as they call it (but in it self the pure Worship of God) therefore
to the end the Minister may be taken and murdered, and the Servants of the Lord
for the Countenance they gave him may be brought to the same punishment, they
ordain him, for the accomplishing of their design, to furnish that party with
all necessares, or to pay such a sum of money for not concuring with them: Now
should he in this case not only forbear to lay down his life for his brethren,
and forbear to deliver them, that are thus drawn unto death on such an account,
(into which forbearance the Great God will make so accurate an inquiry Prove.
24. 11, 12. as may make us tremble, whether we look backward or forward) but
also furnish according to the tenor of this Order, that party of the Dragons
Legions, in their War against the Prince Michael and His Angels, with supplies,
and think to put off the matter and plead innocent with this, that he was under
the Moral force of a Law, accompanied with such military force, as if he had
refused, they would have taken away all he had etc.? For this Plea in its full
strength, is to do evil that some good may come of it (no true good) which
brings just damnation Romans 3. 8. or to choose sin rather than affliction.

3. What if Manasseh, or other Idolatrous Princes, that sacrificed to Devils,
and made Children pass through the fire to Molech, had enacted a Cess, or under
severe Impositions of Fynes had commanded all to concur to a solemn Sacrifice
of that nature, charging every man against a certain day, to bring in his
proportion in order to celebrate the Sacrifice with all its statute
solemnities; Or should have taken a child from every father, and then made a
Law that each of these should contribute such a sum, for furnishing with all
necessaries, and maintaining these Murderers, whom they had conduced to shed
the blood of their innocent Children or sacrifice them to Molech: Could it be
expected that any of the Godly would have paid such Exactions, and then have
wyped his mouth with the notion of a moral force? This comes home enough to our
Case: For no sacrifice they can offer to the Devil, can be more real or so
acceptable, as what they declare they intend to do; being so direct, not only
an opposition to the coming of the Kingdom of Christ, but the deletion of His
precious Interests, and exstirpation of His faithful Remnant, and the giving
Satan such an absolute Dominion in the Nation, as that they who have made the
decree, and all who put it in execution, practically declare thereby they have
mancipate themselves to his slavery, and sold themselves to work wickedness, in
the sight of the Lord: So likewise, that all the rest of the Nation, may with
themselves become his vassals, and in evidence of their opposition to Christ,
and in recognition of Satan's Soveraignity and their subjection, they are
appointed to pay these black Meals.

4. Let it be supposed, that after Nebuchadnezzar had made the decree, for all
to fall down and worship his Image, and the three Children were apprehended for
refusing it, he had made another, that all the Jews especially should
contribute, every one a Faggot, or money to buy it, to heat the furnace, or a
rope to lead them to it: Can any man suppose, that Daniel, or the rest of the
faithful, would have paid it? Even so, let it be supposed, that any one of
these faithful Ambassadors of Christ, or all these zealous Workers together
with God, who have labored among the people in the Preached Gospel, should
fall into the hands of these Hunters; And then they should make a Law, and
appoint every man in the Nation, to send but one thread, to make a Towe, to
hang that Minister, or to hang the whole Company of Christ's Ambassadors, and a
farthing to pay the Executioner: Can any man, without horror think of
complying so far as to contribute what is commanded? Or would not a Gracious
man frighted into an abhorrence at the attrociousness of the wickedness, or
fired into a flame of zeal for God, say without demur, as not daunted, with
fear of what flesh could do unto him, I will rather venture my All to keep them
alive, or be hanged with them, than by doing what is demanded be brought forth
and classed in the cursed and cruel Company of those who shall be dragged
before the Tribunal of Christ, with their fingers dyed and dropping with the
blood of those who are peculiarly dear to Him? I know it will be said that in
all these cases it would be a clear case of Confession. Well, that's all I would
have granted: For that which does over balance to a Testimony, in all the
cases mentioned, is so far from being wanting in the cases now under
consideration, that they have all to enforce the duty, that all of them put
together do include; As will be clear to any who consider (1) The preciousness
of the things and Interests to be destroyed (2) The Concurrence called for from
every one, that this desperate design may be accomplished. (3) The great,
manifold, and indispensible obligations all are under, not only to abstain from
the required Concurrence, but to preserve also and maintain these things in
opposition to all, whom Satan sets on work to serve him in this Expedition
against the Son of God, and to do it or endeavor it with the loss of life, and
all things dearest to men, to the end that these things which are Satan's
eyesore, as only obstructive of His Kingdom, may be preserved among the poor
Remnant, and propogate in their power and purity to the posterity. Happy he
who shall be found so doing now, when the Dragon and his Angels are drawn into
the fields, and have proclaimed the War, and published to the world the Causes
thereof; So that now this General having laid aside all his old disguises,
does in his true shape march upon the head of his black Legions, who wear his
badge and colors, and fight under his banner and standart.

III. In the last place, with all possible brevity, I shall offer some Reasons
against Compliance with these Exactions in Cumulo.

1. To pay these Impositions, upon such declared Accounts, for such declared
Causes, and for such declared ends, would condemn the Contendings and
Sufferings of many eminently Godly, especially in our day who have refused
them. Of these Questions and Sufferings thereupon among the Godly in former
times, we cannot instruct much, for such insolent Impositions, as to all the
dimensions of their heinousness, were never heard before. But we want not
Examples of the Saints refusing to give their money and other such things to
wicked men, either to comply with their wicked demands, obey their wicked Laws,
encourage their wicked courses, or furtheir their wicked designs. In Scripture
we find Paul would not give Felix money that he might be loosed, tho he sent
for him often for that end Act. 24. 26.

Mr Durham in his exposition of the Revelation. Chap. 6. verse 9. Lect. 6. Page
gives an account, that when in the persecution of Dioclesian the Persecutors
sought but the Bibles, poors coats, money, or Cups (wherewith they served) to
be given them, as some Evidence of their ceding; But they refused to accept
deliverance upon these terms: yea when the Soldiers, partly wearieing to be so
bloody, partly desirous of seeming victory over Christians, did profess
themselves content to take any old paper or clout in place of the Bible, they
refused to give any Ecvola (as it was called from the Greek (...)) or castaway
clout; yea when Soldiers would violently pluck such things from them against
their wills, they would follow them, professing their Adherence unto the Truth,
and that they had not any way willingly delivered these things, as it is to be
seen in Baronius. An. 303. page 748. It is reported of one Marcus Arethusius,
who was put to torment under Julian, because he would not build the Idol Temple
which he had formerly demolished, when they were content to accept some part of
the Expenses from him, and to spare his life, he refused to give obolum or one
half penny, Sozom. Lib. 5. 9. Cent. Mag. Cent. 4. page 797. and 833. By which
and many other instances we may see, how resolutly the primitive Saints held
fast their Testimonies: from which especially they were called Martyrs or
witnesses; and by which often, not only many weak ones were strengthened, but
also many Persecuters convinced and made to cry out, Certainly great is the God
of the Christians; while as they saw that no Allurments on the one side, nor
Terrors on the other, could make them loose their grips, but still Truth and
Christ were born witness unto, and well spoken of by them. It will not be
unnecessary here to consider some of Mr. Durhams observations in the fourth
Lecture, for clearing thereof, he adduced these matters of fact. Such as Obs.
7. That the giving of a Testimony by outward Confession of the Truth when
called for, is necessary, and commendable, as well as soundness of faith; yea
it is oftentimes the outward testifieing of the Truth before men, more than the
faith of it before God, that brings on suffering: And there was nothing more
abhorred in the primitive Christians than dissembling of a Testimony, to evite
suffering, as appears in Augustins writings de mendacio and contra mendacium,
and the writings of others to that purpose. Obs. 8. That every Truth of the
word may be a ground of suffering warrantably: For the least thing that has a
Truth in it, as well as the more concerning fundamental Truths, is the word of
God, and so can not be dispensed with by His people. Obs. 9. Every Truth in the
word has an outward Testimony joined to it, and sometimes may be called for
upon very great hazards. Obs. 10. When it is called for, this Testimony or
confession to any Truth before men, is no less necessary, and ought as
peremptorily to be held and st^ck to as the former: Therefore it is called (
Romans 10.) Confession unto Salvation. And called for by a peremptory
certification. Matt. 10. 32. 33. Obs. 11. That these who are sound in the Faith
of the word, will be also exceeding tonacious of their Testimony, in Scripture,
and in primitive times, we will find the Saints sticking at, and hazarding
themselves on things which appear of very small moment, yet were to them of
great concernment* because of the Testimony, which was involved in them, which
they would not let go. Such was Mordecai, Ester 3. Daniel 6. his not shutting
of his windows. Yea further in his lately printed Sermons on Matthew. 16. 24.
Sermon. 7. page 155. the same Author says. There is not in some respect a more
and a less in the matter of duty and in the matter of Truth or in respect of
Suffering. And a little after.. 5. he says, We would not limit sufferings for
Christ to things simply Lawful or unlawful, for it may be sometimes for things
indifferent in their oun nature, which yet being so and so circumstantiated to
us may draw on suffering; a thing may be indifferent and Lawful to some, which
to others stated under such and such circumstances may be counted a receding
from some part of a just Testimony; even tho the matter be not such in it self
and in its oun nature, yet it may be so circumstantiate to some persons as it
may be liable to that Construction if they shall recede from or forbear it; as
in the Example of Daniel, who suffered for opening his windows, which was a
thing indifferent in it self and not essential to his worshipping of God, but --
he finds himself bound in conscience, and that on very just ground, to do as he
was wont to do before, and that on the manifest hazard of his life, left his
malicious enemies should have it to say, that he receded from his duty, and
that he thought more shame now, or was more afraid now, than before to worship
the true God. How worthy Mr Knox argues for withholding Emoluments from the
false Bishops and Clergy may be seen before, part. 1. per. 3. page 28, 29.

The general Assembly in their Declaration dated Jullij ult: 1648. concerning
the then unlawful engadgement in a War against England, plainly and positively
Dehorteth all members of the Kirk of Scotland from contributing any assistence
thereunto, expressed as follows; That they do not concur in, nor any way
assist this present engadgement, as they would not partake in other men's sins,
and so receive of their plagues but that by the grace and assistence of Christ,
they steadfastly resolve to suffer the rod of the wicked, and the utmost which
wicked men's malice can afflict them with, rather than to put forth their hands
to iniquity. In which Declaration may be seen at large, that candor,
faithfullness and freedom which becomes the Ministers of the Gospel, and
dignity of Watchmen, in their seasonable warning and dissuading all from
assisting any way to that unlawful engadgement, perceiving the sin and snare
thereof, So obviously tending to the involveing the Land in guilt, and
exposeing to wrath; yea and that notwithstanding of the fair and plausible
pretexts of the engadgers and joyners therein, who pretended and professed
their undertaking to be for the furthering reformation, establishing and
securing the Covenanted Religion from the plotings and endeavors of the
Popish, Prelatick and Malignant enemies thereof, and prosecuting the ends of
the Covenants; Pretenses which no doubt our silent and time-serveing Ministers
(if they had any such now to plead) would streniously improve, in vindication
of their prudent silence, sinful and shamfull Complyances. Alas how sad and
lamentable is the condition of the Church and Nation now! that even when the
case is so far altered that not only all such pretenses are laid aside,
Reformation deserted and disdained, the established Religion razed and ruined,
the Covenant broken and burned, and the owning the obligation thereof declared
Treason, but also an absolute Power pleaded and exercised to the suspending,
stoping and disabling all penal Laws against Popery and Prelacy, a gap opened
by an Antichristian toleration to the leting in all the Heresies, Idolatries
and blasphemies of the mother of Harlots, and the Land openly defiled
therewith, unjust and wicked Taxations arbitrarily imposed and levied, for the
most dreadful, Sacrilegious and hellish ends that ever was publ^shed to the
world, far exceeding in wickedness these testified against by the Assembly
1648, or any formerly. While the Watchmen have so far abandoned their duty of
seting the trumpet to their mouth and giveing due warning of the sin and danger
of those dreadful and Judgement-procuring courses, that they are caught in the
snare and found complementing and encouraging, the principal Instrument of all
these evils, by their scandalous flattering Adresses.

How faithful and tender some have been even in our day their sufferings and
losses in a measur above others makes manifest, amongst whom the worthy Lord
of Kersland is not to be forgotten, whose Estate heritable and moveable was
declared forfeited, and seized, for his appearing in Arms to join with that
faithful party who by horrid oppression were forced to betake themselves to
defensive resistance anno 1666; who considering the equity of the cause he
appeared for, the indispensibleness of the obligations binding him to that
duty, and how much a good Conscience is to be prefered to an Estate, durst not
part with the sweet comforts of the one for the uncertain profits of the other;
And as he was earnest with God by frequent and fervent Prayer for light and
stedfastness in the matters of his suffering and Testimony, So it pleased the
Lord, so to determine his heart therein, as that all the endeavors and
persuasions used both by friends and foes to move him to a composition with the
enemies for his Estate proved unsuccessfull, yea it is well known how that
severals, both of his near relations and others, who used the most forcible and
persuasive Arguments, as the consideration of the ancient and honorable
Family he was descended from; The miserable case that he, his Lady and
Children should be in, without his Estate; The Counsel and Judgment of grave
and Godly Ministers; The freedom and practice of other learned and knowing men;
Together also with the imputation of vain scrupulocity, simple and
unwarrantable nicitie and precisness etc, that yet even some of those who dealt
most with him, were by his defenses and reasonings convinced of the equity of
his cause, and brought to commend his upright resolution, and to applaud his
tenderness and faithfullness; and in particular his own father, who pleaded
much that he would only consent, that he with others of his friends might
compone in favors of his Family, and that he himself should be no ways
concerned in it further than to assent that the thing be done, but could not
prevail, who afterward blessed God that he did not, declaring that he had much
more satisfaction, and comfort in his sons honesty, and stedfastness than many
such Estats could ever have affourded him.

I shall here mention some considerations which prevailed with him to decline
all composition directly or indirectly with the enemies in that matter. (1)
That he could never attain to freedom to use any such manifest dissimulation,
as deliberatly to assent to any thing that might import his acknowledgeing that
to be a sin and fault (yea such a sin and fault as Rebellion) which he was
convinced in his conscience to be unquestionable duty both before God and man,
nor thereby dissemblingly to insinuat his undoubted right to his Estate, to be
in the person or at the ^isposeing of any other. (2) Considering that there can
be no new right procured upon a composition, and granted to any, but such as
shall carry in the narative thereof that he had forfeited that Estate by
Rebellion, with a long preamble condemning the cause of God, and dutyfull
endeavors of his people for Reformation, and in defense of Religion and
Liberty, all as Sedition, Rebellion and Treason; whereupon he resolved rather
to part with his Estate, than be any way instrumental and occasional to the
indignifieing that holy and honorable Cause with such disdainful, reproachful
and blasphemous Epithets. And albeit such tenderness in principle and practice
of this Worthy Gentleman, and of many others of the faithful sufferers in our
day, be censured and condemned by the lukewarm and worldly-wise Professors in
this age, as an unprecedented noveltie, or precise and unwarrantable notion,
yet we find it the same with the faithful sufferers in former ages, and
exactly agreeing with the Doctrine and Principles of the most orthodox and
famous Divines, for the Reverend and learned Calvin^ having the same case of
conscience proposed to him by the Godly, persecuted in his age, to which his
solid and faithful Answer is extant in his 375 Epistle, Article third, thus
proposed and Answered. An a principe peti possit confiscatio bonorum, illorum
nomine and gratia, quibus persecutio intenditur? Resp: certum est illud fieri
non posse sine peccato, rescriptum enim sive indultum principis, complectitur
omnino blasphemias apertas, contra Dei gloriam, quia fiet illic mentio, errorum
and criminum, and laesoe majestatis divinae, a damnatis; quod rescriptum erit
deinde in jure exhibendum illi qui eo uti cogitabit, atque illud est
approbationis genus quoddam, nullo modo ferendum, quare non video ut viro pio
and recte justituto in Evangelio, ejusmodi fictionibus sese liceat involvere.
i. e. Whither the confiscation of goods can be sought back again from a Prince,
in the name and behalf of these who are forfaulted for Religion? to which he
Answers, that it is certain it cannot be done without sin; for the new right,
or the de novo damus, (as we call it) granted by the Prince, does really
contain, open blasphemies against the glory of God; because therein mention is
made of errors, crims, and divine lese-Majestie, whereof the condemned are
found guilty; which new right most in Law be exhibited by him who intends to
use the same; and that is a certain kind of approbation no ways to be tolerat.
Wherefore I see not that it is Lawful for a Godly man rightly instructed in the
Gospel, to involve himself into such fictions.

2. From the Fountain and Conveyance, whence they proceed; the iniquity of
these payments might be concluded; which is nothing else than that Arbitrary
Power domineering over us, and oppressing and overpressing the Kingdoms with
intolerable Exactions; which to pay is all the consent and Concurrence required
of us to entail slaverie on the posterity. I mean to pay it, out of submission
only to the Moral force of its Imposition, which is all the justification
required of that absolute Tyranny imposing it. For we have the Testimony of a
King for it ( K. James Speech to the Parliament anno 1609.) that a King
degenerateth into a Tyrant, when he leaves to rule by Law, much more when he
begins -- to set up an Arbitrary Power, impose unlawful Taxes etc. It can be
denied by none, that know either Religion or Liberty, and are not enemies to
both, that these Impositions under consideration, upon such accounts, for such
ends, are as unlawful Taxes, and as illegally and arbitrarily imposed, as ever
could demonstrate the most Despotical Absoluteness, Paramount to all Law, or
precedent, but that of Benhadad, of a very Tyrannical strain, Thus says
Benhadad, thy silver and thy gold is mine -- yet I will send my Servants, and
they shall search thine house, and it shall be that whatsoever is pleasant in
thine eyes, they shall put in their hand, and take it away, 1 King. 20. 3, 6.
which even an Ahab and his Elders would not hearken to nor consent. But from an
Exotic Dominator this were not so intolerable, as from such as pretend an
hereditary right to Govern, who should remove violence and spoil, and take away
their Exactions from the Lords people, as the Lord says, Ezekiel. 45. 9. but
instead of that, that they may do evil with both hands earnestly, the Prince
asks and the Judge asks for a reward, and the great man utters his
mischievous desire, so they wrap it up, Mic. 7. 3. The easy Compliance with
which, makes Zion as the grape gleanings of the vintage. If those Exactions be
wicked, then Compliance with them must be iniquity: For it justifies the Court
that enacts and exacts them, a pa^qued Iunct^ of a prevalent faction made up of
perjured Traitors, in a Course of enmity against God, and the Country, who to
prosecute the War against the Almighty, and root out all His people out of the
Land, condescend upon these Cesses, Fynes etc. as a fit and adapted Medium
thereunto. Wherefore, of necessity all that would not oune that Conclusion, as
their oun deed, in these Representatives, and oune them as their
Representatives in that deed, must bear witness against the same, by a Refusal,
to oune the debt, or pay the same. But I shall conclude this, with observing
(1) The holy and remarkable righteousness of the Lord, that we, who would not
contend earnestly for the Liberty of the Gospel, who would not acquit our
selves like men, in witnessing our Loyalty to Christ, were not fixed in our
Engagements, nor steadfast in holding the Liberties, wherewith Christ has made
us free, did not reclaim nor reluctate when we saw our Royal Masters
Prerogative invaded; should be trod upon in all Civills, and treated as
Slaves, even by these, whom we had gratified with a base and sinful forbearance
to plead for God, and preserve from their violence these things, these precious
and invaluable things, which we should have kept more tenderly than the apple
of our eye. O the relucency of this Righteousness, in making the Gods whom we
have served smite us, and in making them, whose interest we minded with a
misregard and Perjury-involving neglect of the Interest of Christ, thus to
destroy our poor pitiful Interests! And thus having taught them to be Captains
over us, we must now sit in the house of bondage in our Land. (2) Who will not
adore and admire the Righteousness of the Lord, particularly in leaving some of
these to be designedly trod upon, who not only were involved in the common
guilt of not with-standing these Encroachments, but first went a great way in
concuring to the making of these wicked Laws; And now have been made to lie
under the load, laid upon their loins, by the hands of such, to whom they gave
the hand in overturning the Work of God? Why should not they be spoiled? Why
should not the young Lions roar upon them, and make their Land wast? Why should
not men of the same metal and soul with the Children of Noph and Tahapanes,
break the Crown of their head (or feed upon their Crown) who have sold and set
the Crown of Christ upon another head, and concured to crush His faithful
Remnant? O let us learn to read and revere! Let us not be wheedled with we know
not what, out of our good old Principles into the espousing the Interest, or
embarquing into the same bottom with men of such Principles and Practices. And
whosoever is wise, and will observe these things, even they shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord: Great loving kindness, that He has showed to his
poor Remnant, in delivering us from deliverances by such Deliverers, whereby
the work had been more really and more shamefully ruined, and the hope of the
posterity more certainly razed.

3. From the declared Ends of all of them, declared either verbally or
virtually, and indisputably and universally known: To wit, that by such
Exactions they might be enabled to maintain and prosecute the National
Rebellion against Christ, and root out His Gospel, and all the faithful
Preachers and Professors thereof. These designs being notour, and the
Impositions demanded being the best expedients, and most adapted means to
attain them, it cannot but be manifest, that whosoever complyes with the means
do cooperate with the ends: Which, if any thing, will involve the Complyers in
the Contrivers sin, and make the Payers obnoxious to the Enacters judgments. If
they that take rewards to slay Innocents, be liable to a Curse Deuteronomy. 27. 25.
they cannot be free who give them: They cannot say Amen to it, who so cooperate
to the effectuating the slaughter. If any thing make Zion liable to be plowed
as a field, when the heads thereof judge for reward, Mic. 3. 11, 11. it must
be, when they demand such rewards, and the demands are complied with. But some
may pretend, and under that pretense think to shut the shour of suffering, and
command the serenity and sunshine of a good Conseience too, and to shelter
their soul under that shadow; That these Exactions may be necessary for other
ends: Can any State be without Exactions? Is it not necessary that forces be
maintained and such as are in public office in the Kingdom? Wherewithal shall
the Nation be guarded against foreign invasion? Alas! the pretense is so false
and frivolous as he could not escape the Censure of foolish, who in answering
it appeared serious, save in a just indignation at its empty vanity. What are
these forces and public Officiers for? What are they employed about, but to
promote the Dragons designs, and serve his drudgerie? Shall these guard the
Nation, who together with Religion tread upon the poor remaining shadow of
Liberty? Do they indeed fear a foreign invasion? No, it does not hold us here:
These called Rulers hide not their designs, but hold them to our eye that we
may not pretend ignorance. They will do the greatest have first: Christ and His
Interest is their great eyesore. This one Jesus who calls Himself a King (yea
and He will be so to their cost) and His Subjects as the most dangerous party,
are to be discussed in the first place: And thereafter, when they are liberate
from that fear of His returning to His Throne, whom they have exauctorate (for
if ever He do, they are ruined, make have O Lord) and have eaten the flesh and
drunk the blood of His people, then they will be in a better case to defend the
Land, by showing the Enemy those Teeth and Tusks, wherewith they have torn the
people of the Lord. But will men put out their oun eyes, that they may be taken
with the more tameness to grind in their Mill, and make them merry at our
madness? Have we lost our senses, that we may with confidence jeopard our
Souls? Have they not invaded the Mediators Kingdom, and taken to themselves His
House in possession? And because Reavers may not be Rewers, they will destroy
all in the Land, who seem faithful to Christ, and resolute to follow the
Captain of the host of Israel. But is it not enough that they menace Heaven?
Will they mock us into the same Rebellion with themselves? He will not be
mocked, but turn their jest into earnest. I cannot here shift the transcribing
some of the very words of that Author, whose Reasonings I am but gleaning on
this subject. Oh Britain! O Scotland! bent into, and bold in backsliding, the
wrath of God, and thy woe seems to be upon the wing. And alas! I am afraid, that
by this Crowning and Crimson wickedness, the Lord God Almighty is making a way
to His Anger, and preparing the Nation for a Sacrifice, to expiate in the sight
of the world our Perjurie, defection and Heaven-daring Provocations. Alas! I am
afraid that the sword of the Lord, which shall avenge the quarrel of His
Covenant, is near to be drawn -- that the Contributers, as well as the stated
party of contrivers, decreers and cruel Executioners of these decrees, may
fall under the blow of the forbished sword of the Lord God: And that the Land
of such abominations, may be swept of its Inhabitants with the besome of
destruction, and soaked with the blood of those, who instead of contending for
Christ, have by this payment associate with His stated, His declared, and
implacable Enemies, whose rage is come up before Him, and will bring Him down
to take revenge. Alas! My fears, My fears are multiplied upon me, that the war
shall not only at last Land in Britain: But that He has been all this while
training up a Militia abroad, breeding them in blood, and teaching them how to
be skillful to destroy, against the time He give them order to march, and put
the flaming sword in their hand, to be bathed in the blood of backsliding
Britain! Oh if our turning unto Him, that He might turn away from the
fierceness of His Anger, might prevent this woeful day! But since instead of any
turning unto Him, we surpass the deeds of the heathen, and out do in wickedness
all that went before us, and proceed with a petulancy reaching Heaven from evil
to worse; I am afraid that all the bloodshed since the sword was drawn in the
Nations about, all the sacked Cities all the burnt dorps and villages, all the
wasted Countries, all the slain of the Lord by sea or Land, all the pillagings,
rapes, Murders outrages (which rage it self, could hardly outdo) all the horrid
and inhumane Cruelties, that have been committed during this bloody war
(wherein the sea has been dyed, and the Land as it were drouned with the blood
of the slain) all the truculent and treacherous Murders of that Monster Alva
in the Low Countries, all the incredible Cruelties of the Guises, and the
bloodshed in the Massacres of France, all the Tortures that the people of the
Lord have been put to in the valleys of Piedmont, by that Little fierce Tiger
the Duke of Savoy, all the savage and barbarous butcheries of the Irish
Massacre; shall be forgotten, or seem things not to be mentioned in one day;
when what shall be done in Britain comes to be reinembered. O Britain o
Britain: of all Nations under the Cope of Heaven, most ripe for the sickle of
vengeance! shall this Throne of iniquity, which has framed so many mischiefs
into Laws, and all that are Accomplices in this wicked Conspiracy, who now are
gathering themselves against the soul of the Righteous, and condemning the
innocent blood, be able to save its subjects, when He comes to make inquisition
for that blood? or shall the subjects calling in all from 60 to 16, be able to
support the Throne? Alas! in vain shall they offer to draw up, and draw the
sword and defend, when the Lord God of hosts draws His sword, to accomplish
upon them the vengeance written, and wrapped up in these words, He shall bring
upon them their oun iniquity* and shall cut them off in their oun wickedness,
yea the Lord our God shall cut them off. And if it come to this, then in that
day escape who will, Professing Gentlemen, and others who in this have complied
with the Rulers, shall not escape: Then shall they be paid for this Payment.
The storm of His displeasure (even tho they get their souls for a prey, yea so
much the more as He will not suffer them to perish eternally) shall be observed
to fall particularly upon their houses, Interests, and Estates. Who can think
upon the wickedness of Britain, with its just aggravations, and imagine the
righteous Lord will proportion His Judgments, to the heinousness of our guilt,
and His revenges to the rage, whereby He, and His Christ has been, and is
opposed, and take other measures?

4. From the Nature of these Payments, it is not our they are sinful
Complyances and Transactions with Christ's declared Enemies, and do partake of
Unitive Confederacies with them; which are demonstrated to be sinful, Head 3.
Arg. 1. in genesis Page Certainly such bargains cannot be discretive, exacted and
complied with by Persons no ways incorporate together, being only overcome by
mere force: since they are not only demanded and granted Acknowledgements of
that Power that imposes them, as legally Lording over them, but obediential
submissions to these wicked Laws that enacts them; which is a formal justifying
of these Laws: For Laws cannot be obeyed except they be justified, seeing Laws
unjust and unjustifyable cannot be obeyed. Therefore, seeing the Payment of the
Cess, Locality, Fynes stipends, fees etc. is an obediential Compliance with the
Laws that enjoin them, that obedience can no more be justified, than the Laws
enacting such Payments: which none can justify but he that is an enemy to those
things for opposing which they are exacted. If then Complyances with the wicked
Impositions and exactions of Arbitrary Dominators, enemies to the Work and
People of God, be in Scripture condemned, then such Payments cannot be
justified: But such Complyances are condemned, and cannot be approven. This was
Issachars brand, that being a strong Ass, he couched between burdens, and bowed
his shoulder to bear and became a servant to Tribute Genesis 49. 14. This was
Asa's folly, that he so far Complied with Benhadad, as to give money to take
his help 1 King. 15. 18. Condemned by the Prophet Hanani 2 Chronicles. 16. 7. etc.
much more if he had given it to help him. Its one of the instances of the Evil
that Menahem did in the sight of the Lord, 2 King. 15. 18 -- 2c. that when Pull
the King of Assyria came against the Land he gave him a thousand talents of
silver, that his hand might be with him, which he exacted of Israel: This was
certainly evil in the sight of the Lord, for if the Confederacy was evil, then
this price to procure it was evil also: And if Menahems exaction was evil, then
Isreal's Compliance was evil also; for thus Ephraim was oppressed and broken in
judgment, because he willingly walked after the Commandment, Hos. 5. 11. It
was also a part and proof of Ahaz's Confederacy with Tiglith-Pileser King of
Assyria, that he sent money to him 2 King. 16. 8. Which to all the fearers of
the Lord is condemned and discharged Isai. 8. 12, 13. Which if it was evil,
then also Hezekiahs Compliance with Sennacherib, giving him money, and offering
to bear that which was put on him, 2 King. 18. 14, 15. was evil: And also
Iehojakims taxing the Land, to give the money according to the commandment of
Pharoh 2 King. 23. 35. was sinful to the Exacter, and likewise to the
Complyers. These were all sinful Complyances and Confederacies with the wicked,
making their peace with them to whom they paid them: Therefore all
Peacemaking payments, by way of Unitive aggreement with the wicked, must be
sinful. And accordingly in the time of Montrose, the Genesis Ass. made an Act for
Censuring the Complyers with the Public Enemies of this Church and Kingdom,
Iun. 17. 1646. Sess. 14. See Part. 1. Per. 5. Page 82.

5. Where these Exactions are extorted only as badges of bondage, without
Consent unto the Law imposing them, its a Case more suitable for lamentation
then Censure, that she that was Princess among the Provinces should become
tributary Lam. 1. 1. But when they are Acknowledgemens of the Lawgivers, and an
exact obedience to the Law, and voluntary agreement and bargain with them,
strengthening them to the prosecution of their Mischiefs, they cannot be free
of the Imposers sin. It was the sin of the men of Shechem, and a proof of their
hearts inclination to follow Abimelech, that they gave him threescore and ten
pieces of silver, enabling him to kill threescore and ten persons and to hire
vain and light persons to follow him, which they paid as an acknowledgement of
his usurped Power, Judge. 9. 3 -- 5. for which afterward fire came out of the
house of Abimelech and devoured them. Certainly a voluntary consent into a
Mischief is a partaking with the sin of it, a consent unto Theft is a partaking
with it Psalm. 50. 18. But if there be any consent unto a Mischief, it must be
when the person agrees it be done against himself, and voluntarily subjects
himself to the force of the Law imposing it, and not only does not oppose or
witness against the doing of it against others, but yields to its reaching
himself, and gives what is demanded to strengthen the Robbers to exercise their
Robbery over all. As the Payer of the Cess, Fynes, and Fees, etc. gives all
the consent required of him, to these Mischiefs framed into Law, not only to
rob himself, but the Church and Nation of its dearest Treasure the Gospel, for
the punishment of ouning which, and as means to remove it, these Payments are
exacted. But the Plea of the payers is, that they are constrained to it, and
they do it against their will. Ans. 1 He who says he understands this, that
the Payer of these Exactions can purge himself of the guilt of them, is like to
buy an after wit at a dear rate. Can it be thought by any man of knowledge and
conscience, that so remote a force makes the deed unvoluntary, whereby the
payer is purged from the guilt of accession to the Imposers deed, whom hereby
in this very Imposition he ounes as his Representatives! 2. The payment cannot
be involuntary; for the Law enjoining it, being the public and declared will
of the Nation, requires no other voluntareness but obedience, and judges no
other thing involuntareness but disobedience. So that the Law being fatisfied,
it absolves the Satisfier from all transgression, and looks npon all who yield
obedience as equally willing, and equally out of the reach of its appended
penalty, in case of disobedience. Neither are we to please our selves with
other fancies and fictitious unwillingness, when real obedience is yielded,
whereby the Law is satisfied, and the Lawmakers capacitated thereby to act all
his intended Mischiefs. For to be unwilling to part with money in the Case, as
it is no virtue in it self, so I suppose there are few who will be sollicitous
to purge themselves of this. And to be unwilling from some struglings of light
and conscience, is such an unwillingness as aggravates the guilt of the Giver,
and makes it more heinous in the sight of God, and hateful in the eyes of all
tender men: The Law enjoining such payments takes no notice of such
reluctancies, only requires obedience, and when that is yielded, the Law is
satisfied, as to the voluntareness of the Action, and must construe the Agent a
willing walker after the Command, and a voluntary Complyer with the public
will of the Nation. 3. It must be simply, really, and truly a voluntary deed,
when there is Deliberation and Election. The Law requiring these payments being
promulgate, every man must be supposed to put the question to himself, what
shall I do in the case? Shall I obey and be free? Or disobey and suffer? Here
is Election and choice upon mature deliberation: And so the deed becomes truly
voluntary. This will be confirmed, if we consider the Law of God, Deuteronomy. 22. 25.
concerning Rapes. Where, to make the unvoluntareness of the betrothed Virgin,
she must not only be supposed to strugle and resist the attempt made upon her
chastity and honor by the villain, but she must cry for assistence in that
resistance, without which she is held in Law willingly to consent to the
committing of that wickedness. And moreover if we consider the Law verse. 13. it
will be manifest, in order to her escaping of death, that when violented and
the villain has committed this villainy, she is to carry as Tamar (when defiled
of that beast, tho of the blood Royal) did 2 Samuel 13. 19. that is, to complain
and cry, and crave Justice against him, and be wanting in nothing, that may
bring him to condign punishment. This does aptly correspond to our Case.
Scotland is the betrothed Virgin: We were espoused to Jesus Christ, and joined
to Him, by a Marriage Covenant, never to be forgotten; But the Rulers, and with
them the body of the Land have treacherously broken it: yet there is a Remnant
that adhere to Him as Head and Husband; because of which, these called Rulers
incensed against Him will violently commit a Rape upon them, and have them
prostitute their bodies, their fortunes, yea their Souls and Consciences to
their lusts, and thus they will needs ravish the Queen in the Kings presence.
And so, while with displayed banner they declare they will drive our Covenanted
Husband out of the Nation, and destroy all who will oune Him as such, they call
for our Assistence and Compliance, to enable them to accomplish this
wickedness. Now either must we make all the Resistance that is in our power; or
the Law judges us willingly to consent; and because of that we fall in the
hands of the righteous Judge, and have neither the evidence of our Resisting,
nor Crying, nor pursuing the wicked for this violent Rape, to produce and plead
upon, why Sentence should not pass, and the Laws just severity be execute upon
us. What? Alas! do they declare they will stone our Husband? (Ah! for which of
His good deeds is this done) And shall they make a Law whereby we shall be
obliged to furnish them with stones to do it? And shall they be obeyed? Is this
our struggling? Is this our Crying? Is this our endeavor that the wicked may be
brought to condign punishment? Oh! let us meditate terror, lest we be brought
forth as willing Consenters! For whatever vengeance the jealous and just God
shall execute upon them, who have committed the Rapt, shall equally, in its
crushing and everlastingly confounding weight, fall upon them who do not by
their-Refusing, and their Resisting make their unwillingness manifest; which in
the present Case is their struggling their Crying, and calling God and man, to
witness, they are not Consenters, but continue constant and loyal in their love
to their betrothed Husband.

6. A formal Consent to the wickedness of these Impositions were the less
matter, if the payment of them were not also a Concurrence to assist them, and
a strengthening their hands in it. But this is so manifest, that the paying of
the Cess, Locality, Fynes, Fees, etc. is a Concurrence with and a Contributing
toward the promoving the wicked designs for which they are imposed, that he
must have a conscience of brass, and in a great measure seared who will run
upon such a formal Engagement against the Lord and His anointed King in Zion.
If it was Aarons sin which made the people naked, and which brought so great a
sin upon them, to take, and the peoples sin and shame to give, that
Contribution of Golden earrings for making a Calf, Exodus 32. 3. etc. And if it
was Gideons sin to take, and Isreal's to give, that Contribution of the
earrings of their prey, to make an Ephod Judge. 8. 25. Then, as it is our
oppressors sin to take, so it must be our sin and shame to give, their demanded
Exaction to help them in erecting such Idols of Jealousy, as they have set up,
and are commanding al^ to bow to, to provoke the Lord to Jealousy, especially
when they affrontedly require such Contributions to be paid, both as
punishments for not assisting, and as means to assist in their establishment.
Should we thus help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? And will not
this bring down wrath upon us from the Lord? 2 Chronicles. 19. 2. Alas! instead of
Arguing, it were more fit to fall a weeping, when its come to be a question
amongst us, whether, in stead of coming to the help of the Lord, against the
Mighty, we shall really help the Mighty against the Lord, and that while they
call for our assistence formally upon this declared account. As the very
inscription of their Acts does carry it in their front, requiring a supply to
his Majesty etc. If this be not a Casting in a Lot among them, who can tell
what it is? Sure it is a preparing a table for that troup, and a furnishing a
drink offering unto that number, Isai. 65. 31. Seeing it is a supplying them
with necessaries, to solemnize their Idolatrous fest vities, who forsake the
Lord, and not only forget but lay waste His Holy Mountain, for which all that
have any accession to it, are threatened to be numbered to the sword. If any
thing be a strengthening the hands of evil doers, Ier. 23. 14. certainly this
is. For as they cannot accomplish their cursed ends without these Exactions, so
the payment of them, is all the present, personal, and public Concurrence in
wageing this war with Heaven, that is required of the Nation, to wit, such a
sum to furnish them with all necessaries, and maintain the Executioners of
their hell-hatched and Heaven-daring Decrees and Orders: And the Law requiring
no more but contributing what is appointed, looks equally upon all the Givers,
as followers of the Command, and active Concurrers in complying with its end,
and carrying on and promoving its design, and so assoils them from all the
statute serverities, in case of Deficiencie.

7. If it were only a Concurrence in their wickedness to pay those their
Exacted supplies, it were more easily comported with: But I fear it shall be
found a hire and reward for their wicked service. At first they were only
enacted and exacted as Helps to capacitate this Popish Prelatical and Malignant
faction to prosecute the war they had undertaken and declared against Christ:
But now, having thereby been enabled to carry it through this length that they
have almost got all visible Appearances for Christ, in ouning His Gospel, and
propagating His Testimony, quite suppressed by means of these Impositions, and
having got the fields cleared of those that formerly opposed their Course and
Career, and all obstacles removed that might stand in the way of the Reception,
they have prepared for their Mistress, the Babylonish lady, the Mother of
Harlots; they now demand these payments, as their wages and Hire for their
labor: Which to pay now is more than a justifying, seeing it is a rewarding
them for their work. And to pay these Pimps, and to purchase their peace
thereby, is worse than to bring the hire of a whore into the House of the Lord
(Deuteronomy. 23. 18.) since it is a hyring them to bring the whore into the House of
the Lord. O how has Scotland played the Harlot with many Lovers! Is this the
zeal we should have had to our Covenanted husband, and the honor of His House,
that we have not only suffered His Enemies, to come in and take Possession of
it, but Consented to their invasion, and not only Consented, but Invited them
to come in, and not only Invited them, but Prostitute our Estates and
Consciences also to their Arbitrary Lusts, and not only played the harlot with
them, but hired them also when they had done! And for this the Lord may say to
Scotland, as He said to His People of old, They give gifts to all whores, but
thou give thy gifts to all thy Lovers, and hirest them that they may come
unto thee on every side, for thy whoredom; And the Contrary is in thee from
other women in thy whoredoms -- in that thou give a reward, and no reward is
given unto thee, therefore thou art contrary, Ezekiel. 16. 33, 34. There Israel is
taxed for hyring the Assyrians: But let it be considered and enquired into in
the History, how this was: What evidence can be given of this in their
Transactions with them? Was only that they were entysed, or did entyse them
into a Communion with their Idolatry? It is true, Ahaz may be an instance of
that, in his sending the pattern of the Altar he saw at Damascus, 2 King. 16.
10. And it cannot be denied but in several respects they did partake with the
Assyrians in their Idolatry, which was their Adultery. But what could be
their hire they gave them for it, if it was not their Taxations they paid, and
money they sent unto them? as Ahaz did verse. 8. and Hezekiah also, tho a good
man, 2 King. 18. 14, 15. Which can no more be justified, than Asa's paying to
Benhadad. It was then their Confederacies, and the hire of them the Lord calls
the hire they gave unto their lovers. With this also Ephraim is charged, that
he hired lovers, Hos. 8. 9, 10. of this we have instances in Menahems giving to
Pull a thousand Talents of silver, and exacting it of the People, 2 King. 15.
19. 20. And in Hoshea his becoming servant to Shalmanesar King of Assyria, and
giving him presents, 2 King. 17. 3. If then hyring wicked men in Confederacies
to help the Lords People, be a hyring of lovers so much condemned in Scripture,
what must a hiring of them to hurt them, and rewarding them after they have
done, and when they formally seek it for such work be? but a giving the reward
they seek to slay the Innocent ( Deuteronomy. 27. 25.) and a voluntary yielding that
which they take ( Ezekiel. 22. 12.) Which if it be sin in the Takers, cannot be
justified in the Givers, but will render both obnoxious to the Indignation of a
provoked God, in the day when He shall begin to Contend for the wrongs He has
got, both by the Work and the wages. Now let all the Acts for the Cess and
Continuation thereof, and other Acts and Edicts for fines and forfeitures, be
considered in their just import, according to the trwe meaning of the Enacters,
and the Causes for which they exact them, and will have them Complied with, It
will be found they were both declared, intended, and improved, and accordingly
approved by the Complyers* Not only as Helps but as Hyres for our Oppressors
and Destroyers, and for such as have been, and are more destructive and
explicitly declared Enemies to Christ's Interests and People in Scotland, than
ever the Assyrians were to the Church in the old Testament. The Cess was not
only a help but a hire to the Tyrant and His Accomplices, for suppressing
Meetings for Gospel Ordinances; Especially the Continuation of it, from time to
time was humbly, unanimously, cheerfully and heartily offered, for themselves
and in name of, and as representing this Kingd^m, as a hire for the doing of
it, and an encouragment to suppress what remained of these Conventicles. The
Localitie was intended as a help to the Soldiers in their quarterings upon
this account, But afterward, being expressly discharged to be furnished
without payment according to the current rates of the Country, Act. 3. Parl.
3. K. Char. 2. Aug. 20. 1681. The Contribution of it gratis must be interpreted
for a reward of their service, Fines are appointed, not only for a punishment
of Contraveeners of their wicked Laws, but for a hire to their most violent
Executers. Stipends for a hire to their Hireling Curats. And fees as a hire to
Iaylors to keep the Lords People in bondage. By which hyres these destroyers
have been rewarded, by them whom they have destroyed, and for which the
righteous Lord will reward both.

8. Let it be considered, how far these submissions are short of, and how
clearly these Complyances are inconsistent with, that duty which lies upon us
with reference to them. Our obligation to God and our Brethren does
indispensibly bird us to a Contrary carriage. If it bind us in our Station and
Capacity to an Active renitency, It does much more bind us up from such
Complyances. Neither is it imaginable, how Moral force can ever justify our
doing that deed, we are obliged by all imaginable bonds, yea if in any probable
Capacity, by the utmost of real force, to counteract. Can we give them that
which they require, and by which they are enabled to murder our Brethren, which
we are so indispensibly obliged to rescue our Brethren, Prove. 24. 11, 12. to
relieve the oppressed Isai. 1. 27. to loose the bonds of wickedness, to undo
the heavy burdens, to let the oppressed go free, and to break ever^ yoke Isai.
58. 6. What do we owe to these Enemies, but seeing they have constitute
themselves by these Acts implacable Enemies to Christ, His People and Interests
in habitu, not only plainly and importunately to pray that He would overturn
them, but to oppose their Course, to the uttermost of our power, and to concur
to wrest that power out of their hands? And since they will needs make the
whole Nation a Curse, they are so far from being to be complied with, that for
these Exactings and Exactions they are to be looked upon, and carried unto, not
only as these who have sold themselves to work wickedness, but endeavor also
to engage with themselves all in the same guilt, and expose them to the same
Curse. And therefore that the Anger of the Lord may be turned away from His
people, every one in his station is obliged to endeavor to bring these Achans
to condign punishment.

9. As it must be taken for granted, that these wicked Oppressions by Law are
Perjurie avouched in the sight of God, yea in a peculiar manner, our Covenanted
subjection unto Him is turned into an open War against Him: So we cannot but
believe, that for this hight of wickedness the Curse of God (to which in the
Covenant the Nation in case of breach, is liable by their oun consent) and the
Mediators Malediction shall follow, pursue, overtake, and fall upon the head of
these, who have made the Decrees, and upon all who concur in the execution, and
carry on this Course: Oh! its impossible to keep them company, and not fall
with them into the hands of the living God. Well then, seeing every one from
whom these Exactions are required, is under an anterior obligation to God and
the Brethren, to preserve these precious Interests, which the Imposers have
been long essaying to root out and ruin, and His people whom they have been
destroying, with the loss of all he has, life not excepted. (For I suppose
none, who acknowledges his Soul is still under the bond of the Covenant (and
its like to cost him his soul who denies it) but he will oune this to be duty;
Nay none who has any sense of Religion, but abstracting from the subjective
obligation of a sworn Covenant, he will oune an objective obligation from the
Law of the great superior, that does immediately bind the Conscience to witness
against this course, and to lay down, if it should come to that, his life for
his Brethren) Then for a man to give his goods to destroy these things and
persons, which he is obliged to defend and preserve with the loss of all, is so
clear a making himself a Tyransgressor, in paying his proportion, and being at
the expense of destroying what he built, and building what he destroyed, that
it seems inexplicable how he can dream to be innocent; especially when more
lies upon it than the souls of the Complyers are worth, even the Interest of
Christ in the Land. And to close this I would put home the question, and pose
the Conscience of any that took that Covenant; If in that day the question had
been asked at him whether he would have judged the paying of a Cess for the
ends narrated, to suppress a Testimony for that Covenanted Reformation, the
paying of fines and fees (for ouning it) to the overturners, Breakers and
Burners of it, to be a plain Perjurie and palpable counteracting of the ends
thereof? And let him speak his soul, and its beyond debate with me, he will not
dare to say he took it in a sense which can subsist with these Complyances. Nay
I doubt not, if to any Morally serious, it had been then said, you will pay
money etc. for destroying this Covenant and its ends, and deleting the Remnant
that shall be found to adhere to it, he would have given Hazaels answer. It
concerns every man, that would be free of the Curse of it, to consider how he
is brought to make inquiry after vows; or to dream of Consistencies betwixt
the performing those Engagements, and the plainest concurring in a
Counteracting thereof.

10. If then these Impositions be so wicked, and for such wicked Ends and
Causes; Then, in order to my being free of this heinous guilt there is a
necessity of my giving a Testimony, and such an one, which when brought to the
Touchstone, will get Gods approbation, and be my Acquittance from a
Concurrence. Now it is not imaginable that my Testimony, can be the exact
obedience to the Law, against the wickedness whereof it is witnessed: But on
the Contrary, it must be at least a plain and positive Refusing to yield
obedience to that Law, when I am in no other case to counteract these Commands,
for I must either obey and be guilty, or refuse and be innocent. I shall not
here plunge into the Labyrinth of these debates and difficulties, wherewith
this matter of Testimonies has been perplexed, and mostly by those who have
had no great mind to the thing. I shall only propound these few Queries (1)
Wether any thing less than a Testimony can free me of this guilt, whereby the
Nation involved in it, is made a Curse? (2) Wether we believe that the
Testimony of every one shall be called for, in the day when God shall seek out
this wickedness? (3) Whether, if ever it be necessary, it be not then when
Christ is openly opposed, and every one is called either to concur or to
testify? (4) Whether a Testimony against a wicked Law must not be notour? for
my Testimony must make it evident that the Law is not obeyed by me, else it is
no Testimony. (5) Whether it be not necessary also, that it be with that
plainness and boldness, as it may keep some proportion with the prodigiousness
of that wickedness testified against? (6) Whether to the making it a Testimony
indeed, it is not only required, that an opposition be made at first, out that
this be so persisted in, as by no subsequent deed, it be weakened? (7) Whether
we do not take it for granted, that according as a man has Testified, the
sentence of the righteous Judge shall pass? For he who has not purged himself
thereby from the guilt of this Conspiracy, shall be led forth and punished with
these Workers of iniquity. Its a saying which should sink in the soul of every
one who would be saved, especially in such a day, Whosoever therefore shall
Confess me before men, him will I Confess also before my Father which is in
Heaven, but whosoever shall deny me before men him will I also deny etc. Oh
that men would now judge of things and Courses, as in that hour they desire to
be judged and then there would be little difficulty, what to determine in the
Case.

11. From what is said it appears, that there is no other way of Testifying
against it, or shunning the sin of this wickedness, imposing and enjoining
these Complyances, but by Refusing them: Which as it is clear duty, so it has
many Advantages to countervail all the supposed loss that can be sustained
thereby. It is a shameful subterfuge to say, I strengthen them more by doing
thus which will make them take all, and so put themselves in better case to do
the Mischief decreed. For as it is then my suffering not my sin, so it is
simply false that I do hereby strengthen their hands; for hereby I do more
certainly weaken their hands, and wound their Cause by my Counteracting,
Testifying and Suffering. For. 1. I do really to the uttermost of the sphere of
my activity Counteract their design, And hence besides my oun upmaking Peace of
Conscience (which is my hundredfold in this Life) I glorify God in the day of
visitation, behaving as the Subject and Soldier of the Prince Michael: And tho
I loss my life in the Conflict, yet the victory over the Dragon, and his
Lievtennant and Trustees, and their Lictors is thereby gained, and they are
foiled, while I fight and overcome by my not loving my life in the present case
unto the death. 2. I do by my example encourage my Brethren to stand fast, and
withstand in this evil day. 3. I hereby transmitt to Posterity a Pattern for
imitation, and so propogate an opposition to this Course to succeeding
generations. 4. I hereby (so to speak) engage God to arise and appear to plead
His oun Cause and His Peoples. For when we out of love to Him and zeal for His
Interests, take our lives in our hands, or expose our substance as a prey in
witnessing for Him, then He is engaged to oune us, and to plead His Cause
taking the quarrel then to be against Himself. Hence it is that when He puts on
the Garments of vengeance for clothing, and goes forth to meet them who in
their risings up against His People run upon the bosses of His Buckler, His Arm
is said to bring salvation to Himself, Isai. 59. 16, 17. and Isai. 63. 5. This
keeps a man in case to Pray against such a Party; Whereas a Compliance with
them in the least degree, will wound a man's faith, and weaken His Confidence,
so that he cannot wrestle with God to prevail: For that wherein his strength
lay, a good Conscience being sinned away, in vain does he essay, when he has
cut his oun hair, to shake himself as at other times. Alas! If by keeping a due
distance from his enemies, we were in case to play the Samsons or Jacobs on our
knees, this Enemy who think it their stability to stand upon the ruins of
Christ's Interest, should not stand long upon their feet. He who would have his
prayer heard, Thy Kingdom come, should make his Practice in a conformity
thereto speak this plain language, If I perish I perish, but Comply I will not:
For its not necessary that I live, or have an estate, but its necessary I
should witness a good Confession against the wrongs done to Christ. 6. This
keeps a man in case, either to Act for God with advantage, if an opportunity be
put in his hand, or to Suffer, as under His supportings, and the shinings of
His face, whereby even while dieing he becomes an Ornament to his Profession,
gives a dash to the Enemy, and so becomes more than a Conqueror.

12. Let us consider the matter of Scandal in the present case, and remember
whose words these are, Woe to the World because of offenses, and Woe to him by
whom offenses ^ome: And it will appear the payers of these Exactions become
highly guilty before God. 1. In stumbling and hardening this Party of Enemies.
For, tho there was never a Party before them in the Nation (and I much doubt
if ever a Party can come after them to outdo them) who had so many evidences
of Plagues poured upon their hearts, that He may pour forth His wrath, and
cause His fury to rest upon them; And that, in His spotless Justice He will
rain snares upon them, that thereafter He may rain fire and brimstone, and a
horrible tempest as the portion of their Cup, when He shall come to plead His
oun Cause: yet we would beware lest we do any thing that may embolden them, or
make them bless themselves in this their stated opposition to Christ's. And
because we know not but some of the Elect, may for a time be carried down with
the Current of this impetuous opposition to Him, and may concur actively for a
season in promoving this Course, we ought even upon this supposition so to
witness, and so to keep a distance from all apparent or interpretative
Compliance with what they contrive and carry on, as they may by beholding our
stedfastness be provoked to consider their oun Course; that considering at last
how their feet go down to death, and their steps take hold on hell, they may
hasten their escape from the Company of His Enemies, lest they be consumed with
the fire of His Indignation, if found congregate with the men of these
God-provoking practices. 2. By paying what is required, I stumble also and
offend my weak Brethren, while by my example they are encouraged to rush into
the same Compliance. O let every man, whose Practice may be pleaded as a
Pattern, remember that Word, and who spoke it, It were better that a Mistone
were hanged about his neck, and he cast into the midst of the sea, than offend
any of these little ones. 3. Sufferers for refusing this payment are offended,
when the payer does not only encourage the Persecuters to proceed with rigor
and rage against him as a peevish and froward Malecontent, but does what in him
lies to wound the heart and weaken the hands of such a faithful Witness:
Whereas, if the poor Sufferer saw himself by a Joint Testimony ouned by his
Brethren, he would be comforted, strengthened, and become more confident in the
Conflict. 4. In paying these things, the Complyers either by their Example lay
a snare for the posterity, to whose knowledge their Carriage may come; and so
in stead of leaving them a Pattern of contending earnestly for the faith, they
spread a net for their feet, yea pave them a way to defection and Apostasy: Or
else they engage the Great God, out of zeal to His oun Glory, and tenderness to
His People who shall succeed, for preventing of their following of such
Progenitors, wherein they have not been followers of Him fully, to give such a
Testimony against their untenderness, and set such marks of displeasure upon
their Course, that the thoughts of turning aside with them, and following their
steps shall be terrible to all that hear of it, le^t for such a Compliance they
fall as they did, for falling from their oun stedfastness into the hands of the
living God. But Alas! for the Posterity, under whose Curse we are like to go
off the stage, because of our not having done what we ought, yea what we might,
both for transmitting pure Ordinances unto them, and for not transcribing in
our Pactice the noble Example of our zealous and Heroic Ancestors, who
valiantly resisted when violently attacqued, and by their valor wrestled us
into a State of Liberty? Well, if we leave those that shall succeed us such an
Example as this, He is like to make us such an Example as will fright the
following Generations, and force them to serve themselves heirs to them who
have gone before us, who did acquit themselves as the good Soldiers of Jesus
Christ, and not to us, the debt of whose declensions and defections cannot be
paid, without the destruction of those who shall serve themselves heirs to us.
But Alas! who does think on what he owes to the poor Posterity! Or who does
make Conscience to preserve for them that precious Treasure put in our
Custody, and judges it more necessary than to live, to leave the Tract of a
way of Contending zealously for God, and the Preservation of His Interests, and
the Propogation of His oun pure Ordinances to the Posterity, shining so
clearly by suffering and blood, as the wayfaring man, and they who shall come
after, though fools need not err therein. Our only Comfort is, that the Lord
who shall see His seed, and must prolong His days, will make His pleasure
prosper, and preserve some to be Witnesses of it to His Praise.

FINIS.

