THE HISTORY OF SCOTCH-PRESBYTERY: BEING AN EPITOME OF The Hind let Loose, By
Mr. SHIELDS.

With a Preface by a Presbyter of the Church of Scotland.

Juven. -- Vitia ultima fictos Contemnunt scauros and Castigata remordent.
LONDON, Printed for I. Hindmarsh, at the Golden-Ball in Cornhill. MDCXCII.

The PREFACE.
THE following Treatise (being but a short Compend of a larger Book) appears at
this time to give the World a just Account of the Principles, Practices, and
Behavior of the Scotch ^resbyterians; it was written some Years ago by ^ne of
that Fraternity. It is sad to consider, how ^uch the Spirits of Men are soured
and imbit^ered by Faction and Interest, it shuts their Eyes against the
clearest light. The Dictates of Huma^ity, and the Genius of the Christian
Religion ^eeten our Passions, but when we are enflamed ^y the Interests of a
Party, we forget the ex^ress Laws of God, and if they look us broad in (...)
Face (when we offer violence to our Convi^ions) we bow and bend them by
metaphysical ^ricks and Evasions to serve our Design, contra^y to their
original Bias and Sanctity; and this ^as never so visible, as in that turbulent
and fiery ^^ct that frequently disturbed, and now at last ^ath almost over-^un
the Church of Scotland, in (...) they have Ruined and Oppressed a Learned,
^rave, and Orthodox Clergy, especially in the ^outhern Shires. They have a
Systeme of Opini^ns peculiar to themselves, which they call Their ^rinciples;
for though a thing in it self is just and ^easonable, yet if it be not
agreeable to Their ^rinciples (that is to say, the Opinions that are ^ore
immediately, properly, and originally Cal^ulated to serve the Designs of their
Society) they ^eject it with Indignation and Disdain, they pity ^ll Mankind
that have not the same Thoughts that ^hey have, and they continue by the
Authority of their Guides, under the slavery of implicit Faith ^ore than any
other Set of Men in the World

The Christian Religion above all things design^d to alienate our Thoughts and
Affections from ^he Pageantry and Vain-glories of the World, and to moderate
our Passions, that they might not ^rove troublesome to Society, nor extravagant
in their Violence, nor precipitate in their Actings; ^he Spirit of Faction
opposes the Gospel in these great Ends, for it covets nothing so much as
outward Glory and Empire, and it prosecutes these Desires with restless and
implacable Ardours, and ^ll under the Visor of Religion. When our perverse
Inclinations (which God commanded to be ^ortified) are made more headstrong by
the ^otions we have of Religion, then our Appetites ^ecome as wild as they are
unreasonable.

We find this clearly exemplified in the Phari^ees of old. Our Savior came
that he might de^troy the Works of the Devil, and enliven the World by a
reasonable Religion, to turn Men from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of
Satan to the living God, to inspire Mankind with the Principles of the best and
wisest Philosophy, most useful in all the Changes and Vicissitudes of this
Life, and that which did certainly prepare them for a better, he taught his
Disciples to be most assiduous in those Duties of Religion that made no Noise
abroad, and fell not easily under the Observation of Men; that advanced solid
and substantial Piety, to love God and our Neighbor, to approve our selves
unto him that sees in secret, to despise the Censures and Applause of a
perverse Generation, and to live upon the invisible Supports of a good
Conscience, to exercise Patience, and Fortitude, and Magnanimity; because by
our Religion we were engaged to Combat with the World, and with all its cross
Accidents, under the Banner of a crucified Savior.

Yet when we read the History of the New Testament, we find that the most
zealous Sect of the Pharisees, opposed this blessed Design of our Savior in
all its principal Branches. They took great care to be seen by the People, in
all their odd and extraordinary Performances; they were mighty forward to
propagate their own Traditions; the private Doctrines of their Schools were
much dearer to them than the Commandments of God, Mark 7. 3. As for Simplicity
of Intention, Innocence, and the Love of God; they thought such Virtues not so
convenient for them who were in the Government, and thought it necessary to
have the People blindly to obey their Dictates: That Religion that penetrates
to the Center of our Spirits, and changes the whole Bias of our Souls, crosses
the Desires of our degenerate Nature, and leads every Thought captive to the
Obedience of Christ, and is supported by the Faith of distant and invisible
Rewards; they thought such a Religion yielded no nourishment for Vainglory,
and therefore they despised it, and ordered the matter ^o that amidst all their
long Prayers, disfigured Faces, and theatrical Fasts, they might leave their
insatiable Passions of Pride, Vainglory, Covetousness, Malice and Revenge,
untouched, and unsubdued. Hence it is, that they were very careful in little
things, Mat. 23, 24 what^ever drew after it the applause of the People, who
always admired the most empty and the most transient things. Their Bat^ologies
were mistaken for Zeal and Devotion, and their outward Austerities, for true
Mortific^tion. They did all things to be seen of Men, Mat. 23. 5. and if the
Law of God did expressly contradict their beloved Scheme; the Law it self must
needs bow to their Principle. There is nothing in Humane Nature that we feel
more tenderly, nor is there any thing more deeply engraven on our Souls, than
the Gratitude we owe to our Parents, when their Infirmities and Disasters
require our Assistance; yet by their Do^^rine of the Corban, they evacuated
this Fundamental Piety; Justice, Compassion, and Natural Affection were in
their Eyes but mean and despicable things, they only understood the abstruse
Mysteries of Religion, and nothing provoked their indignation so much, as to be
thought ignorant; wherefore they so huffingly tell the poor Man restored to his
sight by our Savior, do thou teach us, Ioh. 9. 34. tho by the most evident
Arguments, he had just before exposed both their shameful Ignorance and Vanity;
and when St. Paul himself was tinctured with this leaven; his brisk and
generous Spirit was sadly employed in persecuting the Church. There is nothing
more opposite to the pure and undefiled Religion, than Pharisaical Pride and
Hypocrisy; nor no kind of Pharisees persecute with greater Violence and Spite,
than that sullen and demure Tribe that affect Domination and Tyranny, by a
counterfeit and disguised Humility.

The sad Effects of such an insolent Humor, are too sadly felt by the Clergy of
Scotland. The Presbyterian Courts and Judicatories are as void of the common
Forms of Justice, as of Tenderness and Humanity, the late Erection of it being
in its Frame more properly Calculated to advance Tyranny, and tho their Agents
propagate many Stories to lessen and extenuate, and sometimes to excuse their
unaccountable Proceedings; yet as long as they confess the shameful rabbling of
the Clergy, they acknowledge more Barbarity and Cruelty, more Reproach to our
Nation than can easily be named: Certainly it cannot be imagined that the
Episcopal Clergy left their Houses, their Livings, and some of them their
Relations, and their Country, for no other Design than to tell Stories of the
Presbyterian Persecution; any Man that believes this, needs not refuse the most
monstrous Improbabilities: Men are not so fond of Crosses and Afflictions, the
Bias of Humane Nature is on the other side, they generally prefer the Law of
Self-preservation to the Law of Self-denial, and the Doctrine of the Cross has
but few to follow it if they can avoid it.

There is no Weapon so proper against the Assaults of a restless and
ungovernable Party, as Christian Patience: This is the Time of our Sufferings,
God in his Anger* has let loose our Enemies to chastise us; and when we are
duly humbled, he will again mercifully visit us, and employ us in the
Attendance and Service of the Sanctuary. If we have preached unto others
Fortitude and Christian Magnanimity, under the sa^^ dest Calamities, from the
Pulpl^, why should no^ we do it by our Courage and Constancy? The Providence of
God, that superintends the mea^^est Creatures, will not desert them that are
ma^^ after his own Image. It was to let us feel the Mutability of all Earthly
Conditions, that we are surrounded thus with Difficulties, on the Right and on
the Left Hand. When I read the He^roick Flights of a Pagan Soul; M. A^rel.
A^^tonin.
and how little the Glory of the Roman Empire appeared to him that sat upon the
Throne, in the midst of Guards Divertisements, and Flatterers, I cannot but
acknowledge how shameful it is for the Disciples (...) Christianity to be so
soon and so easily shaken with Changes and Disasters: If the Contempla^tion of
Philosophy and Natural Religion raise his Spirit so far above ordinary
Thoughts, wha^ may not be expected from us, who have bee^ taught the most
infallible Proofs, the Doctrine (...) Immortality, and the Glories of the World
(...) come? Seneca tells us, that a good Man wrestling with Disasters, and not
yielding to (...) Meannesses of Vice, is a Spectacle worthy o^ Jupiter himself.
The Ears of God are always open (...) the Prayers of the Oppressed; their
Petition^ proceed from Feeling, more than from Art^Form, or Custom. Let us look
into the Error^ of our Lives* and judge our selves, ^^st (...) should be judged
more severely by our God, whom w^ have offended. Let us wash out our Blemishe^
by true Contrition, and return unto our Father who does not willingly grieve
the Children (...) Men; but for great and wise Ends suffers, for ^ while, the
Rod of the Wicked to l^e on the Lo^^ of the Righteous, that his Children may be
pre^pared for that Glory which is to be revealed* The Graces that are most
essential to the Chri^stian Religion, cannot be exercised but under the Cross:
All things work together for good, to the^ that love God. We are told by our
Savior, tha^ an House built upon a Rock stands (...) against a^ the Violence
of Rains, Storms and Tempests.

The Party with whom good Men struggle at pre^sent in Scotland, have neither
Unity amongst them^selves, nor any true Christian Princi^^^ to buil^ upon: And
When I say thus, I do ^ot compr^^hend all that may go under the name of
Presby^terians, but such as give up themselves, without Reserve, to follow
their pernicious Ten^rs, a^^ such as have all their Paces; for God judges (...)
according to our new and factious Discrimin^^tions. It is not by our Names, but
by our N^^ture, that we are separated at the Day of Jud^^ment; and therefore
let no man mista^e me, ^ if I thought this or the other Denomination, th^^
Church or Society, could secure a Man from hazard: I mean no such thing. ^ull.
de Oct^e. ^. 1. (...) si sibi ipse con^ntrat and non in ^erdum natura bo^itate
vincatur ^t ut neque ami^itiam c^lem pos^t, nee justitian, ^es liberalitatem.
But it is undeniable, that the Faction that lately pulled down the Beauty and
Order of our Church, spend their Zeal in lesser things, of very bad, or of no
Consequence at all; and their new and upstart Government eats out the Life and
Primi^ive Innocence of Religion, and promotes Pride and Singularity, and those
other Vices that are most opposite to the pure and spiritual Tendency of the
Gospel. They are the Men I intend the Ring leaders of that waspish Gang, who by
their Principles are obliged to trample upon all ^arthly Powers, unless they
truckle under the Edicts of Presbytery, and recommend no other Doctrines with
Affection and Zeal, but such Opinions as enslave the Consciences of Men to
their Tyranny and Government, and many of the poor People are so infatuated,
that they calmly bow under the heaviest Burdens, if they are laid on by their
Spiritual Taskmasters.

It is very sad to consider the present Decays of true Christianity: What Is
become of that un^ffecte^ Simplicity, that Truth and Purity, Heavenly
mindedness and Charity, that adorns the Profession of the Gospel? What Is become
of that ^teady and regular Devotion, that taught Men frequently to lift up holy
Hands, without Wrath or ^oubting, unto Heaven; by which they were made to love
God above all things, and their ^rethren for God's sake, to relieve their
Neces^ities, to assist them in their Troubles, to rejoice with them that do
rejoice, and to weep with them that weep* nay, to endeavor the Good of all
Mankind, as far as is possible? If Men were affe^tionately zealous to propagate
this Religion, ^hen it would appear like it self in all its beauti^ul Colors,
pure, peaceable, gentle, and easy to be ^^treate^, full of Mercy and good
Fruits, without ^artiality, and without Hypocrisy, Jam. 3. 17. But ^here
Envying and Strife is, there is Consusion and every evil Work. Shall they who
proudly ^^all themselves the special Ambassfdors of Christ, ^^ve so much in
Animosities and Contentions, and ^ot tremble before the Searcher of all Hearts,
^ho sees into the first Motives and Springs of all ^ur Actions? If the Purity
of Religion be in^^nded, why so much Noise and Clamor, so ma^y Arts and mean
Tricks, so many insidious Ac^^sations, so many bold and impudent Lies, so ^any
pragmatick and restless Methods to over^^row their Antagonists? Can the Gospel
of Peace (...) propagated by the Stratagems of War? Or ^^ve they such mean
Opinions of their Opposites, that they will suffer their People to be deluded
with Giddiness and Enthusiasm* and themselv^s so tamely beat off the Stage?
It Is true, many of our Ministers are now made incapable to serve the Public;
yet by their sacred Character, they are still obliged to serve the People, and
to recover the Souls, for whom Christ died, from the Enchantment and Enthusiasm
of Seducers: I hope they will defend the Gospel without fear, upon all
Occasions, in Season, and out of Season. It is not a Question of Discipline, or
Ecclesiastical Government only, (though that be of great Consequence in it
self,) that is now debated: But the Question is, Whether such Methods must be
followed, as expose Christian Religion? Whether the People shall be taught from
the Pulpit to burlesque the holy Scriptures, to lampoon Revelation, and to
ridicule the most grave and serious things? Mankind, indeed, is liable to many
Vanities and Follies, and yet no Follies debase Humane Nature so much as those
that put on the Garb of Religion. It Is lamentable when Men avouch the Authority
of God for their own Dreams, and plead a Divine Right for all their new and
fancied Opinions. The first Presbyterians thought it enough to say, Read the
Preface to Dr. Hooker's Polity.
that their Model was allowable; and therefore they levelled their Arguments to
prove such a Scheme of Government was not altogether forbidden; and it was
never heard, that the Foreign Presbyterians would have refused the Communion of
the Church, because the ancient Government of Episcopacy was retained in it: So
we see all the French Protestants, who have fled to Germany or England, serve
in either Church as Ministers, according to the Rites and Ecclesiastical Canons
of the place where they live: It is only the Covenanted Presbyteriaus (for any
thing I know) plead a Divine Right for their new Model, and their latter
Disciples are forward and daring on this Head. Their Government must be founded
on the express Institution of our Savior, and therefore the Exercise of their
Discipline must be nothing less than the Administrations of his Kingdom and
Royal Scep^re: To contradict or despise them, is an Affront to God himself; and
to be sure, the Baggage of their Lay Elders, and Commissioners from Burghs, are
all of them by Divine Right. And yet all this is not so bold or ridiculous, as
when they endeavor to prove their Scheme by particular Texts of Scripture.
There is one that calls himself the Vindicator of their Ki^k, he wrote a Book
some Years ago, Pretended Answer to the Ir^nicum.
to prove that Presbytery was the only Government instituted by our Savior;
and all he brings for it, over all his Book, which I had the patience to read
over) is, Mat. 20. 25. compared with Luke 22. 25 He tells us in another Book, I
cannot el^e the Page, having no Books by me.
of himself, that his Way is Argumentative; that is to say he writes nothing
but pure Reason and Demonstration. Now let us calmly examine what Foundation
there is for Presbytery in the Texts lately mentioned, for our Savior supposes
Degrees of Sub^ordination amongst his Disciples, as well as in all other
Societies; and therefore he directs such as would climb to the highest Places,
to take other Methods than those that are most usual in Worldly Preferments;
(...) he that deserved Preferment in the Church, was to be the Servant of all;
and ^e that would be great among his Brethren, should in the first place appear
full of Humility, Condescension and Charity; And this T^xt refers to the Method
of their Promotion, not to the Extirpation of their Iu isdiction. He supposes
one would be great among them; and the true way to attain that Greatness, was
not to aspire to it ambitiously, by Force and Violence, as the Lords of the
Gentiles did; but by all the Acts of Modesty, Humility and Self-denial. But let
me ask whether the Apostles understood this Precept of our Savior, in the
Sense of the Presbyterians, or not? If they did, how came they to exercise
Jurisdiction over all inferior Ecclesiastics, during all their Lifetime, in
all the Churches they had planted? Did they (who could not but understand his
meaning) go quite cross to the Institution of our Savior? The plain Truth is,
there is no Text in the Scripture can be alleged more absurdly for the
Presbyterian Parity, than this Text, since our Savior tells them, He did that
himself amongst them, which they were to do to one another; and therefore the
doing of it toward one another, could not infer Parity amongst them, unless
they blasphemously infer, that Christ and his Apostles are equal; for our
Savior recommends what he enjoins from his own Practice, that he who was their
Lord, was their Servant; and therefore the greatest among them were to be
modest, calm, and humble toward all their subordinate Brethren; and this
qualified them for Ecclesiastical Promotions. Is it not very unlucky, that a
Man shall write a Book to prove the Divine Right of Presbytery, and yet bring
no other Proof for it than this Text, which (if understood in the Presbyterian
Sense) degrades our blessed Savior to the Degree of one of his Disciples; for
what he commanded the Apostles, he practiced among them himself: And this is
the strong Motive to engage their Obedience, that they should not exercise
their Jurisdiction as the Lords of the Gentiles, by a Spirit of Pride* Van^ty
and Domination ^ but by the more amiable and enraging Behavior of Modesty,
Meekness, Charity and Humility ^ for he that was to be the greatest among them,
was to be their Servant: And certainly the Bishops of the Church, by their
Character, Dignity and Station, by their public Cares, Fears and daily Labor,
feel that they are more Servants than Masters. When one was promoted among the
Jews, to higher Dignities, there was another appointed to tell him, that upon
that Day he began to serve. And did not St. Paul think so of himself, though in
nothing behind the chiefest Apostles, when the Care of all the Churches lay
upon him? And all the Fathers of the Church, from the first Plantations of
Christianity, had this Notion of their Dignity, that they were the Servants of
all.

Now when this one Text is answered, I think his Book is answered, nor had this
part of that Pamphlet been touched here, if it had not been commonly insisted
on by others as well as by ^his Author. Now if I should yield that there was
any foundation for Ecclesiastical Parity in this Text, it cannot be stretched
so far, as to prove the National and Classical Presbytery, it rather favors
the Congregrational Model, which always appeared to me much more innocent and
allowable, than this new and unaccountable Platform of Presbytery. If this
Author would be entreated to single out of all his Scriblings, an ^rgument one
or two that he himself judges most proper to advance Presbytery, we would thank
him, and return ou^ Answer very easily and speedily, and this Overture is so
much the more reasonable, in that (...) may be done in a sheet or two; but to
go through all his Shufflings, and childish Tergiversation^ and unmanly
Calumnies with (...) his defamato^ry Libels are stuffed, is as unpleasant as it
is un^^difying, and the Public is not at all concerned (...) read such
particular Stories; yet something mu^^ hereafter be said to convince him of his
id^ene^^ were it no more than to let him see his Books de^serve no particular
Answer.

I have no more to trouble the Reader with but to give him a short account of
the followin^ Epitome. It is the true Compend of Mr* Ale^^ander Shields Book,
entitled, The Hind (...) He is the most accurate and diligent of al^ the^
Writers, there is none among them (...) understands the Genius of Presbytery
(...) none more consequential to their Principles, an^ must acknowledge, that
none writes for Presb^^tery with greater Zeal and Vigor; and (...) Principles
are inconsistent with Civil Gover^^ment and Christianity, yet his
Superstructure builds upon them is consequential; and the^^^fore I heartily
invite all Men (who at any time think of the things of this Nature) to read the
following Abridgment of his Book, and next let me ^ntreat them to use their
Reason exactly and impartially, and then tell me whether a Civil Government of
what ever Form or Denomination ^an subsist, where such Principles are heartily
entertained by a considerable number of the Sub^ects; and whether the Severity
of Laws against ^uch Enthusiasts, ^e not the most Christian com^assion toward
the State rather than Cruelty, Tyranny, or Oppression, with which those
restless Incendiaries did asperse the Government of ^h. 2. Our Nobility who
understood the Government and Constitution of our Nation, did ^a^ely
demonstrate, that our Scotch Presbytery ^ad nothing to match it all over the
World; whether you consider the Novelty of their Pre^ences, their restless
Clashings with the Civil Au^hority, or their shameful Confusions and Divi^^ons
among themselves, and this needs no other ^roof, than to read their own Books,
The Acts of their Assemblies, and their most Authentic Papers, we know what
Morals they are taught by their Guides, when we remember their tumultuous
^^bbling of the Clergy in the West of Scotland from their Houses, Livings and
Preferments, we ^eed not rake into that Puddle any more. In ^he beginning of
the late Revolution, those Furies ^^oke loose upon the House of God, and
barba^ously drove from it the immediate Servants of ^he Sanctuary. It is not
the Guildings and Pallia^^ons of their Vindicators can wash off the blem^^sh of
this shameful Tragedy; if the Foundations be destroyed, What can the Righteous
do? ^et in the following Epitome, such violent Proceedings are justified; nay,
the Murder of the Archbishop of St Andrews, and such like religious ^eats of
their Zeal. Therefore let me once again ^ntreat the Reader to read over this
little Book ^arefully, since Mr. Shields was at the pains to ga^her together
and justify in one Book the Histo^y of his Party, their Strugglings against
Autho^^ty, their Declarations and Testimonies against ^he State, and all their
Commotions from their ^^rst beginning in Scotland till the Year 1687. And
^^cause the Book it self is not easily got.

Two Objections I foresee will be managed by (...) Agents against this Book,
the first is that ^ is not owned by the whole Party, but written (...) a single
Minister. To this, I answer, that Mr. (...) Book is rather the History of their
pro^^edings, than a private Systeme of his own O^nions; and since it is
supported by their public (...), Declarations and Testimonies of their
Society, ^ is rather the common Apology than the Senti^ents of one of their
Number: And therefore I challenge any Man to let me see any one Article,
wherein he is inconsequential either to himself, or to the received Doctrine of
the Party; for as long as the Solemn League and Covenant, is the original
Standard of their Sect, the Dictates of Natural Reason, and Texts of Scripture,
must be interpreted, as they may best promote the ends of the Covenant; and
therefore unless you let me see something in the Book not allowed by the
Covenant, it is very impertinent to say* that it contains not the Presbyterians
Doctrine, for I know nothing distinguishes the Presbyterians of Scotland from
other Dissenters; but the bloody Principles of the Covenant by which they
over-turned the ancient Monarchy, Sacrificed the best of Kings, and changed a
prosperous Nation into a field of Blood.

The next thing I foresee their Agents will propagate is, that tho they were
guilty of many extravagant Tricks formerly, yet now (that they are
re-established) they will act with great Modesty for the future: But can the
Ethiopian change his Skin, or the Leopard his Spots? Must not they assert
their Classical Authority and Discipline? Will they so shamefully desert their
Colors? Must they not give their Testimony as their Predecessors have done?
Don't we see that they have Male-versed more in three Years time, than can well
be repaired for twenty? Will their Agents oblige their Meetings and Assemblies
to declare against this Systeme solemnly and judicially? No, they will keep those
Opinions, and practice them upon all Occasions; for they are obliged to do all
they can to support the Covenant when they may co^veniently: Nay, I durst say,
that the late pretended Assembly would justify the Murder of the Arch Bishop
of St. Andrews without ten contradicting Votes; nor is there any thing asserted
in this Book, that is peculiar to Mr. Shields. read The Apologetical relation
of the Church of Scotland, Naphthali, jus popu^i vindicatum, The Cup of cold
Water, The Banders disbanded, and several other little Pamphlets, whose Titles
I have forgot; and you shall find that this is the common Strain by which they
are distinguished from the Presbyterians abroad, as well as from all other
Christian Churches.

If Episcopacy had been a grievance to the Nation, as was tumultuously
alleged, it had been enough to remove those venerable Persons from the Hel^n
of Ecclesiastical Government, and then the Affairs of the Church (by the
acknowledged Principles of Presbytery) should be managed Communi Presbyterorum
consilio. All the Presbyters by their Delegates from all Corners of the Nation
had an equal Right in this Government: But instead of this we have a new Model
set up and the ^cclestastic Government is lodged in the hands of a few Peevish
and Tyrannical Persons, who never sleep quietly until all the Clergy be
extirpate, who do not hold their Mission from the Conventicle. When this is
objected as an extraordinary Solecism in Justice as well as in Government, they
answer, That tho every Presbyter has a right to govern which he cannot part
with yet pro praesenti ecclesiae statu, the Government should be thus modeled;
and this in plain Scotch is no more, than that the Heads of the Faction judged
it convenient, that none should be allowed any share in the Government, but the
sworn I^nizaries of the Covenant* and therefore tho the Presbyters all over the
National Church had an equal right to govern, yet they should be restrained
from the Exercise of Government, until the Faction got entirely uppermost. But
let me ask peaceably and calmly, By whom are they are restrained? Either by the
remainders of the Presbyterian Preachers, or by the Secular Power: If the
first, how can threescore Suspend a thousand Ministers from the Exercise of
Government? Before whom are they cited? By what Authority is this done? Is this
done by the acknowledged Principles of Presbytery? But if this be done by the
Secular Power, then it seems the Presbyterians now think and teach that the
Secular Power can entrust some few Ministers with the Ecclesiastical
Government, when others are restrained, and which is still more absurd. they
allow them in the Exercise of the more Spiritual part of their Ministry, the
Administration of Sacraments and Preaching of the Gospel; but they must not
meddle with the Discipline of the Church: As if the one had not been originally
intended to shelter and defend the other. However, it is easy to observe, that
the Presbyterians love Government (by which they secure the Interest of this
World) much better than Preaching of the Gospel, which more immediately
prepares Men for another. But if they think Presbyters may be thus restrained
from the Exercise of Ecclesiastical Discipline, why might not the former
Government restrain Presbyterians, as well as the present Powers restrain the
Episcopal Clergy from that part of their Ministry? It is very ^ad that Men are
driven to such Shifts as cannot be maintained, neither by the Principles of
true Reason, nor by the peculiar Hypothesis of the Party. They have one Answer
to all this, that the Episcopal Clergy would endeavor the Overthrow of
Presbytery: But what they might do as to that, I know not, I believe there are
but few of them that are very zealous to cont^^nue the present Scheme; and
perhaps the Contrivances of Presbyterians to exclude them from the Government,
is as proper a Mean to overturn Presbytery, as the Admission of them into the
full Exercise of their Function might have been. For my part, I do not see how
such* Syncritism betwixt these contending Parties ca^ be obtained, after all
the political Daublings about it. The Clergy should stand their Ground and let
the World see that they value their Integrity and Principles, at least, as much
as they do their Conveniences; for nothing less tha^ the Essentials of
Morality and Christianity are a^stake.

The following Treatise cannot but be cheerfully received of both Parties,
because it con^tains the distinguishing Doctrines, Principles and Practices of
the Presbyterians; for I assure you it is most faithfully copied by a Friend of
mine in the Author's own Words, from the Origina^ Book. It Is true, he did not
transcribe the whole Treatise, for that is Voluminous, and con^tains so many
Steps of their Rebellion, that (...) you desire a particular Account of them,
you must have recourse to the Book it self, rather than to this Epitome; but he
has, in a fe^ Sheets, contained the Strength of the Author^Reasonings, and all
his Flourishes: So that yo^ have a just Notion, as well as a true Account of
the special Tenets of Scotch Presbyterian^ with all the natural Consequences
that they yield: And if Strangers will not believe the E^piscopal Clergy, let
them read their Opinions (...) their own Books. If one would know the
Do^ctrines of Epicurus, he must go to Lucretius; (...) that of Socrates, he
must read Plato; if the Mo^rals of the Stoics, he must read Marcus Aure^lies,
and Seneca: So it were very unjust to say that Mr. Shields did not give a true
Account (...) the Doctrines of the Scotch Presbyterians, being not only a
Leading Man of the Kirk, as now e^stablished, but also a Man of good Parts,
inde^fatigable Zeal, and great Industry; and this (...) the Reason why his Book
is compendized, because he drove their Principles to their ju^^ Consequences;
and though I have no Kindnes^ for his Opinions, yet I cannot but love his
I^^genuity and Skill; and if any Man tell me (...) mistook the Doctrines of
Presbytery, I mus^ ask him Pardon to think otherwise, and th^^ none of them
dare tell him so when he is pre^sent.

I ^id you heartily farewe^

An Account of the true Scottish Presbytery, from the Year 1570. to the Year
1687. by Mr. Alexander Sheilds, a Presbyterian Minister of the Kirk of
Scotland, as it is now Established by Law.
FROM the year 1570 and downward, the Testimony is stated and gradually
prosecuted, for the Rights, Privileges, and Prerogatives of Christ's Kingly
Office, which has been the peculiar Glory of the Church of Scotland, above all
the Churches in the Earth, that this has been given to her as the word of her
Testimony; and not only consequentially and reductively, as all other Churches
may challenge a part of this dignity, but formally and explicitly to contend
for this very head, The Headship and Kingship of Jesus Christ, the Prince of
the Kings of the Earth, and his mediatory Supremacy over his own Kingdom of
Grace, both visible and invisible. This is Christ's Supremacy, a special
radiant Jewel of his Imperial Crown: which, as it has been as explicitly
incroached upon in Scotland, by his insolent Enemies, as ever by any that
entered in opposition to him, so it has been more explicitly witnessed and
wrestled for, by his Suffering Servants in that Land, than in any place of the
World. This was in a particular manner, the Testimony of that Period, during
the Reign of King James the Sixth; as it has been in a great measure in our
day, since the Year 1660. Which, as it is the most important Cause, of the
greatest Consequence that Mortals can contend for; so it has this Peculiar
Glory in it, that it is not only for a Truth of Christ, of greater value than
the standing of Heaven and Earth, but also it is the very Truth for which
Christ himself Dyed, considered as a Martyr; And which concerns him to
vindicate and maintain as a Monarch. The Witnesses of that day made such an
high account of it, that they encouraged one another to suffer for it, as the
greatest Concern; Being a Witness for Christ's Glorious and free Monarchy,
which as it is the end of the other two Offices, so the Testimony is more
Glorious to God, more Honorable to his Son, and more Comfortable to them, than
the Testimony either for his Prophetical Office, or for his Priesthood,
because his Kingdom was specially impugned at the time; as Mr. Forbess and Mr.
Welsh writ in a Letter to the Ministers at Court. The Corruptions and
Usurpations wronging this Truth, that they contended against, were Prelacy and
the King's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Matters: Which will be useful to hint a
little, how they prosecuted the Conflict. When Satan by several Instruments
and Means, both by force and frauds did endeavor to put a stop to the
Reformation, by re-introducing the Antichristian Hierarchy of Pre^^y, when he
could not reestablish the Antichristian Doctrine of Popery; he left no means
unessayed to effectuate it. And first he began to bring the name of Bishop in
request, that was now growing obsolete and odious. And indeed his first Essay
reached little further than the bare Name, for they were to be Subject to, and
tried by Assemblies, and hardly had so much power as Superintendents before.
But it was a fine Court-juggle for Noblemen to get the Church Revenues into
their hand, by restoring the Ecclesiastical Titles, and obtaining from the
Titulars either Temporal Lands, or Pensions to their Dependers. The faithful
Servants of Christ did zealously oppose it. Mr. Knox denounced Anathema to the
Giver, and Anathema to the Receiver. And the following Assembly condemned the
Office it self, as having no sure Warrant, Authority, nor Ground in the Book of
God; and ordained all that brooked the Office, to demit Simpliciter, and to
desist and cease from Preaching, while they received de novo admission from the
General Assembly, under the Pain of Excommunication. In pursuance whereof, the
Assemblies from that time until the Year 1681. did with much painfulness and
faithfulness attend the work; until by perfecting of the second Book of
Discipline, they completed their work, in the exact Model of Presbyterial
Government. Which was confirmed, and covenanted to be kept inviolate, in the
National Covenant, Subscribed that Year by the King, his Court, and Council;
and afterward by all Ranks of People in the Land. Whence it may be doubted,
whether the Impudence of the succeeding Prelates that denied this, or their
Perjury in breaking of it, be greater. This was but the first brush: A brisker
Assault follows. Wherein, for the better establishment of Prelacy, and not only
Diocesan but also Erastian Prelacy might be set up, the Earl of Arran, and his
wicked Accomplices, move the King, contrary both to the Word and Oath of God, to
usurp the Prerogative of Jesus Christ, and assume to himself, a Blasphemous
Monster of Supremacy, over all Persons, and in all Causes, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil. But this also the Faithful Servants of God did
worthily and valiantly resist: And at the very first appearance of it, gave in
a Grievance to the King, Anno 1582. That he had taken upon him a Spiritual
Power, which properly belongs to Christ, as only King and Head of the Church;
the Ministry and Execution whereof, is only given to such as bear Office in the
Ecclesiastical Government in the same: So that in the King's Person, some Men
press to erect a new Popedom, as though he would not be full King of this
Commonwealth, unless as well the Spiritual as Temporal Sword be put in his
hand, unless Christ be rest of his Authority, and the two Jurisdictions
confounded, which God has divided, which directly tends to the Wrack of all
true Religion. Which being presented by the Commissioners of the General
Assembly; the Earl of Arran asked, with a Frowning Countenance, who dare
Subscribe these Treasonable Articles? Mr. Andrew Melvil answered, we dare, and
will Subscribe, and render our Lives in the Cause. And afterward, that same
Assembly presented Articles, showing, that seeing the Spiritual Jurisdiction of
the Church is granted by Christ, and given only to them, that by Preaching,
Teaching, and Overseeing, bear Office within the same, to be exercised, not by
the Injunctions of Men, but by the only Rule of God's Word, hereafter, no other
of whatsoever degree, or under whatsoever pretense, have any color to ascribe,
or to take upon them any part thereof, either in placing or displacing of
Ministers, without the Churches admission, or in stopping the Mouths of
Preachers, or putting them to silence, or take upon them the Judgment of Trial
of Doctrine, etc.

But in contempt and Contradiction to this, and to Prosecute and Exert this new
usurped Power, Mr. Andrew Melvil was sommoned before the Secret Council, for a
Sermon of his, applying his Doctrine to the Times Corruptions: Whereupon he
gave in his Declinature against them as incompetent Judges; and told them They
were too bold, in a Constitute Christian Church, to pass by the Pastors,
Prophets, and Doctors, and to take upon them to judge the Doctrine, and to
control the Ambassadors of a greater than was there, which they neither ought
nor can do. There are (says he, loosing a little Hebrew Bible from his Girdle)
my Instructions and Warrant; see if any of you can control me, that I have
past my Injunctions. For this he was decerned to be warded in the Castle of
Edinburgh: But he conveyed himself secretly out of the Country.

When as also a Convention in Faulkand was consulting to call home the Papist
Lords; Mr. Andrew Melvil went thither uncalled; and when found fault with by
the King for his Boldness, he answered, Sir, I have a Call to come here from
Christ and his Church, who have special Interest in this Turn, and against whom
this Convention is Assembled directly: I charge you, and your Estates, in the
Name of Christ and his Church, that ye favor not his Enemies, whom he hates,
nor go about to call home nor make Citizens of these, etc. And further
challenged them of Treason against Christ, his Church and Country, in that
purpose they were about.

About the same time in a private Conference with the King, he called the King,
Gods silly Vassal; and taking him by the Sleeve, told him; Sir, I must tell
you, there are two Kings, and two Kingdoms; There is Christ, and his Kingdom
whose Subject King James the 6th is, and of whose Kingdom he is not a King, nor
a Head, nor a Lord, but a Member; And they whom Christ has called to Watch
over and Govern his Church, have sufficient Authority, and Power from him,
which no Christian King should control, but assist; otherwise they are not
Faithful Subjects to Christ. Sir, when you were in your Swadling-Clouts, Christ
Reigned freely in this Land, in spite of all his Enemies; but now the Wisdom
of your Council, is Devilish and Pernicious, etc.

To the like effect, Mr. Robert Bruce, in a Sermon upon Psalm. 51. gives
faithful warning of the Danger of the Times. It is not we (says he) that are
Party in this Cause; no, the Quarrel is betwixt a greater Prince and them.
What are we, but silly Men? Yet it has pleased him to set us in this Office,
that we should oppone to the manifest Usurpations that is made upon his
Spiritual Kingdom. Is there a more forcible means to draw down the Wrath of
God, than to let Barrabas that nobilitate Malefactor pass free, and to begin
the War against Christ and his Ministry? It puts on the Copestone, that so
many of our Brethren should not be so faithful, as their calling and this Cause
craveth. Fie upon false Brethren, to see them dumb, so faint hearted, when it
comes to the Chock: not only are they as ashamed to speak the thing they think
which is a shame in a Pastor, but speak directly against their former Doctrine.
They will speak the Truth a while, till they be put at, but incontinent they
will turn and make their Gifts Weapons to fight against Christ, etc.

Hereafter when the Parliament 1584. had Enacted this Supremacy, and Submission
to Prelacy, to be Subscribed by all Ministers; the faithful first directed Mr.
David Lindsay to the King, desiring that nothing be done in Parliament
prejudicial to the Churches Liberty: Who got the Prison of Blackness for his
pains. And then when they could not get access for shut doors to Protest before
the Parliament; yet, when the Acts were Proclaimed at the Cross of Edinburgh,
they took public Documents, in name of the Church of Scotland, (though they were
but two) that they protested against the said Acts: And fled to England,
leaving behind them Reasons that moved them to do so. And Mr James Melvil,
wrote against the Subscribers at that time, proving, That they had not only set
up a new Pope, and so become Traitors to Christ, and condescended to that
chief Error of Papistry, whereupon all the rest depend; but further, in so
doing they had granted more to the King, than ever the Popes of Rome peaceably
obtained, etc.

After this it is known what bickerings the faithful Witnesses of Christ had,
in their Conflicts with this Supremacy upon the account of Mr. David Blacks
Declinature, which they both advised him to, and approved when he gave it in,
against the King and Council, as Judges of his Doctrine. And the Commissioners
of the General Assembly ordained all, to deal mightily with the power of the
Word, against the Councils Excroachments: For which they were charged to depart
forth of Edinburgh. After which he added a second Declinature: Declaring, There
are two Jurisdictions in this Realm, the one Spiritual, the other Civil; the
one respecting the Conscience, the other Externals: Therefore, in so far as he
was one of the Spiritual Office-bearers, and had discharged his Spiritual
calling in some measure of Grace and Sincerity, should not nor could not be
Lawfully judged, for Preaching and applying the Word, by any Civil Power; he
being an Ambassador and Messenger of the Lord Jesus, having his Commission
from the King of Kings, and all his Instructions set down and limited in the
Book of God, that cannot be extended, abridged, or altered by any mortal Wight,
King or Emperor; And seeing he was sent to all sorts, his Commission and
Discharge of it should not nor cannot be Lawfully judged, by them to whom he
was sent; they being Sheep and not Pastors, to be judged by the Word, and not
to be judges thereof in a judicial way. The Interloquutor being past against
him for this; the Brethren thought it Duty, that the Doctrine of the Preachers
should be directed against the said Interloquutor, as against a strong hold set
up against the Lord Jesus, and the freedom of the Gospel; and Praised God for
the Force and Unity of the Spirit, that was among themselves. And being charged
to depart out of Town, they leave a faithful Declaration at large; showing, how
the Liberties of the Church were invaded and robbed: And when the Ministers
were troubled upon Mr. Blacks business, and there was an intention to pull them
out of their Pulpits, the General Assembly advised them to stand to the
Discharge of their Calling, if their Flocks would save them from Violence; and
yet this Violence was expected from the King and his Emissaries. And when Mr.
Black had a Remission offered to him, refused it altogether, lest so doing he
should condemn himself and approve the Courts Proceedings: And the Brethren
conferring with the Counselors, craving that some penalty should be
condescended unto for satisfying his Majesty in his Honor, would not
condescend to any how light soever; lest thereby they should seem to approve
the Judicatory and their proceeding. The imprisoned Ministers, for declining
the Council, had it in their offer, that if they would without any confession
of offense only submit themselves to his Majesty, pro scandalo accepto, non
dato, they should be restored to their places: But they could not do it without
betraying the Cause of Christ.

The Ministers of Edinburgh were committed to Ward, for refusing to pray for
the Queen, before her Execution in Fothringam Castle 1586. they refused not
simply to pray for her, but for the Preservation of her Life, as if she had
been innocent of the Crimes laid to her charge, which had imported a
Condemnation of the Proceedings against her.

Afterward in the Year 1600. the Ministers of Edinburgh would not Praise God
for the Delivery of the King, from a Conspiracy of the Earl of Gowrie at that
time, of which they had no Credit, nor assurance; and would not crave Pardon
for it neither. For this Mr. Robert Bruce, was deprived of the Exercise of his
Ministry, and never obtained it again at Edinburgh.

But all this was nothing, in Comparison of their wrestlings for the Royalties
of their Princely Master, and Privileges of his Kingdom, against that Tyrants
Insolences, after he obtained the Crown of England. For then he would not
suffer the Church to indict her own Assemblies. And when the faithful thought
themselves obliged to counteract his Encroachments, and therefore convened in
an Assembly at Aberdeen, Anno 1605. they were forced to dissolve: And
thereafter the most eminent of the Ministers there Assembled, were Transported
Prisoners to Blackness. Whence being cited before the Council, they decline
their Judicatory. And one of their Brethren, Mr. Robert Youngson, who had
formerly succumbed, being moved in Conscience, returned: And, when the rest
were standing before the Council, desired to be heard; and acknowledged his
Fault, and Subscribed the Declinature with the rest. And for this they were
Arraigned, and Condemned, as Guilty of Treason, and Banished. Before the
Execution of which Sentence, Mr. Welsh wrote to the Lady Fleeming, to this
effect; What am I, that he should first have called me, and then Constituted me
a Minister of glad things, of the Gospel of Salvation, these fifteen Years
already, and now last of all to be a sufferer for his Cause and Kingdom? To
witness that good Confession, that Jesus Christ is the King of Saints, and that
his Church is a most free Kingdom, yea as free as any Kingdom under Heaven, not
only to Convocate, Hold, and keep her Meetings, Conventions and Assemblies: But
also to judge of all her Affairs in all her Meetings and Conventions, among his
Members and Subjects. These two points, (1) That Christ is the Head of his
Church, (2) That she is free in her Government from all other Jurisdiction,
except Christ's, are the special Cause of our Imprisonment, being now convict
as Traitors, for maintaining thereof. We have now been waiting with joyfulness
to give the last Testimony of our Blood in Confirmation thereof. If it would
please our God to be so favorable, as to Honor us with that Dignity.

After this, the King resolving by Parliament to advance the Estate of Bishops
again, as in the time of Popery, without Cautions, as before; and further to
establish not only that Antichristian Hierarchy, but an Erastian Supremacy; The
faithful Ministers of Christ, thought themselves bound in Conscience to
protest. And accordingly they offered a faithful Protestation to the Parliament
July 1606. obtesting, That they would reserve into the Lords own hands, that
Glory which he will communicate neither with Man nor Angel; to wit, to
prescribe from his Holy Mountain a lively Pattern, according to which his own
Tabernacle should be formed: Remembering always, that there is no absolute and
undoubted Authority in this World, except the Sovereign Authority of Christ the
King; to whom it belongs as properly to rule the Church, according to the
good Pleasure of his own Will, as it belongs to save his Church by the Merit
of his own Sufferings: All other Authority is so entrenched within the Marches
of Divine Command, that the least overpassing of the Bounds set by God himself,
bring Men under the fearful expectation of Temporal and Eternal Judgments, etc.

Yet notwithstanding of all opposition, Prelacy was again restored in
Parliament. And, to bring all to a compliance with the same, Presbyteries and
Synods universally charged, under highest pains, to admit a Constant Moderator
without change: which many refused resolutely, as being the first step of
Prelacy. Upon this followed a great Persecution of the faithful, for their
Nonconformity, managed by that Mongrel and Monstrous kind of Court, made up of
Clergymen, and Statesmen, called the High Commission Court, erected anno
1570. whereby many honest Men were put violently from their Charges and
Habitations; the Generality were involved in a great and fearful Defection.

But the Copestone of the wickedness of that Period, was the Ratification of
the five Articles of Perth; kneeling at the Communion, private Communion to be
given to the Sick, private Baptism, and Confirmation of Children by the Bishop,
and Observation of Festival Days. Which were much opposed and testified against
by the faithful, from their first hatching Anno 1618. to the Year 1621. when
they were ratified in Parliament. And against this the Testimony of the
faithful continued, till the Revolution Anno 1638.

The following Period, from the Year 1638 to 1660* continues and advances the
Testimony, to the greatest height of purity and power, that either this
Church, or any other did ever arrive unto. We shall give a short deduction of
the rise, progress, and end of the Contendings of that Period.

In the midst of the forementioned Miseries and Mischiefs, that the Pride of
Prelacy and Tyrannical Supremacy had multiplied beyond measure upon this Church
and Nation, and at the height of all their haughtiness, when they were setting
up their Dagon, and erecting Altars for him, imposing the Service Book, and
Book of Cannons, etc. The Lords People were surprised with a sudden unexpected
Deliverance, by very despicable means; even the opposition of a few weak Women;
which afterward was followed out with more Masculine fervor, accosting King
and Council with Pititions, Remonstrances, Protestations, and Testimonies
against the Innovations, and resolving upon a mutual Conjunction, to defend
Religion, Lives, and Liberties, against all that would innovate or invade them.
To fortify which, all the Friends to the Liberty of the Nation, did solemnly
renew the National Covenant; which though in it self obligeing to the
Condemnation of Prelatical Hierarchy, and clearly enough confirming
Presbyterial Government, yet they engaged unto it with an enlargement to
suspend the Practice of Novations already introduced, and the approbation of
the Corruptions of the present Government, with the late places and Power of
Church Men, till they be tried in a free General Assembly. Which was obtained
that same Year, and indicted at Glasgow: And there, notwithstanding all the
opposition that the King's Commissioner could make, by Protestations and
Proclamations to dissolve it, the six preceding Assemblies establishing Prelacy
were annulled, the Service Book, and High Commission were condemned; all the
Bishops were deposed, and their Government declared to be abjured in that
National Covenant; though many had, through the Commissioners persuasions,
subscribed it in another Sense without that application: As also the five
Articles of Perth were there discovered to have been inconsistent with that
Covenant and Confession, and the Civil places and power of Church Men were
disproved and rejected: On the other hand, Presbyterial Government was
justified and approved, and an Act was passed, for keeping Yearly General
Assemblies.

This was a bold beginning; out-braving all difficulties. Which in the
following Year were much increased, by the Prelates and their partakers,
Rendezvouzing their Forces under the Kings personal Standard, and menacing
nothing but Misery to the zealous Covenanters: Yet when they found them
prepared to resist, were forced to yield to a Ratification, concluding that an
Assembly and Parliament should be held for healing all Grievances of Church and
State. In which Assembly at Edinburgh, the Covenant is ratified and subscribed
by the Earl of Traquaire Commissioner, and enjoined to be subscribed by the
Body of the whole Land, with an explication expressly concerning the five
Articles of Perth, the Government of Bishops, the Civil places and power of
Church Men.

But the Year following, King and Prelates, with their Abettors, go to Arms
again; but were fain to accommodate the matter by a new Pacification, whereby
all Civil and Religious Rights were ratified. And in the following Year 1641,
by Laws, Oaths, Promises, Subscriptions of King and Parliament, fully
confirmed; the King, Charles the First, being present, and consenting to all.

But the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus being thus advanced, the Glory of the Lord
did shine upon us with such Splendour, that it awaked England, and animated the
Lords People there to aspire to the like Reformation. For advice in which,
because, though all agreed to cast off Prelacy, yet sundry Forms of Church
Government were projected to be set up in the room thereof, chiefly the
Independent Order: Therefore the Brethren in England wrote to the Assembly then
sitting at Edinburgh, who gave them answer in behalf of the Presbyterial
Government. So from henceforth the Assembly did incessantly urge Uniformity in
Reformation, with their Brethren in England, as the chiefest of their Desires,
Prayers and Cares. And in the Year 1643 prevailed so far, that the English
Parliament did first desire that the two Nations might be strictly united for
their mutual defense against the Prelatical Faction and their Adherents in both
Kingdoms; and not to lay down Arms, till these implacable Enemies should be
brought in Subjection; and did instantly urge for help and assistance from
Scotland. Which being sent, did return with an Olive Branch of Peace, and not
without some beginning of a Reformation in England. And afterward a Bloody War
beginning between the King and Parliament, with great success on the Kings
side, Commissioners were sent from both Houses to Scotland, earnestly inviting
to a nearer Union of the Kingdoms, and desiring assistance from this Nation to
their Brethren in that their great distress. And this produced the Solemn
League and Covenant of the three Kingdoms, first drawn up in Scotland, and
approved in the Assembly at Edinburgh, and afterward embraced in England. This
is that Covenant comprehending the purpose of all Prior, and the Pattern of all
Posterior Covenants; which the Representative of Church and State in the three
Nations did solemnly Subscribe and Swear, for themselves and Posterity; and of
which the Obligation cannot be Disannulled, Disabled, or Dispensed, by any
Power on Earth. And this Covenant was rigorously imposed upon all Recusants;
who were wicked Enemies to God, and Church, and Nation, and for their
Malignancy were then to be Prosecuted, not for their Scrupling at a Covenant,
but for their contumacious contempt of a Law. This was no violence done to
their Conscience; for as they had none, and could not pretend to any, so they
were never troubled for that, but for their opposition and conspiracy against
the common Cause. However it went through at that time. And that the Covenanted
Reformation, in a nearer Conjunction betwixt the united Churches, might be
promoted, the Parliament of England called an Assembly of Divines at
Westminster: And desired the Assembly of Scotland to send thither their
Commissioners; and they accordingly nominated and elected, Mr. Alexander
Henderson, Mr. Robert Douglas, Mr. Samuel Rutherford, Mr. Robert Baille, Mr.
George Gillespie Ministers; and John Earl of Capils, John Lord Maitland, and
Sir Archbald Iohnstone of Warristown, Ruling Elder^; to Propone, Consult,
Treat, and Conclude in all such things as might conduce to the extirpation of
Prelacy, etc. and for the settling of the so much desired Union of the whole
Island, in one Form of Church Government, one Confession of Faith, one common
Catechism, and one Directory for the Worship of God. Forces were also sent to
assist the Parliament of England: Which were favored with great success in
their Enterprises, till that War was ended by the total overthrow of the King,
and all his upholders.

But that Prelatical and Malignant Faction being brought much under in England,
attempted to try the Fortune of War in Scotland, under the Conduct of Montrose:
Who, though he prevailed for a time, yet at length was defeat at Philliphaugh, in
the Year 1645. yet certain it is that they had Commission and Warrant from the
King; as the Assembly that Year, Feb. 13. remonstrates it to himself: Warning
him in the Name of their Master, the Lord Jesus Christ, that the Guilt which
cleaved to his Throne was such, as if not timely repented, could not but
involve himself, and his Posterity, under the Wrath of the Everliving God, for
his being Guilty of the shedding of the Blood of many Thousands of his best
Subjects, etc.

At the same time also the Assembly did zealously incite the Parliament to a
speedy Course of Justice against these Incendiaries and Murderers, as the only
mean of cleansing the Land from that deluge of Blood then Current, and of
appeasing the Wrath of God: And solemnly and seasonably warned all Ranks to
search to understand the Language of that Dispensation; wherein many public
Sins and Breaches of Covenant are pointed at; and the Covenant it self is there
very Encomiastically vindicated: We are so far from repenting of it (say they)
that we cannot mention it without great joy; for no sooner was the Covenant
begun to be taken in England, but sensibly the condition of affairs there was
changed to the better; and our Forces sent into that Kingdom, in pursuance of
that Covenant, have been so manifestly and mercifully assisted from Heaven,
that we have what to answer the Enemy that reproacheth us concerning that
business. These following Acts were made, thus, Feb. 14. 1645. Sess. 18. Unless
Men will blot out of their Hearts the fear of Religion and Cause of God, they
must now or never appear actively, each one stretching himself to, yea beyond
his power. It is no time to dally, or to go about the business by halves, nor
be almost but altogether zealous: Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord
negligently. If we have been forward to assist our Neighbor Kingdoms, shall we
neglect to defend our own? Or shall the Enemies of God be more active against
his Cause, than his People for it? God forbid. (And among the Enormities and
Corruptions of the Ministry in their Callings, this is one,. 4. 5. Silence in
the public Cause; some accounting it a point of Wisdom to speak ambiguously,
whereof the remedy is,. 15. That beside all other scandals, silence and
ambiguous speaking, in the public Cause, be seasonably Censured. Genesis Ass.
Edin. June, 13. 1646.) Act for Censuring the Complyers with the public Enemies
of this Church and Kingdom, Genesis Ass. Edin. Jun. 17. 1646. Sess. 4. Where they
judge it a great and scandalous Provocation, and grievous defection from the
public Cause, to comply with these Malignants, in any degree, even to procure
Protections from them, or to have invited them to their Houses, or to be Guilty
of any such Gross degrees of Compliance; Censured to be suspended from the
Communion, and while they acknowledge their Offense. And Genesis Ass. Aug. 24.
1647. Sess. 19. Ministers are charged, us they have occasion from the Text of
Scripture, to reprove the Sins and Errors, and press the Duties of the Time,
and in all these to observe the Rules prescribed by the Acts of Assembly,
wherein if they be negligent, they are to be Censured. And July ult. 1648.
Sess. 2. in their Declaration concerning the unlawful Engagement, they say:
Suppose the Ends of that Engagement be good (as they are not) yet the means and
ways of Prosecution are unlawful; because there is not an equal avoiding of
Rocks on both hands, but a joining with Malignants to suppress Sectaries, a
joining hands with a black Devil to beat a white Devil. And Aug. 3. 1648. All
Ministers that do not apply their Doctrine to the Corruptions of the Time,
which is the Pastoral Gift, and that are cold or wanting of Spiritual zeal,
Dissembling of Public Sins, are appointed to be Censured even to Deprivation;
for forbearing or passing in silence the Errors and Exorbitances of Sectaries
in England, or the Defections current at home, the Plots and Practices of
Malignants, the Principles and Tenets of Erastianism; And if they be found too
sparing, General or Ambiguous in their Applications or Reproofs, they are to be
deposed, for being pleasers of Men rather than servers of Christ, for giving
themselves to a detestable indifferency or neutrality in the Cause of God, for
defrauding the South of People, yea for being Gu^lty of the Blood of Souls, in
not giving them warning. See also their seasonable and necessary Warning July.
27. 1649. Thus did these famous Fathers give us a perfect Pattern of purity and
strictness, in opposition to all degrees of Co^formity and Compliance with the
Corruptions of the Time.

In the mean while, the Malignants in England being crushed in all their
Projects, the King renders himself to the Scots in Newcastle: By whom (because
by Covenant they were not obliged to defend him, but only in defense of
Religion and Liberty, which he had been destroying, and they defending; because
in this War he did directly oppose and oppugn these Conditions, under which
they were only to defend him, and therefore they had all along carried toward
him as an Enemy, as he to them; And because by the same Covenant they were
obliged to discover, and render to condign Punishment all Malignants of whom he
was the chief, and to assist mutually all entered into that Covenant) he was
delivered up unto the English, and kept under restraint in the Isle of Wight,
until he was Condemned and Executed, Ian, 30, 164^^. Which Fact, though it was
protested against both before and after by the Assembly of the Church of
Scotland, out of zeal against the Sectarians, the Executioners of that
extraordinary Act of Justice; yet it was more for the Manner, than for the
matter, and more for the Motives and Ends of it, than for the Grounds of it,
that they opposed themselves to it, and resented it. For they acknowledged and
remonstrated to himself, the Truth of all these things upon which that Sentence
and Execution of Justice was founded. And when the unlawful Engagement was on
foot to Rescue him, they opposed it with all their might: Showing, in their
Answers to the Estates that Year, 1648, and Declarations and Remonstrances, the
sinfulness and destructiveness of that Engagement; that it was a breach of the
Commandments of God, and of all the Articles of the Covenant: Declaring with
all (July ult.) they would never consent to the King's Restitution to the
exercise of his Power, till security should be had, By Solemn Oath under his
Hand and Seal, that he shall for himself and Successors, give his assent to all
Acts and Bills for enjoining Presbyterial Government, and never make opposition
to it, nor endeavor any change thereof. July ult. 1648. Sess. 21. By which it
appears, they were not so stupidly loyal, as some would make them.

Yet there was too much of this Plague of the King's Evil even among good Men:
For after the Death of Charles the First, in the Year 1649. they began to think
of joining once more with the Malignants, and taking into their Bosoms these
Serpents which had formerly stung them to Death. There was indeed at that time
a Party faithful for God, who considering the many Breaches of the Solemn
League and Covenant, and particularly by the late Engagement against England,
did so Travel, that they procured the Covenant to be renewed, with the Solemn
Acknowledgment of Sins, and Engagement to Duties, which was universally
Subscribed and sworn through all the Land; wherein also they regret this
tampering with Malignants. Whereupon they subdued their Adversaries at
Sterling, and in the North they did also give Warning concerning the Young
King, that notwithstanding of the Lords Hand against his Father, yet he
hearkens to the Councils of those, who were Authors of these Miseries to his
Father; by which it has come to pass, that he has hitherto refused to grant
the just and necessary desires of the Church and Kingdom, for securing of
Religion and Liberty: And it is much to be feared, that these wicked
Counselors, may so far prevail upon him, as to engage him in a War, for
overturning the Work of God, and bearing down all those in the three Kingdoms
that adhere thereto. Which if he shall do, cannot but bring great Wrath from
the Lord upon himself and Th^one, and must be the cause of many new and great
Miseries and Calamities to these Lands. And, whereas many would have admitted
his Majesty to the Exercise of his Royal Power, upon any Terms whatsoever, the
Assembly declares, That in the League and Covenant the duty of defending and
preserving the King is subordinate to the duty of preserving Religion and
Liberty: And therefore, he standing in opposition to the public desires of the
People for their security, it were a manifest breach of Covenant, and a
preferring the Kings Interest to the Interest of Jesus Christ, to bring him to
the Exercise of his Power. And therefore, if his Majesty, or any having or
pretending Power and Commission from him, shall invade this Kingdom, upon
pretext of establishing him in the Exercise of his Royal Power; as it will be
an high Provocation against God, to be accessory or assisting thereto, so it
will be a necessary Duty to resist and oppose the same. July 27. 1649. Sess.
27. And when the bringing home of the King came to be voted in the Assembly,
there was one faithful Witness, Mr. Adam Kae Minister, in Gallaway, protested
against it.

But notwithstanding of these Convictions, Warning, yea and Discoveries of the
Kings Malignancy; They sent Commissioners, and concluded a Treaty with him at
Breda. During which Treaty, the Commissions which he had sent to Montrose, and
his Accomplices, were brought to the Committee of Estates, discovering what sort
of King they were treating with. Whereupon the Estates concluded to break off
the Treaty, and recall their Commissioners. To which intent, they sent an
Express with Letters to Breda; which falling into the hands of Libbertone, was
by him, without the knowledge of the other Commissioners, delivered unto the
King: Who then sound it his interest to dissemble. And so sending for the
Commissioners, he made ^ flattering Speech to them, showing that now after
serious deliberation he was resolved to comply with all their Proposals.
Whereupon the Commissioners dispatch the Post back with Letters, full of praise
and joy, for the satisfaction they had received.

The Estates, being over-swayed more with respect to their own Credit (which
they thought should be impeached, if they should retract their own
Plenipotentiary Instructions, to conclude the Treaty upon the Kings assent to
their Conditions) than to their reclamant Consciences, they resolved to bring
home the King. Yet they thought to mend the matter, by binding him with all
Cords, and putting him to all most explicit Engagements, before he should
receive the Imperial Crown. Well, upon these Terms home he comes: And before he
set his Foot on British Ground, he takes the Covenant. And the Commission of
the General Assembly precluded his Admittance to the Crown, if he should refuse
the then required satisfaction, before his Coronation, by their Act at the
West-Kirk, Aug. 13. 1650. Which is this, The Commission of the General
Assembly, considering that there may be just Ground of stumbling, from the
Kings Majesty's refusing to subscribe and excite the Declaration offered to him
by the Committee of Estates, and the Commission of the General Assembly
concerning his former Carriage and Resolutions for the future, in Reference to
the Cause of God, and the Enemies and Friends thereof; does therefore declare,
That this Kirk and Kingdom does not own or espouse any Malignant Party, or
Quarrel, or Interest, but that they fight merely upon their former Grounds and
Principles, and in the defense of the Cause of God, and of the Kingdom, as they
have done these twelve Years past: And therefore, as they disclaim all the Sin
and Guilt of the King and of his House, so they will not own him not his
Interest, otherwise than with a Subordination to God, and so far as he owns and
Prosecutes the Cause of God, and disclaims his and his Fathers Opposition to
the Work of God, and to the Covenant, and likewise all the Enemies thereof^ And
that they will with convenient speed take into Consideration the Papers lately
sent unto them by Oliver Cromwell, and vindicate themselves from all the
falsehoods contained therein; especially in these things wherein the quarrel
betwixt us and that Party is mis-stated, as if we owned the late Kings
Proceedings, and were resolved to Prosecute and Maintain His Present Majesty's
Interest, before and without acknowledging of the Sin of his House and former
ways, and satisfaction to Gods People in both Kingdoms. A. Ker.

And that same day, The Committee of Estates, having seen and considered a
Declaration of the Commission of the General Assembly, anent the stating the
Quarrel wherein the Army is to fight, do approve the same, and heartily concur
therein. Tho. Henderson.

Whereupon thereafter, he encites that Declaration at Drumfermling, Wherein,
Professing and appearing in the full persuasion and Love of the Truth, he
repents (as having to do with and in the sight of God) his Fathers opposition
to the Covenant and Work of God, and his own Reluctances against the same,
hoping for Mercy through the Blood of Jesus Christ, and obtesting the Prayers
of the Faithful to God, for his stedfastness; and then Protesting his Truth and
Sincerity in entering into the Oath of God, resolving to prosecute the Ends of
the Covenant to his utmost, and to have with it the same common Friends and
Enemies, exhorting all to lay down their Enmity against the Cause of God, and
not to prefer Man's Interest to Gods, which will prove an Idol of Jealousy to
Provoke the Lord, and he himself accounts to be but selfish Flatteries. Then
at his Coronation, the Action commenceth with his most solemn renewing of the
National and Solemn League and Covenant.

Thereafter in the Year 1651. followed the Ratification of all these preceding
Treaties, Transactions, and Engagements, concluded and enacted by the King, and
the Parliament; whereby the same did Pass into a Perpetual Law. And this
Covenant, which from the beginning was and is the most sure and indispensible
Oath of God, became at length the very Fundamental Law of the Kingdom, whereon
all the Rights or Privileges, either of King or People, are principally
bottomed and secured.

After this it came to pass, that zeal for the cause rightly stated was
suddenly contracted to a few; whereby a plain defection was violently carried
on by the Public Resolutioners, who relapsing into that most Sinful
Conjunction with the Malignants, did bring them into places of Power and Trust,
in Judicatories and Armies, in a more Politic than Pious way, requiring of
them a constrained and dissembled Repentance, which Reflection did cause the
first Division of that kind, and most permanent of any that ever was in the
Church of Scotland; by reason of the surcease of General Assemblies, stopped
and hindered by the Yoke of the Sectarian Usurpers: And it has been the spring
and source of all our Reflections since. Upon this our Land was invaded by
Oliver Cromwell, who defeated our Army at Dunbar. Next, an Army being raised,
according to these unhallowed Resolutions, was totally routed at Worcester; And
the King forced to hide himself in the Oak, and thence to transport himself
beyond Sea, where he continued in Exile, till the Year 1660.

Yet there was still a faithful Remnant of Ministers and Professors, zealous
for the Cause, keeping their Integrity; who in their Remonstrances and
Testimonies witnessed against both their Malignant Enemies, and their
backsliding Brethren the Resolutioners: And also against the Sectarians their
Invaders; whose vast Toleration and Liberty of Conscience, which they brought
in to invade our Religion as they invaded our Land, and infect it with their
Multifarious Errors, was particularly by the Synod of Fife, and other Brethren
in the Ministry that joined themselves to them, testified against, and
demonstrated to be wicked and intolerable. But in the mean time, the Sectarian
Army here prevailed, till after the Usurper Cromwell his Death; Monk then
General, with a Combination of Malignants and public Resolutioners, did bring
home the King to England from his Banishment.

Now comes the last Catastrophe of the Deformation of the Church of Scotland;
which in a retrograde motion has gradually been growing these 27 Years, going
back through all the steps by which the Reformation ascended, till now she is
reduced to the very Border of that Babylon, from whence she took her departure.
Through all which steps notwithstanding, to this day, Scotland has never
wanted a Witness for Christ, against all the various steps of the Enemies
advancings, and of professed Friends declinings. Though the Testimony has had
some Singularities, in that it has been attended with more disadvantages, by
reason of the Enemies greater prevalency, and Friends deficiency, and greater
want of significant Assertors, than any formerly, in that it has been
entangled in more multifarious Intricacies of questions and debates, and
Divisions among the Assertors themselves: In that it has been intended and
extended to a greater measure, both as to matter and manner of contendings
against the Adversaries, and stated upon nicer points, more earnestly
Prosecuted and tenaciously maintained, than any formerly; to that it has had
more opposition and contradiction, and less Countenance from professed Friends
to the Reformation, either at home or abroad, than any formerly. And yet it
has been both Active and Passive, both against Enemies and Friends; and in
Cumulo stated against Atheism, Popery, Prelacy, and Erastian Supremacy, and
extended in a particular manner against Tyranny. And not only against the
substance and essence of these in the Abstract, but against Substance and
Circumstance, Abstract and Concrete, Root and Branch, Head and Tail of them,
and all complying with them, conforming to them, or countenancing of them, or
any thing conductive for them, or deduced from them, any manner of way,
directly or indirectly, formally or interpretatively. This is that extensive
and very comprehensive Testimony, which in all its parts, points, and particles
is most directly relative, and dilucidly reducible, to a complex Witness for
the Declarative Glory of Christ's Kingship and Headship over All, as he is God,
and as he is Mediator.

The management of this Testimony was thus. King Charles the Second upon his
Return directed a Letter to the Presbytery of Edinburgh, declaring he was
resolved to protect and preserve the Government of the Church of Scotland, as
it is settled by Law, without Violation. Wherein it was observed he spoke never
8 word of the Covenant, our Magna Charta of Religion and Righteousness, but
only of Law; by which he meant the Prelatical Church, as it was settled by the
Law of his Father, since which time he reckoned there was no Law, but
Rebellion. This was a piece and prelude of our base Defection, that we were so
far from withstanding, that we did not so much as witness against the
Readmission and Restoration of the Head and Tail of Malignants, but let them
come in peaceably to the Throne, without any Security to the Covenanted Cause,
and by piecemeal, at their own ease, leisure, and pleasure, to overturn all
the Work of God, and reintroduce the Old Antichristian Yoke of abjured Prelacy,
and Blasphemous Sacrilegious Supremacy, and absolute Arbitrary Tyranny, with
all their abominations: Which he, and with him the Generality of our Nobility,
Gentry, Clergy, and Commonality, did promote and propagate, until the Nation
was involved in the greatest Revolt from, and Rebellion against God, that ever
could be recorded in any Age or Generation: Nay, attended with greater and
grosser Aggravations, than ever any could be capable of before us, who have had
the greatest Privileges that ever any Church had, since the National Church of
the Jews, the greatest light, the greatest effects of matchless magnified Love,
the greatest Convictions of Sin, the greatest Resolutions and Solemn
Engagements against it, and the greatest Reformation from it, that ever any had
to abuse and affront: O Heavens! Be Astonished at this, and Horribly afraid!
For Scotland has changed her Glory, and the Crown has fallen from off her Head,
by an unparallelled Apostasy, a free and voluntary, wilful and deliberate
Apostasy, an avowed and declared and authorized Apostasy, a most universal and
every way unprecedented Apostasy.

These Enemies of God, having once got footing again, with the favor and
fawnings of the Foolish Nation, went on fervently to further and promote their
foolish Design: And meeting with no opposition at first did encourage
themselves to begin boldly. Wherefore, hearing of some Ministers peaceably
Assembled, to draw up a Monitory Letter to the King, minding him of his
Covenant, Engagements and Promises (which was though weak, yet the first Witness
and Warning against that Heaven-daring Wickedness then begun) they Cruelly
incarcerate them; Having hereby much daunted the Ministry from their Duty in
that day, for fear of the like unusual and outrageous usage.

The Parliament convenes Ian. 1. 1661. without so much as a Protestation for
Religion and Liberty given in to them. And there, in the first place, they
frame and take the Oath of Supremacy, Examtorating Christ, and investing his
usurping Enemy with the spoils of his robbed Prerogative, acknowledging the
King only Supreme Governor over all Persons and in all Causes, and that his
Power and Jurisdiction must not be declined. Whereby under all Persons and
Causes, all Church-concerns of Christ, are comprehended: And if the King shall
take upon him to judge their Doctrine, Worship, Discipline or Government, he
must not be declined as an Incompetent Judge. Which laid the Foundation for all
this Babble they have built since, and of all this War that has been waged
against the Son of God, and did introduce all this Tyranny and absolute Power
which has been since carried to its Complement, and made the Kings Throne the
Foundation of all the succeeding Perjury and Apostasy.

Yet, though then our Synods and Presbyteries were not discharged, but might have
had access in some Concurrence to witness against this horrid Invasion upon
Christ's Prerogative and the Churches Privilege, no join^ Testimony was given
against it, except that some were found Witnessing against it in their Singular
Capacity by themselves. As faithful Mr. James Gushire, who had been Honored of
God to be zealous and singularly faithful in carrying on the Work of
Reformation, and for declining this usurped Authority in prejudice of the
Kingdom of our Lord Jesus, and asserting the Kingly Authority of Christ in
opposition to the Erastian Supremacy encroaching thereupon, suffered Death, and
got the Martyrs Crown upon his Head; which being placed upon one of the Ports
of Edinburgh, Preaches, not only against the Enemies Rebellion against God,
but against the defection of many Ministers since, who have Practically denied
that great Truth for which he suffered, viz. His Testimony against the
Supremacy, and for declining the usurped Authority of him who Arrogated it. And
some others, for refusing that Oath Arbi^rarily imposed, were Banished or
Confined.

At the same time, there was a Proclamation, which they caused to be Read at
all the Church-Doors, discharging Ministers to speak against them or their
Proceedings, whereby Profane and Malicious Persons were encouraged to witness
against their Ministers. By which means (though many were in no hazard, thinking
it commendable Prudence, commended indeed by the World, but hateful
Unfaithfulness before God, to be silent at such a time) some faithful Ministers
giving faithful and free warning and Protesting against the present Defection,
were condemned of Treason, and Banished out of the three Dominions. Others were
Sentenced with Banishment, and further were compelled to Subscribe a Bond, under
pain of Death, to remove out of all the Dominions betwixt that and such a day.
This was the Lot, and also the Blot of these Famous and Faithful Ministers, Mr.
John Eivingstoun, M^. Robert Machward, Mr. John Brown, etc. who spent the rest
of their days in Holland.

When they had gained this Bulwark of Christ's Kingdom, then they waxed more
insolent, and set up their Ensigns for Signs, and broke down the Carved Work of
Reformation with Axes and Hammers. In this Parliament 1661. they passed an Act
Rescissory, whereby they annulled and declared void the National Covenant, the
Solemn League and Covenant, Presbyterial Government, and all Laws made in
favor of the work of Reformation, since the Year 1638. O horrid Wickedness! To
condemn and rescind what God did so signally Seal as his own Work, to the
Conviction of the World. But O Holy and Astonishing Justice, thus to Recompense
our way upon our own Head! to suffer this work and cause to be ruined under our
unhappy hands, who suffered this Destroyer to come in before it was so
effectually secured, as it should not have been in the power of his hand
(whatever had been in his Heart, swelled with enmity against Christ) to have
raised and ruined that work as now he most wickedly did, and drew so many in to
the Guilt of the same deed, that almost the whole Land not only consented unto
it, but Applauded it; by approving and countenancing another wicked Act framed
at the same time, by that same per^idious Parliament, for an Anniversary
Thanksgiving, commemorating every 29 th of May, that Blasphemy against the
Spirit and Work of God; and celebrating tha^ unhappy Restoration of the
Rescinder of the Reformation, which had not only the Concurrence of the
Universality of the Nation, but (alas for shame that it should be told in Gath,
etc.) even of some Ministers, who afterward accepted the Indulgence (one of
which, a Pillar among them, was seen scandalously dancing about the Bonfires.)
And others, who should have allarmed the whole Nation Quasi pro Aris and Focis,
to rise for Religion and Liberty, to resist such Wickedness, did wink at it.

Yet albeit, neither in this day, when the Covenant was not only broken, but
Cassed and declared of no Obligation, nor afterward when it was Burnt (for
which Turks and Pagans would have been ashamed, and afraid at such a terrible
sight, and for which the Lords Anger is burning against these bold Burners, and
against them who suffered it, and did not witness against it) was there any
public Testimony by Protestation, or Remonstrance, or any public Witness?
Though the Lord had some then, and some who came out afterward with the Trumpet
at their Mouth, whose Heart then sorrowed at the sight: And some suffered for
the Sense they showed of that Anniversary Abomination, for not keeping which
they lost both Church and Liberty.

It Is true, the ordinary Meetings of Presbyteries and Synods were about that
time discharged, to make way for the Exercise of the new power conferred on the
four Prelates who were at Court. But this could not give a discharge from a
necessary Testimony, then called from faithful Watchmen. However the
Reformation being thus rescinded and razed, and the House of the Lord pulled
down, then they begin to build their Babble.

In the Parliament Anno 1662. by their first Act they restore and reestablish
Prelacy, upon such a Foundation as they might by the same Law bring in Popery;
and settled its Harbinger, Diocesan and Erastian Prelacy, by fuller enlargement
of the Supremacy, The very Act beginning thus: Forasmuch as the ordering and
disposal of the external Government of the Church, does properly belong to his
Majesty as an inherent Right of the Crown, by Virtue of his Royal Prerogative
and Supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastic, whatever shall be determined by his
Majesty with advice of the Archbishops, and such of the Clergy as he shall
nominate, in the External Government of the Church (the same consisting with
the standing Laws of the Kingdom) shall be valid and effectual. And in the same
Act all Laws are rescinded, by which the sole Power and Jurisdiction within the
Church does stand in the Church Assemblies, and all which may be interpreted,
to have given any Church Power, Jurisdiction or Government to the
Office-Bearers of the Church, other than that which acknowledges a dependence
upon, and Subordination to the Sovereign Power of the King as Supreme. By which
Prelates are redintegrated ^o all their Privileges and Preheminences that they
possessed Anno 1687. And all their Church Power (robbed from the Officers of
Christ) is made to be derived from, to depend upon, and to be Subordinate to
^he Crown-Prerogative of the King: Whereby the King is made the only Fountain
of Church Power, and that exclusive even of Christ, of whom there is no
mentioned Exception: And his Vassals the Bishops, as his Clerks in
Ecclesiastics, are accountable to him for all their Administrations; a greater
Usurpation upon the Kingdom of Christ, than ever the Papacy it self aspired
unto.

Yet, albeit here was another display of a Banner of defiance against Christ,
in altering the Church Government of Christ's Institution into the humane
Invention of Lordly Prelacy, there was no public, Ministerial, at least united
Testimony against this neither. Therefore the Lord punished this sinful and
shameful silence of Ministers; when by another wicked Act of the Council at
Glasgow, above 300 Ministers were put from their Charges; and afterward for
their Nonconformity in not countenancing their Diocesan Meeting, and not
keeping the Anniversary Day, May 29. the rest were violen^ly thrust from their
Labors in the Lords Vineyard, and Banished from their Parishes, and adjudged
unto a strange and nice Confinement, twenty Miles from their own Parishes, six
Miles from a Cathedral Church, as they called it, and three Miles from a Burgh.
Yet in this fatal Convulsion of the Church, generally all were struck with
Blindness and Baseness, that a Paper-Proclamation made them all run from their
Posts, and obey the Kings Orders for their ejection. Thus were they given up,
because of their forbearing to sound an Allarm, charging the People of God, in
point of Loyalty to Christ, and under the pain of the Curse of the Covenant, to
awake and acquit themselves like Men, and not to suffer the Enemy to rob them
of that Treasure of Reformation, which they were put in possession of, by the
Tears, Prayers, and Blood of such as went before them; instead of those
prudential fumblings, and fistlings then and since so much followed. Wherefore
the Lord in his Holy Righteousness, left that Enemy to cast them out of the
House of the Lord, and dissolve their Assemblies, and deprive them of their
Privileges, because of their not being so valiant for the Truth, as that a
full and faithful Testimony against that Encroachment might be found upon
Record.

Nevertheless some were found faithful in that Hour and Power of Darkness, who
kept the Word of the Lords Patience, and who therefore were kept in and from
Tentation (which carried away many into sad and shameful Defections) though not
from suffering hard things from the hands of Men; and only these who felt most
of their violence, found Grace helping them to acquit themselves suitably to
that days Testimony, being thereby prevented from an active yiedling to their
impositions, when they were made passively to suffer force. However that season
of a public Testimony was lost, and as to the most part never recovered to
this day.

The Prelates being settled, and readmitted to voice in Parliament, they procure
an Act, Dogmatically condemning several Material parts and points of our
Covenanted Reformation, to wit, these Positions, That it was Lawful for
Subjects, for Reformation or necessary self-defence, to enter into Leagues, or
take up Arms against the King: And particularly declaring that the National
Covenant, as explained in the Year 1688. and the solemn League and Covenant,
were and are in themselves unlawful Oaths, and were taken by, and imposed upon
the Subjects of this Kingdom, against the Fundamental Laws and Liberties
thereof; That all such Gatherings and Petitions, that were used in the
beginning of the late Troubles, were unlawful and seditious: And whereas People
were then led into these things, by having disseminated among them such
Principles as these, That it was lawful for People to come with Petitions and
Representations to the King, That it was lawful for People to restrict their
Allegiance under such and such Limitations, and suspend it until he should give
security for Religion, etc. It was therefore enacted, that all such Positions
and Practices founded thereupon, were Treasonable -- And further did enact, that
no Person, by Writing, Praying, Preaching, or malicious or advised speaking,
express or publish any Words or Sentences, to stir up the People to the dislike
of the Kings Prerogative and Supremacy, or of the Government of the Church by
Bishops, or justify any of the Deeds, Actings or things declared against by
that Act.

Yet notwithstanding of all this Subversion of Religion and Liberty, and
restraint of asserting these Truths here trampled upon, either before Men by
Testimony, or before God in Mourning over these Indignities done unto him, in
everting these, and all the parts of Reformation, even when it came to Daniel's
Case of conf^ssion, Preaching and Praying Truths interdicted by Law, few had
their Eyes open (let be their Windows in an open avouching them) to see the
duty of the day calling for a Testimony. Though afterward the Lord spirited some
to assert and demonstrate the Glory of these Truths and Duties to the World. As
that judicious Author of the Apologetical Relation.

But this is not all: For these Men, having now, as they thought, subverted the
Work of God, they provided also against the fears of its revival; making Acts,
declaring, that if outed Ministers dare to continue to Preach, and presume to
exercise their Ministry, they should be punished as Seditious Persons;
requiring of all a due acknowledgment of, and hearty compliance with the King's
Government, Ecclesiastical and Civil; and that whosoever shall ordinarily and
wilfully withdraw and absent from the ordinary Meetings for Divine Worship in
their own Churches, on the Lord's Day, shall incur the Penalties there
inserted. And thus none are allowed by Law to administer the Ordinances, but
either Apostate Curates, who by their Perjury and Apostatize forfaulted their
Ministry, or other Hir^lings, and Prelates Journey-men, who ran without a
Mission, except from them who had none to give, ac^ording to Christ's
Institution, the Seal of whose Ministry could never yet be shown in the
Conversion of any Sinner to Christ; but if the Tree may be known by its Fruits,
we may know whose Ministers they are; by their Conversions of Reformation into
Deformation; of the Work and Cause of God, into the similitude of the Roman
Beast; of Ministers into ^^i^elings; of the Power of Godliness into Formality;
of Preaching Christ, into Orations of Morality; of the Purity of Christ's
Ordinances, into the vanity of Men's Inventions; of the Beautiful Government of
the House of God for Edification, to a Lordly Preeminence and Domination over
Consciences: In a word, of Church and State, Constitutions for Religion and
Liberty, all upside down into Wickedness and Slavery.

But now this astonishing Blow to the Gospel of the Kingdom, introducing such a
swarm of Locusts into the Church, and in forcing a compliance of the People
with this defection, and that so violently and rigorously, as even simple
withdrawing was so severely punished by severe Edicts of Fining, and other
Arbitrary Punishments at first (for at first they did not Imprison any for
simple absenting themselves from the Curates, and only imprisoned those who at
any time showed more than ordinary Zeal against the Curate's Intrusion) what
did it produce? The generality of Ministers and Professors both went and
Conformed so far as to hear the Curates, contrary to many Points of the
Reformation formerly attained, contrary to their Covenant-Engagements, and
contrary to their own Principles and Practices at that same time; scrupling and
refusing to keep the Bishops Visitations, and to countenance their Discipline
and Power of Jurisdiction, because it was required as a Testification of their
acknowledgment of, and Compliance with the present Government; and yet not
scrupling to Countenance their Doctrine, and usurped Power of Order, required
also by the same Law, as the same Test of the same compliance and submission.
Other Ministers lay altogether by in their retired recesses, waiting to see
what things would turn to; others were hopeless, turned Farmers, and Doctors;
others wily staid at home, and Preached quietly in Ladies Chambers.

But the Faithful found themselves under an indispensable necessity to Preach
the Gospel, and witness for the freedom of their Ministry, and make full proof
of it, in Preaching in Season, and out of Season; and thereupon as occasion
offered, Preached to all such as were willing to hear; but at first, only in
private Houses, and that for the most part, at such times when Sermons in
public surceased (a Superplus of Caution.) But afterward, finding so great
Difficulties and Persecutions for their House-Meetings, where they were so
easily at^rapped, were constrained at last to keep their Meetings in the
Fields: Where testifying both practically, and particularly against these
Usurpations on their Master's Prerogatives, and witnessing for their
Mi^isterial freedom, contrary to all Law-Interdictions, without any Licenses or
Indulgence from the Usurper, but holding their Ministry from Jesus Christ
alone, both as to the Office and Exercise thereof; they had so much of their
Master's Countenance, and success in their Labors, that they valued neither
hazards or hardships, neither the contempt of pretended Friends, nor the Laws
nor threatenings of Enemies, adjudging the Penalty of Death it self to Preachers
at Field-Conventicles, a^ they called them.

Now having thus overturned the Church Government, by introducing P^elacy, to
advance ane absolute Supremacy, the King proceeds in his Design, to pervert and
evert the well modelled and moderated Constitution of the State-Government
also, by introducing and advancing ane A^bitrary Tyranny. For effectuating
which, he first procures a lasting Imposition of intolerable Subsidies and
Taxations; next a further recognisance of his Prerogative, in a Subjection of
Persons, Fortunes, and whole strength of the Kingdom to his absolute
Arbitriment, in a Levy of Militia of 20000 Footmen, and 2000 Horsemen,
sufficiently armed, with Forty days Provision, to be ready upon the King's call
to march to any part of his Dominions, for opposing whatsoever Invasion, or
Insurrection, or for any other Service. The first sproutings of Tyranny were
cherished, by the cheerful and stupid Submission generally yielded to these
Exorbitancies; so that generally People did not so much as scruple sending out,
or going out as Militia-men.

After the fundamental Constitutions of both Church and State are thus razed
and rooted up, he contrived to frame all Inferior Magistrates according to his
Mould: And for this end appointed, that all Persons in any Public Trust or
Office whatsoever, should subscribe a Declaration, renouncing and abjuring the
Covenant. But finding this not yet sufficient security for this unsettled
Settlement; because he well understood, the People stood no ways obliged to
acknowledge him, but only according to the Solemn Covenants, being the
fundamental Conditions whereupon their Allegiance was founded; and well
knowing, that he and his Associates, by violating these Conditions, had loosed
the People from all Subjection to him, or deriving any Power from him, whereby
the People might justly plead, That since he had kept no Condition, they were
not now obliged to him; he therefore contrived a new Oath of Allegiance to be
imposed upon all in public Trust, both in Church and State. Strange! can
Presbyterians swear that Allegiance, which is substitute in the place of the
broken and burnt Covenant? Or could they swear it to such a Person, who having
buried the Covenant, that he might have another Right and another Allegiance
than that of the Covenant, had then remitted to us all Allegiance founded upon
the Covenant?

However, having prepared and furnished himself with Tools so qualified for his
purpose, in Church and State, he prosecutes his Persecution with such fervor
and fury, that at length, in the Year 1666, a small Party were compelled to go
to defensive Arms; which was occasioned thus. Sir James Turner pursuing his
Cruel Orders in Galloway, sent some Soldiers to apprehend a poor old Man; whom
his Neighbors Compassionating, entreated the Soldiers to loose him as he lay
bound; but were answered with drawn Swords, and necessitated to their own
defense: In which they relieve the Man, and disarm the Soldiers; and further
attacked some others oppressing that Country, disarming Ten or Twelve more, and
killing one that made resistance. Whereupon the Country being alarmed, and
fearing Sir James would certainly avenge this Affront upon the whole Country,
without distinction of Free and Unfree, they gather about Fifty four Horsemen,
march to Dumfre^^, take Sir James Turner Prisoner, and disarm the Soldiers,
without any more violence. Being thus by Providence engaged, without any hope
of retreat, and getting some Concurrence of their Brethren in the same
condition, they come to Lanerk, where they renew the Covenant; and thence to
Pentland-Hills, where, by the Holy disposal of God, they were routed, many
killed, and 130 taken Prisoners, of which 35 were afterward hanged, who had
much of the Lords Presence at their deaths, and assurance of his Love,
strengthening them to Seal a noble Testimony. After this conflict many were
forefaulted of their Estates, and Intercommuned; Soldiers are permitted to
take free Quarter in the Country; to Examine Men by Tortures; to strip them who
did so much as resist the Fugitives, and thrust them into Prisons, etc. Hence
we may see the Righteousness of God, how justly at that time he left us in such
a damp, that like Asses we couched under all Burdens, and few came out to the
help of the Lord against the Mighty, drawing on them Meroz's Curse, and the
Blood of their butchered Brethren.

But the King having now brought his only opposites, the few Faithful Witnesses
of Christ, to a low pass, he went on by Craft as well as Cruelty, to advance
his own in promoting Antichrist's Interest. And therefore having gotten the
Supremacy devolved upon him by Law, he would now exert that usurped Power, and
work by insnaring Policy to effe^tuate the End which he could not do by other
means. Therefore seeing he was not able to suppress the Meetings of the Lord's
People for Gospel Ordinances, in Houses and Fields, but that the more he
labored by violent courses, the greater and more frequent they grew; h^ fell
upon a more crafty Device, not only to overthrow the Gospel, and suppress the
Meetings, but to break the Faithful, and to divide between the Mad-cap and the
Moderate Fanatics (as they phrased it) that he might the more easily destroy
both, to confirm the Usurpation, and to settle People in a sinful silence, and
stupid submission to all the Encroachments made on Christ's Prerogatives, and
more effectually to overturn what remained of the work of God. And knowing that
nothing could more fortify the Supremacy than Ministers their homologating and
acknowledging it: Therefore he offered the first Indulgence Anno 1669,
signifying in a Letter, dated that Year June 7. His gracious Pleasure was, To
appoint so many of the outed Ministers, as have lived peaceably and orderly, to
return to Preach and exercise other Functions of the Ministry, in the
Parish-Churches where they formerly served (provided they be vacant) to allow
Patrons to present to other vacant Churches, such others of them as the Council
should approve: That all who are so indulged, be enjoined to keep Presbyteries,
and the Refusers to be confined within the bounds of their Parishes; and that
they be enjoined not to admit any of their neighbor Parishes unto their
Communions, nor Baptize their Children, nor marry any of them, without the
allowance of the Minister of the Parish; and if they Countenance the People
deserting their own Parishes, they are to be silenced for shorter and longer
time, or altogether turned out, as the Council shall see cause^ And upon
complaint made and verified, of any Seditious Discourse, or Expressions in the
Pulpit, uttered by any of the Ministers, they are immediately to be turned out,
and further punished according to Law: And seeing by these Orders, all
pretenses for Conventicles were taken away; if any should be found hereafter to
preach without Authority, or keep Conventicles, His Pleasure is, to proceed
with all severity against them, as Seditious Persons, and Contemners of
Auhtority.

To salve this in point of Law, and to make the Kings Letter the Supreme Law
afterward, and a valid ground in Law, whereupon the Council might proceed, and
enact, and execute what the King pleased in matters Ecclesiastic; He therefore
caused frame a formal Statutory Act of Supremacy of this Tenor, That his
Majesty has the Supreme Authority and Supremacy over all Persons and in all
Causes Ecclesiastic, within his Dominions; and that by virtue thereof, the
ordering and disposal of the External Government of the Church did properly
belong to him and his Successors, as an inherent right to the Crown; and that
he may Settle, Enact, and Emit such Constitutions, Acts and Orders, concerning
the Administrating thereof, and Persons employed in the same, and concerning
all Ecclesiastical Meetings and Matters, to be proposed and determined therein,
as He in His Royal Wisdom shall think fit; which Acts, Orders, and
Constitutions, are to be observed and obeyed by all His Majesty's Subjects, any
Law, Act, or Custom to the Contrary notwithstanding. Whereupon, accordingly the
Council, in their Act July 27. 1669, do nominate several Ministers, and appoint
them to Preach, and exercise the other Functions of the Ministry, at their
respective Churches there specified, with consent of the Patrons. The same day
also, they Conclude and Enact the forementioned Restrictions, conform to the
King's Letter, and ordain them to be intimate to every person, who is by
Authority foresaid allowed the exercise of the Ministry. These indulged
Ministers having that Indulgence given only upon these terms, that they should
accept these Injunctions, and having received it up these terms also (as ane
Essential part of the Bargain and Condition, on which the Indulgence was
granted and accepted, as many following Proclamations did expressly declare) do
appoint Mr. Hutcheson one of the number, to declare so much; In acknowledging
His Majesty's Favor and Cleme^cy, in granting that Liberty, after so long a
restraint; and howev^^ they had received their Ministry from Jesus Christ, with
full Pre^^^^ from him for regulating them therein, yet nothing could be more
ref^eshing on Earth to them, th^^ to have free liberty for the exercise of
their M^nistry, under the Protection of Lawful Authority.

In the mean time, tho cruel Acts and Edicts were made against the meeting of
the Lord's People, in Houses and the Fields, after all these Midianitish Wiles
to suppress them; such was the Presence of the Lord in these Meetings, and so
powerful was his Countenance and Concurrence with the Labors of a few, who
laid out themselves to hold up the Standard of Christ, that the number of
Converts multiplied daily, to the great encouragement of the few Hands that
wrestled in that work, through all humane discouragement. Therefore King and
Council was put to a new shift, which they supposed would prove more effectual;
to wit, Because there was a great number of Nonconformed Ministers not yet
Indulged, who either did or might hereafter hold Conventicles, therefore, to
remede or prevent this in time coming, they appoint and ordain them to such
places where Indulged Ministers were settled, there to be confined with
Allowance, to Preach as the Indulged should employ them; thinking by this means
to incapacitate many to hold Meetings there or elsewhere: And to these also
they give Injunctions and Restrictions to regulate them in the exercise of
their Ministry. And to the end that all the outed Ministers might be brought
under restraint, and the Word of God be kept under Bonds, by another Act of
Council they Command, that all other Ministers (not disposed of as is said)
were either to repair to the Parish Church where they were, or to some other
Parishes, where they may be ordinary hearers, and to declare and condescend
upon the Parishes, where they intend to have their Residence. After this they
assumed a Power, to dispose of these their Curates as they pleased, and
transport them from place to place; whereof the only ground was a simple Act of
Council, the Instructions always going along with them, as the constant
companion of the Indulgence: By all which it is apparent, whatever these
Ministers Allege, viz. That it was but the removal of the Civil Restraint, and
that they entered into their places by the Call of the People (a mere
mock-pretence for a prelimited Imposition, whereby that Ordinance of Christ was
basely prostituted and abused) and that their Testimony and Protestation was a
Salvo for their Consciences (a mere Utopian fancy, that the Indulgers with whom
they bargained, never heard of, otherwise, as they did with some who were
faithful in notifying against their Encroachments, they would soon have given
them a Bill of ease.) It cannot be denied, that that doleful Indulgence, both
in its Rise, Contrivance, Conveyance, Grant and Acceptance, End and Effects,
was a grievous Encroachment upon the Princely Prer^gative of Jesus Christ, the
only Head of the Church; whereby the Usurpers Supremacy was Homologated, bowed
to, complied with, strengthened the Cause and Kingdom of Christ betrayed, his
Churches Privileges Surrendered, his Enemies hardened, his Friends stumbled, and
the Remnant rent and ruined. And yet a great part of the Ministers took that
Indulgence; and another part, did, instead of Remonstrating the Wickedness of
that deed, Palliate, and Plaster, and Patronize it, in keeping up the Credit
of the King and Councils Cur^tes.

Yet the Lord had some Witnesses, who pretty early did give significations of
their Resentment of this dishonor done to Christ; as Mr. William W^er, who
having got the Legal Call of the People, and discharging his Duty honestly, was
turned out: And Mr. John Burnet, who wrote a Testimony directed to the Council,
showing why he could not submit to that Indulgence, inserted at large in the
History of Indulgence; where also we have the Testimony of other Ten Ministers,
who drew up their Reasons of Non-complyance with such a Snare: And Mr. Alex.
Blaire, who, upon occasion of Citation before the Council for not observing the
29 th of May, told the Council, That he could receive no Instructions from them
in the Exercise of his Ministry, otherwise he should not be Christ's*
Ambassador, but theirs.

But afterward the Lord raised up some more explicit Witnesses against that
defection. While the King thought he had by that Device utterly suppressed the
Gospel in House and Field-Meetings, he was so far disappointed, that these very
Means and Machins, by which he thought to bury it, did chiefly contribute to
its revival: For, when by Persecution, many Ministers had been chased away by
illegal Law-Sentences, many had been banished away, and by their ensnaring
Indulgences many had been drawn away from their Duty, and others were now
Sentenced with Confinements and Restraints, if they should not choose and fix
their Residence where they could not keep their Christ and Conscience both;
they were forced to wander and disperse through the Country; by whose
Endeavors the Word of God grew exceedingly, and went at least through the
Southern Borders of the Kingdom, like Lightning. O! who can remember the Glory
of that day, without a melting Heart? A day of such Power, that it made the
People willing to come out and venture upon the greatest of hardships, and the
greatest of hazards, in pursuing after the Gospel; even when they could not
have a probable expectation of escaping the Sword of the Wilderness, and the
barbarous fury of bloody Burrio's raging for their Prey, sent out with Orders
to take and kill them, it being now made Criminal by Law, especially to the
Preachers and Convocaters of these Meetings. I will make bold to say, I doubt
if ever there were greater days of the Son of Man upon the Earth since the
Apostolic times, than we enjoyed for the space of Seven Years at that time.

Now when Christ is gaining ground by the Preached Gospel in Plenty, Purity and
Power, the Usurpers Supremacy was like to stagger, and Prelacy came under
contempt. Hence, to secure what he had possessed himself of by Law, and to
prevent a dangerous Paroxism which he thought would ensue upon these
Commotions, the King returned to exert his innate Tyranny, and to emit terrible
Orders, and more terrible Executioners, and bloody Emissaries against all
Field-Meetings; which after long Patience, the People at length could not
endure; but being first chased to the Fields, where they would have been
content to have the Gospel, with all the Inconveniences of it; and also
expelled from the Fields, being resolute to maintain the Gospel, they resolved
to defend it and themselves by Arms: To which, unavoidable necessity in
unsupportable extremity did constrain them, as the only remaining Remedy. It is
known, for several Years they met without any Arms, where frequently they were
disturbed and dispersed with Soldiers; some killed, others wounded, which they
patiently endured withou Resistance: At length, the Ministers that were most in
hazard, having a Price set upon their Heads to be brought in dead or alive,
with some attending them in their wanderings, understanding they were thus
appointed for death, judged it their duty to provide for the necessary defense
of their Lives, from the Violence of their armed Assaulters. And as Meetings
increased, diverse others came under the same hazard, which enforced them to
endeavor the same Remedy, without the least intention of of prejudice to any.
Thus the number of Sufferers increasing, as they joined in the Ordinances at
these persecuted Meetings, found themselves in some probable capacity to defend
themselves, and these much endeared Gospel-Priviledges, and to preserve the
Memory of the Lord's great Work in the Land, which to transmit to Posterity was
their great design. Wherefore in these Circumstances, being redacted to that
strait, either to be deprived of the Gospel, or to defend themselves in their
Meetings for it; and thinking their turning their Backs upon it for hazard, was
a cowardly deserting duty, and palpable breach of Covenant-Engagements,
abandoning their greatest Interest, they thought it expedient, yea, necessary,
to carry defensive Arms with them; it being an indissoluble obligation in their
Covenants, to maintain and defend the true Religion and one another in
promoting the same. And hereunto they were encouraged by the constant
experience of the Lord's countenancing their Endeavors in that posture, which
always proved successful for several Years, their Enemies either turning their
backs without disturbance when they observed them resolve Defense, or in their
Assaultings repulsed; so that there was never a Meeting, which stood to their
Defense, got any considerable harm thereby. Thus the Lord was with us while we
were with him; but when we forsook him, he forsook us, and left us in the hands
of our Enemies. However, while Meetings for Gospel Ordinances did continue, the
Wicked Rulers did not cease from time to time to increase their numerous Bands
of Barbarous Soldiers, for suppressing the Gospel in these Field-meetings.

But all this is nothing to what followed; when, thinking these Bloodhounds
were too favorable, they brought down from the wild Highlands a Host of
Salvages upon the Western Shires, more terrible than Turks, or Tartars; Men who
feared not God, nor regarded Man; to wast and destroy a plentiful Country,
which they resolved before they left it, to make as bare as their own. This
Hellish Crew was adduced to work a Reformation, like the French Conversions, to
press a Bond of Conformity, wherein every one Subscribed, was bound for
himself, and all under him, Wife, Children, Servants, Tenants, to frequent
their Parish Churches, and never to go to these Meetings, nor reset nor
entertain any that went, but to Inform against, Pursue, and Deliver up all
vagrant Preachers, as they called them, to Trial, and Judgment.

Then for the maintenance of the Soldiers, there were imposed new, wicked, and
arbitrary Cesses and Taxations, professedly required for suppressing Religion
and Liberty, banishing the Gospel out of the Land, and preserving and promoting
the King's Absoluteness over all Matters and Persons Sacred and Civil; which,
under that tentation of great Sufferings threatened to Refusers, and under the
disadvantage of the silence and unfaithfulness of many Ministers, who either
did not condemn it, or pleaded for the peaceable payment of it; many did comply
with it then, and far more since.

Yet at that time there were far more Recusants in some places (especially in
the Western shires) than Complyers: And there were many of the Ministers that
did faithfully declare to the People the Sin of it; not only from the
illegality of its Imposition, by a Convention of overawed and prelimited
States; but from the nature of that imposed Compliance, that it was a sinful
Transaction with Christ's declared Enemies; a strengthening the hands of the
wicked, an obedience to a wicked Law, a consenting to Christ's expulsion out of
the Land; and not only that, but (far worse than the Sin of the Gadarens) a
formal Concurrence to assist his Expellers, by maintaining their force, a
hiring our Oppressors to destroy Religion and Liberty; and from the declared
end of it, expressed in the very Narrative of the Act, viz. To Levy and
Maintain Forces for suppressing and dispersing Meetings of the Lord's People,
and to show unanimous affections for maintaining the King's Supremacy, as now
Established by Law*

Yet all this time Ministers and Professors were unite, and with one Soul and
Shoulder followed the work of the Lord, 'till the Indulged being dissatisfied
with the Meetings in the Fields, whose Glory was like to over-cloud and obscure
their Beds of ease; and especially, being offended at the freedom and
faithfulness of some, who set the Trumpet to their Mouth, and showed Jacob his
Sins, and Israel his Transgressions, impartially, without Cloak, or Cover, they
began to make a Faction among the Ministers, and to devise how to quench the
fervor of their Zeal, who were faithful for God. But the more they sought to
extinguish it, the more it brake out, and blazed into a flame. For several of
Christ's Ambassadors, touched and affected with the affronts done to their
Princely Master by the Supremacy, and the Indulgence of its Bastard-Brood and
Brat, began after long silence to discover its iniquity, and to acquaint the
People how the Usurper had invaded the Mediator's Chair, in taking upon him to
Depose, Suspend, Silence, Plant, and Transplant his Ministers, where, and when,
and how he pleased, etc.

Yet others, and the greater number of Dissenting Ministers, were not only
deficient herein, but defended them, joined with them, and (pretending
Prudence, and prevention of Schism) in effect homologated that deed, and the
Practice of these Priests, Ezekiel 22. 26. teaching and advising the People to
hear them, both by Precept, and going along with them in their Erastian Course:
And not only so, but Condemned and Censured such who Preached against the
sinfulness thereof; especially in the first place, worthy Mr. Walwood, who was
among the first Witnesses against that Defection, and Mr. Kid, Mr. King, Mr.
Cameron, Mr. Donald Cargil, etc. who Sealed their Testimony afterward by their
blood; yet then, even by their Brethren, were laden with the reproachful
Nicknames of Schismatics, Blind Zealots, Jesuits, etc. But it was always
observed, as long as Ministers were faithful in following the Lord in the way
of their Duty, Professors were fervent, and under all their Conflicts with
Persecutors, the Courage and Zeal of the Lovers of Christ was blazing, and
never outbraved by all the Enemies boastings, to undertake brisk Exploits,
which from time to time they were now and then essaying, 'till defection
destroyed, and division diverted their Zeal against the Enemies of God, who
before were always the Object against which they whetted the edge of their jus^
indignation. Especially the Arch-Prelate Sharp was judged intolerable by
ingenuous Spirits. Therefore in July, 1668. Mr James Mitchel thought it his
duty to save himself, deliver his Brethren, and attempted to cut him off; which
failing, he then escaped, but afterward was Apprehended, Tortured, Condemned,
and Executed. But Justice would not suffer the Arch-Prelate to escape
Remarkable Punishment; the severity whereof did sufficiently compensate sat
its delay, after Ten Years respite. For upon the 3 d of May, 167). several
worthy Gentlemen, with some other Men of Courage and Zeal for the Cause of God,
executed Righteous Judgment upon him in Magus Moore, near St. Andrews. And that
same Month, on the Anniversary Day, May 29th. the Testimony at Rutherglen was
Published against that Abomination, Celebrating an Anniversary-Day, kept every
year for giving thanks for the setting up an Usurped Power, destroying the
interest of Christ in the Land, and against all sinful and unlawful Acts,
emitted and executed, published, and prosecuted against our Covenanted
Reformation. Where also they burn^ the Acts of Supremacy, the Declaration, the
Act Recissory, etc. in way of retalition for the burning of the Covenants.

On the Sabbath following, June 1. A Field-Meeting near to Lowden-Hill, was
assaulted by Claverhouse, and with him three Troops of Horse and Dragoons, who
had that Morning taken an honest Minster, and about 14 Countrymen out of their
Beds, and carried them along with them; but they were repulsed at Drumclogg,
and put to flight, the Prisoners relieved, about 30 of the Soldiers killed on
the place, and three of the Meeting, and several wounded on both sides.

Thereafter the People retreating from the pursuit, they judged it most safe in
that extremity for some time not to separate. Which resolution coming abroad to
the Ears of others of their Brethren, determined them incontinently to come to
their assistance, considering their own liableness to the same common danger,
upon the account of their endeavors of that nature to defend themselves, b^ing
of the same judgment for maintaining of the same Cause, to which they were
bound by the same Covenants. This was the Rise and Occasion of that appearance
at Bothwel-Bridge, which the Lord did in his Holy Sovereignty confound, for
former Defections by the means of Division, which broke that little Army among
themselves, before they were broken by the Enemy. They continued together in
amiable and amicable Peace, for the space of 8 or 9 days, while they
endeavored to put out and keep out every wicked thing from amongst them, and
adhered to the Rutherglen Testimony, and that short Declaration at Glascow
confirming it; Representing their present Purposes and Endeavors were only in
vindication and defense of the Reformed Religion, as they stood obliged thereto
by the National and Solemn League and Covenant, and the Solemn Acknowledgment
of Sins, and Engagement to Duties, declaring against Popery, Prelacy,
Erastianism, and all things depending thereupon. Intending hereby to comprehend
the Defection of the Indulgence, to witness against which all unanimously
agreed: Until the Army increasing, the Defenders and Daubers of that Defection,
some Ministers and others came in, who broke all. The occasion of the Breach,
was first, when an Overture was offered, to set times apart for Humiliation for
the Public Sins of the Land; and accordingly the complying with abjured
Erastianism, by the acceptance of the ensnaring Indulgence, was condescended
upon among the rest of the grounds of Fasting and Humiliation: The Sticklers
for the Indulgence refused the Overture, upon Politic Considerations, for fear
of offending the Indulged Ministers and Gentlemen, and provoking them to
withdraw their Assistance. And next; whereas the Cause was stated before,
according to the Covenants, in the Rutherglen Testimony, and Glascow
Declaration, wherein the King's Interest was waved; These Dividers drew up
another large Paper (called the Hamiltown Declaration) wherein they assert the
Kings Interest, according to the Third Article of the Solemn League and
Covenant. Against which, the best affected contended, and protested they could
not in Conscience put in his interest into the state of the quarrel, being now
in stated opposition to Christ's Interests, and inconsistent with the meaning
of the Covenant, and the Practices of the Covenanters, and their own
Testimonies; while now he could not be declared for, as being in the defense of
Religion and Liberty, when he had so palpably overturned and ruined the work of
Reformation, and oppressed such as adhered thereunto, and had burnt the
Covenant, etc. Whereby he had loosed the People from all obligation to him from
it. Yet that contrary Faction prevailed, so far as to get it published in the
name of all, whereby the Cause was perverted, and betrayed. And so in the Holy
All-over-ruling Providence of God, that poor handful was signally
discountenanced of God, deprived of all Conduct, divested of all Protection,
and laid open to the Raging Sword, the just punishment of all such tamperings
with the Enemies of God, and espousing their Interest. About 300 were killed in
the Fields, and 1000 and upwards taken Prisoners, stripped, and carried to
Edinburgh, and there sentenced with Banishment, and sent away for America, and
by the way (a few excepted) perished in Shipwreck; and two faithful and painful
Ministers and Witnesses of Christ, Mr. John Kidd, and Mr. John King, received
the Crown of Martyrdom, sealing their Testimony with their Blood, and many
others after them for the same Cause.

After this fearful and fatal stroke at Bothwell, the Universality of the
Children of the Church of Scotland, which before espoused her Testimony, was
partly drawn by Craft, and partly by Cruelty, from a Conjunction with their
Brethren in prosecuting the same, either into an open defection to the contrary
side, or into a detestable indifferency and neutrality in the Cause of God. For
first of all, the Duke of Monmouth procured the emission of a pretended
Indemnity, attended with a Bond of Peace for its Companion; wherein that
Insurrection was acknowledged to be Rebellion, and ane Obligation never to rise
in Arms against the King, or any Commissionate by him, and to live peaceably,
etc. Which were dreadful Snars fairded over with curious words and cozening
names of living peaceably, etc. This course of defection carried away many at
that time: And from that time, since the taking that Bond of peaceable living,
there has been an Universal preferring of Peace to Truth, and Ease to Duty.
And the Generality have been left to swallow all Oaths and Bonds imposed since;
many Ministers refusing to give their advice when required and requested
thereunto, and some not being ashamed to persuade the People to take them.

But then they not only raised more Forces to exhaust the strength and
substance of the already wasted Country, and laid on and continued from one
Term to another that wicked Exaction and cruel Oppression of the Cess, for the
same declared ends of suppressing and banishing what remained of the Gospel,
and imposed Localites for maintaining the Soldiers employed in those Designs;
for refusing which many Families were Pillaged, Plundered, and quite
Impoverished, besides the beating and abusing them: But also they went on
unweariedly with pressing the Bonds of Peace, and dragging them like Dogs to
the Prisons that would not subscribe them, and for taking up in their Porteous
Rolls the Names of all that were suspected to have been at Bothwell
Insurrection; which they gathered by the Informations of Sycophants, and
reputed them Convict, if being summoned they did not appear, and forced others
to Swear Super Inquirendis, and delate upon Oath whom they did either see or
heard that they were in Arms, or went to Meetings; and such as refused suffered
Bonds of Banishment. Yea, having made it Criminal to reset, harbor, correspond
or converse with those whom they declared Rebels, they thereupon imprisoned,
fined, and ruined vast numbers, for having seen or spoken with some of them, or
because they did not discover or apprehend them when they fancied they might,
for which many Gentlemen and others were Indicted and imprisoned, and some
Arraigned and Condemned to Death. For these Causes, the Country was Harrassed
and destroyed by four extraordinary Circuit Courts, successively going about
with their numerous Train, whereby many were grievously oppressed, and with
their Oppressions tempted with many Impositions of Conscience-debauching Oaths,
and Bonds to compear when called, and to keep the Church, and to refrain from
going to Meetings, etc. and by these tentations involved in Complyances and
Defections. And not only were they Condemned to Death, for being actually in
Arms, or any overt Act of Transgressing their wicked Laws, but even for their
extorted Opinion of things, or because they would not Condemn these
necessitated risings in Arms to be Rebellion and a Sin against God, which they
were forced to declare by terrible menacings of Death; making their Arbitrary
Laws to reach the Heart, Thoughts, and inward Sentiments of the Mind, as well
as outward Actions. Whereupon this became a Criminal Question robbing many of
their Lives, Was the rising at Bothwell-bridge Rebellion and a Sin against God?
And this, Was the killing of the Bishop of St Andrews horrid Murder? Which if
any answered negatively, or did not answer affirmatively, they were cruelly
Condemned to Death.

The Ministry then also were generally ensnared with that Bonded Indulgence,
the pretended benefit of that forementioned Indemnity. For, when a Proclamation
was emitted, inveighing bitterly against Field-Meetings, and absolutely
introducing all such for the future under highest pain, but granting Liberty to
Preach in Houses upon the Terms of a Cautionany Bond given for their living
peaceably: Yet excluding all these Ministers who were suspected to have been at
the late Rebellion, and all those who shall afterward be admitted by
Non-Conform Ministers: And certifying, that if ever they shall be at any
Field-Conventicle, the said Indemnity shall not be useful to such
Transgressors any manner of way: And requiring security that none under the
color of this favor continue to Preach Rebellion. Though there seems to be
enough in the Proclamation it self to have scared them from this scandalous
snare; Yet a Meeting of Ministers at Edinburgh made up of Indulged, avowed
Applauders of the Indulgence, or underhand Approvers and favorers of the same,
and some of them old Public Resolutioners, assuming to themselves the name of
a General Assembly, voted for the acceptance of it. And so formerly transacted
and bargained upon base, dishonest and dishonorable Terms with the Usurper, by
consenting and compacting with the People to give that Bond, wherein the People
upon an humble Petition to the Counsel, obtaining their Indulged Minister, do
bind and oblige that he shall live peaceably. And in order thereto to present
him before his Majesty's Privy Council, when they shall be called so to do; And
in case of failure in not presenting him, to be liable to the Sum of 6000
Merks. Whereby they Condemned themselves of former unpeaceableness.

Many embraced this new Bastard Indulgence that had not the benefit of the
former Brat, of the same Mother the Supremacy, and far more consented to it
without a Witness, and most of all did some way homolegate it, in Preaching
under the Sconce of it: Declining the many reiterated and urgent Calls of the
zealous Lovers of Christ, to come out and maintain the Testimony of the Gospel
in the open Fields, for the honor of their Master and the freedom of their
Ministry.

Whereupon, as many poor People were tumbled and jumbled into many confusions,
so that they were so bewildered and bemisted in doubts and debates, that they
knew not what to do, and were tempted to question the Cause formerly so
fervently contended for against all opposition, than so simply abandoned, by
those that seemed sometimes valiant for it, when they saw them consulting more
their onw ease than the Concerns of their Masters Glory, or the necessity of
the poor People Hungering for the Gospel; so the more zealous and faithful,
after several Addresses, Calls and Invitations to Ministers, finding themselves
deserted by them, judged themselves under a necessity to discountenance many of
them, whom formerly they followed with pleasure; and to resolve upon a persuit
and prosecution of Duty of the Day without them, and to provide themselves with
faithful Ministers, who would not shun for all hazards, to declare the whole
Counsel of God. And accordingly, the Lord sent them first Mr. Richard Cameron,
with whom after serious solicitation his Brethren denied their Concurrence, and
then Mr. Donald Cargill, who, with a zeal and boldness becoming Christ's
Ambassadors, maintained and prosecuted the Testimony, against all the
Indignities done to their Master and wrongs to the Cause, both by the
encroachments of Adversaries, and Defections of their declining Brethren. And
now the Lords Inheritance was again revived.

But as Christ was then displaying his Beauty to his poor despised and
persecuted People; the Duke of York came to Scotland, who did receive him in
great Pomp and Pride. Against which, the forementioned faithful Witnesses of
Christ did find themselves obliged to testify their just resentment, and to
protest against his succeeding to the Crown, in their Declaration published at
Sanquhair, June 22. 1680. Wherein also they disown Charles Stuart, as having
any Right, Title, or Interest in the Crown of Scotland or Government thereof,
because of his breath of Covenant, and Usurpation on Christ's Prerogatives, etc.
And declare a War with him, and all the Men of these Practices, homologating
the Testimony at Rutherglen, and disclaiming that Declaration at Hamiltown.
This Action was generally Condemned by the Body of lurking Ministers; both for
the matter of it, and the unseasonableness of it, and its apparent
unfeasiblness, being done by a handful so inconsiderable, for number, strength,
or significancy. But though it is not the prudence of the management, but the
justness of the Action, that I would have vindicated from Obloquies; yet it
wanted nothing but success to justify both, in the Conviction of many that
made much outcry against it.

In these dangerous Circumstances their difficulties and discouragements daily
increased, by their Enemies vigilance, their enviers Treachery, and their own
inadvertency, some of their number falling into the hands of them that sought
their lives. For two of the most eminent and faithful Witnesses of Christ, Mr.
Donald Cargill, and Henry Hall, were surprised at Queens Ferrie. Mr. Cargill
escaped at that time, but the other endeavoring to resist the Enemies, was
Murdered by them. And with him they got a draught of a Covenant, declaring
their present purposes and future Resolutions. The Tenor whereof was an
Engagement, To free the Church of God of the Corruption of Prelacy on the one
hand, and the Thraldom of Erastianism on the other: To persevere in the Doctrine
of the Reformed Churches, especially that of Scotland, and in the Presbyterian
Government, exercised in Sessions, Presbyteries, Synods and General Assemblies,
as a distinct Government from the Civil, and distinctly to be exercised, not
after a Carnal manner, by plurality of Votes, or Authority of a single Person,
but according to the word of God making and carrying the sentence: To execute
Righteous Judgment impartially, according to the Word, and degree of Offense,
upon the Committers of these things, especially, to wit, Blasphemy, etc.
Oppression and Malignancy, etc. To reject the present Rulers; as the only
speedy way of relaxation from the Wrath of God lying on the Land: Therefore
easily solving the Objectious (1.) of our Ancestors obliging the Nation to this
Race and Line; that they did not buy their Liberty with our Thraldom, nor could
they bind their Children to any thing so much to their prejudice: They could
only bind to that Government which they esteemed the best for common good,
which reason ceasing, we are free to choose another, if we find it more
conducible for that end. (2) Of the Covenant binding to defend the King: That
that Obligation is only in his maintenance of the true Covenanted Religion;
which Homage they cannot now require upon the account of the Covenant, which
they have renounced and disclaimed; and upon no other ground we are bound to
them, the Crown not being an Inheritance, that passes from Father to Son,
without the consent of Tenants. (3) Of the hope of returning from these
Courses: That suppose they should dissemble a repentance, yet the Land cannot
be cleansed from their Guiltness, but by executing Gods Righteous Judgments
upon them. Upon these accounts they reject that King, and those associate with
him in the Government, and declare them henceforth no lawful Rulers, as they
had declared them to be no lawful Subjects, they having destroyed the
established Religion, taken away Christ's Church Government, etc. And declare
they shall, God giving power, set up Government and Governors according to the
word of God, and the qualifications required, Exodus 18. v. 20. And shall not
commit the Government to any single Person, or lineal succession. And moreover,
that these Men set over them shall be engaged to govern Principally, by that
Civil and judicial Law (not that which is any way typical) given by God to his
People of Israel, especially in matters of Life and Death, and other things, so
far as they reach, and are consistent with Christian Liberty, exempting Divorce
and Poligamy. And seeing that the greatest part of Ministers, not only were
defective in Preaching against the Acts of the Rulers for overthrowing
Religion, etc. they declare they neither can nor will hear them. They are for a
standing Gospel Ministry, rightly chosen and rightly ordained, and that no^
shall take upon them the Preaching of the Word, etc. unless called and ordained
thereunto. And whereas separation might be imputed to them, they refell both
the Malice, and the Ignorance of the Calumny: For if there be a Separation, it
must be where the change is; and that was not to be found in them, who were not
separating from the Communion of the true Church, not setting up a new
Ministry, but cleaving to the same Ministers and Ordinances, that formerly they
followed, when others have fled to new ways, and a new Authority, which is like
the new piece in the Old Garment. And that they shall defend themselves in
their Civil, Natural and Divine Rights and Liberties; And if any assault them,
they shall took on it as a declaring a War, and take all advantages that one
Enemy does of another, but trouble and injure none but those that injure them.
This is the Compend of that Paper which the Enemies seized and published, while
it was only in a rude Draught, and not polished, digested, nor consulted by the
rest of the Community.

That poor Party continued together in a posture of defense, without the
Concurrence or countenance of their Covenanted Brethren, until the 22 th of
July, 1680. Upon the which day they were attacqued at Airsemoss, by a strong
party of about 120 Horse well armed, while they were but 23 Horse and 40 foot
at most: And so fighting valiantly, were at length routed. Several of Sions
precious Mourners, and faithful Witnesses of Christ, were killed; and among the
rest, that faithful Minister of Christ, Mr. Richard Cameron sealed and
fulfilled his Testimony with his Blood. And with others, the valiant and much
Honored Gentleman, David Hackston of Rathillet, was after many received Wounds
apprehended, brought in to Edinburgh, and there, resolutely adhering to the
Testimony, and disowning the Authority of King and Council, and all their
Tyrannical Judicatories, head and tail, and for being accessory to executing
judgment upon the Archbishop of St. Andrews, was tortured alive, with the
cutting off of his hands, and then Hanged, and before he was Dead, Ripped up
his Heart, taken our, carried about upon the point of a Knife, and thrown into
a F^re, and afterward his Body Quartered.

Then, not only such as were with that little handful at Airsemoss were Cruelly
Murdered, but others against whom they could charge no matter of Fact, were
questioned if they owned the Kings Authority; which if any did not answer
affirmatively and positively, he was to look for nothing but exquisite Torments
and Death. And if any declared their judgment, that they could not in
Conscience own such Authority as was then exercised; or if they declined to
give their thoughts of it, as judging thoughts to be under no humane
Jurisdiction; or if they answered with such innocent Specifications as these,
that they owned all Authority in the Lord, or for the Lord, or according to the
word of God, or all just and lawful Authority, these underwent and suffered the
Capital Punishment of Treason. And yet both declining and declaring their
extorted Answers about this, they were Condemned as unsufferable. Maintainers
of Principles inconsistent with Government.

But chiefly they labored to Murder the Soul, defile the Conscience, and only
consult to cast a Man down from his excellency, which is his integrity; either
by Hectoring or Flattering from the Testimony: which they endeavored by
proposing many offers, with many threatenings in subtle Terms; And pretending a
great deal of tenderness, protesting they would be as tender of their Blood as
of their own Soul, and purging themselves as Pilate did, and charging it upon
their own Head. They would be very easy in their Accomodations, where they
found the poor Man beginning to faint, and hearken to their overtures, wherein
they would grant him his life, yiedling to him, as cunning Anglers do with
Fishes: And to persuade him to some length in complying, they would offer
Conference sometimes, or reasoning upon the Point, to satisfy and inform his
Conscience, as they pretended, but really to catch him with their busked Hook.
If they had any hope of prevailing, they would change a Man's Prison, and take
him out from among the more strict and fervent in the Cause, that might sharpen
and strengthen his Zeal, and put him among the more cool and remiss. Sometimes
they would stage several together, whereof they knew some would Comply, to
tantalize the rest with the sight of the others Liberty, and make them bite the
more eagerly at their Bait, to catch the Conscience.

But when they had done all they could, Christ had many Witnesses, who did
retain the Crown of their Testimony in the smallest points, till they obtained
the Crown of Martyrdom. But here, as in Egypt, the more they were afflicted,
the more they grew: So that many were reclaimed from their Courses of
Compliance, and others were daily more and more confirmed in the ways of the
Lord, and so strengthened that they chose rather to endure all Torture, and
embrace Death in its most terrible aspect, than to give the Tyrant and his
Accomplices any acknowledgment: Yea, not so much as to say, God save the King,
which was offered at the price of their Life; but they would not accept
Deliverance on these Terms.

Now remained Mr. Donald Cargil, deprived of his faithful Colleague, destitute
of his Brethrens Concurrence; who prosecuted the Testimony against the
Universal Apostasy of the Church and Nation, Tyranny of Enemies, Backsliding
of Friends, and all the wrongs done to his Master on all hands: And
considering, in the Zeal of God, and Sense of his holy Jealousy provoked, and
threatening Wrath against the Land, for the Sins, especially of Rulers; that
notwithstanding of all their Testimonies given against them, by public
Preachings, Protestations and Declarations, remonstrating their Tyranny, and
disowning their Authority; yet not only did they persist in their Sins and
Scandals, but were owned also by Professors, not only as Magistrates, but as
Members of the Christian and Protestant Church; and that however both the
Defensive Arms of Men had been used against them, and the Christian Arms of
Prayers, and the Ministerial Weapon of Preaching, yet that of Ecclesiastical
Censure had not been Authoritatively exerted against them: Therefore that no
Weapon which Christ allows his Servants under his Standard to manage against
his Enemies might be wanting, though he could not obtain the Concurrence of his
Brethren to strengthen the Solemnity and Formality of the Action; yet he did
not judge that Defect, in this broken Case of the Church, could disable his
Authority, nor demur the Duty, but that he might and ought to proceed to
Excommunication. And accordingly in Sept. 1680. at the Torwood, he
Excommunicated some of the most scandalous and principal Promoters and Abettors
of this Conspiracy against Christ, as formally as the present Case could admit:
After Sermon upon Ezekiel 21. 25, 26, 27. And thou profane wicked Prince of
Israel, whose Day is come, etc. The Persons Excommunicated, and the Sentence
against them, was given forth as follows. I being a Minister of Jesus Christ,
and having Authority and Power from him, do, in his Name and by his Spirit,
Excommunicate, cast out of the Church, and deliver up to Satan, Charles the
Second, King etc. The Sentence was founded on these Grounds; For (...) great
Perjury in breaking and burning the Covenant; for his rescinding all Laws; for
establishing the Reformation, end enacting Laws contrary thereunto; For
commanding of Arms to destroy the Lords People; For his granting Remissions and
Pardons for Murderers, which is in the power of no King to do, etc. Next by the
same Authority, and in the same Name, he Excommunicated James Duke of York, for
his Idolatry, and setting up in Scotland to defile the Land, and enticing and
encouraging others to do (...) With several other rotten Malignant Enemies.

But about this time, when some in zeal for the Cause were endeavoring to keep
up the Testimony of the day, in an abstraction from Complying Ministers; others
were left to fall into fearful extravagancies and delirious and damnable
Delusions, being overdriven with ignorant and blind Zeal into untroden Paths,
which led them into a Labyrinth of Darkness: When as they were stumbled at many
Ministers their unfaithfulness, so they came to be offended at Mr Cargill his
Faithfulness, who spared neither left hand Declensions, nor-right hand
Extremes, and left him and all the Ministers, not only disowning all Communion
with those that were not of their way, but Execrating and Cursing them; and
kept themselves in desert places from all Company, where they persisted
prodigiously in Fastings, and singing Psalms, pretending to wonderful Raptures
and Enthusiasms: And in fine, John Gib with 4 more of them came to that height
of Blasphemy, that they burnt the Bible and Confession of Faith. These were the
Sweet Singers, as they were called, led away into these Delusions by that
Impostor and Sorcerer, John Gib, of which destructive way the approached
Remnant, adhering to the foresaid Testimony, had always an Abhorrence of.
Wherefore that ignorant and impudent Calumny, of their Consortship with Gibs
Followers, is only the vent of viperous Envy: For they were the first that
discovered them, and reclaimed them, and were always so far from partaking with
them, that to this day these that have come off from that way, and have offered
the Confession of their Scandal, do still complain of their over-rigid
Severity, in not admitting them to their select Fellowships.

Shortly after this, Mr. Donald Cargill finished his Testimony, being
apprehended with other two faithful and zealous Witnesses of Christ, Mr.
William Smith, and Mr. James Beeg, who with two more were altogether at
Edinburgh 27, July 1681. Crowned with the Glory of Martyrdom. Then came the Day
of the Remnants vexation; the Persecution vaxing on the one hand, and a violent
Spirit of defection carrying down the most part of Ministers and Professors
before it, driving them to Courses of sinful and scandalous Conformings with
the Times Corruptions, Compearings before their Courts, Complyings with their
Commands, paying of their Cesses and other Exactions, taking of their Oaths and
Bonds, and countenancing their Prelatical Church-Services, which they were
ashamed to do before: And thereupon on the other hand the Divisions and
Confusions were augmented, and poor People that desired to cleave to the
Testimony, were more and more offended and troubled at the Ministers, who
either left the Land, or lurked in their own retirements.

But the remaining Contenders fell upon the expedient of corresponding in
General Meetings, to consult, inform and confirm one another, about common
Duties in common Dangers; Laying down this General Conclusion for a foundation
of Order to be observed among them in incident doubtful Cases, and emergent
Controversies, that nothing relative to the public, and which concerns the
whole of their Community, be done by any of them, without harmonious consent
sought after, and rationally waited for, and sufficient deliberation about the
best means and manner.

In the mean time, the Duke of York, as Commissioner from his Brother, held a
Parliament, in which he is declared legal and lineal Successor; and a Test is
framed for a Pest to Consciences, which turned out of all Places of Trust any
that had any remaining measure of common Honesty. And to all the Cruel Acts
then and before made against the People of God, there was one superadded,
regulating the Execution of all the rest, whereby at one dash all Civil and
Criminal Justice was overthrown, That the Right of Jurisdiction both in Civil
and Criminal Matters is so inherent in the Crown, that his Majesty may judge
all Causes by himself, or any other he thinks fit to Commissionate. Here was a
Law for Commissionating Soldiers to take away the Lives of Innocents, as was
frequently exemplified afterward.

Against which encroachments on Religion and Liberty, the faithful thought
themselves obliged to emit a Testimony. And therefore published a Declaration
at Lanerk, Ian. 12. 1682. Confirming the proceeding at Sanquhair, and adding
reasons of their Revolt from the Government of Charles the Second: For his
arrogantly arrogated Supremacy in all Causes Civil and Ecclesiastic, and
oppressing the Godly for Conscience and Duty; for installing a Successor, such
an one (if not worse) as himself, and framing the Test; etc. And in end offer
to prove, they have only endeavored in this to extricate themselves from under
a Tyrannous Yoke, and to reduce Church and State to what they were in the Years
1648 and 1649.

After which Declaration they were more Condemned by them that were at ease,
than ever. For which Cause, in the next General Meeting, they resolved to
delegate some of their number to Foreign Churches, on purpose to vindicate
themselves from these Calumnies; And withal to provide for a Succession of
Witnesses. Therefore by that means having obtained access for the instruction
of some young Men, at an University in the united Provinces, in process of
time, Mr. James Renwick, received Ordination there, and came home to take up
the Standard of his Master, upon the ground where it was left. Which
undertaking, notwithstanding all the Rage of Enemies, and all the Scourge of
Tongues of incensed Professors, he Prosecuted by many weary wanderings, Night
and Day, Preaching, Conferring and Catechizing, until, not only was the
faithful Witnessing Remnant that joined in the Testimony, further cleared,
confirmed and encouraged, and their number much increased by the coming in and
joining of many others to the Fellowship of their settled Societies; but also
many others, in other places of the Country were induced to the contracting
themselves in the like, to the settling such Fellowships in most of the Southern
Shires.

But then the fury of Persecutors began to flame more flagrantly than ever; not
only in sending out Cruel Soldiers, Foot, Horse and Dragoons, to pursue after
them, in the wildest and remotest recesses in the Wilderness; but emitting
Edicts allowing them to kill, slay, hang, drown, and destroy such as they could
apprehend of them pro libitu; and commanding the Country to assist them, etc.
For which Cause, to preserve themselves from, and put a stop to that deluge of
Blood, and demur and deter the Insolency of Intelligencers and Informers, they
were necessitate to publish the Apologetick Declaration, and affix it upon
several Mercat-Crosses, and Parish Church Doors, Nov. 8. 1684. Wherein they
declare their firm Resolution of constant adherence to their Covenants and
Engagements, and to the Declarations disowning the Authority of Charles
Stewart, and to testify to the World, that they purpose not to injure or
offend any whomsoever, but to pursue the ends of their Covenants, in standing
to the defense of the Work of Reformation, and of their own Lives; yet if any
shall stretch forth their hand against them, by shedding their Blood actually,
either by Authoritative commanding, or obeying such Commands, to search for
them and deliver them up to the spilling of their Blood, to inform against
them, to raise the Hue and Cry after them, and delate them before their Courts:
All these shall be reputed by them Enemies to God and the Covenanted
Reformation, and punished as such, according to their Power, and the degree of
their offense, if they shall continue so maliciously to proceed against them:
And declare, they abhor and condemn any personal attempts, upon any pretext
whatsoever, without previous Deliberation, common or competent consent, without
certain probation by sufficient Witnesses, the guilty Persons Confession, or
the notoriousness of the deeds themselves: And in the end warn the bloody Doegs
and flattering Ziphites informing against them, to be expect to be dealt with
as they deal with them.

This Declaration occasioned greater Trials to them and trouble to the Country,
by the pressing an Oath abjuring the same universaly up on all, as well Women
as Men, and suffering none to Travel without a Pass, declaring they had taken
that Oath; and giving power to all Hostlers and Innkeepers to impose Oaths
upon all Passengers, Travelers, Gentlemen or Countrymen, who were to Swear
that their Passes were not forged. And Prisoners that would not take the Oath,
were according to the foresaid Act, Condemned, and Executed. And after that,
they gave Orders and Commands to the Soldiers to pursue the Chase after these
Wanderers more violently, and shoot, or otherwise put them to Death wherever
they could apprehend them. Hence followed such a slaughter and seizure of them,
that common People usually date their common Occurrences since, from that
beginning of killing time, as they call it. Yet that Declaration was so far
effectual, as to scare many from their former diligence in informing against
them, and to draw out some to join with the Wanderers more publicly, even when
the danger was greatest of owning any respect to them.

In the beginning of this killing time, the first Author and Authorizer of all
these Mischiefs, Charles II. was removed by Death. And the Duke of York
succeeding, immediately upon his mounting the Throne, the Executions and Acts
prosecuting the Prosecution of the poor Wanderers, were more Cruel than ever.
Now the Earl of Argyle having been Arraig^ed and Condemned for his Explanation
of the Test, but escaped out of the Castle of Edinburgh; and after him several
Gentlemen being arbitrarily oppressed and troubled, upon the Act of
Intercommuning with Rebels, and for a pretended Plot against the Government (as
they called it;) and many other Gentlemen having lost either their Lives or
Fortunes, many did resort to the United Provinces. From whence, as soon as they
had provided themselves with Arms, after the ascending of James Duke of York,
they returned to Scotland, under the conduct of the Earl of Argyle, their
chosen Captain. And Argyle's Party perceiving that their Enemies were above ten
times their number, dispersed, every Man shifting for himself. The Enemies
searching the Country, gleaned up the Earl of Argyle himself, Col. Rumbold, an
English Man, Mr. Thomas Archer Minister, Gawin Russel, and David Law, who were
all Condemned and Executed at Edinburgh; and many others who were Banished to
America: And about some 20 in the Highlands, who were Hanged at Ineravie.

In the mean time, the Wanderers, though they did not associate with this
Expedition, upon the account of the too promiscuous admittance of Persons to
trust in that party, who were then, and since have discovered themselves to be
Enemies to the Cause, and because they could not espouse their Declaration as
the State of their Quarrel, being not concerted according to the constant plea
of the Scots Covenanters: Yet against this Usurpation of a Papist, they
published another Declaration at Sanquhair, May 28. 1685. Wherein, approving
and adhering unto all their former Declarations, and considering that James
Duke of York, a professed and Excommunicate Papist, was proclaimed; to testify
their Resentment of that deed, and to make it appear unto the World, that they
were free thereof, by Concurrence or Connivance; they protest against the
foresaid Proclamation of James Duke of York as King: In regard that is contrary
to the Declaration of the General Assembly, July 27, 1649. And they protest
against the Validity and Constitution of that Parliament, approving and
ratifying the foresaid Proclamation, etc. This was their Testimony against
Popery in the Season thereof? Which though it was not so much Condemned as any
former Declarations, yet neither in this had they the Concurrence of any
Ministers or Professors; who as they had been silent, and omitted a seasonable
Testimony against Prelacy and the Supremacy, when these were introduced, so now
also they were left to let slip this opportunity of a Testimony against Popery,
to the reproach of the declining and far degenerate Church of Scotland. Yea to
their shame, the very Rabble of ignorant People may be brought as a Witness
against the Body of Presbyterian Ministers in Scotland, in that they testified
their detestation of the first Erection of the Idolatrous Mass, and some of the
Soldiery, and such as had no Profession of Religion, suffered unto Death for
speaking against Popery, and the designs of the King, while the Ministers were
silent. And some of the Curats, and Members of the late Parliament, 1686. made
some stickling against the taking away of the Penal Statutes against Papists;
while Presbyterians, from whom might have been expected greater opposition,
were sleeping in a profound Submission. I cannot without confusion of Spirit
touch these obvious and dolorous Reflections, and yet in Candor cannot forbear
them.

However the Persecution against the Wanderers went on; there were more
Butchered and Slaughtered in the Fields, than in all the former Tyrants Reign;
there have been more Banished to Foreign Plantations in this Man's time, than
in the others; and there have been more cruel Acts of Parliament enacted in
this Tyrants time, than the former made all his Reign. For not only was there
an Act making it Treason to refuse the Oath of Abjuration, confirming all their
procedure hereupon before; but an Act making it Criminal to own the Covenant,
and another Act making it Criminal for any to be present at a Field-Meeting,
which was only so to Preachers before. But a relenting abatement of severity
was pretended against other Dissenters.

At length what could not be obtained by Law at the late Parliament for taking
off the Statutes against Papists, was effectuated by Prerogative, in a
Proclamation dated Feb. 12, 1687. But this was so gross, and grievously griping
in its restrictions, as to Persons, as to the place, as to the matter allowed
the Presbyterians in Preaching, that it was disdained of all; and therefore he
behoved to busk it better, and mend the matter, in a Letter to the Council,
bearing date March 31. 1687. Of this Tenor, Whereas we did recommend to you to
take care, that any of the Presbyterians should not be allowed to Preach, but
such only as should have your allowance for the same, and that they at the
receiving the Indulgence should take the Oath contained in the Proclamation;
these are therefore to let you know, that thereby we meant such of them as did
not solemnly take the Test. But if nevertheless the Presbyterian Preachers do
scruple to take the said Oath, or any other Oath what soever, and that you
shall find it reasonable or fit to grant them or any of them our said
Indulgence, so as they desire it upon these terms; It is now our Will and
Pleasure to grant them the said Indulgence (during our Pleasure only) or so
long as you shall find they behave themselves regularly and peaceably, without
giving any cause of offense to us, or any in Authority or Trust under us in our
Government. But at length to take of all difformity and disparity of the
Proclamation for the Toleration in Scotland, and the Declaration for Liberty of
Conscience in England; he added a third eke to the Liberty, in another
Proclamation dated June 28, 1687. And this is the Royal Charter for ^^curity of
the Protestant Religion in lieu of all the Laws, Constitutions, and Oaths
wherewith it was formerly confirmed. This is the only Patent which the Royal
Dalilees, the Moderate Presbyterians have now received to ensure their
enjoyment of it durante beneplacito.

But as for the poor Wanderers, while others are rejoicing under the
Bramble-shadow of it, they think it a cause of weeping and matter of mourning,
not because they do not share of the benefit of it, but because they are afraid
to share of the Curse of it. For which Cause, they do look upon it as a
seasonable Testimony for the Cause of Christ, and the Interest of the
Protestant Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of the Country, all overturned
and subverted by this Toleration, to keep their Meetings as in former times;
thinking it sinful, scandalous and inconvenient to seem to homologate this
Toleration, the wickedness whereof they are convinced of, from these Reasons
(besides those for which they rejected the former Indulgencies, Indemnities and
Tolerations, and those which regard the Granter, as to his Principles and
Religion.

For considering the Fountain whence it flows, they cannot defile themselves
with it, it being refounded on Absolute Power, proclaiming by sound of Trumpet
a Power Paramount to all Law; a Power to tolerate or restrain the Protestant
Religion, according to his Royal Will or Pleasure. Now the acceptance of this
Grant, would imply the recognizance of this power that the Granter claims in
Granting it: Which utterly dissolves all Government, and all security for
Religion and Liberty.)

Considering also the Channel in which it is conveyed, they cannot comply with
it. Because it comes through such a Conveyance as Casses, annulls, stops,
suspends and disables all Penal Laws against Papists, and thereby eve^ts all
the Securities and legal Bulwarks that Protestants can have for the
establishment of their Religion; yea, in effect leaves no Laws in force against
any that shall attempt the utter subversion of it; but ratifies and leaves in
full rigor all wicked Laws and Acts of Parliament, against such as would most
avowedly assert it. Hence as he has formerly by Absolute Power suspended all
Laws made for the Protection of our Religion, so he may when he will dispense
with all the Laws made for its establishment; and those who approve the one by
such an Acceptance, cannot disallow the other, but must recognosce a Power in
the King to subvert all Laws, Rights and Liberties.

Considering the Ends of its contrivance, they dare not have any accession to
accomplish such wicked Projects, to which this Acceptance would be so natively
subservient. Which Project was discovered in the English Declaration, viz. That
he heartily wishes that all the People of these Dominions were Members of the
Catholic Church.

Considering the Effects already produced thereby, they cannot but abhor it.
Seeing the Papists are thereby encouraged, all places filled with Priests and
Jesuits; yea, the executive Power of the Government put into the hands of the
Romanists: And on the other hand a T^stimony against Antichrist is abandoned
and laid aside as unseasonable, the edge of Zeal for the Interest of Christ is
blunted, they that should stand in the Gap and upon the Watchtower are laid
aside from all opposition to the invasions of the Enemy, and lulled asleep by
this bewitching Charm and intoxicating Opium; Ministers and Professors are
generally settling on their Lees and languishing in a fatal security.

Considering the Extent of it, they cannot class themselves among the number of
them that are Indulged thereby. Whereby the Professors of Christ come in as
Partners in the same Bargain with Antichrists Vassals; and the Lords Ark has a
place with Dagon, and its Priests and Followers consent to it, and the Builders
of Babel and Jerusalem are made to build together, under the same Protection;
and a Sluice is opened to let the Enemy come in like a Flood, which to oppose,
the Accepters cannot stand in a Gap, nor lift up a Standard against them. All
which is contrary to the Confession of Faith Chapter 20.. 4. And therefore to
accept of this Toleration is inconsistent with the Principles of the Church of
Scotland, with the National and Solemn League and Covenant, and Solemn
Acknowledgment of Sins, and Engagement to Duties; in all which we are bound to
extirpate Popery. With the whole Tract of Contendings between the years 1638
and 1660. and particularly by the Testimony of the Synod of Fife, and other
Brethren in the Ministry, against Cromwels vast Toleration and Liberty of
Conscience, above related. For it is plain, if it be not to be suffered, then
it is not to be accepted.

Considering the Terms wherein it is offered, they cannot make such a shameful
bargain. For by it the Matter of Preaching is so restricted and limited, that
nothing must be Preached or Taught, which may any way tend to alienate the
Hearts of the People from him or his Government. Here is a Price at which they
are to purchase their Freedom, which yet hardly can be so exactly paid, but he
may find a pretense for retrenching it when he pleases: For if a Minister shall
Preach against the Kings Religion as Idolatry, and the Church of Rome as
Babylon, etc. This shall be interpreted to be an alienation of the Peoples
Hearts from the King and his Government. But who can be faithful, and Preach in
Season and out of Season now, but he must think it his Duty to endeavor thus
to alienate the Hearts of the People? Sure if any Preach the whole Counsel of
God, he must Preach against Popery. And if he think that this Indulgence,
granted and accepted on these Terms, can supersede him from this Faithfulness,
then he is no more the Servant of Christ, but a pleaser of Men.

Considering the Scandal of it, they dare not so offend the Generation of the
Righteous by the Acceptance, and dishonor God, disgrace the Protestant
Profession, wrong the Interest thereof, and betray their Native-Country, as
thus to comply with the design of Antichrist. And it cannot but be very
stumbling to see the Ministers of Scotland, whose Testimony used to be terrible
to the Popish, and renowned through all the Protestant-Churches, purchasing a
Liberty to themselves at the rate of burying and betraying the Cause into
Bondage and restraint, and thus to be laid by from all active and open
opposition to Antichrists Designs, in such a Season. The World will be tempted
to think, they are not governed by Principles, but their own Interest in this
Juncture, seeking their own things more than the things of Christ; And that it
was not the late Usurpation upon, and overturning of Religion and Liberty that
offended them, so much as the Persecution they sustained thereby; but that if
Arbitrary Power had been exerted in their favors, though with the same prejudice
of the Cause of Christ, they would have complied with it, as they do now. Alas!
Sad and dolorous have been the Scandals given and taken, by and from the
Declining Ministers of Scotland heretofore, but none so stumbling as this.

Lastly, considering the Addresses made thereupon, with such a strain of fulsom
and Blasphemous Flatteries, to the dishonor of God, the reproach of the Cause,
the betraying of the Church, and detriment o^ the Nation, and exposing
themselves to the Contempt of all, the poor Persecuted Party dare not so much
as seem to incorporate with them* I shall set down the first of their
Addresses, and let the Reader judge whether there be not Cause of standing also
off from every appearance of being of their number. It is Dated at Edinburgh,
July 21, 1687. Of this Tenor.

To the King's most Excellent Majesty,
The Humble Address of the Presyterian Ministers of his Majesty's Kingdom of
Scotland.
WE Your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects, the Ministers of the Presbyterian
Persuasion in your Ancient Kingdom of Scotland, from the due Sense we have of
Your Majesty's Gracious and surprising favor, in not only putting a stop to
our long sad Sufferings for Nonconformity, but granting the Liberty of the
Public and Peaceable Exercise of our Ministerial Function without any hazard:
As we bless the Great God, who has put this in your Royal Heart, we do withal
find our selves bound in Duty to offer our most Humble and Hearty thanks to
Your Sacred Majesty, the Favor bestowed being to us, and all the People of our
Persuasion, valuable above all our Earthly comfort; especially since we have
ground from Your Majesty to believe that our Loyalty is not to be questioned
upon the account of our being Presbyterians, who as we have amidst all former
tentations endeavored, so we are firmly resolved still to preserve an entire
Loyalty in our Doctrine and Practice (consonant to our known Principles, which
according to the Holy Scriptures are contained in the Confession of Faith,
generally owned by Presbyterians in all Your Majesty's Dominions) and by the
help of God so to demean our selves, as Your Majesty may find Cause rather to
enlarge than diminish your Favors toward us; thoroughly persuading our selves
from Your Majesty's Justice and Goodness, that if we shall at any time be
otherwise represented, Your Majesty will not give credit to such Information,
until you have due cognition thereof: And Humbly beseeching, that those who
promote any Disloyal Principles and Practices (as we disown them) may be looked
upon as none of ours, whatsoever name they assume to themselves. May it please
Your most Excellent Majesty Gracio^sly to accept of this ou^ most Humble
Address, as proceeding from the plainness and sincerity of Loyal and Thankful
Hearts, much engaged by Your Royal Favor* to continue our Fervent Prayers to
the King of King's, for Divine Illumination and Conduct, with all other
Blessings Spiritual and Temporal, ever to attend Your Royal Person and
Government, which is the greatest Duty can be rendered to Your Majesty by

Your Majesty's most Humble, most Faithful, and most Obedient Subjects.
Subscribed in our Names, and in the Name of the rest of our Brethren of our
Persuasion, at their Desire.

The King's Letter to the Presbyterians in his Ancient Kingdom of Scotland.
WE Love you well, and we heartily thank you for your Address: We resolve to
protect you in your Liberty, Religion and Properties, all our Life: And we
shall lay down such Methods as shall not be in the Power of any to alter
hereafter. And in the mean time we desire you to pray for our Person and
Government. To which may be added that kind Complement of the Chancellours.
Gentlemen, My Master has commanded me to tell you, that I am to serve you in
all things within the compass of my Power.


These Gentlemen needed not to have been sollicitous, that those who avouch an
Adherence to the Covenanted Reformation, and avow an opposition to
Antichristian Usurpers (which they call promoting Disloyal Principles and
Practices) might not be looked upon as of their Confederacy: For all that abide
in the Principles and Practices of the Church of Scotland (which they have
deserted) would count it a Sin and Scandal, to be reckoned of their Association
who have thus betrayed the Cause and the Country. These mutual Complements
between the professed Servants of Christ and the Vassals of Antichrist, if they
be Cordial, would seem to import that they are in a fair way of compounding
their differences, and to accomodate their oppositions at length: But if they
be only adulatory and flattering Complements, importing only a Conjunction of
Tails, like Samsons Foxes, with a Disjunction of Heads and Hearts, tending
toward distinct and opposite interests; then, as they would suit far better
the Dissimulations of Politicians, than the Simplicity of Gospel Ministers, and
do put upon them the Brand of being Men-pleasers rather than Servants of
Christ, so for their Dissemblings with Dissemblers, who know their Complements,
to be and take them for such, they may look to be paid home in good Measure,
heaped up and running over, when such Methods shall be laid down as shall not
be in the Power of any to alter, when such designs shall be obtained by this
Liberty and these Addresses, that the afterbought Wit of the Addressers shall
not be able to disappoint. However the Address is such, as makes the thing
addressed for to be odious, and the Addressers to forfeit the respects and
merit the indignation of all that are Friends to the Protestant and
Presbyterian Cause; as may appear from these obvious Reflections.

1. It was needful indeed they should have assumed the Name of Presbyterians,
and call it the humble Address of Presbyterians Ministers: For otherwise it
would never have been known to come from Men of the Presbyterian Persuasion;
seeing the Contents of this Address are so clearly contrary to their known
Principles. It is contrary to Presbyterian Principles, to congratulate an
Antichristian Usurper for undermining Religion, and overturning Laws and
Liberties. It is contrary to Presbyterian Principles, to justify the
abrogation of the National-Covenant, in giving thanks for a Liberty whereby all
the Laws are ^assed and disabled, therein confirmed. It is contrary to
Presbyterian Principles, to thank the King for opening a door to bring in
Popery, which they are engaged to ex^irpate in the Solemn League and Covenant.
It is contrary to Presbyterian Principles to allow or accept of such a vast
Toleration for Idolaters and Heretics, as is evident above. It is contrary to
Presbyterian Principles to consent to any Restrictions, Limitations, and
Conditions, binding them up in the Exercise of the Ministerial function,
whereby this Liberty is loaded and clogged: So that they cannot enjoy it
without great hazard of Sin, and incurring the Guilt of the Blood of Souls, for
not declaring the whole Council of God, which Addressers cannot declare, if
they Preserve an en^ire Loyalty in their Doctrine, as here they promise.

2. There is nothing sounds here like the Old Presbyterian strain; neither was
there ever an Address of this style seen before from Presbyterian Hands. It
would have looked far more Presbyterian like, in stead of this Address, to have
sent a Protestation against the new openly designed introduction of Popery, and
subversion of all Laws and Liberties which they are Covenanted to maintain; or
at least to have given an Address in the usual Language of Presbyterians, who
used always to speak of the Covenants, and Work of Reformation: But here never
a word of these, but of Loyalty to his Excellent, to his Gracious, and to his
Sacred Majesty, of Loyalty not to be questioned, an Entire Loyalty in Doctrine,
a resolved Loyalty in Practice, and a fervent Loyalty in Prayers: And all that
they are Sollicitous about, is not lest the Prerogatives of their Master be
encroached upon, and the Liberties of the Church be supplanted, and Religion
wronged; but lest their Loyalty be question^d, and they be otherwise
represented: And all that they beseech for is, not that the Cause of Christ be
not wronged, nor Antichristian Idolatry introduced by this Liberty; but that
these who promove any disloyal Principles and Practices may be looked upon as
none of theirs, wherein all their encouragement is, that they persuade
themselves from his Majestys Justice and Goodness, that he will not give Credit
to any other information until he take due cognition thereof. Here is a Lawless
unrestricted Loyalty to a Tyrant, claiming an Absolute Power to be obeyed
without reserve, not only professed, but solicitously sought to be the
Principle of Presbyterians; whereas it is rather the Principle of Atheistical
Hobbs exploded with indignation by all Rational Men. This is not the
Presbyterian Loyalty to the King, in the defense of Christ his Evangel,
Liberties of the Country, Ministration of Justice, and punishment of iniquity,
according to the National-Covenant; and in the preservation and defense of the
true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms, according to the Solemn-League
and Covenant: But an Erastian Loyalty to a Tyrant in his overturning Religion,
Laws and Liberties. This Loyalty in Doctrine, will be found Disloyalty to
Christ, in a sinful and shameful silence at the wrongs done to him, and not
declaring against the Invasions of his open Enemies. This Loyalty in Practice
is a plain betraying of Religion and Liberty, in lying by from all opposition
to the open Destroyer of both. And this Loyalty in Prayers, for all Blessings
ever to attend his Person and Government, will be neither conformed to
Presbyterian Prayers in reference to Popish Tyrants, nor consistent with the
Zeal of Christians, nor founded upon any Scripture Promises, to pray for
Blessings to a Papists Tyranny, which cannot be of Faith, and therefore must be
Sin.

3. This Address is so stuffed with sheaking Flatteries, that it would more
become Sycophants and Court-Parasites, than Ministers of the Gospel; and were
more suitable to that Popish, Prelatical, and Malignant Faction to congratulate
and rejoice in their professed Patron and Head, and fill the Gazetts with their
Adulatory Addresses, which heretofore used to be deservedly inveighed against
by all Dissenters; than for Presbyterians to take a Copy from them, and espouse
the Practice which they had condemned before, and which was never commended in
any good Government, nor never known in these British Nations, before Oliver's
Usurpation; Flattery being always counted base among ingenuous Men. But here is
a Rhapsodie of Flatteries, from the deep Sense they have of his Majesty's
Gracious and surprising favor; finding themselves bound in Duty to offer their
most humble and hearty thanks to his Sacred Majesty, the favor bestowed being
to them valuable above all Earthly comforts. One would think it behoved to be a
very great favor, from a very great Friend, for very gracious ends: But what
is it? In not only putting a stop to their long sad Sufferings; which were some
ground indeed, if the way were Honest: But this not only supposes an also; what
is that? But also granting us the Liberty; which is either a needless Tautology
(for if all Sufferings were stopped, then Liberty must needs follow,) or it
must respect the Qualifications of the Liberty; flowing from such a Fountain,
Absolute Power; through such a conveyance, stopping all Penal Laws against
Papists; in such a Form as a Toleration; for such Ends, as overturning the
Reformation and introducing Popery. This is the Favor for which they offer
most humble and hearty Thanks, more valuable to them than all Earthly Comforts.
Sure, if they thank him for the Liberty, they must thank him for the
Proclamation whereby he grants it, and justify all his claim there to
Absoluteness, being that upon which it is superstructed, and from which it
emergeth; and so become a listed Faction to abet and own him in all his
attemptings, engaged now to demean themselves as that he may find Cause rather
to enlarge than to diminish his favors, which can be no other way but in
assisting him to destroy Religion and Liberty, at least in suffering him to do
what he will without control. O what an indeliberate reproach is this for
Ministers, who pretend to be yet for the defense of the Gospel, thus to be
found betraying Religion, through justifying and magnifying a Tyrant, for his
suspension of so many Laws, whereby it was established and supported!

4. It were more tolerable if they went no farther than Flatteries; but I fear
they come near the Border of Blasphemy, when they say, that the Great God has
put this in his Royal Heart; which can bear no other Construction but this,
that the Holy Lord has put it in his Heart to assume to himself a Blasphemous
and Absolute Power, whereby he stops and suspends all Penal Laws against
Idolaters, and gives a Toleration for all Errors: If it be capable of any other
Sense, it must be like that as the Lord is said to have moved David to number
the People, or that Rev. 17. 17. God has put it in their Hearts to fulfill his
Will, and to agree and give their Kingdom to the Beast. But to bless God, and
thank the Tyrant for this wicked Project, as deliberate and purposed by Men, I
say is near unto Blasphemy. And again where they say, they are firmly resolved
by the help of God so to demean themselves as his Majesty may find Cause rather
to enlarge than to diminish his favors; this in effect is as great Blasphemy,
as if they had said, They resolved by the help of God to be as unfaithful
Time-serving and silent Ministers as ever plagued the Church of God; for no
otherwise can they demean themselves so as he may find cause to enlarge his
Favors toward them, it being no way supposable that his enlarging his Favors
can consist with their faithfulness; but if they discover any measure of Zeal
against Antichrist, he will quickly diminish them.

Thus far I have compendiously deduced the Account of the progress and
Prosecution of the Testimony of this Church to the present State thereof.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for Io. Hindmarsh at the Golden-Ball over
against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill.
THE Antiquity of the Royal Line of Scotland farther Cleared and Defended,
against the Exceptions lately offered by Dr. Stillingfleet, in his Vindication
of the Bishop of St. Asaph. ^y Sir George Mackenzie, His Majesty's Advocate for
the Kingdom of Scotland.

The Moral History of Frugality with its opposite Vices, Covetousness,
Niggardliness, Prodigality, and Luxury. Written by the Honorable Sir George
Mackenzie, late Lord Advocate of Scotland.

A Memorial for His Highness the Prince of Orange, in Relation to the Affairs
of Scotland: Together with the Address of the Presbyterian-Party in that
Kingdom to His Highness; And some Observations on that Address. By two Persons
of Quality.

An Account of the Present Persecut^on of the Church in Scotland, in several
Letters.

The Case of the Present Afflicted Clergy in Scotland truly represented. To
which is added for Probation, the attestation of many unexceptionable Witnesses
to every Particular; and all the Public Acts and Proclamations of the
Convention and Parliament relating to the Clergy. By a Lover of the Church and
his Country.

An Historical Relation o^ the late Presbyterian Genera^ Assembly, held at
Edinburgh, from October 16 to November 13. In the Year 1690. In ^ Letter from a
Person in Edinburgh to his Friend in London.


