BRITANNIA TRIVMPHANS;

OR AN Effectual Method Wholly to destroy the Power of France, BY Encouraging
Navigation in all its Branches.

Whereby their Majesty's Fleet may be sufficiently Manned in a Months Time, on
any Occasion, without Impressing; and by making a Competent Provision for such
as shall be wounded in the Service of Their Majesty's, against the Common
Enemy, in whatsoever Stations they are placed. All which may be effected
without any very considerable Charge to the Kingdom.

Together with A Brief Enumeration of the several Advantages to be made by
erecting a public Fishery, by which a constant Nursery of Able Seamen, and a
Security and Enlargement of our Trade abroad will be surely advanced.

To which are subjoined, Some Proposals for the Support and Maintenance of the
Children of all such as fall in the said Service; and the certain and best
Expedient of increasing the Numbers of our Privateers.

Humbly represented to Their Majesty's, and Members of Parliament.

By Capt. St. Lo, one of the Commissioners of the Prize Office.

LONDON, Printed for John Whitlock near Stationers Hall, 1694.

To the KING and QVEENS most Excellent MAJESTY'S.
HAVING (as I humbly conceive) found out a sure Method for the well Manning
Your Majesty's Fleet, (the Srength and Glory of Your Dominions, and Terror of
Your Enemies) on any Occasion in a Months Time, without the Trouble or Charge
of Impressing; As also a Method for the Breeding of Seamen, and Encouraging
Navigation, whithout Charge to Your Majesty's; I humbly presume to lay the same
at Your Majesty's Royal Feet, in hopes of Your Gracious Acceptance and
Countenance of my Endeavors, for the Service of Your Majesty's, the Ease of
Your Subjects, and the General Benefit of Trade. That GOD may Bless, Preserve
and prosper Your Sacred Majesty's, for the Good of these Your Kingdoms, as well
as the Universal Benefit of Christendom; Shall always be the Prayer of

Your Majesty's Most Obedient, Dutiful and Devoted Subject and Servant, George
St. LO.

To the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in
Parliament Assembled.
I Cannot but give this Honorable Assembly some short Account of the Tyrannous
Insults and Barbarous Threats of Our Enemies, (the French) in Particular
against these Two Houses of Parliament, at the beginning of the War.

IT being my Misfortune to be Disabled and Taken at Sea, in the Year 1689. I
was carried to Breast under very hard usage, and nothing could I hear, but of
having my Self and Men sent to the Galleys, and that they did not question but
in a Twelve Months time, to have all the Parliament of England there, to Row
their King in a Galley, using the most Reproachful Names to this August
Assembly, that their Malice and Madness could think of; and so far they
proceeded in their Barbarity and Confidence of Victory, that they took upwards
of Seven Hundred English Prisoners, (part of them my Ship's Company)
Hand-cuff'd them two and two together, fastening Sixty Couple in a Rope, in that
manner, driving them from Breast and other Places, to Thoulon in Provence, being
several Hundred Miles, Beating, Whipping, and so hardly using them, that
several of them died under their hands: And when they came to Thoulon, hearing
of the Success of Their Majesty's Arms in Ireland, they changed their
Resolution of putting them into the Galleys, but traveled them back again to
Rochfort, under such miserable, harsh and severe usage, with Hunger, Cold,
Traveling, and Beating, etc. That many of them Died by the way, who were then
knocked out of the Irons, and left often in the Fields without Burial; And when
any of them broke Prison, (which their Misery forced them to, desiring rather
to dye than live so) their Guard when they took them, would Chain them to a
wall without shelter from the Weather, and there let them lie Languishing for
several days together, as particularly John Hutchin's, Yeoman of my
Powder-Room, who lay Chained to a Wall Thirty Nine days with a Chain of Eight
Foot long, and many others: And for my own part, they took Me out of the
Hospital at Breast, before half Cured of my Wounds, and would have carried me on
Horseback, though the Surgeon declared it would certainly Kill me; at
length the Chirurgions prevailed to have me carried in a Litter, with
Lieutenant Walker, one of my Lieutenants, who was likewise Wounded; They
Carried us thus Eight Days in Company with three Deserters, whose Noses were
slit an Inch up, their Cheeks burnt with a Flower-de-luce, their Hair cut off,
and their Ears cut, with their Legs tied under the Horses Belly, and their
Hands chained, yet they were better mounted than those in Company with me, to
whom they would neither allow Stick nor Spur; Their Names were Lieutenant
William Clutterbuck, (one of my Lieutenants) Mr. Rowley the Vice Admiral of
Brandenburgh, and one Mr. Carbonnell, an English Merchant of French Parents,
who was first taken up under pretense of being a Spy, and still detained in
Prison, and now pretend Debt upon him. We were guarded with the Povost Marine,
and four Arches, giving out by the way, That I was an English Lord they had
taken, so that all the Country People came flocking to see me. When we came to
Nantz, they clapped us up in the Castle, where there were two Hugonots and a
Priest, one Monsieur La Noa, that had been a Prisoner Two and Twenty Years,
Seven Years in a Dungeon (where he never had any Light but while he Eat)
Sixteen Years before brought to Trial, and then because too old to go to the
Galleys, they Condemned him to perpetual Imprisonment, and all for writing a
Book Reflecting on the Archbishop of Paris; and though they could not prove it
upon him, yet they used him so severely, it being the Barbarous Principle of
the Cruel French King, rather to punish twenty Innocent Persons, than let one,
they think Guilty, Escape: They would not allow us any Provision though we sent
to the Governor, unless we would give half a Crown a Day each; then we desired
the Allowance only of Bread and Water, telling them we had no Money, but for all
that they would not allow us any without paying for it, and Sixpence a Day
found us Four Bread, which we were forced to give or starve; thus we lived on
Bread and Water Fifteen Days, and then the other Three consented to pay for
other Victuals; but because I found such living did me good for my Wounds, I
continued it Five and Twenty Days, with the help of two Pound of Cheese which I
had, unknown to my Guard; but if we had had no Money we must have starved for
Want. When I came to eat Meat, my Wounds growing worse, I was ordered to take
Physic, and being advised by the Protestants to take care I were not Poisoned
therewith, when my Physic was brought, I called the rest of my Company, and
desired them to bear Witness, That if I were Poisoned, it were in Drinking King
William's Health, and thereupon I drank the same, which being told the Governor
by the said Mr. Rowley, and notice sent to Paris, An Order came to take me from
the rest of my Company, and put me into a Dungeon; but the Governor being a Man
of more Conscience than the rest, because there was no Dungeon but what was so
wet would soon have killed me, He put me in a Tower (the Walls twenty Foot
thick) Archt above and below, and the Windows made up, save only a little Light
twelve Foot high, where I lay a lone very disconsolately, three or four Months,
when Mr. Skeleton coming thither, got me liberty to walk in the Castle, which
being known at Paris, an Order came to send me to Angiers, and then I had
Ten-pence a Day paid me for all the time I was at Nantz, which was the only
Money I received of the French all the while I was in France.

At Angiers I lay Close Prisoner in the Castle fifteen Months more, under a
most Cruel and Tyrannical Governor, Monsteur Doteshon (formerly one of Cardinal
Mazarine's Guard) who would receive the Sacrament every Week, and yet as soon
as he came out of the Chapel, and sometimes even within it, would beat or
abuse the Prisoners, or do some wicked thing or other, on any the least
occasion.

There were in Prison fourteen The Duchess de la Force, three Years in Prison.
Mr. de Crosnier, five Years. Mr. de la Brifardiere two Years. Mr. de Malle,
three Years for Religion. Mademoiselle Robert. Mademoiselle Voison Me.
Katharine le Roy. Me. Manon Soignart. Me. du Plessis. Me. Paulain. Me.
Bellefuille. Me. Carnay, Aged 100 Years. Me de la Port, Aged 80 Years. In
Prison 12 years on suspicion of Poisoning, but can have no Trial or Hearing.
Persons, some for Religion, and the rest on other Pretenses; among whom were
People of very good Quality, whose Names are in the Margin; they have some of
them been in Prison ten or twelve Years, some more, some less, and some of them
Eighty and an Hundred years of Age, who are never permitted to Write or receive
any Letters from their Friends, and particularly the Duchess de la Force, tho
her Husband the Duke (by his great Age and Hardship in the Bastile) was forced
to turn his Religion, yet they will not suffer him to Write to his Duchess,
nor her to Write to him.

This Governor by his own contrivance to Punish the Prisoners, had a Door made
to the outside of each Prison Window, which upon every slight occasion, he
would cause to be Locked up, that the Prisoners had no manner of Light
sometimes for six or seven Months together; so that the nearest comparison I
can make of a Prison in France, is to that of a man buried Alive for such a
time, being equally debarred of all earthly Comfort, by any fort of Intercourse
or otherwise.

While I was at Angiers, there was a Protestant Marquess Condemned to the
Galleys for breaking out of Prison; he was Chained to a Turk, that had hardly
Rags to cover him; in this Manner he was carried to the Galleys, and then made
to Strip, and Row with the rest of the Slaves.

The Taxes upon the People are so Prodigious, that a po^^ Shoemaker at Angiers
(one Mathurine Gainer) that had a Wife and three Children, and paid but Twenty
Shillings a Year Rent, was rated a Noble; and tho he offered to part with all
he bad for five Shillings, yet they sent Soldiers to Quarter upon him till he
paid; (which is their usual method of raising Taxes) who taking away what he
had, the poor Man by Charity, got enough to pay the Tax; but yet for saying he
would write to the King about it, he was clapped into a Dangeon in the same
Castle where I was, and there kept three Weeks, and then upon the Supplication
of his Wife, he was permitted to work in the Passage to the Dungeon, to keep
his Children from Starving: And according to the Ability of the Persons, they
send Soldiers to Rifle and Tyrannize over them till they pay their Taxes, and
when I came away, they were going to lay a Tax upon Saboes, or Wooden Shoes,
besides four Pence upon a Hat tho it cost but half a Crown, and Taxes upon
Christnings and Funerals.

There was likewise a Prisoner at Angiers, one Mr. Goddard an English
Gentleman, who being in the Academy before the War, was at the beginning of the
War, taken up as a Spy, tho then but Fifteen Years of Age, and kept so closely,
that they would neither let me see him when he was Sick, nor he see me when I
was Sick, only when I was coming away, with much ado, I got to see him, where
he lay in the Common-Goal in a sad Condition, and now I hear, he is removed to
the Bastile, and no Exchange will be allowed for him, tho there was a Prisoner
sent hence by mutual Agreement, for him, two Tears since, who was kept there
and yet he not delivered; and thus we see what little regard the French have to
their Word, in performing either Articles or Treaties.

At my coming away, I went to visit the English Prisoners at Dinan in Brittany,
where they lay in a most miserable condition; two lay Dead at the Door, and had
so lain four and twenty Hours; the Place Stunk so I was not able to go in; and
with their hard Usage, Seven hundred have been Buried out of that Prison since
this War; which computed with those Dead at Rochfort and other Places, we
cannot reckon to have lost less than Two thousand good Seamen, by the ill
Treatment they have had in France: And notwithstanding the General Exchange
agreed on, they continue their wonted Barbarity to our Seamen as much as ever:
And yet to the Honor of the English Sailers, I never found (notwithstanding all
their ill Usage by Hanger, Beating and otherwise) that any of them went into
that Kings Service, tho much Solicited to it by the Duke of Berwick and Sir
William Jennings, and that Mr. Fitz James, who is Styled Grand Prior of England
and Ireland, went to Sea the two last years, yet there was not Fifty English
Seamen in their whole Fleet; which may serve to confute a popular Mistake among
us, that the French have abundance of our Seamen in their Service: Indeed,
there are three Privateers belonging to King James, that were set out of
Ireland when he was there, that are Manned with English and Irish.

And as they at first gave out I was an English Lord, so I found afterward
their Demands were accordingly for my Release, for they first refused thirty
Seamen in Exchange for me, then they refused two Captains (Pecarr and Busheen)
afterward they demanded Captain St. Maria and four Scotch Captains that lay
Condemned in Newgate, and when that was consented to, then they demanded
Lieutenant General Hamilton for me, and would not be content to take the Earl
of Clancarty, or any of the other Prisoners in the Tower; and now after all,
this Value put upon me by my Enemies, I should be very glad to be thought
Serviceable at Home, as I desire to be, and hope I may in this.

They took on Board me, one John Denny a French Protestant, who was Settled and
Married in England; him they Condemned to be Hanged at Raines, but afterward
gave him his Life to Serve them Ten Years. Now since there is a general
Exchange, and that we Release all the English and Irish of their Party that we
Take, I think it my Duty in like manner to plead for his being Demanded, and
sent for back, that he may return to his Family. There was likewise taken and
Condemned with him at Raines, one Fountain, who was Chyrurigon of the Lively;
but he got his Pardon, and is since come to England.

And here it may not be amiss to let these Honorable Houses know, what care
the French King took to keep an account of what Expense he was at upon the
account of Ireland; for that he had a Commissary on purpose to take and keep an
Account of all the Charges he was at in all things relating thereto; and it may
be easily imagined why he did so: One time it happened that the Governor of
Angiers sent for me, and in Discourse told me what it had cost the King his
Master on the account of Ireland, which amounted to a great many Millions of
Livres, which I put down for a Memorandum, but lost the Paper, and the Sum I
have forgot; but the Governor told me, When King James got England again, he
would pay the French King all the Expenses he had been at on his Account, or
give him Ireland for it. And another time a French Gentleman being permitted by
the Governor to Discourse me, and I not fearing to speak, as knowing I could
not well be used worse than I was, told him, They were all Slaves to their
King, but could not see it, like a Dog that never complains for want of a Hat,
because he never wore one. He said, If they were Slaves, yet their Comfort was,
they should ever long have us to be their Slaves. Another time the Governor
sent for me to tell me Plymouth was Surrendered to them, and that it was done by
the Deputy Governor, upon which I Smiled at the Conceit; he being
extraordinarily desirous to know the reason why I would not believe it, I told
him, That Governors here were not so Arbitrary as they in France; and that
besides, a True Englishman had as much an Antipathy to a Frenchman, as a
Mastiff Dog had to a Bull; upon which he very angrily remanded me to Prison.

Salt is there Ninepence per Pound, which all People must take at that rate,
and what quantity they are allotted; and must not dispose of any to a Neighbor
or Friend; and poor People that are not able to Buy, will watch an opportunity
when any Salt Fish is laid a Freshening, to get the Water to make Pottage, but
the Goblees, which are Officers appointed to look after the Revenue of Salt,
will throw it down the Kennel to prevent the Poor having that small Advantge.

If any Person be found Stealing the Custom of Salt, though never so small,
they must pay an Hundred Crowns for the first Offense, or go to the Galleys;
but if they do it a Second time, nothing can prevent their being sent to the
Galleys; and thus the French King breeds Slaves of his own, without buying
Turks, Moors, or Negroes; for by the help of these, and the Protestants that
break Prison, he finds almost sufficient for that use.

The manner of his Dragooning his Protestant Subjects is this, When any one
would not comply with the Priests in matters of Religion, Dragoons were sent to
Quarter upon them, according to their Rank or Degree; which Dragoons would not
be content with Free Quarters; but the Oppressed Host was forced, for
Quietness, to give them a Pistole, or two Crowns a Day, in that manner wasting
their Estates till all was gone; then the Poor Men would endeavor to make
their Escape out of such Misery: But the Dragoons having a strict Eye over
them, would certainly keep them while any thing was left, and then carry them
to Prison.

The French King to decoy those poor People, at first assured them by his
Officers, that if they would comply, they should receive the Sacrament in both
kinds, which prevailed with many to turn; but then according to his wanted
Broken Word, denied them the Cup, and allowed them only the Wafer; and
abundance are now in Prison that have so been for several Years past on that
Account, who fail not constantly to Pray for the Success of Their Majesty's
Arms.

And if this be their usage to their own People, What may those of our Nation
expect, if ever they should be so wretchedly Unhappy (which God prevent) to
fall under their Power, which makes me admire that some People here should so
lose there Senses, as to Applaud or Entertain the least Thoughts of a French
Government, which I could never imagine, till my Return to England; and
therefore must impute it to the most Stupid sort of Ignorance and Malice, and
that they have nothing to lose after they have parted with their Brains, and
that Love for their Country, Religion and Posterity, which is natural to every
true Englishman. I am,

My Lords and Gentlemen, Your Honors most Faithful, and Obedient Servant,
George St. LO.

ENGLAND's SAFETY, etc. OR A PROPOSAL MADE BY Capt. George St. Lo. FOR THE
Raising Twenty Thousand SEAMEN QUALIFIED,
As here under-mentioned for the Service of Their Majesty's and the Kingdom, in
Manning the Royal Navy on any Occasion, (without Impressing) in a Month's time
after settling the Office; Hereby humbly proposed for that purpose.
THE Qualification of each Seaman, is, That he shall understand the Mechanic
part of a Sailer, which is to Reef and Furl, and take his Trick at Helm, and be
a Man at all Calls, properly called a Haulboling; so that half a Ships
Complement of such Men before the Mast, will be sufficient to well Man any
Ship; for Masters-Mates, Midship-Men, Quarter Masters, Quarter-Gunners, and
other small Officers, will go voluntarily with their respective Commanders; and
several others (may be supposed) for Preferment, which will not be of this
number. And therefore the said Twenty Thousand able Seamen (with the help of
the Warrant-Officers, Volunteers, Officers Servants, small Officers, and
Water-mens Apprentices, who are sent by their Hall, together with the
Sail-Makers, Armores, Carpenters-Crew, and Chirurigions-Crew,) will be
sufficient to Man Their Majesty's whole Fleet.

This Method of bringing in Seamen without Impressing, will be of vast
Advantage to the King and Kingdom.

1. In saving the great Charge of Conduct-Mony, and Bounty-Mony.

2. In saving the Charge of hiring Smacks, Ke^ches, and other Vessels, for
Impressing of Seamen, which stand the King in 30 l. a Month each Vessel one
with another, or thereabouts; and of these each first and second Rate Ship has
three or four, and a third and fourth Rate Ship has one or two, besides the
Captains of each Ship according to the Rate and Bigness, have Impressed Money,
some 100 l. some 50 l. some 20 l. Besides bringing in their Bills of Charges
and Disbursements, which have sometimes amounted to two or three Hundred Pounds
a Ship to my knowledge, all which, by the Method hereafter mentioned, may be
saved to the Crown and Kingdom, which, in Conduct, Bounty and Imprest-Mony,
with the hiring of Vessels as aforesaid, cannot be reckoned to amount to less
than 60000 l. per Annum.

By this Method the King being assured of having Men ready to Man his Fleet on
any occasion, in a Month's time, will save the vast Charges of keeping the
great Ships in Pay all the Winter, and besides prevent the Danger of ever being
Invaded by any Foreign Enemy; (as was like to have been this Year) for after
the Summers Expedition is over, and the Fleet come in, it would be a great
Encouragement to the Seamen to be paid off, and their Tickets paid at the same
time, which would give them Credit at any time, prevent the great Abuse of
Ticket-buying, and enable Seamen to reap the Benefit of their Labor
themselves, as now they do not; and though the King should give 20 l. per Cent.
for Money so to Pay them, his Majesty would save vastly by it: And upon issuing
out his Royal Proclamation at any time, have Men sufficient for his Service
again.

And here it may be Objected, (perhaps from a Book lately set out by one Henry
Maydman a Purser) That Seamen are discouraged from Their Majesty's Service, by
the Abuses of their Commanders: To which it is Answered; It is a sign that that
Purser has Sailed with honest Captains that would not let him pinch the Men,
for the Men never fare better than when a Captain and Purser disagree: I
observe he carefully conceals his Employ of Purser, well knowing, that of all
Officers, such a one in this Case is the least to be Credited; for let
Commanders see that the Pursers do not wrong the Men, and let them be paid
their Majesty's Allowance, and the Tickets at Payment of the Ship, or upon
tender afterward, they are very well encouraged, and care not for hard words
from a Captain, which break no Bones.

But that which discourages Seamen is, the want of their due Pay, and the lying
of their Tickets several Years without Payment, unless sold to a Ticket-buyer,
which occasions the Proverb among them Of going to Sea for a Knife and Sheath.

This would likewise prevent the Impressing of Land-men, (altogether
unqualified, which often breeds Sickness in the Fleet) as also Watermen that
were never at Sea, upon whom it is now very hard: For Instance a Water-man is
Impressed out of his Boat that has a Wife and four or five Children to maintain;
in his absence his Boat is unimployed and receives damage; his Wife and
Children must become burthensom to the Parish, or if she has Credit, perhaps
runs her Husband in debt more than he can get up in a Year or two.

Likewise when a Ship comes home after a long Voyage, the Men are Impressed, who
perhaps have some of them Ventures on Board, which they are snatched from
without having the liberty of going to their Families, and disposing of what
they have, or even to refresh themselves; in which Case their Ventures are
lost, the Men Dissatisfied, and their Families half Ruined: Also, many Persons
have been lost on the Thames and other Places, in endeavoring to Escape; as
particularly Ten or Twelve Persons lately in Boats were Drowned, Shot, and Died
of their Wounds, in making off from a Ship that had Pressed them; and the
Sand-Barges at Plymouth when a Press is thereabouts, lie wholly unemployed by
the Absconding of the Men, which hinders the Working of Husbandmen, for want
of that Sand to Manure the Ground; so that many Teams of Horses and Yokes of
Oxen, lie still on that account, to the great Damage of the Country.

This would also prevent the great Abuses by Persons pretending to be
Press-Masters, who to get Money, often do very ill things; sometimes occasion
Murder, and generally such Disorders as bring an Odium upon Their Majesty's
Fleet undeserved.

Besides, it is very hard upon Lieutenants, who in Pressing cannot but spend
more than their Pay, and sometimes are turned out for Impressing those that
have Protections, (which by this will be taken off:) So that no Man, as the
Case now stands, would be a Lieutenant, were it not for the Prospect of being
advanced to Captain.

In the next place it is hoped, no Man's Private Interest will be thought
equivalent to Balance against so great a Public Good and Ease as this will be
to the King and Kingdom.

The Reasons that have induced me to undertake this great Work, are drawn from
my Dear-bought Experience when Prisoner in France, where I lay two Years and
two Months under great Hardships, and Nineteen Months of that time all alone in
an uneasy and Disconsolate Condition.

When I was first brought Prisoner thither, I lay four Months in an Hospital at
Breast, for Cure of my Wounds, and was sent to Nants before half Cured. While I
was at Breast, I was Astonished at the Expedition used in Manning and Fitting
out their Ships, which till then I thought could be done no where sooner than
in England, where we have ten times the Shipping, and consequently ten times
more Seamen than they have in France; but there I saw Twenty Sail of Ships of
about 60 Guns a piece, got ready in Twenty days time; they were brought in and
the Men Discharged, and upon an Order from Paris, they were Careen'd, Keel'd
up, Rigged, Victualled, Manned and out again in the said time, with the greatest
Ease imaginable. I likewise saw a Ship of 100 Guns there, had all her Guns
taken out in four or five Hours time, which I never saw done in England in
twenty four Hours, and this with greater Ease and less Hazard than here, which
I saw under the Hospital Window; and this I am sure I could do as easy in
England.

I likewise saw on the other side of the River, an Imitation of a Ship with a
Tire of Guns, where the Men were often Exercised and Instructed in the Practice
and Use of the Great Gun, as if they were at Sea, which very much contributed
to their Skill; and if the same were done and practiced near our Seaports, it
would be of great Use in fitting Men for the Sea-Service; in which we need not
be ashamed to learn of them, for they are ready enough to imitate us in any
thing for their Advantage.

The aforesaid Ships being so soon out again, put me upon Enquiry how the Men
were got so quickly, and I found that the Seamen were all Registered by the
Intendant Marine, or Commissary of each Province near the Sea, which puts that
King to vast Charge in paying great Salaries to them, their Provosts Marine,
Arches and other Officers for taking Account of all Maritime Affairs; for a
Merchant Ship cannot go to Sea without leave from such Intendant, who appoints
what Seamen they shall have, and so many Land-men to be trained up in the
French King's Pay, as is thought necessary; which Method he has used for these
Fourteen Years past, in all probability, in hopes of an Advantage over England.

These Officers Register not only Seamen, but Watermen, Fishermen, and all
other Persons belonging to the Sea, or Trading in any River of France, as the
Loire, Seyne, etc. who upon Proclamation are always to be ready to serve on
Board the Fleet, as they have been all this War, and upon Failure (by his
Arbitrary Power) Hangs them up at their own Door without Trial or Mercy.

So that to the wonder of the World (tho he has not above the Tenth part of
Merchant Shipping, as aforesaid, which is the Nursery of Seamen) he gets out
his Fleet ready to Fight the English and Dutch, who are so much Superior to him
in Naval Strength, that it is very much Admired at Abroad, and looked upon as
ill Conduct in us.

Thus the French King when his Fleet is out at Sea, is at much greater Charge
than we, in regard of the Encouragement he then gives to his Officers, both in
Pay and Provisions, which brings his best Nobility to his Service, who when
they are sufficiently Qualified, are Preferred to Command, and never makes
Masters of Merchantmen Captains of Men of War, well knowing that there is as
great an improbability in most of them, to well understand the Nature and
Command of a Man of War, as it is for a Gentleman of 500 l. a Year (that perhaps
knows well enough how to manage his own Estate) to understand Martial
Discipline, to Command in a Castle in a time of Action, or for a Captain in the
Militia to be as fit to make a General-Officer, as one that has been in several
Campains, Sieges, and other Actions; and will sooner prefer one of his
Warrant-Officers that has been trained up in his Service, than one of them; tho
that is also very rare, for he will sooner Reward them with Money for any brave
Action, and give his Commands to his People of Quality.

I find this Particular has given Offense to some Persons, even to the crying
down of the Book, though that does not hinder the Sale of it; and at the same
time those that understand both the Command of a Man of War, and Mastership of
a Merchant-man, very well know the certainty of what I say in this Point; but
that this is defended by some, is to give color to the putting ill Men into
the Service under the Notion of being Masters of Ships, by which Pretense a
Brewer's Clerk, and such like, have been preferred, to the great Disservice of
their Majesty's: As for Instance, when a Captain of a Ship has two Lieutenants,
one a Seaman, the other none, being weary of the latter, he gets him preferred
to be Captain of a Fire-ship, merely to be rid of him, when he as carefully
keeps the other to be an Ease and Assistance to him; by which means the
deserving Man is kept without Preferment, while the other is put over his Head,
which is a great Discouragement to the whole Body of Lieutenants,
Warrant-Officers, Masters-Mates, and Mid-ship-men, in Their Majesty's Service,
which might at once be prevented by putting good Men in at first, who upon any
Vacancy are fit to be made Captains. This is too great a Truth to be spoke by
any one, but an unbiased Sailer; and (if a Reflection) can be upon none, but
those that have certainly done it.

And tho the French King by the Means aforesaid, is at more Charge than we,
when his Fleet is out; yet when they come in he is at much less, for then he
pays off, and lays up his great Ships (as we may now do by the following
Method) which saves him vast Charge in the Winter, when his Men go out a
Privateering, and make a Harvest upon our Merchantmen, which he Encourages by
giving them his Tenths of what they take: Which I could wish was done in
England.

And here I cannot forbear mentioning one generous Action of that King, who as
he Punishes well, takes care likewise to Reward well: For when I was taken in
the Portsmouth by the Chevalier Demany, Knight of Malta, in the Marquess, a
Ship of 60 odd Guns (all Brass but twelve) though he could not bring my Ship in,
she was so much disabled, he dying in forty eight Hours of his Wounds, told the
Second Captain upon his Deathbed, That nothing troubled him, but that he
should die in debt to his Relations and Friends, which being represented to
Monsieur Saignelay, (who then was on Board the Fleet) and by him to the French
King; the King thereupon did much regret the loss of such a Man, saying, He had
rather have lost the Ship than the Captain, and ordered the Payment of his
debts, out of his own Bounty, which came to 22000 Livres, which is near 1800 l.
Sterling.

Thus it being the Method of the French King to furnish himself with Seamen on
any occasion: 1. By Registring them: 2. By his Arbitrary Power, Hanging them in
case of Desertion, thereby like Death, sparing none to the Sea or Gallows. In
England it would be found both difficult, chargeable and needless.

1. It would be very difficult as well as chargeable to Register Seamen here,
because not one in ten is a Housekeeper, and therefore not with any certainty
to be found.

2. It would be needless, in regard we have not occasion (as the French have)
to take all our Seamen, but a moderate Proportion only, which may be done by
Registring all sorts of Shipping and small Craft, using the Sea, or any River,
Port or Harbor in England, Wales, and Berwick upon Tweed, as Merchant-Ships of
all sorts, Fishing-Boats, Oyster-Cocks, Row-Barges, Western-Barges, Lighters of
all sorts, Tricker-Boats, Hiber-Boats, Stow-Boats, and the Trows at Bristoll,
Smacks, Hoys, Ketches, Coasters, etc. (by what Names soever Differenced) and
giving them a certain Number, or Mark of Distinction, as is done to the
Hackney-Coaches, That each of them according to their several Burdens, Trade
and Profit, shall find one Man or more for Their Majesty's Service, or be
obliged to pay Five Pounds into an Office to be Erected for that purpose, for
each Man so ordered for them to furnish for one Year, which Office may be
called, The Office for Registring Shipping and small Craft: And in case of
failure after a Months Notice given by Proclamation, to Forfeit to their
Majesty's the Ship or Vessel they shall refuse or neglect to furnish men for:
And that this may not seem an Hardship upon the Subject, it shall be herein
demonstrated, that it is the Interest of all Persons concerned to comply
herewith, and that the Money or Forfeiture is not the thing desired, for if
they can provide Qualified Men under that Rate, or for nothing, it is the same
thing to us; for the Money so given, is to be bestowed Gratis on such Men as
will go in the Service.

It is Proposed, The Reasons are, I. That every Oyster-Cock, Fishing-Smack or
Hoy for Trawling and Drudging, shall find a Man Qualified, as beforementioned,
and every three Peter-Boats the like, to Serve Their Majesty's in time of War.
Because they offered the late King James (if they might be Incorporated) that
they would find him 500 good Men to Serve him at Sea on any occasion, and now
great part of these People have Protections, and Serve not at all, tho it is
more Reasonable they should Serve the Present Government than the Late, and
this way their Quota will hardly amount to more than they Voluntarily offered
before. II. That each Ballast Lighter find two Men, tho they have but two Men
work on Board them. There are now but Sixty Six Ballast Lighters, tho they
ought to be Eighty; but Sixty Six will find a Hundred thirty Two Men. These Men
are Protected by their great Interest, and very fit to Serve Their Majesty's.
They will in a Tides time take up twenty or thirty Tun of Ballast, which comes
to about 30 s. of which the two Men that Labor hard have but one Third between
them, the other two Thirds are divided between the Ballast-Office and owner of
the Lighter, who having so great profit for little or nothing, the Lighter
being not worth above 60 l. and all Foreigners pay 4 d. per Tun more than
others, ought to contribute toward the Defense of the Sea, which their profit
comes by. III. That each Row-Barge, and Tilt-Boat, find Two Seamen, as above.
These Men are fit for the King's Service, and what they usually give for
Protections may be near sufficient to find the Men proposed. IV. That each
Western Barge, carrying 12 or 14 Men, may find four or five Men, and more or
less according to the number of Men they Employ. These Barges have a great and
certain Profit, pay no Custom or other Duty; and now when they come for London,
leave their Men at Kingston, at Charge, and hire others there, that are not
liable to be Impressed, so that they would willingly contribute to be free and
easy. V. That each Ware Barge, and such like find two Men at the least. For
the Reason aforesaid. VI. That all Coal-Lighters, Close-lighters, and such like
find Men in Proportion to their Tunnage, as shall be thought fit. They now pay
for Protections, and by that means have very good Men for 14 s. a Week, and get
vastly by bringing Coals, etc. through Bridge, having 12 d. for the Carriage of
each Chaldron, besides the advantage of the Measure, if they be Woodmongers.
VII. That all small Craft, viz. Ketches, Hoys, Smacks, Coasters, Traders, etc.
not exceeding forty Tun each, find a Man. This they would gladly do, that they
might not be liable to be Impressed, and get by it too, in regard they might then
make the more Voyages, when they have no Interruption. VIII. That all Colliers,
for every Fifty Tun they Measure, at Ninety Five Foot each Tun, shall find a
Man. The Colliers by this, would be much the gainers, in saving the
extraordinary Charge they are now at for Men, sometimes giving 8 l. a Man each
voyage, which at other times they might have for 30 s. and when their Men are
Pressed in the Swin or Gun-Fleet, they are forced to give 40 s. or 3 l. a Man to
be brought up the River. I have known some Colliers clear 4 or 500 l. in a
Voyage, all Charges paid: They will make five or six Voyages in a Year, now
this War time, and by this Method may make more. IX. That all Merchant-Ships,
Trading beyond Sea, or lying at home by the Wall, find a Man for each fifty tun
they measure, and if they are not like to go to Sea that year, and thereof give
notice to the Office, (when they bring the Men or pay the Money, that a
Memorandum of it may be Entered in a Book for that purpose) and if after a 12
Months time they come again, and make Affidavit, that such a Ship has not been
at Sea in that time, the Office shall repay them two Thirds of the Money they
have given or paid for their Men. When they have made a Voyage and come into
Plymouth, or other places, their Men are Pressed, their Goods it may be
perishable, and their Markets lost, or to prevent that, they are at vast Charge
in hiring Men, or procuring Protections to bring their Ships about, so that it
would be their Interest thus to contribute, to save them the much greater
Expense they are now at as aforesaid, some Ships having to my knowledge given
four and five Pounds a Man, for Hands, to bring them up to London from the
Downs. X. That all Ships or Vessels belonging to Ireland, New England, or other
Plantations, under the Government of England; and trading hither, be obliged
upon their coming to any Port of England to give security to find their Quota
of such Men during the War. Because being Subjects to the Crown of England, and
liable to be Impressed as others are, they ought, for their Freedom, to
contribute toward the War, in regard also that their Safety is concerned in
the Public Good; and also many Ships this War for want of Hands (being pressed
there out) have been cast away and taken. XI. That no hired Ship or Vessel
Employed in their Majesty's Service, on any account whatsoever; for carrying
Provisions, Stores, Soldiers, or otherwise, may be exempted from this
Contribution. Because such Exemption would occasion many Disputes, and great
trouble to the Office, and be made use of as a Pretense, whenas these Men
receiving their hire (which they will take care shall be sufficient) they ought
as well as others to find their Quota. XII. As to the Watermen in the River of
Thames; it is thought reasonable; that every three Boats or Wherries should
find a Man, not exempting the King's, Queen's, or Noblemens Watermen, who have
Badges and Coats, which usually protect them, and abundance others wear
Bromagem Coats, as if they belonged to Noblemen and Gentlemen, tho they do not,
thereby deceiving the Lieutenants, and keeping themselves from being Impressed.
Suppose there are 6000 Watermen belonging to the Thames, one third part of them
are at Sea already, Pressed or Volunteers, so that the rest at home have the
benefit now of what maintained them all before, and therefore three Wherries
may well find one Man more easy than a Hackney-Coachman can pay 5 l. a year,
when he is at so great charge in keeping of Horses, and continual wear of his
Coach. None of the Servants belonging to the King, Queen, Noblemen or Gentlemen
are exempted from paying the Poll, and other Taxes; and since they are always
paid by their Masters for what they do, even beyond what others would, and have
Coats and Badges given them, tho it be allowed that their Persons shall be
protected from going to Sea themselves, yet they ought to pay their Quota, to
find Men as well as their share of other Taxes, and the rather in regard of the
Encouragement they have always had at Sea, where a Waterman's Apprentice that
has served him five year is allowed 23 s. a Month, when a Captain's or Warrant
Officers Apprentice that has served five years actually at Sea, has but 18 s.
a Month, and by this Method the King will have always Good Men instead of Boys,
usually sent by the Watermen. XIII. That all foreign Built Ships contribute one
3d part proportionable to their Burden, more than Ships Built within their
Majesty's Dominions, or what other Proportion the Parliament shall think fit.
This has been done on other occasions, for the Encouragement of English
Navigation, and to put a difference betwixt home Built, and foreign Bottoms.

This Method is intended to comprehend all Vessels and small Craft throughout
England, as the Sand-barges at Plymouth to find one Man, and the Keels at
New Castle one Man or more; the Cobles to the Northward, and all manner of
Fishing-Boats, and small Craft to pay proportionable to the Method before
proposed.

Likewise that Ship-Carpenters, Calkers and Sail-makers, as their employs
relate to the Sea, shall furnish such a Proportion of Men from their several
Yards, for their Majesty's Service, as shall be thought Equitable, and
Armorours are sent by the Office of Ordnance.

And to render this Method the more effectual, it is thought necessary that the
Masters of all Ships, Vessels and small Craft that are to find a Man, shall
bring one qualified Seaman for each Ship, or be obliged to go themselves, tho
they may be excused from bringing the rest of their Quota, on paying 5 l. each;
and this cannot be reckoned hard, considering the great Trouble and Charge they
are now at for Protections, which by this will be saved, and that is
considerable; for sometimes it has cost Men more in obtaining Protections than
would pay their Quota according to this Method for seven Years.

And to make it the easier upon Masters and Owners of Ships, that they may not
be at all the charge for finding their Quota, if it be not provided, that no
private Seaman shall have above 30 s. a Month which would make them amends; It
may be however enacted that all Seamen in Merchant-ships shall pay to their
respective Masters and Owners toward their Charge in finding Seamen for their
Majesty's Ships, half a Crown in the Pound for all Money they shall receive for
Wages over and above 23 s. a Month, that as they are so great Gainers by the
War, they may be assisting to the War, having now sometimes 3 l. a Month,
whereas in time of Peace, they have but 23 s. and 25 s. a Month; and a Seaman
in a Collier has now 8 l. a Voyage which used to be but 30 s. So that by this
way the Masters and Owners will rather gain than lose, and no one will be
prejudiced, for the Seamen pay only out of their extraordinary Wages.

And in case a Vessel exceed 50 Tun, and amount not ot 100 Tun, if she be above
the one half of the 50 Tun, in dispute, she shall find a Man for that, as well
as if she measured the full number; but if she come short of the one half of
the 50 Tun, in dispute, then she shall not find any thing, for the odd Tuns she
measures over and above, even fifties; the Measurers to be sworn to do Justice
between King and Subject, and to be supervised by the Commissioners of this
Office, as occasion offers; this to be understood as relating to Ships going
Voyages by Sea, and not Inland Vessels.

And by this Method instead of having 2 or 300 Lieutenants a Pressing, and
forcing Men to go against their wills, we shall now have 5 or 6000 Men going
about with money in their hands to get Men for their Majesty's Service, who will
hereby be encouraged to go willingly, which will be a great ease on all sides,
and more expeditious than before, because Englishmen may be better led than
drove, and a willing Boy is better than an unwilling Man.

Perhaps it may be objected, that it will be hard for a Ship or a Vessel lying
by the Wall, to contribute in this manner, and others for Covetousness, or some
sinister Ends of their own, to get the Charge taken off themselves, may start
other Objections.

It is answered; It is no more hard for a Ship lying by the Wall thus to
contribute, than for an empty House to find a Militia Man, etc. On the other
hand all good Men, and well-wishers to the Government (so far as I can find, by
discoursing them) are willing to it, as knowing that it will save them great
trouble and charge in Protections, when they may at all times have Men cheap,
and free from being Impressed, to follow their occasions, and besides have
Convoys more ready to attend them, when the Fleet is well Manned, the Ships
clean, and all in good Order: And I am very well assured there will not be one
Ship or Vessel the less on this account; but if any Objection be made by those
Concerned against any Particular hereof, it is humbly desired they may be
personally heard themselves by a Committee, what they have material to offer,
as plain matter of fact, (without Lawyers) and we do not doubt but to give good
Satisfaction therein.

This being duly put in Practice all over England, Wales, etc. according to the
Method proposed, will it is not doubted (with Ease, when the Office is Settled)
furnish Their Majesty's Fleet in a Month's time on any Occasion, with at least
Twenty Thousand Seamen, if not more, and better Men than now, because then the
rate of Wages, will fall from the present Unreasonableness, occasioned by
Impressing, and People will take them that will Serve the Cheapest, and so be
content with the worse. Men themselves; but the King cannot have ill Men,
because they must be all Qualified as abovementioned, and Examined to that
Purpose by the Commissioners appointed for this Office, who must be such as
have been Commanders of Men of War, and no other; and such men as they approve
of, shall have some Paper or Attestation under their Hands, before they be
received on Board any of Their Majesty's Ships of War: And in case any Person
or Persons shall bring one Man to the Office, and after Examination and
Approbation, shall send another in his Room, he or they so Offending, shall
Forfeit to Their Majesty's 20 l. for every such Offense, to be Recovered as is
hereunder mentioned, and paid into this Office for the Uses aforementioned, in
regard the Commissioners are answerable to Their Majesty's for all Unqualified
Men sent on Board their Majesty's Ships of War.

And if any Master, Owner, or other concerned, refuse or neglect to find such
Man, or Men, to be approved of as aforesaid, or to pay the Five Pounds for each
Man, within the Month Limited by Proclamation, he or they shall Forfeit the
Ship or Vessel for which they have not found Men, or paid their Money as
aforesaid, to be recovered into this Office, by Prosecution in the Exchequer,
or at Common Law, and to be by the Officers thereof Sold and Employed in the
Encouraging such Qualified Seamen as shall be fit for Their Majesty's Service;
for which Encouragement or Gratuity many will be willing to come in; and poor
Seamen that come out of France and want Clothes and Necessaries, or are
otherwise Distressed, will gladly come to this Office and receive Five Pounds
to go to Sea, bringing his Landlord, or some other Security to be Bound for his
going accordingly, as must likewise all those that are brought on the account
of any Ship, Vessel, or small Craft; for when any fails, the Vessel they Serve
for, is to be Accountable; and therefore the Master or Owner on giving his
Gratuity, will be careful what Security he has, that his Man or Men shall go.

And that such Master or Owner may not be put to any great trouble upon the
failure of his Men, when there is any such failure, the Commissioners of this
Office will send to the Master or Owner concerned, for the Bonds of the Persons
so failing, and put the same in Suit; for which it is conceived necessary, that
some quick way may be provided for recovering the forfeiture without long
Trouble, or unnecessary Charge to the Office.

And if it shall happen that any of these Men so provided as aforesaid, shall
receive Preferment; the Man so Preferred shall be obliged to find another in
his room. And if any Master shall happen to have his Men Impressed from him after
he has paid his Money, (which I scarce believe will be, unless upon some
emergent occasion) In such Case the Master upon complaint made to the Office,
shall have the Money he paid, returned him again.

And now for the regular and effectual Management of this great Affair, so much
conducing to the ease and benefit of their Majesty's and their Kingdoms, It is
humbly Proposed, that there be appointed for the Principal Office in London
five Commissioners (all Sea Commanders that have well merited in their
Majesty's Service) whereof one to be Superintendant, and any three to make a
Quorum.

That there be an Iron Chest in the Office, with a Slit on the Top, for any
Person that brings Money instead of Men, to see their Money put into, that the
King nor himself be not wronged.

That there be five different Locks to this Chest, whereof each Commissioner to
have a Key, and therefore to be opened only when they are all present, that
there may be no Fraud in the Case.

That there be also a Secretary, Clerks, Messengers, and other Officers
necessary for this Service.

That there be a Sub-Commissioner for the same purpose, at the Ports of
Plymouth, Bristol, Newcastle, Yarmouth, and elsewhere, as thought most
convenient, with a Comptroller, Secretary, Clerks, Surveyors, and such other
Officers as shall be necessary.

That there be a like Iron Chest in each Port, with three Locks, whereof the
Commissioner to keep one Key, the Comptroller another, and the Mayor of each
Town the Third; and the Chest to be never opened without the Mayor being
present with the Commissioner and Comptroller, and seeing what Money is taken
out, and for what use; and that an Account thereof under their and the Mayor's
Hand be from time to time transmitted to the principal Office in London, where
an exact Register shall be kept.

That there be a Measurer in each Port, and Three for London, to measure all
Ships and Vessels that they may not be under-rated.

If it be Objected, that the Creating new Officers necessary for this Service,
will be another Charge upon the Government.

It is humbly Answered, That the Officers employed are to be such as have well
deserved of the Government; that are disabled in the Service, and have a
Pretense to Pensions or half pay, which by this means will be saved, as well as
the other great Sums before and after mentioned, to which this Charge is no way
Equivalent: Besides, it will be an Encouragement to Commanders and Officers in
the Sea Service, that there are Employments capable of Rewarding them, in which
also they may yet serve their Majesty's, and so not be a Charge Unprofitable.

Now for a Demonstration how to raise the 20000 Seamen proposed: In the first
Place, About this time Twelve Months a Fleet of 470 Colliers Loaded at
Newcastle, came over the Bar in two days, and joined 70 Sail more that came
from Sunderland with Coals, which I am assured of by Captain Banks, that was
then their Convoy; they were from 60 Tuns to 400, so that one with another they
may be allowed to be near 200 Tun apiece: And at the same time those that are
Light and Repairing, and Loading at Newcastle, and unloading at other Ports,
with what Trade from Milford, and other parts of Wales, for Ireland, and some
parts of England, with a sort of Coal called Culm for Smiths, cannot be
reckoned at less than as many more, making together 1080 Sail, which at 200 Tun
apiece one with another, may find four Men each, which in the whole raises --
4320 Seamen.

There are likewise belonging to Newcastle and Sunderland about 300 Vessels
called Kells constantly employed in Lading Coals, that carry five and six Men
apiece; and may very well afford to find among them about -- 500 Men.

So that the Colliery of England modestly computed finds alone, -- 4800 Men,
and yet cannot be supposed to be one seventh part of the Shipping of England.

Then for the Watermen there were this year mustered on Board their Majesty's
Ships of War, 1100 good Men that went voluntarily into their Majesty's Service,
who will go again with their respective Commanders, besides those that were
sent by their Hall.

And we cannot suppose but that allowing three Boats or Wherries to find a Man,
without exempting any on account of Privilege: That way there will not go less
than 1500 or 2000 Men, which must be qualified as above, and what Apprentices
they send that have not been at Sea before, are not to be reckoned in this
number.

The Western Barges, Ware Barges, Row-Barges, Tilt-Boats, and Ferry-Boats, will
find 500 Men.

The Ballast-Lighters will now find 132 Men, and ought to find 160.

The Peter-Boats, and Oyster-Cocks, formerly offered 500 Men, and cannot now
find less, if not more.

The Coal-Lighters and Close-Lighters are so numerous, that I know not what
their Quota may amount to. Thus the River of Thames furnishes 3732 Men, without
reckoning Merchant-Ships, and Coal-Lighters, which may be considerable.

In the next place as to the Fishery, about Eight Years since I was Convoy to
the Herring Fishery at Yarmouth, for two Years, and found that the English had
then about 700 Vessels employed in that Trade, carrying from 8 to 20 Men
apiece, so that allowing them to carry 15 Men each one with another, it amounts
to 10500 Men, and great part of these Vessels belonging to the Cinqe Ports,
they pretend a Privilege, that they will never suffer a Press among them,
whereby their Majesty's are deprived of the Service of so many able men; but by
this method their Vessels will be obliged to find their Proportion, as others
do, or pay their Money to provide others; and so their Majesty's will have the
benefit of their Service, as of Right does belong to them,

The Town of Yarmouth, as I have been informed by the Magistrates thereof, has
formerly had 1500 Ships belonging to it; but now much decayed by the choking
up of the Mouth of the Harbor.

The Dutch had then near 3000 Busses and Doggers a Fishing there, with three
small Ships with Flags for Convoy, belonging to Ankhusen; the Commanders coming
on Board me all at once, told me, That that Town had once 1500 Busses and
Doggers belonging to it: Their Vessels carry above 20 Men one with another,
being ner a 100 Tun each, so that at that rate there came 30000 Men from that
one Town: They make three Voyages in a Year, beginning at the Island of Orkney
and Shotland; and following the Fish through the Channel to the North-Foreland.
Whereas we have the convenience of taking them up so near hand, that at
Yarmouth what they take in the Night, they can carry a shore in the Day, and
return to their Fishing again at Night; whenas the Dutch are by their distance
from home obliged to be at great Charge in Gibbing, Pickling and Barrelling
them up to preserve them Sweet; and must lie out at Sea in all Weathers, which
we are not exposed to; and yet to our great Shame and Detriment, both to our
Selves and Posterity, we have in great measure lost that so advantageous Trade
of the Herring Fishery, which is a Seminary for Seamen; and a Maintenance to so
many thousand Families in Holland, who are at much more pains, Charge and
Trouble, than we in England need be, to whom it does of Justice, Ancient Right,
and Situation appertain.

During the time I was Convoy to our Fishery there, as aforesaid; my Business
was to see that no Foreigner should Fish in sight of the Shore, because the
Fish drawing thither to Spawn, the best Draughts are there; and besides the
Waurope of the Dutch is bigger than ours, and their Gear stronger; they have
bigger Vessels than we, and more Men, and so would be too hard for ours, and
drive us off the Fishing Ground, if it were not for our Convoy; for some of
their Vessels have 340 Nets apiece, which will reach upwards of two mile.

It happened once I saw a Dutch Vessel driving near the Shore, upon which I
fired a Gun, and brought the Master on Board me; I asked him how he durst go
there to Fish? he told me ingenuously it was for the advantage of the Draught
there; I asked him what Fish he had taken that Night, seeing his Nets white; he
told me 19 Last, each of which contains 12000 Herrings, so that computing them
at 20 s. per Barrel, his Nights work came to 228 l. with which and what he had
taken before, he was forced to run immediately to Holland, for fear of their
stinking; so that admitting each of these 3000 Vessels take 50 Last of Fish
each Voyage, and three Voyages to be made in one Season, at 10 l. each Last, it
amounts in the whole to 4500000 l. This I thought to be incredible; they told
me also these Herrings in paying Duties for Staves, Hoops, Salt, Packing,
Importing, and again Exporting for the Rhine, and other Countries, bring in a
considerable Revenue to the State; and then to our great Shame these Herrings
taken upon our own Coast, are likewise traded with to England, and there sold
for Twopence apiece, and sometimes more: And by this it is very demonstrable
what the advantage of this Fishery might be, if Encouraged.

The French were there, but had not then above 100 Vessels, tho they (finding
the Sweetness) have much increased since; they would be pressing in for the
Shore; for which reason I sometimes took several of their Masters on Board me,
and then set Sail to the open Sea, and there put them all on Board one of their
Vessels to show them Sea-breeding, and they having no Boats, were two or three
days before they could get into their own Vessels again; and this I did
purposely, that they of all others might not have the Encouragement of
overrunning us in our Fishery.

The Pilchard Fishery in the West is very considerable: I have known 500 Boats
at a time in Mounts-Bay, catching Pilchards: If they be rated according to
their several Burdens, or the number of Men they employ, I doubt not but they
will raise a considerable number of Seamen, as will also the New Foundland and
Iseland Fishery, which if encouraged, would turn to good account, and that is
no way better to be done, than by letting them have free liberty to Trade,
without the Danger of Pressing their Men.

And now since I have taken the pains to get 20000 Seamen for their Majesty's
Service, which I doubt not but by this Method will easily be done, and without
oppressing any, only laying an Embargo for one Month, and obliging all Masters
and Owners of Ships not to allow above 30 s. per Month to any private Seaman; I
humbly conceive it but reasonable some Care be taken of those that lose their
Limbs, or are otherwise disabled in such Service, for which purpose in the
first place it is Proposed:

1. That the Poor's Chest at Chatham be regulated, and to that end be put under
the Care and Inspection of the Commissioners of this Office; and in regard that
the present Revenue of that Chest consists of the Seamens Deductions, which in
time of Peace fall short, and are of no competent Support for the poor disabl'd
Seamen: It is in the second place Proposed,

2. That if the Law-Bill (which was lately in being) were revived and settled
upon this Chest, for the Relief and Support of Seamen, wounded and disabled in
their Majesty's Service; it would not be felt by the Subject, and at the same
time be a constant Fund for this use enough to support it; and whereas a Seaman
has now at the most twenty Nobles a Year for the lose of a Limb, he should then
have at last double that sum, and so be Happier without his Limb than with it;
for the Smart will be forgot when the Money is present. And here my chief design
should be to prevent that common Evil too often seen in things given to good
uses, that the Pillars to support it, may not be the Caterpillars of it.

And that this Office may be kept up in time of Peace as well as, War, to be
ready at all times, for their Majesty's Service; It is humbly Proposed that all
Ships, Vessels and small Craft, shall for each Man they find in time of War,
pay 5 s. per Annum in time of Peace, as an Acknowledgment to this Office.

And that Seamen in Merchant-Ships may not still pretend they have nothing
allowed them, if they lose their Limbs, whereby many Ships have been lost, for
want of defending them; This Office, in case it be thus settled, will, for the
future, pay and allow to all Seamen, wounded and disabl'd in Merchants-Ships,
and likewise in private Men of War, two third parts of what is allowed to
Seamen in their Majesty's Ships of War in the like case.

But if any Seaman or Sailer in any Merchant-Ship shall absent himself, or
refuse or neglect to Fight against the Enemy, when required by his Captain or
Master, such Seaman or Sailer so neglecting or resusing to Act in his station
shall forfeit and lose all his Wages due, and not be capble of recovering the
same in any Court whatsoever. And in Case any Seaman or Sailer shall desert any
Ship when she runs a ground, or is in danger to be stranded, if such Ship be
saved by the Masters industry and getting other hands, such Seaman or Sailer so
deserting his Ship in time of exigency shall forfeit and lose all his Wages,
due and not be cacapable of recovering the same in any Court whatsoever.

Now to demonstrate what may undoubtedly be saved to the King and Kingdom, by
the foregoing Method, I find, that the whole Fleet by the List of the Line of
Battle, consists not of 36000 Men, with Fireships and Tenders; and now we need
not half the Tenders we had before, there being no occasion for them to go a
Pressing.

And when the great Ships are come in and paid off, that is, the 16 first and
second Rates, and 18 of the third Rates, with Fireships, which together take up
about 21000 Men, Officers and all; their whole Pay may be saved during the
Winter, which at the Method usual in the Navy, of allowing 4 l. a Man per
Month, to pay all Wages, Victualling, Wear and Tear, amounts to 84000 l. per
Month, and that for six Months comes to 504000 l. At the same time we shall
have a Winter Squadron, which will be 15 third Rates, and 13 fourth Rates,
besides fifth and sixth Rates. And then we shall not want 10500 Men to be at
all Calls, by reason the others are got already.

Thus besides the said 504000 l. which may be saved each Winter, by paying off
the great Ships, there may be likewise saved 60000 l. at least in Conduct,
Bounty, and Imprest-Mony, and the hiring Vessels for Pressing; so that by the
whole, it appears, besides saving the King these vast Sums yearly, His Majesty
will always have men on any occasion for his Service, his Ships may be ready to
Sail Clean, and in good order: No Pretense can be made use of for lying still
for want of Men, when the Terrors of Pressing and frequent Mischiefs attending
it, are prevented, Protections taken off, because no need of them: Merchants
and Traders will have their Liberty to Traffic, to their own advantage, as
well as the increase of their Majesty's Customs, and the universal good and
benefit of all their Majesty's Kingdoms; those concerned are generally willing
to it, wishing it had been done before, for that it would have saved them a
great deal of Money; and if this be done, I shall have the Satisfaction of
Serving their Majesty's Effectually upon the French, for their Barbarous Usage
to Me; and I doubt not but it will have that Effect, as not only to regain our
Ancient Glory, and put us beyond the Danger of being ever attempted by them (or
any Foreign Enemy) for the Future; but that their Majesty's Royal Navy may go
and Command where they please, and have none dare to oppose them.

And herein I have taken Care as near as may be, not to disoblige or reflect on
any Person: But it cannot be avoided, but that so great a Public Good will
Retrench the Profit of some Officers, as the Secretary of the Admiralty, and
his Clerks, etc. who may for that reason endeavor to obstruct and object
against it; in which Case I desire to be rightly understood, that what I do is
purely for the Service of their Majesty's and the Kingdom, and not to bring a
disadvantage to any Man: But that they may not be Sufferers for a General
Benefit, their Majesty's, if they so please, may compensate their Loss by
Sallary or otherwise, as their Majesty's shall think fit.

Provided always, that in Case any of their Majesty's Men of War, lose her Men
in Action, or by Sickness or otherwise, and being abroad cannot be supplied
from this Office with safety to the Ship, such Ship for her Security may
Impress as formerly, but so as not to disable any Merchant-man.

And in case this Office be thus settled, and that the Law Bill lately in being,
be revived and bestowed upon it; It is humbly Proposed, besides what additional
Encouragement is given to Seamen, wounded and disabled in their Majesty's Ships
of War, Privatiers, and Merchantmen; That there shall be likewise two large
Schools Erected, near a Rivers side, in some Cheap Country, where the Children
of all Seamen killed in their Majesty's Service, shall be taken into one of
these Schools, at twelve years of Age, and be there Taught the Mathematics:
That they shall lie in West India Hammocks, which in the day time may be put
into Lockers, that there may be no room lost for their Lodgings, and every
thing be in good order, so that then it will be wondered where they Lie,

That there shall be a Ship in the River near the School, where, on Play-days,
or other fit Times, the Boys shall go on Board, and Learn to Splice and Knot,
Reef and Furl, etc. whereby they may know all the parts of a Ship, and
understand the Mechanic part of a Sailer, in two or three years time, as well
as if they were at Sea; and then they may be drawn off to Sea every year, as
occasion offers, when they will want nothing but to get their Sea-Legs.

These Youths so drawn off yearly, shall be put out Apprentice for three Years
to Commanders or Lieutenants of Men of War, or Warrant Officers in their
Majesty's Ships, and not for seven Years to Masters of Merchantmen, as is done
to the King's Scholars in Christ-Church Hospital, where, after their Majesty's
have been at great Expense in their Education for three Years, and in putting
them out Apprentice at 40 l. charge in Money and Clothes; they are Bound for
seven Years to Masters of Merchant-Ships, who alone have the benefit of them,
without any advantage to their Majesty's or the Youths, tho at their going out
they are examined, as to their Qualification for the Sea, and perhaps are
better Artists than the Masters they are put to, whereas if they had never been
Taught any thing, or were even took out of the street, they might as well be
put out for half the Money, and the Masters be bound to teach them as much as
these; and after all the Charge their Majesty's are and have been at on this
Account, and that there are Ten drawn off to Sea every Year, for these 18 Years
past, there are not now Ten of them in their Majesty's Service, tho otherwise
there might have been many, had they been Bound to Commanders or Officers of
Men of War.

There are a great many People have entertained a Notion that those bred up in
Merchantmen are better Seamen, than those bred up in Men of War; but to
undeceive them in this Particular, it is evident, that a Cruising Man of War in
two Months time plows more Sea, and wanders further between Heaven and Earth,
than a Merchant-ship does in a Year, by reason he Chases every Sail he sees to
discover what they are; when as a Merchant-ship, like a Carrier's-Horse, goes
only the direct Road, to come at his Port the nearest way he can; besides he is
heavy laden, so that a Man of War runs two Foot to his one: Then he is obliged
to stay her for Freight, and often for Convoy, which taken altogether, often
keeps him in Port or Harbor nine Months in a Year, whereas a Cruising Man of
War is out at Sea nine Months in a Year; so that it is hereby very plain, that
in two years there is more to be Learned in a Man of War, both as to Action,
the way of Command, and otherwise, than by being seven Years in a Merchant-man;
but many hold this Argument, hoping thereby to be thought to understand the Sea.

The other School shall be for the Sons of Commanders killed in their Majesty's
Service, and the Sons of Gentlemen, that are willing to be bred up to the Sea,
where they shall be Taught every thing necessary, to qualify them to make
Officers, as particularly Navigation, Fortification, Gunnery, Languages, the
Exercise of Pike and Musket, etc. They shall be lodged in pretty decent
Apartments, and have Tutors and good Orders among them, sufficient for their
Education and Instruction in things of this nature, which will be of great
Consequence to this Kingdom; and then when it is seen that this is well
managed, it may be presumed many well minded People, that have got Estates by
the Sea, and have no Heirs of their own, may leave their Estates or good
Legacies to the Support and Maintenance of these Schools, which may properly be
called the Academy for the Sea.

Encouragement for Commanders and Seamen in Their Majesty's Service, for Taking
the Enemies Ships, Goods and Effects.
I. THat all Privatiers belonging to the Enemy, who shall hereafter be taken by
any of their Majesty's Men of War, shall be forthwith Condemned in the
Admiralty Court, without any account given to the Prize-Office, and be: shared
among the ships company, which so made her Prize, pursuant to the usual Method.
This was done the last Dutch War, when the Swan Privatier being taken by
Captain Young, his then Majesty King Charles II. bought her of the said
Captain, and made her a Man of War in the year 1675. As also the Hunter in like
manner bought of Sir John Berty. AS to Privatiers, that great Encouragement
ought to be given for the taking of them, by reason they are in a state of War
and Defense, whereby their Majestis Commanders do come to an Engagement with
them, and often find them well Manned, whereby they not only destroy those Ships
of Prey, which greatly disturb the Traffic and Commerce of the Kingdom, but
kill and lessen the number of their Mariners, and consequently destroys the
Naval Force of the Enemy, and leaves our Merchantmen the better liberty of
Trade. II. All Ships of Merchandise, etc. taken out of the Enemies Harbors,
Ports, Creeks, or from and under any Castle, Fortification or Fort, or off, or
from the Shore, or at Anchor under any Head-land, by any of their Majesty's Men
of War, together with any Goods, Effects and Merchandise, that shall be seized
by them, shall be condemned in the Admiralty, and shared as aforesaid. That all
Commanders that shall take the Enemies Ships, by dint of Sword from under their
Guns, ought to have the Encouragement thereof, for that they run an extreme
risk, hazard and danger of their Lives, thereby giving the Enemy constant
Allarms, making the People uneasy, and putting them to a great Charge in
Guarding their Coasts, besides bringing an advantage to their Majesty's in
their Customs, of such Goods so taken thence; And that if the Prize be taken at
Anchor, it may nevertheless not be disputed, for that it is to be supposed all
Men during the time of War, will Anchor in as great Safety as may be. III. All
Merchants Ships and Goods belonging to the Enemy and taken as Prize at Sea, on
Board all Foreigners, viz. Swedes, Danes, Portuguese, and other Nations, that
shall be taken trading with their Majesty's Enemies with Contraband Goods,
shall be Condemned in the Admiralty, and one third of her lading so Condemned,
be given to the Captain, Officers and Seamen, that so took her as Prize, and
paid to the Captain as soon as the Commissioners receive the Money, and not
according to the former method at ten days after payment of the Man of War,
which is not sometimes till two or three years after. That this Encouragement
will put the Commanders to a strict searching of all Foreign Ships for
Contraband Goods, which otherwise would slightly be viewed, or for a small Sum
of Money prevailed upon to suffer them to pursue their several Voyages, to the
great Disservice of the Nation; but the hopes of this will put them upon the
contrary Design. IV. That all Salvage adjudged for Retaking any Ship, shall be
distributed to the Captain and Ships Company, according to ancient Custom: as
likewise one 3d part of the Goods taken and Condemned from Swedes and Danes,
etc. Whereas now if those Ships be not Condemned, the Capter has no benefit of
the Goods that are Condemned, through the want of a Proclamation made full to
that purpose, which is very hard upon the poor Sailers in their Majesty's
Service, who by that means have got nothing all the War. This Encouragement
will hinder any Embezelment, being made after retaking a Ship, and cause the
Captain to take more care in seeing her brought safe into Port. And by this the
poor sailers will be certain of getting something, when their Proportion is
ascertained by Proclamation; whereas at present, if one of their Majesty's
Ships weakens her self to send a Swede or Dane into Port, he may be in danger
by happening to meet with one of his own rank; and besides the Seamen put on
Board the Swede or Dane, are in danger of having the Ship retaken, and being
carried into France, where they suffer great hardship, and for all this, as the
Case now is, have no benefit, if the Ship as well as the Goods be not
Condemned. V. That all Commanders, that shall meet with and Fight the Enemy, to
the utmost extremity, and being overpowered, shall happen to be taken, and his
Ship sunk, burnt, or so extremely disabl'd, that they cannot carry her off, but
are either forced to sink or burn her themselves, the said Commander shall be
allowed the full value, of what he makes out to have lost by the said Capture,
and shall receive his full pay the time of his Captivity; and in Case he the
said Captain be disabled in his Limbs or Body; as not being able any more to go
to Sea, shall have a Pention during the Interval he shall be otherwise taken
Care of, and provided for. That the Encouragement mentioned therein will put
all Commanders upon the Emulation of behaving themselves valiantly, to the
utmost extremity; encourage the Nobility and Gentry to send their younger
Children to Sea, when as they find that the Government makes a competent
Provision for them, (as now the contrary has a different Effect) And this
Article being the Case of a great many honest Gentlemen, is the rather hoped
will be taken into Consideration, for that it is of great Consequence to their
Majesty's Service, and generally observed in all Governments, that Rewarding
well and Punishing well, is the chief means of being well served; therefore
it is hoped this will be put into Execution for Encouragement at Sea, which is
our chiefest Strength. How to Share a Prize Taken by a Man of War. Reasons for
the Sharing a Prize, according to the Method on the other Side. I. The Moiety
of what the King gives in any Prize is to the Captain, and the Money to be paid
into his Hands, to be shared among the Ships company, after paying one fifth
part to the Commander in chief of the squadron, or Fleet; Tho Admiral Russel
has been so generous not to take any thing on that account daring this War. I
should be glad that I could say so of all the rest of the Flag-Officers. The
Captain having a Moiety, is in regard of his being answerable for any Plunder
made before the said Prize be brought into Port, and delivered into the
Prize-Office, in which case he also loses his own Share; and as he has the Care
and Conduct of the Ship, and is liable to answer for all misdemeanors, it is
thought reasonable he should be allowed one half according to ancient Custom,
and have the Distribution of all such Money, as the King in his Bounty shall
think fit to give in such Case. II. The Lieutenant or Lieutenants, are to have
seven Shares The Lieutenants having 7 Shares (which is one share more than the
Master has) is in respect to his Commission, and that he Commands the Master.
III. The Master Six Shares. The master having six Shares (which is one more
than the rest of the Warrant-Officers) is in regard he Commands them. IV. The
Minister, Surgeon, and all Warrant-Officers, five Shares. The Masters-mates,
tho not Warrant-Officers, have five shares as well as they, in regard upon the
Watch they Command the Warrant-Officers. V. Masters-Mates, as Warrant-Officers
five Shares. VI. Midship-Men 3 Shares. The Midship-Men have 3 shares, as being
Officers, and having a Command over the Seamen. VII. Gunners-mates,
Boat-Swains-Mates, Carpenters -- Mates, Chirurgions-Mates, and all of that
degree to have three Shares. The Warrant-Officers Mates, having command of
their respective Crews, are thought fit to have three Shares. VIII.
Quarter Masters, Quarter-Gunners, Cocksons, Corporals; and all of that Rank to
have two shares. The other small Officers have two shares, to make a
distinction betwixt them and the Seamen. IX. And so able Seamen, and ordinary
Seamen, to have one share each. If this be put into a Proclamation, that all
Men may know what their respective Shares of Prize taken will be, it will cause
a great Easiness in the Fleet, prevent Animosities, and making Parties there,
which are more likely on this account than any other, and if any such Divisions
there be, their Majesty's and the Kingdom are the losers by it.

The Reasons of the differences betwixt the Captains of Men of War, and
Commissioners of the Prize, are first the undue Appraisement; Secondly, The
great Embezelments which they meet with from Prize-Officers, which often puts
the Captains upon Plundering the Ships before they deliver them in.

To prevent these Inconveniences, the following Proposals are humbly offered,
whereby the King may not be Cheated, and the Captain and Ships Company may have
Right done them.

Proposals The Reasons I. When any Captain shall bring or send a Prize into
Port, and deliver her into the Prize-Office, appointed for the Appraisment of
the said Prize, on behalf of the King, the Captain to be there, or to choose two
others in his Absence, whose Names shall be sent to the Commissioners Prizes,
who shall give them power to Act along with the two Custom-House Officers, and
Prize-Officers in the Appraisment of the said Prize. Two Custom-House Officers
are conceived necessary to be joined with the two Prize-Officers, that the King
may not be defrauded of his Customs as formerly, and the Captain being there,
or two in his behalf, will prevent any Fraud to the King, himself or the ships
Company. II. That for the advantage and encouragement of the Buyers, the Goods
shall be Appraised in small Quantities (and not whole Ships Cargoes together,
as formerly) which will be a great A^gmentation to the price. That the Goods
Appraised in small Quantities, will give liberty to small Merchants to buy,
whereby the price will be much augmented, to the advantage both of the King and
Captain, etc. III. That the said Goods so Appraised be sold afterward by Inch
of Candle, and set up at the price Appraised, by which Means the value will
again be much augmented, and prevent any thing of Fraud. The Goods being sold
by Inch of Candle after Appraised, will prevent any Fraud or private Contract,
which wrongs either King or Subjects, and will much heighten the value of
Goods. IV. The Sale will be free and public, and timely notice given to all
Persons, particularly to the Appraisers, who shall be allowed to bid, so that
neither the King nor the Captain be wronged. The Sail being free and Public,
the Appraisers, Custom, and Prize-Officers, are free to bid, being to be sold
to the best Chapman.

It is conceived necessary, that there be a Seaman Comptroller of the
Prize-Office, which would be a great Advantage to their Majesty's, and make all
sides easy.

Encouragement for English Privatiers.
1. THat such English private Men of War, as shall take any French or other
Enemies Privatiers, or Ships, having Letters of Mart, may have the whole
without Payment of Tenths; by reason in doing this, they venture their Lives
and Estates, for the Public Good, such Prizes being but of small value.

2. That all such Prizes as shall be taken off the Enemies Shore, or at Anchor
under any Fort or Castle, or within any Port, Harbor, Road, Headland or Creek
of the Enemies Country, may pay no Tenths, by reason of the great Hazard and
Danger the Men thereby run of their Lives and of losing their Vessels, which
will not be done without Encouragement.

3. That they may pay no Tenths for any Salvage, that shall be adjudged to them
for Retaking any English or Friend's Ship, by reason they have often Retaken
small Vessels, for which they have had but a fifth part, amounting to not above
the Charge of bringing them in, and the Charges of the Law, and yet have been
obliged to pay Tenths of such Fifths, to their great Discouragement, the which
is so much the more reasonable to be condescended to, for that several Ships
have been Retaken, which have paid his Majesty 2 or 3000 l. each for Custom,

4. That whereas many Ships, that have lain in Ports, Harbors and Roads of this
Kingdom without any Seizure or Molestation of the Vice-Admirals or Governors,
have been found out to be the Enemies Goods, and seized by private Men of War,
and Condemned as Prize, the said Vice-Admirals or Governors have very much
obstructed them in the Condemnation thereof, and sometimes after Condemnation
have claimed the same to their Use, or the Use of their Majesty's, to the great
discouragement of private Men of War, without whose Diligence and Intelligence
they had never been discovered or seized: Therefore it is proposed, that in
such Cases they may have no Molestation or Impediment, but have their Prizes
according to their Commissions, which grant them all they shall take, as well
in Ports or Harbors, as upon the Sea.

5. That the Tenths of all other Prizes may be remitted to them concerned in
private Men of War, for their Encouragement, for the Reasons following, viz.

I. The French King does at this time do the same, which has so Encouraged
their Privatiers, that they have fitted out many Ships of good force, and much
annoyed and disturbed our Trade; the French Privatiers having taken about 600
of our Ships, whereas their Men of War have not taken Sixty.

II. This Encouragement will enable the Concerned, to fit out better Ships than
now they have, and get Men to Man them by contracting to take Care of all such
Men as shall be Wounded, and the Wives and Families of them that shall be
Killed or Drowned, which at present they cannot afford to do.

III. There is more Reason to make this Remission of Tenths to the English
private Men of War, than the French, in regard of the Prohibition, and the
small Trade of France.

6. Whereas it may be objected, that unless some Officers be put on Board each
Prize, the private Men of War will be at liberty to do what they please, and
such Officers cannot be maintained without Duties to bear the Charge: It is
answered, That each private Man of War, at the taking out of his Commission,
does not only oblige his Ship, self and Owners, but also gives two other
sufficient Securities in 3000 or 1500 l. Bond, not to abuse their Majesty's
Subjects or Allies, but to make Satisfacton for all Injuries done by them, and
to pay Customs, etc. And besides the Custom-House Officers presently put
Waiters on Board, to look after the Customs, which the private Men of War pay
themselves, without Charge to their Majesty's; And by this proposed
Encouragement, the Customs will be Increased by the Prize-Ships, so that it
will pay twenty times more than their Majesty's have or will receive for
Tenths: And Besides, the Encouragement of English Private Men of War, will be
very beneficial to this Kingdom, not only in the Increasing of Customs, and
weakening the Enemy as aforesaid, but in breeding of Seamen, they being obliged
by their Bonds to carry two third Landmen, and but one third of their
Complement Seamen.

7. And if it be objected, that by thus Remitting the Tenths, the Advocate,
Receiver, etc. employed therein, will lose their Salaries; the Proposer humbly
hopes it will not be thought Reasonable, that the private Interest of two or
three Persons, without advantage to the King or Government should be preferred
before so great a Public Good, as this Encouragement would be both to the King
and Kingdom.

Lastly. It is demonstrable, that this Encouragement to Privatiers, will prove
of no small advantage to his Majesty's Customs; for Example, they frequently
Retake rich Ships, prevent Ships being taken, and one Ship retaken, oftentimes
brings in more Customs to his Majesty than the Tenth will amount to in a whole
Year; so that both his Majesty and Subjects well be much the Gainers by this
Means: Therefore it is to be hoped these Proposals will meet with their
Majesty's Compliance, for that their Majesty's may at first give it only for a
Year, or what time they shall think fit, to see the advantage of it, and
afterward to do therein as they please.

Reasons humbly Offered for bringing down the Exorbitant Rates of Seamens Wages
from 50 s. and 3 l. a Month, to 30 s. and 35 s. a Month.
THe Seamen for the lucre of such great Wages in Merchantmen, do lurk and hide
themselves from their Majesty's Service, whereby it comes to be so difficult to
get Men for the Kings Ships, whereas if their Wages were near alike, their
Majesty's would never want Seamen in their Fleet. A Seamans Wages, in a
Merchant-man, in time of Peace, is usually about 25 s. a Month, and in a
Collier 30 or 40 s. a Voyage, which now is come to 6, 7, and 8 l. a Voyage; and
50 s. and 3 l. a Month in a Merchant-man, which while they can have, they will
leave their Majesty's Ships and abscond themselves from being Impressed, rather
than serve for the usual Rate of the Navy, which is 23 s. a Month at 28 days in
a Month, which is 25 s. a Month at twelve Months in the Year; and till such
their extraordinary Wages be brought down, it is not to be thought it will be
otherwise, though it is not evident they are ever the Richer at the Years End
for any such large Wages. As for Instance, a Seaman goes to Newcastle, and
perhaps has 6 or 7 l. for his Voyage; while that lasts he never goes to Sea
again; but lurks about till he is run 30 or 40 s. in debt to his Landlady, and
then it may be makes another trip to Newcastle, and so is not above 3 Months at
Sea in a year, whereby the Nation loses the benefit of his service all the rest
of his time.

Therefore it is humbly proposed, that for their Majesty's Service, the Rates
of Seamens Wages in Merchantmen be reduced to 30 s. per Month going with
Convoy, and 35 s. per Month running without Convoy; and that if any private
Sailer shall demand more than the Rates aforesaid, that he may be brought to
the Office to be erected for Registring of Shipping and small Craft, and thence
sent on Board one of their Majesty's Ships of War, there to serve for a Year as
a Prest-man.

This will be an Equivalent for the Masters and Owners of Ships, providing a
Seaman according to my Proposal; for Example, a Ship of 70 Tun has seven Men
to Sail her, whereof five are before the Mast, and now receive 50 s. a month:
By this Regulation the Master will save 5 l. a Month while at Sea, in lieu of
one Seaman each Ship is to find for the King, and hereby the Seamen in their
Majesty's Ships will have Encouragement, because they will have Money given them
to go, and lose none of the great Wages which now tempts them to lurk, and go
in Merchantmen.

It may be Objected, that this Reducement of Wages will make Seamen leave their
native Country and go into Foreign service

To which it is Answered on the contrary, that they will not do it, because
first no Nation Victuals so well as the English, and our Sailers love to Eat
well: I that have Summer'd and wintered them so often, know something of their
Tempers; Secondly, It is as good Wages, if not better, than any other Country
gives, and therefore it is not to be thought, that English Seamen (except some
few Scoundrels, I have observed good for nothing) will leave their Native
Country, their Friends and their Families, to go into Foreign Service for the
same or less Wages, which may sufficiently Be seen by their refusing the French
Service, tho they had large offers made them.

This done, will be a vast Advantage to their Majesty's Fleet, and the Benefit
of Trade; 'twill be an Ease on all sides, and make Seamen plenty.

And to show that there are English Seamen sufficient both for public and
private Service, we may observe this last Summer, that their Majesty's Fleet
was very well Maned, besides great Fleets of Merchant Ships, both Abroad and at
Home: And if Care in the first place be taken of the Grand Fleet, which is the
main Interest of the Kingdom, the Seamen for Merchants Ships may be the least
of Our Care, for they will not fail of having Men enough.

If it be questioned, whether Seamen will come into their Majesty's Service,
for 5 l. Advance, according to this Propsal.
It is answered, That they certainly will for these follwing Reasons.

I. A Seaman for the sake of two Months Advance in an Eastindia-man in time of
Peace (which is but between 40 and 50 s.) will enter himself to go to the
East Indies, for 20 and 23 s. a Month, tho that be a hard and sickly Voyage,
two years out from their Friends, and some times three, and after all must
repay that two Months Advance again.

II. Since this War, it may be seen, what effect their Majesty's bounty of six
weeks Pay has had among the Seamen; for this last Summer the Admirals Ship,
also Sir Ralph Delavalls, Colonel Churchill's and several others, were very
well Manned all with Volunteers, who came in for the sake of that Bounty, as
may be seen by the many Thousand pounds paid by their Majesty's on that Account.

And then can it be doubted, that if six weeks Bounty, which is but 34 s. and 6
d. has so great an effect upon them, that 5 l. (which is above four Months
Bounty) can any way fail, especially when Seamen are assured of being paid off
at the laying up the great Ships; for this being ready Money, and so
considerable, will be the greater encouragement to Seamen to leave with their
Wives and Families in their absence. And this Money the Masters and Owners of
Ships cannot grudge to pay, in Regard of the Equivalent before Proposed of
bringing down the Seamens Wages, by which not only the Seamen will the readier
come into the Kings Service, when the temptation of great pay in Merchants
Ships is taken off, but also the Merchant will gain by thus paying the 5 l. in
saving the great Rate he now pays for Wages.

Advertisement to the Reader.
THE following Proposals being humbly offered to the furtherance of Their
Majesty's Service, as well in the speedy and easy Manning the Fleet, as
preventing the great Expense and Cost of Impressing Seamen; It is not to be
supposed, that Their Majesty's must lose Their Royal Power and Prerogative of
Impressing Seamen, and others, in Cases of Exigencies, and when these Methods
fail, which I have no reason as yet to doubt of. But it will be still a further
Encouragement for Seamen to come in Volunteers for the sake of the Reward, when
they shall still be liable to a Press if they do not come in, and the fear of
that will make them the more willing to go upon Encouragement rather than be
forced to go without it; and that is also the Reason of the Merchants, Owners
and Masters of Ships, being willing this should go forward, in that it will
free them of the Charge of Protections, and prevent the hindrance of their
Voyages, by which they are now great losers.

If the matter of these ensuing Sheets be not digested into that Method and
Order I could wish, and that the Style and Language be not Correct enough to
appear in Print, I must beg the Reader to consider, first, That it comes from a
Sailer, whose Busmess it is rather to speak Truth plain, than Neat and Elegant;
Secondly, That the haste I was in to get them Printed early enough for the
Parliament to make them Useful for the ensuing Year, may be partly the occasion
of it; and Thirdly, That by my ill Usage and Hardships sustained in my
Imprisonment in France, my Memory is prejudiced; but sure I am there is a good
Foundation for wiser Heads to work upon; and when the Parliament have it under
their Consideration, it will be at their Election to Enact this for a Year, or
what time they please, and under what Regulations shall be thought fit, and
according as it shall be found in that time it may either be made use of, or
not.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by William Miller, at the Acorn in St. Paul 's
Churchyard, where Gentlemen, or others, may be furnished with the best
Collections, either in whole or in part, taking all the State-Matters,
Church Government, Sermons, Divinity or Humanity.
In FOLIO.

ASSemblies Annotations in two Vol. Ainswhorth's Annotations. Book of Martyrs,
in three Vol. Ben. Johnson's Play, Bartholomew-Fair. His Staple of News. Devil
is an Ass Boyle's Wall-Flower. Charleton's Physiologia, or a Fabric of
Science, Natural, upon the Hypothesis of Atoms. Downam of Justification.
Extravagant Shepherd, the Anti-Romance. Elton on the Colossians. Guzman's Life.
Goad's Aphorisms and Discourses on the Bodies Celestial. Spanish Baud.
Herbert's Travels. Heylen's Cosmography. Heywood of Angels. His Love and
Revenge, a Romance. Pryn's History of King John, etc.

In QUARTO.

Allin's Scripture Chronology. Arraignment of the whole Creature. Barclay's
Argenis, with the Cuts. Ball against Came of Separation. Behmon's Works.
Bolton's Pieces. Baxter's Works. Brisket's Discourse of a Civil Life. Blunt's
Voyage to the Levant. Lord Bacon's Essays. Craddock's Knowledge and Practice.
Clark's Life of William the Conqueror. -- Black Prince. -- Sir Francis Drake.
Coopers Heaven Opened, Romans 8. Carpenter's pragmatical Jesuit, a Comedy.
Declaration of Nusances, in Cities Towns and Corporations, by four Famous Sages
of the Common Law, Mounson, Plowden, Manwood; with the Resolution of the Judges
of Assize. Dod on the Commandments. -- On the Sacrament. -- On the Lord's
Prayer. Dike on the Heart, etc.

15795. A Collection of State-Matters in all Volumes, as,

ACTS of Parliament. Answers for and against one another. Advices. Apologies.
Army for and against. Appeals. Animadversions. Articles of War and Peace.
Allarms. Accounts. Addresses. Agreements. Arguments. Almanacks. Bishops for and
against. Charges of High Treason. Considerations. Collections of Papers.
Characters. Conferences. Commissions. Cases. City Affairs. Catalogues of all
sorts. Decrees. Declarations. Desires. Discourses. Discoverers. Dialogues.
England, several sorts English. Fights, diverse. France. Good Old Cause. Grand
Cases. Great Britain. Hue and Cries. Histories. Impeachments. Instructions.
Kings. Knights. Lists. Levellers. Letters. Majesty's. Messages and Answers.
Lilborne's Tracts. Mercuries. Monarchy. Mysteries. Memorials. Murders. News of
most Sorts. As also to supply Gentlemen that want any New-years-Gifts.
Needham's Tracts. Narratives. New England, no Protestant Plot, all the
Gazettes, Observations, Orders, Ordinances.

Parliament, for and against. Proclamations. Plots. Protestations. Plain
English Proverbs. Problems. Politic Powers. Propositions. Pleas. Present
States. Proceedings. Papers. Petitions. Peace. Princes. Tracts. Questions.
Queries. Relation's. Reply. Reasons. Representations. Royalists Defense.
Resolutions. Replications. Remonstrances. Sedgwi^k, Stafford, States, Stubbs.
Speeches. Trials. Travels and Voyages. Treatises, Transactions, Triumphs,
Treason, Tests for and against, Votes of Parliament. Vox Populi, Coeli, Regis,
Dei. Civitas Plebis militis Clamantis. Vindication, Victories, War, Warnings.

3578. Church Government and Divinity, on most Occasions.

3472. Sermons on most Occasions, as,

Assizes, Artillery, Christmas, Passion, Resurrection, Funerls, Feasts, Fifths
of November, Consecration, Thirtieth of January, Twenty Ninth of May, Latin
Visitation, Weddings, etc.

5693. Humanity of several Sorts, as,

Husbandry, Histories, Law, Lilly, L'Estrange, Physic and Surgery, Plays,
Poetry, Popery for and against; Prophesies, Schools, Sea, Trade, Usury and
Witchcraft Books, etc.

158. Catechisms of several Sorts.

18936. Broad Sheets.

RIch's Pen's Dexterity in Shorthand. Divine Examples of God's severe
Judgments upon Sabbath Breakers, in their Unlawful Sports: Collected out of
several Divine Subjects, viz. H. B. Mr. Beard, and the Practice of Piety. A fit
Monument for our present Times.

A Brief Remembrancer: Or, the right improvement of Christ's Birthday.

A Second Sheet of Old Mr. Dodd's Sayings: Or, Another Posie gathered out of
Mr. Dodd's Garden.

Hunting for Money, the First Part.

-- Match for Money. The Second Part.

Venning's Allarm to Unconverted Sinners.

Muses Fireworks upon the Fifth of November, or the Protestant Remembrancer.

Perkins's Whole Duty of Man.

Mr. Richard Baxter's Serious Sayings, concerning the great Duty of Charity.

Bishop Hall's Sayings concerning Travelers, to prevent Popish, and Debauched
Principles.

Bacchanalia Caelestia: A Poem in Praise of Punch.

21459 Other Broad Sheets, and Sheets on several Subjects.

^12796 -- As also in Half-sheets.

FINIS.

