A VINDICATION OF THE DOCTRINE OF THE Holy and Ever Blessed TRINITY, AND THE
INCARNATION OF The Son of God. OCCASIONED By the Brief NOTES on the Creed of
St. Athanasius, and the Brief HISTORY of the Unitarians, or Socinians, and
containing an Answer to both.

By WILLIAM SHERLOCK, D. D. Master of the TEMPLE.

The Second Edition.

IMPRIMATUR, Z. Isham, R. P. D. Henrico Episc. Land. a Sacris. Ian. 9. 1690.

LONDON: Printed for W. Rogers, at the Sun over against St. Dunstans Church in
Fleet Street. 1691.

TO THE READER.
I Will make no Apology for publishing this Vindication of the Great and
Fundamental Mysteries of our Religion, for if ever it were necessary, it is
now, when Atheists and Heretics, some openly, some under a disguise, conspire
together to ridicule the Trinity, and the Incarnation.

I confess, the Book is too big, could I have made it less, as at first I
intended; but when I was once engaged, I saw a necessity of going farther; and
I hope no man will have reason to complain, that I have said too much, but
those, who will find a great deal too much said, for them to answer.

My Original Design was to vindicate the Doctrines of the Trinity and
Incarnation, from those pretended Absurdities and Contradictions, which were so
confidently charged on them: and this I Am sure I have done; for I have given a
very easy and intelligible Notion of a Trinity in Unity, and if it be possible
to explain this Doctrine intelligibly, the Charge of Contradictions vanishes;
and whether men will believe this Account or not, they cannot deny, but that it
is very possible and intelligible, and if we could go no farther, that is
enough in Matters of Revelation.

But I hope, I have done a great deal more than this, and proved, That it is
the true Scripture Account of it, and agreeable to the Doctrine of the Ancient
Fathers; and have vindicated the Scripture Proofs of a Trinity and Incarnation
from the pitiful Sophistries of the late Socinian Historian.

I have not indeed answered particularly the whole Book in Order and Method, as
it lies, which was too tedious a Work, and not necessary; but I have considered
whatever was most material in it, and have avoided nothing, because it was hard
to Answer, but because it needed no Answer, as I am ready to satisfy the
World, whenever a just Occasion calls for it: for having dipped my Pen in the
Vindication of so glorious a Cause, by the Grace of God, I will never desert
it, while I can hold a Pen in my Hand.

I must thankfully own, that the writing of this Book has given me clearer and
more distinct Notions of this Great Mystery, then I had before, which is the
Reason, why the Reader will find some things explained toward the end, which I
spoke doubtfully of at first, as particularly the difference between the
Eternal Generation of the Son, and the Procession of the Holy Ghost; and I hope
this is a pardonable Fault.

The writing this Book has cost me many Thoughts, and those who have a mind
thoroughly to understand it, must not think much if it cost them some; and if
they cannot be contented to bestow some serious Thoughts on it, it will be lost
labor to read it. I pray God give success to it, and open the Eyes of those
Men, before it be too late, who are so industrious to write or disperse such
Brief Notes and Brief Histories, as are valuable for nothing but Blasphemy and
Nonsense; for I will be bold to say, That Socinianism (after all its pretenses
to Reason) is one of the most stupid senseless Heresies, that ever infested the
Christian Church.

THE CONTENTS.
SECT. I. COncerning the Nature of a Contradiction, and how to know it. page 1.
Many Contradictions pretended, where there are none, as in the Notion of a
Spirit, and of God 3 How to discover when a pretended Contradiction is not
real, but in our imperfect Conception of things. 4 It is absurd to dispute
against the Being of any thing from the difficulty of conceiving it. 5 What the
natural Boundaries of Humane Knowledge are. 9 SECT. II. The Athanasian Creed
contains nothing but what is necessary to the true Belief of the Trinity and
Incarnation. 10 The Dispute between the Greek and Lat. Church, about the
filioque. 17 SECT. III. Concerning the necessity of the Catholic Faith to
Salvation, and a Brief History of Athanasius. 21 That the Catholic Faith is
necessary to Salvation. 25 What is meant by keeping the Catholic Faith whole
and undefiled. 28 The Scriptures being a complete Rule of Faith, do not make
Athanasius's Creed an unnecessary Rule. 29 The great usefulness of ancient
Creeds. 31 Pope Leo III. would not deny Salvation to those who disowned the
filioque. 33 What is meant by the Catholic Faith. 35 The History of
Athanasius. 37 SECT. IV. The Catholic Doctrine of a Trinity in Unity, and
Unity and Trinity, explained, and vindicated from all pretended Absurdities and
Contradictions. 45 What it is that makes any Substance numerically One. 48 The
Unity of a Spirit nothing else but Self-consciousness. ibid. And therefore
mutual consciousness makes Three Persons essentially and numerically One. 49
The unity of a Mind or Spirit reaches as far as its Self-consciousness does. 50
That this is the true Scripture Notion of the Unity of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost. ibid. The Unity between Father and Son explained. 51 The union of
created Spirits, an union in Knowledge, Will and Love. 52 The same union
between Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. ibid. But this, which is only a moral
union between Creatures, is an essential union between Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, as it is the effect of mutual Consciousness. 55 This proved from
Scripture, as to the unity between Father and Son. 56 This makes all Three
Divine Persons coessential and coequal. 58 That the Holy Spirit is One with
Father and Son by a mutual Consciousness, proved from Scripture. 64 This Notion
contains the true Orthodox Faith of a Trinity in Unity. 66 For it does not
confound the Persons, but makes them distinct. ibid. Nor divide the Substance,
but makes them numerically One. 68 This makes the Doctrine of the Trinity as
intelligible as the Notion of One God. ibid. The material Images of Substance
confound our Notions, both of One God, and of a Trinity in Unity. 69 God must
be considered as Eternal Truth and Wisdom. 70 Wisdom and Truth a pure and
simple Act, and contains all Divine Perfections. 71 Three infinite Minds must
necessarily be mutually conscious to each other. 74 No positive Notion of
Infinity, but only in a Mind. 75 No infinite Extension. 76 What the true Notion
of Infinite is, that it is absolute Perfection. 78 That there are no absolute
Perfections, but those of a Mind. 79 Extension is no Perfection, nor to be
Omnipresent by Extension. 80 The same absolute Perfections of a Mind, by a
mutual Consciousness, may be entire and equal in Three infinite Minds. 81 This
reconciles the perfect equality and subordination of the Divine Persons. ibid.
And shows, how each Person is God, and all but one God. 82 This gives an
Account of the different modi subsistendi, of which the Schools speak. 83 And
how the Operations of the Trinity ad extra are common to all Three Persons. 85
An Answer to the Absurdities and Contradictions charged on the Doctrine of the
Trinity by the Brief Notes. 87 SECT. V. The Doctrine of the Fathers and Schools
about a Trinity in Unity, reconciled to the foregoing Explication of it. page
100 That the Fathers made the Three Divine Persons Three distinct infinite
Minds 101 That Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are as distinct Persons, as Peter,
James, and John, how to be understood. 104 How the Fathers Explain the Unity of
the Godhead. 105 1. By the (...) or coessentiality of the Divine Persons. 106
What they meant by the (...). ibid. How they proved the Unity of Essence from
the sameness of Nature. Gregory Nyssen's reasoning in this matter, and
vindicated from the Mesrepresentation of Petavius and Dr. Cudworth. 109. etc.
2. To this the Fathers added a Numerical Unity of the Divine Essence. 121
Concerning the Unity of Energy and Power. 123 The (...) or Circumincession is
Self-consciousness. 125 St. Austin explains the Unity of the Divine Persons by
Examples of Self-consciousness. 126 The Unity of the Godhead consists in the
Unity of Principle. 128 How the Three Divine Persons, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost are essential to the Notion of One God, explained at large. 129, etc.
SECT. VI. Concerning expounding Scripture by Reason. 140 The Arguments against
a Trinity in the History of the Unitarians, Letter 1. particularly answered.
153, etc. His first Argument. 154 His second Argument. 155 1 Coloss. 17. The
firstborn of every Creature explained. 156 The Mediatory Kingdom of Christ
explained at large. 159 His third, fourth, and fifth Arguments answered. 176
His sixth Argument. 178 His seventh Argument. 184 His eighth Argument from
those Texts, which declare that the Father only is God. ibid. His ninth
Argument, That if Christ were God, there was no need of giving the Holy Spirit
to his Human Nature. 187 His tenth and eleventh Arguments. 188 His Arguments
against the Godhead of the Holy Ghost. ibid. Concerning the Personality of the
Holy Ghost. 189 That the Spirit is obtained of God by our Prayers, therefore it
self is not God, Answered. 193 Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the entire Object
of Worship. page 193 Those who do not worship the Trinity, do not worship the
true God, if Father, Son, and Holy Ghost be God. 194 No need of any new Cammand
to worship the Holy Ghost, when it is revealed, that he is One God with the
Father and Son. ibid. That the Scripture speaks of God as One Person, Answered.
196 Whether the Socinian Faith be a reasonable and accountable Faith. 198 The
Socinian Faith ridicules the Scriptures. 199 This is particularly shown in the
Expositions of Scripture, contained in the History of the Unitarians. ibid. The
Form of Baptism in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, explained. 209 1 John 1, 2. In the beginning was the Word, etc.
explained and vindicated. 215 How this Historian has represented Grotius. 220
Socinianism makes the Jewish economy very unreasonable and unaccountable. 231
Socinianism ridicules the Christian Religion. 238 SECT. VII. An Answer to what
remains in the Brief Notes. 256 Concerning the Generation of the Son. ibid. The
equality and coeternity of the Persons in the Trinity. 259 Concerning the
Incarnation. 262 How an infinite and finite Being may be united into one
Person. 263 What makes a Personal Union. 266
A VINDICATION Of the DOCTRINE OF THE Holy and Ever Blessed TRINITY, AND OF THE
Incarnation of the SON of GOD, In ANSWER to the Brief NOTES on the Greed of St.
Athanasius.
SECT. I. Concerning the Nature of a Contradiction, and how to know it.
BEFORE I particularly Examine the Brief Notes on Athanasius 's Creed, which
under a pretense of exposing that Creed, charge the Christian Faith itself of
Three Persons and One God, with the most monstrous Absurdities and
Contradictions: I shall, 1. Show what a Contradiction is, and in what cases we
can judge of a Contradiction. 2. I shall take a brief view of the Athanasian
Creed, and show that it signifies no more than that there are Three Persons and
One God, or a Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity; and that if we own this,
we must own the particular Explications of the Athanasian Creed.

First, As for the first: A Contradiction is to deny and affirm the same thing
in the same sense; as to say, that a thing is, and is not at the same time;
that there is but One God, and that there is Three Gods; that is, that there
is, and that there is not, but One God; for if there be Three Gods, then it is
not true that there is only One God: Things which are so contrary as to
contradict each other, can never be both true, for all Contradictions finally
resolve into this: It is, and It is not; which is absolutely impossible.

But when we come to apply this to the nature of Things, we may easily fancy
Contradictions where there are none: For a Contradiction in the nature of
Things, is such a Notion or Idea of any thing as implies a Contradiction; and
then it is impossible any such thing can be, as it is impossible, that such a
Proposition whose terms contradict each other should be true: but then before
we can pronounce, that such a Notion or Idea is contradictions, we must be
sure, that we perfectly understand and comprehend the nature of that Being,
otherwise the Contradiction may not be in the thing, but in our manner of
conceiving it: It is not enough in this case to say, we cannot understand it,
and know not how to reconcile it; but we must say, that we do perfectly
understand it, and know that it cannot be reconciled.

As for instance: Some new Philosophers will tell you, that the Notion of a
Spirit, or an immaterial Substance is a Contradiction, for by Substance they
understand nothing but Matter, and then an immaterial Substance is immaterial
Matter, that is, Matter and no Matter, which is a Contradiction: but yet this
does not prove an immaterial Substance to be a Contradiction, unless they could
first prove, that there is no Substance, but Matter; and that they cannot
conceive any other Substance but Matter, does not prove, that there is no other.

Thus the Atheist discovers a great many Contradictions or Absurdities in the
very Notion and Idea of a God, or of an Eternal, Omnipresent, Omnipotent,
Omniscient Being. For to be without a cause, and without a beginning, without
time, and without succession; to be present everywhere, and to fill all
Places, and yet to have no parts, no extension; to be able to create a World,
and to annihilate it again, to make all things of nothing, and to reduce all
things to nothing again; to know all things, past, present, and to come,
especially the most contingent Futurities, the freest Thoughts and Counsels of
Men, before they think them, or some Ages before they themselves are in being,
without imposing a Fatal Necessity on Humane Actions; I say, the Notion of such
a Being is very much above our conception, and to an Atheist, who is for
believing nothing, but what he can fully comprehend, seems very absurd and
contradictious.

This shows, that Men may easily mistake in charging the Nature and Notions of
Things with Contradictions, and therefore we must enquire, how we may discover,
when such an appearing Contradiction is not real, but is wholly owing to our
imperfect conception of things.

I. Now in the first place we have great reason to suspect this, when it
relates to such things as all Mankind agree, we do not, and cannot fully
understand or comprehend; for it is a vain and arrogant presumption to say what
is, or what is not a Contradiction, when we confess, we do not understand or
comprehend the thing we speak of: A Contradiction in the Nature of Things, is
what is contrary to the Nature of that Being of which we speak: Now so far as
we understand the Nature of any Being, we can certainly tell what is contrary
and contradictions to its Nature: As that Accidents should subsist without
their subject, that a Body should be without extension, or an organized Body
without any distinction of parts; that the same individual Body should be in
Heaven and on Earth, and in a thousand distant places at the same time; that
Flesh and Blood should lie invisible under the Species of Bread and Wine; that
a Body, suppose of five or six foot long, should be concealed under the least
crum of Bread; these and such like are the manifest Absurdities and
Contradictions of Transubstantiation; and we know that they are so, because we
know the Nature of a Body, and know that such things are a contradiction to the
essential Properties of a Body: But now all Men must confess, that they have
not a clear and comprehensive Notion of the Nature and Essential Properties of
a Spirit, especially of an infinite Spirit, as God is; and it is impossible to
know, what is contrary to the Nature of a Spirit, if we know not, what the
Nature of a Spirit is; and that Man, who shall pretend to comprehend all that
is possible in an infinite Nature, is as contemptibly ridiculous, as if he
should challenge to himself infinite Knowledge, for without that, no Man can
comprehend what is infinite.

II. It is a sufficient proof, that such seeming Contradictions are not in the
nature of things, but in our imperfect manner of conceiving them, when we have
other evident proofs, that the thing is, though we cannot comprehend it: for
nothing can be, which involves a Contradiction in its nature, and therefore if
it is, the contradiction is not real, but imaginary. As for instance: As
unconceivable as the Notion of Eternity is, yet all Mankind, even Atheists
themselves, must confess, that something was from Eternity; for if ever there
was nothing, it is impossible there ever should have been any thing; for that
which once was not, can never be without a cause, and therefore whatever
Difficulties there may be in the Notion of an Eternal Being, we must
acknowledge something Eternal, and that is proof enough, that there is nothing
absurd or contradictious in the Notion, though we cannot comprehend it; and I
am sure the Notion of a first Eternal Cause, is much more easy and natural,
than to make either Matter, or the World and all the Creatures in it Eternal.
Whatever we can certainly prove to be, either by Sense, Reason, or Revelation,
if there be any difficulty in conceiving it, we must attribute that to the
imperfection of our own Knowledge, not to any Absurdity or Contradiction in the
thing itself.

This shows how unreasonable that Method is, which is taken by Atheists,
Infidels, and Heretics, to dispute against the being of any thing from the
difficulty of conceiving it, and some pretended Absurdities and Contradictions
in it, when there are very plain proofs that the thing is, and such as it is
impossible for them fairly to answer; this is the fundamental miscarriage,
which is not owing to a prudent caution, as is pretended, but to wilfulness and
obstinacy, and pride of Understanding, or to a fixed prejudice and aversion to
the belief of such matters, and therefore I shall not only observe, but
particularly prove the unreasonableness of it.

The proof of this comes to this one point, that we may have sufficient
evidence of the being of a thing, whose nature we cannot conceive and
comprehend; he who will not own this, contradicts the sense and experience of
Mankind; and he who confesses this, and yet rejects the belief of that, which
he has good evidence for, merely because he cannot conceive it, is a very
absurd and senseless Infidel.

And the reason of this is very plain, because all the ways whereby the being
of any thing can be proved, are obvious and intelligible to all Mankind, but
the nature of most things are very dark and obscure, and such as the wisest Men
know little or nothing of: And therefore we may certainly know, that a great
many things are, whose nature and essential properties we cannot conceive: As
to show this particularly.

1. The proofs that any thing is, are either from Sense, from Reason, or from
Revelation. What is evident to Sense, is evident to all Men, who have their
Senses; what is plainly proved by Reason (and it is not a sufficient proof, if
it be not plain) is plain to all Men, who can use their Reason; and what is
plainly revealed every Man may know, who can read and understand the
Scriptures; the being and nature of things are known very different ways, and
the being of things not only may, but most commonly is known without knowing
their natures: Any Man may know the first, but few Men in any measure can know
the second: Whoever has his Senses about him, knows that there are such things,
as he sees, hears, or feels, but the Philosophy of Nature is not learnt by
Sense: Reason will convince us by some visible and sensible effects, that there
are some invisible causes, without informing us distinctly, what the nature and
powers of such causes are; and God may and does reveal many things to us, which
we either are not capable of fully comprehending, or the nature of which he
does not think fit particularly to explain to us; and in all these cases we may
certainly know, that things are, without understanding the Nature and
Philosophy of them.

2. It is so far from being a wonder to meet with any thing, whose nature we do
not perfectly understand, that I know nothing in the World, which we do
perfectly understand: It is agreed by all Men, whoever considered this matter,
that the essences of things cannot be known, but only their properties and
qualities: The World is divided into Matter, and Spirit, and we know no more,
what the substance of Matter, than what the substance of a Spirit is, though we
think we know one, much better than the other: We know thus much of Matter,
that it is an extended substance, which fills a space, and has distinct parts,
which may be separated from each other, that it is susceptible of very
different qualities, that it is hot or cold, hard or soft, etc. but what the
substance of Matter is, we know not: And thus we know the essential properties
of a Spirit; that it is a thinking substance, with the Faculties of
Understanding and Will, and is capable of different Virtues or Vices, as Matter
is of sensible qualities, but what the substance of a Spirit is, we know no
more than what the substance of matter is:

Thus as for the essential properties, operations, and powers, of Matter,
Sense, Experience, and Observation will tell us what they are, and what causes
constantly produce such effects, and this is all we do, or can know of it; and
he who will not believe that Matter is extended, that the Fire burns, that
Water may be condensed by Frost into a firm and solid Pavement, that Seed sown
in the Earth will produce its own kind again, that a Body can move from one
place to another; that a Stone falls to the ground, and Vapors ascend and
thicken into Clouds, and fall down again to the Earth in gentle Showers, etc. I
say, he who will not believe these things till he can give a Philosophical
account of them, must deny his Senses in complement to his Understanding; and
he who thinks, that he does understand these matters, would make a Man
question, whether he has any Sense.

Thus it is also with reference to a Spirit: We feel within ourselves, that we
can think and reason, that we can choose and refuse, that we can love and hate,
and desire and fear, but what these natural powers and passions are, we know
not; how thoughts rise in our minds, and how one thought begets another; how a
thought can move our Bodies, or fix them in their Seat; how the Body can raise
thoughts and passions in the Soul, or the thoughts and passions of the Soul can
affect the Body: The Properties and Operations both of Bodies and Spirits are
great Secrets and Mysteries in Nature, which we understand nothing of, nor are
concerned to understand them, no more than it is our business to understand,
how to make either a Body or a Spirit; which we have no power to do, if we did
understand it, and therefore it would be an useless piece of Knowledge, which
would serve no end but Curiosity; and that is reason enough why our wise Maker
should not communicate this knowledge to us, were we capable of it, because it
does not belong to our Natures; as no Knowledge does which we can make no use
of: the perfect Notions and Idea's of Things are proper only to that Almighty
Mind, which can give being to them.

Now this plainly shows, what the Natural Boundaries of Humane Knowledge are;
how far we may attain to a certain Knowledge, and where we must give off our
Enquiries, unless we have a mind to impose upon our Understandings with some
uncertain and fanciful Conjectures, or to perplex our selves with inexplicable
Difficulties.

1. As first, We have certain ways of discovering the being of Things, which
fall within the compass of our Knowledge; this our Senses, Reason, or
Revelation, will acquaint us with, and therefore we may know what Things there
are in the World, as far as they fall under the notice of Sense, or are
discovered by Reason or Revelation.

2. We may know what Things are, or what their essential Properties, Qualities,
Operations, and Powers are, whereby we can distinguish one sort of Beings from
another; as suppose, a Body from a Spirit, Bread from Flesh, and Wine from
Blood; and can Reason from Effects to Causes, and from Causes to Effects, with
as great certainty as we understand, what the Causes or Effects are.

3. But the Essences of Things, and the Philosophy of their Natures, the
Reasons of their Essential Properties and Powers, which immediately result from
their Natures, the manner of their Production, and the manner of their
Operations, are Mysteries to us, and will be so, do what we can; and therefore
here our Enquiries must cease, if we enquire wisely; for it is vain and absurd
to perplex ourselves with such Questions, which we can no more answer, than we
can make a World.

The sum is this, when we charge any Doctrine with Absurdities and
Contradictions, we must be sure, that we understand the thing; for if it be
such a thing, as we do not, and cannot understand the Nature of, we may imagine
a thousand Absurdities and Contradictions, which are owing wholly to our
Ignorance of Things.

SECT. II. The Athanasian Creed contains nothing but what is necessary to the
true belief of the Trinity and Incarnation.
II. LET us now take a view of the Athanasian Creed, which this profane Author
makes the Subject of his Drollery and Ridicule; and examine, whether there be
any thing in it, which a good Catholic Christian can reject, without rejecting
the Catholic Doctrines of the Holy and Ever Blessed TRINITY, and the
Mysterious Incarnation of the SON of GOD; for if this Creed contains nothing
but what is necessary to this belief, and what every Christian who believes
these Doctrines must profess, then all these Scoffs, which are cast upon the
Athanasian Creed, do indeed belong to the Christian Faith itself, if the
Trinity and Incarnation be Christian Doctrines.

As to begin with the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity. The Athanasian Creed tells
us: The Catholic Faith is this, that we worship One God in Trinity, and
Trinity in Unity: that is, that we worship One God, and Three Persons, Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost; and this all Christians grant to be the Catholic Faith,
except Arians, Macedonians, and Socinians, and such like Heretics: And how we
must worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, is explained in the next
Paragraph.

Neither confounding the Persons, nor dividing the Substance.

Which must be acknowledged, if there be Three Persons and One God: for if we
confound the Persons, by saying, that they are all but One Person under Three
different Names and Titles, or Denominations, then we destroy the Distinction
of Persons; if we divide the Substance, by saying, that every Person has a
separate Divine Nature of his own, as every Man has a separate Humane Nature,
then we make Three Gods, as Peter, James, and John, are Three Men, which is to
overthrow the Doctrine of One God; and therefore the Creed adds,

For there is One Person of the Father, another of the Son, and another of the
Holy Ghost.

But the Godhead of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost is all One;
the Glory equal, the Majesty coeternal.

This is so far from being a Nicity, that it is no less than a Demonstration,
if we confess Three Persons and One God; for if there be Three Persons, then
the Person of the Father, the Person of the Son, the Person of the Holy Ghost,
must be distinct Persons, or they cannot be Three; if there be but One God,
then the Godhead of all the Three Persons is but One, for if the Godhead were
more than One, there must be more than One God; for the Godhead makes the God,
and there must be as many Gods, as there are Godheads, as there must be as many
Men as there are particular Humane Natures: And if the Godhead be but One, then
with respect to the same One Godhead, all Three Persons must have the same
Glory and Majesty; for there cannot be Three different Glories and Majesty's of
the same One Godhead; and therefore as it follows:

Such as the Father is, such is the Son, and such is the Holy Ghost.

The Father Uncreate, the Son Uncreate, and the Holy Ghost Uncreate.

The Father Incomprehensible, the Son Incomprehensible, the Holy Ghost
Incomprehensible.

The Father Eternal, the Son Eternal, and the Holy Ghost Eternal.

And yet they are not Three Eternals, but One Eternal.

As also there are not Three Incomprehensibles, nor Three Uncreated; but One
Uncreated, and One Incomprehensible.

So likewise the Father is Almighty, the Son Almighty, and the Holy Ghost
Almighty.

And yet there are not Three Almighties, but One Almighty.

So the Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God.

And yet there are not Three Gods, but One God.

So likewise the Father is Lord, the Son Lord, and the Holy Ghost Lord.

And yet not Three Lords, but One Lord.

For like as we are compelled by the Christian Verity, to acknowledge every
Person by himself to be God and Lord.

So are we forbidden by the Catholic Religion, to say, there are Three Gods,
or Three Lords.

This is the sum of all, that as the Catholic Religion, both Natural,
Mosaical, and Christian, requires us to believe, that there is but One God, so
especially the Christian Religion teaches us, that there are Three Divine
Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, who are this One God. Now if each Person
with respect to the same Divine Nature be God, then all the essential
Attributes and Perfections of a God must be allowed to each Person; that he is
Uncreated, Infinite, or Incomprehensible, Eternal, Almighty God and Lord;
unless we will say, that there may be a Created, Finite, Temporal, Impotent
God; that is, a God, who is not in truth either God or Lord: and yet though we
must acknowledge each Person to be God and Lord, we must not assert Three
distinct Uncreated, Incomprehensible, Eternal, Almighty Gods (which is the true
sense of the Article, of which more anon) for that is to make not One, but
Three Gods and Lords, which overthrows the Unity of the Godhead.

Now whatever difficulty there may be in conceiving this (which I do not now
dispute) if that be any fault, it is no fault of the Athanasian Creed, but of
the Doctrine of the Trinity itself; the Athanasian Creed only tells us what we
must believe, if we believe a Trinity in Unity, Three Persons and One God: And
I challenge any Man, who sincerely proffesses this Faith, to tell me, what he
can leave out o^ this Exposition, without destroying either the Divinity of
some of the Three Persons, or the Unity of the Godhead. If each Person must be
God and Lord, must not each Person be Uncreated, Incomprehensible, Eternal,
Almighty? If there be but One God, and One Lord, can there be Three separated
Uncreated, Incomprehensible, Eternal, Almighty Gods! which must of necessity be
Three Gods, and Three Lords: This Creed does not pretend to explain, how there
are Three Persons, each of which is God, and yet but one God, (of which more
hereafter) but only asserts the Thing, that thus it is, and thus it must be, if
we believe a Trinity in Unity; which should make all Men, who would be thought
neither Arians, nor Socinians, more cautious how they express the least dislike
of the Athanasian Creed, which must either argue, that they condemn it, before
they understand it, or that they have some secret dislike to the Doctrine of
the Trinity.

Nor is this to make any additions to the Christian Faith, as some object, no
more than to explain what we mean by GOD is an addition to the Faith: This was
all the Christian Fathers aimed at in their Disputes against Arius, and other
Enemies of the Catholic Faith, and in those Creeds they framed in opposition
to these Heresies, to assert the true Divinity of the Son and Holy Spirit in
such express terms, as would admit of no evasion: For this reason they insisted
so immoveably upon the term Homo-ousios, which signifies, that the Son was of
the same Nature with the Father, as he must be, if he be true and real God;
whereas had he been only like the Father, as the Arians asserted, he could not
be One God with him; for that which is only like something else, is not the
same: Now though the term (...), is not in Scripture, yet this is no
unscriptural addition to the Faith, because all that is signified by it is
there; that is, that Christ is the Eternal and Only Begotten Son of God, a true
and real, not a made, or created, or nominal God: And the Athanasian Creed, as
far as it relates to this matter, is only a more particular explication of the
Homo-ousios, or in what sense the Son is of the same Nature with the Father,
and One God with him.

In the next place, the Athanasian Creed having very explicitly declared the
Unity of the Godhead in Three Persons, it proceeds to the distinct Characters
of each Person, and their Unity among themselves; and here also it teaches
nothing but what seems essential to the Distinction and Unity of the Three
Divine Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

The Father is made of none, neither created nor begotten.

The Son is of the Father alone, not made, nor created, but begotten.

The Holy Ghost is of the Father, and of the Son, neither made, nor created,
nor begotten, but proceeding.

So there is One Father, not Three Fathers, One Son, not Three Sons, One Holy
Ghost, not Three Holy Ghosts.

The Distinction then between these Three Divine Persons, (if I may so speak)
is in the manner of their Subsistence: That the Father is (...), God of
Himself, the Original Fountain of the Deity, not made, nor created, for then he
would be a Creature, not a God; nor begotten, for then he would be a Son, not
the first Father and Origin of all.

The Son is of the Father alone, which is essential to his being a Son; not
made, nor created, for there was no time, when he was not, as all things made
or created must have a beginning, but begotten; which is the proper term,
whereby we express Generation, and whereby the eternal Generation of the Son is
expressed in Scripture: What it signifies we know not any further than this,
that it is the Eternal communication of the Nature and Image of the Father to
him; as an earthly Parent communicates his own Nature and Likeness to his Son.

The Holy Ghost is of the Father and of the Son, not made, nor created, for no
Creature, not begotten, for no Son; but proceeding, (...), the manner of which
we understand no more, than the manner of the Eternal Generation; but there is
this plain difference between being begotten and proceeding, that though the
Holy Spirit have the same Nature with the Father and the Son, yet he represents
the Person of neither, as the Son does the Person of the Father, as being the
brightness of his Father's Glory, and the express Image of his Person: and
therefore is said not to be begotten, but to proceed.

But the difficulty of this is with reference to the Dispute between the Greek
and Latin Church about the Filioque, or the Spirits proceeding from the Father
and from the Son: the reason why the Latin Church insists on this, is to
preserve the Unity and Subordination of the Divine Persons to each other: The
Son is united and subordinate to the Father, as begotten by him: The Holy Ghost
is united and subordinate to Father and Son, as proceeding both from the Father
and from the Son; but if the Holy Spirit proceeded only from the Father, not
from the Son, there would be no Union and Subordination between the Son and the
Spirit, and yet the Spirit is the Spirit of the Son, as well as of the Father,
and that these Three Persons be One God, it is necessary, there should be an
Union of Persons, as well as One Nature: But then the Greek Church confesses,
That the Spirit proceeds from the Father by the Son, though not from the Son;
and by and from are such Niceties, when we confess, we understand not the
manner of this Procession of the Holy Spirit, as ought to have made no Dispute,
much less a Schism between the two Churches: The Greek Church acknowledges the
Distinction of Persons, and their Unity and Subordination; That there is One
Father, not Three Fathers, One Son, not Three Sons, One Holy Ghost, not Three
Holy Ghosts; that the Unity in Trinity, and the Trinity in Unity is to be
worshipped: which is all this Creed requires as necessary to Salvation: He
therefore, that will be saved, must thus think of the Trinity: that is, must
acknowledge and worship a Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity; which the
Greek Church does, and therefore are not excluded from Salvation in this Creed
upon the nice Dispute of the Spirit's proceeding from or by the Son.

That which seems to sound harshest in this Creed is what follows:

And in this Trinity, none is before or after other, none is greater or less
than another.

But the whole Three Persons are coeternal and coequal.

And yet this we must acknowledge to be true, if we acknowledge all Three
Persons to be Eternal, for in Eternity there can be no before, or after other;
and that we cannot conceive an Eternal Generation or Procession, is no great
wonder, when we cannot conceive an Eternal being, without any beginning or any
cause: As for greater or less, and the equality of Three Persons, this we must
confess also, if we believe all Three Persons to be one Supreme and Sovereign
God; for in one Supreme Deity, there cannot be greater or less; but then we
must distinguish between Subordination and Equality: Persons who are equal may
be subordinate to each other; and though there be not a greater or less, yet
there is Order in the Trinity: Equality is owing to Nature, Subordination to
Relation and Order, which is indeed a greater and less in Relation and Order
without an inequality of Nature, and it is the Equality of Persons with respect
to their Nature, not to their Order and Subordination, of which the Creed
speaks; for in this sense the Father is greater than the Son, and the Father
and the Son than the Holy Spirit, as being first in Order, but their Nature is
the same, and their Persons with respect to this same Nature coequal.

And now I see no reason to make such Exclamations, as some Men do, against
that damnatory Sentence, That except every One do keep this Faith whole and
undefiled, without doubt he shall perish everlastingly, and that he that will
be saved must thus think of the Trinity; which refers to no more than the
belief of Three Persons and One God, or a Trinity in Unity, and Unity in
Trinity, which I take to be the true Christian Faith, and as necessary to
Salvation as any part of the Christian Faith is; but of this more anon.

Thus much for the Doctrine of the Trinity; as for the Doctrine of the
Incarnation, no Man can reasonably except against that Explication, which is
given of it in the Athanasian Creed, without rejecting the Doctrine it self,
and then we may as well part with the Doctrine of the Incarnation, as with the
Athanasian Creed. As to show this particularly:

For the right Faith is, that we believe and confess, that our Lord Jesus
Christ the Son of God, is God and Man: for otherwise the Son of God is not
Incarnate, has not taken Humane Nature upon him.

God of the Substance of the Father, begotten before the Worlds: as he must be,
if he be God: Man of the Substance of his Mother, born in the World; for he
could not be true Man, if he did not partake of Humane Flesh and Blood.

Perfect God and perfect Man; for otherwise he were neither God, nor Man: of a
reasonable Soul, and humane Flesh subsisting: for a perfect Man consists of
Soul and Body, and unless he have both, he is not a Man; in opposition to those
Heretics, who thought that the Divine Nature animated a Humane Body, instead
of a Soul, but that Christ had no humane reasonable Soul, though he had a
humane Body, and therefore was no more a Man, than a humane Body without a Soul
is a Man, but a God clothed with Flesh and Blood.

Equal to the Father as touching his Godhead; for he is perfect God, of the
same Substance with the Father; and inferior to his Father as touching his
Manhood: for a Man is inferior to God and therefore inferior to the Father,
though united in one Person to the Son.

Who although he be God and Man, yet he is not Two, but One Christ.

One, not by the Conversion of the Godhead into Flesh, but by taking the
Manhood into God.

One altogether, not by Confusion of Substance, but by Unity of Person.

For as the reasonable Soul and Flesh is One Man; so God and Man is One Christ.

All this is necessary to the belief of the Incarnation, that the same Jesus
Christ is both God and Man; for if he be but One Christ, he must be God and Man
in one Person; for two Persons make two Christ's; and if the same One Christ be
both God and Man, then the Divine and Humane Nature continue distinct without
any mixture or confusion, he is perfect God and perfect Man, in opposition to
the Heresies of Nestorius and Eutyches, the first of whom divided the Persons,
the second confounded the Natures; the first made God and Man two distinct
Persons, and two Christ's, the second swallowed up the Humanity in God.

This may serve for a brief Vindication of the Athanasian Creed, that it
teaches nothing, but what is necessary to the true belief of a Trinity in
Unity, and Unity in Trinity, and the Incarnation of the Son of God; and I
thought fit to premise this, to let the World see, that all the spite against
Athanasius's Creed, is not so much intended against that Creed, as against the
Doctrine of the Trinity and Incarnation, which are so fenced and guarded from
all Heretical Senses and Expositions in that Creed, that there is no place left
for Tricks and Evasions: And now I come to consider the Brief Notes, and to
expose the Venom and Blasphemy of them, which deserves a sharper Confutation
than this: And that this Author may not complain of unfair usage, I shall
examine them Paragraph by Paragraph.

SECT. III. Concerning the Necessity of the Catholic Faith to Salvation, and a
brief History of Athanasius.
WHosoever will be saved, before all things, The Creed.
it is necessary, that he hold the Catholic Faith.

A good Life is of absolute necessity to Salvation; Brief Notes.
but a right belief in these Points, that have been always controverted in the
Churches of God, is in no degree necessary, much less necessary before all
things. He that leads a profane and vicious Life, sins against a plain
acknowledged Rule, and the plain and unquestioned Word and Letter of the Divine
Law, and the Dictates of Natural Conscience, he wilfully refuses to advert to
these Monitors, and therefore can no way palliate or excuse his wickedness: But
he that errs in a Matter of Faith, after having used reasonable diligence to be
rightly informed, is in no fault at all: his Error is pure ignorance; not a
culpable Ignorance; For how can it be culpable not to know that, of which a Man
is ignorant, after a diligent and impartial Enquiry.

Answer.
This, I must confess, is as artificial an Introduction to these Notes, as could
have been invented; for it makes Faith a very useless, and Heresy a very
innocent and harmless thing; and then Men need not be much concerned what they
believe, if they take care to live well: The Creed affirms, That the Catholic
Faith is before all things necessary to Salvation; if this be true, then how
virtuously soever Men live, they may be damned for Heresy; and this is a
dangerous point, and will make Men too much afraid of Heresy to trade in such
Notes as these; and therefore this must be confuted in the first place, to take
off the dread and fear of Heresy: Now can we hope, that any thing should
escape the Censures of such a Critic, who will not allow the Catholic Faith
to be necessary to Salvation? For if the Catholic Faith is not necessary, no
Faith is, and then we may be saved without Faith; and yet the Scripture tells
us, that we are justified and saved by Faith; and if any Faith saves us, I
suppose, it must be the Catholic Faith, and then whoever does not hold this
saving Catholic Faith must be damned. So that at best, he has placed this Note
wrong; he should only have opposed the necessity of Athanasius's Catholic
Faith to Salvation, not of the Catholic Faith in general; and yet this seems
not to be a mistake, but design, for his Arguments equally hold against all
Faith, as well as against Athanasius's Creed, and will serve a Turk, a Jew, or
a Pagan, as well as a Heretic. For if what he says is true; He that errs in a
Question of Faith, after having used reasonable diligence to be rightly
informed, is in no fault at all: How comes an Atheist, or an Infidel, a Turk,
or a Jew to be in any fault? and if they be good Moral Men [and many of them
are, or may be so] why should they be damned for their Atheism or Infidelity,
for their not believing a God, or not believing in Christ at all? For are not
these Questions of Faith, whether there be a God and a Providence, and whether
Christ be that Messiah, who came from God? Or does our Author think, that no
Atheist or Infidel, no unbelieving Jew, or Heathen, ever used reasonable
diligence to be rightly informed? Whatever he can say against their reasonable
diligence, I doubt, will be as easily said against the reasonable diligence of
Socinians, and other Heretics.

If you say, he confines this to such Points as have always been controverted
in the Churches of God, I desire to know a reason, why he thus confines it? For
does not his Reason equally extend to the Christian Faith it self, as to those
Points, which have been controverted in Christian Churches? And why then should
not Infidels as well have the benefit of this Principle, as Heretics? But I
desire to know, what Articles of our Faith have not been controverted by some
Heretics or other? And whether then this does not give sufficient scope to
Infidelity, to renounce all the Articles of our Creed, which have been denied
or corrupted by some professed Christians?

But what he would insinuate in this, that these Points of the Athanasian Creed
have always been matter of Controversy in the Christian Church, is manifestly
false, as appears from all the Records of the Church: The Anti- Nicene Fathers
were of the same Faith, before the Definition of the Council of Nice, as the
Learned Dr. Ball has abundantly proved; this was always the Faith of the
Christian Church; and those Heretics, who taught otherwise, either separated
themselves from the Church, or were flung out of it; and I hope the Disputes of
Heretics against the Catholic Faith, shall not be called Controversies in the
Churches of God.

And yet I desire to know, why that may not be the Catholic Faith, and
necessary to Salvation, which has always been matter of Controversy? Has the
Catholic Faith any such Privilege as not to be controverted? Or is it a
sufficient proof that nothing is a point of the Catholic Faith, which has been
disputed and controverted by some or other in all Ages of the Church? And if
Men of perverse Minds may dispute the most necessary Articles of Faith, then if
any Faith be necessary, it may be of dangerous consequence to err with our
reasonable diligence in such necessary and Fundamental Points, as are and have
been disputed.

But before I dismiss this Point, it may be convenient to instruct this Author
(if he can use any reasonable diligence to understand) how necessary it is to
Salvation, and that before all other things, to hold the true Catholic Faith,
and that the Faith of the Athanasian Creed is that Catholic Faith which is
necessary to Salvation.

1. As for the first of these, I would desire him to consider, that though
without Holiness no Man shall see God, yet no Man is saved by his good Works
but by Faith in Christ: to say, that we shall be saved by Holiness and good
Works without Faith in Christ, is to assert the Merit of good Works ten
thousand times more than ever Papists themselves did: The meritorious Works of
Popery serve only instead of Penance, to keep them out of Purgatory, or to
shorten their time there; they serve instead of that Temporal Punishment, which
absolved and penitent Sinners must undergo for those sins, the Eternal
Punishment of which is remitted, not for their own meritorious Works, but for
the merits and expiation of Christ; but he who expects to be saved for his good
Works without Faith in Christ, attributes such a merit to good Works, as
redeems him from the Wrath of God, and the Eternal Punishments due to Sin, and
purchases Eternal Rewards for him, which is somewhat more than the Church of
Rome pretends to; especially since whatever merit they attribute to good Works,
they ascribe wholly to the Merits of Christ, whose Merits alone have made our
good Works meritorious, which is very honorable to our Savior, and very
Orthodox Divinity, in comparison with those, who think good Works such
meritorious things, whatever their Faith be; and if he considers this twice, I
suppose, he will confess, that Faith in Christ, the true Catholic Faith, is
necessary to Salvation.

2. Nay, it is necessary before all other things to our Salvation, because it
is necessary to Baptism, which alone puts us into a state of Salvation: For he
that believes and is baptized, shall be saved, but he that believes not shall
be damned: All Christians must confess, that there is no other Name given under
Heaven whereby Men can be saved, but only the Name of Christ; that Faith in
Christ in adult Persons is necessary to Baptism, that Baptism alone
incorporates us into the Body of Christ, and puts us into a state of Salvation;
and therefore that neither Jews, nor Turks, nor Heathens, none but believing
and baptized Christians are in a state of Salvation, how morally virtuous
soever their Lives may be: Whoever does not confess this, makes nothing of the
Covenant of Grace in Jesus Christ, nothing of his Sacrifice, Priesthood and
Intercession; makes the Christian Religion nothing but a new and more perfect
Sect of Philosophy, than either Jews or Heathens taught before; whose Condition
yet is as safe as the Condition of Christians, if they live according to the
knowledge they have: Our Author then must either renounce the Christian
Religion, or confess the true Catholic Faith, or a true Faith in Christ, is
before all other things necessary to Salvation, because this is that which puts
us into a state of Salvation by Christ, without which no Man can be saved
according to the terms of the Gospel.

3. If Faith in Christ be necessary to Salvation, I suppose, all Men will
grant, it must be the true Faith in Christ, not a false and heretical Faith;
for that is equivalent to Infidelity; there seems to be little difference
between not believing in Christ at all, and not believing what we ought to
believe of him, and the belief of which is necessary to Salvation; for if we do
not believe that of Christ, which is necessary to Salvation, we may as well
believe nothing: and then to be sure it concerns us to hold the Catholic
Faith, whatever that be.

4. That the Faith of the Holy Trinity is that true Christian Faith, which is
necessary to Salvation, appears from the Form of Baptism itself; for we are
baptized in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: that
is, into the Faith and Worship of the Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity,
which is the Substance of the Athanasian Creed: This is the Baptismal Faith,
and that certainly is necessary to Salvation, if any Faith be: Now when we
consider, that Baptism is our solemn Dedication to God, and Admission into
Covenant with him, to be dedicated to the Son, and Holy Ghost, in the same
manner, in the very same act, and same form of words, whereby we are dedicated
to the Father, were they not One Supreme and Sovereign God with the Father,
would make any considering Man abhor the Christian Religion, as the most open
and barefaced Idolatry, as joining Creatures with God in the most solemn Act
of Religion, that of dedicating Men to His Worship and Service: But not to
insist on that now, our Author may hence learn, that to believe in Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, is necessary to Salvation, because it is the Faith of Baptism,
and if that Exposition which the Athanasian Creed has given of this Faith, be
the true Catholic Doctrine, then that is necessary to Salvation; and therefore
the Creed begins very properly with asserting the necessity of holding the
Catholic Faith, if we will be saved; which must be as necessary to Salvation,
as it is to be Christians.

Which Faith except a Man keep whole and undefiled, without doubt he shall
perish everlastingly.

By keeping this Faith whole and undefiled must be meant, Notes.
(if any thing be meant) that a Man should believe and profess it, without
adding to it, or taking from it: If we take from it, we do not keep it whole,
if we add ought to it, we do not keep it undefiled, and either way we shall
perish everlastingly.

A Man of ordinary Sense and Candor would have said, Answer.
that to keep this Faith whole and undefiled, signified not to corrupt the
Faith either by adding to it, or taking from it: for whatever we add, or
whatever we take away, which does not alter the Essentials of our Faith, the
Faith remains whole and undefiled still: But this would have spoiled his
notable Remarks both as to adding and taking away.

First for adding: What if an honest plain Man, because he is a Christian and a
Protestant, Notes.
should think it necessary to add this Article to the Athanasian Creed: I
believe the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, to be a Divine,
Infallible, and Complete Rule, both for Faith and Manners? I hope no Protestant
would think a Man damned for such addition: And if so, then this Creed of
Athanasius is at least an unnecessary Rule of Faith.

That is to say, it is an addition to the Catholic Faith, Answer.
to own the Scriptures to be the Rule of Faith: As if it were an addition to
the Laws of England to own the Original Records of them in the Tower: For the
Catholic Faith is what we are to believe, the Rule of Faith is that Book or
Writing wherein this Catholic Faith is to be found, and upon the Authority of
which we must believe it; and therefore what the Catholic Faith is, and what
is the Rule of Faith, are two very distinct Questions; and to apply what is
said of the Catholic Faith, to the Rule of Faith, becomes the Wit and
understanding of an Heretic: This is the very Argument, which the Papists use
against our Authors Complete and Infallible Rule of Faith, the Scriptures, that
they do not contain all things necessary to Salvation, because they do not
prove the great Fundamental of the Protestant Faith, that the Canon of
Scripture, which we receive, is the Word of God; now what Answer he would give
to Papists, with reference to the sufficiency of Scripture, let him suppose, I
give him the same Answer in Vindication of the Catholic Faith of the
Athanasian Creed, and we are right again.

But his parting blow is worth some little observation, That if the Scriptures
be a complete Rule of Faith, then this Creed of Athanasius is at least an
unnecessary Rule of Faith: But why did he not say the same thing of the
Apostles Creed, or Nicene Creed, or any other Creeds, as well as of the
Athanasian Creed? for it seems a Creed, as a Creed (for there is no other sense
to be made of it) is a very unnecessary thing, if the Scripture be a complete
Rule of Faith: And thus both Catholics and Heretics, even his dear Arians and
Socinians, have troubled themselves and the World to no purpose, in drawing up
Creeds and Confessions of Faith.

But this Author ought to be sent to School to learn the difference between a
Creed, and a Rule of Faith: A Rule of Faith is a divinely inspired Writing,
which contains all matters to be believed, and upon the Authority of which we
do believe; a Creed is a Summary of Faith, or a Collection of such Articles, as
we ought to believe, the Truth of which we must examine by some other Rule: the
sum then of our Author's Argument is this: That because the Scripture is the
Rule of Faith, and contains all things necessary to be believed, therefore it
is very unnecessary to collect out of the Scripture such Propositions, as are
necessary for all Christians explicitly to believe: He might as well have
proved from the Scriptures being a complete Rule of Faith, that therefore there
is no necessity of Commentators, or Sermons, or Catechisms, as that there is no
necessity of Creeds.

But as senseless as this is, there is a very deep fetch in it; for he would
have no other Creed, but that the Scripture is the Divine, Infallible, Complete
Rule of Faith, which makes all other Creeds unnecessary; and then he can make
what he pleases of Scripture, as all other Heretics have done before him: But
let me ask this Author, whether to believe in general, that the Scripture is
the complete Rule of Faith, without an explicit belief of what is contained in
Scripture, will carry a Man to Heaven? There seems to me no great difference
between this general Faith in the Scriptures, without particularly knowing and
believing what they teach, and believing as the Church believes.

We suppose then, he will grant us the necessity of an explicit belief of all
things contained in the Scripture necessary to Salvation; and ought not the
Church then to instruct People, what these necessary Articles of Faith are, and
what is the true sense of Scripture about them? Especially when there are a
great many damnable Heresies taught in the Church by Men of perverse Minds, who
wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction; and does not this show the
necessity of Orthodox Creeds and Formularies of Faith?

And this puts me in mind of the great usefulness of ancient Creeds, though the
Holy Scripture be the only Divine and Infallible Rule of Faith, viz. That they
are a kind of secondary Rule, as containing the Traditionary Faith of the
Church: It is no hard matter for witty Men to put very perverse senses on
Scripture to favor their heretical Doctrines, and to defend them with such
Sophistry as shall easily impose upon unlearned and unthinking Men; and the
best way in this case is, to have recourse to the ancient Faith of the
Christian Church, to learn from thence, how these Articles were understood and
professed by them: for we cannot but think, that those who conversed with the
Apostles, and did not only receive the Scriptures, but the sense and
interpretation of them from the Apostles, or Apostolical Men, understood the
true Christian Faith much better than those at a farther remove; and therefore
as long as we can reasonably suppose this Tradition to be preserved in the
Church, their Authority is very Venerable; and this gives so great and
venerable Authority to some of the first General Councils; and therefore we
find Tertullian himself confuting the Heretics of his days, by this argument
from Prescription, or the constant Tradition of all Apostolic Churches, which
was certain and unquestionable at that time; and as much as Papists pretend to
Tradition, we appeal to Tradition for the first Three or Four Centuries? and if
the Doctrine of the Athanasian Creed have as good a Tradition as this, as
certainly it has, it is no unnecessary Rule, though we do not make it a primary
and uncontrollable Rule, as the Holy Scripture is: where there are two
different Senses put on Scripture, it is certainly the safest, to embrace that
sense (if the words will bear it) which is most agreeable to the received
Doctrine of the Primitive Church, contained in the Writings of her Doctors, or
Ancient Creeds, or such Creeds, as are conformed to the Doctrine of the
Primitive Church.

Notes.
Then for taking ought from this Creed, the whole Greek Church (diffused
through so many Provinces) rejects as Heretical that Period of it, The Holy
Ghost is of the Father and of the Son: contending that the Holy Spirit is from
the Father only; which also they clearly and demonstratively prove, as we shall
see in its proper place. And for the menace here of Athanasius, that they shall
perish everlastingly; they laugh at it, and say, He was drunk, when he made
that Creed. Gennad. Schol. Arch Bishop of Constantin.

Answer.
This Addition of the Filioque, or the Holy Ghost proceeding from the Father and
from the Son, which was disputed between the Greek and Latin Church, is no
corruption of the Essentials of the Christian Faith about the Doctrine of the
Holy Trinity, as I observed before; nor does Athanasius deny Salvation to
those, who do not believe it: For he that will be saved, must thus think of the
Trinity, does not relate to every particular Word and Phrase, but to that
Doctrine, which immediately proceeds; That the Trinity in Unity, and Unity in
Trinity, is to be Worshipped, which the Greeks acknowledged as well as the
Latins, and therefore agreed in the Substantials of Faith, necessary to
Salvation.

And that I havereason for what I say, appears from this; that after the Latins
were persuaded, that the Holy Ghost did proceed from the Son they were far
enough from denying Salvation to those, who believed otherwise: Pope Leo III*
assented to the definition of the Council of Aquisgrane, An. 809. concerning
the procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son and yet would by no means allow,
that it should be added to the Creed; nor would he deny Salvation to those who
believed otherwise, but when that Question was asked him, returned this Answer;
Vossius de tribus Symbel. dissert. 3 Cap. 29, 30.
That whosoever has subtilty enough to attain to the Knowledge of this, or
knowing it, will not believe it, cannot be saved; but there are many, and this
among the rest, deep Mysteries of the Holy Faith, which all cannot reach to,
some by reason of Age, others for want of understanding, and therefore as we
said before, he that can, and will not, cannot be saved: And therefore at the same
time he commanded the Constantinopolitan Creed to be hung up at Rome in a
Silver Table without the addition of the Filioque: Cap. 31. Ibid.
nor can any man tell when this was added to the Creed; however we never read
the Greeks were Anathematized upon this account, Cap. 48. Ibid.
till Pope Urban II. 1097. and in the Council of Florence under Eugenius IV.
1438 -- 9. Joseph the Patriarch of Constantinople thought this Controversy
between the two Churches might be reconciled, and the Filioque added in a sense
very consistent with the belief of the Greek Church.

As for what he adds, that the Greek Church condemned this addition as
Heretical, I desire to know, what Greek Council did this; Vossius a very
diligent Observer, Ibid. Cap. 44.
gives no account of it; the quarrel of the Greeks with the Latins was, That
they undertook without the Authority of a General Council, to add to the Creed
of a General Council, when the Council of Ephesus and Chalcedon had
Anathematized those, who did so; and therefore for this reason the Greeks
Anathematized the Latin Church, without declaring the Filioque to be Heretical,
and as that Learned Man observes, this was the true cause of the Schism, that
the Greeks thought, the Pope of Rome, and a Western Synod, took too much upon
themselves, to add to the Creed of a General Council, by their own Authority,
without consulting the Eastern Church, which was equally concerned in matters
of Faith.

But the Comical part is still behind; for he says, The Greeks laugh at
Athanasius 's menace, and say he was drunk, when he made the Creed; and for
this he refers us to Georgius Scholarius, or Gennadius, who was made Patriarch
of Constantinople by Mahomet, when he had taken that City. I confess, I have
not read all that Gennadius has Writ, and know not where to find this place,
and he has not thought fit to direct us: but this I know, that whether
Gennadius says this himself, or only reports it as the saying of some foolish
Greeks (for I cannot guess by our Author, which it is) whoever said it, said
more then is true, for Athanasius neither made the Creed, drunk nor sober, for
as most Learned Men agree, he never made it at all, though it bears his name;
but I wish I could see this place in Gennadius, for I greatly suspect our
Author; Gennadius being a very unlikely Man to say any ill thing of Athanasius
upon account of the Filioque, who himself took the side of the Latin Church in
this dispute, and as Vossius relates, gives Athanasius a very different, and
more honorable Character (...). Dissert. 2. c. 1.
The great Athanasius the Preacher and Confessor of Truth.

But there is nothing smites me more than to hear this Arian, or Socinian, or
whatever he is, affirm, That the Greeks have clearly and demonstratively
proved, that the Holy Spirit is from the Father only; For that which is proved
clearly and demonstratively, I hope is true, and then this alone is a
confutation of his brief Notes, for the Greeks taught, and proved
demonstratively, as he says, that the Holy Spirit so proceeds from the Father
only as to be of the same Substance, and One God with the Father.

And the Catholic Faith is this: Creed.


Catholic Faith is as much as to say in plain English, the Faith of the whole
Church; Notes.
now in what Age was this, which here follows, the Faith of the whole Church?

The Catholic Faith, I grant, is so called with relation to the Catholic
Church, whose Faith it is, Answer.
and the Catholic Church is the Universal Church, or all the true Churches in
the World, which are all but one whole Church, united in Christ their Head: the
Profession of the true Faith and Worship of Christ makes a true Church, and all
true Churches are the One Catholic Church, whether they be spread over all the
World, or shut up in any one corner of it, as at the first Preaching of the
Gospel the Catholic Church was no where but in Iudaea. Now as no Church is the
Catholic Church of Christ; how far soever it has spread it self over the
World, unless it profess the true Faith of Christ; no more is any Faith the
Catholic Faith, how universally soever it be professed, unless it be the true
Faith of Christ; nor does the true Christian Faith cease to be Catholic, how
few soever there be, who sincerely profess it. It is downright Popery to judge
of the Catholic Church by its multitudes or large extent, or to judge of the
Catholic Faith by the vast Numbers of its Professors: were there but one true
Church in the World, that were the Catholic Church, because it would be the
whole Church of Christ on Earth; and were the true Christian Faith professed
but in one such Church, it would be the Catholic Faith still; for it is the
Faith of the whole true Church of Christ, the sincere belief and profession of
which makes a Catholic Church.

Notes.
Not in the Age of Athanasius himself, who for this Faith, and for Seditious
Practices, was banished from Alexandria in Egypt (where he was Bishop) no less
than four times; whereof the first was by Constantine the Great.

What shall be done unto Thee, thou lying Tongue? What impudence is this,
Answer.
to think to sham the World at this time a day, with such stories as these?
when the Case of Athanasius is so well known, or may be, even to English
Readers, who will take the pains to read his Life, written with great exactness
and fidelity by the learned Dr. Cave.

But when he thinks a second time of it, will he say, that the Church of God in
Athanasius's Age, was not of the same Faith with him? What thinks he of the
Nicene Fathers, who condemned Arius? In which Council Athanasius himself was
present, and bore a considerable part, and so provoked the Arian Faction by his
Zeal for the Catholic Faith, and his great skill and dexterity in managing
that Cause, as laid the Foundation of all his future Troubles.

Will he say that Constantine the Great, who called the Council at Nice in the
Cause of Arius, and was so zealous an Asserter of the Nicene Faith, banished
Athanasius for this Faith? No, his greatest Enemies durst not make his Faith
any part of their Accusation, though it was the only Reason of their Malice
against him; but they charged him with a great many other Crimes; and that the
Reader may the better understand by what Spirit these Men were acted, which
still appears in this Author, I shall give a short Account of the Story.

The Arian Faction headed by Eusebius of Nicomedia, perceiving how impossible
it was to retrieve their lost Cause, while Athanasius was in Credit, and so
great Authority in the Church, having ripened their Designs against him in
their private Cabals, prevail with Constantine to call a Council at Caesarea in
Palestine, at which Athanasius did not appear, suspecting, probably, the
partiality of his Judges, who were his declared Enemies. This was represented
at Court as a contempt of the Imperial Orders, and another Council was
appointed at Tire, which met Ann. 335. with a peremptory Command for his
appearance; where he first excepted against the competency of his Judges, but
that being overruled, he was forced to plead.

And first he was charged with Oppression and Cruelty, particularly toward
Ischyras, Callinicus, and the Miletian Bishops, but this fell of it self, for
want of proof. In the next place, he was accused for having ravished a Woman,
and one too who had vowed Virginity: The Woman was brought into the Council,
and there owned the Fact; but Timotheus, one of Athanasius's Friends,
personates Athanasius, and asks the Woman, whether he had ever offered such
Violence to her; she supposing him to have been Athanasius, roundly declared
him to be the Man? who had done the Fact; and thus this cheat was discovered.
His next Accusation was, That he had murdered Arsenius, a Miletian Bishop,
whose hand he had cut off, and kept by him for some Magical Uses; and the Hand
dried and salted was taken out of a Box and shown to the Council: and to make
this more credible, they had of a long time conveyed Arsenius away, and kept
him out of sight: But he having made his escape about this time, and being
accidentally met by some Friends of Athanasius, was on a sudden brought into
the Council, where he showed both his Hands safe, to the shame and confusion of
the malicious Inventors of that Lie. This failing, they accuse him of Impiety,
and Profanation of Holy Things: That his Ordination was tumultuary and
irregular; the contrary of which was evidently true: That Macarius his
Presbyter, by his command, had broke into Ischyras's Chancel, while he was
performing the Holy Offices, and overturned the Communion Table, broke in
pieces the Sacramental Chalice, and burnt the Holy Books; all which Ischyras
was present to attest; but the contrary in every branch of the Accusation was
made apparent, and the whole Plot discovered by a writing under Ischyras his
own hand, sufficiently attested.

After all these shameful baffles they would not give over, but sent
Commissioners from the Synod to inquire into the matter of fact upon the place,
and having raked together any thing, which they could make look like Evidence,
though gained by the most barbarous Cruelties, and other vile arts, they return
to the Council, who without more ado condemn and depose Athanasius from his
Bishopric, and command him to go no more to Alexandria; upon this he withdrew
himself and went to Court, prays the Emperor for a more fair and impartial
Trial, who thereupon sent to the Council, then adjourned to Jerusalem, to come
to Constantinople, and make good their charge; Five Commissioners appeared, who
joined with some others, whom they could get together, formed a small Synod,
but not daring to insist upon their former accusations, start up a new Charge
more like to take at Court, viz. That he had threatened to stop the Emperors
Fleet, that yearly Transported Corn from Alexandria to Constantinople; which
was as true and as probable a story as any of the rest: but they told this with
such confidence, and urged the ill consequences of it so home upon the Emperor,
that they prevailed with him to banish Athanasius to Triers in Germany. If this
short story does not make our Author blush, he is possessed with the true
Spirit of the Tyrian Fathers. But to proceed,

He was also condemned in his own life time by Six Councils, as an Heretic,
and Seditious person; of these Councils, that at Milan consisted of Three
Hundred Bishops, and that of Ariminum of Five Hundred and fifty, the greatest
Convention of Bishops that ever was. This consent of the Churches of God
against him and his Doctrine, occasioned that famous Proverb, Athanasius
against all the World, and all the World against Athanasius.

Answer.
This is all Sham. I grant, Athanasius was condemned by several Arian
Conventicles (which he profanely calls the Churches of God) in his own life
time, but I deny, that he was condemned as a Heretic, or that he was condemned
for his Faith. We have seen the account of his condemnation by the Council of
Tire already, and for what pretended Crimes he was condemned, without the least
mention of his Heresy; for if this Author understood any thing of the story of
those times, he must know, that though the Arian cause was vigorously and
furiously promoted, yet it was done more covertly, since that fatal blow which
was given it by the Council of Nice, whose Authority was too sacred to be
easily born down: and therefore they did not pretend to unsettle the Nicene
Faith, nay pretended to own it, though they did not like the word Homo-ousios,
and therefore formed various Creeds, as they pretended to the same sense
without that litigious word: which shows that it was not time of day for them
to accuse Athanasius of Heresy, but* of such other Crimes, as might condemn
and depose him, and remove him out of the way, that he might not hinder their
Designs.

Thus in the Council at Antioch, in the Reign of Constantius, 341, the old
Calumnies are revived against Athanasius, and he deposed again, after he had
been restored by Constantine the younger, and George the Cappadocian, a Man of
mean Birth, base Education, and worse Temper (for they could find no better
Man, that would accept it) was advanced to the Patriarchal Chair; but all this
while, he was charged with no Heresy in Faith: But that his return to
Alexandria had occasioned great Trouble and Sorrow there, and the effusion of
much Blood: that being condemned by a Synod, and not restored again by the
Authority of a Synod, he reassumed his Chair again, contrary to the Canons,
etc.

Upon this Athanasius fled to Rome, where in a Synod of Western Bishops, he was
absolved, and restored to Communion, contrary to the earnest Solicitations of
the Council of Antioch. Anno 347, a Council of Eastern and Western Bishops was
called at Sardica; where the Eastern Bishops, (who were most of them Arians, or
Favorers of that Party) refused to join with them of the West, and acted in a
separate Assembly, and had brought with them Count Musonianus, and Hesychius an
Officer of the Imperial Palace, to countenance and promote their proceedings;
and having bespattered Athanasius with all the ill things they had formerly
charged him with, and tried in vain to delay the Sentence of the Western
Bishops, they proceeded Synodically to condemn and depose him, together with
several other principal Bishops of the Catholic Party; of all which they
published an Encyclical or Decretal Epistle wherein they gave a large account
of their whole proceeding. The Western Bishops in the mean time, after a large
and particular Examination of Athanasius's Case, and all Matters of Fact
relating to him, acquitted and restored him; and having heard the Complaints
made to the Synod from all parts concerning the Grievances they lay under from
the Arian Faction; they particularly condemned and deposed the chief Heads of
that Party, and banished them from the Communion of the Faithful, publishing an
account of what they had done in several Synodical Letters: Thus far it was
pretty well with Athanasius, for all the Churches of God did not condemn him;
if he were condemned by the Eastern Bishops in a Schismatical Conventicle, he
was absolved by the Western Council; if he was condemned by the Arians, he was
absolved by the Catholics; but still his Faith was no matter of the Dispute.

But now the Zeal of Constantius reduced Athanasius to greater extremity; for
he lying at Arles in France Anno 353, a Synod was held there, where all Arts
were used to procure the condemnation of Athanasius; at least by refusing to
hold Communion with him, to which most of the Bishops yielded, and Vincentius
of Capua himself, the Pope's chief Legate, subscribed the Condemnation;
Paulinus of Triers for his honest courage and constancy in refusing it, being
driven into Banishment.

Not contented with this, as if poor Athanasius could never be often enough
condemned, Anno 355, Constantius going to Milan, another Synod was called
there, and the Catholic Bishops were strictly required to subscribe the
Condemnation of Athanasius; and the Emperor himself being present in the Synod,
drew his Sword, and fiercely told them, That it must be so, that he himself
accused Athanasius, and that his Testimony ought to be believed: And for
refusing to comply, Eusebius Vercellensis, Lucifer Caralitanus, and several
others were sent into Banishment. This is the Council, which as our Author
tells us, consisted of Three hundred Bishops, but the Emperor was more than all
the rest, and it was he, that extorted the Condemnation of Athanasius; and let
him make his best of this.

The like Violence was used in other Synods, as in that of Syrmium, Anno 357,
where a Confession of Faith was drawn up, which Hosius of Corduba was forced to
subscribe, and as some say, to condemn Athanasius. Anno 359; was his other
great Council at Ariminum, of Five hundred and fifty Bishops, where they were
so managed by the subtilty and importunity of some few Arian Bishops, and so
wearied out by Taurus the Prefect, and that by the command of the Emperor, that
they generally yielded, several of them being even starved into compliance: and
this is the time of which St. Ierom speaks, that the whole World wondered to
see itself Arian: By such Councils, and by such Arts as these Athanasius was
condemned, though he was never accused nor condemned for his Faith: and that
veneration the whole Christian World has had ever since for the Name of
Athasius, is a sufficient Vindication of his Person and Faith, notwithstanding
the ill usage he met with under an Arian Emperor.

As for his next Paragraph, wherein he appeals to the late Arian Historian,
Chr. Sandius, I shall only refer the Reader to Dr. Bull's Answer, and I think I
am more than even with him; and whoever will read and consider what that
learned Man has irrefragably proved, that those Fathers, who lived before the
Council of Nice, were yet of the same Faith with the Nicene Fathers, as to the
Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, will see, that a very modest Man may call this
the Catholic Faith, even in his sense of the word Catholic, as it signifies
the common Faith of Christians in all Ages, since the Preaching of the Gospel
in the World: And that it requires both Forehead and Forgery to deny it. And if
in that Age Athanasius were the only Man who durst openly and boldly defend the
Catholic Faith, against a prevailing Faction, supported by a Court Interest,
and grown formidable by Lies and Calumnies, and the most barbarous Cruelties,
it is for his immortal Honor, and will always be thought so by the Churches of
Christ.

And now I come to answer his terrible Objections against the several Articles
of this Creed, which he has endeavored to ridicule; and when I have done so, I
hope he will think it time to consider, what it is to ridicule the Christian
Faith: A modest Man would not affront the general Faith of Christians, at least
of that Church in which he lives; and a cautious Man, whatever his private
Opinion were, would not ridicule so venerable a Mystery, lest it should prove
true; which is the same Argument we use to make Atheists modest, not to laugh
at the Notion of a God, lest he should find the God, whom he has so impudently
affronted, when he comes into the other World.

SECT. IV. The Catholic Doctrine of a Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity
explained, and vindicated from all pretended Absurdities and Contradictions.
THE Catholic Faith is this, Creed.
That we worship One God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity.

He means here, Notes.
That we must so worship the One True God, as to remember he is Three Persons;
and so worship the Three Persons, as to bear in mind, they are but One
Substance, or Godhead, or God: So the Author explains himself in the Three next
Articles, which are these:

Neither confounding the Persons, nor dividing the Substance: for there is One
Person of the Father, another of the Son, another of the Holy Ghost: but the
Godhead of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, is all One. Therefore
all these Articles make indeed but One Article, which is this? The One true God
is Three distinct Persons, and Three distinct Persons (Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost) are the One true God.

Thus far I agree with this Author; Answer.
and indeed this is the whole of the Creed, as far as relates to the Doctrine
of the Trinity, that there are Three Persons and One God, all the rest being
only a more particular explication of this; and therefore I would desire the
Reader to observe, for the understanding this Creed, what belongs to the
Persons, and what to the One Eternal undivided Substance or Godhead, which will
answer all the seeming Contradictions which are charged on this Doctrine. But
he proceeds:

Notes.
Plainly as if a Man should say, Peter, James, and John, being Three Persons,
are One Man; and One Man is these Three Persons, Peter, James, and John. Is it
not now a ridiculous attempt, as well as a barbarous Indignity, to go about
thus to make Asses of all Mankind, under a pretense of teaching them a Creed,
and Things Divine, to despoil them of their Reason, the Image of God, and the
Character of our Nature? But let us in two words, examine the Parts of this
monstrous Proposition, as it is laid down in the Creed itself.

Neither confounding the Persons, nor dividing the Substance.

But how can we not but confound the Persons, that have (say they) but One
numerical Substance; and how can we but divide the Substance, which we find in
Three distinct divided Persons.

Answer.
Our Author should have kept to Athanasius's Creed, which he undertook to
expose, and then we had not heard of this Objection: for the Creed does not
say, that there are Three Persons in One numerical Substance, but in One
undivided Substance; nor does it say, that there are Three divided Persons in
this One undivided Substance, but Three Persons, which may be Three, and yet
not divided, but intimately united to each other in one undivided Substance:
Now though we should grant it unconceivable, how Three distinct Persons should
have One numerical Essence, that the Essence of the Father, of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost should be numerically the same, and yet their Persons distinct;
[for it is not easy to distinguish the Essence or Substance from the Person,
and therefore not easy to tell, how there should be but One Substance and
Three Persons,] yet it is no Absurdity or Contradiction to say, that Three real
substantial Persons should subsist in One undivided Substance, and then there
is no necessity either to confound the Persons, or divide the Substance. We
must allow the Divine Persons to be real substantial Beings, if we allow each
Person to be God; unless we will call any thing a God, which has no real Being,
as that has not, which has not a real Nature and Essence; whereas all Men grant
there are no Accidents, or Qualities, or Modes in God, but a pure and simple
Essence or pure Act; and therefore the Three Divine Persons are substantially
distinct, though in One undivided Substance: which shows, that to say, That the
One true God is Three distinct Persons, and Three distinct Persons are the One
true God, is not plainly, as if a Man should say, That Peter, James, and John,
being Three Persons are One Man, and One Man is Three distinct Persons, Peter,
James, and John: Because Peter, James, and John, are not only distinct, but
divided and separate Persons, which have Three divided and separate Substances,
which therefore cannot be One Man, as Three distinct Persons in One undivided
Substance are One God.

This is sufficient to vindicate the Athanasian Creed, which only asserts Three
distinct Persons in One undivided Substance, which has nothing absurd or
contradictious in it; but because this Author founds his Objection upon One
numerical Substance, let us briefly consider that too; for the Divine Essence
or Substance is certainly numerically One, as there is but One God; and the
difficulty is, how Three distinct substantial Persons can subsist in One
numerical Essence: I will not pretend to fathom such a Mystery as this, but
only show, that there is nothing absurd in it, and take down the confidence of
this vain Pretender to Reason and Demonstration.

Let us then enquire, what it is, that makes any Substance numerically One,
that if there be any Absurdity in this, we may find out where it lies.

Now in unorganiz'd Matter, it is nothing else but the union of Parts, which
hang all together, that makes such a Body One; whether it be simple or
compounded of different kinds of Matter, that is One numerical Body, whose
Parts hang all together. In Organical Bodies, the Union of all Parts, which
constitute such an organized Body, makes it One entire numerical Body, though
the Parts have very different Natures and Offices; but this is of no use to
explain the numerical Oneness of the Divine Essence, because the Divine
Substance has no Extension, and no Parts, and therefore cannot be One by an
Union of Parts.

In finite created Spirits, which have no Parts and no Extension neither, that
we know of, no more than a Thought, or an Idea, or a Passion, have Extension or
Parts; their numerical Oneness can be nothing else, but every Spirit's Unity
with itself, and distinct and separate subsistence from all other created
Spirits. Now this Self unity of the Spirit, which has no Parts to be united,
can be nothing else but Selfconsciousness: That it is conscious to its own
Thoughts, Reasonings, Passions, which no other finite Spirit is conscious to
but itself: This makes a finite Spirit numerically One, and seperates it from
all other Spirits; that every Spirit feels only its own Thoughts and Passions,
but is not conscious to the Thoughts and Passions of any other Spirit: And
therefore if there were Three created Spirits so united as to be conscious to
each others Thoughts and Passions, as they are to their own, I cannot see any
reason, why we might not say, that Three such Persons were numerically One, for
they are as much One with each other, as every Spirit is One with itself;
unless we can find some other Unity for a Spirit than Self-consciousness; and,
I think, this does help us to understand in some measure this great and
venerable Mystery of a Trinity in Unity.

For God being present everywhere without Parts, and without Extension, we
must strip our Minds of all material Images and Figures, when we contemplate
the Unity of the Divine Nature. Though we should suppose but One Person in the
Godhead, as well as One God, (as this Author does) yet we must consider his
Unity, not as the Unity of an infinite Body, but an infinite Mind, which has no
distinct Parts to be united; and let any Man, who can, give me any other Notion
of the numerical Oneness of an infinite Mind, but Self-consciousness: that
though present everywhere, it is still intimate with itself: and in the very
same way, and for the very same reason, Three Divine Persons, who are as
intimate to each other, and if I may so speak, as mutually conscious to each
other, as any One Person can be to itself, are truly and properly numerically
One.

This, I suppose, is what several Ancient Fathers called (...), or
Circumincession, which I confess is an ill word, and apt to raise very material
Imaginations in us, as if the Divine Persons were united in One Substance, as
Three Bodies would be, could they touch in every Point; whereas we know not,
what the Substance of an infinite Mind is, nor how such Substances as have no
Parts or Extension can touch each other, or be thus externally united; but we
know the Unity of a Mind or Spirit, reaches as far as its Self-consciousness
does: for that is One Spirit, which knows and feels itself, and its own
thoughts and motions: and if we mean this by Circumincession, Three Persons
thus intimate to each other are numerically One: And therefore St. Austin
represents this much better by that Self-consciousness which is between those
distinct Faculties in us, of Memory, Understanding and Will, which know and
feel whatever is in each other: We remember what we understand and will, we
understand, what we remember and will, and what we will, we remember and
understand; Aug. lib. contra Sermon. Arrian, c. 16.
and therefore these Three Faculties, which are thus intimate to each other,
make one Man, and if we can suppose Three Infinite Minds and Persons, thus
conscious of whatever is in each other, as they are of themselves, they can be
but One numerical God.

But that this may not be thought a mere arbitrary and groundless conjecture, I
shall show you, that this is the true Scripture Notion of the Unity of the
Godhead, or of Three Persons and One God.

That the Three Divine Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are Three Infinite
Minds, really distinct from each other; that the Father is not the Son, nor the
Holy Ghost either the Father, or the Son, is so very plain in Scripture, that I
shall not spend time to prove it, especially since it is supposed in this
Controversy; for when we enquire, how these Three Infinite Minds or Persons
are One God, it supposes, that they are distinct; and if there were any Dispute
about it, what I shall say in explaining their Unity, will prove their
Distinction, that they are Three distinct infinite minds.

1. Let us then consider, what the Unity is between the Father and the Son, for
so our Savior tells us, I and the Father are One, 10 John 30. And how they are
One, we learn from several places in this Gospel, which as the Ancients tell
us, was wrote on purpose in opposition to the Heresy of Carinthus, to prove,
that Christ was not mere Man, but the Eternal Son of God, and One with his
Father: Now 1 John 1. the Evangelists call him the (...), or the Word of God,
the Eternal Wisdom and Reason of God, and therefore as intimate to God as his
own Eternal Word and Wisdom; as intimate as a Man's own Wisdom and Reason is to
him; and therefore he adds, that this Word which was in the beginning, was
(...) with God, as we translate it, which cannot signify a local presence, but
an essential union, or a being in God, as Christ tells us, The Father is in me,
and I in him, 10 John 38. for before place was made, or any thing to fill it,
to be with God, could signify nothing else but to subsist in him: and
therefore, v. 18. the Apostle expounds this being with God, by being in the
bosom of the Father; which cannot signify an External Union, because God has
no External Bosom; but Bosom signifies the very Essence of God, and if we could
distinguish Parts in God, the most inward and secret Recesses of the Divine
Nature: Now this intimate Union and In-being, when we speak of an essential
Union of pure and infinite Minds, is a mutual consciousness, and if I may so
speak, an inward sensation of each other, to know and feel each other, as they
know and feel themselves.

To represent this plainly and intelligibly, if it be possible, to the meanest
understanding, I shall consider, wherein the most perfect Union of created
Spirits consist, which are distinct and separate Beings from each other;
wherein the Union of the Divine Persons in the Ever Blessed Trinity answers
this, and wherein it excels it.

Now created Spirits, as Angels and Humane Souls, are then most perfectly
united to each other, when they most perfectly know one another, and know all,
that each other knows, and perfectly agree in all they know, which is an Union
in Knowledge: when they perfectly love one another, have the same will, the
same affections, the same interests and designs; when they are a kind of
Unisons which move and act a like, as if one Soul animated them both: This is
that perfect Unity, which is so frequently and earnestly recommended to
Christians both by Christ and his Apostles; as we may see everywhere in
Scripture.

And the very same Union with this, there is between the Persons of the Ever
Blessed Trinity; an Union in knowledge, in love, in will, in works.

The Son perfectly knows the Father, and therefore knows all that the Father
knows; this St. John means when he tells us, That he is in the Bosom of the
Father: 1 John 18. No man has seen God at any time: that is, no Man ever had a
perfect knowledge of God, which is here called seeing, because sight gives us
the most distinct and perfect knowledge of things: The only begotten Son, which
is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him: Where it is plain, to be
in the bosom of the Father, is put to signify the most perfect and intimate
knowledge of him; as in ordinary speech to take any Man into our bosom,
signifies to impart all our Secrets to him: but our Savior tells us this in
plain words; that the Father perfectly knows the Son, and the Son the Father,
10 John 15. As the Father knows me, so know I the Father. Thus the Father
loves the Son, 3 John 25.5. Joh. 20. And the Son loves the Father, 14 John
31. Thus the Son has no will but his Fathers, 5 John 20. I can of my own self
do nothing, as I hear, I judge, and my judgment is just; because I seek not
mine own will, but the will of the Father, which has sent me, 6 John 38. For I
came not to do my own will, but the will of him that sent me. 4 John 34. My
meat is to do the will of him that sent me and to finish his work: Thus
whatever Christ did or spoke, it was in conformity to his Father, what he saw,
and heard, and learnt of him. 5 John 19. The Son can do nothing of himself, but
what he sees the Father do; for whatsoever things he does, these also does the
Son likewise. 12 John 49. I have not spoken of my self, but the Father that
sent me, he gave me a commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak.
This is as perfect an Union, as Union signifies agreement and concord, as can
possibly be between two minds and spirits.

The like may be said of the Holy Ghost: He perfectly knows the Father, and his
most secret Councels: For the spirit searches all things, yea the deep things
of God, 1 Cor. 2.10. He is the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, who inspired
the Prophets and Apostles, to declare God and his will to the World, and
therefore is most intimately acquainted with it himself: Thus our Savior
comforts his Apostles, when he was to leave them himself, with the Promise of
the Spirit, who should guide them into all truth. 16 Ioh. 13, 14, 15. Howbeit
when he the spirit of truth is come, he shall guide you into all truth; for he
shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak,
and he will show you things to come. He shall glorify me, for he shall receive
of mine, and shall show it unto you: All things that the Father has are mine,
therefore said I, that he shall take of mine, and shall show it unto you. Of
which words more hereafter; at present I only observe, how intimately the Holy
Spirit is acquainted with all the Secrets both of Father and Son, whatever
things the Father knows, that the Son knows, and what the Son knows, that the
Holy Spirit knows; that is, whatever the Father knows, which is first said to
be the Father's, then the Son's, and then the Holy Spirit's, according to the
Order of Persons in the adorable Trinity.

Thus the Holy Spirit is the Spirit of Love, which inspires us with the love of
God, and gives us the reciprocal Testimonies of God's love to us: For the love
of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us,
5 Romans 5. And as some of the Ancients represent it, he is that love, wherewith
the Father and the Son love each other; and therefore there is no question, but
that he who unites Father and Son, and unites God to us, and us to God, by
love, is united to Father and Son by love himself.

He is that Holy Spirit, who renews and sanctifies us, and subdues our wills
into a conformity and subjection to the will of God; and therefore no doubt,
but he has the same will with Father and Son.

Thus Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are most intimately united in knowledge,
will, and affection, but after all, this is no more, than what we call a Moral
Union; such as may be between created Spirits, which remain separate Beings
still, and though they are morally, are not essentially One; and therefore such
an Union as this cannot make Father, Son, and Holy Ghost One God, but Three
agreeing and consenting Gods, as Peter, James, and John, though they should in
the most perfect manner be united, in the same Faith, and mutual love and
affection, etc. yet would be Three Men still: And therefore I must now show,
that what is merely a Moral Union between Creatures, is an essential Union
between the Persons of the Ever Blessed Trinity.

And this I have already shown in part. The Three Divine Persons of the Ever
Blessed Trinity, are united in knowledge, in will, in love: but are not united
as Creatures are by an external likeness, conformity, agreement, consent, in
knowledge, will, and affection; but are so united to each other, as every Man
is to himself, not as one Man is to another.

As for instance: Every Man by an inward sensation feeels his own knowledge,
will, and affections, but he does not know any other Man's thoughts, or will,
or passions, by feeling them in himself as he does his own, but by an external
communication of thoughts; and therefore though they may be morally One by an
exact agreement and harmony of thoughts and passions, as far as by external
communication they can know, what each others thoughts and passions are, yet
they are essentially distinct and separate: But Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
are One not by an external agreement or consent, but by an internal
consciousness, as every Man is One with himself: If I may so speak, because we
want proper words to express it, they feel each other in themselves, know the
same thing by feeling each others knowledge, and will, and love a-like, by
feeling what each other wills and loves, just as every Man feels his own
thoughts, knowledge, will, and passions; that is, are as intimate to each
other, and as essentially One, by a mutual Self-consciousness, as every Man is
One with himself.

And the phrases and expressions of Scripture, whereby the Unity or Oneness of
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are expressed, require this sense. Thus I observed
before, that the Son is the eternal word and wisdom of the Father, and
therefore as intimate to him, as every Man's Reason is to himself, and knows
the Father, not by external Revelation, but as every Man knows himself.

But the most frequent expression, whereby Christ represents this close and
intimate and essential Union between his Father and him, is, I am in the
Father, and the Father in me; which he repeats several times in St. John's
Gospel. Now if we will allow this to be a proper, not a metaphorical
expression, it can signify no other Union, than what I have now described:
That it is a proper, and not a metaphorical expression, appears from this, that
there is no such Union in Nature between any two other Beings, as this, to be
in One another, and a Metaphor is translated from something, that is real and
natural, upon account of some likeness and similitude: and therefore that which
is like to nothing else, which has no pattern and example, can be no Metaphor,
because it alludes to nothing: Now if we speak of a substantial Union, or a
Union of Substances, what two Substances can there be in the World, which can
mutually be in each other, or can mutually comprehend each other; which is
indeed a palpable contradiction, as signifying at the same time to be greater
and to be less than each other; for in substantial Unions, that which
comprehends is greater than that which is comprehended, that which is within
any thing else is less than that which contains it: and therefore for two
Beings mutually to comprehend, and to be comprehended by each other, is to be
greater and less than each other, greater as they comprehend each other, and
less as they are comprehended.

So that this Oneness between the Father and the Son, is such an Union as there
is nothing in Nature like it, and we cannot long doubt, what kind of Union this
is, if we consider, that there is but one possible way to be thus united, and
that is by this mutual Consciousness, which I have now described. If the Son be
conscious in himself of all that the Father is, as conscious to the knowledge,
to the will, to the love of the Father, as he is to his own, by an internal
sensation, then the whole Father is in the Son; if the Father be thus conscious
to all that the Son is, then the whole Son is in the Father; if the Holy Ghost
be thus conscious to all that is in the Father and in the Son, then the Father
and the Son are in the Holy Ghost, and the Holy Ghost in the Father and the
Son, by this mutual Consciousness to each other. This is very plain and
intelligible, and makes them as much One, as every Man is One with himself, by
Self-consciousness.

And this is a plain demonstration, that all Three Divine Persons are
coessential and coequal with each other: We know nothing of God, but that he is
an infinite Mind; that is, infinite Knowledge, Wisdom, Power, Goodness: And if
these Three Divine Persons are all internally conscious of all these
Perfections, which are in each other, they must all have the same Perfections,
the same Knowledge, Wisdom, Power, Goodness, that is the same Nature, unless
that Knowledge, Wisdom, Goodness, which we are internally conscious of, and
feel within ourselves, be not the Perfections of our Nature; whereas we may
externally know those Perfections, which are not ours, but what we feel in
ourselves is our own: and therefore this mutual Consciousness, makes all that
is the Father's the Son's, and all that is the Son's the Holy Spirit's; as our
Savior speaks: All things that the Father has are mine: therefore said I,
that he (the Spirit) shall take of mine, and shall show it unto you, 16 John
15. And if these Three Persons be thus mutually in each other, as you have
already heard, they must be all equal; for if the Father be in the Son, how can
the Son be less than the Father, if he comprehends the Father, and all his
infinite perfections? If Son and Holy Ghost are in the Father, and Father and
Holy Ghost in the Son, and Father and Son in the Holy Ghost, imagine what
inequality you can between them; if Son and Holy Ghost are conscious to all the
infinite Perfections, which are in the Father, and have all the Perfections,
they are conscious to, how can Son and Holy Ghost be less perfect than the
Father, or then each other: I am sure our Savior attributes all his Wisdom,
and Knowledge, and Power to his intimate conscious Knowledge of his Father,
which he calls seeing him, which is such a knowledge as Creatures cannot have
of God, 5 John 19.20. Verily, verily, I say unto you, the Son can do nothing of
himself, but what he sees the Father do; for whatsoever things he does, those
also does the Son likewise. For the Father loves the Son, and shows him all
things, that himself does, and he will show him greater works than these, that
ye may marvel. By this perfect conscious Knowledge, which the Son has of the
Father, he has all those Perfections in himself, which are in the Father: he
can do whatever he sees the Father do, and he sees whatever the Father does,
but can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father do; He has all the
Perfections which are in the Father, and therefore can do whatever he sees the
Father do; but there is no knowledge, no perfection, no power in the Son, which
is not in the Father, and which he does not receive from the Father, and
therefore he can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father do; which
signifies the most perfect equality between the Father and the Son, founded on
the Son's seeing the Father, and whatever he does, or his intimate
Consciousness of all that the Father is. And this is the true Notion of the
Son's being the Image of his Father: The brightness of his Father's glory, and
the express Image of his person, 1 Heb. 2. For as a dead Image and Picture
represents the external Lineaments and Features of the Person, whose Picture or
Image it is, that we can see the Person in his Picture; so a living essential
Image, is the living essential perfections of the Father, and with a conscious
knowledge sees the Father in himself.

For this reason the Son is said to hear of his Father, to see what his Father
does, and to do the same, to receive commandment from his Fatber, to do the
will of his Father, and the works of his Father, to finish the works, which his
Father gave him to do, to glorify his Father, etc. Which must not be expounded
after the manner of Men, (as the Socinians expound such expressions, and thence
conclude the great inferiority, inequality, subjection of the Son to the
Father, such as there is between a Prince, and the Ministers he employs, and
that therefore the Son cannot be the Supreme God, for the Supreme God cannot be
commanded, taught, sent on Messages to fulfill the will and pleasure of another,
and do nothing but what he sees done, and receives Commission to do; I say, we
must not put such a mean and servile sense on these expressions) but we must
expound them only to signify that the Son receives all from the Father, Life,
Knowledge, Will, Power, by Eternal Generation, and whatever he does, he does
with a Consciousness of his Father's Will, and Wisdom, as it were, feeling the
Will and Wisdom and Power of his Father in himself; and this he calls hearing
and seeing the works of the Father, receiving Commands, and doing the Works of
the Father, because his Nature is that to him, which external Teachings' and
verbal Commands are to Men: he hears, he sees, he does the Works, and Will, and
Commands of his Father, by being the perfect, living, self-conscious image of
his Father's Will and Knowledge and infinite Perfections.

But there is one place more I must take notice of, by which the Socinians
think to overthrow all that I have now said; that the Union between the Father
and Son is not such an essential Unity, as we speak of, but a mere moral Union,
or a perfect agreement and consent in knowledge, will, and affection, such as
is, or ought to be among Christians; and that our Savior himself has thus
expounded it: 17 John 20, 21. Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also
which shall believe on me through their word: That they all may be One, as thou
Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be One in us: Which is the
very expression I have so much insisted on, to prove this essential Union, and
Self-consciousness between the Father and the Son, As thou Father art in me,
and I in thee: which, it seems, signifies no other kind of Union, than what our
Savior prays for among Christians, That they also may be One, as thou Father
art in me, and I in thee: Now the Union of Christians is only an Union in Faith
and Love, and One Communion, and therefore thus the Father and the Son are One
also by a consent and agreement in Knowledge, Will, and Love.

Now this I readily grant, as I observed before, that Father and Son are One by
a most perfect agreement in Knowledge, Will, and Love, which we call a Moral
Union between Men; and it is this Unity or Oneness for which our-Saviour prays,
that his Disciples may be One, as the Father and he are One; that they may
perfectly agree in the same Faith and Love, that they may speak the same
things, and mind the same things: But then this perfect harmony and consent
between the Father and the Son results from an essential Unity, from their
being in one another; which is such an Union as it is impossible there should
be between Christians; but this Moral Union in the same Faith, and mutual love,
is called being One, as the Father and Son are One, because it is the nearest
resemblance of this essential Unity, that can be between Creatures: and that is
the only meaning of As, That they may be One, As thou Father art in me, and I
in Thee: Not that they may be One in the very same manner, but with such a kind
of Unity, as does most nearly resemble the Unity between the Father and the
Son; that is, which produces the like consent and harmony in Will and
Affections.

For we must observe, that As very often signifies only some likeness and
resemblance, not a sameness for kind or degree; and thus it must of necessity
signify in all comparisons between God and Creatures; for though there is
something in Creatures like to what is in God, some faint shadows and images of
it, yet nothing in Creatures is the same, that is in God: St. Peter exhorts
Christians, As he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of
Conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15. And Christ commands us to be perfect as our Father,
which is in Heaven is perfect, 5 Matthew. 48. But can any Creature be holy and
perfect as God is? Will you hence conclude, that Holiness is not the immutable
Nature of God, but the free choice of his Will; not his Nature, which is One
pure simple Act, but an Habit of Virtue, because so it is in us; and yet we
must be holy and perfect as God is, which cannot be, (according to this way of
Reasoning) unless holiness in God be the same holiness, which is in Creatures;
and indeed we may as well conclude this, as that the Oneness between the Father
and the Son is only a Moral Union in Will and Affection, because there can be
no other Union between Christians, and yet Christ prays, that they may be One,
as He and his Father are One: Since this phrase, As thou Father art in me, and
I in thee, does evidently signify a great deal more, than such a Moral Union
of Will and Affections, why should they not as well conclude, that Christ prays
for such an essential Oneness between Christians, as there is between him and
his Father; as that the Father and the Son are One in no higher and more
perfect sense, than what is applicable to the Unity of Christians with each
other? There may be such a likeness and resemblance between natural and moral
Unions, between the Acts and Perfections of Nature, and the Virtues of the Will
and Choice, as may be a just foundation for a comparison; but he is a very
absurd Reasoner, who from such a comparison will conclude, they are the same:
we are required to love our Neighbor as our selves; but will any Man hence
conclude, that the love of our selves, and the love of our Neighbor, are of
the same kind? Which is manifestly false: Self-love being a natural and
necessary Passion; the love of our Neighbor a Christian Virtue; the first the
effect of Nature, the second of Grace; but the effects so like each other, that
they may well be compared, and the natural principle, which acts most equally
and necessarily and perfectly, may be made the Rule and Measure of Brotherly
love: Thus this essential Unity between the Father and the Son, produces the
most perfect harmony and Union of Will and Affections, and therefore is the
most perfect Pattern of that Moral Union, which ought to be among Christians.

For we may observe, that this Oneness between the Father and the Son, is not
the only natural and essential Unity, which is made the Pattern of Unity among
Christians; the unity of the natural Body, and the vital sympathy and
fellow-feeling, which all the Members of the same natural Body have for each
other, is proposed as a pattern also of that mutual love and affection between
Christians, 1 Cor. 12.12 -- 27. And yet no man will be so absurd as to say;
That either Christians are as naturally and vitally united to each other, as
the Members of a natural Body are; or that the Members of the natural Body are
united only by mutual Love and Affection, as Christians are.

This is sufficient to show, how Father and Son are One, by a mutual
consciousness, whereby they are as intimate to each other, as every man is to
himself, who knows all that is in himself, and feels all the motions and
workings of his own mind; and we need not doubt, but the Holy Spirit is in the
same manner One with Father and Son: But I must not expect, that the
Adversaries I have to deal with, will grant any thing, which is not proved, and
therefore I shall not stand to their Courtesy, but briefly prove this also.

St. Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 2.10. That the Spirit searches all things, yea the
deep things of God: So that the Holy Spirit knows all that is in God, even his
most deep and secret Counsels, which is an argument, that he is very intimate
with him; but this is not all, it is the manner of knowing, which must prove
this consciousness, of which I speak; and that the Apostle adds in the next
Verse, that the Spirit of God knows all that is in God, just as the Spirit of a
Man knows all that is in Man; that is, not by external revelation or
communication of this knowledge, but by Self-consciousness, by an internal
Sensation, which is owing to an essential Unity: v. 11. For what man knows
the things of a man, save the spirit of a man which is in him; even so the
things of God knows no man, but the spirit of God. So that the Spirit of God
is as much within God, and as intimate to him, as the Spirit of Man is in Man;
that is, by an essential Oneness, and Self-consciousness. And as the Spirit
knows the deep things of God, so God who searches the hearts, knows the
mind of the spirit too, 8 Romans 27. So that the Father and the Holy Ghost are
mutually conscious to each other, as a Man and his own Spirit are; and then we
need not doubt, but the Holy Spirit, which is the Spirit of the Son, as well as
of the Father, Is as intimate to the Son also: And therefore Christ tells us of
the Spirit; He shall glorify me, for he shall receive of mine, and shall show
it unto you, all things that the Father has are mine, therefore said I, he
shall take of mine, and shall show it unto you, 16 John 14, 15. So that the
Holy Spirit receives the things of Christ; But how does he receive them? Just
as Christ receives them of the Father; the same things, and the same way; not
by an external communication, but by an essential Oneness and Consciousness of
all that is in the Father, and in the Son.

This seems to me to be the true Scripture-account of the numerical Unity of
the Divine Essence, and to make a Trinity in Unity as intelligible as the
Notion of One God is; but because all that I have to say, turns upon this, I
shall more particularly explain this Notion: 1. By showing that this contains
the true Orthodox Faith of the Holy Trinity. 2. That it gives a plain and
intelligible Solution of all the Difficulties and seeming Contradictions in the
Doctine of the Trinity.

I. This contains the true Orthodox Faith of the Holy Trinity, or a Trinity in
Unity; for so the Athanasian Creed teaches us, To worship One God in Trinity,
and Trinity in Unity, neither confounding the Persons, nor dividing the
Substance, for there is One Person of the Father, another of the Son, another
of the Holy Ghost, but the Godhead of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost is all One, the Glory equal, the Majesty coeternal.

There are two things then, which an Orthodox Christian must take care of,
neither to confound the Persons, nor to divide the Substance; that is, to
acknowledge Three distinct Persons, and yet but One God; and nothing can be
more apparent than both these, in that account which I have given of the Ever
Blessed Trinity.

1. It is plain the Persons are perfectly distinct, for they are Three distinct
and infinite Minds, and therefore Three distinct Persons; for a Person is an
intelligent Being, and to say, they are Three Divine Persons, and not Three
distinct infinite Minds, is both Heresy and Nonsense: The Scripture, I Am sure,
represents Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as Three intelligent Beings, not as
Three Powers or Faculties of the same Being, which is downright Sabellianism;
for Faculties are not Persons, no more than Memory, Will, and Understanding,
are Three Persons in One Man: When we prove the Holy Ghost to be a Person,
against the Socinians, who make him only a Divine Power, we prove, that all the
Properties of a Person belong to him, such as Understanding, Will, Affections,
and Actions; which shows, what our Notion of a Person is: such a Being as has
Understanding, and Will, and Power of Action; and it would be very strange,
that we should own Three Persons, each of which Persons is truly and properly
God, and not own Three infinite Minds; as if any thing could be a God, but an
infinite Mind.

And the distinction between these Three Infinite Minds is plain according to
this Notion; for they are distinguished, just as Three finite, and created
Minds are, by Self-consciousness: They are united indeed into One (as I have
already discoursed) by a mutual Consciousness to each other, which no created
Spirits have, which are conscious only to the actings of their own Minds, not
to each others: and therefore these Three Divine Persons are not separate
Minds, as created Spirits are, but only distinct: each Divine Person has a Self
consciousness of its own, and knows and feels itself (if I may so speak) as
distinct from the other Divine Persons; the Father has a Self-consciousness of
his own, whereby he knows and feels himself to be the Father, and not the Son,
nor the Holy Ghost; and the Son in like manner feels himself to be the Son, and
not the Father, nor the Holy Ghost; and the Holy Ghost feels himself to be the
Holy Ghost, and not the Father, nor the Son; as James feels himself to be
James, and not Peter, nor John? which proves them to be distinct Persons: Which
is a very plain account, how these Three Divine Persons are distinct, that
there is One Father, not Three Fathers, One Son, not Three Sons, One Holy
Ghost, not Three Holy Ghosts. Here is no confounding of Persons.

2. Nor do we divide the Substance, but unite these Three Persons in One
numerical Essence: for we know nothing of the unity of the Mind but
self-consciousness, as I showed before; and therefore as the self-consciousness
of every Person to itself makes them distinct Persons, so the mutual
consciousness of all Three Divine Persons to each other makes them all but One
infinite God: as far as consciousness reaches, so far the Unity of a Spirit
extends, for we know no other unity of a Mind or Spirit, but consciousness. In
a created Spirit this consciousness extends only to itself, and therefore
self-consciousness makes it One with itself, and divides and separates it from
all other Spirits; but could this consciousness extend to other Spirits, as it
does to itself, all these Spirits, which were mutually conscious to each other,
as they are to themselves, though they were distinct Persons, would be
essentially One: And this is that essential unity, which is between Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, who are essentially united by a mutual consciousness to
whatever is in each other, and do by an internal sensation (I want other words
to express it) feel each other, as they do themselves; and therefore are as
essentially One, as a Mind and Spirit is One with itself.

2. This is a very plain and intelligible account of this great and venerable
Mystery, as plain and intelligible as the Notion of One God, or of One Person
in the Godhead.

The great difficulty of conceiving a Trinity of Persons in One infinite and
undivided Essence or Substance, arises from those gross and material Idea's we
have of Essence and Substance, when we speak of the Essence or Substance of
God, or created Spirits: We can frame no Idea of Substance, but what we have
from Matter; that it is something extended in a tripple Dimension, in length,
and breadth, and depth, which is the subject of those Qualities, which inhere
and subsist in it: And therefore as Matter is the subject of all sensible
Qualities, so we conceive some such Substance of a Mind and Spirit, which is
the subject of Will and Understanding, of Thoughts and Passions: And then we
find it impossible to conceive, how there should be Three Divine Persons, which
are all infinite, without Three distinct infinite Substances, each distinct
infinite Person having a distinct infinite Substance of his own; and if we
grant this, it seems a plain contradiction to say, That these Three distinct
infinite Substances, are but One numerical Infinite Substance; which is to say,
that Three Infinities are but One Infinite, and that Three Persons are but One
Person; for a Person and an intelligent Substance are reciprocal Terms, and
therefore Three distinct Persons are Three distinct numerical Substances, and
One numerical intelligent Substance is but One numerical Person.

But this is all carnal Reason in a strict and proper sense, which conceives of
an infinite Mind after the manner of a Body, and distinguishes between the
Matter or Substance, and the Powers and Virtues of the Divine Essence, as it
does between Matter and Qualities and Accidents in Bodies. We know nothing of
the Divine Essence, but that God is an infinite Mind, and if we seek for any
other Essence or Substance in God, but an infinite Minds; that is, infinite
Wisdom, Power, and Goodness; the Essence of God, though considered but as One
numerical Person, is as perfectly unintelligible to us, as the One numerical
Essence or Substance of Three Divine Persons in the Ever Blessed Trinity.

It is this gross and material imagination about the Essence and Substance of
the Deity, which occasions all the Difficulties about the Notion of One God, as
well as of a Trinity in Unity: For we cannot imagine, how any Substance should
be without a beginning; how it should be present in all places without Parts,
and without Extension; how Substance, Essence, Existence, and all Divine
Attributes and Powers, which are distinct things in created Spirits, should be
all the same, one simple Act in God: and yet Reason tells us we must allow of
no Composition, no Qualities or Accidents in the Divine Nature; for a
compounded Being must have Parts, and must be made; for that which has Parts
must have some Maker to join the Parts together, and to endow it with such
Qualities and Powers.

But now if we consider God as Wisdom and Truth, which is his true Nature and
Essence, without confounding our Minds with some material conceptions of his
Substance, these things are plain and easy: For it is demonstrable, that Truth
is eternal, had no beginning, no Maker; for when we speak of original and
essential Truth and Wisdom, what was not always Truth and Wisdom, could never
begin to be so: And if Truth be the only real thing, and necessarily eternal,
there is an eternal Mind, which is nothing else but eternal Truth; for he, who
can imagine, Truth and Wisdom to be eternal, without an eternal Mind, ought not
to pretend to either, unless he can tell us, how Truth can subsist without a
Mind. Thus it is demonstrable, that Truth and Wisdom has no Parts, no
Extension, no more than Thought has; Truth and Wisdom is confined to no place,
fills no space, but is everywhere the same without Extension and Parts, and
therefore has a necessary and essential Omnipresence: There is a faint
resemblance of this in finite and created Spirits; even humane Wisdom and
Reason, Thoughts and Passions, have no Extension nor Parts, which is a good
argument that a created Spirit has no Extension nor Parts neither; for nothing
which has Extension and Parts can be the subject of that which has none: All
the Qualities of Bodies are extended as Bodies are; for the Properties and
Qualities of all Things must conform to the Nature of the Subject in which they
are; and therefore Faculties, Powers, and Operations, which have no Extension
or Parts, [as the Will, the Understanding, the Memory, the Thoughts and
Passions have none,] must be seated in a Subject which has no Parts nor
Extension neither. Thus Thought is confined to no place, but in a Minute
surrounds the Earth, and ascends above the Heavens, and visits all the empty
Capacities of infinite space; which is an imperfect imitation of the
Omnipresence of an Infinite Mind.

Thus what can be a more pure and simple Act than Wisdom and Truth? Now though
we conceive the Divine Attributes and Perfections under different Notions and
Characters, such as Wisdom, Love, Justice, Goodness, Power, they are indeed
nothing else but Infinite Truth and Wisdom, which receives several Characters
and Denominations from its different effects; as the same Sea or River does
different Names from the Countries by which it passes: For what is intellectual
Love, but the perfect Idea's of Truth, or the true knowledge and estimation of
Things? What is Justice and Goodness, but an equal distribution of Things, or a
true and wise proportion of Rewards and Punishments? What is perfect Power, but
perfect Truth and Wisdom, which can do, whatever it knows? This last will not
be so easily understood, because in Men we find Knowledge and Power to be very
different things, that Men may know a great deal, which they cannot do: And yet
if we consider this matter over again, we shall find it a mistake: For even
among Men it is only Knowledge that is Power. Humane Power, and humane
Knowledge, as that signifies a Knowledge how to do any thing, are commensurate;
whatever humane Skill extends to, humane Power can effect; nay, every Man can
do, what he knows how to do, if he have proper Instruments and Materials to do
it with; but what no humane Power can do, no humane Knowledge knows how to do:
We know not what the Substance or Essence of any thing is, nor can we make any
Substance; we cannot create any thing of nothing, nor do we know, how it is to
be done; which shows, that Knowledge and Power in Creatures are equal, and that
proves a very near relation between them; especially when we add, that
Knowledge is not only the Director of Power, but is that very Power which we
call Force: For it is nothing but Thought which moves our Bodies, and all the
Members of them, which are the immediate Instruments of all humane Force and
Power: excepting Mechanical Motions, which do not depend upon our Wills, such
as the motion of the Heart, the circulation of the Blood, the concoction of our
Meat, and the like; all voluntary motions are not only directed, but caused by
Thought; and so indeed it must be, or there could be no motion in the World,
for Matter cannot move it self, and therefore some Mind must be the first
Mover: which makes it very plain, that infinite Truth and Wisdom is Infinite
and Almighty Power. So that if we set aside all material Images of Essence and
Substance, and contemplate God as Eternal Truth and Wisdom, the Notion of a God
is very plain and easy, as far as we are concerned to know him in this state.

The same cause has confounded and perplexed the Notion of a Trinity in Unity,
and given occasion to some vain and arrogant Pretenders to Reason, profanely to
deride and ridicule that most Sacred and Venerable Mystery.

They puzzle and confound themselves with some gross and corporeal Idea's of
Essence and Substance, and how Three Divine Persons can subsist distinct in the
same numerical Substance: but would they but consider the Three Divine Persons,
as Three Infinite Minds, distinguished from each other by a self-consciousness
of their own, and essentially united by a mutual consciousness to each other,
which is the only way of distinguishing and uniting Minds and Spirits, and then
a Trinity in Unity is a very plain and intelligible Notion.

Now certainly this is much the most reasonable way: For what the Essence and
Substance of a Spirit is, when we distinguish it from Understanding and Will,
which we call the Powers and Faculties of a Spirit, for my part, I know not, no
more than I do, what the naked Essence and Substance of Matter is, stripped of
all its Qualities and Accidents: as I observed before, the naked Essences of
Things are not the Objects of our Knowledge, and therefore it is ridiculous to
dispute about them, to say peremptorily what is, or what is not, in matters,
which we know nothing of: And therefore as we frame the Notion of Bodies from
their external and sensible Qualities, so we must frame the Notion of a Spirit
from its intellectual Powers, of Will, and Understanding, etc. and when we
dispute about the distinction or union of Spirits, we must not dispute how
their Substances, which we know nothing of, can be distinguished or united, but
how two Minds considered as intellectual Beings, are distinguished and united,
and then there will appear no difficulty or absurdity, in the essential union
of Three Minds by a mutual consciousness to each other.

That the essential unity of a Spirit consists in self-consciousness, every man
may feel in himself, for it is nothing else which makes a Spirit One, and
distinguishes it from all other Spirits; and therefore if Two Spirits were
conscious to all that is in each other, as they are to what they feel in
themselves, they would be united to each other by the same kind of unity, which
makes every individual Spirit One: And why then should not this be thought an
essential unity between the Divine Persons of the ever Blessed Trinity.

And is there any difficulty in conceiving this, that Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost should be thus intimately conscious to each other: The Scripture plainly
asserts that it is so, as I have already proved, and there is no impossibility
in the thing; nay, if we will allow Three infinite Minds, it is impossible, it
should be otherwise.

A finite created Spirit indeed is conscious only to itself, and not to any
other created Spirits; but God, who is an infinite Mind, is conscious to all
created Spirits, dwells within us, and sees all our Thoughts and Motions, and
Passions, as perfectly as we do our own; how he does this we know not, that he
does so, the Scripture assures us, and that there is nothing impossible in it,
our Reason will tell us; for certainly that infinite Mind, which made all
finite Spirits, can see them too; that is, see all the Thoughts and Passions of
a Spirit, which is the only way of seeing a Spirit; and that can be no infinite
Mind which does not; for there is something, which it does not know, if it does
not know our thoughts.

If then it be essential to an infinite Mind to be conscious to all Spirits, if
we allow, that there are Three infinite Minds, we must grant, that they are
mutually conscious to each other: though an infinite Mind is conscious to all
that is in created Spirits, yet there is not a mutual consciousness, and
therefore no essential unity between them, for created Spirits are not
conscious to an infinite Mind, as it is impossible they should, unless they
were infinite themselves; for a Mind which is conscious to an infinite Mind,
that is, a Mind which comprehends an infinite Mind, must be infinite: But it is
a contradiction to say, there are Three infinite Minds, unless they are
mutually conscious to each other; for if there be any thing in one, which is
not in the other, they cannot both be infinite, unless one infinite can be
greater than another.

The truth is, we have no positive Notion of Infinity, but only in a Mind, and
it is impossible to conceive any Three Beings that are infinite, but only Three
infinite Minds; and Three Minds may be infinite, but then they must be mutually
self-conscious, or they cannot all be infinite.

When we think of an infinite Being, we are presently confounded with the
corporeal Images of an infinite Substance, or a Substance infinitely extended;
and this we can make nothing of; for indeed it is demonstrable, that there can
be no such thing. We have an imagination of infinite space, which we can set no
bounds to, but how far soever we extend our thoughts, we can still imagine
something beyond that; but then we have no Notion, that space is any thing, but
only a capacity to receive something; nay, it seems to me, to be nothing else,
but an imaginary Idea of Extension separated from Body and Matter; as we
conceive place to be distinct from the Body, which fills the place, and
therefore, that if the Body were annihilated, place would remain still of the
same dimensions, which the Body had, that filled it; and this is the conception
of an imaginary space infinitely extended. But it is as plain as any
demonstration, that no real Being is infinitely extended; for there is, and can
be no actual Extension infinite: The Extension of a real Being must really and
actually be, and yet there is not a more self-evident Proposition than this,
that there is no Extension so great but that it may be extended farther, and
then there can be no such thing in being, as an infinite Extension, for if
there were, there would be such an Extension, as could not be extended farther,
unless we can extend that, which is actually infinite already. We may easily
observe, what it is, that cheats us into the Opinion of infinite Extension, as
if there were such a real thing: viz. That we cannot see to the end of all
possible Extension, we cannot extend our thoughts so far, but we can imagine
something farther, and therefore we fancy, that there is something infinitely
extended, though we cannot comprehend it, or see to the end of it, which would
be a contradiction, to see to the end of that which has none: But we should
observe, that it is not the defect of our imagination, that we cannot conceive
an infinite Extension, but Reason tells us, that there neither is, nor can be,
any such Extension, but what may be extended farther: now what cannot be,
cannot be a real thing, for whatever is real, is.

It is exactly the same case in Numbers: there neither is, nor can be an
infinite number, because there is no number so great, nor can any number be so
great, but it may be made greater by adding to it; so that Numbers, Extension,
and the same may be said of Time and Succession, are called infinite, not that
they have any real and positive infinity, but because we can add to them
without end, which is a demonstration, that they neither are, nor can be
infinite, for what is infinite, is capable of no additions; and there can be no
Number, Extension, or successive Duration, but what is capable of infinite
additions, and therefore is at an infinite distance from being infinite.

By this time, I suppose every one is convinced, that infinite Extension does
not belong to the Idea of a God, because there is no such thing in Nature; and
if infinite Extension does not, no Extension can; for nothing is God, but what
is infinite.

Though the truth is, this very word infinite confounds our Notions of God, and
makes the most perfect and excellent Being, the most perfectly unknown to us:
for infinite is only a negative term, and signifies that, which has no end, no
bounds, no measure, and therefore no positive and determined Nature, and
therefore is nothing; that an infinite Being, had not use and custom reconciled
us to that expression, would be thought Nonsense and Contradiction; for every
real Being has a certain and determined Nature; and therefore is not infinite
in this sense, which is so far from being a perfection, that it signifies
nothing real.

But since Custom has made it necessary to use this word, it is necessary to
explain what we mean by it: That an infinite Being signifies a Being absolutely
perfect, or which has all possible Perfections: which has no other end of its
Perfections, but Perfection itself; that is a finite imperfect Being, that
wants any Perfections; that is an infinite Being, not which has no end of its
Perfections, but which actually has all Perfections, and can be no more perfect
than it is: For there is a measure of the most absolute, and in this sense
infinite Perfections, before which no Being is absolutely perfect, and beyond
which there are no new degrees of Perfection; for if we do not grant this,
there can be no Being absolutely perfect.

As for Instance: Infinite Wisdom, Knowledge, Goodness, Justice, Power, have
fixed and set bounds to their Perfections, beyond which they cannot go: Infinite
Knowledge and Wisdom knows all things, that are knowable, and that are wise;
infinite Goodness can do all things which are good; infinite Justice is perfect
Justice, which observes the exact proportions of Right and Wrong; infinite
Power can do all things which can be done; To know, what is not to be known, to
do what is not to be done, to be good or just beyond the perfect measures of
Goodness and Justice, is a contradiction; for it is neither Wisdom, nor Power,
nor Goodness, nor Justice: The Nature of Wisdom, Power, Justice, and Goodness,
is fixed and determined, and the utmost bounds of them is absolute perfection:
The Divine Nature is the Original Rule and Standard, and utmost bounds of them,
and therefore absolutely perfect. These Perfections indeed may be called
infinite in the Negative sense, with respect to us, that we know not, what the
utmost extent of them are: We know not how far infinite Wisdom, and Power, and
Goodness reaches, but then we certainly know, that they have their bounds, and
that the Divine Nature is the utmost bounds of them; for nothing can be a Rule
and Measure of absolute Perfections, but the Divine Nature itself: Now this
gives us a positive Notion and Idea of God, though we cannot comprehend his
absolute Perfections; we as certainly know, what God is, as we know, what
Wisdom, Knowledge, Power, Goodness, Justice signify; but how wise, how good,
how powerful God is, we know not, because we do not know the utmost extent of
these Perfections.

I must now add, that there can be no absolute Perfections, but those of a
Mind, such as I have so often mentioned, Wisdom, Power, Goodness: As for
Matter, it is so imperfect a Being itself, that it cannot be the subject of
absolute Perfections: Nothing which belongs to Matter is a Perfection,
considered in itself; Extension is no Perfection, no more than the dimensions
of a Body are, to be long, or broad, or deep, to be little or great, which may
be Perfections or Imperfections, as it happens, with relation to the just
measures and proportions of different Bodies; for either greatness or
littleness may make different things monstrous, and therefore neither of them
are either Beauties or Perfections themselves; for what is in itself a
Perfection, is always so.

Extension is of no use, but where there is a multitude or diversity of Parts,
and such a compound Being can never be absolutely perfect, because it is made
of Parts, which are not absolutely perfect, as no Part can be; and ten thousand
imperfect Parts can never make up an absolute perfect Being: And if what is
infinitely perfect can have no Parts, it needs no Extension, and can have none;
for what is extended has assignable Parts, whether they can be divided or not.

Omnipresence is a great and unquestionable Perfection, but to be Omnipresent
by infinite Extension, (if such a thing could be) would be no Perfection at
all; for this would be to be present only by Parts* as a Body might be, which
is infinitely extended; and a Body is a capable of infinite Extension, as any
Man can conceive a Spirit to be; and yet if a Spirit be Omnipresent only by
infinite Extension, the whole Substance of that Spirit is not present every
where, but part of it in one place, and part in another, as many Miles distant
from each other as the places are, where such parts of the Omnipresent Spirit
are. This all Men will confess to be absurd; and yet if the whole Mind and
Spirit be present every where, it is certain, it is not present every where by
way of Extension; for the whole Extension of an infinitely extended Spirit is
not present every where: And if Omnipresence itself cannot be owing to infinite
Extension, no Man can tell me, why an infinite Mind should be extended at all:
For Extension itself is no Perfection. Much less do any other Virtues and
Qualities of Bodies deserve the Name of Absolute Perfections, and therefore we
must seek for Absolute Perfection only in a Mind; perfect Wisdom, Knowledge,
Power, Goodness, Justice, make an absolute perfect Mind; there are no other
absolute Perfections but these, and therefore there can be no other absolutely
perfect Being, but an infinite Mind.

But besides this we may observe, that all these absolute Perfections, by a
mutual consciousness may be entire and equal in three distinct infinite Minds:
There is no contradiction, that three infinite Minds should be absolutely
perfect in Wisdom, Goodness, Justice, and Power; for these are Perfections,
which may be in more than One, as Three Men may all know the same things, and
be equally just and good: but Three such Minds cannot be absolutely perfect
without being mutually conscious to each other, as they are to themselves; for
if they do not perfectly know each other, as they know themselves, their Wisdom
and Knowledge is not absolutely perfect; for they do not know all things, if
they do not perfectly know one another; and there can be no such perfect
knowledge of each other, without a mutual consciousness.

This shows not only the possibility of this Notion, that Three distinct
infinite Minds should be mutually conscious to each other, but the necessity of
it, if there be Three such infinitely perfect Minds; for they cannot be
infinitely perfect, without being conscious to one another.

Thus to proceed: This Notion plainly reconciles the perfect equality of all
Three Persons, with the Prerogative of the Father, and the Subordination of the
Son and Holy Spirit. That all Three persons are perfectly equal in Knowledge,
Wisdom, Goodness, Justice, Power, is evident from their mutual consciousness,
whereby they all know, love, and do the same things, which is a perfect
equality: But this does not destroy the natural Subordination of the Son to the
Father, of a derivative to an original Light, as Christ is called in the Nicene
Creed; God of God, Light of Light: For though God has communicated his own
Nature to him, and received him into his Bosom, to an intimate consciousness
with himself, which makes him the perfect Image of his Father; yet he receives
all this from his Father by eternal Generation, he is a Son still, though equal
to his Father in all Divine Perfections, and therefore subordinate to him as a
Son: and the like may be said of the Holy Spirit.

This shows also, how these Three distinct Persons are each of them God, and
yet are all but One God. Each Person is God, for each Person has the whole and
entire Perfections of the Godhead, having by this mutual consciousness, the
other Persons in himself, that each Person is in some sense the whole Trinity:
The Son is in the Father, and the Father in the Son, and the Holy Spirit in
Father and Son, and Father and Son in the Holy Spirit; and therefore if the
whole Trinity be God, the Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost
God, they being all mutually in each other; and yet this is a plain
demonstration, that they are not Three Gods, but One God; because neither of
them are the One Supreme God, but as thus intimately united to all the rest;
and then they can be all Three, but One Supreme God: This gives an intelligible
account of one of the most difficult Problems in all School Divinity, which the
Master of the Sentences borrowed from St. Austin as he has done most of his
other Distinctions; that the whole Trinity is not greater, than any One Person
in the Trinity. This sounds very harshly at first hearing, and yet if we
consider it, we must confess it to be true, unless we will say, that there is a
greater and less in God, or that the Three Persons in the Trinity make One God,
as Three parts make a whole, each of which parts must be less than the whole;
and yet I cannot see any possible way to understand this matter, but only this:
That the whole Trinity by a mutual consciousness is in each person, and
therefore no Person is less than the whole Trinity.

And this is the only possible way of understanding the different Modi
subsistendi, of which the Schools speak: That the Three Divine Persons have One
numerical Essence, and are One God, but are distinguished from each other by a
distinct manner of Subsistence proper to each Person: It is plain, the
Schoolmen were no Sabellians; they did not think the Three Divine Persons, to
be only Three Names of the same infinite Being; but acknowledged each Person to
be really distinct from one another, and each of them to have the same
numerical Essence, and to be truly and properly God, and not to be Three Modes
of the same infinite God, which is little better than Three Names of One God.

And what are these Modi subsistendi, by which the Divine Persons are
distinguished from each other? Now they are no other, than the proper and
distinguishing Characters of each Person; that the Father is of himself, or
without any cause; that the Son is begotten of the Father, that the Holy Ghost
proceeds from Father and Son: Which proves that by these Modi subsistendi, they
did not mean (as some mistake them) that the Three Divine Persons are Three
Modes of the Deity, or only modally distinguished, for there are no Modes, no
more than there are Qualities and Accidents, in the Deity, much less can a Mode
be a God: To be sure, all Men must grant, that the Father is not a Mode of the
Deity, but essentially God, and yet he has his Modus subsistendi, as well as
the Son, and the Holy Ghost; and no Man can think, that the Father begat only a
Modus, and called it his Son, whereas a Son signifies a real Person of the same
Nature, but distinct from his Father.

All then that can possibly be meant by these Modes of Subsistence is this,
that the same numerical Essence is whole and entire in each Divine Person, but
in a different manner; the Son and Holy Ghost are in the Father, as the One is
begotten, the other proceeds from him, and yet both remain in him an intimate
consciousness; and thus you have often heard, all Three Persons are in each
other, and therefore are numerically One; the Father has the Son and Holy Ghost
in himself as the Fountain of the Deity, the Son begotten of the Father, the
Holy Ghost Proceeding from Father and Son. That is, there are Three infinite
Minds, which are distinguished from each other by the relations of Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, the Father begets, the Son is begotten, the Holy Ghost
proceeds, which are there different Modes of subsisting; but each of these
infinite Minds has the other Two in himself, by an intimate and mutual
consciousness, and that makes all Three Persons numerically One Divine Essence,
or One God; for when the whole Trinity is in each distinct Person, each Person
is the same One numerical God, and all of them but One God; If the Father, for
instance, have his own personal Wisdom, and by an internal consciousness, all
the Wisdom of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; and the Son have his own personal
Wisdom, and by the same consciousness, all the Wisdom of the Father, and the
Holy Ghost; and in like manner, the Holy Ghost have his own personal Wisdom,
and all the Wisdom of Father, and Son; this infinite Wisdom which is in Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, is identically the same: for from which Person soever you
begin to reckon this Union, it is the same Father, Son, and Holy Ghost still,
which are thus intimately united into One; and therefore it is the same
numerical and identical Wisdom, which is in each of them, and the same in all.

To add no more: This Notion gives a plain account too of that Maxim of the
Schools, That all the Operations of the Trinity, ad extra, are common to all
Three Persons; for it cannot possibly be otherwise, when they are thus
intimately united by a mutual consciousness; for they can no more act, than
they can subsist separately; when the Wisdom, Goodness, Justice, Power of the
whole Trinity is entire in each Person, and the same in all, every Person of
the Trinity must be equally concerned, saving the Natural Order, and
Subordination of Persons, in all the external Effects and Operations of the
Divine Wisdom, Justice, Goodness, and Power.

Thus I have endeavored to explain this Great and Venerable Mystery of a
Trinity in Unity; and this I may say, that I have given not only a very
possible and a very intelligible Notion of it, but such also as is very
agreeable to the phrase and expressions of Scripture, such as preserves the
Majesty of the Article, and solves all the Difficulties of it; there may be a
great deal more in this Mystery, than we can fathom, but thus much we can
understand of it, and that is enough to reconcile us to this belief, and to
shame and silence the profane Scoffers at a Trinity in Unity; as I have in part
shown already, and will do now more fully, by proceeding to answer those many
Absurdities and Contradictions charged on it by the Brief Notes: To proceed
then where I left off.

Creed.
There is One Person of the Father, another of the Son, another of the Holy
Ghost.

Notes.
Then the Son is not the Father, nor is the Father the Son, nor the Holy Ghost
either of them.

Answer.
I grant it: their Persons are distinct, and therefore are not each other, but
they are all essentially united by a mutual consciousness, whereby they are
mutually in each other, and can be no more separated from each other, than
every Man's own mind can be divided from itself.

Notes.
But if the Father is not the Son, and yet is (by confession of all) the One
true God, then the Son is not the One true God, because he is not the Father:
The reason is self-evident, for how can the Son be the One true God, if he be
not He, who is the one true God. After the same manner it may be proved, that
(on th^e Athanasian Principles) neither the Father, nor Holy Spirit, are, or
can be God, or the One true God; for neither of them is the Son, who is the One
true God, according to Athanasius, and all Trinitarians; for they all say, The
Father is the One true God, the Son is the One true God, and the Holy Ghost the
One true God; which is a threefold contradiction, because there is but One true
God, and One of these Persons is not the other. But if it be a Contradiction it
is certainly false, for every Contradiction, being made up of Inconsistencies,
destroys itself, and is its own Confutation.

This is mere trick and fallacy, Answer.
or misrepresentation. To have made his Argument conclude, he should have said:
The Father is not the Son, and yet the Person of the Father considered not only
as distinguished, but as divided and separated from the Person of the Son, is
the One true God, and then the Son is not the One true God, because he is not
the Father: And then indeed his reason had been self-evident, that the Person
of the Son, as separated from the Person of the Father, is not the One true
God, because the Person of the Son is not the Person of the Father, who is the
One true God: But neither Athanasius, 'nor any of the Trinitarians ever said
this, That the Person of the Father, as separated from the Persons for the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost, is the One true God; or that the Person of the Son as
separated from the Persons of the Father, and the Holy Ghost is the One true
God; or that the Person of the Holy Ghost as separated from the Persons of the
Father, and of the Son, is the One true God; for we constantly affirm, that
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, by an intimate and inseparable Union to each
other, are but One true God; but as their Persons can never be separated, so
they must never be considered in a separate state, and if we will imagine such
an impossible absurdity as this, neither of them are the One true God; for
whoever separates them, destroys the Deity, and leaves neither Father, Son, nor
Holy Ghost.

And yet if we consider these Three Divine Persons, as containing each other in
themselves, and essentially One by a mutual consciousness, this pretended
Contradiction vanishes: For then the Father is the One true God, because the
Father has the Son, and the Holy Spirit in himself; and the Son may be called
the One true God (of which more presently) because the Son has the Father, and
the Holy Ghost in himself; and the Holy Ghost the One True God, because he has
the Father and the Son in himself, and yet all but One true God, because
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are united into One; and then though One of these
Persons is not the other, yet each Person by an essential unity contains both
others in himself, and therefore if all Three Persons are the One true God,
each Person is God.

And this is the true meaning of the Athanasian Creed, which this Author has
corrupted by adding, the One true God to every Person; that the Father is the
One true God, the Son the One true God, the Holy Ghost the One true God, as if
each Person as distinguished and separated from the other, were the One true
God; and then it would indeed sound pretty like a Contradiction to add, yet
there is but One true God: But the Athanasian Creed only says, The Father is
God, the Son God, the Holy Ghost God; yet Three are not Three Gods, but One
God; which plainly shows, that it does not speak of these Three Divine Persons,
as distinguished and separated from each other; but as united into One God, not
as Three parts of the Deity, but as Three Persons, who are essentially One God,
as mutually containing each other, that is, by a mutual self-consciousness, as
I have now explained it, which is the essential Unity of a Mind.

As for this expression, The One true God, it is never attributed to Son, or
Holy Ghost, that I know of either in Scripture, or any Catholic Writer; though
it is to the Father, whom our Savior himself calls, The only true God; for all
Three Divine Persons as in conjunction with each other, being the One only true
God: This Title cannot so properly be attributed to any One Person, but only
the Father, who is the Fountain of the Deity: for though all Three Persons are
in each other by a mutual consciousness, and therefore each Person has all the
Perfections of the Godhead; yet the Son is in the Father, and the Holy Spirit
in the Father and the Son, in such a manner as the Father is not in the Son,
nor the Father and Son in the Holy Spirit, which the Schools call the Modi
subsistendi; that is, the Son is in the Father by eternal generation, and the
Holy Spirit in Father and Son by eternal procession; and this is the natural
Order of the Trinity; and therefore when this One God is to be signified by the
Name of any One Person, it is proper to follow the Order of Nature, if I may so
speak, and to signify the whole Sacred Trinity by the Name of the Father, who
is the eternal Scource and Fountain of it.

The Godhead of the Father, and of the Son, Creed.
and of the Holy Ghost is all One, the Glory equal, the Majesty coeternal.

The meaning of the last clause is, Notes.
that the Glory and Majesty of the Son and Holy Spirit is equal to the Glory
and Majesty of the Father, or the Son and Holy Spirit are equally Glorious and
Majestical with God the Father.

Therefore I ask, whether the Glory and Majesty with which the Son and Spirit
are Glorious and Majestical be the same in number (that is, the very same) with
which the Father is Glorious and Majestical, or only the same for kind or
degree? If it be not the same in number, then the Godhead of the Father, and of
the Son, is not (as this Creed teaches) all One, and they are not One and the
same God: for Two infinite and distinct Glories and Majesty's make Two Gods,
and Three make Three Gods; as every one sees, and (to say true) the
Trinitarians themselves confess. It remains therefore that they say, That the
Glory and Majesty of the Son and Spirit is the same in number and not for kind
and degree only, with that of the Father; but then it follows, that the Glory
and Majesty of these Persons is neither equal, nor coeternal. Not equal, for
it is the same, which equals never are. Not coeternal, for this also plainly
intimates, that they are distinct: For how coeternal, if not distinct? Do we
say, a thing is coeternal and cotemperary with itself? Therefore also this
Article does impugn and destroy itself: Besides, if the Glory and Majesty of
the Three Persons be numerically the same, then so are all their other
Attributes: from whence it follows, that there is not any real difference
between the Three Persons, and they are only Three several Names of God, which
is the Heresy of the Sabellians.

Answer.
What he says, That if the Glory and Majesty of the Three Persons be numerically
the same, so are all their other Attributes, is certainly true; for their Glory
and Majesty is nothing else, but the infinite Perfections of their Nature. And
therefore to make short work with this, I affirm, that the Glory and Majesty,
and all the other perfections of these Three Divine Persons are as distinct as
their Persons are, and therefore may be coequal and coeternal, because they are
distinct, and yet they are as numerically One and the same as the Godhead is.
They are Three Infinite Minds, and therefore distinct as Three Minds are, but
they are all mutually conscious to each other, and therefore as essentially
One, as the same Mind is One with itself by a self-consciousness; this does not
destroy the Distinction of their Persons, nor consequently of their Majesty and
Glory: their Glory and Majesty is as distinct as their Persons are, and united
as their Persons are, into One essential and numerical Glory of one Supreme
God, a Trinity in Unity.

But to expose the ridiculous Sophistry of this, instead of their Glory equal,
their Majesty coeternal, let us put in their Persons equal and coeternal: for
the equality of their Glory, and coeternity of their Majesty, is nothing else,
but the equality and coeternity of their Persons; that the Godhead of the
Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost is all One, their Persons equal and
coeternal. And then our Note-makers Argument runs thus:

I ask, whether the Persons of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, which are equal
and coeternal with the Person of the Father, be the same in number (that is,
the very same) with the Person of the Father, or only the same for kind and
degree? If they be not the same in number (that is, if they be distinct
Persons, (as the Creed affirms) then the Godhead of the Father, and of the Son,
is not all One, and they are not One and the same God, for Two infinite and
distinct Persons make Two Gods, and Three make Three Gods. Is not this now, a
self-evident proof, that there cannot be One Godhead, if there be Three
Persons, because Three Persons make Three Gods! Quod erat demonstrandum; that
is, it cannot be, because it cannot be: But to proceed with his argument.

It remains therefore, that these Trinitarians say, That the Person of the Son
and Spirit, is the same in number, and not in kind or degree only, with the
Person of the Father. That is, because they affirm these Divine Persons to be
distinct, therefore they must say, they are numerically the same; and what
then? Why then they are neither equal, nor coeternal, because they are the same
without any real distinction, and the same thing is not equal, nor coeternal
with itself: Right! very right Sir! a plain demonstration! And thus the poor
Trinitarians are eternally confounded! They teach, that there are Three
distinct Persons, and One eternal and infinite God; he plainly confutes this by
saying, That if there be One Godhead, there cannot be Three distinct Persons,
for Three distinct Persons are Three Gods; and if he had proved it, as well as
said it, it had been a direct confutation. They affirm, that these Three
distinct Persons are coequal and coeternal; he proves, that they are not,
because they must say, (though they say the quite contrary) that they are not
Three, but One numerical Person, and then they cannot be coequal and coeternal:
and thus they shamefully contradict themselves, and this Article is Felo de se:
If this be the profound Reason of Heretics, God deliver me from Heresy, if it
were for no other Reason, but to keep my Understanding: And yet as ridiculous
as this looks, it is the whole of his Reasoning; for if there be Three distinct
coequal and coeternal Persons, their Majesty and Glory must be as distinct,
coequal, coeternal, as their Persons are, and united into One numerical
essential Glory, as their Persons are into One God; and how Three infinite
Minds, or the Three Divine Persons, or, which is the same thing, Three Divine
Glories and Majesty's may be really distinct, and yet numerically One God, I
have already explained at large.

In the next place, this Creed teaches, That, The Father is Incomprehensible,
Uncreate, Eternal, Creed.
Almighty; the Holy Ghost is Incomprehensible, Uncreate, Eternal, Almighty:
Also, That each of these Persons is by himself God and Lord; so that the Father
is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God: yet there are not Three
Gods, or Lords, nor Three Incomprehensibles, nor Three Almighties, not Three
Eternals, nor Uncreated.

Now if in imitation of this, Notes
a Man should have a mind to say: The Father is a Person, the Son is a Person,
and the Holy Ghost is a Person; yet not Three Persons, but One Person; I would
know, why this were not as good Grammar and Arithmetic, as when Athanasius
says, The Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God, yet not
Three Gods, but One God; or when he says, The Father Uncreated, the Son
Uncreated, the Holy Ghost Uncreated, yet not Three Uncreated, but One
Uncreated. And so of the rest?

Does not a Man contradict himself, when the Term or Terms in his Negation, are
the same with those in his Affirmation? If not, then it may be true, That The
Father is a Person, the Son is a Person, the Holy Ghost is a Person, yet there
are not Three Persons, but One Person: For all the fault here is only this,
that in the last clause the term Person is denied to belong to more than One,
when in the first it had been affirmed of no fewer than Three. For the same
reason it must be a Contradiction to say, The Father is God, the Son is God,
the Holy Ghost is God, yet there are not Three Gods, but One God: For the Term
God is at last denied to belong to more than One, though in the first clause,
it was affirmed of Three: Will they say, that in these words there are not
Three Gods but One God, the term God is not denied to belong to more than One,
or is not appropriated to One? If so, then there are not three Persons, but One
Person; and again, there are not Three Men, but One Man; then I say, these
Propositions do not deny the terms Person and Men to belong to more than One,
or appropriate them to One only, which yet every Body confesses they do.

This Objection sounds very formidably too, but proves nothing but the shameful
Ignorance and impudence of this Author, Answer.
who undertakes to write Notes upon Creeds, and to ridicule the Venerable
Mysteries of the Christian Faith, before he understands them.

For let us begin with the Adjectives first, such as Uncreated,
Incomprehensible, Eternal, Almighty; and we need take under consideration, but
any One of these, and that will explain all the rest, for there is the same
account to be given of them all.

The Father then is Uncreated, the Son Uncreated, the Holy Ghost Uncreated, and
yet there are not Three Uncreated, but One Uncreated: Now to make this a
Contradiction, that there are Three, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Uncreated,
and yet that there are not Three Uncreated, but One Uncreated, this term
Uncreated must be applied to the same subject, and affirmed and denied in the
same sense: Now when Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are said to be Uncreated,
this term Uncreated is applied to the Three Divine Persons, and if Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, are Uncreated, it is certain, there are Three Divine Persons
Uncreated; and had it been said in the Creed, that there are not Three Divine
Persons Uncreated, it had been as plain a Contradiction, as to say, That the
Father is a Person, the Son a Person, and the Holy Ghost a Person, and yet
there are not Three Persons, but one Person: Thus far our Author and I agree:
But wherein then do we differ? For is it not expressly said in the Creed, that
though the Father is Uncreated, the Son Uncreated, the Holy Ghost Uncreated,
which are plainly Three Uncreated, if Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are Three;
yet there are not Three Uncreated, but One Uncreated? I grant it; but if our
Author had understood any Greek or Latin, he should have made a little use of
it here, and then he would have found, that the Creed of Athanasius had not
denied, that there were Three Uncreated Persons, and therefore did not
contradict, what it had before affirmed, that the Three Persons of the Sacred
Trinity are all Uncreated. For (...), and tres Increati, cannot signify Three
Uncreated Persons, as it must do to make it a Contradiction; for though there
is no Substantive expressed, yet some must be understood, and (...), and
Increati will not agree with (...), or Personae, and therefore (...), and Dii
must be understood; that is, though there are Three Uncreated Persons, Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost; yet there are not Three Uncreated Gods, but One Uncreated
God, which is no more a Contradiction, than to say, that though there are Three
Divine Persons, there are not Three, but One God.

And that this is the true meaning of the Article, appears from the whole scope
and design of it. I shall instance only in the conclusion, which contains the
Reason of the whole, why though all Three Persons are Uncreated,
Incomprehensible, Eternal, Almighty, God, and Lord; yet we must not say, that
there are Three, but One Eternal, Incomprehensible, Uncreated, Almighty, God,
and Lord: For like as we are compelled by the Christian Verity; to acknowledge
every Person by himself to be God and Lord, and there is the same reason for
Eternal, Uncreate, etc. So are we forbidden by the Catholic Religion, to say,
There are Three Gods, or Three Lords, Three Eternals, Incomprehensibles,
Uncreated, Almighties. Which plainly proves, that when the Creed denies, that
there are Three Eternals, or Three Uncreated, it does not deny, that there are
Three Eternal and Uncreated Persons, but that there are Three Eternal and
Uncreated Gods, which is not like saying, there are not Three Persons, but One
Person; but these Three Eternal Persons are not Three Eternal Gods, but One
Eternal God.

This is a sufficient Answer with relation to the Adjectives of Eternal,
Uncreate, Incomprehensible, Almighty, that if you join them with Person, there
are Three Eternal, Uncreated Persons, but if you join them with God, there are
not Three Eternal, Uncreated Gods, but One Eternal Uncreated God; and this is
no more a contradiction, than to say, there are Three Persons and but One God;
but what shall we say to the term GOD, which is ascribed to all Three Persons;
and yet the Creed affirms, that though there are Three Persons, each of which
is God, yet there are not Three Gods, but One God? That is, the term God is
affirmed of Three, and yet denied to belong to more than One; And is not this a
Contradiction? I answer, No, unless this term God be attributed to Three
divided and separated Persons; for if Three such separated Persons be each of
them God, they must be Three Gods, and it would be a Contradiction to say, that
Three Persons which are divided and separated from each other, are each of them
God, and yet that there are not Three Gods, but One God: But if these Three
distinct Persons are not separated, but essentially united into One, each of
them may be God, and all Three but One God: for if these Three Persons, each of
whom (...) as it is in the Creed, singly by himself, not seperately from the
other Divine Persons, is God and Lord, are essentially united into One, there
can be but One God and One Lord, and how each of these Persons is God, and all
of them but One God, by their mutual consciousness, I have already explained.

That Salvo he has found out for the Trinitarians, of this pretended
Contradiction of Three Gods, and One God; that there are Three personal Gods,
and but One essential God, is so senseless, and the Paragraph so long, that I
shall not give my self the trouble of transcribing it: for the Answer lies in a
few words. We grant there are Three Persons, each of whom is God; but we deny,
that there are Three personal Gods: because though their Persons are distinct,
they never were, and never can be divided and separated; and therefore can be
but One God, being essentially united into One: by Three Gods all Mankind
understand, Three distinct and separate Beings, independent on One another,
each of which is a Supreme and Sovereign God, as Three separate humane Persons
are Three Men; but where the Persons are not separated, but essentially united
into One, there we must acknowledge but One God.

But you will say: Though the Union of their Persons will not allow us to say,
that there are Three separate personal Gods, yet if all Three Persons are
distinct, though not separated from each other, and each of them is God
considered (...), as distinct, though not separate from the other Divine
Persons, then at least the Godhead of each Person must be as distinct as their
Persons are, and we must acknowledge three distinct, though not separate Gods.
I answer, by no means. We must allow each Person to be a God, but each distinct
Person is not a distinct God; there is but One Godhead, which can no more be
distinguished, then it can be divided from it self. There is but One God, and
each Divine Person is this One numerical God, has the whole entire Godhead in
himself, and the same One numerical Godhead is in them all; thus each Divine
Person is God, and all of them but the same One God; as I explained it before.

This One Supreme God is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, a Trinity in Unity, Three
Persons, and One God: Now Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, with all their Divine
Attributes and Perfections (excepting their personal Properties, which the
Schools call the Modi subsistendi, that One is the Father, the other the Son,
the other the Holy Ghost, which cannot be communicated to each other) are whole
and entire in each Person by a mutual consciousness, each Person feels the
other Persons in himself, all their essential Wisdom, Power, Goodness, Justice,
as he feels himself, and this makes them essentially One, as I have proved at
large. Now if the whole Trinity be in each Divine Person by such an intimate
and essential Union, we must confess each Person to be God, if the whole
Trinity be God: and yet there being but One Trinity, One Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, who are essentially One by a mutual consciousness, it is certain all
these Three Divine Persons can be but One God: for wherever you begin to
reckon, there are but Three, and these Three are One: If we consider the Father
and Holy Ghost in the Son by this mutual consciousness; we truly affirm the Son
to be God, as having all the Divine Perfections of the whole Trinity in
himself; if we consider the Father and the Son in the Holy Ghost; for the same
reason we affirm the Holy Ghost to be God; but the natural Order of the Trinity
is to reckon from the Father as the Fountain of the Deity: that Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost are One God: for the Son and Holy Spirit are in the Father; not
only by a mutual consciousness, as the Father and the Son are in the Holy
Ghost, but as in their Cause, (if I may so speak, and the Ancient Fathers were
not afraid to speak so) as in their Root, their Origin, their Fountain, from
whence they receive the communications of the Divine Essence, and Godhead; the
Son by Eternal Generation, being God of God, Light of Light; the Holy Ghost by
Eternal Procession from the Father and the Son. Thus all these Divine Persons
are naturally united in the Father, who is the Fountain of the Deity, and all
essentially in each other by a mutual consciousness, which makes each Person
God, and all One and the same God without any show of Contradiction.

SECT. V. The Doctrine of the Fathers, and of the Schools, concerning the
Distinction of Persons, and the Unity of Essence in the Ever Blessed Trinity,
considered and reconciled to the foregoing Explication of it.
THis Notion of the Union of the Divine Persons in One numerical Essence, by a
mutual consciousness to each other, is so very plain, and gives so easy and
intelligible an account both of the Phrases of Scripture, and all other
Difficulties in the Doctrine of the Trinity, that this alone is sufficient to
reconcile any Man to it: but I am very sensible, how afraid Men are (and not
without reason) of any new Explications of so Venerable a Mystery, and such a
Fundamental Doctrine of Christianity, as this is; and therefore I must ward
this blow, as well as I can, and remove the prejudice of Novelty and
Innovation. Now if it appear, that I have advanced no new Proposition, but have
confined myself to the received Faith and Doctrine of the Catholic Church; if
that Explication I have given of it, contain nothing new, but what is
universally acknowledged, though possibly not in express terms applied to that
purpose I use it for; if that explication I have given be very consistent with,
nay, be the true interpretation of that account the Ancients give of a Trinity
in Unity, I hope it will not be thought an unpardonable Novelty, if I have
expressed the same thing in other words, which give us a more clear and
distinct apprehension of it: and to satisfy all men, that it is so, I shall
compare, what I have now said concerning the Distinction of Persons, and the
Unity of Essence in the Ever Blessed Trinity, with the Doctrine of the Fathers,
and the Schools.

I. To begin then with the distinction of Persons. I have not indeed troubled
my Readers with the different signification of Essence, and Hypostasis,
Substance, Subsistence, Person, Existence, Nature, etc. which are terms very
differently used by Greek and Latin Fathers in this Dispute, and have very much
obscured this Doctrine instead of explaining it; but I plainly assert, That as
the Father is an eternal and infinite Mind, so the Son is an eternal and
infinite Mind, distinct from the Father, and the Holy Ghost is an eternal and
infinite Mind, distinct both from Father and Son; which every body can
understand without any skill in Logic or Metaphysics: And this is no new
Notion, but the constant Doctrine both of the Fathers and Schools. Three
Persons signify Three, who are infinite in Knowledge and Wisdom, and all other
Perfections, which belong to a Mind: Now no Man who acknowledges a Trinity of
Persons, ever denied that the Son and the Holy Spirit, were intelligent Beings
or Minds.

When they tell us, (which is their common Language) that the Son is the
substantial Word and Wisdom of the Father, what is this else but to say* that
he is an intelligent Being, or infinite Mind: Greg. Nyssen calls the Son, or
Word, (...), Mind, or Intellect. Athanasius observes from our Savior's words,
I and my Father are One; (...). Athanas. Cont. Arium. Disput. Tom. 1. p. 116.
Paris 1627.
that are signifies two, or the distinction of Persons, as One signifies the
Unity of Essence: for he does not say, I and my Father am, but are One. And
therefore if the Father be an eternal Mind and Wisdom, the Son also is an
eternal, but begotten Mind and Wisdom; as the Nicene Creed tells us, That he is
God of God, Light of Light, very God of very God. St. Austin in his Sixth Book
of the Trinity, takes notice of a common argument used by the Orthodox Fathers
against the Arians, to prove the coeternity of the Son with the Father; that if
the Son be the Wisdom and Power of God, as St. Paul teaches, Quae ratiocinatio
ad id cogit, ut dicamus Deum Patrem non esse sapientem, nisi habendo sapientiam
quam genuit, non existendo per se pater sapientia. Deinde si ita est, filius
quoque ipse sicut dicitur Deus de Deo, lumen de lumine, videndum est utrum
possit sapientia de sapientia dici, si non est Deus Pater ipsa sapientia, sed
tantum Genitor sapientiae. Quod si tenemus, cur non and magnitudinis suae, and
bonitatis, and aeternitatis, and omnipotentiae suae Generator sit; ut non ipse
sit sua magnitudo, and sua bonitas, and sua aeternitas, and sua omnipotentia,
sed ea magnitudine magnus sit, quaem genuit, and ea bonitate bonus, etc. S.
Aug. Tom. 3. l. 6. de Trinitate.
1 Cor. 1. and God was never without his Wisdom and Power, the Son must be
coeternal with the Father; for it is distraction to say, that the Father was
ever without his Wisdom, or Power, was neither wise nor powerful. But this
acute Father discovered a great inconvenience in this argument, for it forces
us to say, that the Father is not wise, but by that Wisdom which he begot, not
being himself Wisdom as the Father: and then we must consider, whether the Son
himself, as he is God of God, and Light of Light, may be said to be Wisdom of
Wisdom, if God the Father be not Wisdom, but only begets Wisdom; and by the
same reason we may say, that he begets his own Greatness, and Goodness, and
Eternity, and Omnipotency, and is not himself his own Greatness, or Goodness,
or Eternity, or Omnipotency, but is Great, and Good, Eternal and Omnipotent, by
the Greatness, Goodness, Eternity, Omnipotency, which is born of him; as he is
not his own Wisdom, but is wise with that Wisdom, which he begets.

The Master of the Sentences follows St. Austin exactly in this Point, and
urges this unanswerable Argument for it, which he grounds upon St. Austin's
Principle, That in God, Si hoc est ibi esse quod Sapere, non per illam
Sapientiam quam genuit, Sapiens dicitur Pater, alioquin non ipsa ab illo, sed
ille ab ipsa est. Si enim Sapientia; quam genuit, Causa est illi ut Sapiens
sit, etiam ut sit, ipsa illi Causa est, -quod fieri non potest nisi gignendo
eum, aut faciendo: sed nec genetricem nec couditricem Patris ullo modo quisquam
dixerit Sapientiam; quid enim est insanius Lib. 1. Did. 32. cap. Praeterea.
to be and to be wise is the same thing; and if it be, he cannot be wise with
the Wisdom he begets, for then he would receive his Being from this begotten
Wisdom, not Wisdom from him: for if the Wisdom he begets be the Cause of his
being wise, it is the Cause also, that he is; which must be either by begetting
or by making him; but no man will say, that Wisdom is any way the Begetter or
Maker of the Father? which is the height of madness. And in the next Chapter
he teaches, That the Father is unbegotten, the Son begotten Wisdom; so that
according to St. Austin and the Master of the Sentences, who is the Oracle of
the Schools, the Father is Eternal Wisdom, or an Eternal Mind, and the Son
Eternal Wisdom and Mind, though both are united into One Eternal Wisdom: and if
we confess this of Father and Son, there can be no Dispute about the Holy
Ghost, who is Eternal Mind and Wisdom, distinct, both from Father and Son.

Nothing is more familiar with the Ancient Fathers, than to represent Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, to be Three as distinct Persons, as Peter, James, and John
are, as every one knows, who is at all versed in this Controversy; and this is
charged on them by some men, as little better than Polytheism, or a Trinity of
Gods, as Peter, James, and John are a Trinity of men; but this must be true
with reference to distinction of Persons, if we will acknowledge a real
distinction between them; for if the distinction be real, and not merely
nominal (which was the Heresy of Sabellius) their Persons must be as distinct,
as three humane Persons, or three men are: The Father is no more the Son, or
the Holy Ghost, than Peter is James or John: but then they are not separated or
divided from each other, as Peter, James and John are; for that indeed would
make them three Gods, as Peter, James and John are three men.

There is no Example in Nature of such a distinction and unity, as is between
the Three Persons in the Godhead, and therefore the ancient Fathers made use of
several Comparisons to different purposes, which must carefully be confined to
what they applied them, for if we extend them farther, we make Nonsense or
Heresy of them. There are three things to be considered in the ever blessed
Trinity; the Distinction of Persons, the (...), or Sameness of Nature, and
their Essential Unity; and the Fathers make use of different Comparisons to
represent each of these by, because no one can represent them all; but
inconsidering Persons seek for all in One, and because they cannot find it,
they reject them all, as impertinent, dangerous, or heretical, and reproach the
Fathers, sometimes as ignorant of this great Mystery, sometimes as bordering
upon Heresy, which I am sure does little service to the Doctrine it self, and
gives great countenance to false and corrupt Notions of it; whence the Fathers
themselves, even those who were the most zealous Opposers of Arianism, are
thought Favorites of such Opinions. I shall have occasion to take notice of
several Instances of this, as I go on, at present I shall confine my self to
the Distinction of Persons, which cannot be more truly and aptly represented
than by the distinction between three men; for Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are
as really distinct Persons, as Peter, James and John; but whoever shall hence
conclude, That these Fathers thought, that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are no
otherwise One also, than Peter, James, and John are, greatly abuse them without
any colorable pretense for it, as will appear more presently; but this
Comparison of theirs shows what their sense was, that these Three Divine
Persons are Three Eternal and Infinite Minds* as really distinct from each
other, as Three men are; though essentially united into One Infinite and
Eternal Mind, or One God. But I need not insist on this, for the real
distinction of Persons is so plainly taught by the ancient Fathers, especially
after the rise of the Sabellian Heresy, that there is more difficulty to
understand, how they unite them into One God, then that they make them distinct
Persons, and what they say about the unity of the Godhead, abundantly proves
this distinction of Persons.

Secondly, Let us therefore in the second place consider, How they explain this
great Mystery of a Trinity in Unity: they all agree, That there are Three
distinct Persons, and that these Three Persons are but One God; and they seem
to me to agree very well in that account they give of it; though some late
Writers are very free, and I think very unjust, in their Censures of some of
them as scarcely Orthodox in this Point: I shall only remind you, that this
being so great a Mystery, of which we have no Example in Nature; it is no
wonder, if it cannot be explained by any one kind of Natural Union: and
therefore it was necessary to use several Examples, and to allude to several
kinds of Union, to form an adequate Notion of the Unity of the Godhead: and we
must carefully apply what they say to those Ends and Purposes for which they
said it; and not extend it beyond their Intension, as I observed before: and
there are several steps they take toward the Explication of this great
Mystery; which I shall represent in short, and show, that taking them
altogether, they give a plain and intelligible Notion of this Unity in Trinity,
and indeed no other than what I have already given of it.

1. The first thing then to be considered is the (...) orCo-essentiallity of
the Divine Persons. That all Three Persons in the Godhead have the same
Nature, which they signified by the word (...): now whereas the same Nature may
signify the same Numerical, or the same Specific Nature, Petavius, and after
him Dr. Cudworth, Petavius de Trin. l. 4. c. 5. Cudworth's Intellectual System,
p. 603. etc.
have abundantly proved, that the Nicene Fathers did not understand this word
of a Numerical but Specific Sameness of Nature: or the agreement of things,
numerically differing from one another in the same common Nature. As Maximus
very plainly tell us, that that is said to be (...), (...). Maximi Dial. 1. de
Trinit. inter Opera Athanasij Vol. 2. p. 168. Edit. Paris.
which has the same Notion or Definition of its Essence; as a man differs
nothing from a man, as he is a man, nor an Angel from an Angel, as he is an
Angel: and therefore this word did equally overthrow the Sabellian and the
Arian Heresy; as it affirms both a distinction of Persons, and the sameness of
Nature, as St. Ambrose and others observe; Ambros. l. 3 de Fide, c. 7.
for nothing is (...) to it self, but to something else, distinct from it self,
but of the same common Nature: and therefore some, who owned the (...),
rejected the (...) and (...) and (...) as savouring of Sabellianism, and
implying such a numerical Unity of Essence in the Godhead, as destroyed all
distinction of Persons; for which reason the (...) it self was rejected by
some, as abused by the Sabellians; till the signification of that word was fixed
and declared by the Fathers at Nice, as Petavius observes.

This is One thing wherein the Fathers place the Unity of the Godhead; that all
three Persons have the same Nature; and to be sure, this is absolutely
necessary to make Three Persons One God: for it is impossible they should be
One God, if they have not the same Nature, unless Three distinct and separate
Beings of diverse Natures can be One God; that is, unless the Divine Nature be
not One pure and simple Act, but a compound Being, and that of different
Natures too. But some of the Fathers went farther than this, and placed the
Essential Unity of the Divine Nature in the sameness of Essence; that there is
but One God, because all the Three Divine Persons have the same Nature. And it
will be necessary briefly to examine what they meant by it, to vindicate these
Fathers from the Mis-representations, and hard Censures of Petavius and Dr.
Cudworth, who (as I hope to make appear) have greatly mistaken their Sense. The
Charge is, that they make the Three Divine Persons, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, to be One God only upon account of the same Specifical Divine Nature
common to them all; just as Three men are One, by having the same common
Nature, or the same Humanity: and being asked, Why they may not then be called
Three Gods, as well as we say, Peter, James, and John, are Three men; they
answer, That this is owing to an ill Custom, for they ought not to be called
Three men neither, which, is like saying, there are Three Human Natures; and
though in inferior Matters we may bear with the abuse of Words, and improper
forms of Speech, yet this is of dangerous Consequence, when we speak of God;
and therefore though there is no great hurt in saying, there are Three men;
though there is but one Humanity common to them all; yet we must not say there
are Three Gods, since there is but One Divine Nature and Essence common to all
Three Persons: This, Petav. de Trin. l. 4. c. 9.
Petavius says, is to deny the true and real Unity of the Divine Substance and
Essence, and to make God only collectively One; as a multitude of men are said
to be One People, and a multitude of Believers One Church; which was the Error
of Abbot Ioachim, for which he was Condemned in the Council of Lateran. Dr.
Cudworth represents it thus: These Theologers supposed the Three Persons of
their Trinity to have really no other than a Specific Unity and Identity, Ubi
supra.
and because it seems plainly to follow from hence, that therefore they must
needs be as much Three Gods, as Three men are Three men, these Learned Fathers
endeavored with their Logic to prove, that Three men are but abusively and
improperly so called Three, they being really and truly but One, because there
is but One and the same Specific Essence or Substance of Human Nature in them
all. -- He adds, It seems plain that this Trinity is no other than a kind of
Tritheism, and that of Gods Independent and Coordinate too.

This is a very high Charge, and yet these Theologers are no less men than
Gregory Nyssen, and Cyril of Alexandria, and Maximus, and Damascen, men of Note
in their Generation, and never charged with Heresy before. But whatever the
meaning of these Fathers was, it is plain, that Petavius and Dr. Cudworth have
mistaken their meaning. For they did not think, that Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost were one God, only as Peter, James, and John, are one man; or that Peter,
James, and John are One man, as Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are One God; they
neither dreamt of a Collective nor Specific Unity of the Godhead, but asserted
a real subsisting numerical Unity of Essence, as is obvious to every impartial
Reader, and therefore if they had not understood, how they explained this, yet
they ought not to have put such a sense upon their Words, as is directly
contrary to what they affirm: I shall not need to transcribe much out of these
Fathers to justify them in this Point, but will only represent their Argument
as plainly as I can, and that will be their Justification, whatever become of
their Argument.

They affirm then, That Father, Son; and Holy Ghost, are but One God, because
there is, and can be, but One numerical Divinity, or one Divine Nature and
Essence, though it subsist in Three distinct Persons: against this it was
objected, that Peter, James, and John, though they have the same Human Nature,
(...). Greg. Nyss. Tom. 2. p. 448. Quod non sint tres Dij.
yet are called Three men; and there is no absurdity in it, when there are more
than One, who have the same Nature, to speak of them in the Plural Number, to
call Two Two, and Three Three; how then comes it to pass, that Religion forbids
this; that when we acknowledge Three Persons, who have the same Nature without
any imaginable difference, we must in a manner contradict our selves,
confessing the Divinity of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost to be One and the
same, and denying that they are Three Gods.

This Gregory Nyssen answers at large, and I shall chiefly confine my self to
the Answers he gives, which will abundantly show, how much these two Learned
Men have misrepresented his Sense.

And first, he takes notice of the common Form of Speech, of calling Three, who
partake of the same Human Nature, Three Men; which inclines us to call the
Three Divine Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, who have all the same Divine
Nature Three Gods; and that naturally betrays men into the Opinion of a Trinity
of Gods, as well as of a Trinity of Persons, who are as much Three Gods, as
Peter, James, and John, are Three men: and therefore he tells us, that this is
an improper way of speaking, even when applied to men, to say, that there are
Three men. For man is the name of Nature, not of the Person: to say that there
is but One man, is no more than to say, there is but One Humanity; and to say
there are Three men, is to say, there are Three Humanities, or Three Human
Natures; and the Name of Nature cannot be a proper Name of distinction, and
therefore ought not to be multiplied: for that which is the same in all, cannot
distinguish one Person from another. This he observes all men are very sensible
of; for when they would call any particular Person out of a Crowd; they do not
call him by the Name of Nature; that is, they do not say, you man come hither;
for this being a common Name, as the Nature is common, no man could tell, who
was meant: but they call him by the Name of his Person, Peter, or James; for
though there are many, who partake of the same Human Nature, yet there is but
One man, or One Humanity in them all: Persons are distinguished and divided and
multiplied by peculiar personal properties, and therefore may be numbered; but
Nature is One, united with it self, a perfect indivisible Unity, which neither
increases by addition, nor is diminished by Substraction, but though it be in a
Multitude of Individuals, is whole, entire, and undivided, in all. And
therefore as a People, an Army, a Church, are named in the single number,
though they consist of Multitudes: so in exactness and propriety of Speech, man
may be said to be One, though there are a Multitude who partake of the same
Human Nature. So that, hitherto all that the Father has said, tends only to
justify this Form of Speech, as having nothing absurd or incongruous in it; to
acknowledge, that the Father is God, the Son God, and the Holy Ghost God, and
yet that there is but One Divinity or Godhead, not Three Gods, for though this
sounds as harsh, as to own, that Peter is a man, and James a man, and John a
man, and yet there are not Three men, but One man, which Custom has made very
absurd and contradictious to say, (which is the Objection he was to Answer) yet
he observes, that according to strict propriety of speaking, this is no
absurdity to say, there are not Three men, but One man, nay, that it is an
abuse of Speech to say otherwise, because man is the Name of Nature, not of a
Person, and therefore there is but One man, as there is but One Human Nature in
all those, who partake of it, for Human Nature is but One, whole, and
indivisible in all; and therefore cannot distinguish One Person from another,
and therefore not be a Name of Number.

But what makes St. Gregory dispute thus nicely about the use of words, and
oppose the common and ordinary Forms of Speech? Did he in good earnest believe,
that there is but One man in the World? No! No! he acknowledged as many men, as
we do; a great Multitude who had the same Human Nature, and that every One who
had a Human Nature, was an individual man; distinguished and divided from all
other Individuals of the same Nature: what makes him so zealous then against
saying, that Peter, James, and John, are Three men? Only this; that lie says
Man is the Name of Nature, and therefore to say there are Three men, is the
same as to say, there are Three Human Natures of a different kind; for if there
are Three Human Natures, they must differ from each other, or they cannot be
Three; and so you deny Peter, James, and John, to be (...), or of the same
Nature; and for the same reason, we must say, that though the Father be God,
the Son God, and the Holy Ghost God, yet there are not Three Gods, but (...),
One Godhead and Divinity, lest we destroy their Homoousiotes, or the Sameness
of their Nature, and introduce Three Gods of a different Nature, like the Pagan
Polytheism: which is the first reason he gives, why we do not say there are
Three Gods to avoid the suspicion of Polytheism, (...). Ibid. p. 448.
in numbering and multiplying Gods, as the Heathens did, which he says is a
sufficient Answer for ignorant and unskilful People. But to say this in gross,
will not satisfy more inquisitive men; and therefore he assigns the reason for
it, that Individuals in strict propriety of Speech, ought not to be numbered by
the name of their Nature, because that argues a diversity in their Natures; to
say, Three men, is to say, there are Three different Humanities, whereas
Humanity is One and the same in all; and as men are not distinguished, so they
ought not to be numbered by the Name of Nature; and that this is all his
meaning, appears from the reason he gives, why this improper way of speaking
may be tolerated without any inconvenience, when we speak of men, that we may
say, there are Three men; but it is very dangerous to apply this to the
Divinity, and say there are Three Gods; because there is no danger, (...).
Ibid. p. 458.
by this Form of Speech, that that there are Three or more men, that any one
should be betrayed into that Conceit, that we mean a Multitude of Humanities,
or many different Human Natures; but there is danger, lest our naming more
Gods, or saying, that there are Three Gods, men should imagine, that there are
diverse and different Natures in the Divinity, that is, that the Three Persons
in the Godhead are not all of the same Nature.

Here St. Gregory lays his Foundation, That we must not say, there are Three
Gods, because there is but One Divinity; Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, being all
(...), of the same Nature, whereas God being the Name of Nature, to say there
are Three Gods, is to say, there are Three different Divinities, or Divine
Natures, which destroys the Homoousiotes of the Godhead; which is the Sum of
his Argument against using the Name of Nature Plurally, to say, there are Three
men, or Three Gods.

Athanasij Vol. 1. Dial. 1. de Trin.
There is nothing more plain than this in the Dialogues of Maximus, who all
along explains this (...) and (...) the One Divinity, and the One Humanity, by
the (...), or the Sameness of Nature, and therefore there can be but One
Nature, though it subsist in several Persons, or Individuals.

Now indeed had they gone no farther in explaining the Unity of the Godhead,
than this Specific Unity and Identity of Nature, there had been some reason to
quarrel with them; but they do not stop here, but proceed to show, how this
(...) or Sameness of Nature in all Three Persons of the ever blessed Trinity,
proves a true Numerical and Essential Unity of the Godhead; which it does not,
and cannot do in created Natures: without this it is evident, there can be no
Essential Unity, unless we will allow of a Composition of different Natures in
the Godhead; where the Nature is the same it may be One, not only by a Logical,
but by a Real and Essential Unity.

Gregory Nyssen has two ways of doing this. 1. He observes, that the Name God,
and so those other Names which are ascribed to the Divinity, do not so properly
signify the Divine Nature, as declare something relating to it: for the Divine
Nature is (...), (...). Greg. Nyss. Vol. 2. p. 451.
that which has no Name, and which no words can express and signify, as the
Scripture teaches: but the Names given to God only teach us, either what we
ought not to attribute to the Divine Nature, or what we ought, but not what the
Divine Nature it self is.

This is a fair Introduction, such as becomes a wise man, who considers, how
unknown the Essences of all Things are to us, much more the Substance and
Essence of God; and how it confounds our Minds, when we talk of the Numerical
Unity of the Godhead, to have the least conception or thought about the
distinction and union of Natures and Essences; and therefore he tells us, that
(...) is (...) and (...), the Inspector and Governor of the World; that is, it
is a Name of Energie, Operation, and Power; and if this Virtue, Energie,
Operation be the very same in all the Persons of the Trinity, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, then they are but One God, (...) -- (...) -- Ibid. p. 453.
but One Power and Energie; and thus he proves it is, and that not as it is
among men, who have the same Power and Skill, do the very same Things, profess
the same Art, are Philosophers or Orators alike; and yet are not all One
Philosopher, or One Orator; because though they do the same thing, yet they act
apart, every one by himself, and have no Communion nor share in what each other
do; but their Operations are proper to themselves alone; but in the Divine
Nature it is not so; the Father does nothing by himself, nor the Son by
himself, nor the Holy Ghost by himself; but the whole Energie and Operation of
the Deity relating to Creatures, begins with the Father, passes to the Son, and
from Father and Son to the Holy Spirit: The Holy Trinity does not act any thing
separately; there are not Three distinct Operations, as there are Three
Persons, Ibid. p. 456, 457.
(...), but one motion and disposition of the good Will, which passes through
the whole Trinity from Father to Son, and to the Holy Ghost, and this is done
(...), without any distance of Time, or propagating the Motion from one to
the other, but by One thought, as it is in One numerical Mind and Spirit, and
therefore though they are Three Persons, they are but one numerical Power and
Energie.

By this time I hope the Reader is satisfied, That this Father does not make
the Persons of the Trinity Three Independent and Coordinate Gods, who are no
otherwise One than Three men are by a Specific Unity and Identity of Nature;
but has found out such an Unity for them, as he confesses cannot be between
Three men, even such an Unity as there is in a Spirit, which is numerically One
with it self, and conscious to all its own Motions; for I leave any man to
judge, whether this (...), this one single Motion of Will which is in the same
instant in Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, can signify any thing else but a
mutual consciousness, which makes them numerically One, and as intimate to each
other, as every man is to himself, as I have already explained it. Petavius was
aware of this, and therefore will not allow this to belong to the same
Argument, but to be a new and distinct Argument by it self: Now suppose this,
yet methinks he should have suspected, he had mistaken the Fathers Sense, when
he found him contradict, what he apprehended to be his Sense, within the
compass of two Pages; but indeed the mistake is his own; for the Father pursues
his intended Argument, to prove, that though the Father is God, and the Son
God, and the Holy Ghost God, yet we ought not to say, that there are Three
Gods, but One God. This he proves, first, because God is the Name of Nature,
and the Name of Nature must not be expressed in the Plural number, when the
Nature is the same without any the least conceivable difference; for to say,
there are Three Gods, is to say, that there are Three different Divine Natures,
which introduces Polytheism; as to say there are Three men, is to say, there
are Three different Human Natures; for if they be the same, they are not Three;
and therefore the Name of the Nature must not be expressed plurally, how many
Persons soever there are, who have the same Nature. This was to secure the
Homoousiotes of the Divine Nature, and if he had stopped here, Petavius and Dr.
Cudworth might have said, what they pleased of him; but having secured the
Homoousiotes or Sameness of Nature, which was the great Dispute of those days
between the Orthodox and the Arians, he proceeds to show, how this same Nature
in Three distinct Persons is united into one numerical Essence and Godhead; and
this he does first by showing, that God signifies Power and Energie, and that
all the Three Persons in the Trinity have but One numerical Energie and
Operation, and therefore are but One God; which is only the improvement of his
former Argument; for the Sameness of Nature is necessary to the Sameness of
Operation; for Nature is the Principle of Action, especially in God, whose
Nature is a pure and simple Act, and an unity and singularity of Energie and
Operation is a demonstration of One numerical Essence; for the same single
individual Act cannot be done by Two separate Beings, who must act separately
also.

Secondly, As for those, who are not contended to contemplate God as a pure and
simple Act or Energie, which easily solves this difficulty, how Three Persons
are One God, they having but One numerical Energie and Operation; I say, as for
those who not contented with this, inquire after the Unity of the Divine Nature
and Essence, he asserts that this perfect Homoousiotes or Sameness of Nature,
without the least difference or alteration makes them numerically One; and
returns to what he had first said, That the Name of Nature should not be
expressed Plurally, it being One entire undivided Unity, which is neither
increased nor diminished by subsisting in more or fewer Persons.

I confess, I do not understand his reasoning in this matter, he seems to
destroy all Principles of Individuation, whereby One thing is distinguished
from another, (...). Greg. Nysl. ibid. p. 456.
where there is no difference or diversity of Nature; for Things, he says, must
be distinguished by Magnitude, Place, Figure, Color, or some other diversity
in Nature, before we can number them, and call them Two or Three: and therefore
since the Divine simple unalterable Nature, admits of no Essential diversity,
that it may be One, it will not admit of any number in it self, but is but One
God. Whereas I confess, to my understanding, if the same pure unmixt Nature, as
suppose Humanity, should subsist in Twenty several Persons, without the least
variation, I should not doubt, notwithstanding the Specific Unity of Nature,
to say, there are Twenty subsisting Human Natures; and Three Minds and Spirits,
which have no other difference, are yet distinguished by self-consciousness,
and are Three distinct Spirits: and therefore to help this out, he sometimes
adds, that there is (...), no difference either of Nature or Energie in the
Deity; and at other times, (...), the Divine Nature is invariable, and
undivided; which all the ancient Fathers added to explain the Unity of the
Trinity, that inseparate Union of Nature, which is between the Divine Persons,
that they are (...) inseparable from each other.

But however he might be mistaken in his Philosophy, he was not in his
Divinity: for he asserts a numerical Unity of the Divine Nature; not a mere
Specific Unity, which is nothing but a Logical Notion; nor a Collective Unity,
which is nothing but a Company, who are naturally many; but a true subsisting
numerical Unity of Nature: and if the difficulty of explaining this, and his
zeal to defend it, forced him upon some unintelligible Niceties, to prove that
the same numerical Human Nature too is but one in all men, it is hard to charge
him with teaching, that there are Three Independent and Coordinate Gods,
because we think he has not proved, that Peter, James, and John, are but One
man. This will make very foul work with the Fathers, if we charge them with all
those Erroneous Conceits about the Trinity, which we can fancy in their
inconvenient ways of explaining that venerable Mystery, especially when they
compare that mysterious Unity with any Natural Unions.

I am sure St. Gregory was so far from suspecting that he should be charged
with Tritheism upon this Account, that he fences against another Charge of
mixing and confounding the Hypostases or Persons, by denying any difference or
diversity of Nature, (...), Ibid. p. 459.
which argues, that he thought he had so fully asserted the Unity of the Divine
Essence, that some might suspect, he had left but One Person, as well as One
Nature, in God.

But though the Homoousiotes or Coessentiality of the Divine Persons is not
sufficient alone to prove this Unity of the Godhead, yet as I before observed,
this is necessary to an essential Unity, for they must all have the same
Nature, or they cannot be One, and therefore this was the first thing to be
considered in the Unity of the Godhead.

Secondly, To this Homo-ousiotes the Fathers added a numerical Unity of the
Divine Essence. Petavii Vol. 2. l. 4. c. 13, 14.
This Petavius has proved at large by numerous Testimonies, even from those
very Fathers, whom he before accused for making God only collectively One, as
Three Men are One Man; such as Gregory Nyssen, St. Cyril, Maximus, Damascen;
which is a demonstration, that however he might mistake their explication of
it, from the Unity of human Nature, they were far enough from Tritheism, or One
collective God.

For we must observe, though all the Fathers assert, the singularity of the
Godhead, or the numerical Unity of the Divine Essence, yet they do not assert
such a numerical Unity, as there is, where there is but One Person as well as
One Essence; but such a numerical Unity, as there is between Three, who are
(...), of the very same nature, but are not merely united by a specific Unity,
but by an essential Union, and therefore are Three and One. This as Maximus
truly says, is (...), both a wonderful distinction and union, but though
several Fathers attempt several ways of explaining it, they all agree in the
thing; that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Three distinct Divine Persons, are
united in one numerical Nature and Essence.

And I cannot but observe, that Petavius greatly commends Boethius's
explication of this Mystery, which is the very same he had before condemned in
Gregory Nyssen, and those other Fathers. That Father, Ibid. p. 430.
Son, and Holy Ghost are One God, not Three Gods: Cujus conjunctionis ratio est
indifferentia: the reason or manner of which Union and Conjunction is their
indifference; that is, such a sameness of Nature, as admits of no difference or
variety, or an exact Homo-ousiotes, as he explains it: Eos enim differentia
comitatur, qui vel augent vel minuunt, ut Ariani qui gradibus meritorum
Trinitatem variantes distrahunt, atque in pluralitatem deducunt: Those make a
difference, who augment and diminish, as the Arians do, who distinguish the
Trinity into different Natures, as well as Persons, of different worth and
excellency, and thus divide and multiply the Trinity into a plurality of Gods.
Principium enim pluralitatis alteritas est: Proeter alteritatem enim nec
pluralitas quid sit intelligi potest: For the beginning of plurality is
alterity; for we know not what plurality is but alterity: that is, there must
be some difference in the Nature of Things to make them Two or Three, but when
the Nature is exactly the same, they are but One: which is exactly the same
account, which Gregory gave of it, as I have already shown; and why this should
be little better than Heresy in him, and very good Divinity in Boethius, is a
little mysterious; for after all, this numerical Unity of Essence is nothing
else, but an (...), where there are no (...), as Maximus speaks, such an
invariable sameness of Nature, as has no differences to distinguish it, and
therefore must be One: For these Fathers apprehended, that where there was such
an exact sameness of Nature, they did mutually exist in each other, and were
but One Power and Energie, Will and Counsel, and therefore but One Godhead and
Monarchy: This Gregory Nyssen insists on, as I showed before; and Petavius has
quoted a remarkable Testimony from Damascen to this purpose; which shows also,
Ibid. p. 435.
that though they asserted but One Humanity, yet they were far enough from
thinking, that the Three Divine Persons are One God, only as Peter, James, and
John, are one Man; where he tells us, That the distinction and separation
between Peter and Paul is real and visible, their union and community of Nature
only Notional: for we conceive in our minds, that Peter and Paul are of the
same kind, and have but One common Nature: thus common Nature is discerned by
Reason, but yet it subsists by Parts, and separately by itself, and is
distinguished from itself as it subsists in individuals by many things, some
peculiar marks and properties: but especially that they do not subsist in each
other, but separately, (...). -- (...). Damasc. de fide Orthod. l. 1. c. 11.
and therefore may be called Two or Three or many Men; (and Gregory Nyssen says
the same, as Petavius himself owns) but in the most sacred Trinity it is
otherwise; for there the community of Nature is not a Logical Notion, but is
real; from the same Eternity, Identity of Substance, Action, Will, Agreement of
Counsels, Identity of Authority, Power, Goodness; I do not say Likeness, but
Identity.

The numerical Unity then of the Divine Essence resolves itself into those two
Principles, the Unity and Identity, of Power and Energie, and that which they
call the (...), or circumincession, or in-being of the Three Divine Persons in
each other, which preserves the distinction of Persons, but makes the Divine
Essence numerically One; and indeed these Two are but One, and both of them
nothing more than what I have explained, I think, a little more intelligibly by
a mutual consciousness, whereby all Three Divine Persons are mutually in each
other, and have but One Energy and Operation.

That the Fathers universally acknowledged, That the Operation of the whole
Trinity, De Trinitate, l. 4. c. 15.
ad extra, is but One, Petavius has proved beyond all contradiction; and hence
they conclude the Unity of the Divine Nature and Essence; for every Nature has
a virtue and energy of its own; for Nature is a principle of Action, and if the
Energy and Operation be but One, there can be but One Nature; and if there be
Two distinct and divided Operations, if either of them can act alone without
the other, there must be two divided Natures.

This is certainly true, but yet it gives no account, how Three distinct
Persons come to have but One Will, One Energy, Power, and Operation; and there
is no account to be given of it, that I know of, but what I have now given,
viz. mutual consciousness; and that is a very plain account of it: for if all
Three Persons be conscious to each other, as every Man is to himself, there can
be but (...), as Gregory Nazianzen speaks, but One and the same motion and Will
of the Deity; they must move and act all together, according to the order and
subordination of the Divine Persons; and it is impossible they should do so
without this mutual consciousness, as it is, that Three Men, who are not
conscious to each other, should have but one single motion of Will, in One
single and undivided Act: The Fathers then and I agree in this, that the Unity
of the Divine Nature and Essence consists in the singularity of Operation; I
only add, how this Energy and Operation is, and must be one, by a mutual
consciousness; and if this be a reasonable and intelligible account, I hope it
is no fault.

And there is no other account to be given of that mutual In-being of the
Divine Persons in each other, which they call the (...), as Christ tells us, I
am in the Father, and the Father in me: the necessity of this they saw, from
what our Savior says, and because it is impossible they should be One without
such an inseparable and intimate Union and Presence and Inhabitation in each
other: (...). Dam. l. 3. c. 5.
and therefore Damascen tells us, that they cannot go out of each other, nor be
separated; but are united and mutually penetrate each other without confusion.

Such an Union as this they all agreed in, De Trin. l. 4. c. 16.
as Petavius largely shows, but how to explain it they know not; sometimes they
are thus intimately united by the sameness of Nature, but this might be the
cause of this Union, but does not explain, what this intimate Union is;
sometimes they represent it by corporeal similitudes, which raise gross and
material Images in the mind, unworthy of the pure and simple Essence of God: as
the mixture and union of the Light of several Candles in the same Room, and of
the Colors of the Rainbow, etc. which is owing to a material conception of the
Divine Substance, and the Union of Substances, which we know nothing of; but
had they contemplated God as a pure Mind, it had been easy to explain this
Perichoresis, or In-dwelling of the Divine Persons in each other: for there is,
and can be no other Union of Minds but consciousness, and by a mutual
consciousness they are as intimate to each other, as they are to themselves;
and are whatever each other is; as I have explained it at large; and I hope,
this is no fault neither, to give an intelligible Explication of that, which
all the Fathers taught, but were not always equally happy in their Explications
of it.

But to do St. Austin right, though he do not name this consciousness, yet he
explains this Trinity in Unity by examples of mutual consciousness: Supra p. 50.
I named one of his Similitudes before, of the Unity of our Understanding,
Memory, and Will, which are all conscious to each other; that we remember what
we understand and will; we understand what we remember and will; and what we
will, we remember and understand; and therefore all these Three Faculties do
penetrate and comprehend each other. But his Ninth Book, St. Aug. T. 2. de
Trin. l. 9.
De Trinitate, is spent wholly upon this Argument. It is very familiar with the
Ancient Fathers to represent the Father as the infinite Original Mind; the Son
the Wisdom of the Father, his Image, or reflex knowledge of himself; and the
Holy Spirit that Divine Love, wherewith Father and Son love each other; St.
Austin takes this similitude of a Mind, Igitur ipsa men's, amor, and notitia
ejus, tria quaedam sunt, and haec tria anum sunt, and cum perfecta sunt
aequalia sunt.
its knowledge of itsself, and love of itsself, and shows how these are Three
and One, which he makes a faint Image of, Men's autem cum se totam novit, hoc
est, perfect novit, per totum ejus est notitia ejus; and cum se perfect amat,
totum se amat, and per totum est amor ejus. -- Quomodo autem ista tria non sint
ejusdem substantiae non video, cum men's ipsa se amet, and ipsa se noverit.
Atque ita sunt haec tria, ut non alteri alicui rerum men's vel amata vel nota
sit. Vnius ergo ejusdemque essentiae necesse est haec tria sint.
and resemblance of a Trinity in Unity. Now the Mind, when it knows its whole
self, its knowledge comprehends its whole self; and when it perfectly loves
itself, it loves its whole self, and its love comprehends its whole self; and
this proves them to be of the same Substance; for the Mind knows itself, and
loves itself, and these are so Three, that the Mind is known and loved by
nothing else, and therefore it is necessary that these Three have One Nature
and Essence.

He proceeds to show, that this Unity is without all manner of confusion and
mixture, as it is in the Sacred Trinity, where the Persons are united, but
distinct; for mixture of Persons destroys the Trinity: and shows, In alternis
autem ita sunt quia men's amans in amore est, and amor in amantis notitia, and
notitia in mente noscente. Singula in binis ita sunt, quia men's quae se novit
and amat, in amore and notitia sua est: and amor amantis mentis, feseque
scientis in mente notitiaque ejus est; and notitia mentis se scientis and
amantis in mente atque amore ejus est, quia scientem se amat, and amantem se
novit. Ac per hoc and bina in singulis, quia men's quae se novit and amat, cum
sua notitia est in amore, and cum suo amore in notitia; amor quippe ipse and
notitia simul sunt in mente quae se amat and novit. Tota vero in totis
quemadmodum sint jam supra oftendimus, cum se tota men's amat, and totam novit.
and totum amorem suum novit, totamque amat notitiam suam.
how each of them are distinct, and then how they are alternately in each
other; for the Mind that loves is in the love, and love in the knowledge of the
Lover, and knowledge in the knowing Mind; and how each of them is in the other
two; for the Mind, which knows and loves itself, is in its own knowledge and
love; and the love of the Mind, which knows and loves itself, is in its own
knowledge; and the knowledge of the Mind which knows and loves itself is in the
Mind, and in its love, because it loves itself knowing, and knows itself
loving; and thus also two are in each, for the Mind which knows and loves
itself, with its knowledge is in love, and with its love is in knowledge; for
love and knowledge are together in the Mind, which loves and knows itself: and
the whole is in the whole; for the whole Mind loves itself, and knows its whole
self, and knows its whole love, and loves its whole knowledge. I need not tell
any Man, that this is the mutual consciousness which I have described, and by
this St. Austin represents the Trinity in Unity; and I hope his Authority will
defend me from the charge of Innovation; and I am sure the reason of the thing
will defend itself.

But for the better understanding of this, we must further observe, that the
Fathers resolve the Unity of the Godhead into the Unity of Principle: that is,
though there be Three Divine Persons in the Godhead, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, yet the Father is the Original Fountain of the Deity, who begets the Son
of his own Substance, and from whom, and the Son, the Holy Ghost eternally
proceeds, of the same Substance with Father and Son: So that there is but one
Principle and Fountain of the Deity, and therefore but One God.

But this, as Petavius well observes, does not of itself prove the Unity of the
Godhead, but only the (...), or sameness of Nature; (...). Athan. Syn. Nic.
Decret. p. 261.

(...). p. 265.

(...) -- (...). p. 268.


and therefore the Fathers add, That God begets a Son not without, but within
himself, for the Wisdom of God is within him, and inseparable from him: This
they illustrated by the Sun, its light and splendor, which are coaeval and
inseparable; by the Fountain, and its Streams; by a Tree, and its Branches,
which are united in One; which Comparisons must not be strained farther than
they were intended, as if Father, Son, and Holy Ghost were one in the same
manner, as the Sun and its Light, or the Tree and its Branches, or the
Fountain, River, and Streams, but only that there is such a natural and
essential Union between the Divine Persons, as makes them One numerical God.

But there is something still to be added to this to complete this Notion, that
as the Father is the Fountain of the Deity, and the Son and Holy Ghost
inseparably united to him, so Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are essential to One
God, as St. Austin calls the Trinity, Vnam quandam summam rem, Aug. l. 1. De
Doct. Christ. c 5.
One Supreme Thing: And as all acknowledge, that the Three Persons are One God,
and since God is the most necessary Being, all Three Persons are necessary and
essential to One God: That there must necessarily be Three Divine Persons in
the Unity of the Godhead, and there can be no more.

For the explication of this, I shall proceed by these steps, which are all
plain, and universally acknowledged.

1. That there are no Accidents, nor Qualities, nor Faculties in God, as there
are in created Spirits; but whatever is in God is (...), Essence and Substance,
a pure and simple Act. This is universally acknowledged by all Christians: St.
Austin affirms, Aug. de Trin. l. 5. c. 5.
That there are no Accidents in God: Athanasius, That there is no Composition
in God, as between Substance and Accident, (and it is much alike, as to Mind
and its different Faculties and Powers, which is a Composition) but that God is
(...), a pure simple Act: Athan. Syn. Nicaenae Decr. p. 271.
but there is no need of Testimonies to prove that, which Natural Reason
proves; for nothing can be Eternal and Self-orginated, but a pure and simple
Act, for what is compounded is made; for it wants a Maker.

2. That it is essential to an eternal Mind to know itself, and to love itself;
for this is essential to a Mind; no human Mind can be without it, much less the
most perfect and excellent Mind; and therefore God does know himself, and love
himself and his own Image.

3. That Original Mind and Wisdom, and the Knowledge of it self, and love of it
self, and its own Image, are distinct Acts, and never can be One simple,
individual Act. They are distinct Powers and Faculties in men, Knowledge,
Self-reflexion, and Love, and are so distinct, that they can never be the same:
Knowledge is not Self-reflection, nor love either Knowledge or Self-reflection,
though they are inseparably united, they are distinct.

4. Therefore these three Acts, which are so distinct, that they can never be
the same, must be three substantial Acts in God, that is, three Divine
subsisting Persons; for there is nothing but Essence and Substance in God; no
Accident, or Faculties, as there are in Creatures.

5. That these are the true and proper Characters of the distinct Persons in
the ever blessed Trinity. The Father is Original Mind and Wisdom; the Son the
Word and Wisdom of the Father; that is, the reflex knowledge of himself, which
is the perfect Image of his own Wisdom; the Holy Ghost, that Divine Love which
Father and Son have for each other: It would be very impertinent to confirm
this by the Authority of the ancient Fathers, because all men, who know any
thing of them, know that this is their constant language.

I am sure this is very agreeable to the Language of Scripture, and Answers all
those Characters we find there of the Son and Holy Ghost.

The Son is expressly called the Word and the Wisdom of God. That Word which was
in the beginning, which was with God, and was God, 1 John 1. For God did
certainly always know himself, and therefore this Word was always with God,
intimately present with him, not as our transient and vanishing Reflections
are, but as a permanent and substantial Word, the subsisting and living Image
of his Fathers Wisdom: as he is called the Brightness of his Fathers Glory, and
the express Image of his Person, 1 Heb. 2. His Fathers Glory and Person is
Eternal and Original Wisdom; He is his Fathers begotten Wisdom, or the bright
Reflection of his Wisdom; which is as perfect and exact, as the Fathers
Knowledge of himself. And therefore St. John might well say, No man has seen
God at any time, the only begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, he
has declared him, 1 John 18. And our Savior might well tell us, As the Father
knows me, even so know I the Father, 10 John 15. that he sees all that the
Father does: That he receives all his Commands from the Father, that he that
sees him, sees the Father; and many such like Expressions he uses to signify
his perfect knowledge of his Father; for he is that Wisdom and Knowledge
wherewith his Father knows himself; and if the Father perfectly knows himself,
he is the perfect Image and Wisdom of the Father.

For this reason he is called the Son, because he is the perfect Image of the
Father, begotten of his own Eternal Wisdom, by a reflex Act upon himself: for
he begets his own Son in his own likeness by knowing himself; and therefore the
Son must be of the same Nature, the very Wisdom of the Father, unless the
Father knows himself otherwise than he really is.

This is the Eternal Son and Word of God, whereby he made the Worlds; for it is
this reflex Knowledge and Wisdom, which makes all things: The Eternal Ideas of
Truth and Wisdom in the Divine Mind effect nothing no more than mere
Speculation does in us, till it is brought into Act by reflection; for it was
this reflex Knowledge, which took the Patterns of things for the new World, and
gave Being to them; and therefore God made the World by his Son and begotten
Wisdom; who does all things by seeing what the Father does, as the Father does
all things by seeing himself in his reflex and begotten Wisdom; for the Father
and the Son are one single Energie and Operation.

This is that eternal Word and Reason, that true light, 1 John 9.
which lights every man that comes into the world, which communicates the
light of Reason, and the eternal Idea's of Truth to Mankind: This is that Son,
who reveals the Father to us, and acquaints us with his secret Counsels for the
Salvation of Sinners. v. 18.
This is that Word which became Flesh, v. 14.
and dwelt among us, who has undertaken the Work of our Redemption, and is
become the Wisdom of God, and the Power of God to Salvation to them that
believe: 1. Cor. 1.24.
for all the natural Communications of Wisdom and Reason; all the new
Discoveries of the Divine Wisdom; whatever the Divine Wisdom immediately does,
must be done by this begotten Wisdom; that is, by a reflex Wisdom, which is the
Principle of Action and Execution: and therefore as God made the World by his
Word, so also he redeems the World by his Incarnate Word; this being as
immediate an effect of the Divine Wisdom and Counsel, as his Creation of the
World:

As for the Holy Ghost, whose Nature is represented to be Love, I do not indeed
find in Scripture, that it is any where said, that the Holy Ghost is that
mutual love, wherewith Father and Son love each other: but this we know, that
there is a mutual love between Father and Son: The Father loves the Son, 3
John 35.
and has given all things into his hands. 5 John 20.
And the Father loves the Son, and shows him all things, that himself does.
And our Savior himself tells us, I love the Father. And I showed before, 14
John 31.
that love is a distinct Act, and therefore in God must be a Person; for there
are no Accidents nor Faculties in God. And that the Holy Spirit is a Divine
Person is sufficiently evident in Scripture: for he is the Spirit of God, 1
Cor. 2.11.
who knows what is in God, 1 John 4.16.
as the Spirit of Man knows what is in Man, and he is the Spirit of Christ, who
receives of the things of Christ: and his peculiar Character in Scripture is
love; which shows us, what he is in his own Nature, as well as what he is in
his Effects and Operations, for Nature and Energy is the same in God.

It is by the Holy Spirit, that the Love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, 5
Romans 5. The Love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is
given unto us. For this Spirit is the essential love of God, and therefore both
inspires us with the love of God, and gives us a feeling sense of God's love to
us.

He is the Spirit of the Son, the Spirit of Adoption, 8 Romans 15.
whereby we cry Abba Father, and which cries in our hearts Abba Father. The
Spirit of the Son; that is, 4 Gal. 6.
of the eternal and only begotten Son; that very spirit, whereby the eternal
Son calls God Father, whereby the Father owns the Son, and the Son the Father;
that is, that essential Love, which is between Father and Son; and therefore
wherever this Spirit of the Son is, it will call God Father, will cry Abba
Father; that is, is a Spirit of Adoption in us; for the eternal Spirit of the
Son, dwells only in Sons; by our Union to Christ, who is the eternal Son of
God, we become his adopted Sons, and as such the Spirit of the Son dwells in us.

And therefore the fruits and operations of the Spirit answer this Character. 5
Gal. 22.
For the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness,
goodness, meekness, which are the communications of the Spirit of Love.

This shows the difference between generation and procession, between being a
Son, and the Spirit of God. Generation, as I observed before, is a reflex Act,
whereby God begets his own Image and Likeness; it is God's knowledge of
himself, which to be sure is his own perfect Image; and the living essential
Image of God is his Son: for to be a Son, is to be begotten of his Father's
Substance, in his own Likeness and Image: But the Divine Spirit, or this
Eternal Love proceeds from God, is not a reflex but a direct Act, as all
Thoughts and Passions are said to proceed out of the Heart: a reflex Act turns
upon it self, and begets its own likeness; but Love is a direct Act, and comes
out of the Heart; and thus does this eternal Love proceed from God: besides,
this eternal Love is not the Image of God, but his eternal complacency in
himself and his own Image, and therefore is not a Son begotten of him, but the
eternal Spirit which proceeds from him. It is true, this eternal subsisting
Love, which is the third Person of the Trinity, has all the Perfections of
Father and Son in himself; for Love must have the perfect Idea of what it
loves, and therefore this subsisting Love must have all those Perfections in
himself, which are the Eternal Object and Cause of this Eternal Love; but his
essential Character is Love, and though Love has the whole Divine Perfections
in it self, yet it has them not as a Son, not as the Image of God.

This gives a plain Account also, how he is the Spirit of the Father, and the
Spirit of the Son, and according to the Profession of the Latin Church,
proceeds both from Father and Son; for this Divine Love eternally proceeds from
God's reflex Knowledge of himself, or seeing himself in his own Image: he loves
himself in his Image, and therefore the Spirit proceeds from Father and Son;
that is, from the Original and the Image, by one undivided Act: as every man
loves himself in that Idea and Image he has formed of himself in his own Mind.

And no man will wonder, that the Creation of the World is ascribed to the Holy
Spirit, as well as to the Father and Son; for it is Eternal Love which gives
Being to all things, which is the Author and Giver of Life, without which
Infinite Wisdom and Power produces no One Effect: Original Wisdom contains the
Ideas of all Things, and begotten Wisdom can frame the Natures of Things
according to the Original Ideas of the Divine Mind, but it is Love which gives
Being to them.

6. From hence it is clear, That these Three Divine Persons, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, are one God, as these Three Powers, of Understanding,
Self-reflexion, and Self-love are one Mind: for what are mere Faculties and
Powers in created Spirits, are Persons in the Godhead, really distinct from
each other, but as inseparably United into One, as Three different Powers are
essentially united in One Mind: There is a vast difference indeed between them,
as there is between God and Creatures; the Mind is but One, the Faculties and
Powers more, but these being only Faculties and Powers, neither of them is a
whole entire Mind: the Understanding alone is not the whole entire Mind, nor
Reflection, nor Love, but the Mind is whole and entire by the union of them all
in One: but these being Persons in the Godhead, each Person has the whole
Divine Nature: The Son has all that the Father has, being his perfect and
natural Image; and the Holy Spirit, is all that Father and Son is,
comprehending all their infinite Perfections in Eternal Love: and they are all
the same, and all united into One God, as the several Faculties and Powers are
in One Mind.

7. For this proves, that these Divine Persons are intimately conscious to each
other, which, as I before showed, makes them One numerical God: for as the same
Mind is conscious to all its own Faculties and Powers, and by that unites them
into One; so where there are Divine and Infinite Persons instead of Faculties
and Powers, they must be mutually conscious to each other, to make them all One
God.

8. This proves also, that though there are Three distinct Persons, there can
be but One Energie and Operation; Father, Son, and Holy Ghost is the Maker and
Governor of the World by one inseparable and undivided Energie: neither of
them do nor can act apart: as the several Powers of the Mind all concur to the
same individual Action; Knowledge, Self-reflection, and Will, do the same
thing, which is the Effect of Knowledge brought into act by Reflection and
Will: and yet the Effect may be ascribed to Knowledge, and ascribed to Will, as
the making of the World is to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy
Ghost, not separately to either, but as they act in Conjunction, and produce
the same Effect by One individual Energie and Power.

9. This proves also, that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, must be coeternal, as
the several Powers and Faculties must be co-temporary, and co-exist in the same
Mind. Understanding cannot be without a Power of Reflection, nor that without
Will and Love. And I suppose, no man will say, that there could be any
imaginable instant, wherein God did not know and love himself.

This Account is very agreeable to what St. Austin has given us; St. Aug. Tom.
3 de Trin. l. 9.
who represents the Father to be Original Mind, the Son his Knowledge of
himself, and the Holy-Spirit Divine Love, as I have done; and gives the very
same Account of their Union. Cum itaque se men's novit and amat, jungitur ei
amore verbum ejus, and quoniam amat notitiam, and novit amorem, and verbum in
amore est, and amor in verbo, and utrumque in amante and dicente. When the Mind
knows and loves it self, its Word is united to it by Love, and because it loves
its Knowledge, and knows its Love; its Word is in Love, and Love in its Word,
and both in the loving, and speaking or knowing Mind. This is the Eternal
Generation of the Son: Itaque men's cum seipsam cognoscit, sola parens est
notitioe suoe, and cognitum enim and cognitor ipsa est* when the Mind knows it
self, it is the sole Parent of its own Knowledge; for its self is both the
Knower and the Thing known; that is, the Son is begotten of the Father by a
reflex Knowledge of himself; and he gives us the same Account of the Difference
between Generation and Procession; that One is a new Production (if I may so
express it) inventum, partum, and repertum, that is the Production of its own
Image, of its own Wisdom and Knowledge by Self-reflexion; the other comes out
of the Mind, as Love does, and therefore the Mind is the Principle of it, but
not its Parent. Cur itaque amando se non genuisse dicatur amorem suum, sicut
cognoscendo se genuit notitiam suam: in eo quidem manifest ostenditur, hoc
amoris esse principium unde procedit: ab ipsa quidem mente procedit, quae sibi
est amabilis antequam se amet: atque ita principium est amoris sui, quo se
amat; sed ideo non recte dicitur genitus ab ea, sicut notitia sui, qua se
novit; quia notitia jam inventum est, quod partum vel repertum dicitur, quod
saepe praecedit inquisitio eo fine quietura.

This I hope is sufficient both to explain and justify this Doctrine (which is
the great Fundamental of the Christian Religion) of a Trinity in Unity, and
Unity in Trinity, and that Account I have given of it. It must be confessed,
that the ancient Fathers did not express their Sense in the same terms, that I
have done, but I will leave any indifferent and impartial Reader to judge,
whether they do not seem to have intended the very same Explication, which I
have now given of this venerable Mystery.

As for the Schoolmen, they generally pretend to follow the Fathers, and have
no Authority, where they leave them: Sometimes they seem to mistake their
Sense, or to clog it with some peculiar Niceties and Distinctions of their own.
The truth is, that which has confounded this Mystery, has been the vain
endeavor of reducing it to terms of Art: such as Nature, Essence, Substance,
Subsistence, Hypostasis, Person, and the like, which some of the Fathers used
in a very different Sense from each other; which sometimes occasioned great
Disputes among them, not because they differed in the Faith, but because they
used words so differently, as not to understand each others meaning, as
Petavius has shown at large. The more pure and simple Age of the Church
contented themselves to profess the Divinity of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost;
that there was but One God, and Three, who were this One God; which is all the
Scripture teaches of it. But when Sabellius had turned this Mystery only into a
Trinity of Names, they thought themselves concerned to say, what these Three
are, who are One God: and then they nicely distinguished between Person and
Hypostasis, and Nature and Essence, and Substance, that they were Three
Persons, but One Nature, Essence, and Substance; but then when men curiously
examined the signification of these words, they found, that upon some account
or other they were very unapplicable to this Mystery: for what is the Substance
and Nature of God? How can Three distinct Persons have but one Numerical
Substance? What is the distinction between Essence, and Personality and
Subsistence? The Deity is above Nature, and above terms of Art; there is
nothing like this mysterious Distinction and Unity, and therefore no wonder, if
we want proper words to express it by, at least that such Names as signify the
Distinction and Unity of Creatures, should not reach it. I do not think it
impossible to give a tolerable Account of the School-terms and distinctions,
but that is a work of greater difficulty than use, especially to ordinary
Christians, and I have drawn this Section to too great a length already to
enter upon that now.

SECT. VI. Concerning Expounding Scripture by Reason.
FOR like as we are compelled by the Christian Verity to acknowledge every
Person by himself to be God and Lord. Creed.


So are we forbidden by the Catholic Religion, to say, there be Three Gods and
Three Lords.

By the Christian Verity I suppose is meant, the Sacred Books which contain the
Christian Religion, Notes.
that is, the Books of the Old and New Testament. But do these Books, and does
this Verity compel us to the acknowledgment of Three Persons, each of which, is
by himself Supreme God, and Lord, and yet all of them together but One God?
Does, I say, the Holy Scripture compel us to this contradictory acknowledgment?
Is there any Text alleged from Scripture, which all the Unitarians, and some
or other of the most learned Trinitarians, do not easily interpret in such
Sense, that the Unity of God is preserved, and no more than One Person (even
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ) acknowledged to be God? See the
History of the Unitarians. But if there is no Text of Scripture, but what is in
the Opinion of some or other of their own Learned Men, fairly capable of a
Sense contrary to the Faith delivered in this Creed, then we are not compelled
to acknowledge this Faith. And the truth is, the Contest between the Unitarians
and Trinitarians is not, as is commonly thought, a Clash of Reason with
Scripture; but it lays here, whether, when the Holy Scripture may be
understood as teaching only One God, or but One who is God, which agrees with
the rest of Scripture, and with Natural Reason, we must notwithstanding prefer
an Interpretation of it that is absurd, and contrary to it self, to reason, and
to the rest of Scripture, such as the Trinitarians Interpretation (expressed in
this Creed) appears to be! In a word, the Question only is, Whether we ought to
Interpret Holy Scripture, when it speaks of God, according to Reason, or not,
that is, like fools, or like wise men.

There is nothing in this long Paragraph to trouble an Answerers thoughts,
Answer.
but a great deal to exercise his Patience, if he be apt to be provoked by
Arrogance and Folly.

His first Argument to prove, that the Holy Scriptures do not compel us to
confess each Person in the ever blessed Trinity to be God and Lord, and yet
that there is but one God, is because it is a contradictory acknowledgment: So
he says, and has endeavored to prove it, and how vainly and impertinently, I
leave the Reader to judge; but if a Trinity in Unity imply no Contradiction, as
I am persuaded, I have evidently proved; then I hope the Scripture may teach
this Doctrine, and require the belief of it: but this is an impudent Argument,
which brings Revelation down in such sublime Mysteries to the level of our
Understandings, to say, such a Doctrine cannot be contained in Scripture,
because it implies a Contradiction; whereas a modest man would first inquire,
whether it be in Scripture or not, and if it be plainly contained there, he
would conclude, how unintelligible soever it appeared to him, that yet there is
no Contradiction in it, because it is taught by Scripture: we must not indeed
expound Scripture contrary to common Sense, and to the common Reason of
Mankind, in such Matters as every man knows, and every man can judge of; but in
Matters of pure Revelation, which we have no natural Idea of, and know nothing
of but what is revealed, we must not pretend some imaginary Contradictions to
reject the plain and express Authority of a Revelation; for it is impossible to
know, what is a Contradiction to the Natures of Things, whose Natures we do not
understand; as I showed before.

His next Proof, That the Scripture does not compel us to this Acknowledgment,
is, that the Unitarians, and some of the most Learned Trinitarians expound
these Texts of Scripture, which are alleged for a Trinity in Unity to another
Sense, and easily reconcile them with the Belief and Acknowledgment of One
only, who is God, as well as of One God; and for this he refers us to that
Learned Piece, the History of the Unitarians.

As for examining particular Texts, which are alleged on both sides in this
Controversy, it is too voluminous a Work at present, and besides my present
Undertaking, which is only to vindicate the Athanasian Creed, and the true
Christian Doctrine of a Trinity in Unity, from the pretended Absurdities and
Contradictions charged on it in these Notes, and when that is done, (and I
hope, I have done it) I dare trust any man of competent Understanding to judge
which is most agreeable to the Scope and Language of Scripture.

But as for what he says, that the Unitarians or Socinians can easily reconcile
all the Texts of Scripture alleged for the proof of a Trinity, to their Notion
of One God in opposition to Three Divine Persons in the Godhead, we must let
him say so, because he will say it, as all other Heretics pretend Scripture to
be on their side; but to say, that they can easily do this, is a little
impudent, when all Men, who understand this Controversy, see what Art they
use, and what forced and arbitrary Interpretations they put on Scripture to
reconcile it to their Opinions; especially when some of the most learned
Socinians stick not to confess, That they will expound Scripture to any sense,
rather than acknowledge such Doctrines, as they think so contradictory to the
Reason and Understanding of Mankind; which no modest Man would own, were he not
sensible of the harshness and uncouthness of his own Expositions; for things
are come to a desperate pass, when they shall resolve upon any sense, or no
sense, rather than that, which the words most aptly and properly signify, but
lies cross to their Prejudices and pre-conceived Opinions: But what thinks he
of Socinus's Exposition of that Text, where Christ says, That he came down from
Heaven; which he could not do, if he had no being, before he was born of the
Virgin Mary? Did Socinus find it so easy a thing to reconcile this Text to his
darling Opinion; when he was fain to fast and to pray for it, and to pretend
Revelation, because he wanted Reason to support it? viz. That Christ before he
entered on his Prophetic Office, was taken up into Heaven to be instructed in
the Gospel, and then came down from Heaven again to publish it to the World:
Whereas our Savior plainly speaks of his first coming into the World, when he
was born of the Virgin, and the whole History of the Gospel takes no notice of
his being taken up into Heaven before his Resurrection from the dead; I think
this was no easy Exposition; but of this more presently.

That there are no Texts of Scripture alleged for the proof of a Trinity, but
what are rejected by one or other of the most learned Trinitarians, is as true
as the other: There are many Texts, which all hearty Trinitarians do, and must
agree in, and whoever rejects them, whatever name he goes by, can be no better
than a Socinian in disguise; but however there are no Texts alleged by learned
Trinitarians, but are acknowledged by some or other of his learned
Trinitarians, and thus it is as broad as long; but it is not the Authority of
any modern Expositors, which we rely on, but their Reason; and if a learned
Trinitarian should reject any Text without Reason or Learning, it signifies no
more to us, than the Expositions of a learned Socinian: when we seek for
Authority we go higher, to the Primitive Fathers of the Catholic Church, and
there we find it. They not only delivered to us the traditionary Doctrines of a
Trinity, which had always been taught in the Catholic Church, but the
Traditionary Exposition of those Scriptures too, whereon this Doctrine is
founded; and they being so near the Head and Fountain of Tradition, the
Apostolic Age, their Authority is venerable; and a modest and prudent Man will
not reject any Interpretation of Scripture, which relates to Articles of Faith,
and is unanimously delivered by the Ancient Fathers, if the words in any
tolerable construction will bear the sense: for though a Text should fairly
bear two different Interpretations, that is most likely to be true, which has
been from the beginning taught by the Catholic Church: And I challenge this
Author to name any Text, which is alleged for the proof of a Trinity by
learned Trinitarians, which has not been used to the same purpose by many, or
most, or all the ancient Fathers, who have alleged those Texts.

But his Conclusion from hence, that therefore the Scripture does not compel us
to acknowledge a Trinity in Unity, because the Unitarians, and some or other of
the most Learned Trinitarians, expound these Texts to another Sense, is very
pleasant, and shows what a great Master of Reason he is: for his Argument is
this; the Scripture does not compel us to believe any thing, while there are
other men, who expound the Scripture to a contrary Sense; and thus I am sure
the Scripture compels us to believe nothing; for it will be hard to name any
Text, which concerns any Article of Faith, how plain and express soever it be,
but what has been expounded to a contrary Sense by one Heretic or other. I
would ask this Author, whether the Scripture compels him to believe but One
God, in his Sense of it, that is, but One who is God? If it does not, why does
he believe it, and insist so peremptorily on it, in defiance of the whole
Catholic Church? and yet how can the Scripture compel him to this, when the
Catholic Church, and the Catholic Doctors in all Ages, have expounded
Scripture to a contrary sense, that there are Three Divine Persons, who are
this One God? At this rate, when Men differ in their Expositions of Scripture,
the Scripture does not compel us to believe either; and thus notwithstanding
the Scripture, we may believe nothing. If the Scripture have a determined
Sense, we are bound to believe that Sense, and must answer it to God, and to
our Savior, if we do not, whoever expounds it otherwise; and therefore when it
is said in the Creed, that we are compelled ((...) are under a necessity) by
the Christian Verity to acknowledge each Person by himself to be God and Lord;
the meaning is, not that men are under any force to believe or acknowledge it,
or to expound Scripture to this sense; but that the true Sense and Exposition
of Scripture does make this Acknowledgment necessary, if we will believe as the
Scripture teaches; and this may be true, whatever the Unitarians, or any
Learned Trinitarians teach.

He adds; That the Contest between the Unitarians and Trinitarians, is not a
clash of Reason, with Scripture; but whether we ought to interpret holy
Scripture, when it speaks of God according to Reason, or not, that is, like
fools, or like wise men. Now this is all sham, and falacy: for to expound
Scripture by Reason, may signify two very differeent things. 1. To use our own
Reason to find out the true Sense and Interpretation of Scripture. 2. To
expound Scripture in Conformity to the Principles and Maxims of Natural Reason.
In the first sense he expounds Scripture according to Reason, who considers the
Use and Propriety of Words, the Scope and Design of the place, what goes
before, and what follows, and how one place of Scripture is consistent with
another, just in the same way as we find out the sense of any Humane Writing;
and he who does not thus expound Scripture by Reason, expounds it like a fool;
that is, if he put such a sense upon it, as the words will not bear, or the
scope and design of the Text will not admit, and as no man would think of, who
were not prepossessed and prejudiced against what appears to be the plain and
obvious Sense of the Text, and whether they, or we, in this sense, expound
Scripture according, or contrary, to Reason, like fools, or like wise men,
shall be examined presently.

As for the other Sense of Expounding Scripture according to Reason, that is,
in Conformity to the Principles and Maxims of Natural Reason; we allow this too
so far, that we must not expound Scripture to such a sense, as contradicts the
plain and express Maxims of Natural Reason; for though God reveals such things
to us, as Natural Reason could not discover, and cannot comprehend, yet
Revelation cannot contradict plain Reason; for Truth can never contradict it
self; what is true in Revelation, can never be false in Reason; and what is
true by Natural Reason, can never be false in Revelation; but then as I
observed before, we must be sure that there is such a Contradiction; it must be
evident and express, and not made out of uncertain Consequences, which many
times are not owing to the Nature of Things, but to the Imperfection of our own
Knowledge: As to keep to the Matter of our present Dispute:

Natural Reason tells us, That there is, and can be, but One Supreme God, the
Sovereign Lord of the World, and should any man pretend to prove from
Scripture, that there are Three Gods, this would be an express Contradiction to
the Natural Belief of One God, and therefore we must reject this Sense of
Scripture, as contrary to Reason: but to prove from Scripture, that there is
but One God, and that there are Three, who are this One God, this is no
Contradiction to Reason, which teaches but One God; for Scripture teaches the
same, and all Trinitarians acknowledge the same, and must do so, if they
believe the Athanasian Creed; and therefore the belief of the Trinity does not
contradict the natural belief of One God. Yes, you will say, that there should be
Three Persons, each of which is God, and yet but One God, is a Contradiction:
but what Principle of Natural Reason does it contradict? Reason tells us, that
Three Gods cannot be One God, but does Reason tell us, That Three Divine
Persons cannot be One God? if my Reason be like other Men's, I am sure, my
Reason says nothing at all about it, does neither affirm, nor deny it; and
therefore when the Scripture assures us, that there is but One God, as Natural
Reason teaches, and that this One God is Three Divine Persons, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, this contradicts nothing which Reason teaches, but adds something,
which Natural Reason could not discover, which is the proper use of Revelation.
Scripture teaches, that there is but one God, and that there are Three Divine
Persons, who are this One God: Reason teaches, that there is but One God, but
does not teach that there are Three Divine Persons in the Unity of the Godhead,
nor does it teach that there are not; and therefore though the Scripture
teaches more then Natural Reason does (which I suppose may be allowed by these
Adorers of Reason) yet it teaches nothing contrary to what Natural Reason
teaches; nay, these men can not graft any Contradiction upon it, without
perverting the Faith of the ever blessed Trinity, as it is taught in Scripture,
and has always been taught in the Catholic Church: that is, to find a
Contradiction, their business is to prove, that these Three Divine Persons,
each of which is God, must be Three distinct Gods, and then Three distinct Gods
cannot be One God: this I grant, and their Argument is unanswerable to those,
who own these Three Divine Persons, to be Three distinct Gods, but what is that
to us, who teach, that they are not Three distinct Gods, but One God, as the
Scripture teaches, and the Catholic Church always taught, and as of necessity
we must teach, if we believe a Trinity in Unity? so that there is no
Contradiction is not our Faith, for that which they make a Contradiction is not
our Faith, but a Contradiction to our Faith, as well as to common Sense and
Reason. Well! but if we believe Three distinct Divine Persons, each of which is
God, we must believe Three distinct Gods: I hope not, when we profess to
believe but One God; yes, whatever we profess to believe, Three such distinct
Persons, must be Three Gods; now this we deny, and challenge them to produce
any plain Principle of Reason to prove, that it must be so; Natural Reason
teaches nothing about the Personality of the Godhead; it teaches One God, but
whether this One God, be One or Three Persons, it says not, and therefore it
may be either, without contradicting the Natural Notions we have of One God;
and then here is free scope for Revelation, and if Revelation teaches, that
there is but One God, and that there are Three Divine Persons, each of which in
Scripture have not only the Title, but the Nature and Attributes of God
ascribed to them, then we must of necessity believe a Trinity in Unity; Three
Persons and One God; for what the Scripture affirms, and Reason does not deny,
is a proper Object of our Faith: and then their Objection against this Faith,
that these Three Divine Persons, must be Three distinct Gods, if each of them
be God, is senseless and ridiculous; for it is demonstrable, that if there be
Three Persons and One God, each Person must be God, and yet there cannot be
Three distinct Gods, but One. For if each Person be not God, all Three cannot
be God, unless the Godhead have Persons in it, which are not God; and if all
Three are but One God, they cannot be Three distinct Gods: so that whoever
believes the Three Divine Persons to be Three distinct Gods, does not believe a
Trinity in Unity; and whoever believes a Trinity in Unity, cannot believe Three
distinct Gods* and if there be a Trinity in Unity, each Person must be God, and
yet there cannot be Three Gods, but One God; and now let him go look for his
Contradiction in the belief of Three Persons, and one God, and when he has
found it, let me hear from him again.

So that all his Absurdities and Contradictions are vanished only into
Nicodemus his Question, How can these things be? and if I could give him no
other Answer, I should think it a very good one to say, God knows. Must we deny
every thing that we cannot conceive and comprehend, though it be expressly taught
by God himself; Must we deny what we read in the Bible to be there, because
Reason does not teach it, and cannot frame an Adequate Idea of it?

But I have not done with our Author thus, but must give him a little more
about expounding Scripture according to Reason: For I affirm, that Natural
Reason is not the Rule and Measure of Expounding Scripture, no more than it is
of Expounding any other Writing. The true and only way to interpret any
Writing, even the Scriptures themselves, is to examine the use and propriety of
Words and Phrases, the Connection, Scope, and Design of the Text, its Allusion
to ancient Customs and Usages, or Disputes, etc. for there is no other good
Reason to be given for any Exposition, but that the Words signify so, and the
Circumstances of the Place, and the apparent Scope of the Writer requires it.

But our Author (as many others do) seems to confound the Reasons of believing
any Doctrine, with the Rules of Expounding a Writing. We must believe nothing
that contradicts the plain and express Dictates of Natural Reason, which all
Mankind agree in, whatever pretense of Revelation there be for it; well, say
they, then you must expound Scripture so as to make it agree with the necessary
Principles and Dictates of Reason: No, say I, that does not follow; I must
expound Scripture according to the use and signification of the Words, and must
not force my own Sense on it, if it will not bear it. But suppose then, that
the Natural Construction of the Words import such a Sense, as is contrary to
some evident Principle of Reason? then I will not believe it. How? not believe
Scripture? no, no, I will believe no pretended Revelation, which contradicts
the plain Dictates of Reason, which all Mankind agree in, and were I persuaded,
that those Books, which we call the Holy Scriptures did so, I would not believe
them; and this is a fairer and honester way, than to force them to speak, what
they never intended, and what every impartial man, who reads them, must think
was never intended, that we may believe them: to put our own sense on
Scripture, without respect to the use of Words, and to the Reason and Scope of
the Text, is not to believe Scripture, but to make it; is not to learn from
Scripture, but to teach it to speak our Language; is not to submit to the
Authority of Scripture, but to make Scripture submit to our Reason, even in
such Matters as are confessedly above Reason, as the infinite Nature and
Essence of God is.

Though I am never so well assured of the Divine Authority of any Book, yet I
must expound it, as I do other Writings; for when God vouchsafes to speak to us
in our own Language, we must understand his Words just as we do, when they are
spoke by men: Indeed when I am sure that it is an inspired Writing, I lay it
down for a Principle, that it contains nothing absurd and contradictious, or
repugnant to the received Principles of Natural Reason; but this does not give
me authority to Expound the Words of Scripture to any other sense, than what
they will naturally bear, to reconcile them with such Notions, as I call
reason; for if one man has this liberty, another may take it, and the Scripture
will be tuned to every man's private Conceits; and therefore in case the plain
sense of Scripture contradicts those Notions I have of things, if it be
possible to be true, I submit to the Authority of Scripture; if it seems to
include a Contradiction and Impossibility, if that Contradiction be not plain
and notorious, and in such Matters, as I am sure, I perfectly understand, there
I submit again, and conclude it is no Contradiction, though I cannot comprehend
how it is; if I can by no means reconcile it, I will confess, I do not
understand it, and will not pretend to give any Sense of it, much less to give
such a Sense of it, as the Words will not bear.

This shows, that men may pretend to Expound Scripture according to Reason,
when the Dispute is nothing else, but a Clash of Reason with Scripture, as this
Author phrases it: for so it is, when the usual signification of the Words, and
the Scope and Circumstances of the Place require one Sense, and men force
another Sense on it, upon pretense of Expounding Scripture by Reason, that is,
to reconcile Scripture to their pre-conceived Notions and Opinions of Things:
for what the Words signify, that is the Sense of Scripture; and when they will
not admit this Sense, because they apprehend it contrary to Reason, though most
agreeable to the Words and Scope of the Place, that is nothing else but a
Controversy between Scripture and Reason.

My present Undertaking does not oblige me to examine all the Scriptures, which
are alleged by the Socinians against the Doctrine of the Trinity, or by
others for it; this is a voluminous Work, and has often been done by others,
and if there were any just Occasion of doing it again, it deserves a Treatise
by it self: but indeed it is the Doctrine it self, which the Socinians dislike,
more then our Expositions, which they cannot deny to be reasonable enough, were
the Doctrine so; but they must not expound Scripture contrary to Reason, and
therefore must never allow, that the Scripture teaches such a Doctrine, which
they think contradicts the plain and self-evident Reason of Mankind; reconcile
men to the Doctrine, and the Scripture is plain without any farther Comment;
this I have now endeavored, and I believe our Adversaries will talk more
sparingly of Absurdities and Contradictions for the future, and then they will
loose the best Argument they have against the Orthodox Expositions of
Scripture: but yet I am unwilling to dismiss this Argument, without some few
Observations about the Sense of Scripture.

This Author refers us to the History of the Unitarians, which though it be but
a little Book in all Senses, is too large to be particularly examined now; but
however I shall give some taste of it In the first Letter the Author marshals
those Texts, which he thinks overthrow the Doctrine of the Trinity, and because
this may be most dangerous to unskilful Readers, I shall more particularly
examine that. He reduces the Scriptures under several Topics, or Heads of
Arguments.

History of Unitarians, p 4, 5.
1. If our Lord Christ were himself God, there could be no Person greater than
he, none that might be called his Head or God, none that could in any respect
command him. Now this Argument is fallacious, for though Christ be God himself,
yet if there be Three Persons in the Godhead, the equality and sameness of
Nature does not destroy the Subordination of Persons: a Son is equal to his
Father by Nature, but inferior to him as his Son: if the Father, as I have
explained it, be Original Mind and Wisdom, the Son a personal, subsisting, but
reflex Image of his Fathers Wisdom, though their Eternal Wisdom be equal and
the same, yet the Original is superior to the Image, the Father to the Son: and
therefore though I know such Texts as he alleadges, 14 John 28. 1 Cor. 11.3. 20
John 17.
My Father is greater than I. The Head of Christ is God. I ascend to my Father
and your Father, to my God and your God; are both by Ancient and Modern
Expositors applied to Christ's Human Nature; yet I see no Inconvenience in
owning this to be true with respect to his Divine Person, and his Relation to
his Father: For the Father is the Head and Fountain of the Deity, and the Son
is God of God, and therefore the Father may be called his God.

As for Christ's receiving Commands from the Father, 12 John 49.14.31.
though this relates to the Execution of his Mediatory Office, and so concerns
him as God Incarnate, as by the Dispensation of the Gospel, he is the Minister
of God's Will and Pleasure, yet I grant even as God, he receives Commands from
his Father, but it is no otherwise than as he receives his Nature from him: by
Nature he is the Word* the Wisdom, the Command of the Father; his reflex Image,
whereby he produces all the Designs of his own Wisdom, and Counsel into act.
Thus St. Austin answered the Arrian Objection, Cogitent quibus aliis verbis
jusserit Pater unico verbo: Formant enim sibi in phantasmate cordis sui, quasi
duos aliquos, etsi juxta invicem, in suis tamen locis constitutos, unum
jubentem, alterum obtemperantem. Nec intelligunt ipsam jussionem Patris ut
fierent omnia, non esse nisi verbum Patris, per quod facta sunt omnia. Aug.
contr. Sermon. Arrianorum, Lib. 3.
That Christ was but God's Instrument, and made the World by God's Command. Let
them consider with what other words the Father commanded his only Word. But
they frame to themselves an Imagination of two, near one another, but separated
by their distinct Places, one commanding, another obeying. Nor do they
understand, that the Fathers Command it self, that all things should be made,
is no other Word of the Father, but that by which all things are made; that is,
the substantial Word and Wisdom, and Command of the Father, his only begotten
Son.

2. If our Lord Christ were indeed God, it could not, Page 5.
without blasphemy, be (absolutely and without Restriction) affirmed of him,
that he is the Creature, the Possession, the Servant, and Subject of God. It is
well he added, absolutely and without restriction, but he had done better, if
he had remembered it in his Proofs: that Christ is called a Creature, he proves,
because he is the firstborn of every Creature, 1 Col. 1.
but here he should have remembered his absolutely and without restriction, for
he is so to the firstborn of every Creature, that he is the Image of the
Invisible God, and therefore no Creature; so born before all Creatures, 1 Col.
17.
as (...) also signifies, That by him were all things created, that are in
Heaven, and that are in Earth visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones,
or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers; all things were created by him and
for him, and he is before all things, (which is the Explication of (...),
begotten before the whole Creation, and therefore no part of the Creation
himself) and by him all things consist, (...), all things were not only made by
him, but have their Subsistence in him; as the Apostle tells us, in God we live
and move and have our being, that this does not relate to the new Creation, as
the Socinians would have it, is very plain: For 1. in this Sense Christ (if he
were mere Man) was not the firstborn of every new Creature; for I hope there
were a great many new Creatures, that is, truly good and pious men, before
Christ was born of his Virgin Mother. 2. Nor in this sense were all things in
Heaven and Earth visible and invisible, Thrones, Dominions; Principalities, and
Powers, that is, all the Orders of Angels created by him: For the greatest part
of visible things, (especially in the Apostles days, when so little part of the
World was converted to the Christian Faith) were not new made by him; and none
of the invisible things were new made by him: good Angels did not need it, and
he came not to convert fallen Angels, but to destroy the visible Kingdom of the
Devil in this World, and to judge them in the next. 3. Nor in this sense were
all things made for him; for he is a Mediator for God, to reduce Mankind to
their Obedience and Subjection to him; and therefore when he has accomplished
his Work of Mediation, and destroyed all Enemies, in the final Judgment of the
World; he shall deliver up his Kingdom to his Father, that God may be all in
all; of which more presently. 4. And therefore the Apostle proceeds from his
Creation of the Natural World, to his Mediatory Kingdom, which proves, that he
did not speak of that before: And he is the Head of the Body the Church, Verse
14.
who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead, that in all things he
might have the pre-eminence: as the Maker of all things visible and invisible,
he is said to be before all things, begotten of his Father before the Creation
of the World; as Head of the Church, he is (...) also, the beginning, the first
who rose from the dead, that he might be the (...), the first upon all
Accounts; before the Worlds, and the firstborn from the dead. That he was
God's Minister and Servant, he proves by several Texts: as that he was
appointed or made (which has the same sense) by God, Page 6.
the Apostle and High Priest of our Profession: but here is a restriction to
his being High Priest, 3 Hebr. 1, 2.
and therefore no danger of Blasphemy, though he be God: for we may observe,
that though the Jewish High Priest were but a man, yet he was a Type of a
High Priest, who is more than man, even the Eternal Son and Word of God, as
some of the Learned Jews acknowledge; for the Son of God is the only proper
Mediator and Advocate with the Father, as Philo Iudoeus often calls the (...)
or Word, the (...) or High Priest; and shows that the Garments of the
High Priest were Figures of Heaven and Earth, which seems to signify, that the
Eternal Word, which made the world, is the true High Priest. And the Story
Josephus tells of Alexander looks this way; that when Iaddus the High Priest
went out to meet him, dressed in all his Pontifical Attire, he approached him
with great Reverence and Veneration, and his Captains wondering at it, he told
them, That that God, who appeared to him, and sent him upon that Expedition,
and promised him Victory and Success, appeared to him in that very Habit. I am
sure the Apostle distinguishes Christ from Highpriests taken from among men;
and makes his Sonship the Foundation of his Priesthood. 5 Hebr. 1.
Christ glorified not himself to be made an High Priest (which shows that it is
no Servile Ministry) but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, this day have
I begotten Thee. As he says also in another place, 5, 6.
Thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchizedec. And what the
Mystery of this Melchizedecian Priesthood was, he explains 7 Hebrews, 7 Hebr.
2.3.
that Melchizedec was first by Interpretation King of Righteousness, and after
that also, King of Salem, which is King of Peace. Without Father, without
Mother, without Descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life, but
made like unto the Son of God, which is a Priest continually.

1 Cor. 3.23.
As for his next Quotation, that Christ is Gods, I know not what he means by it;
for there is no doubt but Christ is God's Son, God's Christ, God's High Priest,
serves the ends and designs of God's Glory; and what then? therefore he is not
God? By no means! he may conclude, that therefore he is not God the Father,
because he acts subordinately, not that therefore he is not God the Son.

His next Proof is, that God calls him his Servant by the Prophet Isaiah; but
it is his Servant in whom his Soul is well-pleased, 12 Matthew. 17, 18.
which is the peculiar Character of his Son; and is that very testimony which
God gave to Christ at his Baptism by a voice from Heaven; This is my beloved
Son, 3 Matthew. 17.
in whom I am well pleased.

His next Proof is, that he humbled himself, 2 Phil. 8.9.
and became obedient, which is all he cites; but what does he prove from this?
that Obedience is part of his Humiliation? And what then? therefore he is not
God? because he voluntarily condescends below the Dignity of his Nature, does
he forfeit the Dignity of his Nature? and yet this is the plain Case, as the
Apostle tells us in that place: that He being in the form of God, thought it
not robbery to be equal with God, but made himself of no reputation, and took
upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men, and being
found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death,
even the death of the Cross. And this is a wonderful Proof, that he is not God,
because being in the form of God, that is, being God, he voluntarily
condescended to the meanest and most servile state of Human Nature for the
Salvation of sinners. But the sting of all is behind, that for this submission
and obedience he was rewarded and exalted by God, and a God is not capable of a
reward or exaltation, being Supreme himself, and yet as it follows, for this
God has highly exalted him, and given him a Name above every Name.

Now it seems very strange to me, that Christ's advancement to the supreme
Government of the World, should be made an Argument against his being God, or
the Eternal Son of God: for is it fitting and congruous for God to make a mere
Creature the Universal Lord and Sovereign of the World? to advance a mere man
above the most glorious Angels, to be the Head of all Principalities and
Powers, which would be an Indignity to the Angelical Nature? is a mere Creature
a fit Lieutenant or Representative of God in Personal or Prerogative Acts of
Government and Power? must not every Being be represented by one of his own
Kind, a Man by a Man, an Angel by an Angel, in such Acts as are proper to their
Natures? and must not God then be represented by One, who is God? Is any
Creature capable of the Government of the world? does not this require infinite
Wisdom and infinite Power? and can God communicate infinite Wisdom and infinite
Power to a Creature, or a finite Nature? that is, can a Creature be made a true
and essential God? if our Adorers of Reason can digest such Contradictions as
these, I hope they will never complain of Absurdities and Contradictions more.
A God without infinite Perfections, is only a Titular and Nominal God, and to
say, that Creatures may have all the Perfections of God, is to say, that God
can make an infinite Creature, which has a thousand times greater
Contradictions, than the most absurd Explication of the Trinity can be charged
with; for then a true and real God may be a Creature; then the Divine Nature is
not eternal, but may be created; then the Divine Nature is not numerically One,
but if the first God so pleased, he could make a world of Gods, as well as of
Angels, or Men. If then this Kingdom to which Christ is advanced, cannot be
administered without infinite Wisdom and Power, then he is by Nature a God; for
otherwise all Power in Heaven and Earth could not have been committed to him,
because he was not capable of it, could not administer it: and would God choose
a King, who could not administer the Government of the World, nor do any thing
toward it?

And yet the Difficulty remains; if he be by Nature the Son of God, and the
Natural Lord of the World, how is he said to be exalted by God, and to receive
a Kingdom from him as the Reward of his Sufferings? when he was already
possessed of it, ever since the Foundations of the World, being the Natural
Lord of all Creatures; and therefore had no need to receive that which was his
own, or purchase what was his Natural Right, by such mean and vile
Condescensions, as suffering Death upon the Cross.

And therefore rightly to understand this, we must consider the Nature of
Christ's Kingdom; that it is not merely the Natural Government of the World,
but a Mediatory Kingdom. God is the Supreme and Natural Lord of the World, King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and the only Ruler of Princes: and while God
governed the World only as its Natural Lord, the Son had no distinct Kingdom of
his own, but in Conjunction with his Father. For though there always were Three
Divine Persons in the Godhead, yet the Father being the Fountain of the Deity,
the Government of the World was administered in his Name.

But Mankind quickly Apostatized from God, forfeited immortal Life, corrupted
their Manners, and defaced the Image of God upon their Souls, and the
Government of God considered only as our Maker and Sovereign Lord could give no
hope nor security to guilty sinners; and this made a Mediatory Kingdom
necessary, to reconcile God and Men, and to restore Man to the Integrity of his
Nature: and this Power and Dignity God bestowed upon his own Son, who had the
most right to it, and was best qualified for it, being the begotten Word and
Wisdom of the Father: but he must first become man, and publish the Will of God
to the World, and make Expiation for Sin, and then he should rise again from
the dead, and set down at the right hand of God.

And therefore we may observe, that all this Power Christ is invested with, is
as Head of the Church. God has put all things under his feet, 1 Ephesians 22, 23.
and given him to be Head over all things to the Church, which is his Body, the
fullness of him, which fills all in all. That is, he has made him the
Governor of the whole World, as Head of the Church. For the Salvation of
Mankind required the Government of the World to be put into his Hands, that he
might restrain the Power and Malice of wicked Spirits, and destroy the Kingdom
of Darkness, and employ good Angels in the Service and Ministeries of his
Church, as the Apostle tells us, 1 Heb. 14.
They are ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for them, who shall be
heirs of Salvation. That the Government of this lower World might be
administered by him with a peculiar regard and subserviency to the great ends of
his Spiritual Kingdom. For the Church of Rome is so far in the right, that the
Supreme Head of the Church must be Supreme in Temporals too in ordine ad
spiritualia; but their fault is, they give this Power to a vicarious Head,
which is due only, and can be administered only by Christ, who is the true
Supreme Head of all things to his Church.

The Government of Israel was a Type of this. The Kingdom of Israel was
originally a pure Theocracy; God was their King, and governed them almost as
visibly by his Priest, his Oracles, his Judges, whom he extraordinarily raised
up, as a Temporal King governs his Subjects. But in time they grew weary of the
Government of God, and desired a King like other Nations: upon which God tells
Samuel, They have not rejected thee, but rejected me, 1 Samuel 8.7.
that I should not reign over them. But yet he complies with their Desires in
giving them a King; and their King was peculiarly God's Anointed, and God's
King, who ruled God's People and Inheritance by God's peculiar and delegated
Authority: for the Government of Israel did not cease to be a Theocracy, when
they had a King; for they were God's People and Inheritance still; but now the
King was between God and the People, whereas God governed them more immediately
before. And therefore as David was a Type of Christ, so his Kingdom was typical
of the Kingdom of Christ; 2 Psalm 6.
Yet have I set my King upon my holy Hill of Sion; which seems to have some
aspect on David; though it received its just Acomplishment in Christ: and hence
the Kingdom of the Messiah is called the Throne of his Father David; 1 Luke 32.
18 John 36.
not that Temporal Kingdom which David governed, for his Kingdom was not of
this World; but that of which David's Kingdom was a Type and Figure, the
Government of the Church, who are God's People, of whom the carnal Israel was a
Type, which he rules by a vicarious, but a Sovereign Authority, for God, and in
his name and stead. This gives a plain account, how God may give this Kingdom
to his Son, and that as the Reward of his Sufferings. It may be a Gift, because
it is not a Natural Right; for it is not a Natural Kingdom, but erected by the
Wisdom and Counsel of God, for the Salvation of Sinners; and it must be the
Reward of his Sufferings, because it is a Sacerdotal Kingdom, which is founded
in the Expiation of his Blood.

And though Christ be the Eternal Son of God, and the Natural Lord and Heir of
all things, yet God has in this highly exalted him, and given him a name which
is above every name, that at (or in (...)) the name of Jesus every knee should
bow, of things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and things under the Earth, and
that every tongue, (some of all Nations, Languages, and Tongues) shall confess,
that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the Father. For when God exalts
and magnifies himself, or exalts his Son, it does not, and cannot signify any
addition or increase of their essential Greatness and Glory, for neither the
Father nor the Son can be greater than they are; but yet God is exalted, when
his Greatness and Power is more visible, and more universally acknowledged and
adored: and thus God has highly exalted his Son too, by conferring the
Mediatory Power and Kingdom on him; as to show this particularly, but briefly.

This makes the Son more universally known, acknowledged, and adored. The
Notion and Belief of one God is Natural to Mankind; that there are three Divine
Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in the Unity of the Godhead, is not known
by Nature, but by Revelation: There are some obscure hints and intimations of
this even in the History of the Creation; more plain in the Types and
Prophesies of the Jewish Law, which relate to the Messiah; and possibly this
was more particularly explained in their Cabala, which some learned men
industriously prove contained this Mystery of the Trinity: but all this while,
this Mystery was very obscure, and the Glory of the Son little known in the
World: for though now we certainly know from the Exposition of Christ and his
Apostles, that the Prophets spoke of Christ under the name of Lord, and God,
and Jehovah, yet all went in the Name of God. But when Christ appeared in the
World, then God owned him for his Son; this is my beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased; 3 Matthew. 16. 3 John 16, 17.
Christ owned himself for the Son of God, his only begotten Son: and upon all
occasions calls God his Father, and that in such a distinguishing manner, that
the Jews understood him to mean, that he was the Son of God by Nature, and
charge him with Blasphemy for making himself God. 10 Joh. 29, 30, 32, 37, 38.
He appealed to those mighty Works he did in his Father's Name, to prove the
Truth of what he taught them, that he was indeed the Son of God.

But then God visibly owned him for his Son, when he raised him from the dead,
and bestowed a Kingdom on him, a Name which is above every Name, as St. Paul
tells us, 1 Romans 5.
That he was declared to be the Son of God with power according to the Spirit
of Holiness, by the Resurrection from the Dead. And for this reason, that of
the Psalmist, Thou art my Son, 2 Psalm 7.
this day have I begotten Thee, is applied to the Resurrection of Christ from
the Dead. 13 Acts 32, 33.
We deliver unto you glad tidings, how that the promise that was made to the
Fathers, God has fulfilled the same to us their Children, in that he has
raised up Jesus again, as it is also written in the second Psalm, Thou art my
Son, this day have I begotten Thee. Which it is plain does not signify, that
God then first begot him; for he owned him for his beloved Son long before, at
his Baptism; and Christ calls himself his only begotten Son long before; and
the Socinians themselves attribute his Sonship to his miraculous Conception in
the Womb of the Virgin; and St. Paul, we see, expounds God's begetting him at
his Resurrection, by his being declared the Son of God by the Resurrection from
the Dead, which supposes he was his Son before, and that not (...) according to
the Flesh, for so he was the Seed of David, but (...) according to the Spirit
of Holiness, or his Divine Nature, for so its opposition to (...) proves it
must signify. He was the only begotten Son of God from eternal Ages, but the
World did not fully know him to be so, till God declared this by his
Resurrection from the Dead, and by bestowing a Kingdom on him; and then he
visibly appeared in the Glory and Majesty of the Son of God, as if he had been
begotten by him that day: and this seems to be the meaning of our Savior's
Prayer; And now, 17 John 5.
O Father glorify thou me with thine own self, with that glory which I had
with Thee, before the World was; that is, now publicly own me to be thy Son,
which I always was, but was never yet sufficiently declared so to the World.
And therefore when he was raised from the Dead, and advanced into his Kingdom,
which he was to administer, not by Human Force and Power, but by the Power of
the Divine Spirit, it was time to let the World know this great Mystery of a
Trinity in Unity, because each Divine Person has his distinct and proper part
in this mysterious economy: and therefore he commands his Disciples to Baptize
in the Name of the Father, 28 Matthew. 19.
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, that is, into the belief and worship of
One God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: of which more presently.

But this is not all; the Son is not only now made known and manifest to the
World, and publicly owned by his Father, but he has a peculiar Authority
invested in him, distinct both from the Father and the Holy Spirit, as he is a
Mediatory King.

There being but One Supreme and Sovereign God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
who are but One Energy and Power, but One Monarchy, but One Maker, and One Lord
of the World; in the Natural Government of the World there is no distinction of
the Divine Persons, no peculiar Offices and Administrations to distinguish
them; not one thing done by the Father, another by the Son, and a third by the
Holy Ghost, but the whole Trinity made and governs the World by One individual
Operation: and therefore the Creation and Government of the World is the Work
of One God, and therefore peculiarly attributed to the Father, who is the
Fountain of the Deity, who is that Original Mind and Wisdom, who made, and who
governs the World by his Son and holy Spirit; so that in the Natural Government
of the World, the Son has no Kingdom of his own, but reigns as One Supreme God
with the Father and the Holy Spirit, and all attributed to the Father as the
beginning of Energy and Power.

But in the economy of man's Salvation, the Son has a Kingdom of his own,
which is peculiarly his, administered in his Name, and by his Sovereign
Authority. The Father is atoned by him, and has committed to him all Power both
in Heaven and in Earth: 28 Matthew.
He is made the Head of all Principalities and Powers, which are now
immediately subjected to him, and must receive their Commands and Orders from
him; as the Apostle to the Hebrews tells us, when God brings in the first
begotten into the World, that is, when God raised him from the dead, and
received him into Heaven, to sit at his right hand; he says, 1 Hebr. 6.
and let all the Angels of God worship him: obey his Commands, and be his
Ministers and Servants. The Holy Spirit is given by him, he sends the Spirit to
dwell in his Church, which is his Body, and to animate all the true and sincere
Members of it; He governs this lower World, disposes of Kingdoms and Empires in
subserviency to the ends of his Spiritual Kingdom: He has the Power of
pardoning sins, of judging the World, of raising the dead; whom he pardons, God
pardons; whom he condemns, God condemns; for the Father judges no man, but
has committed all judgment to the Son. Should the Father judge the World, he
must judge as the Maker and Sovereign Lord of the World, by the strict Rules of
Righteousness and Justice, and then how could any sinner be saved? but he has
committed Judgment to the Son, as a Mediatory King, who judges by the Equity
and Chancery of the Gospel.

The Power indeed whereby he administers his Kingdom, is the Power of the whole
Trinity, of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; for they being essentially One God,
have but one Energy and Power, and therefore can never act separately: and
therefore the Resurrection of Christ from the Dead is ascribed to God the
Father, 2 Acts 24.13.30.
God raised him from the dead: to Christ himself, as he tells the Jews, Destroy
this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up. And, I lay down my life, 2
John 19.10.17, 18.
that I may take it again. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to
take it again. And to the Holy Spirit, If the Spirit of him that raised up
Christ from the dead dwell in you; he that raised up Christ from the dead,
shall also quicken your mortal bodies by the Spirit that dwells in you. Where
God indeed is said to raise up Christ from the dead, 8 Romans 11.
but it was by his Spirit, and by the same Spirit he will raise us.

But yet this is the Kingdom of Christ, because now the Administration and
Exercise of this Power is committed to him, and is as it were under his
direction and influence. The Natural Kingdom and Government of the World is
peculiarly attributed to God the Father, though the Son and Holy Ghost reign
with him as one God: because the Father is Original Mind and Wisdom, and
therefore the beginning of all Power and Energy. As the Father begets the Son,
not the Son the Father, and the Holy Ghost proceeds from Father and Son, not
Father and Son from the Holy Ghost; so the Son and Holy Ghost will and act with
the Father, not the Father with the Son and the Holy Ghost; that is, if we may
so speak where there is but One individual Act and Energy, the Father is the
first Mover in the Sacred Trinity: For reflex Wisdom, that is the Son, who is
begotten Wisdom, moves and acts, at it is begotten, by Original Mind and
Wisdom, who is the eternal Father, as Christ himself tells us; 5 John 19.
The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father do; for
whatsoever things he does, these also does the Son likewise. And my Father
works hitherto, and I work: But the Father is the Principle and Beginning of
Action; and therefore the Government and Monarchy must receive its Denomination
from him; that it is the Kingdom of the Father.

But now in the Mediatory Kingdom, the exercise of the Divine Power is
committed into the hands of the Mediator, and is administered by the measures
and terms of his Mediation. The Power is not taken out of God's hands, for that
is impossible; Father, Son, and Holy Ghost govern the World still by One
individual Act and Power, but as in the Natural Government of the World the
Exercise of this Power begins with the Father, so in this Mediatory Kingdom it
begins with the Son, and is directed by his Mediation: that is, God governs the
World now, not merely as a Natural Lord, by the Rules of Natural Justice, but
with respect to the Mediatory Power and Authority of his Son, and to serve the
ends of his Mediatory Kingdom.

Now the Father judges no man, but has committed all Judgment to the Son; He
has power to save and to destroy; whom he pardons, God pardons; whom he
condemns, God condemns; all Petitions are put up to God in his Name; all
Blessings, both temporal and spiritual, are obtained from God in his Name: that
is, it is the Name and Authority of Christ by which God now governs the World.
This is the Name God has given him, which is above every Name, that at the Name
of Jesus every knee should bow, 2 Phil. 9, 10, 11.
both of things in Heaven, and things on Earth, and things under the Earth: and
that every Tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory of
God the Father. That Angels in Heaven move at his Command, and obey his Power;
that Men on Earth worship God, and expect all from him in his Name; that evil
Spirits tremble at his Name, and yield to his Power; and that all the World
confess the Supreme and Sovereign Authority of the Son, to the Glory of the
Father, who has thus highly exalted him.

There can be no other meaning but this, in what Christ tells his Disciples
after his Resurrection from the Dead; All Power is given unto me both in Heaven
and Earth. 28 Matthew. 18.
For unless it be some Power, which he had not before as the Eternal Son of
God, how can it be said to be now given unto him: and yet before, in
conjunction with, and subordination to his Father, he had all Power both in
Heaven and Earth; but then this Power was not in his own Name, nor seated
immediately in himself, as his own Personal Authority; but now the Son is
immediately invested with this Power and Authority as a Mediatory King.

And this is the meaning of what he tells us; As the Father has life in
himself, 5 John 26.
so has he given to the Son to have life in himself. To have life in himself,
is to have the Power and Authority of bestowing Life, as appears both from what
goes before, and from what follows: As the Father raises up the dead and
quickneth them, so the Son quickneth whom he will. Verily, verily, I say unto
you, the hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the
Son of God, and they that hear shall live. Marvel not at this, for the hour is
coming, in the which all that are in the Graves shall hear his voice, and shall
come forth; they-that have done good to the Resurrection of Life, and they that
have done evil, unto the Resurrection of Damnation. This Power the Son always
had as begotten of his Father, from all Eternity, and One God with him; but he
here speaks of a Personal Authority, which is given him as the Son of Man, as
an Incarnate and Mediatory King, And has given him Authority to execute
Judgment also, because he is the Son of Man. And therefore now it is given him
to have Life in himself, as the Father has Life in himself: The Father has
Life in himself, as the Original Fountain of all Life, by whom the Son himself
lives; all Life is derived from God, either by eternal Generation, 6 John 57.
or Procession, or Creation; and thus Christ has Life in himself also, in the
new Creation he is the Fountain of Life; he quickens whom he will; he is the
bread of life; that came down from Heaven; if any man eat of this bread, he
shall live for ever. As the living Father has sent me, and I live by the
Father, so, he that eats me, even he shall live by me. I am the Resurrection
and the Life; 11 John 25, 26
he that believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live; and whosoever
lives and believes in me, shall never dye. This is the Authority of his
Mediatory Kingdom, which he has received from his Father, that he has Life in
himself, and has Authority and Power to give Life to the World.

This is a Kingdom in a Kingdom, the Mediatory Kingdom of the Son in the
Natural Kingdom of the Father, which restrains the Father's Justice, dispenses
his Grace, and directs the Exercise of his Power in the Government of the
World, which though it be upon these accounts a Superior Authority, and
therefore a high Exaltation of the Son, yet it is no diminution to the Father:
The confessing Jesus Christ to be Lord, is to the glory of God the Father.

1. Because this Mediatory Kingdom is erected by the Father, and by the Father
given to the Son; it is he, who gave him this Authority, because he is the Son
of Man. And therefore Christ every where owns, that he was sent by God. 17 John
28.5.43.
I am not come of my self; I am come in my Fathers Name. I proceeded forth, and
came from God, 5 John 30.8.42.50.12.44.6.38.
neither came I of my self, but he sent me, I seek not my own will. I seek not
my own glory. I came not to do my own will, but the will of him that sent me.
Which Scriptures make up the fourth Argument in the History of the Unitarians
against Christ's being God; because Almighty God does all things in his own
Name, and by his own Authority; Page 8.
but Christ comes in the Father's Name, and does his will, and seeks his glory.
Which proves indeed, that he receives this Power from the Father, that he
fulfils his will, and serves his glory in it; but if he receive this Kingdom,
he has it, and a very glorious Kingdom it is, in some respects superior to the
Natural Government of God, as it sets bounds to it. But this only proves, that
he is not the Father, but the Son, and the King of God; and this Authority
being given him of the Father, to reduce Mankind to their Obedience, it is no
lessening of the Fathers Authority, from whom he receives this Mediatory Power.

2. This can be no Diminution to the Father, because he is his only begotten
Son; One God with himself, the brightness of his glory, and the express Image
of his Person, the Natural Heir of his Power and Greatness, and the Natural
Lord of the World. As a Son, he is by Nature equal to his Father, but yet
subordinate, and therefore cannot be his Rival; as a Son, his advancement is
the glory of the Father, 5 John 23.
that all men should honor the Son, as they honor the Father; and therefore
it is no derogation to the Father, though he commit to the Son a more glorious
Authority, then he exercises himself; the Authority of a Mediatory Kingdom, or
Sovereign Grace, which is a more glorious Authority to Sinners, then Natural
Justice and Dominion: for all men know, a Son must receive all from his Father,
and if the Father, for wise Reasons, of which more presently, give the Son the
more glorious Power, it is the Father, who is glorified in it: As he is God,
the Eternal Son of God, and One with the Father, he is the proper Object of
Religious Worship; and therefore all those Divine Honors and Adorations, which
are paid him upon account of his Mediatory Kingdom and Power, are no Injury to
the Divine Nature, as they would have been, had God conferred this Power on a
Creature; which had been to give his glory to another, which God detests, and
declares his abhorrence of, and which all Arians and Socinians do, who worship
Christ, believing him to be only a Creature, or a mere Man. The Command in
Scripture to worship him, and pay Divine Honors to him, is a much better
Argument to prove that he is God, then to justify the worship of any Creature;
which God universally prohibits, and is a much greater Contradiction to the
Principles of Natural Religion, than a Trinity in Unity is to Natural Reason.

3. To this we must add, That his Kingdom is the Reward of his Obedience and
Sufferings, that is, it is founded in the Expiation of his Blood: Is an
Authority to dispense that Grace and Mercy which he has purchased with his
Blood: so that his Kingdom and Power is founded in the most perfect submission
to his Father, is the Reward of his Obedience, whereby he glorified his Father
on Earth; and therefore let his Power be never so great and glorious, his
receiving it from God, as the Reward of his Obedience, secures the Prerogative
and Glory of the Father.

4. Especially when we add, That the Exercise and Administration of this
Kingdom, is not by way of any direct Authority and Power over God (which would
necessarily Eclipse the glory of the Father, and make him subject to the Son)
but by way of Mediation and Intercession, as an Advocate and High Priest. He
first makes Atonement to God, and reconciles him to Sinners, does not command
or overruled, but propitiate the Divine Justice, and then Exercises a Sovereign
Authority in forgiving sins, in destroying his Enemies, in governing Kingdoms
and Empires, in subserviency to his Spiritual Kingdom, and at the last Day in
judging the World.

5. And therefore the time shall come, when Christ shall deliver up this
Kingdom again to the Father: for it is not a Natural Kingdom, and therefore
must not last always; no longer then till it has attained the ends for which it
was erected; when Mankind are reduced into Obedience to God; when the Kingdom
of the Devil is destroyed, and the Devil and his Angels, and all bad men cast
into the Lake of Fire, which is the second Death, and good men raised out of
their Graves, and rewarded with Eternal Life; that is, when Christ has
accomplished the work of his Mediation, that there is no longer any need of a
Mediator, then the Mediatory Kingdom ceases. Then comes the end, when he shall
have delivered up the Kingdom to God even the Father, 1 Cor. 15.
when he shall have put down all Rule, and all Authority and Power. -- and when
all things shall be subdued unto him, 24. -- 28.
then shall the Son also be subject unto him, that put all things under him,
that God may be all in all. That is, the Son shall no longer have a distinct
Kingdom of his own, but shall return to his Natural Subordination to his
Father, and reign with Father and the Holy Spirit One God blessed for evermore:
there shall no longer be any distinction between God and a Mediator, but God
shall be all in all.

This is the best Account I can give of that Kingdom which the Son receives
from the Father, and which he delivers up to the Father again; and these
Socinians must think themselves very great Wits, or the rest of Mankind very
great Fools, who hope to prove that Christ is not God, because he received a
Kingdom, when it is such a Kingdom, as none but a God can receive or
administer. But to proceed:

3. His next Argument is, That Christ it not God, because He is a Mediator
between God and Men: History Unit. p. 6, 7.
a Priest that appears in the Presence of God, and intercedeth with him for
men. This he needed not have proved, because all Christians own it; only the
Socinians make him a metaphorical Priest, which indeed is no Priest. But this I
have answered already. He is a Priest after the Order of Melchizedec King of
Salem and Priest of God; that is, he is a Sacerdotal King, and this Sacerdotal
or Mediatory Kingdom proves him to be God, not a mere Creature Advocate or
Intercessor.

4. His next Argument is, That he receives Authority from God, is sent by God,
came to do the will of God: And this I have also already answered.

Page 8.
5. His next Argument consists in applying such things to the Divinity of our
Savior, as belong to his Humanity: That he increased in Wisdom -- (he should
have added Stature too, 2 Luke 52.
but that had been ridiculous, because it had discovered the fallacy, for to be
sure Stature does not belong to a God) and in favor with God and Men: and why
did he not add, that he was born, and was an Infant and Child, and by degrees
grew up to be a Man? 13 Mark 32.
that he knows not the Day of Judgment, which he evidently speaks of himself as
Man; as all the ancient Fathers confess. In St. Mark it is said, But of that
day, and that hour, knows no man, no not the Angels that are in Heaven,
neither the Son, but the Father. St. Matthew does not mention the Son: 34
Matthew. 36.
Of that day and hour knows no man, not the Angels of Heaven, but my Father
only. Which shows that the Son in St. Matthew is included in the (...) none, or
no man, and therefore concerns him only as a man: for the Father includes the
whole Trinity, and therefore includes the Son, who sees, whatever his Father
does. But of this more hereafter. That he knew not where Lazarus was laid,
because he asks, Where have ye laid him? 11 John 34.
And yet this very Jesus knew without asking, at a distance, and some days
before, that Lazarus was dead; which would tempt one to guess, that he might
know where they laid him too, though it was decent to ask. What his next Text
refers to I know not. For how the Father, being always present with him to
confirm that testimony he gave of himself by miraculous Powers, proves that he
is not God, I cannot tell: 8 John 16, 18.
that he was tempted by the Devil, proves that he was a Man, but does not prove
that he was not God: and that he would not be called good by those, 18 Luke 19.
who thought him no more than a man; or that he took this occasion to instruct
them, what an infinite distance there is between the essential Goodness of the
Divine Nature, and the Goodness of Creatures, I think does not prove that he is
not God.

Page 10.
6. His sixth Argument is to the same purpose; That God gives what and to whom
he pleases; he needs not the aid of any other; he entreats not for himself
and his people; he cannot die; and deriveth his Power from none but himself.
But it is certain that the Lord Christ could not himself, without the praevious
ordination of the Father, confer the prime Dignities of Heaven or of the Church
(or any thing else, if he pleases, for he does nothing but what he sees his
Father do) he placed his safety in his Fathers presence and help: he prayed
often and fervently to the Father, both for himself, and for his Disciples. He
died, and was raised from the dead by the Father. After his Resurrection he had
received of another that great Power, which he now enjoys.

Now all this we grant, and have answered already, which partly refers to the
economy of the Incarnation, and partly to his Natural Subordination to his
Father. But to give a more full and plain Answer, and to prevent all such
Objections for the future, it will be necessary briefly to state this Matter
also.

Now this Author is certainly so far in the right, that the One Supreme God has
all Authority and Power, can need no help from any other, can receive no
Commands, no Power from another, has no need to pray to any other, to intercede
for himself or others; can dispose of all things, as he pleases, and to whom he
pleases: accordingly this One Supreme God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
receives no Power or Authority from any other Being, intercedes with no other
Being, stands not in need of the help of any other, neither prays for himself
or others to any other Being.

Well! but the Son prays to the Father, interceeds with the Father, receives
Authority from the Father, disposes of all things by his Father's Will. What
then? then the Son is not the One Supreme God. Why so? He interceeds with no
Creature, receives Authority from no Creature, etc. nor from any God neither
separated from himself, for he is One God with the Father and the Holy Ghost:
that he interceeds with the Father, proves indeed that he is a distinct Person
from the Father, not that he is not One God with him. If each Divine Person be
God, none of them can interceed with, or receive Authority from any separate
Being, for then there must be some separate God above them; and then they are
not the Supreme God; but if there be Three distinct Divine Persons in the
Godhead, and an order and subordination between these Divine Persons; I see
nothing to hinder, why One Person may not interceed with another, and receive
from another.

To show the fallacy of this, I will frame another Argument exactly like it,
which may do our Socinians a kindness in helping them to a new Argument, and
who knows but that such great Wits as they are, may make it a good one: and it
is this. The One Supreme God is not, and cannot be begotten of any other, nor
proceed from any other, and therefore the Son, who is begotten of the Father,
is not the One Supreme God, and the Holy Ghost, who proceeds from Father and
Son, is not the One Supreme God. The Major is as self-evident as any
Proposition in Euclide; whoever understands the Terms, must confess it to be
true, that the One Supreme God cannot be begotten, nor proceed from any other;
the Minor is confessed by Trinitarians, that the Son is begotten of the Father,
and the Holy Ghost proceeds from Father and Son; how then shall we avoid the
Conclusion, That the Son is not the One Supreme God, nor the Holy Ghost the One
Supreme God? Indeed no way, that I know of, for the thing is true: the Son is
not the One Supreme God, nor the Holy Ghost the One Supreme God, nay nor the
Father the One Supreme God, considered separately from each other, but Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, or a Trinity in Unity is the One Supreme God: Now of this
One Supreme God, it is certainly true, that he is not begotten, nor proceeds
from any other; for then there must be a God above this One Supreme God: but if
there be Three Persons in this One Supreme God, this does not hinder, but the
Father may beget the Son, and the Holy Spirit proceed from Father and Son, and
yet the One Supreme God neither be begotten nor proceed; for it is not the One
Supreme God, that is begotten, but the Divine Person of the Son, who is God,
and with the Father and Holy Spirit, One Supreme God; nor is it the One Supreme
God that proceeds, but the Divine Person of the Holy Ghost, who also is God,
and together with Father and Son One Supreme God.

This is plain, and what every one may understand at first sight; and the
fallacy of the Argument consists in this, That whatever may be affirmed of the
One Supreme God, is applied to each Divine Person in their Personal Capacities,
as if each Person considered separate from the other Divine Persons, were the
One Supreme God: Now this is false, for the One Supreme God is not any One
Person distinct and separate from the rest, but all Three Persons essentially
united into One God; and therefore the Application must be false too; when what
is true of the One Supreme God, is applied to every distinct Person in the
Godhead.

It is certain, the One Supreme God can neither be Father, Son, nor Holy Ghost:
If he be a Father, he must beget a Son, who is not One with him, and yet is
God: For the Son of God, who is begotten of his Father's Substance, and has the
same Nature with him (which is the proper Notion of a begotten Son) must be
God; as the Son of a man is a man: And if the Father himself in his own proper
Person, as begetting the Son, be the One Supreme God, the whole entire Deity,
then he must beget a Son without, not within himself, who is not, and cannot be
that One Supreme God, that the Father is. The One Supreme God is One in
himself, and separate from all other Beings: And therefore if the One Supreme
God be a Father, he must beget a Son separate from himself; if he be a Son, he
must have a Father separate from himself; and so of the Holy Ghost.

In the One Supreme God, there may and must be a Trinity of Divine Persons;
within the Unity of the Godhead there is a Father, a Son, and a Holy Ghost, but
the One Supreme God is neither; neither begets, nor is begotten, nor proceeds;
for all Three Persons are the One Supreme God, and what belongs to the Godhead,
belongs to them all as considered in the Unity of the same Godhead, but not as
considered in their distinct Personal Capacities, as One is the Father, the
other the Son, and the third the Holy Spirit.

And thus it is in the present Case: the One Supreme God can no more be sent,
then he can be begotten, can receive no Commands from any other, cannot be
given by any other; cannot be subject to any other Will but his own, etc. but
the Divine Persons may send and be sent, and interceed with each other; for
though in the Unity of the Godhead they are all the One Supreme God, yet there
is a mutual Relation and Subordination between the Divine Persons, as I have
already explained it.

As to instance in Intercession or Prayer for himself or others, which is a
Contradiction to the Notion of a Supreme God, as it is to the Notion of an
Absolute and Sovereign Prince: But yet a Sovereign Prince may interceed with
himself; his own Wisdom, his own Mercy, Clemency, and Compassion, may interceed
with him, and prevail too, without any diminution to his own Sovereign Power.
Thus though the Supreme God can interceed with no other Being, yet the Son may
interceed with the Father; his own eternal and begotten Wisdom may interceed
with him, and make Atonement and Expiation for sinners: and thus God interceeds
with no body but himself; for it is his own Wisdom which interceeds with him,
and makes the Atonement.

And if we will consider things aright, we shall find that there can be no
other Advocate with the Father but the Son, but his own eternal and begotten
Wisdom. When a man interceeds with himself, it is done by reflecting on his own
Mind, and examining the Reasons and Motives he finds there to pity and spare,
and to do good; that is, by his reflex Wisdom and Knowledge of himself, which
in the Godhead is the Son, God's reflex Knowledge of himself, or his begotten
Wisdom, that Divine (...) or Word, which Philo calls the (...) or High Priest:
For let us consider, what it is to interceed with God, and what kind of
Intercession is consistent both with the Sovereign Authority, and Sovereign
Goodness of God. An infinitely wise and just and good Being cannot be moved by
mere Entreaties, nor by the bare Interest and Favor of the Advocate, for this
is weakness in men, and therefore cannot be incident to the Divine Nature: Now
if you set aside Entreaties and Importunities and Favor, there can be no other
Advocate with the Father, but his own Eternal Wisdom. It is his own Wisdom that
must Atone him, that must reconcile him to sinners, that must obtain Pardon and
all other Blessings for them; for if this cannot be done wisely, God cannot do
it; and therefore his own Wisdom must do all this; for no created Wisdom can.
But God loves his own Wisdom, his only begotten Son, and therefore Wisdom is a
powerful Advocate, and must prevail with the Father. So that the Son's
Intercession with the Father is so far from being incongruous, or inconsistent
with his being God, that the Divine Nature can admit of no other Advocate or
Intercessor, properly so called. To intercede with a never-failing Effect and
Success, is an Act of Power and Authority, and for God to make a
Creature-Advocate and Mediator, is to give a Creature Authority over himself,
which cannot be; for it is a debasement of the Divine Nature, and a reproach to
the Divine Wisdom, as if God did not better know, how to dispose of his Grace
and Mercy, than any Creature does. For Creatures to pray to God for themselves
or others, as humble Supplicants, is part of the Worship which Creatures owe to
God; but to intercede with the Authority of a Mediator, is above the Nature and
Order of Creatures; and God can no more give this to any Creature, than he can
commit his own Sovereign Power and Authority to them: But his own Eternal
Wisdom can intercede with Authority; for Original Mind and Wisdom must yield to
the Intercessions of his own Eternal Wisdom: which is not to submit to any
Foreign Authority, but to his own. To proceed;

7. His next Argument to prove that Christ is not God, is this; That Jesus
Christ is in Holy Scripture always spoken of, as a distinct and different
Person from God; and described to be the Son of God, and the Image of God. This
we own, and he has no need to prove it: and this is a wonderful Argument to
convince those who acknowledge Three distinct Persons in the Godhead, to prove
that Christ is not God, because he is a distinct Person from the Father; for so
according to the Language of Scripture, God signifies God the Father, when he
is distinguished from the Son and the Holy Spirit, as all men grant: and to
say, Page 12.
It Is as impossible that the Son or Image of the One true God should himself be
that One true God, as that the Son should be the Father, and the Image that
very thing whose Image it is, is mere Sophistry; for if the Father and the Son
and the Holy Ghost be the One true God, they are the same One true God, and yet
the Father is not the Son, nor the Son the Father.

Page 13.
8. His next Argument is, from many Texts, which expressly declare that only the
Father is God. Now this, I confess, would be a demonstration, could he produce
any one Text, which asserts the Father only to be God, in opposition to the
Son, and to the Holy Ghost; for then the Father must signify the Person of the
Father, in opposition to the Person of the Son, and to the Person of the Holy
Ghost; but when the Father is called the Only true God, only in opposition to
all the false Gods, which the world then worshipped, there Father does not
signify personally, but that One Godhead or Divinity, of which the Father is
the Source and Fountain and Original; he being that Eternal and Original Mind,
which begets his own Image or Eternal Son, and from whom and the Son the Holy
Spirit proceeds in the Unity of the same Godhead.

When the Father is said to be the only true God, 17 John 3. 1 Cor. 8.6.
and the One God, that the Son and Holy Ghost are not hereby excluded from the
Unity of the same Godhead, is evident from those other Texts of Scripture,
which plainly teach the Divinity of the Son and Holy Ghost; for if the
Scripture teaches, that the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost God, it can never
separate the Father from his only begotten Son and Eternal Spirit; and
therefore the Dispute will issue here, Whether the Scripture does teach the
Divinity of the Son and the Holy Spirit.

When the Father is called the only true God, it must be in opposition to all
those who were at that time worshipped for Gods in the World, but were not true
Gods, and therefore when Christ calls his Father the only true God, it could
not be in contradistinction to himself and the Holy Spirit, for they were not
then distinctly worshipped. And when St. Paul calls the Father the One God, he
expressly opposes it to the many Gods of the Heathens. For though there be that
are called Gods, whether in Heaven (the Sun and Moon and Planets, and Deified
men) or in the Earth (the several Elements, Birds, Beasts, etc.) ( as there be
Gods many and Lords many) but to us, there is but one God the Father, of whom
are all things, and we in him; and One Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all
things, and we by him; where the One God and One Lord and Mediator is opposed
to the many Gods and many Lords or Mediators, which were worshipped by the
Heathens.

These Texts indeed do plainly distinguish between the Father, and Christ: This
is Life eternal to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have
sent. And to us there is but One God the Father, and One Lord Jesus Christ;
which is no more than what St. Paul teaches; There is one God, and One Mediator
between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus. The One God and the One Mediator
ought to be distinguished; for the whole Christian Religion, and the salvation
of sinners, depends upon this distinction; but this does not exclude Christ
from being One God with the Father, though he have a distinct additional Glory
of a Mediatory Kingdom.

I consider farther, when the Father is called the One God, and the only true
God, it can be understood only of those, who are distinct and separated Gods
from the Father, and are not One God with him; but it cannot exclude those, who
are united in the Unity of the same Godhead; for they are but One God with the
Father.

And this is plainly signified in the Title of the Father, and the Father of
our Lord Jesus, which is God's peculiar Name under the Gospel, as the Maker of
Heaven and Earth was before: for the Title of the Father does not exclude, but
includes the Son; and therefore if it appears from Scripture, that this Son is
true and real God, begotten of his Father from Eternity, the Son at least must
be included in this Character of the only true God. His other Texts, which he
cites under this Head, 1 Cor. 15.24. 3 James 9. 15 Romans 6.
prove no more but that the Father of Christ is God, not that Christ is not One
God with the Father.

9. He adds; If Christ were indeed God, Page 14.
as well as Man, or (as Trinitarians speak) God the Son incarnate in an Human
Nature, it had been altogether superfluous to give the Holy Spirit to his said
Human Nature as a Director and Guide; for what other help could that Nature
need, which was One Person with (as they speak) God the Son, and in which God
the Son did personally dwell.

Now the account of this is plain and short; for the whole Trinity is but One
Energy and Power, and the Divine Persons cannot act separately ad extra; what
the Father does, that the Son does, and that the Holy Ghost does by one
individual Act, as I have shown at large; but the sanctification of all
Creatures (and such the Human Nature of Christ is) is peculiarly attributed to
the Holy Spirit; and he might as well have asked, Why the sanctification of the
Church is ascribed to the Holy Spirit; for the Church is the Body of Christ,
and Christ the Head from. whence all Influences of Grace are derived into the
Body; and though this be not a personal Union, it is next degree to it; for we
are Flesh of his Flesh, and Bone of his Bone: and a Personal Union makes no
difference in the manner of Operation, though it does in the Measures and
Degrees: the Divine Word acts by and in conjunction with the Holy Spirit, and
therefore sanctifies his own Human Nature, as he does his mystical Body the
Church by the Operations and Influenences of the Holy Ghost.

10. And this Answers his next Argument, That the Miracles of Christ are
attributed to the Holy Ghost, or to the Father dwelling in him: for Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost act together, as Christ tells us, My Father works
hitherto, and I work.

11. His next Argument is; Had our Lord been more than a Man, Page 15.
the Prophesies of the Old Testament in which he is promised, would not
describe him barely as the Seed of the Woman; the Seed of Abraham; a Prophet
like unto Moses, the Servant and Missionary of God, on whom God's Spirit should
rest. That our Savior ought to have been thus described, though he had been
more than a Man, is plain enough, because he was to be all this: the Seed of
the Woman, the Seed of Abraham, a Prophet like unto Moses, but a much greater
Prophet: 3 Hebr. 5, 6.
for Moses was faithful in all his House as a Servant, but Christ as a Son over
his own House. But what he insinuates, that he is barely thus described, shows,
That this Author will never loose a Cause by overmuch Modesty; for we with all
the Christian Church, and we have the Authority of Christ and his Apostles for
it too, say, That he is described in the Old Testament also, not only as the
Seed of Abraham, but as the Son of God. Of which more presently.

His next Attempt is against the Divinity of the Holy Ghost, but here is little
that requires a distinct Answer, it being only the Repetion of his old
Fallacies.

Page. 16.
1. That the Holy Ghost or Spirit, and the Power of God, are spoken of as one
and the same thing. And what then? His intended Conclusion, I suppose, is that
the Holy Ghost is not a Person, which is the Intention of his second Argument;
but this is so novel and ridiculous a Conceit, (too senseless for any of the
ancient Heretics) that it ought not to be seriously confuted, but despised:
for it is as easy to prove the Father and the Son to be no Persons, as the
Holy Spirit. He is the Spirit of God, which searches the deep things of God,
and he who knows all that is in God, is a knowing Mind: but to dream of Power
and Inspiration in God, distinct as he confesses from God, and no Person; is to
attribute such Powers and Faculties to an infinite Mind, as there are in
created Minds; to compound God of Mind and Intellectual Powers and Faculties,
which all Men of sense have scorned the thoughts of: what are Faculties in us,
are Persons in God, or else God is not a pure and simple Act, as I showed
above. Which shows the vanity of his Pretense, Page 18.
That the Holy Spirit is spoken of as a Person, by the same figure of Speech
that Charity is described as a Person, 1 Cor. 13.4, 5. and Wisdom, 9 Prove. 11.
For these natural or acquired Powers and Habits are said to do that which the
Person who has them, and acts by them, does: as Charity suffers long, and is
kind, because a charitable man does so, etc. And if we will allow such Habits
and Powers in God, the Case may be somewhat parallel; for when we have
compounded God of Substance or Essence, or Faculties or Powers, we may then
find figurative Persons in God, as there are in Men.

This is certain, all Personal Acts belong to a Person, and therefore whatever
has any Personal Acts ascribed to it, we must conclude is a Person, unless we
know by some other means, that it is no Person, and then that proves the
Expression to be figurative. Thus we know Charity is no Person, but a Grace or
Virtue, and therefore when Personal Acts are attributed to Charity, as to
suffer long, and be kind, etc. we know this is a figure; but it is ridiculous
hence to conclude, That the Holy Ghost, who has Personal Acts ascribed to him,
to work Miracles, to raise the Dead, to comfort, to convince, to sanctify the
Church, to dwell in the Church, as in his Temple, etc. is yet no Person,
because Charity, which we know to be no Person, has Personal Acts ascribed to
it: which is as much as to say, That because Personal Acts are sometimes used
figuratively, therefore they must never be properly expounded; whereas on the
other hand, we must never expound any thing figuratively, but where the subject
will not admit of a proper sense. If it were as known and certain, that the
Holy Ghost is no Person, as that Charity is none, then there would be reason to
allow a figure; but to prove that the Holy Ghost is no Person, only because
Personal Acts are sometimes figuratively attributed to that which is no Person,
is a maxim only in the Socinian Logic, which is nothing else but a System of
absurd and ridiculous Fallacies.

2. His second Argument against the Spirit's being God, is this; A manifest
distinction is made, as between God and Christ, so also between God and the
Holy Spirit, or Power and Inspiration of God; so that it is impossible the
Spirit should be God himself. This has been answered already, as to the
distinction between God and Christ, and the same Answer will serve for the Holy
Spirit. But this Confession of the Socinian confutes his whole Hypothesis, and
proves the Holy Spirit to be a Person, and a God.

He says the Holy Spirit is distinct from God, so distinct that it is impossible
he should be God himself; then say I, this Holy Spirit is either a Divine
subsisting Person, or nothing but a Name. If this Spirit were a Divine Virtue
and Power, as he would have it, then it is not distinct from God, but is God
himself, as the Powers and Faculties of the Mind, though they may be
distinguished from each other, yet they cannot be any thing distinct from the
Mind, but are the Mind it self; and therefore if the Spirit, as he says, be
represented in Scripture, as so distinct from God, that it is impossible he
should be God himself, then he must be a distinct Divine Person, and not the
mere Power of God, which is not distinct from God himself.

If the Spirit be distinct from God, and not God himself, and yet have Personal
Acts ascribed to him, then he must be a distinct Person; for Faculties,
Virtues, and Powers, have Personal Acts and Offices ascribed to them, only upon
account of their unity and sameness with the Mind in which they are, which is a
Person, and acts by these Powers; but a Power which is distinct from God, and
is not God himself, (as he says the Holy Spirit is) if it have any Personal
Acts, must be a distinct Person; and if these Personal Acts are such, as are
proper only to God, it must be a distinct Divine Person.

He says, this Holy Spirit is the Inspiration of God; be it so: This
Inspiration then is either within God himself, or without him, in Creatures,
who have this Inspiration. If it be within God himself, it must be a Person, or
else it cannot be distinct from God; and a Divine Person unless any thing be in
God, which is not God. If this Inspiration be without God, in Creatures, who
are inspired by him; how is it the Spirit of God? for the Spirit of God must be
in God, as the Spirit of Man is in Man: How does this Inspiration in Creatures
search all things, 1 Cor. 2.10, 11.
yea the deep things of God? and knows the things of God, as the Spirit of a
Man knows the things of a man? For the inspiration in Creatures searches
nothing of God, and knows nothing of God, but what God is pleased to reveal.
The Inspiration knows nothing of God, but the inspired Mind knows as much, as
it is inspired with the knowledge of. So that according to this Account, the
Spirit of God is nothing but the inspired knowledge in Creatures; and therefore
no Personal Acts can be attributed to it, but what Creatures can do by such
Inspiration; and let any man consider, whether this Answers those Characters we
have of the Spirit of God in Scripture.

If this be so, I desire to know, How the Spirit of God differs from his Gifts
and Graces? For if the Spirit be nothing but God's Inspiration in Creatures,
the Spirit is either a Gift or a Grace, and is not One in All, but as many as
those Creatures are, that are inspired; and as different as the Gifts and
Graces are, with which they are Inspired: Whereas St. Paul tells us, There are
Diversities of Gifts, but the same Spirit; and there are differences of
Administrations, 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6.
but the same Lord, and there are diversities of Operations, but it is the same
God, which works all in all. So that the Spirit is distinguished from his
Gifts, as the Lord is from his Administrations, and God from his Operations;
and is the same Spirit in all, as it is the same Lord, and the same God.

3. His next Argument is, The Spirit is obtained for us of God by our Prayers;
therefore itself is not God. But this has been answered already; for though the
One Supreme God cannot be sent, nor given (which I suppose is the force of his
Argument) yet in the ever blessed Trinity, One Divine Person may send and give
another; the Father may send the Son, and give the Holy Spirit. And yet since
they like that better, we will allow, That the Holy Spirit does give himself,
and is asked of himself; for the Divine Persons in the Trinity, as I have often
observed and proved, do not act separately, but as the Father and the Son give
the Holy Spirit, so the Holy Spirit gives himself in the same individual Act.

And when we pray to God for his Holy Spirit, we pray to Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, who are this One God, and One entire object of Worship: It is the ever
blessed Trinity we invoke, when we pray Our Father, which art in Heaven. For as
they are inseparably One God, so they are the inseparable Object of our
Worship; since this great Mystery of a Trinity in Unity is so plainly revealed
to us, we cannot worship this One Supreme God, but we must direct our Worship
to all Three Divine Persons in the Unity of the same Godhead; for we do not
worship this One Supreme God, unless we worship, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost:
and therefore whether we invoke each Person distinctly, as our Church does in
the beginning of the Litany; or pray only to God by the Name of the most High
God, or by the Name of Father; or the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, it is
all one, for Father, Son, and Holy Ghost is the One Supreme God, and the entire
Object of our Worship: and whoever worships One God, but not Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, does not worship the true God, not the God of the Christians.
Before this was so plainly revealed, it was sufficient to worship One Supreme
God, without any conception of the distinct Persons in the Godhead; but when it
is plainly revealed to us, that this One Supreme God is Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, whoever does not worship Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, does not worship
the true God; for the true God is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and there is no
God besides him: which I would desire our Unitarians (as they falsely call
themselves) and our Deists carefully to consider: if any thing be fundamental
in Religion, it is the worship of the One true God, and if Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost be this One true God, those who worship a God, who is not Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, do not worship the true God, and that I think is the true
Notion of Idolatry. So that these Men are so far from being Christians, that I
cannot see, how they are worshippers of the true God: which should at least
make them concerned to examine this matter with more Care and less Prejudice
than they have yet done.

So that when we worship One God, we worship Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and
when the Glory of these Divine Persons was made known to the World, there was
no need of any new Command to worship these three Divine Persons; for when it
is revealed, that they are the One Eternal God, the Command of worshipping this
One God must include them all. Which gives a sufficient Answer to what he adds,
That there is neither Precept nor Example in all Holy Scripture, of Prayer made
to the Spirit, on this or any other occasion: which on the Trinitarian
Supposition, that the Holy Spirit is a Person and God, no less than the Father,
is very surprising, nay utterly unaccountable. But I hope this will satisfy
any man, that it is not unaccountable; for though the Spirit be God, he is but
One God, with Father and Son, and therefore not a distinct and separate Object
of Worship, but is worshipped with the Father and the Son, in the Unity of the
same Godhead, and this required no new Command, nor any separate worship of the
Holy Spirit.

There is indeed a distinct worship paid to Christ: All men must honor the
Son, as they honor the Father. When God brought his first begotten into the
World, that is, when he raised him from the Dead, and exalted him to his own
right hand, he said, and let all the Angels of God worship him: 1 Hebr. 6.
God has highly exalted him, and given him a Name, which is above every Name,
3 Phil. 10, 11.
that at the Name of Jesus every Knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and
things in Earth, and things under the Earth. But this is not merely as he is
the Son of God, the second Person in the Trinity, for so he is worshipped as
One God with the Father and the Holy Ghost; but as he is a Mediator or a
Mediatory King; as he has a Kingdom distinct from the Natural Kingdom of the
Father, as I have already shown, so there is a worship proper to him as
Mediator; but the Holy Spirit has no distinct Kingdom, and therefore no
distinct Worship, but is worshipped in the Unity of the Godhead, and this
required no new Command; for he who knows, that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are
One Supreme God, must worship Father, Son, and Holy Ghost as One Supreme God.

4. His next Argument is against a Trinity of Persons in the Godhead, Page 19.
which, he says, is contrary to the whole Scripture, which speaks of God but as
One Person, and speaks of him, and to him, by singular Pronouns, such as I,
Thou, Me, Him.

His Proofs that the Scripture speaks of God as but One Person, are very
wonderful. His first is, that of Job; Will ye speak wickedly for God? and talk
deceitfully for him? 13 Job 7, 8.
Will ye accept his Person? will ye contend for God? But surely to accept God's
Person, no more signifies the Personality of the Godhead, than to accept the
Person of a Man, signifies his Human Person: the Hebrew is his Face, which is
far from signifying a Person in the sense we say, there are Three Persons in
the Godhead. To respect the Person of a Man is to do something for him, which
neither Law, nor Justice, nor Equity required, not because he is a Person,
which every Man is, but from some partial respect we have to his particular
Person; and therefore to accept the Person of God here signifies to speak
wickedly for God; which is an absurd and senseless thing, as Job represents it,
whether the Supreme God be One Person, or Three; for in this sense of Person,
One God can be but One Person.

The other Text that Christ is the express Image of God's Person, 1 Hebr. 1, 2.
is as little to the purpose; for it is plain, the Person of whom the Son is
the express Image, is the Person of God the Father; and the Father indeed is
but One Person.

As for his singular Pronouns, they prove indeed that there is but One God, as
we all own, not that there are not Three Persons in the Godhead. For when the
Scripture speaks of God without any particular respect to the distinction of
the Persons, it must speak but of One God, because God is but One, and singular
Pronouns are most properly applied to One God. As for what he objects, Page 20.
That no Instance can be given in any Language of Three Persons whoever spoke
of themselves, or were spoken to, by the singular Pronouns, I, Thou, Me, Him,
Thee; it were sufficient to answer, That there is no other Example in Nature
neither, of Three Persons who are essentially One; and if the manner of
speaking must be conformed to the Nature of Things, there can be no other
Instance of this way of speaking, because there is no other Example of this
Unity; but all Languages speak of One in the singular Number, and so the
Scripture uses singular Pronouns of One God. But this is not the Case; for when
God speaks of himself, he does not speak of himself, as Three Persons, but as
One God, and therefore may say I and Me: and when the Prophets speak of God, or
pray to him, they pray to him as One God, and therefore may say, Thou, and Him,
and Thee. When Three Persons are One God, God may speak of himself, or we may
speak of, or to God; either considered as Three Persons, or as One God; and
though Three Persons require the Plural Number, yet One God may speak of
himself, or be spoken to, by singular Pronouns.

5. He says, Had the Son or Holy Ghost been God, Page 22.
this would not have been omitted in the Apostles Creed. And I say, Had not the
Son been God, and the Holy Ghost God, they would not have been put into the
Apostles Creed, no more than into the form of Baptism, which is the original of
the Apostles Creed. That the Primitive Christians did believe the Divinity of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, we are sufficiently, assured from all the
ancient Records of their Faith; but there was no reason to express this in so
short a Creed, before the Arian and Socinian Heresies had disturbed the Church;
and indeed there was no need of it, for the only Son of God must be by Nature
God, and the Spirit of God is as essentially God, as the Spirit of a Man is
essential to a Man.

Page 24.
He concludes; That theirs (the Socinians) is an accountable and reasonable
Faith; but that of the Trinitarians is absurd, and contrary both to Reason and
to it self, and therefore not only false, but impossible. The Faith of a
Trinity in Unity, I hope, I have sufficiently vindicated already from Absurdity
and Contradiction. But it will be worth the while briefly to consider, how
accountable and reasonable the Socinian Faith is.

The Socinian Doctrine is, That Christ, who is called the Son, the only
begotten Son of God, the Brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his
Person, is no more than a mere Man, who had no Being, till he was Conceived in
the Womb of the Virgin Mary, and is called the Son of God, because God formed
him by an immediate Power in the Virgins Womb, and raised him from the Dead,
and exalted him to his own right hand in Heaven; and that the Holy Spirit is
only the Power and Inspiration of God, that is, is either God himself, or the
Operation of his Power in Creatures.

This is their accountable and reasonable Doctrine, and to show how very
accountable and reasonable it is, I come now to draw up my charge against it.

1. That it ridicules the Scriptures. 2. That it ridicules the whole Jewish
economy. 3. That it ridicules the Christian Religion. 4. That it justifies, or
at least excuses both Pagan and Popish Idolatries. The Charge is full enough,
and I am contented it should pass only for big huffing words, till I have
proved it; and then I hope, it may pass for a just Return to the ridiculous
Blasphemies of the Brief Notes, and Brief History.

1. That it ridicules the Scripture, by putting either an absurd, or a very
mean trifling sense on it, unworthy of the Wisdom of God, by whom it was
inspired; and this I shall give some Instances of, in their Expositions of
Scripture, which I find in the Brief History of the Unitarians.

In the second Letter he takes notice of some Texts in the Old Testament, which
speak of God, and in the New Testament are applied to Christ, which we think a
very good Argument to prove, That Christ is that God, to whom those Texts
belong in the Old Testament; for though possibly without such an Application we
could not certainly have known, that these Texts were spoken of Christ, yet the
Authority of Christ and his Apostles who have made this Application, is as good
a Reason to believe, that they were meant of Christ, as to believe any other
part of the Gospel: Let us then consider, how he answers such Texts.

What the Psalmist says, Thy Throne, O God, Page 4.5.45 Psalm 6.7. 1 Hebr. 8.9.
is for ever and ever, a Scepter of Righteousness is the Scepter of thy
Kingdom. Thou have loved Righteousness, and hated Iniquity, therefore God, even
thy God has anointed Thee with the Oil of Gladness above thy Fellows; the
Apostle to the Hebrews applies to Christ; But unto the Son he says, thy
Throne, O God, etc. To this he Answers, In the Hebrew, and in the Greek, it is
God is thy Throne (i. e. thy seat, resting place, establishment) for ever; If
he had only said, it may be so, he had said right; but it is false, to say, it
is so. For the Hebrew Elohim may be either the Nominative or the Vocative Case,
and so the Greek (...), which is an Attick Vocative, and so is used by the
Septuagint, 22 Psalm 1. 'O (...), My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me.
And it is evident, the Septuagint, the Vulgar Latin, the Chaldee Paraphrase,
the Syriack and Arabic Versions, took it for the Vocative Case, and thus the
Christian Church has always understood it; and this is the most natural
Construction, when it immediately follows a Pronoun, which has no other
immediate Relative; Thy Throne, O God, that is, O God, thy Throne is for ever
and ever. And thus the Apostle must understand it; To the Son he says, Thy
Throne, O God; where, O God, must be referred to the Son, and thy to God: and
the sense he gives of it, is absurd, and what we have no Example of in
Scripture, that God is a Throne: God indeed is called a Rock, a Fortress, a
high Tower, which is expounded by a Deliverer; 18 Psalm 2.
but a Throne here signifies a Kingdom, as is evident from the following words;
and to say, that God is the Throne, and the Kingdom of Christ, is to Subject
the Father to the Son; for a King sits upon his Throne, and governs his Kingdom.

The Apostle in the next Verse cites another glorious Testimony which God has
given to his Son; And, Thou Lord in the beginning have laid the Foundations of
the Earth, 102 Psalm 25, 26, 27.
and the Heavens are the work of thine hands; they shall perish, but thou
remainest; and they all shall wax old as does a Garment, and as a Vesture shall
thou fold them up, and they shall be changed; but thou art the same, and thy
years shall not fail. This is so plain a Testimony to the Divinity of our
Savior, if these words be allowed to be applied by the Apostle to Christ, that
our Author is forced to deny it. He says, The Context has this sense, And thou
Lord, Page 50.
( that is, and in another Text of the Psalms, it is said, Thou Lord) which is
certainly true, if he had added but One word more, viz. to the Son. And in
another Text of the Psalms, it is said to the Son, And thou Lord have laid the
Foundations of the Earth; for so the Context requires us to supply it, if we
will make sense of it; for the Apostle observes in what different Language God
speaks of the Angels, and to the Son: Of the Angels he says, who makes his
Angels Spirits, and his Ministers a flaming fire; but to the Son, he says, thy
Throne, O God, is for ever and ever -- And to the Son he says, Thou Lord in
the beginning have laid the Foundations of the Earth. -- But to which of the
Angels said he at any time, Sit on my right hand until I make thine Enemies thy
Footstool. This is easy and natural; but to apply those words to the Father,
Thou Lord in the beginning have laid the Foundations of the Earth, etc. is to
break the whole Context, is contrary to the Apostles design, and no good sense
can be made of it; and this I think is to ridicule Scripture, to make it
Nonsense, or very bad, disturbed, and incoherent sense, when there is no need
of it, but to serve an Hypothesis which the Text was designed to confute. He
says, Tho. Aquinas rightly acknowledged, that the words of both these Texts may
be understood of God only, not of Christ; but this is false (as indeed he
seldom cites any Author, but he corrupts him) for Thomas says, this Text may be
understood of either; but if you understand it of the Father, then by in the
beginning you must understand the Son, who, he says, is called the beginning:
Thou Lord in the beginning, that is, in or by the Son, have laid the
Foundations of the Earth; for he saw the Context required, that these words
should be applied to Christ, but he thought it indifferent, whether they were
applied to him in whole or in part, since both ways he is made the Creator of
the World, which answers the Apostles design; and though I think Thomas was
mistaken, yet this makes nothing to our Authors purpose.

68 Psalm 18. 4 Ephesians. 8.
Thus what the Psalmist says of God, Thou have ascended on high, thou have led
captivity captive, thou have received Gifts for Men; St. Paul attributes to
Christ. Here our Historian spends a great many words to no purpose, about
Christ's descent into the Grave and into Hell, and his ascending into Heaven to
fill all things; or, as he says, it might be better rendered to fulfill all
things, that is, all the Prophesies of himself, and others concerning his
Death, and Ascension into the highest Heavens: But how does (...) signify all
Prophesies, or how does his Ascension into Heaven fulfill all Prophesies? As for
the Gifts given to men, he says, in the Psalms, they are literally meant of
God, and of Christ, only by way of Prophecy, or rather of Emblem, or
Accommodation; which he learnedly proves, because the Gifts the Apostle speaks
of, were not given or received till about One thousand years after David 's
time.

Now what of all this? we readily grant, that ascending on high, the leading
captivity captive, the receiving gifts for men, which the Psalmist speaks of,
were not the same, with the Ascension of Christ into Heaven, his leading
captivity captive, and giving Gifts to men, but were Types and Figures of it;
but the single Question is, Whether Christ be that God, of whom the Psalmist
says, that he ascended on high, etc. if he be not, St. Paul has abused us, for
he applies that to Christ, which was not said of him; if he be, we have what we
desire, that Christ is God: but this, which was the only Question, he says not
one word to. Men may be Types and Figures, as David and others were of Christ;
and in this case, what was said of David, as a Typical Person, may be applied
to the Person of Christ: but God himself can be no Type, for the Type is always
less perfect than the Antitype; and therefore whatever is said of God, must
belong to his Person, and cannot belong to any other. What God did under the
typical State of the Law, may be a Type and Figure of those more glorious
things, which we would do in Human Nature; and thus his Triumphs and Victories
over the Enemies of his Church, which is by a Metaphor called his ascending on
high, (since God, who fills all places, neither locally ascends nor descends)
was a Type and Figure of his real Ascension into Heaven, after he had first
descended into the lowermost parts of the Earth, as the Apostle argues; but if
what the Psalmist says, that God ascended on high, etc. received its
accomplishment in the Ascension of Christ into Heaven, Christ must be the God
of whom the Psalmist speaks.

Thus what the Psalmist says of God, Page 49. 97 Psalm 7. 1 Hebr. 6.
Worship him all ye Gods, or Angels, the Apostle Attributes to Christ; when he
brings in the first begotten into the world, he says, and let all the Angels
of God worship him. To this our Author answers, It Is uncertain whether St. Paul
had any respect to the words in the Psalm. What? when he cites the very words,
as a Prophecy of Christ? How shall we then know, when the Apostle has respect
to the words he quotes? But if he had, he does not quote the words of the
Psalmist as if they were spoken of Christ, but only declares the Decree of God
(known to him by the Spirit) for subjecting the Angels to Christ, in the same
words that the Psalmist had used upon another occasion. But he proves this
Decree of God by no other Revelation, but the words of the Psalmist, nor
pretends any other; and if that do'nt prove it, we have no other. But his
Reason for this is admirable, because they are words most proper to express
that Decree, for the Writers of the New Testament generally affect to speak in
Scripture language: which is an effectual Answer to all the Texts of Scripture
quoted out of the Old Testament; that the Apostles did not intend to prove any
thing by them, but only affected to speak in Scripture language; but when the
Apostle says this was spoken of Christ, if it were not spoken of him, I doubt
he affected something worse than speaking in Scripture Language; this is either
to ridicule Scripture, or give the lie to it, let him choose which he likes
best.

Page 60. 45 Isai. 23. 14 Romans 10, 11.
St. Paul applies that of the Prophet Isaiah, I have sworn by my self, (which
all acknowledge to be spoken by God) unto me every knee shall bow, to Christ.
This our Historian says, is, Because Christ then and there (at the last
Judgment) holds the place of God, represents him, and acts by his
Commission. So men are said to appear before our Sovereign Lord the King, when
they appear at the Bar of his Judges, because the Judges act in the King's
stead, and by his Commission. But why does he confine this bowing the Knee to
the last Judgment? St. Paul indeed gives this as one Instance of it, but does
not confine it to this, but in the Epistle to the Philippians makes it as large
as the Exaltation of our Savior; 2 Phil. 9, 10, 11
Wherefore God has highly exalted him, and given him a Name, which is above
every Name, that at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow, -- and that every
Tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory of God the
Father. This is what God says by the Prophet, Every Tongue shall swear to me;
and St. Paul to the Romans, Every Tongue shall confess to God. And this shows,
that it is the Person of Christ to whom we must bow the knee: it is the Name of
Jesus at which every knee must bow; and every Tongue must confess, that Jesus
Christ is the Lord. Now I suppose he will not say, That we must confess the
Judges to be the King, or that we must bow to their Persons, but to their
Commission; or that they represent the King, wherever they are, but only in the
King's Court.

If then we must bow to the Person of Christ, and confess him to be the Lord,
and this be an accomplishment of God's Oath, unto me every Knee shall bow, and
every Tongue shall swear; then Christ is that God, who in the Prophet Isaiah
swore, that every Knee should bow to him: And the Prophet plainly describes,
who this God is to whom every Knee shall bow; Surely shall one say, 45 Isai.
24, 25
in the Lord have I righteousness and strength; even to him shall men come, and
all that are incensed against him shall be ashamed; in the Lord shall the Seed
of Israel be justified, and shall glory; And I suppose all Christians know, who
that Lord is, who is made unto us Wisdom, 1 Cor. 1.30.
and Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption; 2 Cor. 5.21.
by whom we are justified through Faith in his Blood: And this is that God, to
whom every Knee must bow.

But he is a little mistaken also in his Law; we are not said to appear before
our Sovereign Lord the King, because we appear before the Judges, who act by
the King's Commission; for this is true only of the Court of King's Bench,
which is peculiarly the King's Court; though other Judges act by the King's
Commission also: in the Kings Court we are said to appear before the King.

But now though Christ receive his Kingdom and Power from God, and God is said
to judge the World by him, yet it is properly Christ's Judgment Seat: So St.
Paul here calls it; 14 Romans 10.2 Cor. 5.10.
We shall all stand before the Iudgment-Seat of Christ; and we must all appear
before the Iudgment-Seat of Christ; for the Father judges no man, but has
committed all Judgment to the Son, that all men should honor the Son even as
they honor the Father; which I explained before. And therefore this being
Christ's Court, of which he is the Supreme and Sovereign Judge, to him we must
bow our Knee; that is, he is that Lord, of whom the Prophet Isaiah speaks.

8 Isai. 13, 14.
The same Prophet tells us, Sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be
your fear, and let him be your dread. And he shall be for a Sanctuary; but for
a Stone of stumbling, and for a Rock of Offense to both the Houses of Israel,
for a gin, and for a snare to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem. This is evidently
spoken of the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel. And this St. Paul applies to
Christ, that the Jews did stumble and fall, 9 Romans 31, 32, 33.
and were broken, as the Prophet foretold at this stumbling Stone: Israel,
which followed after the Law of Righteousness, has not attained to the Law of
Righteousness. Wherefore? because they sought it, not by Faith (the Faith of
Christ) but as it were by the Works of the Law, for they stumbled at the
stumbling-stone; as it is written, Behold I lay in Sion a stumbling-stone, and
rock of offense; and whosoever believes on him shall not be ashamed. Where the
Apostle joins two Prophesies together; the first, that which I have already
quoted, where the Lord of Hosts is said to be a Stumbling-stone, and Rock of
Offense: And another of the same Prophet; Behold, I lay in Zion for a
Foundation a Stone, a tried Stone, 28 Isai. 16.
a precious Cornerstone, a sure Foundation: he that believes shall not make
haste; which both St. Paul and St. Peter render with the Septuagint shall not
be ashamed. Now from hence we learn, that the Prophet speaks of the same Stone,
that the Stumbling-stone and Rock of Offense, is the Foundation stone, the
precious Cornerstone: and therefore the Lord of Hosts, who is the
Stumbling-stone, is the precious Cornerstone also: And St. Paul and St. Peter
tells us, that Christ is the Stumbling-stone, and that precious Cornerstone,
of which the Prophets speaks, that is, that Christ is the Lord of Hosts. To
whom (to Christ) coming as unto a living Stone, disallowed indeed of Men, 1
Pet. 2.4, 5, 6.
but chosen of God and precious, ye also as lively Stones are built up a
spiritual House -- wherefore also it is contained in Scripture, Behold, I lay
in Sion a chief Cornerstone, elect, precious, and he that believes on him
shall not be confounded, or ashamed.

All that our Historian says to this, is, That neither St. Paul, Page 56.
nor St. Peter cite the words of the Prophet as spoken of Christ, but only as
in some sense applicable to him, namely as Christ was to many a stone of
stumbling; which is nothing else but to outface the World with downright
Impudence; and to charge the Apostles with abusing Scripture, and producing
Proofs, which are no Proofs. St. Paul alleadges this Prophecy to prove, that
the Infidelity of the Jews, and that Offense they should take at Christ, was
foretold in Scripture; which answers that Objection against his being the
Messiah, that the great Body of Israel, to whom the Messiah was peculiarly
promised, should reject him when he came; which had it not been foretold, had
been a very unanswerable prejudice; and yet if Christ be not the Prophets
stumbling Stone, this Prophecy does not foretell it. St. Peter urges this
Prophecy to prove, that Christ is the Foundation, Corner Stone, Elect, and
Precious, on which the Church was to be built; but he abuses us also with a
sham Proof, if this Prophecy were not meant of Christ. And thus these men,
rather than they will allow the Scripture proofs, that Christ is God, destroy
all the Old Testament proofs of the Truth of Christianity; and I am afraid they
are able to give us no good proofs of Christianity without them; and yet if
such Texts as these must pass only for Accommodations and Allusions, I know not
where they will find any proofs. St. John curiously observes the several
Circumstances of our Savior's Death, and shows that they were the
Accomplishment of ancient Prophesies; and among others, that of piercing his
side with the Soldier's Spear, which was foretold by the Prophet Zechary, 12
Zech. 10.
They shall look on me, whom they have pierced, which is confessed to be spoken
of God; and here he tells us again, That the words in the Prophet are not by
St. John interpreted of Christ, 19 John 37.
but accommodated to Christ and his Sufferings. And thus, as fast as he can,
Page 65.
one after another, he accommodates away all the proofs of Christianity: for we
may as well prove the Gospel out of Homer, by accommodating Homer's Words and
Phrases to it, and turning it into an Homerical Poem, as we know has been done,
as prove it by accommodating the Phrases and Language of the Old Testament to
it, which were never intended to signify any such thing; this I think is to
ridicule and profane both the Old and New Testament, and to overthrow the
Authority of both.

But I am quite tired with this Work, and therefore shall pass over his other
Old Testament Proofs; for what can we say to convince these men, that such Old
Testament Texts speak of Christ, who will not believe the Apostles themselves?
And to conclude this, I shall only give you a Specimen, how they deal with the
New Testament also, in two or three Instances.

I shall begin with the Form of Baptism; 28 Matthew. 19.
Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. All the Fathers have made this
an Argument, that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are One God, because we are
baptized in their Name, and we must not be baptized in the Name of any
Creature; for to be baptized in their Name, signifies to be devoted and
consecrated by a Sacred and Religious Rite to the Faith, Worship, and Obedience
of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and it is Idolatry to join Creatures with God
in so solemn an Act of Religion; in the same Act whereby we give up our selves
to God, to give up our selves to Creatures, in the same Form of words, without
making any other difference between them, but the Order of Persons.

And it is to no purpose to dispute, What is meant by baptizing in the Name,
for whatever that be, it signifies the very same to be baptized in the Name of
the Father, and to be baptized in the Name of the Son, and in the Name of the
Holy Ghost; our Savior makes no distinction, and we must make none; and if
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost be not One God, this Form of Baptism destroys the
distinction between God and Creatures, and devotes us as entirely to Creatures
as to God.

We must consider Baptism, as the Sacrament of our Initiation into the
Christian Religion, and our Admission into the Gospel Covenant, and therefore
the Persons in whose Name we are baptized is that God, who receives us into
Covenant, and to whose Worship and Obedience we consecrate our selves. Our
Historian says, Page ^7.
That to be baptized in the Name of a Person or Persons, is a Rite by which one
delivers himself to the Institution, Instruction, and Obedience of such Person
or Persons: so that to be baptized in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, is to profess to be led or guided by them, or (as Grotius expresses this
matter) it is to declare we will admit of no other thing, as a part of our
Religion, but what proceeds from these, that is, nothing but what is commanded
by God or the Father, and has been delivered by his Son, the Lord Christ, and
confirmed externally by Miracles, and internally with the Witness and Testimony
of the Spirit, that is by the Power and Inspiration of God.

This is a very false Account of Grotius, and therefore I shall consider it, as
his own. Now I readily grant, that Baptism does include our Profession of
believing the Gospel, and making that the sole Rule of our Faith and Worship;
those who are baptized do own, as Grotius speaks, tres dogmatis sui Auctores,
Three Authors of their Doctrine or Religion, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; but
then Baptism being a Religious Rite, it is a Religious Profession of this, a
Religious devoting our selves to them, and therefore we give up our selves to
their Institution and Guidance, not as to Creatures, but as to God, who is both
the Author, and the Object of our Faith and Worship. No man must religiously
consecrate himself to a Creature, for that is Idolatry: even among the Pagans,
their Mysteries terminated on their Gods, and they were initiated by them into
the Worship of that God, whose Mysteries they were; and it was never known yet,
that men devoted themselves to the Institution and Guidance of any Human
Doctors or Masters by Religious Ceremonies.

Now if Baptism be a Religious Rite, God and Creatures can never be made the
joint Object of Religion, and therefore the Son and the Holy Ghost, must be One
God with the Father. I desire to know what is meant by being baptized in the
Name of the Father? Is it only to take him for our Instructor and Guide? Or is
it to worship and obey him for our God? And why then do not the same words in
the same Religious Act signify the same thing, when applied to the Son and
Holy Ghost, as they do, when applied to the Father? Let them show me any one
Instance in Scripture, where a Creature is joined with God in any Act of
Worship, much less in the Fundamental Contract of Worship (if I may so speak)
wherein we devote and consecrate our selves to God.

Our Author with his usual Assurance adds; It Is in vain, not to say
ridiculously pretended, that a Person or Thing is God, because we are baptized
into it, or in the Name of it; for then Moses and John Baptist also would be
Gods: Our Fathers were -- all baptized unto Moses: unto what then were you
baptized? 1 Cor. 10.1, 2.
and they said unto John 's Baptism. 19 Acts 3.
That is (says the generality of Interpreters) unto John, and the Doctrine by
him delivered.

But in the first place he mis-represents the Argument, which is, That the Son,
and Holy Ghost are God, because we are baptized in their Name, as we are in the
Name of the Father; and together with him; in the Name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; and I confess, he had answered this Argument,
could he have shown us, that the Jews were baptized in the Name of God, and in
the Name of Moses, for that had joined Moses with God, as our Savior joins the
Son and the Holy Ghost with the Father in the Form of Baptism.

But he is so far from doing this, that in the next place I observe, that the
Jews never were literally baptized in the Name of Moses, or in the Name of
John, as Christians are by our Savior's Institution in the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Moses did not Baptize the Jews at all,
much less in his own Name, though St. Paul observes, that they had a kind of
Mystical Baptism under Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea.

And therefore it is plain, that to baptize into Moses is a figurative and
allusive Expression, and does not, and cannot signify, that they were baptized
in the Name of Moses, because it is not true; for though we should grant, 6
Romans 3.3 Gal. 27.
as he argues, that to be baptized into Christ, and baptized in the Name of
Christ, signifies the same thing, when men are literally baptized in the Name
of Christ, yet it is a demonstration, that to be baptized into Moses, and
baptized in the Name of Moses, cannot signify the same thing; because those
who were mystically baptized into Moses, never were baptized in the Name of
Moses; and it is burlesquing Scripture to make any Phrase and Expression
signify that which never was. I will only ask this Author, Whether the Jews
were baptized in the Name of Moses? If they were not, let him tell me, how
their being baptized into Moses comes to signify their being baptized in the
Name of Moses? Could the Apostle mean by this Phrase, that they were baptized
in the Name of Moses? that is, could the Apostle mean, what he knew was not
true?

And yet I deny, that to be baptized into Christ, and baptized in the Name of
Christ, signify the same thing; for to be baptized into Jesus Christ, does not
relate to the Form of administering Baptism in the Name of Christ, but to the
effect of it, in uniting us to Christ, and incorporating us with him, as
Members of his Body, 6 Romans 3, 4.
which induces an Obligation of a Spiritual Conformity to his Death, in dying
to Sin, and living to God. And thus the Israelites were baptized into Moses, or
into the Mosaical Covenant, not by being baptized in the Name of Moses, but by
mystical Sacraments; the Cloud, which over-shadowed and guided them, and the
Red Sea, which divided and gave them safe Passage, but drowned the Egyptians,
being Types and Figures of the Christian Baptism; but I shall not spend time in
explaining this now; it is enough to show, that it is nothing to our present
Argument.

Thus it is evident, that to be baptized into John 's baptism, does not
signify to be baptized in the Name of John, for John did not baptize in his
own Name, but made Proselytes to the Messiah, as the Apostle adds; John verily
baptized with the baptism of Repentance, saying unto the People, 19 Acts 4.
that they should believe on him, who should come after him, that is, on Christ
Jesus. Are not these now admirable Proofs, that we may be baptized in the Name
of Creatures, because the Israelites were mystically baptized into Moses, who
never literally baptized any, much less in his own Name; and that the Disciples
of John were baptized into John's Baptism, that is into John, and that is, in
the Name of John, which we know he never did. And yet the Socinians, who deny
the personality of the Holy Ghost, make this Form of Baptism infinitely more
absurd still: The Holy Ghost, they say, is not a Person, but the Power and
Inspiration of God. Now is it not very absurd, that the Power and Inspiration
of God, which is not a Person, should be joined in the same Form with Father
and Son, who are Persons? Is not this like swearing Allegiance to the King, and
to his Son, and to his Power, or to his Wisdom? The Holy Spirit is plainly
distinguished from the Father, and from the Son; and it seems, has a distinct
Name of its own, into which we are baptized; now if the Holy Spirit be not a
Person, I desire to know, how the Power and Inspiration of God is so distinct
from the Father, as to justify our being distinctly baptized in the Name of
the Father, and in the Name of the Holy Spirit, or of his Power or Inspiration:
To be baptized into the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, is sufficient to convince any man, who is not resolved against being
convinct, that the Holy Ghost is a Person, as Father and Son are Persons;
otherwise it were very absurd to join the Holy Ghost with Father and Son, in
such a Religious Dedication as Baptism is.

In the next place let us consider the first Chapter of St. John's Gospel,
which gives a glorious Testimony to the Divinity of Christ; and a plain
demonstration of the incurable perverseness of Heretics. 1 John 1, 2.
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God, the same was in the beginning with God. Our Historian tells us, The
Trinitarian Exposition of this Chapter is absurd and contradictory. It Is this;
In the beginning; Page 80.
i. e. from all Eternity. Answ. From all Eternity, is before the beginning, or
without beginning, not in the beginning. Reply. This is false. No man expounds
in the beginning of Eternity: but when St. John tells us, In the Beginning was
the Word, we say this proves the Eternity of the Word: for that which was, when
all things began, which had a beginning, was it self before the beginning, and
without beginning: especially when it was so in the beginning, that it gave
beginning to every thing else; that all things were made by him, and without
him was not any thing made, that was made.

Was the Word; i. e. was God the Son. Answ. But where in Scripture is the Word
called God the Son? Reply. This Word indeed is God the Son, but we do not
Paraphrase it so in this place, In the beginning was God the Son; but in the
beginning was that Divine Person; who is called the Word.

The Word was with God; i. e. The Son was with the Father. Answ. It seems then
that God in this Clause is the Father. But was not the Son also with the Holy
Ghost, and is not he too (according to the Trinitarians) God, or a God? If he
is, why does St. John only say, The Son was with the Father; and how comes the
Father to engross here the Title of God to the Exclusion of the Holy Ghost?

Rep. This is true also; the God with whom the Word was, is the Father, but
that is not his Character here neither, no more than the Character of the Word
is the Son. But by God, the Apostle here means that Original mind and Wisdom,
that Supreme and Sovereign Being, whom all men called God, without making a
distinction of Persons in the Godhead.

And therefore, whereas he thinks, that he has got the Trinitarians at an
Advantage, when the Apostle adds, and the Word was God, his triumph is vain.
What (says he) shall we do here? was the Word the Father? for so they
interpreted God in the foregoing Clause. No! no! neither so, nor so. The Word
was God, signifies the Word was a Divine Person in the Godhead: and the Verse
is very plain; In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God,
intimately and inseparably united to him, and that not as a Faculty or Power,
as Reason is in Human Minds, but as a Divine subsisting Person, for the Word
was God.

God is the Name of a Being absolutely Perfect, and the Light of Nature teaches
us, that there is but One such Supreme Being, or but One God; but Nature does
not teach us, that there are Three Divine Persons, who are this One God; though
when Revelation has discovered this Mystery, natural Reason is able in some
measure to understand it, and see the necessity of it, as I have already shown;
and if there be Three Divine Persons in the Godhead, Reason will tell us, that
each Person is God, though all Three Persons are but One God: This is the
Trinitarian Hypothesis, and if the words of the Evangelist do easily and
naturally agree with this Hypothesis, and cannot reasonably signify any thing
else; that is a sufficient Argument to me, that this is the true Interpretation
of the Text:

In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God. That is,

In the beginning of all things was the Divine Person, whose Name and Character
is The Word, this Word was inseparably united to that Supreme Being, whom we
call God, and was himself God, a Divine Person subsisting in the Unity of the
Godhead; not a Power and Faculty, as Reason is in Man. Can any thing be more
easy and obvious, and more agreeable to the Doctrine of the Trinity? Or if you
change the Subject and the Praedicate, as others will have it, and read, God
was the Word, (...), it makes no difference at all; for this Supreme Being,
whom we call God, was, and is the Word, though not Only the Word: for God is
the Father, and God is the Son, and God is the Holy Ghost, though God is not
only the Father, nor only the Son, nor only the Holy Ghost; but the Supreme God
is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Now when the Evangelist had said, That the Word was God, or God was the Word,
there was great reason to repeat, the same was in the beginning with God, which
our Historian thinks a mere Tautology: Page 82.
for the intention of it is plain, to inculcate more expressly on us, that
though the Word be God, yet the Word is not all that God is, as Grotius well
observes; for the Word was with God, and therefore a distinct Person from some
other Person, who is called God, that is, that Eternal and Original Mind and
Wisdom, who is the Father of the Word: And why the Name of God should
peculiarly be appropriated to the Father, as the Fountain of the Deity, I have
often observed.

But yet the Evangelist does in this Verse say something more than he said
before, and therefore this is no Tautology: He had said, That the Word was in
the beginning, that it was with God, that it was God: now he adds, The same
Word was in the beginning with God; that is, was always with him, never
separated from him: and this is added for the sake of what follows, That the
Word was so with God in the beginning, that God made the World by his Word: For
all things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made, which was
made; which is another very mysterious Repetition, which nothing can give so
plain an Account of as our Hypothesis. All things were made by him; this is
full enough, without the following addition, nay indeed signifies more, than
what follows, in strictness and propriety of Speech, seems to do: for that
nothing was made without him, of it self does not signify, that he made all
things, but that he had something to do in it; as he may have, who is not the
principal Actor. But our Doctrine gives a plain account of this Addition: when
the Evangelist had said, That this Word, who was with God in the beginning,
made all things, there was an obvious Objection: viz. then it seems, that God
with whom the Word was, did not make the World; if all things were made by the
Word: to have attributed the Creation of the World to the Word, so as to have
excluded God from making the World, had been very absurd, and contrary to the
sense of Mankind; God made the World by his Word; the Word made all things, not
so as to Exclude God from making the World; and God made all things, but not so
as to exclude the Word; for without him was not any thing made, that was made:
which is exactly what we teach, that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as they are
One God, so they are One Creator, who made the World by One individual Act and
Operation. God the Father made the World, and the Creation of all things may
eminently be attributed to him, as the Fountain of the Deity, and of all Energy
and Power; but he did not make the World without his Word and Spirit: All
things were made by the Word, and without him was not any thing made, that was
made.

This Account is very far from containing any thing absurd or contradictious;
but to have as little dispute as may be with this Author, let us take it in
that sense he would have us take it in; instead of Word put the Son, and
instead of God put God the Father, and I can find none of the Contradictions he
talks of: for then the words run thus; In the beginning of all things was the
Word the Son of God, and this Son of God was inseparably united to God the
Father, and the Son was One God with the Father; this same Son was in the
beginning with the Father; for the Father made all things by him, and without
him was not any thing made, that was made.

But let us consider what Account our Socinian Historian gives of this Chapter:
He appeals to Grotius's Interpretation of it, but has misrepresented Grotius;
that did an Action of Forgery lie in these Cases, many men have lost their Ears
for less matters. The Account he gives of it in short is this: Briefly, the
Word (according to Grotius) is not an Eternal Son of God, but is here the Power
and Wisdom of God; Page 88.
which Word abiding without measure on the Lord Christ, -- it is therefore
spoken of as a Person, and as one Person with Christ, and he with that. Whoever
will be at the pains to consult Grotius, will soon see, what credit is to be
given to this Socinian; but it is no wonder, that those Men pervert Human
Writings, who having nothing else to value themselves upon but perverting the
Scriptures. But what Agreement there is between this Socinian and Grotius, I
shall show in some few particulars, by comparing their Expositions with each
other; by comparing Grotius, as he is represented by this Historian, with
Grotius himself.

Brief History:
1 John 1.
In the beginning] That is, when God created the Heavens and the Earth. Was the
Word] The Hebrews call, that Power and Wisdom of God, by which he made the
World, and does all other his extraordinary works, the Word, 33 Psalm. 6. 11
Hebr. 2. 2 Pet. 3.5. They borrowed this Expression from Moses; God said let
their be light, 1 Genesis 3. -- undoubtedly Moses is not to be understood of a
Word orally spoken; for God is a Spirit; but his meaning is, God put forth his
Power and Wisdom, and thereby created Light and the Firmament, etc. This is a
direct opposition to Grotius, whom he pretends to follow, and his Reason is as
silly, as his Authority is counterfeit: for why could not an infinite Mind,
beget a substantial Word, the substantial Image of his own Power and Wisdom;
and by this Word make the World? and why may not this be represented by his
saying, Let there be Light? for since he confesses, this was not an oral word,
why should it be represented by speaking, or saying, if God have not an
eternal, substantial Word, by which he made the World? there must be some
foundation for such forms of speech, and since it is evident, God did not
create all things by an oral Word or Command, there is no pretense for this
expression, God said, Let there be Light, unless there be a Divine Person, who
is the Word and Wisdom of God, by whom he made the world; especially since this
Phrase of Moses is thus expounded both in the Old and New Testament, that God
made the world by his Word, which is every where represented as a Divine
subsisting Person. The Word was with God] i. e. It was not yet in the World, or
not yet made Flesh; but with God. So that to be with God signifies nothing but
not to be in the world. The Word was God] i. e. The Word (or Divine Wisdom and
Power,) (that is, not a substantial personal Wisdom and Power, but such a
Faculty, as Reason and Wisdom is in man) is not something different from God,
but being his Wisdom and Power is God (as the wisdom of man is man) it is the
common maxim of Divines, that the Attributes and Properties of God are God:
which is in some sense true. The meaning of that Maxim is, that there are no
Powers or Faculties in God, as there are in created Minds, but God is a pure
and simple Act, and therefore what are and must be distinct Powers and
Faculties in created Minds, must be distinct Persons in the Godhead. And thus
whatever is in God is God, as each Divine Person is. But if there be distinct
Powers and Faculties in God, as there are in men, then the Wisdom of God is not
God, nor the Power of God, God; no more than the Understanding is the Man, or
the Will the Man, or the Memory the Man. He adds, That those Persons (whether
Angels or Men) to whom the Divine Word has been in an extraordinary
degreeCommunicated, have also had the Names of Jehovah and God communicated to
them. Verse. 2. The same was in the beginning with God] This is here repeated by
the Evangelist to teach us that the Word is so God, that it is not all, that
God is; there being other Properties and Attributes communicable, as well as
the Word. So that the Word is but an Attribute of God, and a communicable
Attribute, and but one of God's communicable Attributes. So that there may be
many Words, for the Word, as he just now said, may be communicated to Angels
and Men, in such a degree that the Name Jehovah may belong to them; and then
why does St. John call the Word the (...), or the only begotten of the Father.
Grotius.
So also Grotius. But adds was; jam tum erat, was when all things began; and
shows, that among the Hebrews, this was a popular Description of Eternity to be
before the World, 17 John 5. And to this purpose Applies the words of Justin
Martyr concerning the word (...), he was before the Worlds. The Word] He owns,
it is called the Word in allusion to what Moses says, That God said let there
be Light. But he calls this Word, vim, (...) (...), Power, Efflux, Emanation,
in the same sense as the ancient Christians used them, to signify a
Substantial Word, Power, Emanation. In this sense he shows, that it is used in
the ancient Books of the Chaldoeans, and by the Writer of the Orphicks; by
Heraclitus and Zeno, as Tertullian and Lactantius affirm. Nay, that the
Stoics, and Platonists, and especially Philo Iudaeus uses it in the same
sense; who attributes the making of the World to the Word, which he calls the
Name, the Image, the Son of God. To which purpose he before cited Rabbi
Eliezel, that God, and his Name, were before the World was made: and explains
this by the sayings of some Fathers, as all meaning the same thing, and we
know, they meant by it a Divine Person. The Worcester d was with God] Grotius does
say, that this is opposed to the Words being made Flesh, and appearing in the
world: but he was far enough from thinking, that these words have only a
negative sense, that to be with God, signifies only not to be in the world: for
he tells us, what the positive sense is, that with God is (...), with the
Father (the very sense which our Historian before rejected as absurd) and
explains it by what Wisdom says, 8 Prove. 30. Then I was by him, as one brought
up with him, and I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him; which he
does not think a Prosopopoea, but spoken of a subsisting Person. The Word was
God] Here Grotius produces numerous Testimonies to prove that that Divine
Person, who is called the Word, not the Faculty of Wisdom and Power in God, is
God. He says indeed, that the ancient Hebrews, and Primitive Christians teach,
that when an Angel is in Scripture called Jehovah, it is not a mere Angel, sed
cui adfuerit (...), such an Angel, to whom the Word is joined or united, (not
as the Historian says to whom the Divine Wisdom has been in an extraordinary
degree communicated; that is an extraordinary wise Angel, for there is no other
sense in it) but I know not what Grotius meant by the Union or Presence of the
Word with the Angel; but I know the Primitive Christians asserted, That the
Angel called Jehovah, was the Word. Grotius assigns this Reason of the
Repetition, that because the Evangelist had called the Word God, he would have
us understand, that he is so God, that he is also with God; that is, that the
Word is not all that God is, but only One Person in the Godhead: which he
observes that Origin, and others after him, called the Distinction of
Hipostasis, though the Primitive Christians, and Athanasius himself, used that
word Hipostases in a different sense; and the Christians seemed to take up this
sense of it from the Platonists: But whatever becomes of the Phrase, this is
plainly what Grotius meant by the Word's not being all, that is God, that is,
that he is but One Person in the Godhead, not that he is but One communicable
Attribute in God.
This is sufficient to show how our Historian has abused this Great Man, when
he represents him, as making the Word only the Divine Wisdom and Power, not a
Divine Person; and all his other mis-representations depend on this, and need
not be particularly examined.

But I perceive our Socinian Historian is ashamed of that Exposition which
Socinus, and his genuine Disciples, give of this Chapter, which had been a sign
of some Understanding and Modesty, had he not invented as foolish and senseless
an Interpretation himself, for it is not Grotius's, but his own.

Socinus was sensible that the Word must signify a Person, but would allow it
to be no more than a Man, called the Word, not with respect to his Nature, but
Office, as the greatest and most excellent Prophet, who reveals God's will to
the world. Our Historian was convinced, that the Word must be something Divine,
which was with God from the beginning of the world, and was not different from
God, but is God, and did create all things at first, and was in a sense
Incarnate; was made Flesh, did abide on, and inhabit an human Person, the
Person of Jesus: So far is very well. But then he will not allow the Word to be
a Person, but a Divine Quality or Accident, the Wisdom or Power of God; and the
fault of this is, that it is unintelligible Nonsense, to describe the Word so
pompously, as distinct from God, but with God in the beginning, and himself
God, and to ascribe the making of the world to him, and tell us, that he was
made Flesh; and all this while the world is only a communicable Attribute in
God, what we call the Faculty of Reason in Men: This is a new way of making a
God of a Prosopopoea, and incarnating a Prosopopoea, which must be a very
figurative God, and Incarnation. But I observed before, that when any Virtue or
Power or Faculty is spoken of as a Person, what is said of the Virtue or Power
belongs to the Person in whom that Virtue and Power is: and what that is said
to do, is done by the Person, or else it is not a figurative but a false and
absurd form of speech: As when Charity is said to suffer long, and is kind; the
meaning is, a charitable man is so; a Prosopopoea is easily understood, and
conveys its sense clearly and elegantly to our minds; but where there is
nothing but Nonsense at the bottom, it must not be made a figure, for a
figurative Speech is good sense: Let us then examine his Prosopopoea by this
Rule.

In the beginning was the Word, that is, the Wisdom and Power of God; and this
Wisdom and Power of God was with God, that is, God was with himself; and this
Wisdom and Power of God, was God, that is, God was God: what sense I beseech
you is there in this?

That the Wisdom and Power of God made the world, I grant is sense, because God
did make the world; but if there be any sense in the words being made Flesh, it
is certain, that God is Incarnate. For the Wisdom and Power of God, which is
with God, and is God, cannot be Incarnate, unless God be Incarnate. Unless we
can divide God from his Wisdom, and separate the Wisdom of God, [which was with
him from the beginning,] from God, to be Incarnate in Man. The Wisdom of God
can no more be Incarnate, unless God can be Incarnate, then the Wisdom of an
Angel can be Incarnate, without the Incarnation of the Angel: and thus this
Socinian is turned Sabellian, and Patropassian.

However, I confess, we are beholden to this Historian, for he has given up
this place to us, which is one of the most express places for the Divinity of
our Savior. He allows, that the beginning is the beginning of all things; that
Word signifies something Divine; even the Wisdom and Power of God; that to be
with God, is to be intimately present with him; that to be God, is to be God
himself: That all things were made by him, is meant of the first Creation of
the world; that this Divine Word was made Flesh, and did abide on the human
Person of Christ Jesus; the only difference between us is, whether this Word,
of whom all these things are said, be a Divine Person, or only the communicable
attribute of Wisdom and Power in God; and this after what I have said, I leave
to any man of common understanding to determine.

But what becomes of his beloved Socinus all this while? when the very
Masterpiece of his Wit and Invention is rejected by his own Disciples; for if
this Socinian be in the right, his Master was greatly in the wrong.

By the Word he understands a Person, but One who is the Word, not by Nature,
but Office: by the beginning he understands the beginning of John the Baptist's
Preaching; in this beginning the Word was; that is, Christ was in being, was in
the world, when John the Baptist began to preach; a great discovery! But he was
with God, known to God only at that time; which is very hardly true; and was
God, by Dignity and Office, not by Nature. All things were made by him, not
created; the world was not made by him; but all things are new made by him;
that is, all who believe in him, are made new Creatures; and after a great many
great things said of this Word, at last the Evangelist discovers this great
Mystery, the Word was made Flesh, that is, the Word was a Man.

If this be not ridiculing Scripture nothing is; I am sure it represents the
Evangelist very ridiculously, to tell the World, that Christ, who was half a
year younger than John, was in the world when John began to preach; but how
great a Person he was, and what his Office was, was then known only to God.
Which if it were true, is no great Mystery; and to say this in such a
mysterious pomp of words, as there is nothing like it in all the Scripture, is
such a vain affectation, as no School master, but an arrant Fop, would endure
in a Schoolboy.

I shall not go about industriously to confute that, which they themselves
begin to be ashamed of, but shall only lay down one rule of expounding
Scripture, and all other Writings, which is a very reasonable one, and will
easily answer all the Art and Fallacy which is used in this Cause; and that is
this, to expound all words and phrases to a proper and literal sense, and to
the utmost extent of their signification, where the Circumstances of the place
do not require a figurative and limited sense; if we do not allow this, there
is no certain rule of expounding, but men may interpret, according to their own
Fancies and Imaginations, to any sense that the word was ever used in; and then
we may make any thing of any thing, even a good Catholic of Socinus himself.

Now according to this Rule, in the beginning must signify the first beginning
of all things; for that is beginning in its utmost Latitude, and that is the
proper signification of beginning, when there is nothing to limit it, and there
is nothing here. Was the Word must signify the Word did subsist, and therefore
is a Person; God must signify God by Nature, which is the first and proper
signification of the Word, not a Metaphorical God by Dignity and Office, for
there is nothing to incline it to that sense: All things were made by him, and
without him was nothing made that was made, must signify the first Creation of
all things, when God made the world by his word; for that is the proper Notion
of making all things, to give being to them, and as there is nothing in the
Text to require any other sense, so its relation to in the beginning, when God
made all things by his word, determines it to this sense: This is all true and
certain, if it be a good Rule to expound words in a proper sense, when there is
nothing that requires an improper and metaphorical sense: And then it is
nothing to the purpose to show, that in the beginning sometimes signifies the
beginning of the Gospel, that God sometimes signifies a metaphorical God, that
making all things, sometimes signifies new making all things, for all this I
allow, when the Circumstances of the place require it, when there is any thing
added to determine these words to this sense, but will never allow it, where
there is not, and therefore cannot allow it here; and if we must expound these
words properly in this place, there is an end of this Controversy.

But I must hasten to a Conclusion, and therefore this shall serve at present
as a Specimen, how these men pervert Scripture, and impose forced and
ridiculous senses on it; and by the help of what I have now discoursed, it will
be easy to detect all their other Fallacies, and rescue the Scriptures from
their perverse Comments; as I shall be ready at any time to show, when I find a
just occasion for it.

Secondly, Socinianism, as reasonable and accountable a Doctrine as our
Historian says it is, makes the Jewish economy very unreasonable and
unaccountable. The Jewish Worship was External and Ritual, but very pompous and
mysterious, and had there not been something very Divine and Mysterious
praefigured by it, it had been no better than a Childish piece of Pageantry,
unworthy of the Wisdom of God, unworthy of the Nature of Man. But the New
Testament assures us, that all these mysterious Ceremonies were Types of
Christ, and were accomplished in him; in whom are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge; 2 Col. 3.
or in whom are all the hidden Treasures ((...)) of wisdom and knowledge; that
is, all those Treasures of wisdom and knowledge, which were formerly hid and
concealed under the Types of the Jewish Law; 17.
for they were but a shadow of things to come, but the Body is of Christ. And
yet if Christ were no more than a mere Man, the Antitype falls very short of
the Types; I shall instance at present only in the Temple, and its Worship and
Ministers.

The Tabernacle and Temple was God's House, where he chose to dwell by the
visible Symbols of his Presence; and was so contrived as to be a Figure both of
Heaven and Earth; for so the Apostle to the Hebrews expressly tells us, that the
Holy of Holies was a Figure of Heaven, into which the High Priest only entered,
and that but once a year, to make Expiation; and therefore the other Courts of
the Temple, which were for their daily worship, did represent the Earth, on
which men worship God: for God being the Maker and Sovereign Lord of the world,
who has Heaven for his Throne, and Earth for his Footstool, it was fitting the
House where he dwelt should be an Emblem and Figure of the whole world.

But we must all confess, that this was a very unaccountable and insignificant
Ceremony, for God, who fills Heaven and Earth with his Presence, to dwell in a
House made with hands; to appoint this the peculiar place of his worship,
ordinarily to accept no Sacrifices, but what were offered there, etc. Had it
not praefigured something more Divine and Mysterious, Solomon in his Prayer of
Dedication might well say, But will God indeed dwell on the Earth? 1 Kings 8,
27.
Behold the Heaven, and Heaven of Heavens cannot contain Thee, how much less
this House that I have built.

The Temple then was a Figure, and we must enquire what it was a Figure of. Now
a typical Presence can be a Figure of nothing, but a real Presence, and God's
Personal dwelling among Men: for Presence and Habitation can signify nothing
but Presence, and a Figure must be a Figure of something that is real: and
nothing can answer to a figurative visible Presence of God, but a personal
visible Presence.

Now our Savior calls his Body the Temple, Destroy this Temple, and in three
days I will raise it up: which St. John tells us, 2 John 19.21.
He spoke of the Temple of his Body. The Temple then, which was God's House,
where he dwelt, was but a Figure of Christ's Body; Christ's Body then was that
in truth and reality, which the Temple was but a Figure of; that is, God's
visible Presence on Earth. But God was not visibly present on Earth, unless he
were personally united to Human Nature; that the Body of Christ was the Body of
God, or of the Divine Word, by as true and real an Union, as any man's Body is
his. Thus God may be personally and visibly present among men, as a man, though
his Soul be as invisible as the Deity, is yet visibly present by his Union to a
visible Body: But if Christ be not God incarnate, if the Divine Word be not
personally united to Human Nature, the Body of Christ is but as figurative a
Temple, as the Temple at Jerusalem was, and then one Figure is made a Type of
another, which is as great an Absurdity in Types, as a Metaphor of a Metaphor
is in Speech.

God was as really present in the Temple, as he was in Christ without a
personal Union: for God fills all places, and is really present every where,
but yet was peculiarly present in the Temple to peculiar ends* and purposes; to
hear Prayers, to accept their Sacrifices and Oblations, to give forth his
Oracles and Responses; and if Christ be but a mere Man, he dwells no otherwise
in him, but by Inspiration; and though Christ was more perfectly inspired than
the Jewish Oracle, this does not alter the Nature of God's Presence, does not
make one a typical and figurative, the other a real Presence; for God is really
present in both, but not personally united to either.

The typical Presence of God in the Tabernacle and Temple is not opposed to a
real Presence, by real and sensible Effects, but to a visible Presence. God is
present every where, but he is invisibly present, but as he had chosen Israel
for his peculiar People and Inheritance, so he would dwell visibly among them;
but this could be done no other way, but either by taking a visible Body, or by
some instituted signs of his visible Presence; the first he would not do yet,
but intended to do in the fullness of time, which his own infinite wisdom had
appointed for it; and in the mean time did praefigure this visible appearance
of God on Earth in Human Nature by some visible Symbols of his Presence; by a
visible House, wherein he dwelt, by a visible Throne, or Mercy-Seat; and by
placing a visible Oracle among them: So that the Temple, as a Type, was a Type
and Figure of God's visible Appearance and dwelling upon Earth; and therefore
if it was a Type of Christ's Body, as Christ himself tells us it was, God did
visibly dwell in Christ by a Personal Union; for nothing else can make God
visible, but a Personal Union to a visible Nature.

To this St. John plainly alludes, when he tells us, The Word was made Flesh, 1
John 14.
and dwelt among us, and we beheld his Glory, the Glory as of the only begotten
of the Father, full of Grace and Truth; (...), Tabernacled among us, fulfilled
that Type of God's dwelling in the Tabernacle, and Temple at Jerusalem, by his
dwelling personally in Human Nature: and we beheld his Glory; Page 87.
that is, says our Historian, the glory of the man, on whom the Word did abide
and inhabit in him: But St. John says, it is the glory of the Word made Flesh;
the glory of the Word, as of the only begotten of the Father, did shine in
Human Nature; there were visible signs of the Glory of the Incarnate Word: This
glory he says, was beheld in his Miracles, and in his Transfiguration, and on
many other occasions: very many indeed; in his Life and Doctrine especially;
for how would they have the glory of the Incarnate Word seen, but by the
visible Operations of it in Human Nature? How does a Human Soul discover its
glory but by visible Actions?

Thus our Savior tells us, that he is greater than the Temple; I say unto you,
12 Matthew. 6.
in this place is one greater than the Temple: Now the Temple was God's House
and figurative Presence, and if he were greater than the Temple, God dwelt in a
more perfect manner in him: that is, he was not a symbolical visible Presence
of God, which was all he could be, had he been no more than a man, but a
visible God; even the Lord of the Temple, 3 Mal. 1.
as the Prophet Malachi assures us: Behold I will send my Messenger, and he
shall prepare the way before me; and the Lord whom ye seek, shall suddenly come
into his Temple: even the Messenger of the Covenant, whom ye delight in, behold
he shall come, says the Lord of Hosts. This Messenger, all men own, was John
the Baptist, 3 Matthew. 3.
The voice of one crying in the wilderness, prepare ye the way of the Lord,
make his paths straight. Now our Historian confesses, he prepared the way for
Christ: and God says, he shall prepare the way before Me, which proves that
Christ is this Lord of Hosts for whom John was to prepare the way; but that I
at present intend is, that he for whom John was to prepare the way, is the Lord
of the Temple, for it is called his Temple. Now we know, the Lord Jehovah was
the Lord of the Temple: for the Temple was God's House, dedicated to his Name
and Worship; he dwelt in his Temple before by Types and Figures, but now he was
to come visibly and personally into his Temple, and therefore he might well
say, he was greater than the Temple, since he was the Lord of it; that
Incarnate God, of whom God's dwelling in the Temple was a Figure: and which had
been a very empty and insignificant Figure, unworthy of the Wisdom and Majesty
of God, had it not praefigured the mysterious Incarnation of the Son of God.

Thus as God had a Typical House, so he had a typical High Priest, and typical
Sacrifices. That the High Priest, who once a year entered into the typical Holy
of Holies, was a Type of Christ, who entered into Heaven. The Apostle teaches
us, 9 Hebr. that the Jewish Sacrifices were typical of the Sacrifice of
Christ's Death; and the several kinds of them typical of the various Effects
and Virtues of Christ's Death, we learn every where in the New Testament;
which, 13 Rev. 8.
I believe, is the true meaning, of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the
world: not merely slain in God's Decree, for what God has decreed, shall be
done, is not therefore said to be done before it is done: but this Lamb was
slain in Types and Figures from the foundation of the world; ever since the
fall of Adam, in those early Sacrifices, which were offered after the Fall,
which were typical of the Sacrifice of Christ; for God had then promised, that
the Seed of the Woman should break the Serpents Head; and for my part, I must
profess, I know no Principle of Natural Reason, that teaches us to offer the
Blood of Beasts in Sacrifice to God; and therefore must think the Sacrifices of
Beasts to be an Institution.

Now that a Human Priesthood, and the Sacrifices of Beasts were not acceptable
to God in themselves, the Apostle to the Hebrews sufficiently proves; and I
would desire some of our Learned, Hebr. 8. and 10. chapter
Reasoning Socinians (as they think themselves) honestly to tell me, what
account they can give of this Jewish Priesthood, and Sacrifices, which is
becoming God: why should God be propitiated by a man, subject to the same sins
and infirmities, and very often guilty of them, that other men are? why
innocent Beasts must die to expiate the sins of men? when the Apostle tells us,
that it is not possible, 10 Hebr. 4.
that the Blood of Bulls and Goats should take away sin. And yet if there were
no more in it, then God's mere appointment and institution, I do not see, but
the Jewish Priesthood and Sacrifices might have been as effectual as any other:
I think, they are so far in the right, and consistent with their own
Principles, that as they own Christ to be no more than a Man, so they make him
only a metaphorical Priest, and his Death a metaphorical Sacrifice; for a mere
man can be no more than a metaphorical or typical Priest and Sacrifice: but
then the difficulty is, how Christ is the Antitype to the typical Priests, and
Sacrifices of the Law, if he be but a metaphorical Priest and Sacrifice
himself; for the Antitype ought to be that in truth and reality, which the Type
is a Figure of: and though they were typical, yet they were true and proper
Priests and Sacrifices, and made a true and proper Expiation for sin, as far as
they reached, and therefore one would think should typifie not a metaphorical,
but a true Priest and Sacrifice, though of a more excellent and perfect Nature.
This is easily accounted for, if we allow the Divine Word to be Incarnate, and
to be our Priest and Sacrifice, but without this the Jewish economy is a most
absurd and unaccountable Institution.

Thirdly, Socinianism ridicules the Christian Religion, that is, makes it a
very mean and contemptible Institution; which I shall show in a few words.

The Fundamental Mystery of the Christian Religion is the stupendous Love of
God in giving his own Son, his only begotten Son, for the Redemption of
Mankind. This our Savior lays great stress on; God so loved the World, 3 John
16.
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have everlasting life. By this one would have thought, that Christ
had been the Son, the only begotten Son of God, before he gave him: as Isaac,
who was a Type of Christ, was Abraham's Son, before he offered him at God's
Command: for that it is the Argument of Love, when we part with what we have,
and what is dear to us; but this is not the Case, if Socinianism be true; God
did not give us any Son he had before, but made an excellent Man, whom he was
pleased to call his only begotten Son, (though he might have made as many such
only begotten Sons as he pleased) and him he gave for us; that is, made a Man
on purpose to be our Savior. God's love indeed in redeeming sinners is very
great, be the means what they will; but his love in giving his only begotten
Son for our Redemption, which our Savior fixes on as the great demonstration
of God's love, is not so wonderful, if this giving his Son signifies no more
than making a Man on purpose to be our Savior.

In the next place, the Apostles mightily insist on the great love of Christ in
dying for us, and his great humility in submitting to the Condition of Human
Nature, and suffering a shameful and accursed Death, even the Death of the
Cross. Ye know the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 8.9.
that for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty might be rich:
For the love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one died
for all, then were all dead. 5.14.
Let this mind be in you, which was in Christ Jesus, who being in the form of
God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God, but made himself of no
reputation, 2 Phil. 5.6, 7, 8.
and took upon him the form of a Servant, and was made in the likeness of men,
and being found in fashion as a man, be humbled himself, and became obedient
unto death, even the death of the Cross. Now supposing Christ to be but a mere
man, who had no Being before he was born of the Virgin, who knew nothing of his
own coming into the World, nor for what end he came; whose undertaking was not
his own voluntary choice, but God's appointment; where is the great love, where
is the great humility of this? How did he become poor for our sakes, who was
never rich? Yes, says our Historian, he could have lived in the greatest
splendour, dignity, and plenty. Page 124.
He that could multiply the loaves and fishes, and the wine at the wedding of
Cana, need not have wanted any Comforts of life. Right! if he can prove that
God would have enabled him to work Miracles, to have made himself rich and
great, and to have ministered to Secular Pomp and Luxury, if he had so minded;
but he being a mere Creature, could work no Miracles, nor to any other ends or
purposes than God pleased; and therefore if by God's Decree he was to live a
mean life here, and dye an accursed death, and he was made for this purpose, he
neither ever was rich, nor ever could be rich, and therefore did not make
himself poor for our sakes. He could not by the Constitution of God have done
otherwise than he did, if he would be the Savior of Mankind, and therefore if
he was not rich before he came into the World, and voluntarily chose his
Poverty for us, I do not understand the great Grace of his becoming poor, for
he never was rich, nor ever could be in this World.

Thus what is that humility our Apostle so highly commends in our Savior: for
suppose his being in the form of God, signifies no more than being made like to
God, Page 128.
(as our Historian will have it) by a communication of power over Diseases,
Devils, the Grave, the Winds, the Seas, etc. which dwindles the form of God
into just nothing; for according to them he had no inherent Power to do this,
but God did it at his word, as he did for other Prophets; and therefore this is
no form, no likeness of God at all, for he did not work Miracles, as God does,
by an inherent Power, but God wrought Miracles for him; yet suppose this, how
is it an Argument of his humility, that he committed not robbery by equalling
himself to God, (as he renders the words, which our Translators render, and
which the ancient Fathers expound to the same sense, he thought it not robbery
to be equal to God) that is, says he, did not rob God of his honor, by
arrogating to himself to be God, or equal to God; though if this were robbery,
both Christ and his Apostles were guilty of it, for Christ declared, I and my
Father are One, which the Jews understood (and they did not mistake him in it)
was to make himself God; and the Apostles do this frequently in express terms,
as I have already shown: but to allow his Interpretation, I only ask, whether
Christ, if he would, could have committed this Robbery? whether upon their
supposition of his being a mere Man, if he had arrogated to himself to be God,
God would have permitted this? and suffered him to have wrought Miracles, to
cheat the world into this belief? if he could not, it is ridiculous to talk of
his humility in not doing it; and I am sure it is ridiculous upon their
Hypothesis, to say, that he could.

But he took upon him the form of a Servant; i. e. became like a Servant,
possessing nothing of his own, and suffering injuries and reproaches, etc. But
how did he take this form upon him, [which must signify his own free and
voluntary choice,] when he did not take it, but was made so? This was the
Condition, which he did not choose, but was made for: and what humility was
this, for a mere Man, to be a Minister and Servant of God, and so great a
Minister, as to be in the form of God, as he says, to be glorious for Miracles,
and admired as the great power of God, especially when he was to be exalted
into Heaven for it, and advanced above all Principalites and Powers? This is
such Humility, as would have been Pride and Ambition in the most glorious Angel.

But he was made in the likeness of men, and being found in fashion as a man,
humbled himself, etc. that is, says this Historian, being made like other men,
in the common similitude of man (and I pray, how should a man be made, but like
a man) he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death; i. e.
notwithstanding that he could have delivered himself from them, yet was he
obedient even to evil Magistrates, and without resistance under-went that
death, which their wickedness and malice prepared for him; 4 Acts 28.
or rather, which God had decred for him; which his hand and counsel determined
before to be done: and therefore which he could not, which he ought not to
avoid.

The plain Case is this: All the Circumstances of our Savior's Birth, and
Life, and Death, were so punctually foretold by the Prophets, and so
peremtorily decreed by God, that after he was come into the world, there was no
place for his choice and election; he could not show either his love or his
humility in choosing Poverty or Death, and therefore if it were matter of his
free choice, and a demonstration of his great Humility and Love, as the
Apostles says it was, he chose it before he came into the world: He was in the
form of God, equal to God, rich, before, and chose to become Man, a Minister, a
Servant, and to submit to a mean Life, and an infamous Death for our sakes, and
this indeed was a mighty Love and stupendous Humility in the Son of God: This
we can all understand; it is a venerable Mystery, and a powerful Argument of
our Religion; but Socinianism makes Nonsense of it.

The Faith and Worship of Christ is the distinguishing Character of the
Christian Religion, and if Christ be no more than a Man, as the Socinians
teach, it is a direct Contradiction, both to Natural and to the Mosaical
Religion, which condemn the worship of any Creature, and all Religious Trust
and Affiance in them. It is a Religion without a Priest, and without a
Sacrifice, or which is much the same, retains the Name of a Priest and a
Sacrifice, without any proper Atonement or Expiation; which is a very unfit
Religion for sinners: But that which is most to my present purpose is, that it
makes a God of a mere Creature, and makes a Mediator and King without any
inherent Power, to save Sinners, to protect his Church, to govern or to judge
the World, which is a mere Pageant and Shadow of a King.

To make a Mediator or Mediatory King, who shall be a fit Object of Religious
Hope and Trust and Worship (as I have already explained it at large) he must
have a Personal Knowledge of all our particular Wants, and an Inherent Power to
help us; and though his Humane Nature is confined to Heaven, his Knowledge and
Power must extend to all the world; as he himself tells us after his
Resurrection, All Power is given unto me, both in Heaven and in Earth:
particularly, he must have Power to protect his Church on Earth from all her
Enemies, to restrain and govern the malice of Men and Devils, to forgive sins,
to give the fresh Supplies of Grace, to raise the Dead, to judge the World, to
condemn bad men to Hell, and to bestow Heaven upon his sincere Disciples.

Let us then consider, what account our Socinian Historian gives of this
matter, and what a kind of Mediator and King he makes of Christ. Sometimes to
abuse the World, he tells us, Page 108.
the Socinians generally not only grant, but earnestly contend, that Christ is
to be worshipped and prayed to; because God has (they say) by his inhabiting
Word or Power given to the Lord Christ, a faculty of knowing all things, and an
ability to relieve all our wants. Now if they mean honestly, that Christ has an
inherent Personal Knowledge and Power, whereby he knows, and can do all things,
this is to ascribe true Divine Perfections to him, for such are infinite
Knowledge, and infinite Power; and that is to make him a true and real God; and
I think, there is not greater Nonsense in the World, than a Made-God, than a
Creature-God, as I showed before: But it is plain our Historian is none of
these Socinians, for all his Expositions lean another way, and in the same
place he disputes earnestly against praying to Christ, and says, that those
Gentlemen (he must mean the Socinian Gentlemen, who are for praying to Christ,
Page 11.1
especially the Polonian Zealots) say, that Christ's Mediation and Intercession
for us, is not to be understood of a Verbal or Personal Mediation, proceeding
from a particular Knowledge of our Wants and Prayers (and thus we have already
lost this Faculty in Christ of knowing all things) but he Mediates by his
Merits; that is (not by his Expiation and Sacrifice, but) by the perfect
Obedience and most acceptable Services, that he has performed to God. So that
these Socinians are all of a mind as to this matter, that whatever they seem to
talk of Christ's Faculty of knowing all things, and Ability to relieve all our
Wants, his Knowledge is only by Inspiration, as the Knowledge of other Prophets
is, not an abiding, inherent Faculty; and does not extend to all things, not to
the present and particular Wants and Necessities of his Church, much less of
every particular Christian, nay, not to the prayers that are made to him; and
then I confess, I see no reason to pray to him; and his Ability to help is not
an inherent Power to do those things for us, which we need, and which we pray
for, but only to intercede for us with God, and that not particularly neither,
but only in general, for he does not always know our particular Wants.
Christian Ears know not how to bear such talk as this, which makes a Mediator
and Mediatory Kingdom an empty insignificant Name and Title, without any other
Power but Prayers: And that this is the Mind and Belief of our Historian, I
shall now briefly show, and will leave all Men to judge, whether this be not to
ridicule the Scriptures and Christianity together.

1. First then let us consider, what the Knowledge of our Savior is: and two
or three places will suffice for this purpose, for they are very full and
express. St. John tells of Christ, 2 John 25.^
He knew what was in man. To which he answers, Page 90.
The Knowledge which the Lord Christ had, or now in his state of Exaltation
has, of the secrets of men's hearts, is the pure gift of God, and revelation
from God, and the Divine Word abiding on him: that is, Divine Inspiration, for
he means no more by the Divine Word abiding on him: this is a plain abuse of
the Text, and the Reason of it, He knew what was in Man, is the Reason
assigned, why he needed no External Information or Testimony of Man, needed not
that any one should testify of man, for (...), he himself knew what was in
man, and knew all men; which, according to the propriety of words, signifies an
inherent Personal Knowledge, in opposition to any External Manifestation, and
therefore to Revelation it self: for he always knew all men, which cannot be
done by Revelation, which is particular and occasional. But this is not our
Dispute at present, but only to show, what this Socinian thinks of it.

The same he tells us with reference to the last Judgment, when Christ shall
judge the secrets of men, 2 Romans 16. 1 Cor. 4.5. Page 119.
the knowledge Christ has, or at the last Judgment shall have of the secrets
of hearts, is purely by Revelation from God, and the Divine Word communicated
to him. This he repeats again in answer to what Christ says in the
Revelations, 2 Rev. 23. Page 154.
I am he which searches the reins and heart. The knowledge which the Lord
Christ had, or has, of any ones secret thoughts, is a Revelation made to him
by God, as it was also sometimes to former Prophets, -- Prophets search the
heart, (which was never said of any Prophet, for to search the heart is to look
into the heart, and see the secrets there, not to know them by Revelation) that
is, know the thoughts and propensions of the heart, by the Spirit or
Inspiration of God in them. But the Lord Christ has a far greater measure of
that Spirit, than any of the former Prophets ever had: that is, God reveals
more to Christ, than ever he did to any former Prophets, but it is only
Revelation still, not an inherent Knowledge. In all these places to prove that
Christ's knowing what is in man, judging the secrets of men, searching the
reins and heart, can signify no more, then that Christ has this Knowledge by
Inspiration, he proves from the first words of St. John's Revelations; 1 Rev. 1.
The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to him, to show unto his
Servants things which must shortly come to pass. Which does not signify, that
this was a Revelation made to Christ, but that Revelation which Christ made;
for though God is said to give it to him, it is to show unto his Servants, that
is, by the appointment of God Christ showed this Revelation to John. Thus when
St. John saw a Lamb, 5 Rev. 6. Page 156.
having seven horns, and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God, sent
forth into all the Earth: he says, This Text confirms what has been often said,
namely, that the Knowledge which our Lord Christ now has of Affairs on Earth,
is (partly) by means of those ministering Spirits which are sent forth into all
the Earth, as his eyes, to see and relate the state of things: for what other
reason can they be here called his eyes. I shall ^ot now dispute, what the
meaning of this is, it is enough that we know his Opinion, that Christ now in
Heaven knows nothing of the Affairs on Earth, but either by the Revelation of
God, or the Ministry of Angels; and it seems, notwithstanding the Divine Word
abiding on him, God does not reveal all things to him, but he is fain to use
the Ministry of Angels to be more perfectly acquanted with the Affairs of his
Church. And thus much for his Knowledge; and I confess, I desire a Mediator who
knows more, and in a more perfect manner.

2. Let us now consider his Power, which the Scripture speaks so magnificently
of, and which Christ himself calls all Power both in Heaven and Earth: and yet
our Socinian tells us, that this all Power is no other Power but Intercession;
that Christ has no inherent Power in himself, can do nothing at all, but
intercedes with God to do it.

He expressly tells us, and lays it down as a Principle, that Christ's
Intercession is inconsistent with an inherent Power in him, to hear and help us
himself. For if he does hear our Prayers, and can and does (by a Power
constantly resident in him) relieve our Wants, to what purpose is he our
Mediator with God -- What can be more evident then that here (7 Hebr. 25.)
Christ's saving us from the evils we either fear, Page 110, 111.
or labor under, is ascribed not to his own inherent Power, but to his
Intercession with the Almighty.

Thus Christ promises to be always with his Church, 18 Matthew. 20.28.20.
and a very comfortable Promise it is; for we may expect a constant protection
from him; but our Historian tells us, Page 76.
that Christ is neither present with us, nor can help us himself; b^t Christ is
in the midst of, and is with his People, not by an immediate presence, as God
is, but by his most powerful aid and help, which he affords, partly by his
continual and successful Mediation with God for them all in general; partly by
the Angels who are under his Directions, and by him engaged in the defense of
the Faithful. So that Christ's Promise to be always with us, does not signify,
that he will be with us, but that he intercedes for us with God, not
particularly for you and me, for he knows not what our particular Condition is,
but for all in general; and directs the Angels to take care of all the
Faithful, and leaves it to their discretion, how to do this, for he can only
direct, as he intercedes, in general, being ignorant of our particular
Condition.

Christ promises, If you ask any thing in my Name, I will do it; 14 John 14.
Page 98.
and for my part I always believed our Savior could do it, as he promised; but
he tells us, the obvious meaning is, if you pray for any thing to God, using my
Name, I will cause it to be done for you, by my Intercession. Well! but will he
particularly intercede for us? No; but the general Intercession I will make for
all good Christians.

Nothing is a greater support to Christians under all their Temptations and
Sufferings, than to remember, that they have a merciful and compassionate High
Priest, who is touched with a feeling of our Infirmities, being in all things
tempted as we are, which the Apostle urges as a great encouragement to us, 4
Hebr. 15, 16.
to come boldly to the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find
grace to help in time of need: But this Argument is lost, if our High Priest
does not particularly know what our wants are, nor when we want help, and does
not intercede in particular for us, but only generally for all: and they who
are not sensible of this, do not consider the state of Human Nature; for the
hope of Sinners is in their Advocate and Mediator, and in his Compassion for
them; but if he know not their wants, his general Intercession gives them less
hope. And yet this great Consolation of Sinners is destroyed by this Socinian,
who resolves all only into a general Intercession, That our High Priest having
been in our very Circumstances, Page 145.
is touched with a true feeling of our Infirmities, and therefore does with
great earnestness intercede for us all in general. But let us consider the
particular Exercise of this Mediatory Power.

One glorious Act of Power is to forgive sins, but this is wholly taken away by
our Historian. Our Savior challenged this Power, while he was on Earth; The
Son of Man has power on Earth to forgive sins: 9 Matthew. 6. Page 74.
And because our Savior challenges it, he dares not deny it in plain terms,
but expounds it away. He says, God gave this Authority to the Lord Christ,
because he gave to him also to know what was in men's hearts: namely, whether
their Repentance and outward Professions were sincere and lasting: that is,
Christ had not a direct Authority to forgive sins, but a declarative Authority,
that their sins were forgiven upon a certain Knowledge of the sincerity of
their Repentance.

Nay, Christ is so far from forgiving sins, that our Author will not allow that
they are forgiven in his Name, or for his sake, as appears from his Paraphrase
on what our Savior says; That Repentance and Remission of sins should be
preached in his Name. 24 Luke 47.
The sense (says he) is, Christ commanded the Disciples to require men to
repent, and on their so doing to assure them in his Name (or from him) that God
would forgive them. God deliver us from such Expositors, who expound away the
whole Gospel of our Savior.

Another Act of Mediatory Power, which is absolutely necessary to the Christian
Church, is to give the fresh Supplies of Grace according to the Needs and
Necessities of Christians; 15 John.
but though Christ represents himself as a Vine, and Christians as Branches in
the Vine, who derive their Spiritual Life and Nourishment from him; yet our
Historian will not allow that he can do any thing in this neither, but only
intercede with God to give his Grace to us. Thus when the Apostles said unto
the Lord, Increase our Faith; 17 Luke 5. Page 80.
his Comment is, by thy Prayers to God, which are always heard for us. When St.
Paul besought the Lord thrice, that it (the Thorn in the Flesh, the Messenger
of Satan to buffet him) might depart from him, and received an Answer, 2 Cor.
12. 8, 9.
My Grace is sufficient for thee; for my strength is made perfect in weakness.
His Comment is, He besought the Lord, that is, he besought God; though we know
in St. Paul's Epistles, The Lord, without any other addition, Page 124.
is commonly used for the Lord Christ. And so it is here; where my strength is
immediately interpreted to be the power of Christ, and therefore he adds, the
Power of Christ here is the strength or power which Christ procures by his
general Mediation (for all his Church, and every Member of it) with God. So
afraid is he to own, that Christ can bestow strength and power on us himself to
conquer temptations. But still he was sensible, this was to offer force to the
words, and therefore says, That the Socinians, for the most part of them do
grant, that the Word or Power of God abiding on Christ, does qualify him to
hear our Prayers, and to succor us in all Distresses. But of this above.

Nay, he will not allow that Christ could direct or prosper St. Paul's Journey,
1 Thessalonians. 3 11, 12.
but only by his general Intercession: and that he causes us to abound in
love, and all other graces, partly by his Gospel, Page 136.
partly by his Intercession.

He denies that Christ raised himself from the dead by his own proper Power;
Page 89.
and though he shall raise and change our Bodies at the last day, Page 93.
yet it is by the Divine Word and Power communicated to him, and abiding on
him, by which he raised Lazarus, which he says, Christ himself intimates was
not his own proper Power, but God's, that is, the Fathers. And left this should
be thought too much that Christ should raise the dead, though by his Fathers
Power, not his own, he adds, Almighty God can lodge even in dry bones, a power
of restoring the dead, 2 Kings 13.21. which is a very honorable Comparison for
our Savior, and shows what a mighty Opinion he has of his Power; which is only
lodged in him, as it was in the Prophets dry bones, and is no more his own
Power. But this lodging Power in dry Bones, is a new kind of Philosophy, and in
great request at Rome.

To conclude; One would think, that he should leave Christ the full Power of
Judging the World, since God has made him Judge both of the quick and of the
dead. But this must be expounded away to nothing too. We heard before, that at
the day of Judgment, when he is to judge the secrets of hearts, he knows them
only by Revelation from God; and therefore he has no Personal Qualifications to
judge the World, but only bears the Name, when God the Father does the thing:
But thus much he allows him; That Christ is said to judge the World, because he
shall pronounce the Decree and Sentence of God, Page 140.
and order the Angels to execute it.

And now, has not this Socinian made a glorious King and Mediator of Christ,
without the least Power to do any thing, but intercede by Prayers and
Supplications with God, and that without knowing the particular Condition of
those, for whom he intercedes. If this be Christianity, sit anima mea cum
Philosophis: if this be to expound Scripture by Reason, it is plain that
Scripture and Reason spoil one another; for no man would reason so foolishly,
but to pervert Scripture; nor expound Scripture so absurdly, but to comply with
what he calls Reason.

4. Socinianism justifies, or at least excuses, both Pagan and Popish
Idolatries; at least as it is taught by those men, who allow of the Worship of
Christ, which it is certain, the Christian Religion teaches: Now if Christ be
no more than a Man, this is Creature Worship, and then Creature Worship is not
Idolatry; and this goes a great way in justifying or excusing Pagans and
Papists. If the Worship of a Creature be natural Idolatry, God would not have
permitted the Worship of Christ; if it be not, then Pagans and Papists are no
Idolaters: Though they worship Creatures, whatever their Fault be in it, (if it
be so much a Fault, as a Mistake) yet it is a Fault of a much less Nature than
Idolatry, and more easily pardoned.

Especially when they do not worship these Creatures as the Supreme God, but as
their Mediators, and Patrons, and Advocates with the Supreme God; for there is
a Worship due to a Mediator, distinct from the Worship of the Supreme God, as
the Worship of Christ proves, who is not God, but a Creature-Mediator; and thus
the Heathens worshipped their inferior Deities, and thus the Papists worship
their Saints: And if they do mistake, and worship those for Mediators, who are
none, and can do them no Service; the greatest hurt seems to be, that they
loose their labor, but according to these Principles, they do no injury to God.

For as they tell us, when it is said, 5 John 23. Page 92.
That all men should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father; the
meaning only is, as we honor God or the Father, so we must not forget to
honor also the Son of God -- An equality of Honor is no more intended here,
than an equality of Perfection in those words, Be ye therefore perfect, as your
Father, which is in Heaven is perfect. So the Heathens did not intend the same
degree of worship to their Mediators and Inferior Deities, as to the Supreme
God; and we know the Papists distinguish between the worship of Latria and
Dulia, or that Sovereign worship which is due to the Supreme God, and that
inferior honor to Saints and Angels; and it is plain, this is not an
arbitrary, but real distinction, as is evident in the worship of God, and the
Man Christ Jesus, who are worshipped with different degrees of honor, as these
Socinians assert.

And whereas the Papists are charged with making Gods and Goddesses of dead Men
and Women, by paying Religious Worship to them, they no more make them Gods,
than the Socinians make Christ a God.

And as for the worship of the Virgin Mary, they have in reason as much to say
for it, as the Socinians have for the worship of Christ: They make Christ the
Son of God, only because he was formed by a Divine Power in the Womb of the
Virgin; but Papists, who believe Christ to be God, own her for the Mother of
God; and I cannot see, why it is not as great an honor to be the Mother of
God, as to be born of a Virgin by the Power of God, and it may be more. And in
reason I cannot see (allowing of the Intercession of a Creature) why the Virgin
Mother of God, should not intercede as powerfully for us, as a Man born of a
Virgin by the Power of God; and I am apt to think, our Savior will account it
a less fault to worship his Mother, than to make himself a mere Creature.

And though the blessed Virgin do not particularly know our Condition, yet she
may help us by her general Intercession as Christ does, and pray particularly
for her peculiar Devotoes, and therefore at least we may pray to God in the
Name of the Virgin, and other Saints, as Socinians do in the Name of Christ,
who knows as little of them.

And yet the Virgin, and other Saints, may understand our Condition and Affairs
the same way, that the Socinians say Christ does, viz. by Revelation from God,
and by the Ministry of Angels, who are sent into the World, and carry the News
of this World to Heaven, though we should not allow of their Glass of the
Trinity, wherein they see and know all things.

So that here is nothing wanting but the appointment and allowance of God, to
make the blessed Virgin and other Saints as proper Advocates for us, as the
Socinians make Christ to be; for they are as well qualified for it, or might
be, if God so pleased, according to their Principles; and this the Papists
think they have too, that God has appointed, or at least allows the worship of
such favorite Saints; and though they are mistaken in it, it is certainly a
much more innocent and pardonable mistake, to make a Mediator, whom God has not
made, than to make the Eternal Son of God a Creature.

In a word, whatever evil there is in Creature worship, that the Socinians are
guilty of in worshipping a mere man; but this is not the worst of their Case,
for they overthrow the whole Christian Religion by it; which Popery does not
overthrow, though it greatly and dangerously corrupts it.

SECT. VII. An Answer to what remains in the Brief Notes.
I Am now hastening to a Conclusion, and there is little behind to stop me; for
though half the sheet be yet untouched, it is answered before I come to it; and
therefore both to save Paper and Pains, I shall not transcribe his long
impertinent Harangues, as I have hitherto done, but only give the Reader a view
of those Passages which he intends for Argument or Drollery, I know not whether.

Creed.
The Son is of the Father alone, not made, nor created, but begotten.

Our Note-maker has discovered a Contradiction between the beginning and the
end of this Article; for either the Son is not of the Father alone, or he is
not begotten; for every Novice in Grammar, and proper Speaking, knows, that
begotten, when it is distinguished from made and created, always supposes two
Parents, a Mother as well as a Father. He will allow the Son to be begotten, if
you speak of the Generation of the Son by the Divine Power on the Virgin Mary;
for then it would have been true, that the Son is neither made, nor created,
but begotten; for then he has both Father and Mother; God is his Father, and
the Virgin Mary his Mother; and thus, though they will not allow the Virgin to
be the Mother, they will allow her to be the Wife of God, which is as
honorable. These are very fit men to make Addresses to a Morocco Ambassador,
for they are so far of Mahomet's mind, that God cannot have a Son, unless he
have a Wife; but Mahomet was the better Divine in this, that he never dreamt of
God's having a Woman for his Wife. I am afraid this is Blasphemy; I Am sure, we
have always thought it so from the Mouth of a scoffing Atheist or Infidel; for
this is not his own, but borrowed Wit.

For does our Author in earnest think, that God cannot have a Son, unless he
begets him, as one man begets another? This is to dispute against God's
begetting a Son, Quae molitio, quae ferramenta, qui vectes, quae machinae, qui
Ministri, tanti muneris suerunt? De Not. Deor. l. 1.
as the Epicurean in Tully did against God's making a World, that he wanted
Ministers and Instruments for such a Work, as if God made a World, as a
Carpenter builds a House. Does a Son necessarily signify one who is begotten
of two Parents? I thought the true Notion of a Son had been, one who is
produced out of the Substance of its Parent, (not out of nothing, which we call
Creation, nor formed of any other Praeexistent Matter which we call making) and
that the true Notion of begetting, is to produce its own Image and Likeness out
of its own Substance, by what means soever this is done; and if one Parent can
thus beget a Son of his own Substance, this argues greater perfection in the
Father, and is a more perfect manner of Production than by two; and methinks he
might allow the most perfect Being to beget a Son in the most perfect manner.
And that an infinite Mind can and must beget his own likeness and image, that
is, an Eternal Son, by a reflex Knowledge of himself, I have already shown.
Supra p. 130


Creed.
The Holy Ghost is of the Father and the Son, neither made, nor created, nor
begotten, but proceeding.

His first quarrel against this, is the Procession of the Holy Ghost, from
Father and Son: the next is about the distinction between being begotten and
proceeding, which he says are the same thing, and are now confessed to be so,
by the most learned Trinitarians; who these are, I know not, but be they who
they will, it was no Argument of their Prudence or Learning to reject a
distinction, which both the reason of the thing requires, and the Christian
Church has always owned: but this I have accounted for before, Supra Page 134,
135.
and plainly shown the distinction between Generation and Procession, the first
is a reflex Act, whereby God knows himself, and begets his own Likeness and
Image; Procession is a direct Act, that Eternal Love, whereby God loves himself
and his own Image, which proceeds from God, as all Thoughts and Passions
proceed out of the Heart.

Creed.
And therefore there is but One Father, not Three Fathers, One Son, not Three
Sons, One Holy Ghost, not Three Holy Ghosts. The second Person, is indeed the
Son of the first, but the third Person, who proceeds from Father and Son, is
not the Son of either; for to proceed is not to be begotten, and therefore
there are not two Sons, nor two Fathers, as this Author affirms; much less are
they Three Holy Ghosts, though I grant, as he says, that they are Three Holy
Spirits. But this is a mere childish Fallacy, and playing with words: as as
there is but One God, so he is a holy Being, and a pure Mind and Spirit, as
Spirit is opposed to Matter; and thus all Three Divine Persons are holy Minds
and Spirits, essentially united into One infinite Mind and Spirit; but the Holy
Ghost, who is the Spirit of the Father and the Son, and a distinct Person in
the Trinity, is but One.

In this Trinity none is before or after other, Creed.
none is greater or less than another.

Yet the Son himself says the Father is greater than I, Notes.
14 Joh. 28. And the Son himself says, I and the Father are One, 10 Joh. 30.
And therefore there can be no greater inequality between them, than what is
consistent with an Oneness and Identity of Essence: that is, not an inequality
of Nature, but Order, as a Father is greater than the Son, who is naturally
subordinate to him, though their Nature be equal and the same. Though we know,
the ancient Fathers understood this of Christ as Man, as it is also expressed
in this Creed, Equal to the Father, as touching his Godhead, inferior to the
Father, as touching his Manhood. He proceeds.

As for the other Clause, None is before or after other; it is just as true, as
that there is no difference between before and after. I ask, whether the Son
does not, as he is a Son, derive both Life and Godhead from the Father? All
Trinitarians grant he does; grounding themselves on the Nicene Creed, which
expressly calls the Son, God of God, Light of Light, very God of very God,
begotten, not made. But if the Father gave to the Son Life and Godhead, he must
have both, before he could communicate, or give either of them to the Son, and
consequently was before the Son was. No effect is so early as its Cause; for if
it were, it should not have needed, or had that for its Cause. No Proposition
in Euclid is more certain, or evident than this.

Answ.
I hope, he will abate a little of his Mathematical Certainty, before I have
done with him; and yet I shall quickly have done with him too. I will begin
with his Philosophy of Causes and Effects. No Effect, he says, is so early as
its Cause. Did he never then hear of what we call Emanative Effects, which
coexist with their Causes? Is not the Sun the Cause of Light, and Fire of Heat?
and can he conceive a Sun without Light, or Fire without Heat? and if he cannot
so much as in thought, without absurdity and contradiction, separate these
Causes and Effects, is it possible to separate them in time, that the Cause
should be before its Effect? that is, that the Sun should be without Light, and
the Fire without Heat? and yet, can Light be without the Sun, or Heat without
Fire? What becomes then of his Reason, which is as certain and evident as any
Proposition in Euclid? That if the Effect were as early as its Cause, it should
not have needed, or had that for its Cause. For Light needs the Sun, and Heat
the Fire, for their Causes, and yet are as early as their Causes. But I
perceive he is but a young Mathematician or Philosopher, and therefore I would
desire him to remember against the next time, That plain Matter of Fact is as
certain and evident as any Proposition in Euclid.

In all other Causes and Effects, which subsist distinctly and separately, his
Maxim is good, That the Cause must be before the Effect; but when the Effect is
essential to the Cause, and the Cause cannot be without it, there the Effect is
as early as its Cause, because the Cause cannot subsist without its Effect, as
the Sun cannot be a Sun without Light, and Fire cannot be Fire without Heat.

And this is the Case here; the Son is begotten by the Father, and is God of
God, Light of Light, the Holy Ghost proceeds from Father and Son; but Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, are essentially but One God, and therefore unless the same
One God can be before and after himself in the Trinity, there can be no before or
after, but all Three Persons are Coeternal, because they are essentially One
Eternal God: and it is in vain to confound our Minds with conceiving an Eternal
Generation, for that is as intelligible as an Eternal Being; we can see the
necessity of both, but cannot comprehend either, no more than we can Eternity.
It is demonstrable, something must be Eternal, and it is as certain, that an
Eternal Mind eternally knows it self, and loves it self; for there can be no
infinite Mind without a reflex Knowledge of himself, which is his Eternal Son,
nor without the love of himself and his One Image, which is the Holy Spirit: of
which I have sufficiently discoursed already.

And thus we are come to the last part of our Task, what concerns the
Incarnation of Christ, which after all that has been said to prove Christ to be
the Eternal Son of God incarnate, will take up no great time; for what ever
difficulties there may be in the Philosophy of the Incarnation, or how God and
Man is; united into One Person, it will not shake my Faith, who see a thousand
things every day which I can give no Philosophical Account of, and which a
little Philosophy would teach considering men not to pretend to give any
account of; and yet we believe our Eyes without understanding the Philosophy of
things; and why we should not believe a Divine Revelation to, without it, I
know not. But let us hear what he has to say.

Creed.
The right Faith is, that we believe and confess, that our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Son of God, is both God and Man.

Notes.
Then the Lord Christ is two Persons, for as he is God, he is a Person. Very
right! And as he is a Man, he is a Person; that we deny, that he is a distinct
Person from the Godhead, when united to God. But a rational Soul vitally united
to a Human Body is a Person. Right! when it is by it self; and so a Soul
without a vital Union to a Human Body is a Person; and a Beast, which has no
reasonable Soul, but only an Animal Life, as a Man has together with a Human
Soul, is a Person, or a Suppositum, or what he will please to call it, but it
is a distinct living subsisting Being by it self, but when the Rational and the
Animal Life are united in Man, he is not two Persons, a Rational, and an Animal
Person, but one Person: and therefore we neither need own Christ to be two
Persons with Nestorius, (which yet is much more innocent than to deny his
Godhead) nor deny him either to be God or Man; for he is God-Man in one Person;
as a Man is a Reasonable and Animal Creature united into One Person; though we
may find the reasonable and animal life subsisting apart, and when they do so,
they are two, and but one, when united.

This is explained in the Creed by the Union of Soul and Body; for as the
reasonable Soul and Flesh is One Man, so God and Man is One Christ: which he
says vainly enough, is the only offer at Reason, that is to be found in the
whole Creed. Well! we are glad any thing will pass with him, though it be but
for an offer at reason, and let us hear how he confutes it.

1. He says, In the Personal Union of a Soul with a Body, the Union is between
Two finite things: but in the (pretended) Personal Union of God to Man, and Man
to God, the Union is between finite and infinite, which (on the Principles of
the Trinitarians, I wish he had told us, what those Principles are) is
impossible: For we must either suppose, that finite and infinite are
commensurate, that is, equal, which every one knows is false; or that the
finite is united but to some part of the infinite, and is disjoined from the
rest, which all Trinitarians deny and abhor. I beg your pardon Sir! they were
never so silly, as to think of it; but they abhor to see such Sacred Mysteries
treated with so much Ignorance and Impudence.

Since he is for confuting the Doctrine of the Trinity by raising Difficulties
about the manner of this Union, how God and Man are united into One Person; I
desire, he would first try his skill in inferior things, and tell me, how the
parts of Matter hang together? which though every Body thinks, he knows, I
doubt no Body does. Then I would desire to know, how Soul and Body are united,
how a Spirit can be fastened to a Body, that it can no way release it self,
though never so desirous of it, till the vital Union (which no Body knows, what
it is) is dissolved? Why the Soul can leave the Body, when the Body is disabled
to perform the Offices of Life, but cannot leave it before? The Soul, I say,
which we Trinitarians believe to be a Spirit, which can pass through Matter,
which cannot be touched, or handled, or held, by Matter, and yet feels the
impressions of Matter, is pleased, or afflicted with them, and sympathizes with
the Body, as if it could be cut by a Knife, or burnt with a Fever, or torn by
wild Beasts, as the Body is.

And since he apprehends, there can be no Union without Commensuration, and
therefore a finite and infinite Being cannot be united, because they are not
Commensurate; I desire to know, whether he thinks the Soul and Body are
Commensurate? whether the Soul have parts, as the Body has, which answer to
every part of the Body, and touch in every Point? These will be very new
Discoveries, if he can say any thing to them; if he cannot, it is his best way
to deny the Union of Soul and Body, because he cannot understand it; to assert
that man has no Soul, but only a Body, because it is impossible, that Matter
and Spirit should ever be united into one Person and Life; which is to the full
as unreasonable, as to deny the Personal Union of God and Man, because he
cannot understand how finite and infinite (which are not Commensurate, nor can
be, because neither a finite, nor infinite Spirit, have any parts to be
measured) can be united.

But in great good Nature, he has found out a Salvo for the Trinitarians; That
God indeed is infinite, and every Soul and Body (even that of Christ) finite,
yet the whole God, and the whole Man are united; because, as the whole Eternity
of God does Coexist to a moment of time, so the whole Immensity of God is in
every Mathematical point of place: And adds, The very truth is, they cannot
otherwise defend the Incarnation, or Personal Union of an infinite God to a
finite Man.

This is Gibberish which I do not understand; but this I do understand, (which
I suppose is the meaning of it, if it have any meaning) That an Eternal Being,
who has no beginning, and no succession of Being, may Coexist with time; and
that an infinite Mind, who has no parts, or extension, is present every where,
without extension: Vide supra p. 76, 80.
This I have sufficiently discoursed already, and refer my Reader to it.

But he has a thundering Argument against this: But withal it must be owned,
that then the Doctrines of the Trinity and Incarnation do infer, imply, and
suppose all the Contradictions that Mr. Johnson has objected to the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation? I hope not all, for that is a very good Discourse, and I
only wish for the Author's sake, si sic omnia; but pray, what is the matter?
His whole Book, and all his Demonstrations, are founded upon these two
Suppositions, That a longer time does not all of it coexist in a shorter; nor
is a greater extension constipated, or contained in a less. Suppose this, (for
I have forgot what his Demonstrations are, and have not the Book now by me)
what is this to the Trinity and Incarnation? though a longer time cannot all of
it coexist in a shorter, (which I hope is not so loosly expressed by Mr.
Johnson, because it is not sense, for time is in a perpetual flux, and nothing
of it exists but (...)) but what is this to an Eternal Being's coexisting with
time without time or succession? Though a greater Extension cannot be contained
in a less, what is this to an infinite Mind's being present every where without
Extension? for here is no Comparison between a longer and shorter time, but
between Time and Eternity, which is not Time nor Succession; nor between a
greater and less Extension, but between a finite and infinite Mind, neither of
which have any Extension. But suppose the worst, how does this concern the
Doctrine of the Incarnation? If he could tell how to apply all the
Demonstrations of Mr. Johnson, (which he tells us in Print, he forbears to do,
because the Press is not open to them) these Absurdities and Contradictions
would not fall upon the Doctrine of the Incarnation, but upon the Notion of an
Omnipresent God, who has no Parts, nor Extension, which was not invented to
salve the Difficulties of the Incarnation; but is the true Notion of God, and
his Omnipresence, who is not Omnipresent by Parts, but is every where a perfect
and infinite Mind; and if he can ridicule God out of the World, we will quarrel
no more about the Incarnation: I do not at all wonder, that he boasts so much,
what Follies and Contradictions he could discover in the Athanasian Creed; for
a man who cannot understand common Sense, can never fail of finding Follies and
Contradictions.

2. He proves, That the Union between God and Man cannot make one Person, as
the Union of Body and Soul does, because the Union of Soul and Body is not the
Union of Two Persons, but only of One Person (the Soul) to a thing otherways
without Life, Reason, Memory, or Free Will. But in the (pretended) Union of God
with Man, there are Two distinct and very different Lives, Memories, Reasons,
and Freewills, which utterly destroys a Personal Union, for that supposes but
One Life, One Reason, One Memory, One Free Will.

Now this is false as to matter of Fact: for though we will allow the Soul to
be the Person, yet by its Union to the Body, it has two sorts of different
Lives, Wills, Affections, Appetites, Reasons; the Animal and Sensual, and the
Rational Life, Will, Appetites, a Carnal, and a Spiritual Reason, that is, two
different Principles of Flesh and Spirit, as much as if every Man had two Souls.

So that there may be two Lives, two Wills, etc. in the same Person, and it
makes no difference in this Case, whether these two Wills be seated in two
different Subjects, or the same Soul by its vital Union to Matter, have two
distinct Wills and Reasons; and therefore we must find out some other Notion of
a Personal Union than this, that one Person can have but one Will, one Reason,
etc. for it is plain, one Person may have two Wills and Reasons, and if he may
have two, he may have three, according to the number and diversity of Natures,
which are united into One Person.

Now when I inquire what it is that unites different Natures into One Person, I
do not mean, what it is that naturally unites them; neither what the natural
Union is between Soul and Body in the Person of Man, nor of God and Man in the
Person of Christ, for this we know nothing of, and therefore no pretended
Contradictions and Impossibilities in this, shall hinder my belief of it; as I
discoursed in the first Section: But how two different Natures may be so
united, as to make but One Agent; for One Agent is One Person.

Now there are but two things necessary to this: 1. That these different
Natures be so united, that the superior Nature have the Government of the whole
Person; unless there be One governing Principle, there cannot be One Agent, and
therefore not One Person, and the superior Nature must be the Governor and the
Person: as this Author tells us, the Soul is the Person in man, as being the
superior governing Principle; and in the Soul, Reason has the natural
government of Sense, as being the superior Faculty, proper to a Spirit, whereas
Sense results from its Union to Matter: And thus in Christ, the Divine Word is
the Person, and in this Personal Union of God and Man, has such a government of
Humane Nature, as Reason has over Sense in Man: and therefore St. John tells
us, 1 John 14.
That the Word was made Flesh, or was Incarnate: for the Person of the Word,
took Humane Nature into a Personal Union with himself.

And this is the Reason, why all the Actions and Passions of Humane Nature are
attributed to Christ, as the Son of God, because the Word is the Person, to
whom Humane Nature is united, and who has the sole government of it; as all the
Sufferings and Actions of the Body are attributed to the Man, though the Soul
is the Person, because it is the superior and governing Power, and constitutes
the Person.

2. To complete a Personal Union, it is necessary there be One Consciousness in
the whole: As a Man has a conscious Sensation of every thing, which is done or
suffered either by Body or Soul; feels its own Reasonings and Passions, and all
the Pains and Pleasures of the Body; and in this Sense there must be but one
Life in one Person, and this own Consciousness to the whole, is the One Life.

But then we must observe, That where different Natures are united into One
Person, this universal Consciousness to the whole Person, is seated only in the
superior and governing Nature, as it ought to be; because in that the Natures
are united into One Person, and that must govern and take care of the whole.
Thus the Mind in man is conscious to the whole man, and to all that is in man,
to all the motions of Reason and Sense; but Sense is not conscious to all the
Actings of Reason, which is the superior Faculty, though it is conscious, as
far as is necessary to receive the Commands and Directions of Reason; for the
Body moves at the command of the Will, and it is so far conscious to its
Commands.

Thus in the Person of Christ, who is God-man, the Divine Word is conscious to
his whole Person; not only to himself, as the Divine Word, but to his whole
Humane Nature; not by such Knowledge as God knows all men, and all things, but
by such a Consciousness, as every Person has of himself: But it does not hence
follow, that the Humane Nature is conscious to all that is in the Word; for
that destroys Humane Nature by making it Omniscient, which Humane Nature cannot
be; and its being united to the Person of the Word, does not require it should
be; for an inferior Nature is not conscious to all, that is in the superior
Nature, in the same Person.

This Union of Natures does require, that the inferior Nature be conscious to
the superior, as far as its Nature is capable, and as far as the Personal Union
requires; for so Sense is in some degree conscious to Reason, and it cannot be
one Person without it. And therefore the Human Nature in Christ is in some
measure, [in such a degree, as Human Nature can be,] conscious to the Word,
feels its Union to God, and knows the Mind of the Word, not by External
Revelations, as Prophets do, but by an Inward Sensation, as every man feels his
own Thoughts and Reason; but yet the Human Nature of Christ may be ignorant of
some things, notwithstanding its Personal Union to the Divine Word, because it
is an inferior, and subject Nature. And this I take to be the true account of
what our Savior speaks about the Day of Judgment; 24 Matthew. 36.
Of that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels in Heaven, but my
Father only: where our Savior speaks of himself as a man; and as a man he did
not at that time know the Day of Judgment, though personally united to the
Divine Word, who did know it; for as he is the Divine Word, so our Savior
tells us, That he sees all that the Father does, and therefore what the Father
knows, the Eternal Word and Wisdom of the Father must know also.

But yet the Human Nature of Christ was conscious to all the actings of the
Divine Word in it; as we may see in the Story of the Woman, having an Issue of
Blood twelve years, who in the midst of a great Crowd of People, came behind
him, and touched his Garment, and was immediately healed; our Savior presently
asked who touched him, and when all denied it, and Peter wondered he should ask
that Question, when the Multitude thronged him, and pressed him; Jesus said,
some body has touched me, 8 Luke 43, 46.
for I perceive that virtue is gone out of me; he felt the miraculous Power of
the Divine Word working in him, as a man feels what is done in himself.

This I think gives some account, how God and Man may be united into One
Person, which though it be a great Mystery, which we cannot fully comprehend,
yet is not wholly unintelligible, much less so absurd and contradictious, as
this Author pretends.

As for what he adds about believing and professing this Faith, let him apply
it to Christ's being the Messiah, or any other Article of the Creed, and see
what Answer he will give to it; for what if men cannot believe it? are we
obliged under the penalty of the loss of Salvation to believe it, whether we
can or no? does God require of any man an impossible Condition in order to
Salvation? No! but if it be credible, and what a wise man may believe, and what
he has sufficient Evidence to believe, he shall be damned, not because he
cannot, but will not believe it.

But what if it be against a man's Conscience to profess it? -- if he profess
against his Conscience, he sins; and if notwithstanding this a man must either
profess or be damned, then God requires some men to sin in order to their
Salvation. God requires no man to profess against his Conscience, but he shall
be damned for not believing it, not for not professing what he does not
believe: it looks like a Judgment upon these men, that while they can talk of
nothing less than the severest Reason, they impose upon themselves, or hope to
impose upon the World by the most Childish Sophistry and Nonsense.

And now I shall leave our Note-maker to harangue by himself, and persuade
Fools, if he can, that the Doctrine of the Trinity and Incarnation is nothing
but Popery, or must be parted with for the sake of Jews, or be made a
Complement to the Morocco Ambassador, and his admired Mahomet; or must be
sacrificed to Peace and Unity, and to secure men from damnation, who will not
believe. I will not envy him the satisfaction of such Harangues, it being all
the Comfort he has; for I am pretty confident he will never be able to Reason
to any purpose in this Cause again.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, World without end. Amen.

THE END.
ADVERTISEMENT.
A Preservative against Popery, in two Parts; with a Vindication, in Answer to
the Cavils of Lewis Sabran a Jesuit. 4o.

A Discourse concerning the Nature, Unity, and Communion of the Catholic
Church. 4o.

A Sermon Preached before the Lord Mayor, November. 4. 1688. 4o.

A Practical Discourse concerning Death. The Fifth Edition. 8o.

The Case of the Allegiance due to Sovereign Powers, stated and resolved,
according Scripture and Reason, and the Principles of the Church of England,
with a more particular Respect to the Oath, lately enjoined, of Allegiance to
Their Present Majesty's, K. William and Q. Mary. The Fifth Edition. 4o.

By William Sherlock, D. D. Master of the Temple. Printed for W. Rogers.


