Imprimatur,

Jan. 14. 1690/1. Z. Isham, R.P.D. Henrico, Episc. Land. a Sacris.

A VINDICATION OF THE Case of Allegiance DUE TO Sovereign Powers, In REPLY to
an ANSWER To a late Pamphlet, Entitled,

Obedience and Submission to the Present Government, demonstrated from Bishop
Overal's Convocation-Book; with a Postscript in Answer to Dr. Sherlock's Case
of Allegiance, etc.

By WILLIAM SHERLOCK, D. D. Master of the TEMPLE.

LONDON: Printed for W. Rogers, at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's Church,
in Fleet Street, 1691.

A VINDICATION OF THE Late CASE OF ALLEGIANCE, etc.
IN a Postscript to an Answer to a late Pamphlet entitled, Obedience and
Submission to the Present Government, demonstrated from Bishop Overal' s
Convocation Book, the Author is pleased to Examine what I have said relating to
the said Subject, in my Case of Allegiance due to Sovereign Powers; He writes
with great triumph and assurance, which it seems Men may do, who are resolved
never to own a Mistake; though he thinks it unpardonable in me, who have been
so weak, as to confess, that I am not Infallible, ever to believe my own Senses
again. He threatens an Answer to my Arguments in due Time; and I will patiently
expect till his due Time comes, and apply myself at present to his Postscript,
and Answer, as far as I am concerned in it; but shall beg leave to follow my
own Method, and justify what I have said in the same Order, I have said it in,
his altering of which has more Art than Honesty in it.

The Mighty Place, as he truly calls it, is Chap. 28. Page 57. where the
Convocation having given an Account of the Various and Irregular Revolutions of
Government, brought about by the Providence of GOD, who for the Sins of any
Nation or Country, alters their Governments and Governors, transferreth,
sets up, and bestows Kingdoms, as it seems best to his heavenly Wisdom,
they add these remarkable Words: And when having attained their Ungodly
Desires, (whether ambitious Kings by bringing any Country into their
Subjection, or disloyal Subjects by their rebellious Rising against their
natural Sovereigns) they have established any of the same degenerate Forms of
Government among their People; the Authority either so Unjustly gotten, or
wrung by Force from the true and lawful Possessor, being always GOD's Authority
(and therefore receiving no Impeachment by the Wickedness of those that have
it) is ever (when any such Alterations are thoroughly settled) to be Reverenced
and Obeyed, and the People of all sorts (as well of the Clergy, as of the
Laity) are to be subject unto it, not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience
sake.

This I then thought, and think so still (though our Author thinks not) a very
plain Testimony, that all Usurped Powers, Cast of Alleg. p. 5.
when thoroughly settled, have GOD's Authority, and must be Obeyed: And while I
was transcribing this Passage, there came to my hand the New Observator of
Friday, Dec. 5, 1690, Vol. 3. Numb. 12. containing a Letter written by King
James the First, with relation to this very Convocation, which he says he
transcribed Verbatim from the Original, communicated to him by an eminent
Person, in whose hands it is; the four last Lines of which are written with
King James's own hand, and the rest, as he guesses, by the then Secretary of
State. The Letter was written to Dr. Abbot; I shall not transcribe the whole,
but such Passages as may satisfy us, how King James himself understood the
Convocation.

You have dipped too deep in what all Kings reserve among the Arcana Imperii. And
whatever Aversion you may profess against GOD's being the Author of Sin, you
have stumbled upon the Threshold of that Opinion, in saying upon the matter,
That even Tyranny is GOD's Authority, and should be reverenced as such. If the
King of Spain should return to claim his old Pontifical Right to my Kingdom,
you leave me to seek for others to Fight for it; for you tell me upon the
matter before hand, his Authority is GOD's Authority, if he prevail.

This makes so much for our Author indeed, that King James did not like the
Doctrine of the Convocation, no more than he does; but then it proves against
him, that K. James understood the Convocation not in his, but in my Sense: For
when he charges them with saying upon the Matter, (that is, in sense, though not
in express words) that Tyranny is God's Authority, and should be reverenced as
such, it is the very Interpretation I there give of it, That those Princes, who
have no legal Right to their Thrones, may yet have God's Authority: for by
Tyranny the King meant such Princes as are Tyranni sine Titulo, or Illegal
Kings; for as for Tyrants Exercitio, who are Rightful Kings, but govern
Tyrannically, neither K. James nor this Author would dispute, whether they have
God's Authority. And if they may have God's Authority, whilst they are in the
first sense Tyrants, or have no legal Right to their Thrones, then their
Government may be thoroughly settled as the Convocation speaks, without a legal
Right; for till a thorough Settlement, according to the Doctrine of the
Convocation, they have not God's Authority; and when the King charges them with
saying upon the matter, That Tyranny is God's Authority, he must conclude, that
they taught, that such Tyrants might be thoroughly settled in their Government;
for if they cannot be settled till they obtain a legal Title, they must cease
to be such Tyrants, before they have God's Authority: And it is evident, that
K. James did not apprehend, that the Convocation meant by a thorough
Settlement, (as this Author expounds it) a Settlement by the Death or Cession
of the rightful King and all his Heirs, or by a long Prescription of an hundred
Years, of which more presently; for he was afraid, that by this Doctrine, the
King of Spain, should he claim by his Pontifical Right, and prevail in it,
might, while he himself lived, be so thoroughly settled in the Kingdom of
England, as to have God's Authority, and then his Subjects must not Fight for
him, their old rightful King, against the King of Spain, who by a thorough
Settlement and Possession of the Throne of England, would be invested with
God's Authority, and must not be opposed by the Subjects of England. The King
disliked this Doctrine so much, that he thought fit to suppress it, and to
reserve it among the Arcana Imperii; which was a much wiser course then to
palliate it with such forced Interpretations, as no impartial Reader can think
to be the sense of the Convocation. If I have mistaken the sense of the
Convocation, I have done no more then King James did, who was nearly concerned
to know, what they meant: if I err in following the Convocation, I err with as
great and learned Men, as any Age of the Church has bred; I err with the Church
of England, if we may learn the Sense of the Church from a Convocation.

But let us set aside the King's Letter, and try if we can learn the sense of
the Convocation from the Convocation itself.

I observed in the first place, from the Words of the Convocation, That those
Princes, Case of Alleg. p. 5.
who have no Legal Right to their Thrones, may yet have God's Authority: which
I proved, because the Convocation speaks of Illegal and Usurped Powers, and yet
affirms, that the Authority exercised by them, is God's Authority.

To this our Author answers, Postcript, p. 3.
The Doctor will not, but the Convocation distinguishes between the means of
acquiring the Power, and the Power itself; the means of acquiring Power may be
very unjust and illegal, and yet the Power afterward may be very Legal. But
the Doctor resolves they must be all one; and because the Convocation speaks of
the Ambition of encroaching Kings, and the Rebellion of Subjects, as a means,
whereby Governments have been altered; therefore by a Government being
thoroughly settled, they must mean usurped Powers. As if it were impossible for
such beginnings afterward to acquire a Right, and to terminate in a Legal
Title; and till that is, the Government is as unjust as the Rebellion and
Encroachment. So that according to this Author, a Government, which is
illegally and wickedly begun, when it is legally settled has God's Authority,
and this is all, that the Convocation meant by it.

As for what he says, That I will not distinguish between the means of
acquiring Power, and the Power itself. I do not indeed distinguish as he does,
but I distinguish as the Convocation does, that the Means are wicked; but the
Power and Authority is Gods; which is all the distinction the Convocation
makes; and I desire him to show me, where the Convocation says, that the
Government which is illegally acquired, cannot be thoroughly settled, till it
becomes Legal; if this had been their meaning, it had been easily said, and had
prevented all mistakes about it, which their words without this limitation are
very apt to betray Men into.

I believe all unbiassed Men who are not prepossed with other Notions, and
concerned, that the Convocation should be on their side, would never dream of
our Author's Sense of the Convocation.

For 1. If the Convocation meant no more than our Author says, that a
Government illegally begun, when it is legally settled, has God's Authority,
what a wonderful discovery is this, that Legal Princes have God's Authority!
for who doubts of this? What need was there to introduce this with such a long
pompous Preface of the changes of Government, by the Ambition of Princes, and
the Rebellion of Subjects? For let Governments begin how they will, when they
are once legally settled, no Man, that I know of, who owns the Authority of any
Government to be from God, disputes theirs. Which makes me wonder at our
Author's reason, Answer, page 21.
viz. Left it should be thought, that wicked ways of obtaining this Right, was
a prejudice to the Right itself, and people should from thence take occasion to
rebel, and disturb all the Governments of the World, because they could not
show an express Order from God, or derive the Pedigree of their Government even
from Adam and Noah; to prevent the terrible Confusion that such a Notion would
make in the World, they say, That the wicked ways of attaining it, or the
wickedness of the persons that have it, is no impeachment of the Right itself;
but when it is attained it is God's Authority, and ought to be obeyed.

That is to say, a wise and grave Convocation write a whole Chapter to confute
a Notion, without naming it, or giving any hint at it, which if ever it entered
into any mad Man's Head, yet never did, never can disturb any Government, till
a Nation is fitter for Bedlam, than to be directed by a Convocation: whereas
the Difficulties occasioned by the Changes and Revolutions of Government,
especially when a rightful Prince is dispossessed, and another settled in his
Throne, are very great, and worthy of the determination of a Convocation to
direct Men's Consciences in such cases; and which is the most probable account
of this matter, let every one judge.

2dly, When the Convocation speaks of the Settlement of Illegal Powers, which
began by Ambition and Rebellion, it is manifestly unreasonable, unless it had
been expressed, to expound this of a Legal Settlement, by acquiring a new Legal
Right. Settlement, I grant, as our Author says, is a Term of Law, and used by
Lawyers of a Legal Settlement, and must always in reason be understood so in
Law, when the contrary is not expressed; but yet a firm and stable possession
without Right, must be confessed, to be a Settlement too, though not a rightful
Settlement: I suppose, our Author will not deny, but that the Government was
settled in fact under the Three Heneries, though in his sense it was not a Legal
Settlement.

Now as it is reasonable in Law, to understand a Settlement of a Legal
Settlement, when the contrary is not expressed, because the Law must speak of
such Settlements as are according to Law; so for the same reason, when the
Convocation speaks of the Settlement of Powers, which are against Law, it must
be understood of the Settlement of Possession, not of Right, unless this had
been expressed; for the only ordinary way of settling illegal Powers is by
Possession, not by Right, and that ever such Powers be afterward legally
settled is a great accident, and therefore the natural and obvious exposition of
Settlement in such Cases, is a Settlement of Possession; and it argues great
perverseness of mind to reject that sense of the Word, which is proper to the
Subject to which it is applied, for such a Sense as is foreign and unnatural.

It is plain, that the Right and Settlement of Government are two very
different things, for they may be parted; the first relates to the Title, the
second to the settled Possession, and Exercise of Government: and whenever a
rightful King is dispossessed, our Author must grant, that his Settlement is
gone, though not his Right; and if Right and Settlement may be parted, I desire
to know, why there may not be a Settlement without Right; and then it is
ridiculous to conclude, that Settlement must always signify Right.

Nay, the Addition of Thorough plainly refers Settlement to Possession, and not
to Right; for there are no degrees of Right, no more than there are of Truth;
for all Right in this Case of a Legal Title is Thorough Rite; but there are
degrees of Settlement, as that signifies Possession; for Princes may be more or
less settled in the Possession and Exercise of Government; which is reason
enough to expound thoroughly settled of a thorough settled possession of Power,
and Authority, or a complete and perfect Administration of the Government.

3dly, Let us consider what our Author makes necessary to the thorough
Settlement of such Powers as begin by Usurpation or Rebellion, and try what
sense it will make of what the Convocation says.

Now he tells us, Answer, page 19.
That a Right to a Government may be acquired, by the death or cession of the
Person in whom the Right was: and this (he says) is the case: In this Chapter
the Convocation mentions several Variations of Government, as to the Forms,
Aristocracy and Democracy; and as to the ambitious encroaching of Kings upon
their Neighbors; and particularly the Four Monarchies, and the King of Babylon
upon the Jews: All which respective Governments; tho they were begun by
Rebellion, Ambition, and unlawful means (which the Convocation condemns) yet
afterward they became lawful Governments, and had such a right to the
respective Governments they did possess: and this is to be thoroughly settled.
To the death and cession of the person in whom the Right was, he adds in
another place, when the right to the Government is acquired by prescription,
and that is a long and uninterrupted possession joined with the consent of the
people; that is, Ibid. p. 27.
a possession of an hundred Years, as he has learnt from Bishop Buckeridge. So
that to make a legal settlement of a Government illegally begun, the rightful
Prince, and all his Heirs, must die, or resign up their Government to the
Usurper; or the Usurper and his Heirs must reign about an hundred Years, and
then he may come to be a legal King; though this settlement by prescription I
do not well understand. For suppose the Usurper should have an uninterrupted
possession of an hundred Years, will this make him a rightful King without the
death or cession of the whole Royal Family? If it will, how does the Royal
Family come to lose their right by an usurped possession of their Throne? for
how long soever it has been, it is an usurpation still, and the right is still
in them: and if an usurpation will destroy their right, why not a short
usurpation, as well as a long one? for it is all but usurpation still: and how
will our Author justify the people in consenting, that such an usurper should
reign, while their rightful King is living? or how long must the usurper reign
before the people must consent to it? and how long must he reign afterward
with their consent, before he comes to be thoroughly settled as a lawful King?
or if the lawful King must die, or resign his Crown to settle the usurper, what
need of so long a prescription? since he tells us, that a possessory Right is
something, and where there is no better, that ought to carry it; and the
conclusion from hence is this: That any person (by what means soever) gaining
the possession of the Throne, if there be no better claims against him, Ibid.
p. 19.
then he has a right to it, and then and not till then he is thoroughly settled.
So that according to my understanding, this presciption signifies nothing. If
there be no body, that has a better claim to the Crown, possession gives a
right: if there be, I desire to know of our Author, whether an hundred years
possession is a good right against a better claim; or how this better claim
comes to expire after an hundred years usurpation? But however, we will take it
all together, and see what can he made of it.

Now I observe, 1. That all the Convocation says, relates to the visible and
actual alterations of Governments and Governors, and translation of Kingdoms,
brought about by the wickedness of men, but disposed by the divine foresight
and providence to accomplish his own wise counsels. Now this is matter of fact,
not of right, unless all alterations of Government are rightful and legal: and
therefore the settlement of such alteratious is an actual not a legal
settlement of them. And this brings the Dispute to matter of sense; for if such
alterations of Government and translation of Kingdoms may he made and settled
without the death or cession of the rightful King, and without the prescription
of an hundred years, then the death or cession of the King, or a long
prescription cannot be necessary to the settlement, the Convocation speaks of;
for there may be an actual and visible settlement without it, which is all that
is required to an actual and visible translation of Kingdoms; and that is all
the Convocation intended. And he who will venture to say, that a new Prince
cannot be actually and visibly settled in the Throne, while the old rightful King
is living and makes his claim, shall dispute by himself for me.

2ly. The Convocation expressly teaches, that the Authority, which is God's
Authority, and must be reverenced and obeyed, when such Alterations are
thoroughly settled, is the Authority, which is unjustly gotten, or wrung by force
from the true and lawful possessor: and then it is plain, it is not a legal
Authority by the death or cession of the rightful King; for we are to obey it,
as God's Authority, though it be wrung by force from the true and lawful
possessor; and though the present possessor should have no other visible Title
to it, but such unjust force. The words are these: The Authority either so
unjustly gotten, or wrung by force from the true and lawful possessor, being
always God's Authority (and therefore receiving no impeachment by the
wickedness of those that have it) is ever (when any such alterations are
thoroughly settled) to be reverenced and obeyed, etc. Now let any man, who
understands Grammar, construe this otherwise, if he can. What Authority is
that, which must be obeyed and reverenced? It is (says the Convocation) the
Authority unjustly gotten, or wrung by force, from the true and lawful
possessor; and therefore not a new legal Authority gained by death or cession,
or a long prescription. What is God's Authority, which we must obey? It is no
other, than the Authority unjustly gotten, or wrung by force, etc. which can
receive no impeachment by the wickedness of those, who have it. By what
wickedness? their wicked and ungodly and violent means of getting and having
it: for the Convocation speaks of no other wickedness, but the wickedness of
Usurpation: so that we must obey the Authority, because it is Gods, even when
men have it wickedly, and therefore before they have acquired any new legal
Title to it.

And this I think plainly proves, that the settlement, the Convocation speaks
of, is not a legal settlement, for that would make the Authority legal, whereas
these Alterations may be thoroughly settled, whilst the Authority exercised in
such new Governments is unjustly and wickedly got and possessed. This, I think,
if our Author be not very unreasonable, is enough to justify my first
Assertion, That the Convocation speaks of illegal and usurped Powers, and yet
affirms the Authority exercised by them is God's Authority, and therefore those
Princes, who have no legal Right, may have God's Authority.

I proceeded to prove the same thing from other testimonies out of the
Convocation Book. Case of Alleg. p. 6.
For they teach, that the Lord (in advancing Kings to their Thrones) is not
bound by those Laws which he prescribes others to observe, and therefore
commanded Iehu a subject to be anointed King over Israel to punish the sins of
Ahab and Jezebel, (p. 46.) And the Lord both may and is able to overthrow any
Kings or Emperors, notwithstanding any claim, Right, Title, or Interest, which
they can challenge to their Countries, Kingdoms, or Empires. These Passages our
Author has thought fit to take no notice of; for if they do not prove God's
Sovereign Authority, to remove and pull down the most rightful Kings, and give
his Authority to those, who have no right, and place them in the Thrones of
those, who have the right, there is no sense to be made of them.

Our Author's hypothesis is as direct a contradiction to this, as words can
make it: for if no Prince can have God's Authority, nor must be obeyed, unless
he have a legal Right, either an old Hereditary Right, or a new Acquired Right,
by the death or cession of the Royal Family, or by a long prescription; then
God is bound to those Laws in advancing Kings, which he prescribes to others;
that is, to adhere to Humane Rights: then God may not overthrow any Kings or
Emperors, who challenge their Countries, Kingdoms, or Empires, by any just
Claim, Right, Title, or Interest. Then he cannot set up any Kings, or Emperors,
who have no just right and claim. For he cannot unmake a rightful King, if he
cannot absolve Subjects from their Allegiance; nor make a King without a legal
Right, if he cannot give him his Authority, and transfer the Allegiance of
Subjects to him. God can remove the Man by death, but cannot unmake the King,
unless he unmake himself by resigning his Crown; He can set a Man upon the
Throne, but cannot make a King of him, without the leave of the Right Heir,
under an hundred years prescription: Wherever our Author learnt this Doctrine,
I am sure, this Convocation never taught it him.

To confirm this, I observed, that the Convocation teaches, that Obedience was
due to such Kings, as never could have any legal Right to the Government of
Israel; as the Kings of the Moabites and Aramites, Ibid.
of Egypt and Babylon, and yet says, that the Israelites knew, that it was not
lawful for them of themselves, and by their own Authority, to take Arms against
the Kings, whose Subjects they were, though indeed they were Tyrants. And that
it had not been lawful for Ahud to have killed King Eglon, had he not first
been made by God, the Judge, Prince, and Ruler of the People.

On the other hand our Author affirms, that all these Kings had a legal Right;
Postscript, p. 3.
and were legal Powers; and that it appears in all and every one of the
Instances the Convocation gives of Government, to which they say obedience is
due, that these Governments had such a Right. Ans. p. 19.
This is a bold Undertaker, unless he only play with equivocal words; and that
I believe is the truth of the matter; for such legal Rights, as he has found
for these Princes, will quickly transubstantiate all usurped Powers into legal
Governments.

But our first Inquiry is, What the Convocation thought of these Kings; as for
instance, the Kings of the Aramites and Moabites, who ruled over and oppressed
Israel; whether they thought them the legal and rightful Kings of Israel; they
call indeed the Israelites, their Subjects, as our Author observes; and from
thence proves, that these Kings had a legal power over Israel; but the mischief
is, that the Convocation in express words owns them to be only Kings de facto,
to whom they were in subjection, and teaches, that if any man shall affirm,
that any person, born a Subject, and affirming by all the Arguments, which Wit
or Learning could devise, that God had called him to murder the King de facto,
under whom he lived; yea, though he should first have procured himself to be
proclaimed and anointed King, as Adonijah did, and should afterward have laid
violent hands upon his Master, ought therefore to be believed of any that
feared God, he does greatly err. Which is spoke with reference to Ahud's
killing King Eglon, who it seems, was but a King de Facto, in the judgment of
the Convocation; and, I suppose, our Author knows what a King de Facto
signifies, in opposition to a King de Iure, one who is King without a legal
Right: and yet the Convocation asserts that such Kings de Facto must not be
murdered by their Subjects; which is an express Determination against our
Author.

Let us now see what legal Right and Title our Author has found, for the Kings
of the Aramites, and Moabites, and Babylonians over Israel; and for all the
four Monarchies, which were successively Erected with the most manifest
Violence and Usurpation: Postscript, p. 2.
And that is, the Submission both of Prince and People, which he says, I grant,
gives a legal Right; whereas I only said, That the Submission of the Prince
might be thought necessary to transfer a legal Right; which I think differs a
little from granting it does so.

The truth is, our Author is here blunder'd for want of clear and distinct
Notions of what he writes, and imposes upon himself and others with ambiguous
Terms; which if they were truly stated, would clear all these Difficulties.

Legal Powers signify such Powers as are according to Law; but then there are
different kinds of Laws, and when we speak of legal Powers, unless we agree by
what Law we call them Legal, we shall never understand one another.

Now we may understand Legal, either with respect to the Laws of Nature, the
Laws of Nations, or the Laws and Constitutions of a particular Nation or
Kingdom; and in this last sense Legal is understood by all Men, who understand
themselves, in this Controversy of legal Powers; that those only are legal
Powers, who have the rightful Authority of Government according to the Laws and
Constitutions of the Kingdom which they govern: This is the reason of the
Distinction between a King de Iure and de Facto, which relates to the
particular Laws and Constitutions of the Kingdom; a King de Iure is a rightful
King by the Laws of the Land; a King de Facto, whatever other Right he may
have, is not rightfully and lawfully possessed of the Crown, by the Laws of
Succession proper to that Kingdom. And if our Author will take the Controversy
off of this Bottom, and dispute only about legal Powers in general, we will
then admit his Plea of Submission, and join issue with him upon that Point.

And this is all the Mystery I intended, when I affirmed, that the Moabites and
Aramites, Egyptians and Babylonians, could not have a legal and natural Right
to Govern Israel; that is, that by the Constitutions of the Jewish
Commonwealth, they could not give the Power of the Government to a Stranger,
nor set up a Prince over them, who was not of their Brethren; and therefore no
Strangers, neither Aramites nor Moabites, could be their legal Kings. As for
their Submission, when under Force, it shall be considered presently.

This made me smile to see how he was concerned to ward off a Blow, Postscript,
p. 3.
which was never intended him; for since the Israelites did submit to the
Aramites and Moabites, etc. and according to our Author, Submission gives a
legal Right, he could not imagine why I said, that those Nations never could
have a legal Right to the Government of Israel, unless it were, because God was
at that time their Sovereign, and He did not submit; and the Submission of the
Sovereign, as well as of the People, is necessary to give a legal Right: And
now he had started an Objection, which he knew not what to do with; and his
Answer is as extravagant as the Objection; for he has found out something,
which he thinks equivalent to God's Submission to the Aramites and Moabites,
and that is, that God delivered them into their hands: What then? did God
resign his Government of Israel into the hands of the Aramites and Moabites,
and quit his Right and Claim to the Government of them? Spectatum admissi --

But to proceed: I will grant this Author, that legal Powers may be understood
in a larger Notion, as that may be said to be Legal, which is agreeable to the
Laws of Nature or Nations; and in this sense, Submission may make a legal King
of him, who, according to the Laws of the Land, can be only a King de Facto.
This is worth considering, and therefore I shall briefly explain it:

In a State of Nature, wherein we must suppose all Men free from any
Government, but that of Parents, and Heads of Families, (which how far it
extended before Civil Governments were formed, we cannot tell) they were at
liberty to give up the Government of themselves to whom they pleased; and this
made such Persons their legal and rightful Princes and Governors by the Law of
Nature: For Men who are free, may give the Government of themselves to another,
and if they may do this, their doing it is a Law to themselves.

Especially Nature teaches this, When Men are overpowered by Force, and must
either submit to the Government, or suffer the Vengeance and Fury of an
Usurping Nimrod; for Nature teaches us to preserve ourselves, and therefore
justifies whatever may be lawfully done to preserve ourselves; and in a State
of Nature Men may part with their Liberty, and submit to be governed by
another; and such a Submission, with respect to themselves, gives a Right; for
it is a voluntary Consent, though extorted by Force, as all Moralists allow such
a mixed Choice and Election to be.

But it will be said, This is nothing to us, who are at such a distance from
the first Original of Government: this can be done but once; for when we have
given up ourselves to the Government of another, we have given away our Liberty
to choose for ourselves.

Right! unless we fall into a State of Nature and Liberty again, or something
like it; which may be done many ways, but I shall name but one, and that is in
case of a new prevailing Force; that is, with respect to a Kingdom, when Prince
and People are conquered, for then the Government is at an end, and they are as
much at liberty to submit to a Conquering Prince, as they were in the State of
Nature; for every Dissolution of Government must so far restore us to the State
and Liberties of Nature, as to provide for ourselves; or if the Prince be
conquered, and driven out of his Kingdom, and the People in the Power of the
Conqueror, they are as perfectly at liberty to submit to the new Conqueror, as
they were before to submit to their old Prince, or his Ancestors; with respect
to private Subjects, when their Prince or the Government of the Nation is
violently Changed, and they are as much under the Force and Power of the new
Prince, or new Government, as they could be under a conquering Prince, who had
Conquered both King and People: for Force will justify Submission, and then it
is much the same thing from what quarter the Force comes: when a Man is under
the power of a new Government, which he cannot resist, and which will not
protect him, nay, which will undo and ruin him, if he will not submit, it is
all one to him, with respect to his Submission, as if both his King and Country
were absolutely conquered.

Though we live under a settled Government, yet if we happen to fall into the
hands of Thieves and Robbers, where the Government cannot protect us, we may
very innocently for our own preservation, promise and swear to them such
things, as are against the Laws of the Land, and which it would be unlawful for
us to do in other circumstances; and then I think with greater reason, if the
Government cannot protect itself, nor its Subjects, from a greater Force,
Subjects are at liberty to shift for themselves, and to submit to the greater
Power; for our Obligations to human Government are reasonably supposed to
except the case of a greater force, since such Obligations can last no longer
than the Government lasts. Conquest is the death and dissolution of the
Government, and dissolves the Contract, as the death of either Party does the
Marriage-Vow. This is not as some vainly talk to justify the breach of Oaths
and Promises to save ourselves, and to make Self-preservation the only Supreme
Rule of Good and Evil; but the dissolution of the Government, or of the Power
of the Prince to protect himself or his Subjects in his Government, puts an end
to the Obligation of Oaths: for in matters of Government, it is an unalterable
Right of Nature to submit to Force.

All Men will grant, that no human Laws and Constitutions are so sacred as the
positive Laws of God; I mean that Government and Polity which God himself
prescribed to the Children of Israel; which they were religiously bound to
observe by virtue of their Covenant with God; which certainly was as sacred as
any Oath. Now these Laws did not admit of the Authority and Government of
Strangers, but expressly forbad it; that had they chose to be governed by any
Foreign Prince, they had greatly sinned in it; but this very Law, as sacred as
it was, gave way to necessity, and when they were conquered by the Aramites, or
Moabites, or any other Nation, it was no fault to submit to them. And if Force
would justify this in the Israelites, who had God for their King, and were
obliged by their Covenant with him to accept of no Foreign Prince to govern
them; it is hard if it will not justify the Subjects of Human Governments,
(most of which were at first founded in mere Force) whatever their Oaths or
Obligations be, to submit to a new and greater Force.

And this gives a sufficient Answer to what our Author adds in the place last
quoted: That God's being the King of Israel, would be an argument against their
submission; for the Doctor tells us, That where God entails the Crown, (he
refers to what I say about Ioash and Athaliah, of which more anon) the people
were not to submit to an Usurper, if the right Heir was alive; and therefore
much more where God himself was their King, (as if God were not the King of
Israel, when he set Kings over them) and then surely they might lawfully resist
these Kings, whose Subjects they were not, nor could be, and they needed no
especial Commission or Direction to destroy the Usurpers, as Ahud did Eglon;
but they might, nay they were bound to do it, as Jehoiada slew Athaliah. For I
hope God s Entail is not of greater force than his own immediate Government. So
that either their submission transferred a legal Right, or else their
submission was a sin.

This looks like something very deep, but it is so very a nothing, that I
cannot devise what he would be at: Would he prove, that God was not the King of
Israel, against the Scriptures, who say he was? Or would he prove, that the
Israelites ought not to have submitted to the Moabites, but have had all their
Throats cut by a vain opposition? Or would he prove against the Convocation,
that they were not the Subjects of King Eglon, but any Israelite might have
killed him without any such Commission from God, as Ahud had? Whatever he
intends to prove, if he knows that himself; yet as far as I am concerned, it is
no more but this: That while the Israelites were under no Foreign Force, but
had liberty to live by their own Laws, they were bound to make him their
Prince, on whom God had entailed the Crown; while they were under Force, they
might do as they could, and submit to the Conqueror, which submission could not
give those Usurpers a Legal Right, according to the Laws and Constitutions of
the Jewish Commonwealth, but according to the Laws of Nature, which allow
submission unto a Conqueror, it did.

Now if the Laws of Nature, when we are under the Protection of no Government,
allow us to submit to Force and Power; then call it Conquest, or what you will,
when I am under no Protection, and under Force, I am at liberty to submit,
whatever my former Obligations were; and I become as firmly and entirely bound
to such a new Power, as ever I was to the most Legal Prince.

Thus far the Laws of Nature go toward making a Legal King, and this is
confirmed by the Laws of Nations, which are nothing else but received Customs
and Usages, agreeable to the Laws of Nature, and right Reason: Now though
different Nations have different Laws of Succession to the Crown, yet they seem
all to agree in this, That he is the King, who is in possession of the Throne,
with the consent and submission of the People. The consent and submission of
the People, turn that, which was originally no more but Force, into a Civil and
Legal Authority, by giving themselves up to the Government of the Prince.

By this means Kingdoms and Empires are transferred, and Princes gain a Right
to those Thrones, to which they had no antecedent Right. When God intends to
pull down one King, and set up another, he gives success to the rising Prince,
puts the Nation into his hands, and so orders it, that by Force and Power, or
other Arts, he obtains their consent and submission, and then he is their King,
and is invested with God's Authority; especially when he is visibly settled in
the Throne by the united strength and power of the Kingdom.

Upon these terms, I suppose, our Author and I may very well agree; that the
Convocation does allow such Governments, as were begun by wicked means, when
they are thoroughly settled to become legal and rightful Powers, not by the Laws
of the Land, but by the consent and submission of the People, and the Authority
of God, wherewith they are invested: This I owned before, that the distinction
between Kings de Iure, and de Facto, related only to the Laws of the Land, for
upon other accounts, those Kings who are set up by God, and have his Authority,
are rightful Kings; that is, so rightful, that our Obedience is due to them.

But this is all shuffling and playing with words; for the single Question is,
Whether the Convocation by, thoroughly settled, means, that such Governments as
are begun by Usurpation or Rebellion, or other wicked means, cannot be
thoroughly settled, till they acquire a legal Right by the Laws of the Land;
which he says must be by the death or cession of the rightful King, or by a
long Prescription: now this I say, the Convocation could not mean, as appears
by the Instances they give of such Powers. For the Aramites and Moabites could
never, by the Constitution of the Jewish Commonwealth, be the legal and
rightful Kings of Israel: and a Commonwealth where there is a perpetual
Succession of Persons in whom the ordinary Power resides, can never die, nor
lose their claim to that Power, which is given them by God, though they might
submit when under Force; so that here was neither Death nor Cession, and they
were far from having such a Prescription, as our Author makes necessary to give
such Powers a Legal Right, and this answers all his other instances, where he
argues only from the term lawful.

Now if submission in such Cases will give a Right to our Obedience in
contradiction to the Laws of the Land; that which justified the submission of
Israel, will justify the submission of any other People to a prevailing Power,
and will give such Powers as good a Right, as the Aramites and Moabites could
challenge to Israel.

All that can be said here, I think, is this: That by submission, which gives a
legal Right, Answ. p. 5.
our Author means the submission and acknowledgment of those in whom the Right
is: That is to say, the submission of the People does not give a legal Right,
but the submission of the King does.

1. But for answer to this, in the first place I desire to know, what
submission of the King it is, that gives a legal Right? Is swearing Allegiance
a submission and acknowledgment? What became then of the Right of the House of
York, when the Duke of York swore Allegiance to Henry IV.? is yielding to Force
and Power, quitting the Administration of the Government, and leaving the
Throne, though with an intention to recover it again, when he can, a submission?
If it be, does not a King so far submit, when he leaves his Country, without
any legal Authority of Government, and leaves his People in the hands of a
prevailing Prince? Is not this as much a submission, as if he had stayed at
home, and laid aside his Crown, and submitted to a private Life, without
renouncing his Right and future Claim; but if nothing be a submission, but
renouncing his Right, and making a formal Resignation and Conveyance of Power,
I desire to know, how our Author will prove, that the Israelites thus submitted
to the Aramites and Moabites? Or what other submission they made, but a bare
yielding to Force and Power? What other submission did the King, and Princes,
and People of Judah make to the King of Babylon, when they were carried away
Captives to Babylon? And yet their submission our Author confesses gave a legal
Right.

2dly, Can the submission of the King give a legal Right to the Crown, without
the submission of the People? If not, it seems the People may have some right,
if not to Government, yet to give away the Government of themselves. If the
consent and submission of a People can make a King, when they have none, why
can it not do so, when they are under a new Force and Power, which is the same
state, as if they had no King? for Power has an immediate effect, and will
admit of no delays.

3ly, Cannot every private Man, or any City or Garrison, when they are
overpowered, and cannot be relieved by their Prince, submit for themselves to
the Conqueror, without the submission of their Kings? and do they not by such a
submission, according to the Laws of Nations, become the Subjects of the
Conqueror, till they are retaken? And why cannot a whole Nation in the same
circumstances do the same thing, though the King has escaped, and does not, and
will not submit to the Conqueror?

4ly, For has a Nation no Right, when the King is gone, to preserve themselves
by making the best terms they can with the new Powers? Must they ask leave of
their Prince, whether they shall continue a Nation, when he is gone? Whether
they shall submit to a new Prince, when he can protect them no longer? All
Mankind have this natural Right to submit for their own preservation, and need
ask no Princes leave to do it.

I urge all this only to show, that there are such Cases, wherein Subjects may
submit without the submission of their Prince, and when they do so, it gives
that Prince a Right to govern them; for they have made themselves his Subjects,
and if the Case is such, wherein they might lawfully do it, they confer a
lawful Right, though they cannot extinguish their former King's Claim by it,
who has not submitted.

5ly, For what will our Author say to the submission of Iaddus and the Jews to
Alexander, while Darius was living, whose Subjects they were, and who had not
submitted? and yet they assert, that by this means Alexander gained a lawful
Authority over them, and that they owed all the Duty and Obedience to
Alexander, which they formerly had done to the Kings of Babylon and Persia,
(Can. 31. page 67.) and then according to this Convocation the submission of
Subjects, without the submission of the King, gives a lawful Authority.

Our Author is much troubled about this Story of Iaddus and Alexander, Answer,
p. 3, 4, 5, 6, etc.
and spends several Pages to confute Josephus, who is the only Relator of it. I
will not engage in this Quarrel, the Vindication of Josephus as to this Story,
being undertaken by a more learned Pen, as I suppose our Author will know,
before he will see this. But this I must say, that if they part with this
Story, they lose so glorious a Testimony (as they used to account it) to the
indispensable obligation of an Oath of Allegiance, while the King to whom we
have sworn Allegiance lives, whether he be in possession or out of it, that
they will not find the like again in any Records of Time: but it seems they are
sensible Iaddus confuted their sense of it himself, by submitting to Alexander,
notwithstanding his Oath of Allegiance, while Darius was living, and now they
are willing to part with it.

Well, Ibid. p. 11.
but as he himself observes; the Dispute is not, whether the Story be true or
false, but whether the Convocation believed it: for if they believed the Story
true, by their Judgment on the case, we may know what their sense was about
this matter.

This he grants, but says likewise, That their sense is not to be extended
beyond their words; and this I grant: nor are they to be made parties to any
more of the story, than they have inserted in their Book. But this I deny; for
if they believed any of the Story upon Iosephus's Authority, by the same reason
they must believe all; and if they pass their Judgment on a matter of fact,
such wise Men ought to be presumed to judge upon the whole matter of fact;
especially when different circumstances will alter the nature of the Action.

According to our Author's Opinion, it makes a great difference in Iaddus's
submission to Alexander, whether Darius were living or dead: And can we think
such wise Men as made up that Convocation, should not consider this? though, as
he says, they take no notice of it: And if they did consider it, and took their
Story from Josephus, (and it seems by him, they could have it from no other
Author) it is plain, they must believe Darius to be living, when Iaddus, who
was his Subject, and had sworn Allegiance to him, notwithstanding this
submitted to Alexander: which shows what their Opinion was, That Subjects, who
had sworn Allegiance to their Prince, might yet, when under Force, as Iaddus
was, become the Subjects of another prevailing Prince.

What he mentions concerning Iaddus's Answer to Alexander, I answered before in
The Case of Allegiance, p. 8. and he has not thought fit to make any Reply to
it.

But he adds, Ibid. p. 12.
Granting the Story true, it is not to the purpose, it is urged for: that is,
it will not justify a Subject under an Oath of Allegiance to submit to another
Prince, while his own King is living; and his reason for it is this: Josephus
tells us, That God appeared to Jaddus in a Dream, and warned him to submit to
Alexander, and to meet him in that solemn manner he did: so that this is a
singular and exempt Case, and falls within the circumstances of Iehu and Ahud.
-- It was always the Custom in the Jewish Church, in Cases of great extremity
and emergency, to have recourse to God for some express Revelation, what they
should do. And here Josephus tells us, were all the Preparations to it: they
fasted and prayed, and the next Night God appeared to Jaddus, (however, as we
have the Story from Josephus, so we must take all from him, and he tells
expressly that God appeared to him) and ordered him so to do, and God's
appearing and Command stands upon the same Authority with all the rest of the
Story. And then it is wholly besides the purpose it is alleged for: For there
is a wide difference between acting by common and standing Rules, and by
express Revelation. And if these Gentlemen will show us any express Revelation
for what they do, as Jaddus had, then they say something; but till they can
show that, this Example of Jaddus, if it were true, will do them no service.

We are now disputing about the sense of the Convocation, and therefore must
remember, that the Convocation does not assign this reason, why Iaddus, after
his Oath to Darius, submitted to Alexander; for they make no doubt at all about
the lawfulness of his submission, and therefore never inquire into the reason
of it, which they thought visible enough in the force he was under. But I will
take no advantage of this, if he will but remember it, when we come to the Case
of Iehoiada and Athaliah.

But the Answer to all this is plain: For as Josephus tells the Story, Iaddus
never questioned, whether it were lawful for him to submit to Alexander, when
he was coming with a great Force to Jerusalem; but his care was, how he might
atone for his former contumacy, by an early submission; and the Prayers and
Sacrifices he commanded the People to offer, Joseph. l. 11. cap. 8.
were not to beg God's direction, whether he should submit to Alexander or not,
for that he was determined to do, but that God would be favorable to his
People, and deliver them from the imminent danger they were in, from a provoked
Conqueror; and when God is said to appear to him in his Dream, he answered no
question about the lawfulness of submitting to Alexander, but directed him, how
to do it in such a manner, as should prevent the threatened danger: that he
should appear in his Pontificial Attire, in which, it seems, God himself had
formerly appeared to Alexander, and promised him success over the Persians, by
which Alexander knew, that he was the Priest of that God, to whom he owed his
Victories, and this made him worship the High Priest, and show all kindness to
the Jewish Nation. So that Iaddus had no Revelation of the lawfulness of
submitting to Alexander, nor have we need of any; but we have the Judgment of
the Convocation upon this, which they intended as a common and standing Rule.

But the great instance our Author depends on, and doubts not to carry the
Cause by it, is the Case of Ioash and Athaliah. The Story as it is related by
the Convocation is this:

After the death of Abaziah King of Judah, Convocat. chapter 23. p. 41.
his Mother Athaliah finding his Children all to be very young, killed them all
but the youngest, and reigned by Usurpation six Years over the Land. The said
youngest Child (whose name was Ioash) was secretly conveyed away by his Aunt
Iehosabeth, his Father's Sister, and Wife to Iehoiada the High Priest; who kept
him so secretly in the Temple, as that Athaliah the Usurper could never hear of
him. Now after the said six Years that Ioash, the true and natural Heir
apparent to the Crown, had been so brought up, he the said Iehoiada, being the
King's Uncle, and the chief Head or Prince of his Tribe, sent through Judah for
the Levites and chief Fathers both of Judah and Benjamin, to come unto him to
Jerusalem; who accordingly repairing thither, and being made acquainted by him
with the Preservation of their Prince, (as is aforesaid) and that it was the
Lord's will that he should reign over them; they altogether, by a Covenant,
acknowledged their Allegiance unto him, as unto their lawful King; and so
disposed of things, as presently after he was Crowned and Anointed; which
dutiful Office of Subjects being performed, they apprehended the Usurper
Athaliah and show her, as before it was by the said States resolved. In all the
Process of which Action nothing was done, either by Iehoiada the High Priest,
or by the rest of the Princes or People of Judah and Benjamin, which God
himself did not require at their hands. Ioash their late King's Son being then
their only natural Lord and Sovereign, although Athaliah kept him six Years
from the Possession of his Kingdom.

This is the Story, and their Canon upon it is this: If any Man therefore shall
affirm, either that Athaliah did well, in murdering her Son's Children, or
that Jehoiada and his Wife did amiss in preserving the life of their King
Joash; or that Athaliah was not a Tyrannical Usurper, (the right Heir of that
Kingdom being alive) or that it was neither lawful for Jehoiada, and the rest
of the Princes and Levites and People to have yielded their Subjection to their
lawful King; nor having so done, and their King being in Possession of his
Crown, to have joined together for the overthrowing of Athaliah the Usurper; or
that Jehoiada the High Priest, was not bound as he was a Priest, both to inform
the Princes and People of the Lord's Promise, that Joash should Reign over
them, and likewise Anoint him, or that this Fact either of the Princes,
Priests, or People was to be held for a lawful Warrant, for any afterward,
either Princes, Priests or People to have deposed any of the Kings of Judah,
who by right of Succession came to their Crowns, or to have killed them for any
respect whatsoever, and to have set another in their places, according to their
own Choice; or that either this Example of Jehoiada, or any thing else in the
Old Testament did give then to the High Priest any Authority to Dispute,
Determine, or Judge, whether the Children of the Kings of Judah should either
be kept from the Crown, because their Fathers were Idolators, or being in
Possession of it, should be deposed from it in that respect, or in any other
respect whatsoever, he does greatly err. I have transcribed this, because we
must have a little dispute about it, and it was fitting the Reader should have
both the Story and the Canon before him.

Our Author' s Argument from this Story is this: Answer, p. 17.
It is plain the Convocation does not conceive, that the Enjoyment of the Crown
with all its Dignities, etc. is that thorough Settlement, to which is due
Subjection and Obedience as to God's Authority. Athaliah personally enjoyed the
Crown with all its Dignities, etc. and all Places of Trust and Power, etc. were
in her hands, and at her disposal, and this also for no less a time than six
Years, and in as full and ample a manner, as any Usurper, or any rightful King
ever enjoyed them: but for all that the Convocation is so far from urging
Obedience to her, as to God's Authority, that they expressly justify the
resisting, nay, the slaying her. And this is a clear Demonstration, that by a
thorough Settlement the Convocation does not mean a full Possession of Power
merely: for they say, when a Government is fully settled, it ought to be
obeyed, as God's Authority, not only for Fear, but for Conscience sake: But
they say also, that when Athaliah was fully possessed of the Throne, she ought
not to be obeyed, but to be resisted and slain. And the Conclusion from these
Premises is, That to be fully possessed of the Throne, is not of it self to be
so thoroughly settled as to make it God's Authority, and Obedience to become a
Duty.

Now it were sufficient here to observe, that he has not given the true Notion
of a full and settled Possession; for he has left out the principal part of it,
as I state it, viz. When the Estates of the Realm, and the Great Body of the
Nation has submitted to such a Prince: Which in the Case of Antiochus is one
thing, Convocat. p. 69.
the Convocation expressly makes necessary to a thorough Settlement, The
Government of that Tyrant (Antiochus) being not then either generally received
by Submission, nor settled by Continuance: though I cannot blame him for this,
because the Author, whom he answers, took no notice of it; but I must blame him
for affirming, that the Convocation say, That when Athaliah was fully possessed
of the Throne, she ought not to be obeyed, but to be resisted and slain: for
they say no such thing, and though he may imagine this to be the Consequence of
what they say, he ought not therefore to affirm, that they said it, because he
may mistake in his Consequence, and that he has done so, shall presently appear:

The Convocation says not one word of the thorough Settlement of Athaliah in
the Throne; but if we may learn the Sense of the Convocation (as this Author
concludes we may) from what Bishop Buckridge, Answer, p. 27.
a Member of that Convocation, has written in his Defense of Barclay, they did
not think her settled in the Throne: for when Bellarmin had objected the quiet
Possession of Athaliah for six Years, the Bishop, as this Author cites him,
answers, How quiet soever it was, it was violent, for she was guarded with
Soldiers; and affirms, that Athaliah had not acquired a Right to the Crown, (I
suppose he means only such a Right as a thorough Settlement gives) neither by
the Consent of the People, nor by the Prescription of six Years: Six Years were
not long enough for a Prescription, which he says must be a hundred Years; and
the Consent of the People, it seems, she had not, and therefore being a mere
Usurper, and no Queen, she might be Deposed. And thus his whole Argument is
lost. And here I must observe, that the Bishop allows, as the Convocation does,
that either the Consent of the People, or a long Prescription gives a Right;
that is, such a Right as makes Obedience due to Princes thus settled without a
legal Title: and therefore our Author greatly prevaricates, when he pretends to
give the Bishop's sense of a thorough Settlement; that is, when a Right to the
Government is acquired by a Prescription, and that is a long and uninterrupted
Possession, joined with the Consent of the People. The Bishop distinguishes
between the Consent of the People, and a long Prescription, and says that
either of them will give a Right: And our Author, though he pretends to give
the Bishop's sense, makes both of them together necessary to give a Right, a
long and uninterrupted Possession, which is what the Bishop calls Prescription,
joined with the Consent of the People; so that he leaves out neither and nor as
insignificant Particles, and likes with better, as more agreeable to his
Design: and at this rate he may make Convocations and Bishops speak his sense,
when he pleases.

But to gratify our Author, let us suppose the Convocation did own Athaliah to
have been as thoroughly settled on the Throne, as any Usurper can be, while the
right Heir is living; and then the Consequence is, That the Convocation teaches
that Kings and Queens de Facto, who have all the Settlement that can be had
without Right, may be Deposed and Murdered by their Subjects: And will this
Author say, that this is the Doctrine of the Convocation? Do they not expressly
warn us against believing any Person who shall affirm by all the Arguments
which Wit or Learning could devise, Convocat. Car. 27* 26 p. 55.
that God had called him to Murder the King de Facto, under whom he lived?

It seems then the Convocation made a great difference between the Case of
Athaliah, and other Kings de Facto, who had no better Title, nor more thorough
Settlement than she had, (if they thought her settled in the Throne, without
which Supposition our Author's Argument is lost) for they justify the killing
Athaliah, Case of Allegiance, p. 34, 35.
and condemn the murder of a King de Facto; and this I gave two accounts of in
my Case of Allegiance.

1. All that this Story amounts to is no more than this: That when the legal
and rightful Heir is actually possessed of his Throne, Subjects may return to
their Allegiance, and by the Authority of their King prosecute the Usurper; for
Ioash was first Anointed and Proclaimed, before any one stirred a finger
against Athaliah; now this is a very different Case from raising a Rebellion
against a Prince, who is in possession of the Throne, to restore an Ejected
Prince.

2. But this was a peculiar Case; for God himself had Entailed the Kingdom of
Judah on the Posterity of David; and therefore nothing could justify their
Submission to an Usurper, when the King's Son was found, to whom the Kingdom
did belong by a Divine Entail: 1 Chr. 23. 5.
and by this Iehoiada justifies what he did, Behold the King's son shall reign,
as the Lord has said of the sons of David. Now when God has Entailed the Crown
by an express Declaration of his Will, and Nomination of the Person or Family
that shall Reign, (as it was in the Kingdom of Judah) Subjects are bound to
adhere to their Prince of God's choosing, when he is known, and to persecute all
Usurpers to the utmost, and never submit to their Government: But in other
Kingdoms, where God makes Kings and Entailes the Crown, not by express
Nomination, but by his Providence, the placing a Prince in the Throne, and
settling him there in the full Administration of the Government, is a reason to
submit to him, as to God's Ordinance.

This our Author answers with great Triumph in his Postscript, (p. 4, 5.) but
with how much Reason, I shall now examine; and I must begin with his Answer to
the second:

This Distinction, (That God himself had Entailed the Kingdom of Judah upon
David's Posterity) he says, is not in the Convocation Book, and so does not
affect their Sense: I grant it, and therefore did not concern the
Convocation-Book in the Story, nor make any mention of it; but only raised this
Objection from the Story, and gave that Answer to it, by which Iehoiada the
High Priest justified what he did: For though the Convocation takes notice of
this Story, yet they neither make nor answer this Objection in direct Terms:
They had another Design in mentioning it, and fitted their Answers wholly to
that, viz. to prove against the Papists, Convocat. chapter 23. p. 41.
That no Priest in the Old Testament did ever Depose from their Crowns any of
their Kings, how wicked soever, or had any Authority so to do. And because this
Example of Iehoiada used to be urged by them to this purpose, they show that no
such thing can be proved from it.

But though the Convocation does not answer a Question which they never proposed,
yet this is a good Answer to it, and agreeable to the Sense of the Convocation
in that place: for they take notice, that Iehoiada, when he had sent to the
Levites, and chief Fathers both of Judah and Benjamin, acquainted them with the
Preservation of their Prince, and that it was the Lord's will, that he should
Reign over them; which plainly refers to that Divine Entail of the Crown upon
David's Posterity; as Iehoiada expressly told them, Behold the King's son shall
reign, as the Lord has said of the sons of David. So that it is evident, the
Convocation itself answers the Difficulties of this Story by the Divine Entail;
and it is as true and proper an Answer to that Question, Whether we may Murder
a King de Facto, to place the right Heir on his Throne, since Iohoiada anointed
Ioash and slew Athaliah? To say, That the Divine Entail of the Crown made a
vast difference between the Case of Athaliah and other Kings de Facto, who are
settled in their Thrones; as it is to that Question, Whether the High Priest
have not Authority to Depose one King, and set up another, since Iehoiada
actually did so, anointed Ioash and killed Athaliah? To say, that this was done
not by any ordinary Jurisdiction, which the High Priest had over Kings, but in
Obedience to God, who had Entailed the Crown on David's Posterity.

He proceeds, They do no not speak of this, when they call Athaliah an Usurper,
and justify the Proceedings of Jehoiada and the People against her; but the
reason they give is general, The right Heir of the Kingdom being alive, which
extends to all Kingdoms, that are Entailed, and go by Succession.

This Author, who would confine me so strictly to the Sense of the Convocation,
even where I don't appeal to it, makes very bold with the Convocation himself:
For they do not offer to justify the Proceedings of Iehoiada and the People
against Athaliah, by saying, That the right Heir of the Kingdom was alive; but
only prove by this, that she was an Usurper who had no legal Right to the
Throne, the right Heir being living: But if our Author will think again, I
presume, he will own, that they are two very different Questions, Whether such
a Prince be an Usurper; and whether he may be Deposed and Murdered? The
Convocation I Am sure makes them two Questions, when they will not allow of the
Murder of a King de Facto. But on the other hand, the Convocation justifies
Iehoiada from the express Command of God: p. 24, 25.
In all the process of which Action nothing was done, either by Jehoiada the
High Priest, or by the rest of the Princes and People of Judah and Benjamin,
which God himself did not require at their hands; Joash their late King's Son
being then their only natural Lord and Sovereign, although Athaliah kept him
for six Years from the Possession of his Kingdom. How did God himself require
this at their hands? Was it only by the Principles of Reason and Natural
Justice, in setting the right Heir upon the Throne? No; by its being God's
Will, and God's requiring it at their hands, they plainly mean, GOD's entailing
the Crown upon David's Posterity, which made it the Duty of Jehoiada, and the
rest of the Princes, Levites and People, to yield their Subjection to their
lawful King; and having done so, and their King being in possession of the
Throne, to join together for the overthrowing of Athaliah the Usurper; and that
Jehoiada, the High Priest, was bound as he was a Priest, to inform the Princes
and People, of the Lord's purpose, (which can refer only to this Entail) that
Jehoiada should Reign over them, and likewise to Anoint him. Which contains a
particular Justification of all that was done; and all resolved into the Will
and Purpose of God, that Ioash should Reign; which was no otherwise declared,
but by God's Entailing the Kingdom upon the Posterity of David.

It was the Duty of Jehoiada and the rest of the Princes, etc. to yield
Subjection to their lawful King, who was Heir by Succession; for that they
expressly make equivalent in the Kingdom of Judah to being Elected and Named by
God himself, (Can. 17. p. 28.) And therefore Chapter 19. p. 30. affirm, That they
should receive such Kings as sent to them by God himself; which proves, that
this cannot extend to Heirs merely by Humane Succession, which is not
equivalent to God's Nomination. Iehoiada sent through Judah for the Levites, and
chief Fathers both of Judah and Benjamin, to come to him to Jerusalem, (Chapter 23.
p. 41.) and therehe discovers the King's Son to them. Thus the Convocation says
by the Constitution of that Government it ought to be, that the Prince, whom
God had appointed, should be made known to the People, and they should
cheerfully submit to him. (Chapter 17. p. 27.) and they add, Afterward also the
like course was held upon the Death of every King, to make his Successor known
to the People.

Iehoiada, who was High Priest, gave this notice to the People, and took a
Covenant of them, and Anointed their King; and this also the Convocation says
was his Duty: As we have said of the People, That when the Kings of Judah were
to succeed one another, their Duty was to come together with Joy and Gladness,
to receive them for their Kings, (as sent to them by God himself) and
accordingly to submit themselves unto their Authority and Government: So at
such times the Priests for the most part, besides their general Duties, as
Subjects, had some further Service to be then by them performed; the parts of
which Service are all of them manifest in the Advancement of King Solomon to
the Royal Throne of his Father David; where the Priests, by King David's
direction, did give Thanks to God, and prayer for King Solomon -- and Zadock
the High Priest did himself Anoint him. I suppose our Author may by this time
be satisfied, that the Convocation resolves all into the Authority of a Divine
Entail, and makes a great difference between a Divine and Humane Entail.

He adds, And it is plain, they thought of no such Difference as to this
Matter; but that a thorough Settlement of a Government (and though attained by
the same ill means) was the same thing, and had God's Authority in Judah as
well as any other Nation; as in the instances of the Babylonians, Macedonians,
and Romans, whose Government over the Jews was not attained by honester Means
than Athaliah's, and was as much contrary to the Entail upon David's House, as
hers; and yet they justify and require Obedience to them, but justify the
slaying her: And therefore it is plain, that by a thorough Settlement they do
not mean a full Possession of Power in the Kingdom of Judah, as had the
Babylonians, Macedonians, or Romans, nor do they reckon God's Entail upon
David's Posterity any ground of difference in this Matter, for the Government
of Judah by the Babylonias, was as much contrary to that Entail, as the
Government of Athaliah.

Now all this is answered in one word, from what I have before discoursed: The
Entail God made upon David's Posterity, did always oblige the Jews, when they
were at their own Choice, and had Power enough to take the King, on whom God
had entailed the Crown; which was evidently their Case when Iehoiada anointed
Ioash, and slew Athaliah; but when they were under Force, (as they were under
the Babylonians, Macedonians, and Romans) no Entail, though made by God himself
could bind them; and then I hope it will be granted, that no Humane Entails can
bind any People, who are under Force, if a Divine Entail cannot do it.

And thus our way is prepared to answer what he objects against the first
Account I gave of this Case of Athaliah, viz. That all that this Story amounts
to, is no more than this, That when the legal and rightful Heir is actually
possessed of his Throne, Subjects may return to their Allegiance, and by the
Authority of their King prosecute the Usurper.

Our Author answers, Postscript, p. 4.
The Story amounts to a great deal more; and that is, That Subjects may set the
rightful Heir upon the Throne, although it be in the actual possession of the
Usurper; for so Iehoiada and the People did. It is true, it does signify
something more with reference to Ioash, but I had regard only to the Case of
Athaliah; but yet it does not signify so generally, as he puts it; but it
signifies only this, That Subjects by the express Command and Authority of GOD
(as the Convocation teaches) may place the rightful Prince upon his Throne,
though it be possessed by an Usurper: And this will do our Author no service,
for it will not reach to all Hereditary Kings, but to those only of God's
Appointing and Nomination, or where God himself has made the Entail, as it was
in the Kingdom of Judah.

I showed this was the Case here, that the rightful Heir was actually possessed
of the Throne; for Joash was first anointed and proclaimed, before any one
stirred a finger against Athaliah. To this he answers, But is the Doctor sure,
that Joash was actually possessed of the Throne? He was anointed indeed, but is
anointing actual possession? And it will not be easy to prove it according to
the Doctor's Notion of Possession, of having the whole Administration of
Affairs, and all the Authority of the Kingdom in his hands.

I reply: The Convocation arffims, That King Ioash was in possession of his
Crown, before Athaliah was slain; and I believe, if our Author thinks of it
again, he will confess, that Anointing gives actual Possession to a rightful
King, tho a thorough Settlement of his Government is necessary to the full
Possession of an Usurper: and the reason of this difference is manifest; for
where there is Right, nothing more is necessary to give Possession, but that
Subjects actually own and recognize that Right, and accept him for their King;
for his Right makes their Obedience a Duty, when he is in Possession, how weak
and unsettled soever his Government be: But when a Prince has no legal Right to
the Crown, nor consequently to the Obedience of his Subjects, it is only a
thorough Settlement, which makes Obedience a necessary Duty.

And yet if that will satisfy our Author, the whole Administration of Affairs,
and all the Authority of the Kingdom was then in Ioash's hands, and Athaliah
had none of it: for all the Princes, and Levites, and People, that is all who
had the Administration of Affairs, and the Power of the Kingdom in their hands,
yielded their Subjection to Ioash as to their lawful King; and that put the
whole Authority and Administration into his hands: and what Authority Athaliah
had left, appeared in her Tragical End.

He proceeds: But howev^r, who Anointed? and who Proclaimed him? and who put
him in Possession? Why truly no body else, but his own Subjects, and those very
Men that had lived six Years under the Usurper. And then I perceive, that
Subjects may stand by the rightful Heir against an Usurper, though possessed of
the Throne for some Years: But then where is that Fidelity, Allegiance, and
Obedience, that the Doctor says, we are bound to pay to usurped Powers

Answ. Truly just where it was before, in the Convocation Book, and in the
Scriptures, which requires our Subjection to the present Powers, and in the
reason and necessity of things; but this was an exempt Case, upon account of a
Divine Entail; and where God himself has made the Entail, no Usurpation can cut
it off, nor absolve Subjects from their Duty to him, whom God himself has made
their King; but it is not so with humane Entails, of which more presently.

Now I said, that for Subjects to return to their Allegiance, and by the
Authority of their King to prosecute the Usurper, when the rightful Heir is
actually possessed of his Throne, is a very different Case from raising
Rebellions against a Prince, who is in the possession of the Throne, to restore
an ejected Prince. To this he answers: Was not Athaliah in possession of the
Throne, when Jehoiada anointed Joash? I answer as I have before done: She was
in the actual and visible possession of the Throne, but against a Divine
Entail, and therefore her possession was a nullity, and when they knew the
King's Son was living, to whom by the Law of God they were to submit, they were
bound to look upon it as a nullity, and not to consider her as their Queen; but
this is not the question; the question is, Whether Athaliah were possessed of
the Throne after Ioash was anointed, when Iehoiada gave Orders to kill her: and
that I suppose our Author will not say, that she was in possession of the
Throne, when the rightful Heir was actually possessed of it.

But, he says, the question is concerning Allegiance to an Usurper in the
possession of the Throne, and as to that there is no difference: For these pay
as little Allegiance to an Usurper, who anoint a King, and then depose him, as
those who do it to restore an ejected one: and I would fain know, what
difference there is (as to Allegiance to an Usurper) between anointing a new
King, and upon his Authority dispossessing an Usurper, and doing the same thing
upon the Authority of one already anointed.

Now I grant, there is no difference between anointing a King, and upon his
Authority dispossessing an Usurper, and doing the same thing upon the Authority
of one already anointed, in such Cases wherein it is the Duty of Subjects
either to anoint a new King, or to restore an old anointed King, in opposition
to the Usurper, who is settled in the Throne; but this is a Duty only, where the
Usurpations, how thoroughly settled soever it be, is against God's Entail, which
was the peculiar Case of Ioash; and yet even in this Case the Convocation
thought it very considerable, that the Princes, Levites, and People, yielded
Subjection to their lawful King, and having so done, and their King being in
possession of his Throne, joined together for the overthrowing of Athaliah the
Usurper; if the Convocation had not thought, that there was some difference
between killing Athaliah before or after the Anointing of Ioash, they would not
have laid so much stress upon the time, when she was slain; that having so
done, and their King being in possession of his Throne, they joined together
for the overthrowing of Athaliah the Usurper.

And I wonder our Author should perceive no difference between these two: for
though it had been the same thing to Athaliah, whether she had been killed,
before or after the Anointing of Ioash, yet it greatly altered the nature of
the fact; and that upon two accounts, both with respect to the Authority,
whereby it was done, and to the Character of the Person, who suffered.

The Convocation will not allow a private Man to kill a King de Facto, and that
was the Case of the Jews during Athaliah's Reign, before Ioash's Title was
recognized, and he anointed, and placed on the Throne; but when this was done,
they had the visible and actual Authority of their King, to slay the Usurper,
which is a parallel Case to that of Ahud and King Eglon. Before Ahud was made
by God the Judge and Savior of his People, they teach, that it was unlawful
for him, Convocat. chapter 27. p. 52.
or any one else, to have killed King Eglon; but the Case was altered, when God
himself immediately had made him Judge, and had given him a full and absolute
Authority, (independent upon any, but upon him that gave it) to undertake any
thing, that by God's direction appertained to his place.

Thus whatever Authority Athaliah had before, when Ioash was anointed, she sunk
into the state of a Subject, and then to kill her, was not to kill a Queen de
Facto, but a Subject who had been an Usurper, but now was a Subject again, and
therefore no Fidelity, or Allegiance was due to her. This is the Case of Iehu,
who was a Subject, but commanded by God to be anointed King over Israel; and
accordingly Elizeus the Prophet caused Jehu to be anointed, Ibid. chapter 25. p. 46.
and God's Message to be delivered unto him; who presently upon the knowledge
of God's Will, and the submission of the Princes and Captains of Israel to him,
as to their lawful King, did put in execution the said Message, by killing
Joram (before that time his Sovereign,, but then his Subject), etc. Now, I
suppose, our Author will confess, that there is a difference between killing
with Authority, and without; and between killing a Sovereign Prince, and
killing a Subject by the Authority of the Prince; and this was the Case of
Athaliah, when Ioash was anointed.

The Convocation was very careful not to encourage Subjects to rise up against
their Prince, though he were but a King de Facto; and therefore from these
examples of Ahud and Iehu, expressly observe, that God foreseeing in his
heavenly Wisdom, Chapter 27. p. 53.
and Divine Providence, what mischief private Men, under the color of these
Examples, might otherwise have pretended, or attempted against their Sovereigns
(as being either discontented of themselves, or set into some fury by other
malicious Persons) he did so order and dispose of all things, in the execution
of these such his extraordinary Judgments; as that thereby it might plainly
appear to any (that should not wilfully hood-wink himself) never to be lawful
for any Person whatsoever, upon pretense of any Revelation, Inspiration, or
Commandment from his Divine Majesty, either to touch the Person of his
Sovereign, or to bear Arms against him; except God should first advance the
said Person from his private Estate, and make him a King, or an absolute
Prince, to succeed his late Master in his Kingdom or Principality.

If our Author will not, yet I hope, all impartial Readers will think this a
sufficient Answer to the Case of Ioash and Athaliah. But however he will not
give it over thus; but undertakes to prove, that my Arguments will equally
justify submission to Athaliah in the Kingdom of Judah, Postscript, p. 5.
notwithstanding such Entail, as to any Usurper in any other Nation.

Well! and suppose he can prove it; what then? Did I ever deny that it was
lawful to submit to Athaliah, while she was possessed of the Throne, and Ioash,
the true Heir, concealed? Does he find in Scripture, that the Jews are
condemned for submitting all this while to Athaliah? If any one should have
been condemned for it, Iehoiada the High Priest was the Man, who knew that
Ioash was living; and yet for six Years together, while he thought fit to
conceal this Secret, he submitted himself to Athaliah, and acted under her
Authority, and neither blames himself, nor any of the Nation for doing so.

Surely Iehoiada had not the same Notions of Loyalty, which our Author has, for
then he durst not have submitted to Athaliah, when he knew Ioash was living,
and was in his own keeping. For, (says our Author) while the Government is as
unjust as the Rebellion and Encroachment, Ibid. p. 3.
a Man cannot justly become a Party to the Government, no more than to the
Rebellion, for they are both equally unjust; unless the stealing of a Purse is
very unjust; but the keeping it after it is stolen is very just. -- He that
partakes with Injustice (as he certainly does, that joins with it) partakes
with the guilt too. And if the Power be unjust, then to abet, to defend,
support and maintain that Power, must be unjust likewise. And I add, to do this
for six Years is unjust likewise; and yet this Iehoiada did, and is no where
condemned for it.

So that our Author mistakes the question: It is not enough for him to prove,
that my Arguments will justify submission to Athaliah, while she was in the
possession of the Throne, and of the Power of the Kingdom; for let the Entail
be what it will, a Divine or Humane Entail, it is always lawful to submit to
Power; but the question is, whether my Arguments give as irresistible Authority
to Athaliah, who usurped the Throne contrary to a Divine Entail, as they do to
other Kings de Facto, who are thoroughly settled in their Thrones, contrary to
mere legal Rights, and humane Entailes; if they proved this, I should confess
my Arguments were naught, as proving too much; but if they only justify the
present submission of the Jews to Athaliah, while Ioash was concealed, and they
thought all the King's Sons had been cut off, I see no hurt in this: The
Scripture does not condemn them for it, and it is certain, they ought to be
justified in it, and I desire to know, how our Author will justify them
according to his Principles.

For we must observe, the Convocation does not meddle with that question, when
it becomes lawful to submit to usurped Powers, but when it becomes our Duty: It
is lawful to do it, when we are under a Power, which we cannot resist, but when
such Usurped and Illegal Powers are thoroughly settled, then it becomes our Duty
to submit, and to pay all that Obedience, which Subjects owe even to the most
rightful Powers.

Now we know, the general submission of the People is necessary to a thorough
settlement of such new Governments, and therefore if such Governments may be
settled without the sin of the Subjects, it must be lawful in some Cases, to
submit, before the Government be settled; for the Government cannot be settled
without their submission: but when the Government is settled by such submission,
then submission, which necessity justified before, becomes a Duty; and those
who would not submit at first, or might have refused to do so without sin, when
the Government is settled by a general submission, are then bound in Conscience
to submit themselves.

The Question then between us is, or ought to be this, if he intends to oppose
me; Not whether the Jews might lawfully submit to Athaliah, while she was
possessed of the Throne, for this I grant they might lawfully do; but whether
they having sosubmitted, and she being thoroughly settled in her Throne (for
that our Author will suppose) it were not as unlawful upon my Principles, for
the Jews to set up Ioash, and to kill Athaliah, as it is for any other People
to Depose and Murder a King de facto, whose Government is thoroughly settled
among them. And here he takes notice of two Arguments I make use of, the
Argument from Providence, and from the necessity of Government, for the
preservation of human Societies, which, he says, will equally serve Athaliah,
as any other King or Queen de facto; and if they will, I will give them up for
lost.

1. As for Providence; Postscript, p. 7.
the sum of all, he says, is this, That according to my Principles, Athaliah
was placed in the Throne by God, by his Counsel, Decree, and Order, and
peculiar Order; Well! I must own it; for I know none but God, who can advance
to the Throne; and I know no more hurt in owning, that God exalted Athaliah to
the Throne, than that he exalted Baasha, who slew Nadab the Son of Jeroboam,
and Reigned in his stead; and yet God himself, by his Prophet, tells Baasha, I
exalted thee out of the dust, and made thee Prince over my people Israel, 1
Kings 16. 2.

And what does he prove from this? Now Athaliah (says he) had the actual
administration of Sovereign Power, and therefore according to the Doctor she
was Queen by God's Authority, though not by the Law of the Land; and Allegiance
must be due to her, as well as to any other: And all the Doctor's Arguments are
as conclusive and valid for submission to Athaliah, as for submission to any
body else. Grant all this, and what then? Why then this justifies the
submission of the Jews to Athaliah, while she was possessed of the Throne, and
no rightful Heir appeared: And what hurt is there in this? Will our Author
condemn them for this submission? or does the Scripture, or Convocation do it?

If he would have concluded any thing to the purpose, he should have said, And
therefore it was unlawful for Jehoiada to have anointed Joash, and to have
killed Athaliah. But this he knew did not follow from my Principles; for I
expressly distinguish between God's making Kings by a particular nomination,
Case of Allegiance, p. 11.
as he made Kings in Jewry, and entailed the Kingdom of Judah on David' s
Posterity, and his making Kings by his Providence, as he does in other Nations.
Now what I say about the Rights and Prerogatives of Kings advanced to the
Throne, and settled there by the Divine Providence, concerns only such Kingdoms,
where God makes Kings only by his Providence; not such Kingdoms where God
ordinarily makes Kings by a particular nomination of the Person, or by a Divine
entail, which is equivalent to a particular nomination: For this greatly alters
the Case.

To make this plain, let us consider the state of the Kingdom of Judah, and of
the Kingdom of Israel, after the Ten Tribes were divided from the House of
David. God first made Kings by an express nomination of the Persons, as he did
Soul and David, and afterward entailed the Kingdom on David's Posterity; when
the Ten Tribes were divided from Judah, he still reserved to himself the
Prerogative of nominating their Kings when he pleased; but yet he did not so
strictly confine himself to nominate whom he would have to be King, or to an
entail of his own making; but that he sometimes set up Kings by his Providence,
without a particular nomination, or any successive right, as he did in other
Nations; let us then consider what the right of these providential Kings was in
Judah and Israel.

Now these Kings, when they were settled in their Thrones, had all the rights of
other Sovereign Princes of Judah or Israel, excepting this, that they were
liable to be divested of their Kingdom by God's nomination of a new King, or by
the revival of an old Entail. When God nominated any King, and gave command to
his Prophets to anoint him, it was always for life; and though during his Life he
might nominate another to succeed him after his death, as he did David to
succeed Saul, yet he never nominated another to take his Life and his Crown
from him: and when he had made a perpetual Entail, though he might for a time
interrupt the Succession, he did not cut it off; but it was otherwise with mere
providential Kings, as it must necessarily be in such Kingdoms which were under
the immediate disposal and nomination of God: A new nomination, or the
appearing of the right Heir, put an end to their Reign. As for example.

Jeroboam was placed on the Throne of Israel by God's nomination, and Reigned
as long as he lived, but for his sins God would not entail the Kingdom on his
Family; but Baasha slew his Son Nadab, and succeeded in the Kingdom, and was
the first providential King of Israel without a Divine nomination or entail.
Elah, Baasha's Son, was slain by Zimri, and the Children of Israel, without any
Divine appointment, made Omri King; Ahab his Son succeeded Omri, and Ioram
Ahab, who were all advanced by the Divine Providence, without God's nomination;
but now their sins being very provoking, God commands his Prophet to anoint
Iehu King over Israel, to destroy the Family of Ahab; and Iehu as soon as he
was anointed, immediately takes possession of the Kingdom, kills Ioram, and
destroys the House of Ahab. For though Ioram was advanced by the Providence of
God, and was the third successive King of his Family, and therefore had a good
right against all human claims; yet he could have no unalterable right in the
Kingdom of Israel, because that Kingdom was at God's immediate disposal, when
ever he pleased to nominate a King. And this is the Reason of the different
behavior of David and Iehu: David was anointed as well as Iehu, but he never
pretended to the Crown while Saul lived, because there was then an anointed
King on the Throne: But this was not Ioram's case; He had no more than a
Providential Right, which in the Kingdom of Israel must give place to God's
anointing; and therefore Iehu was King of Israel as soon as he was anointed,
and Ioram was his Subject.

And this was Athaliah's case; She took possession of the Throne by very wicked
means, but must be allowed to be placed there by the Providence of God; and if
she had as through a settlement, as other Usurpers can have, had a right to the
submission and obedience of the Jews, while it was not known that the King's
Son was living; but Judah was an Hereditary Kingdom by God's entail, and
therefore as soon as the true Heir appeared, she fell from her Power, as much
by the express Ordinance and Command of God, as Ioram did when Iehu was
anointed; for a Divine Entail, as the Convocation asserts, is equivalent to an
express nomination.

This shows a manifest difference between Kings set up by the Divine Providence
in the Kingdoms of Judah and Israel, which were subject to the Divine
Nomination, or to a Divine Entail; and King's set up by the Providence of God
in other Nations, where God makes Kings only by his Providence: The first may
be, and are deposed when ever God nominates a new King, or the Right Heir
appears; though they had all the Rights and Settlement of the Regal Power before;
in other Nations, those Kings, who are placed in the Throne, and settled there,
are, and continue Kings, till the Providence of God displace them again; for
where Kings are made only by the Providence of God, they can be unmade by
Providence too.

Had our Author considered this, he would not have said, That it is mere
trifling to talk of God's entailing the Crown, as if God was tied any more to
the entails of his own making, than he is to humane Entails, and his own
Decrees and Orders would not cut off his own Entails as well as those of Men.
For tho God may cut off his own Entails, if he pleases, yet Men cannot, and the
mere Events of Providence can never prove, that God has done it; for we must
never interpret providential Events to contradict an express Revelation: And
therefore, tho the Providence of God in placing a King on the Throne in Judah
or Israel, who neither was anointed by God's Command, nor had an Hereditary
Right by God's Entail, justified their Submission to him; yet whenever God was
pleased to anoint a new King, or to discover their Hereditary Prince, and to
put it into their Power to place him on the Throne, the Right and Authority of
these Providential Kings was at an end.

And now there will be no great occasion to take much notice of what he answers
to my second Argument, From the necessity of Government, to the Preservation of
Humane Society; for I readily grant what he contends for, That these Arguments
will equally conclude for Submission to Athaliah, as to any other Usurper; and
what then? The Jews did actually submit to Athaliah, and this Argument from the
necessity of Government justifies their Submission. But our Author disputes, as
if it were manifest that the Jews did not submit to Athaliah; but it is evident
from the Story, that they did, and yet are not blamed in Scripture for so
doing; but I suppose his mistake is, that because they owned Ioash for their
King, when he was anointed by Iehojada, and slew Athaliah, therefore they never
submitted to Athaliah's Government; as if they could not very innocently and
lawfully submit to the Government of Athaliah, while they knew of no other King
they had, and yet own their King, who was their King by a Divine Entail, when
they knew him; but indeed, here is the fundamental mistake of all, That he
supposes the Jews all this while knew, that Ioash the true Heir to the Crown
was living, and therefore out of Loyalty to their Prince, they did not all this
while submit to Athaliah; whereas it is evident from the Story, that they knew
nothing of this matter, till Iehojada sent for the Princes and Levites, and
discovered the King's Son to them; and I would desire him to consider, how
Athaliah should be ignorant of this for six years, when all the People of
Israel knew it; and yet, if he was not guilty of this mistake, I know not what
sense to make of what he says, (p. 8.) about swearing an Oath of Fidelity to
her, to defend her against all Men, even against him whom they owned and
acknowledged had a Right to the Throne; that is, against Ioash, who was their
Rightful King, but they could not own and acknowledge him to be so, without
believing him to be alive and safe: And yet, if they knew nothing of Ioash, and
did believe that the Royal Line was extinct, I desire to know of our Author, by
his own Principles, had it been customary in those Days, what should have
hindered them to have sworn Allegiance to Athaliah? for he allows possession to
be something, when there is no better claim against it. And yet though they had
sworn Allegiance to Athaliah, they might without Perjury have owned their
lawful Prince, when Iehoiada had discovered him to them; for no Oath can oblige
against a Divine Entail; and therefore such Cases are always supposed to be
excepted.

I asserted in the Case, Case of Allegiance, p. 42.
That Government and Allegiance are such relatives, as do mutuo se ponere and
tollere, the one cannot subsist without the other: if the Prince cannot govern,
the Subject cannot obey; and therefore as far as he quits his Government, he
quits their Allegiance, and leaves his Subjects, as he does his Crown, to be
possessed by another, and must recover them both together. Postcript. p. 7.
This Our Author says, is as plain a fallacy, as ever he met with, and proves
from the Example of Ioash, that it is so; but I have said so much already to
that case, that I will trouble my Reader no further with it. Divine and Humane
Entails give very different rights to Princes (as will appear more presently)
and yet even in Divine Entails, it was lawful for Subjects to submit to, and
obey Usurped Powers, either when they were under force, or when they knew not
their Rightful King; that is, whenever their King could not govern them.

He says, By Government, I mean the actual administration of it; and then
Government and Allegiance are so far from being such Relatives, that they are
no Relatives at all; they are only the Acts of Relatives; and to say the Acts
of Relatives, are Relatives, is so far from being as certain as any Proposition
in Logic, that it is Logical Nonsense. Well! Logical Nonsense, I hope, is the
best sort of Nonsense however.

But my meaning is plain enough, and certainly true, which is as much, as any
Proposition in Logic can be: By Government, I do mean the Actual Administration
of Government, not as that signifies the particular Acts of Government; but the
actual possession of Power and Authority to govern: by Allegiance, I mean that
Obedience and Subjection which is due to Government; and if our Author will be
so severe, as not to allow me to call these Relatives, yet they are the
Relations which make the Relatives, and do mutuo se ponere and tollere; for
what is the relation of a King to a Subject? His Dominion and Government: What
is the relation of a Subject to a King? His due Allegiance and Subjection: then
Dominion and Government makes a King, and Allegiance a Subject; and Allegiance
has as necessary a relation to Dominion, as a Subject has to a King; if there
be no King, there can be no Subject; if no Dominion and Government, there can
be no Allegiance. Paternity is the relation that makes a Father, and Filiation
a Son, and Paternity and Filiation have as mutual and necessary a respect to
each other, as Father and Son; these are called by Logicians, Relative Acts,
and why then may not I call Government and Subjection Relative Duties, by which
I explained what I meant by Relatives; but this I Am sure is only a Logical
Banter, and so let it pass.

But as to the matter in hand, since we are got into Logic, I desire to know of
our Author, whether the Relative continues to be a Relative, when the relation
is destroyed; for we are told, that the whole nature of Relatives, relata
secundum esse, (for I must speak cautiously) consists in their Relation: if the
Relation then of a King to his Subjects be Dominion and Government, does he
continue a King, when he has lost his Dominion and Government? or do Subjects
continue Subjects, when he ceases to be King? do they owe him Allegiance, when
he has lost his Dominion? that is, can one Relative subsist by its self,
without its Correlate?

He tells us indeed, Postscript. p. 10.
that the relation is only between King and Subject, and the actual
Administration of Government of the one hand, and paying Allegiance on the
other, are but the acts of that Relation, and consequential to it, but are not
Relatives themselves: But I desire to know, what he calls the relation between
King and Subjects; for King and Subjects are not the relation, but Relatives;
as Father and Son are Relatives, Paternity and Filiation the Relation; now I
desire to know what is the Relation between these Relatives, King and Subjects?
the particular Acts of Government, and the particular Acts of Allegiance, I
grant, are but the Acts of that Relation, but still we want to know what the
Relation is, to which these particular Acts are consequential, and let our
Author think of anything else, wherein to place this Relation, if he can,
besides actual Dominion, and Sovereign Power, on the one hand, to make a King,
and the obligations to Subjection and Allegiance, on the other hand, to make a
Subject: from whence flow the particular Acts of Government and Allegiance: now
if the Relative ceases with the Relation, where actual Dominion and Government
ceases, the Kingship is lost, and the obligations to Subjection and Allegiance
with it. All that I know of, that can be said in this Cause (and which those
men must say, who make Allegiance inseparable from Right) is only this, that
the Relation continues, as long as the fundamentum relationis, that whereon the
Relation is founded, continues; and that being a Legal Right, while this Right
remains, such a Legal King, though he be fallen from Power, is King still, and
Subjects are Subjects still, and owe Allegiance to him.

Now to shorten this Dispute, I shall only observe, That a Legal Hereditary
Right is not the fundamentum relationis, the foundation of that relation, which
is between Prince and Subjects, for then there would be no foundation of this
relation between Prince and Subjects in any but Hereditary Kingdoms; for the
same relation can have but one foundation; and yet there are a great many ways
whereby Princes are advanced to the Throne; An Hereditary Right, The Election
of the People, The Nomination of God, A Divine Entail, And Conquest, Which very
much differ from each other; and if all these be different Foundations, there
must be different Kinds and Species of Kingship; whereas the Relation between
King and Subjects is the same in all.

And therefore we must find out such a foundation for this Relation, as will
serve all Sovereign Princes, by what means soever they are settled in the
Throne; and that can be no other but the Authority of God, by which Kings
reign, and to which Subjects owe obedience: the several ways of advancing
Princes to the Throne, are but the several ways of investing them with God's
Authority; but the Authority of God with which they are invested, is the
foundation of this Relation; and this is not always annexed to a Legal Right,
but is always annexed to a full and settled possession of the Throne. No man can
have God's Authority, who has not the actual Power and Authority of Government;
for God's Authority is the Authority of Government; and when Princes fall from
Government, so far they lose God's Authority, whatever becomes of their Legal
Right; and all Logicians grant, that Relations are dissolved, when the
foundation of such Relations cease. And therefore as in the nature of the
thing, Subjects cannot obey a Prince, when he cannot command, nor submit to him,
when he cannot govern; so when he falls from his Government, and another Prince
is settled in his Throne, the foundation of this Relation at present ceases; for
when God has taken away his Government, he has taken away his present Authority
to govern; for God never gives the Civil Authority* without the Civil Sword.

I grant in all other Relations, where the Relation it self does not consist in
the Authority of Government, nor the foundation of the Relation cease by
falling from the actual Authority of Government, the Case is different, as
between Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, where the Relation is
founded in Nature, or Purchase, or Civil Contracts, under the superior
direction and government of the Civil Authority; tho the Master of the Family,
as he says, be spirited away, or taken captive, his Servants, and House, and
Family, do not presently fall to the lot of the next Possessor, but must be
disposed of by the Laws of the Country, and by the Authority of the Prince;
for such private and particular Interests are subject to public Laws, and a
Superior Authority. But the Authority of God is at his own disposal, and
Sovereign Power and Dominion, to which the Divine Authority is annexed, is the
Relation of a King to his Subjects; and when his Sovereignty is lost, the
Relation is so far dissolved, and there is no higher Tribunal to appeal to, but
to that God who removes Kings, and sets up Kings.

And this shows, how inconsequent his Argument is, from the incapacity of a
Subject to pay Allegiance, and a King to govern. If (says he) a Subject be
taken captive, or otherwise hindered from paying actual Allegiance, is the
Relation lost, and does he therefore immediately cease to be a Subject? And
therefore neither does a King, if he be hindered from the actual administration
of Government, cease to be a King, but has the same right to our Allegiance,
in, and out of possession. Now to wave all other Answers (though, I suppose,
our Author will not deny, that such a Captive may become a Subject to another
Prince) these two Cases are not parallel; in the first Case, tho the Subject is
taken Captive, yet the foundation of the Relation is not destroyed, for his
Prince is on his Throne still, in the actual administration of the Government,
tho he be violently torn from him; so that this Relation may continue, because
he has a Prince to whom he is related: but when the Prince is fallen from his
Kingdom and Power, the foundation of the Relation is at present destroyed; the
Kingdom is translated to another Prince, and the Subjects, and their Allegiance
translated with it.

Our Author proceeds to argue from the Case of Ioash. The Doctor's distinction
(that is, about a Divine Entail) is against him. It Is true, God did entail the
Kingdom of Judah on the Family of David, and for that reason they ought not to
submit to an Usurper. But this is so far from being a reason, why they may
submit to one in other Kingdoms, where Entails are made by Laws that it is a
reason, and a very good one, why they ought not.

But before we hear his Reason, I must observe that he mistakes the use of my
Distinction; which was not to prove, That because God had entailed the Kingdom
of Judah on the Posterity of David, and had reserved to himself a right in the
Kingdom of Israel, to nominate their King, and entail the Crown, when he
pleased; that therefore the Subjects of those Kingdoms might not submit to any
other Kings, whom the Providence of God placed in the Throne, without such a
Divine Nomination and Entail; for it appears from what I have already
discoursed, that they both actually did, and lawfully might submit to such
providential Kings, when either there was no King by God's Nomination or
Entail, or no such King was known; but the use of the Distinction was to show,
that in such Theocratical Kingdoms, where God challenged a peculiar right to
make Kings by his express Nomination or Entail, though God may see fit
sometimes to set a providential King upon the Throne, yet whenever he nominates
a new King, or discovers the right Heir to whom the Crown belongs by a Divine
Entail, the Reign of such Providential Kings is at an end, and the Subjects may
and ought to depose or kill them, and own the King of God's nomination: so that
if he will prove any thing from my Distinction with reference to other entailed
Kingdoms, he must show, that my Distinction proves, that in such Kingdoms,
where God makes Kings only by his Providence, a Humane Entail of the Crown will
justify Subjects in deposing and murdering a new King who is placed and
settled in the Throne by Providence, while the Legal King, or Legal Heir is
Living, as much as God's express Nomination or Entail would justify the
deposing a Providential King in the Kingdoms of Judah and Israel.

And now let us hear his Reason: For (says he) God's entailing the Crown of
Judah, was the Law of that Kingdom in that respect; and the people of other
Kingdoms are as much bound to observe their own Laws, as the people of Judah
were theirs. All Humane Laws that are just, bind in Conscience, and (according
to the Doctor's own Principles) these Laws were made by God's Authority. So
that the Doctor mistakes the Question; we do not oppose Humane Laws to God's
Authority, but we oppose Laws which are made by God's Authority, and which are
Rules to us, to Providence, which is no Rule. When God entailed the Crown upon
David's Posterity, they had then a Legal Right to it, and so has every Family
in other Kingdoms, upon which an Entail is made by the respective Laws of the
Country.

But what would our Author prove from this? That in every Hereditary Kingdom
the Legal Heir has a Legal right to the Crown, as well as in Judah? and did I
ever deny it? or that the standing Laws of every Country are the Rule for
Subjects in setting up Kings, when it is their own free Act and Choice; and who
denies this too? There is a Dispute indeed whether the Laws of England do
oblige Subjects in all cases to make the next Lineal Heir to the Crown their
King; but no man ever denied, but that in making Kings, Subjects are bound by
the Laws of the Land, when it is their own free and voluntary Act. I am sure my
Hypothesis is not concerned in this Question, and therefore be it how it will,
it can prove nothing against me. Or would he prove, that when an Entail is
settled either by Divine or Humane Laws, God never interposes by his Providence
to set up a King, who has not this Entailed Legal Right? This was manifestly
false, both in the Kingdom of Judah and Israel, which God had reserved for his
own Nomination, or Entail, and yet He set up several providential Kings,
Athaliah in Judah, and Baasha, and Omri, and Ahab, and Ioram and others in
Israel; and in all other Kingdoms, at one time or other. Or would he prove,
that when God by his Providence has settled a Prince in the Throne without a
Legal Right, Subjects ought not to obey him, and submit to him as their King?
This is confuted by the Examples of Judah and Israel, who submitted to
Athaliah, and their providential Kings, who had no Legal Right, by a Divine
Nomination, or Entail, and are yet never blamed for it. Or would he prove, that
a Human Entail of the Crown does as much oblige Subjects in Conscience to pull
down a King, who is settled in his Throne by God's Providence, with a National
Consent and Submission, but without a Legal Right, to set the Legal Heir on his
Throne again, as Iehoiada was, by virtue of the Divine Entail, to anoint Ioash,
and slay Athaliah? This is the single Point he ought to prove; but I do not see
that he offers any thing like a proof of it.

The sum of his Argument is this; That a Human Entail of the Crown, made by the
Laws of any Country, does in all Cases, and to all intents and purposes, as
much oblige Subjects, as a Divine Entail, which is only the Law of the Kingdom
too. For the people of other Kingdoms are as much bound to observe their own
Laws, as the people of Judah were theirs.

The Dispute in general about the Authority and obligation of Humane Laws, is
very impertinent to this purpose; for no man denies it; But yet we think Divine
Political Laws much more sacred, and universally obligatory than any mere Human
Laws, tho they are made by men, who have their Authority of Government, and
consequently of making Laws from God; and I believe our Author is the first man
who has equalled Humane Laws, with those Laws which are immediately given by
God.

But the Dispute between Divine and Humane Laws, and a Divine and Humane Entail
of the Crown, are of a very different nature, though they be both the Laws of
the Country for which they are made, as will easily appear, if we compare
God's making Kings by a providential settlement of them in the Throne, with a
Divine and with a Humane Entail A Divine Entail is God's settling the Crown on
such a Family by the express Revelation of his Will; and though God should
after this, settle a Prince in the Throne by his Providence, to whom the Crown
did not belong by this Entail, such a Providence would not justify Subjects in
submitting to such a providential King, when it is in their power to set the
right Heir upon the Throne; for this would be to expound Providence against the
express Revelation of God's Will: But a Human Entail is only a providential
settlement of the Crown on such a Family; and what is settled only by
Providence, may be unsettled by Providence again; for where God makes Kings only
by his Providence, he can unmake them by his Providence also, and make new ones.

This discovers the fallacy of what he adds; We do not oppose Human Laws to
God's Authority, but we oppose Laws that are made by God's Authority, and which
are a Rule to us, to Providence, which is no Rule. Now I would ask our Author,
Whether the Laws of England, which entail the Crown, are not Humane Laws? If
they be, I ask, Whether they do not oppose these Humane Laws to the Authority
of God in making Kings by his Providence? for do they not refuse to obey a
King, whom the providence of God has placed and settled in the Throne, upon a
pretense that he is not King by Law? And then I think, they give greater
Authority to the Laws of the Land, than to God in making Kings, which is to
oppose Humane Laws to God's Authority.

To avoid this, he will not call them Humane Laws, but Laws made by Gods
Authority; but the Question is, Whether they are Humane or Divine Laws? It is a
childish piece of Sophistry, and argues a great contempt of his Readers, to
call Humane Laws, Laws made by God's Authority, because Sovereign Power, which
makes these Laws, is God's Authority; as if there were no difference between
Humane and Divine Laws, because they are both made by God's Authority; though
the one are made by the immediate Authority of God, the other are made by men,
who receive their Authority from God; whereas in the first Case the Authority
of God gives an immediate Divine Authority to the Laws made by God, which
therefore are said to be made by God's Authority; in the other case the
Authority of God terminates on the Person, and does not immediately affect his
Laws; Sovereign Princes have their Authority from God, but their Laws are the
Laws of Men; and the difference between them is this, that Divine Laws, which
are made by God himself, have a Superior Authority to Men, and to all Humane
Laws, though made by a delegated Authority from God; for God grants Authority
to Men only in subordination to himself, and the Authority of his own Laws: He
might as well have said, That all the Bylaws of a Corporation are the King's
Laws, because made by his Authority granted to them by Charter; and therefore
there is no difference between the private Laws of the City, and the Laws of
the Kingdom, as being both made by the Authority of the King. This may satisfy
our Author, That though Humane Laws in some sense may be said to be made by
God's Authority, yet when men oppose a legal Entail of the Crown to the
Authority of God in making Kings, they oppose Humane Laws to the Authority of
God.

Well! but these Law are our Rule; they are are so, when they are not
overruled by a Superior Authority; but that they may be by the Authority of
God: And the Providence of God is no Rule to us; If by this he means, that we
must not make Providence the Rule of Good and Evil to us, i. e. that we must
not think it lawful for us to do whatever the Providence of God does, I grant
it; for the Laws of God are the Rules of Good and Evil, not his Providence: but
if he means, the Providence of God cannot direct our Duty cannot lay some new
Obligations on us, and discharge our old ones, this is manifestly false in a
thousand Instances; every new Condition Providence puts us in, every new
Relation it creates, it requires some new Duties, and lays some new Obligations
on us. I shall instance only in the Case before us: If the Providence of God
can remove one King, and set up another, tho this does not alter the Duty of
Subjects to their Prince, yet it changes the Object of their Allegiance, as it
changes their Prince: the Laws of God prescribe the Duty of Subjects to their
Prince, but the Providence of God makes him.

And now let us consider the opposition he makes between Humane Laws of Entail,
and Providence; for he confesses, they do oppose Laws made by the Divine
Authority, that is, the Laws of the Land, which entail the Crown, to
Providence, or to the Providence of God in making Kings: that is, they think
themselves bound in Conscience to adhere to that King, tho out of possession,
who by the Laws of the Land has a legal Right to the Crown, against that King,
who is actually settled in the Throne by the Providence of God: Now if we will
consider the sense of things, and not the words, this is no more than to say,
that they oppose the Providence of God against Providence; his former
Providence against his later Providence; that is, they will not allow the
Providence of God to change and alter, whatever Reasons the Divine Wisdom sees
for it; but what God has once done, that they are resolved to abide by,
whatever he thinks fit to do afterward, which is to oppose God's Authority,
and to shackle and confine Providence, that it shall not alter its usual
methods in the Government of the World; or when it has disposed of the Crown
once, shall never be at liberty, while that Family lasts, to dispose of it
again to any other.

For what are these Laws, which, he says, are made by the Divine Authority, and
are our Rule? They are the Laws of Succession, which entail the Crown. And how
does God settle the Crown on any Family by such Laws? No otherwise but by his
Providence, so overruling the hearts and counsels of Men, as to consent to
such an Entail, which gives a humane Right to the Crown, and bars all other
humane Claim. So that an Hereditary King, by a humane entail of the Crown, with
respect to God, is only a Providential King; as much a Providential King as the
first of the Family was, who obtained it by Election, or Conquest, or worse
Arts, not by God's express nomination of the Person: So that to opppose the
Laws of Entail made, not by God's immediate Authority, as they were in the
Kingdom of Judah, but by the overruling influence of Providence, against God's
setting up a new King on the Throne, by other Acts of his Providence, is to
oppose Providence against Providence; God's Providenee in settling the Crown in
such a Family by a legal Entail, against his Providence in settling a new King
upon the Throne: It is all but Providence still, and I desire to know why the
Providence of an Entail is more Sacred and Obligatory than any other Act of
Providence, which gives a Settled possession of the Throne?

What follows is pretty, and nothing more: The Land of Canaan was divided among
the Twelve Tribes by God's express Command, and this answers to God's Entail of
the Crown on David' s Family; the possession in all other Countries is only by
Providence, and this answers to a humane Right and Title to the Crown: Well!
there is something of likeness between them, Postscript* p. 11.
and what then? And therefore according to the Doctor's way of reasoning, every
Man who wrongfully possessed himself of another Man's Estate in that Land
(Canaan) must be made to restore it; for God had expressly given it to the
other, and to his Family. But in all other Countries, if a Man by Providence
get his Neighbor's Estate, he must have it; for the event is God's Act, and it
is his evident Decree and Counsel that he should have it.

Now the fundamental mistake, which runs through all these kind of Arguments,
is this; That they make the events of Providence in private injuries, Thefts,
Robberies, Encroachments of one Subject on another Subject's Rights, to be the
very same with God's disposal of Kingdoms, and to have the same effects;
whereas all private injuries are reserved by God himself to the correction and
redress of Public Government, and Humane Courts of Justice; and therefore his
Providence has no effect at all on such personal Rights; but the very nature of
the thing proves, that such disputes, which are too big for a legal decision,
or any humane Courts, for the decision of which, God has erected no universal
Tribunal on Earth, he has reserved to his own judgment, such as the Correction
of Sovereign Princes, and the transferring Kingdoms and Empires; and here the
final determinations of Providence in settling Princes on their Thrones, draws
the Allegiance and Submission of Subjects after it; and in such Cases God does
not confine himself to determine on the side of Humane Right, but acts with a
Sovereign Authority, and gives the Kingdoms of the World to whom he pleases, as
he can best serve the Wise, and many times the unsearchable designs of his
Providence by it; which shows how much our Author is out, in applying what I
said of God's making Kings, to God's disposal of private Estates. It is to say,
that God, as well as Men, is confined to humane Laws; In making Kings, I said;
In disposing of Estates, says our Author; as if disposing of Estates, and
making Kings, were the very same thing; whereas God has erected humane
Judicatures to Judge of the first, but has reserved the second to his own
judgment; and when God himself judges, he judges with Authority, with Wisdom,
with Justice, superior to all humane Laws. Our Author might as well have said,
That we must not resist private Men, or Inferior Officers, when they are
injurious, because we must not resist a Sovereign Prince, when he illegally
oppresses us, as that we must not dispossess a private Subject, who has
injuriously possessed himself of our Estates, because Subjects must not pull
down a Prince, who is settled in the Throne without a legal Right. The Poet
would have taught him the difference between these two Cases.

Regum timendorum in proprios Greges.
Reges in ipsos Imperium est Iovis.
Subjects are under the Government and Correction of Princes; Princes under the
Government of God.

And besides this, according to my Principles, Kings must be thoroughly settled
in their Government before it becomes unlawful for Subjects to dispossess them;
and then if he will make the Cases parallel, He who unjustly seizes another
Man's Estate, must be thoroughly settled in it, before it becomes unlawful to
dispossess him; but that no private Man can be, who is under the Government of
Laws, and has not the possession of his Estate given him by Law; and when he
has, whether right or wrong, he must not be violently dispossessed again; but
in Causes superior to Laws, as the revolutions of Government, and the
translations of Kingdoms are, there may be a through settlement by a settled
possession without Law; and must be so, where Laws cannot determine the
controversy, that is, where there is no superior Tribunal to take cognizance of
it.

So, that as our Author has stated the Case, it signifies nothing to the
present purpose; for whether private Men's Estates be settled by a Divine or
Humane Entail, it is the same case; if they suffer any Injury from their
Fellow Subjects, they must seek for Redress from public Government; but I
could have told him a way, how to have applied this case to the purpose; but
then it would not have been to his purpose, but to mine.

In Canaan, where God allotted every Tribe and Family their Inheritance, none
could pretend a Right to any Portion of Land, but what was allotted them: but
in other Countries, which were left in common, Possession and Occupation gave a
Right. Thus in Judah, none had an ordinary Right to the Crown, but those who
were nominated by God, or had the Crown descended on them by a Divine Entail;
but in other Countries, Possession and Occupation gave a Right to the
Allegiance of Subjects.

In Canaan, when God had settled such an Inheritance in a Family, it could never
be perpetually alienated; but tho it were sold, it could be sold for no longer
time than till the year of Iubilee, when all Estates were to return to their
old Proprietors again; but in other Countries, Men may part with their Estates
for ever. Thus in the Kingdom of Judah, tho God by his Sovereign Authority
might set up a Providential King, yet this did not cut off the Entail, but when
ever the true Heir appeared, Subjects, if they were at liberty, were bound to
make him King, and dispossess the Usurper; but in other Kingdoms, a Kingdom may
be lost, as well as an Inheritance sold for ever.

In Answer to that Objection, That the Laws of the Land in such Cases as these,
are the measure of our Duty, and the Rule of Conscience; and therefore we must
own no King, but whom the Laws of the Land own to be King, that is, in an
H^reditary Monarchy, the right Heir; I granted. Case of Alleg. p. 51, 52.
That the Laws of the Land are the Rule of Conscience, when they do not
contradict the Laws of God; but when they do, they are no Rule to us, but their
Obligation must give place to a Divine Authority. Suppose then there were an
express Law, that the Subjects of England should own no King but the Right
Heir; and notwithstanding this Law, (as it will sometimes happen, and has often
happened in England) a Prince, who is not the right Heir, should get into the
Throne, and settle himself there; if the Divine Law in such a Case commands us
to pay all the Obedience and Duty of Subjects to a Prince in the actual
Possession of the Throne, and the Law of the Land forbids it, which must we
obey, the Law of God, or the Law of the Land?

To this our Author answers, Postscript, p. 11.
Where is this Law of God, that commands us to obey Usurpers? Where is it ever
affirmed in Scripture in express Terms, or deduced from thence by evident
Consequence? This I had showed before, and it is in my Boek still, and there he
may see it. But this Law had need be very clear and evident, and the Doctor had
need be very sure of it, when he builds not only his Book, but his Practice
upon it, in plain Contradiction (by his own confession) to the Laws of the
Land. But I never confessed, this was contrary to the Laws of the Land; but on
the contrary, that the Laws of the Land, if we will believe Learned Judges and
Lawyers, do allow and justify it; and I think the Scripture is very plain in
the case; and if he would give me leave to be sure of any thing, I think I am
pretty sure of it. But he proves the Scriptures cannot be clear in the point,
from the Controversies about it, in the late dismal Times of Usurpation; that
is to say, nothing can be clear in Scripture, which is matter of Controversy;
and thus we must either be Scepticks in Religion, or seek for an Infallible
Interpreter. Thus Heretics oppose the Articles of Faith; thus Papists dispute
against the Scriptures being the Rule of Faith; and whither these Arguments
will carry our Author, I cannot tell, but they look very kindly toward Rome;
and if that be his Inclination, I can pardon his Zeal in this Cause.

But no Learned Men could ever espy this Law before the time of John Goodwin.
Imperia omnia post vocationem gentium Deus regit and mutat non communi tantum
illa providentia, per quam multa relinquit naturali ordine; sed sapientia
attemperata subditorum utilitatibus, aut si ita meruerint poenis. Fecit hoc and
olim Deus aliquoties, Psalm. 75. 6, 7. Prove. 28. 2. Dan. 2. 21, 37. At Christus
hoc Universaliter a Christianis credi, and pro certo haberi voluit. Joh. 19.
11. quem sequens hoc loco Paulus, nullum ait imperium nunc contingere, nisi Deo
Authoritatem ei suam dante, sicut Rex dat praesidibus. Quod ut rectius
intelligatur, addit, omnia imperia quae sunt, i. e. quam diu manent ac durant,
a Deo constitui, i. e. Authoritatem suam accipere, non minus quam si Reges illi
per Prophetas uncti essent, ut quidam Syriae Reges. In Clem. Constable. habemus,
Tov (...). Iren. 5. 24. Cujus enim jussu homines nascuntur, hujus jussu, and
reges constituuntur, apti illis, qui illis temporibus ab ipsis regnantur. Tert.
Apol. Nos judicium Dei suspicimus in Imperatoribus, qui gentibus illos
praefecit, Grot. in 13. Romans 1. Ac sane hoc verbo mihi videtur Apostolus
voluisse tollere frivolam hominum curiositatem, qui sape solent inquirere quo
jure adepti fuerint potestatem qui rerum potiuntur; satis autem nobis esse
debet quod praesunt: non enim conscenderunt sua ipsi virtute in hoc fastigium,
sed manu Dei sunt impositi, Calv. in 13. Romans 1.
What then does he think of Mr. Calvin and Grotius, who have both passed for
learned Men? And they espied this Law before the time of John Goodwin, as he
may see, if he pleases, in their Commentaries on Daniel, and the Romans; or
that he may not seek for it, I have given him a taste of their Judgment in the
Margin. What thinks he of Bishop Overal's Convocation? Were there no Learned
Men in it? And yet they espied this Doctrine, before John Goodwin was thought
of; what John Goodwin thought of this matter I cannot tell, for I am not much
versed in his Writings; but if some Men abused a true Doctrine to wicked
purposes, must we therefore deny the Doctrine, or rather vindicate it from such
Abuses? But what thinks he of the Primitive Christians, whose Sense he may
guess at, from what Grotius has cited; and their practice in all the
Revolutions of the Empire does more fully declare it; for they always submitted
to the Reigning Emperor, by what means soever they gained the Throne; and that
is an argument, that they owned the Doctrine, because they practiced it; as our
Author will quickly be informed by a Learned Pen.

I grant indeed, That the Resolution of Conscience ought not to depend on such
Nicties of Law and History, as Learned Men cannot agree about; and that is a
reason, why Legal Rights and Titles should not be the Rule and Measure of our
Obedience to Princes, who are possessed of the Throne; but is this a reason to
reject the Directions of Scripture too, because some Men will dispute the
plainest Texts? This has nothing but either Skepticism or Infallibility at the
bottom.

Our Author proceeds to consider the Scripture-Testimonies, Postscript, p. 12.
which I cite in this Cause. And First, from the Old Testament, That God gives
Kingdoms to whomsoever he will; that he removes Kings, and sets up Kings,
4. Dan. 17. 2. 21, 37. Now the whole of his Answer to this, is, That Usurpers
are no Kings; and therefore, tho God removes Kings, and sets up Kings, he does
not set up Usurpers; and the whole of his proof is, that Athaliah, who was an
Usurper, was no Queen. As for Athaliah, I suppose our Author has enough of her
already; She was God's Providential Queen, tho an Usurper, as much as Baasha
was God's King. And to say, That a King without a Legal Title, or an Usurper,
who has a settled Possession of the Regal Power, is no King, is Nonsense. For
Regal Power and Authority makes a King, Aug. de Civitate Dei, l. 5. c. 12.
as St. Austin tells us, Regnum a Regibus, Reges a Regendo; that a Kingdom is
so called from Kings, and Kings from Governing; it is certain, he who has the
Exercise of the Regal Power and Authority, is King, whether we will call him so
or no; and he is no King, who has no Regal Power, whatever his Title be. If
this be not so, our Laws are Nonsense, which distinguish between a King de jure
and de facto, if a King de facto be no King, tho it signifies one who is
actually King.

But pray, what Sense does this make of what the Prophet Daniel says, That God
changes times and seasons, removes Kings, and sets up Kings? By Kings
here, according to our Author, the Prophet means not Usurpers, but Rightful and
Lawful Kings; and then the meaning is, that God removes, or pulls down
Rightful Kings, and that he sets up Rightful Kings. Now, as for setting up
Rightful Kings, our Author likes it very well; but how does he like pulling
down Rightful Kings, which is as much against Law and Right, as to set up Kings
without Right? And that it seems God does. He will not allow us to pay
Allegiance to a King, who is set up without Right; will he then allow us to
withdraw our Allegiance from a Rightful King, whom God has removed and pulled
down? If he will not, as it is plain he will not, then God can no more remove a
Rightful King, than he can set up an Illegal Usurper; but when the Prophet
says, God removes Kings, and sets up Kings, to reconcile it to our Author's
Hypothesis, the removed King must signify an Usurper, and the King set up, a
Rightful and Legal King. I doubt not but our Author would be ashamed to say
this; but whether he be or no, he dares not say it; for then he must allow,
that King may signify an Usurper, as well as a Rightful King, which overthrows
all he says, for then it is reasonable to expound the Text of all Kings,
whatever they be, who are removed or set up.

And this is evidently the Prophet's meaning, to attribute all the changes and
revolutions of Government, when ever they happened, not to Chance or Fate, but
to the Divine Providence, that whenever we see one King removed, and another
set up, whoever they be, they are removed and set up by God, who rules in the
kingdom of Men, and gives it to whomsoever he will; Does whomsoever signify
those only who have a legal Right? Does giving suppose an antecedent right in
him to whom it is given? Does giving to whomsoever he will, signify, giving it
only to those to whom the Law gives it? Do we use to say, a Man may give his
Estate to whom he will, when his Estate is entailed, and he cannot alienate it
from the Right Heir? We should think this a very absurd way of speaking among
Men; and yet thus our Author must expound God's giving a Kingdom to whomsoever
he will, to signify his giving the Kingdom to the Right Heir. He may, if he
please, call this Expounding Scripture; but I doubt every body else will give
it some other name, and I hope he himself upon second thoughts will be ashamed
of it.

But it is more absurd still, if we apply it to the occasion, viz. those great
Revolutions and Changes of Empires, which the Prophet foretold, and which he
attributes to God; and when Kingdoms and Empires are overturned by violence, it
is nonsense to talk of God's setting up only Rightful Kings, not Usurpers; when
all those Revolutions were nothing else but force and Usurpation: Men may talk
of Law and Right of Succession in a settled Government, but Kingdoms are not
transferred, nor Kings removed, nor set up by Law; and therefore when the
Prophet tells us with respect to such violent Revolutions, That God changes
times and seasons, that he removes Kings and sets up Kings, an ingenious
Man must be hard put to it, to say, This is not meant of Usurpers, but of
Rightful and Legal Kings; whereas if but one of these must be meant, we must
expound it of such Kings, who ascend the Throne by Force and Usurpation; and if
when God is said to remove Kings, he will allow this to be meant of Rightful
Kings, who were legally possessed, I wonder how he should fancy, that those
Kings who dispossess the rightful Kings, and place themselves in their Thrones,
should in his sense be legal and rightful Kings too.

My Testimony from the New Testament is, Romans 13. 1, 2. Let every Soul be
subject to the higher powers, for all power is of God. Now by Powers, our
Author says, I understand Usurped as well as Lawful Powers: I do so; by Powers
I understand the Powers in a settled Government, whatever their Claim and Title
be: He says, this is contrary to the current of all good Interpreters; That I
deny: I have shown him already, that I have Mr. Calvin and Grotius on my side,
and the Convocation; and if that will not satisfy him, it is no hard matter to
produce more.

My Reason, Case of. Alleg. p. 18.
he says, is, Because the Scripture makes no distinction between Kings, and
Usurpers. One of my Reasons is, That the Scripture has given us no directions
in this case, but to submit and pay all the obedience of Subjects to the
Present Powers. It makes no distinction, that ever I could find, between
rightful Kings, and Usurpers, between Kings whom we must, and whom we must not
obey. These last words he conceals, because they Spoil all his Argument: For he
adds, I thought the Case of Athaliah had been a distinction; and had this
precept been given in those days, I wonder whether any body would have doubted
of whom it ought to be understood, of Athaliah or Joash.

But the Answer is plain, There was a distinction between Athaliah and Ioash,
That She was an Usurper, and He the Rightful King; and I hope our Author had
not that mean opinion of me, to think that I made no distinction between an
Usurper and a Rightful King, with respect to their Usurpation and their Right;
but I say, the Scripture makes no distinction between a Rightful King and an
Usurper, with respect to the Obedience of Subjects, while they are settled in
the Throne; the Scripture does not tell us, that there are some Kings whom we
must obey, and other Kings, viz. Kings by Usurpation, whom we must not obey:
And with reference to this, the Case of Athaliah is no example of such a
Distinction; for the Jews were not forbid either by the standing Law of the
Kingdom, or by Iehoiada, to submit to Athaliah, while she was possessed of the
Throne, and Ioash was concealed; but they actually submitted to her, and are no
where blamed for it: That Iehoiada afterward anointed Ioash, and slew
Athaliah, was owing to the Divine Entail of the Crown, and was peculiar to
Judah, and affects no other Providential Kings, who are settled in their
Thrones. So that had this Law been given to the Jews at that time, while Ioash
was concealed, it must have been expounded of Athaliah, who had possession of
the Throne; when Ioash was known, and anointed, it must have been expounded of
him, as having a Divine Right to the Throne of Judah.

He proceeds; But (says the Doctor) if the Apostle had intended such a
distinction; he ought to have said it in express words; and why so, I pray? I
gave him a reason for it, which he is pleased to conceal; Why should we think
the Apostle here intends a distinction unknown to Scripture? had there been any
such Rule before given, to submit to Lawful Powers, but not to submit to
Usurpers, there had been some pretense of understanding St. Paul's All Power,
of all Legal Power; but there being nothing like this any where else in
Scripture, if he had intended any such distinction, he ought to have said it in
express words, or else no body could reasonably have understood him to intend
this Precept of subjection to the Higher Powers, only of Powers that had a
Legal Right. This I thought a very good reason, and did not expect to have been
asked for more, till this had been answered.

But, says our Author, does not the nature of the thing sufficiently
distinguish it? The nature of the thing distinguishes between a Legal King, and
a Usurper, but the nature of the thing does not prove, that Usurped Powers are
not the Higher Powers, and ought not to be obeyed; but, I think, proves the
quite contrary. But are there not several Rules about Right and Wrong, which
extend to all Persons and Cases? Yes, there are; such is the Apostle's Rule in
this Chapter, to give to every one their due; but then the Question returns,
What is their due? Whether Obedience and Subjection be not due to the Prince,
who governs, not to the Prince who does not, and cannot govern, whatever his
Legal Right to the Government be?

But because this Argument of Right, and our obligations to do right to every
man, especially to Princes, is that whereon this Controversy turns, I shall
particularly, but briefly consider it.

The Argument is this. He who by the Laws of the Land has a right to the Crown,
has a right to our Allegiance; and whether he be in or out of possession, to
own any other King, to submit and pay Allegiance to any other, though actually
possessed of, and settled in the Throne, is great injustice to our natural
Prince, and a violation of that precept, To give to every one their due. And
whatever force and necessity we are under, we must not do so wicked and unjust
a thing, to preserve our selves, nay, to preserve the Nation from ruin.

This Objection has been answered more than once in my Case of Allegiance; but
because I find some men very unwilling to understand it, I will try whether I
can set it in a clearer light. Now here are two things to be considerred. 1.
The Right to the Crown. 2. The Right to Allegiance.

As for the first, the fundamental prejudice and mistake seems to be this, That
men make no difference between a Legal Right to the Crown, and the Legal Right
of Subjects to their Estates: and therefore think it as wicked and unjust, for
Subjects, whatever their Circumstances are, to own any other Prince, but the
Legal Heir, as it would be for Tenants to pay their Rent to any but their true
Legal Lord. But I apprehend a great difference between these two Cases, and it
is this; That in settling an Estate, there is nothing more required but a mere
Humane Right; but to make a Legal King, besides an Humane Right to the Crown,
he must have God's Authority. There is nothing but a Legal Descent, and a Legal
Possession, that gives Right to a Legal Estate, and therefore the Law must have
its effect, and is the only adequate Rule of Right and Wrong in such Cases. And
though the Providence of God allots men's private Fortunes; though he makes
rich, and makes poor; yet he gives no man a Right to an Estate, which he has
got by Fraud, Injustice and Violence; nor exempts them from Legal Punishments
and Prosecutions; but leaves all such mere Legal Rights, under the general
influence of his Providence, to the care of public Government.

But now if a mere Humane Right cannot make a King, but it is God's Authority
which makes a King; if God reserves this Authority in his own hands, to the
free disposal of his own Sovereign Will and Counsel, and does not inseparably
annex it to Humane Entails of the Crown; if God's Authority, without a Humane
Right, can make a King, but Humane Laws cannot make a King without God's
Authority; this may satisfy us, that when God thinks fit to interpose his
Authority, a mere Legal Right is not a sufficient reason to adhere to a Prince
whom God has removed from the Throne, nor the mere want of a Legal Right, a
sufficient reason to disown a Prince, whom God has set upon the Throne: If mere
Law made a King, as it makes an Heir to an Estate, it were very unjust in
Subjects to own any but a Legal King; but if the Sovereign Authority of God can
remove a King, who has the Legal Right, and set up a King, who has no Legal
Right, then mere Humane Laws are not the only Rules of Right and Wrong in this
matter: and there is no reason to charge any man, who upon these Terms submits
to a new Prince, with the least injustice, either in disowning his old Legal
Prince, or in submitting to a new one.

Secondly, As for the Right to Allegiance, it was the great design of my Book
to prove, that Allegiance is not immediately due to a Legal Right to the Crown,
but to Government; and therefore a Prince, who has a Legal Right to the Throne,
but has it not, cannot have a Right to my Allegiance, till he gains the Throne;
and I deny him no Right which he can justly claim, tho I deny my Allegiance to
him, while he is out of the Throne: And methinks our Author should have
answered all that I said upon this Argument, before he had so dogmatically told
us, That the general Rules about Right and Wrong, which extend to all Persons
and Cases, made it needless for St. Paul to have told us, That by the higher
powers, and the powers that are, he meant only Legal Powers; for if Illegal
Powers, in his Sense, may be the highter Powers, and the Powers, that at
present are, who have the actual administration of Government, and Allegiance
be immediately due only to the Governing Powers; then notwithstanding the
General Rules of Right and Wrong, the Apostle might mean our Author's Illegal
Powers. I am sure the Reason of things does not prove the contrary; for when
the Allegiance and Obedience of Subjects, is a Duty only for the sake of
Government, for the ease and safety of it, it is very strange that it should
not be due to a settled Government, but due to a Prince who does not, and cannot
Govern.

And if I may have liberty to dispute with this Author upon his own Principles,
I desire to know of him, Whether Allegiance be due to any Prince upon any other
account, than his being invested with God's Authority? let him say it is at the
utmost peril of his Cause. How then does God invest any Prince with his
Authority of Government, whom he does not immediately nominate, as he did in
the Kingdom of Judah? it must be either by annexing his Authority to the Legal
Office, or by placing such a Person on the Throne, by what means soever he does
it, or by both: And then it is certain no Prince can have God's Authority, who
is not in possession of the Throne, and then no Allegiance can be due to him.

If God's Authority be annexed to the Regal Office, a Prince must be in the
actual Administration of the Regal Office and Power, before he can have God's
Authority: as a man must be actually married, before he can have the Authority
which the Divine Laws give to a Husband. If God's settling a Prince in the
Throne, gives him this Authority, then no Prince who is removed from the
Throne, can have God's Authority: And this is agreeable to the Language of
Scripture, when God is said, to remove Kings, and set up Kings, which when it
does not signify the express Revelation of his Will, but the Acts of his
Providence, can mean no more, than the removing one King from the Throne, and
placing another in it; as it is elsewhere expressed, He pulls down the mighty
from their seat, and exalts the humble and meek. The truth is, The Authority
of Government is always God's Authority; and that is the Reason Bishop Overal's
Convocation Book gives, why any degenerate Forms of Government, when thoroughly
settled, must be reverenced and obeyed; because the Authority so unjustly
gotten, Convocat. Chap. 28 p. 57.
or wrung by force from the true and lawful Possessor, is always God's
Authority; which they offer no proof at all of, but what is supposed in their
Reason, that the Authority of Government, when it is once settled, is God's
Authority; and then how those Princes, who, whatever their Right be, have no
Authority of Government, should have God's Authority, I cannot guess: For to
call a Right to the Crown, the Authority of Government, is contrary to the
Sense of Mankind, when they speak of Sovereign Princes: for he has the Actual
Authority, who actually administers the Government; and it is Actual Authority,
which is God's Authority, not Authority in Fancy and Idea; for God does not
give Authority to govern, without the Power of Government, which is a very
fruitless and insignificant Authority.

But to proceed, our Author proves by a parallel Case, that St. Paul by the
Higher Powers could mean only Lawful Powers, for the Apostle exhorts (13. Hebr.
17.) Obey them that have rule over you, meaning the Ministers of the Gospel;
now the Apostle makes no distintion between lawful Ministers and Intruders, and
yet we must understand it of lawful Ministers; and by the same reason, though
St. Paul makes no distinction between lawful and unlawful Powers, yet he means
only lawful Powers; for this is the force of his Argument, though he has not
expressed it.

But these Cases are by no means parallel. For the Apostle to the Hebrews had
no reason to make any such distinction, which yet was necessary for St. Paul to
have done, had he intended his Precept of Obedience, should be understood only
of lawful Powers.

The Apostle to the Hebrews knew, who had the rule over them at that time, that
they were lawful Ministers, and exhorts the Hebrews to obey them; and had he
added such a distinction, it would have insinuated, that he knew some among
them, who were not lawful Ministers, and such a Suggestion without naming the
Persons, would have made them jealous of them all, and spoiled his Exhortation
of obeying them: The Hebrews knew whom St. Paul meant by those, who had the
Rule over them, St. Paul knew, they were such as ought to be obeyed; and
therefore there was no need here of any distinction between lawful Pastors, and
Intruders. But St. Paul gives a general Charge to be subject to the higher
Powers, and generally affirms, that all power is of God, and therefore if he
had not intended, that we should understand this as universally as he expresses
it, of all Powers, however they came by their Power, he should have limited it
to legal and rightful Powers.

He adds, In short, the Dr's Reason is against him. There has ever been a
distinction in the World between Legal and Usurped Powers, and it is probable
enough that St. Paul (who was so learned a Man) knew it, and if he had intended
to enjoin Obedience to Usurped Powers, it is probable he would have said so in
express terms, but since be never said so, we have reason to conclude he never
intended it.

Now I doubt not but St. Paul did know this distinction between Legal and
Usurped Powers, and knew also, that the Pharisees made this Objection against
their Submission to the Romans, and for that reason he affirms, that all power
is of God, and that they must be subject to the Higher Powers, without any
distinction; which he would not have done, if any distinction ought to have
been made; when he knew the dispute was about the Romans, whom they looked upon
as Usurpers over Israel, who were God's peculiar People and Inheritance: and
yet though there was a distinction between Legal and Usurped Powers, there was
no distinction made in point of Obedience to them, but only by the Pharisees;
and therefore with respect to the rest of the World, he ought to have made this
distinction in express words, if he intended any distinction should have been
made.

I have insisted the longer on this, because it gives a full Answer to his next
Objection; Postscripe P. 13.
that the Interpretation I give of the Convocation Book, justifies an
unreasonable and impious Doctrine, by making the Acts or Permissions of
Providence a Rule for practice, against Right and Justice. Now this, I confess,
is a very unreasonable and impious Doctrine, and were I sensible, that any
thing I have said, would justify this Doctrine, I would immediately renounce
it; but I hope when our Author considers again, that I have evidently proved,
that the Interpretation I have given, is the true Sense of the Convocation, he
will be more favorable to it, for their sakes. But I have already stated this
matter about Right and Justice, and have shown the difference between the Right
of private Men to their Estates, and of Princes to their Thrones, and to the
Allegiance of Subjects; between a Thief's taking a Purse, and an Usurper a
Crown, by the Providence of God; between the Providence of God in such matters,
as he refers to the Correction and Redress of public Laws, and public
Government, and what he reserves to his own cognizance and disposal, as he does
the Revolutions of Government, the removing Kings, and the setting up Kings.

The truth is, our Author writes at that rate, that it is to be feared, some
People will suspect, that he does not believe a Providence, or does not
understand it, or has a mind to ridicule it. For let me ask him, does God make
Kings in England, or not? if he does (which I hope our Author will grant, or he
renounces the jure divino with a witness) how does he make Kings? He sends no
Prophets among us to anoint Kings, and to tell us, whom he has nominated to
Reign over us, and therefore he can make Kings no other way among us, but by
the Events of Providence: and how does God make Kings by his Providence? truly
this can be done no other way, but by placing them in the Throne, and settling
them there with the general Consent and Submission of the People: does then
this Providential Settlement in the Throne, which makes a King, invest such a
King with God's Anthority? if it does not, then it seems God makes a King
without giving him his Authority, makes a King without any Authority to govern,
which is a Contradiction; if he does, does not this make it the duty of
Subjects to obey such a King? Are not Subjects bound to obey such Kings, as
have God's Authority?

Again, suppose a Prince ascends the Throne, and obtains the Consent and
Submission of the People, by the most unjust force, and the most ungodly Arts,
that can be thought on, who places such a Prince on the Throne, if God don't?
Our Author according to his Principles must answer, that by God's Permission he
Usurps the Throne, but is no King, much less a King of God's making. Well, let
him call him King, or Usurper, or what he pleases, but it seems a Prince may
ascend the Throne, and govern a Kingdom for many years (it may be a hundred
years, for so long a Prescription our Author requires to give a Just Title to
an Usurper) without God's Authority; and then I desire to know, whether God
Rules in such a Kingdom, while an Usurper fills the Throne; The reason of the
question is plain, because the Prophet Daniel pronounces universally, that God
rules in the Kingdom of men, and as a proof of it adds, and gives it to
whomsoever he will, and then it should seem, that God does not Rule in these
Kingdoms, which he does not dispose of by his own Will and Counsel, which he
does not give to whom he will, but suffers Usurpers to take the Government of
them. For indeed will any Man say, that God governs such a Kingdom, as is not
governed by his Authority, or Minister? Does Providence and Government signify
only his Permission? that God looks on, and sees Men snatch at Crowns, and take
them, and keep them, and exercise an Authority, which he, who is the universal
Lord of the World, never gave them? To resolve Providence into a bare
Permission, especially in matters of such vast Consequence, as the disposal of
Crowns, is to deny God's Government of the World.

But it is objected, that to say, that Prosperous Usurpers, when they are
settled in the Throne, are placed there by God, and have his Authority, is to
make God a Party to their Wickedness. Now this is another Argument, not merely
against God's making Kings, but in general against God's Providence and
Government of the World: for if God cannot direct and overruled the Wickedness
of Men to accomplish his own Wise Counsels and Purposes, without being the
Author of those Sins, whereby such Events are brought to pass, there is an end
of the Providence of God, or of his Holiness and Justice; for the most glorious
designs of God's Grace and Providence, have been accomplished by very wicked
means, even the Crucifixion of our Savior himself.

But to confine my self to our present Case of transferring Kingdoms and
Empires, as it was in the four Monarchies. It is possible this may sometimes be
done by very honest means, but it is commonly done by great Injustice and
Violence in Men, and yet God very just and righteous in doing it.

No Man, I suppose, will deny, but that God, as the Supreme Lord and Sovereign
of the World, may give the Kingdoms of the World to whom he pleases, without
doing Injustice to any Prince, who can have no Right but by his Gift: No Man
will deny, but that God may be very just and righteous in removing some Princes
from their Thrones, and in setting up others: And then the Translation of
Kingdoms, the pulling down one Prince, and setting up another, is no act of
Injustice with God; but is his Prerogative as the King of Kings, and when it is
done for wise, and holy, and just Reasons, (as we ought always to presume of
what God does) is a plain Demonstration of the Wisdom, and Holiness, and
Justice of his Providence.

The only dispute then can be, about God's bringing such Events to pass by the
Wickedness of Men; and what hurt is there in this, if God can so overruled the
Ambition of Princes, or the Faction and Rebellion of Subjects, as to do that in
pursuit of their own lusts, which God for wise and holy Reasons, thinks fit to
have done: It cannot be denied, but that God does permit Men to do very
wickedly, and if he can permit the Wickedness of Men without being guilty of
their Sins, I hope to direct and overruled their Wickedness to wise purposes,
to bring Good out of Evil, and Order out of Confusion, can be no blemish to
Providence. indeed I should be much puzzled to justify the Divine Providence,
in permitting the Sins of Men, especially such Sins, as do great mischief to
the World, were I not very well satisfied, that God overrules all to wise and
good Ends.

Let us suppose an Ambitious Prince spurred on with Fame and Glory to grasp at
an Universal Empire; our Author will not say, but that God may permit this Man,
to ravage and depopulate Countries, to pull Princes from their Thrones, and to
bring their Kingdoms into Subjection to himself: such Men there are in all
Ages, did not God think fit to restrain them, and to fling Difficulties in
their ways to make them tame and quiet. Now I would ask any Man, which most
becomes the Divine Wisdom, to suffer such Men when they please to overturn
Kingdoms, and to bring horrible Desolations on the World, only to gratify
their own Lusts; or to give the Reigns, and to give prosperous Success to them,
when he sees fit to new model the World, to pull down such a Prince, or to
chastise and correct such a Nation: I am sure this much more becomes the Wisdom
and Justice of Providence, than a bare permission of such Violence, without any
farther design, which does not become the Wise Governor of the World. And if
God may permit such Wickedness and Violence without contributing to their Sin,
or being a Party to their Wickedness; much more may he overruled their
Wickedness for wise Ends, make them the Executioners of his Justice in
punishing a wicked Age, and transferring Kingdoms; and then why may not God
give them those Kingdoms, which he has overturned by them? for I suppose, it is
as agreeable to the Sovereignty, Wisdom and Justice of God, to give a Kingdom
to a violent Usurper, as to suffer a wicked, impious, tyrannical Prince to
ascend the Throne, with a legal Title: and yet this God often does, witness
many of the Roman Emperors, whom I know our Author will have to be legal
Princes; and those who will not allow them to be legal Princes, need not want
Examples of this nature in Hereditary Kingdoms.

But our Author says, that to own an Usurper, who is settled in the Throne by
Providence, and to obey and submit to him as our King, justifies an
unreasonable and wicked Doctrine, by making the Acts or Permissions of
Providence, a Rule for practice against Right and Justice; as for his Right and
Justice, it has been considered already, let us now consider how far the
Providence of God may be the Rule for practice.

It is indeed an impious Doctrine to justify every Action, and every Cause
which has success; God many times prospers very evil Designs, when he can serve
a good End by them; and therefore to measure the good or evil of things by
external success, to conclude, that is God's Cause, which the Providence of God
prospers, confounds the difference of good and evil, and destroys all the
standing Rules of Right and Justice: but yet it is so far from being an impious
Doctrine, that it is a necessary Duty, to conform our selves to the Divine
Providence, and to discharge those Duties and Obligations, which the Providence
of God lays on us, according to the Nature and Intention of the Providence: and
thus the Providence of God in some sense may be the Rule of our Practice, and
may make that our Duty, which was not, and that cease to be our Duty, which was
our Duty before: and thus it always is when the Providence of God changes our
Relations, or Condition of Life; as to mention only our present Case, when he
removes one King, and sets up another; for he must transfer my Allegiance, when
he changes my King.

The truth is, as far as I can perceive, the great, if not the only fault of my
Case of Allegiance, is this unreasonable and impious Doctrine of Providence:
for some Men cannot endure to hear, that God makes Kings by his Providence, for
that argues there is a God; others cannot bear the thoughts, that Kings Reign
by God's Authority, for then they cannot make and unmake Kings, as they please;
others will by no means allow, that the Providence of God can make a King
against the Laws of the Land, can remove a rightful King, and set up a King
without a legal Title, at least not without the death or cession of the
rightful King, or a hundred years Prescription; but to say, that the Providence
of God gives his Authority to a King de facto, who is settled in the Throne;
this is an impious Doctrine.

So that had I left out Providence, I might have had fairer quarter on all
hands, though in effect the thing had been the same, and I had taught the same
thing, viz. that when a rightful King is dispossessed, Subjects may own and
submit to the King, who is settled in the possession of the Throne, which is all
I undertook to prove.

Had I only said, that Conquest in a just War, by the Law of Nations, gives a
Right to the Conqueror, though the former King be alive, and has made his
Escape. Had I only said, that unjust Force and Violence makes it lawful for
Subjects to submit, when the Prince cannot protect them, and such Submission
and Consent of the People settles a Prince in the Kingdom, I might have escaped
very well, as others have done.

Or had I only said, that the Laws of the Land allow and require Subjects to
pay Allegiance to a King de facto in possession of the Crown, most of our
Non-swearers themselves would have allowed this a good Plea, could I have
persuaded them it was true; for the Laws of the Land they must allow to be the
rules and measures of our Allegiance.

But now to add, that God by all these ways and means makes Kings, and settles
them on their Thrones, and gives his Authority to them, this spoils all, and is
an impious Doctrine: that is, any of these ways will make very good Kings
without God; but it is a very wicked thing to say, that God makes them Kings,
or gives his Authority to them: For it is a dangerous thing to allow, that God
makes Kings, or that Kings have his Authority, or that the Providence of God
does not barely permit, but Govern all the Changes and Revolutions of the World.

But I had learnt from Scripture (and B. Overal' s Convocation Book proves,
that those learned Men were of the same mind) that Kings are made only by God,
and that it is God's Authority, which makes them Kings; and therefore I could
not think it enough to say by what visible means Princes are advanced to the
Throne, without adding, that the Providence of God by these means settles them
in the Throne, and gives his Authority to them, on which the true resolution of
Conscience depends in all such Revolutions: And if this be my only fault, that
I assert the Right and Prerogative of God in making Kings, and the Wisdom and
government of Providence in all the Revolutions of States and Empires, I am
contented to suffer obloquy and reproach for maintaining such Impious Doctrines.

Our Author in his Answer has another Argument to prove, that we misrepresent
the Sense of the Convocation, which he has thought fit to leave out in his
Postscript, Ans. p 21, 22.
viz. That the Interpretation we give of it, is inconsistent with the main and
Fundamental Doctrines of the Convocation Book, viz. Passive Obedience and
Non-resistance.

But if the Convocation taught both (as they certainly did) it is a sign, that
whatever our Author thinks, or whatever he can prove, the Convocation did not
apprehend any inconsistency between them. I observed in the Case, that the
Doctrine of Obedience and Allegiance to the Present Powers, Case of Alleg. p.
36.
is founded on the same Principle with the Doctrine of Non-resistance and
Passive Obedience, viz. That God makes Kings and Invests them with his
Authority, which equally proves, that all Kings who have received a Sovereign
Authority from God, must be Obeyed, and must not be Resisted: And therefore all
settled Governments, as the Convocation asserts, having their Authority from
God, must be obeyed, for the same reason, for which we must not resist
Sovereign Princes, viz. because they have their Authority from God; but this
our Author thought fit to pass over.

For it is a plain Case, that Non-resistance and Passive Obedience, can be due
only to him who is our King, and if God can remove one King, and set up
another, Non-resistance must be Due, not to the King, whom God has pulled down,
but to the King whom God has set up; and therefore he may harangue as long as
he pleases upon this Argument to no purpose, unless he can prove, that God has
not pulled down one King and set up another.

His next Argument against this Interpretation of the Convocation Book is this:
That it reproaches the Virtue and Loyalty of those admirable Men, who Suffered
between the Years 42. and 60. And therefore this cannot be the Sense of the
Convocation; for no doubt the Convocation in 603. had great regard to the
Loyalty of those who Suffered between 42. and 60; by a Spirit of Prophecy I
suppose.

And here our Author grows very angry, both in his Answer and Postscript, and
gives many hard and spightful Words to his Adversaries, but be that to himself,
I am resolved not to be angry.

This I answered at large in the Case of Allegiance, (p. 46. etc.) and shall
now take a brief review of it.

I said, it is a great Prejudice but no Argument; for if these Principles be
true, and according to these Principles they might have complied with those
Usurpations, that they did not, is no confutation of the Principles.

He answers, Post. p. 14.
I thought an Argument from Example had been an Argument, though not always a
very good one; Right! but Example is only a Prejudice, not an Argument against
plain Reasons, which cannot otherwise be answered; let Reasons be first
answered, and then when there is no Reason against a thing, the Examples of
great and wise Men without any other Reason carry some Authority with them:
especially when we have other good Reasons for doing any thing, Example gives
some new strength to them; and thus the Example of Iaddus may be an Argument,
when other Examples are none: though he knows the Example of Iaddus was
alleged by me only to prove the sense of the Convocation, and how Iaddus
himself understood his Oath of Allegiance to Darius, which is a very different
Case from what he urges.

But to let pass his transport of Zeal, and to forgive the froth and folly of
it, when he urges the Examples of these great Men, there are many things he
ought to have considered.

As 1. He should have considered whom he reproached in all this as well as whom
he commended. He reproaches all those, who in those times of Confusion
submitted to the Usurped Powers, and lived quietly and peaceably under them,
and yet the King found a great many true Friends, and Loyal Persons, at his
return among those Men: He reproaches all those Loyal Persons both of the
Nobility, Gentry, and Clergy, who suffered cheerfully under those Usurpations,
and as cheerfully comply with the present Revolution, which, as I observed
before, is an Argument, that they make a great difference between these two
Cases: But if as our Author argues, to justify our present Submission and
Compliance be to reproach those Worthies, who suffered for their King in that
horrid Rebellion and Usurpation; then he must upon his Principles accuse those
Worthies, who suffered for their King then, with falling from their Loyalty, by
their present Compliance. He reproaches all the Nobility, Gentry, and Clergy,
who have now Sworn Allegiance to their present Majesty's; and tho the Clergy,
he says, are only a Company of Weathercock Divines, and therefore it is no
great matter for them, yet I doubt the Nobility and Genty will not take it well
from him, to be thought Weather-Cocks, or less Loyal, than those who suffered
for K. Charles were. And if it moves our Author's Indignation to see the
Worthies of the World, and of our Church mocked and diminished, and represented
as Fools and Knaves (which no body has done but himself) a much cooler Man than
he is, may be a little moved, if not with Indignation, yet with Contempt, to
see all our present Worthies in Church and State so maliciously libelled.

2ly. If our Author will argue from Examples, he ought not only to consider
what was done, but upon what Principles they did it, whether they were all of
our Author's mind, that it is absolutely unlawful in any Case whatsoever, to
submit to a Prince, who is possessed of the Throne, while the legal King, or
his true Heir is living, tho dispossessed. It is probable some few might be of
this mind; but that this was their general sense, can never be proved; and that
it was, is very improbable; for it was neither the Doctrine of the Church, nor
the Law of the Land: And yet if our Author cannot prove this, he proves
nothing to his purpose; if they did not act upon his Principles, though they
suffered for their King then, they might have complied now, as some of them
have done, and yet don't think they have recounced the true Principles of
Loyalty by it.

3ly. When he resolved to argue from Example, he should have carefully
considered, whether there are not more and greater Examples on the other side,
whether supposing the Case to be as he represents it, there be any thing like
it in all Story, either sacred or profane, whether both Jews and Christians did
not always submit to the present Powers, when the Government was settled by
what wicked means soever it began: But I shall not enter upon this Argument
now, which will be managed by a more learned Pen.

I showed what a vast difference there was between the late times of Rebellion
and Usurpation, and this present Revolution; this he cannot deny, but says, it
makes no difference in the Argument; let us then try that.

But to state the matter so plain, that our Author himself, had he never so
much mind to it, shall not be able to mistake or misrepresent it, I must first
premise, that they are two very different Questions, as I have observed above,
When it is lawful to submit to Usurping Powers? and, When it becomes a Duty to
do it? It is lawful to submit, when we are under such force as can compel us;
it is our Duty to submit, when, as the Convocation says, the Government is
thoroughly settled; now while we are in this state, that we are under mere
force, but the Government not settled, we may either submit or not submit
without Sin; and then that which must turn the Scale, are Arguments from
Interest.

Now, what I said upon this occasion in the Case of Allegiance, had reference
to both these, viz. That Subjects were not in those days bound in Conscience to
submit to these usurped Powers, and not being bound in Conscience to do it,
there were many reasons which might move the Royal Party not to do it.

Now this is so far from lessening and reproaching their Loyalty, that it is
greatly for the Commendation of it; that when they were not bound in Conscience
to submit to those Usurpations, tho by Submission, our Author intimates, they
might have made better Terms for themselves, yet they rather chose to venture
their Lives and Fortunes to restore the King, which is not, as our Author
insinuates, to prefer their Interest to their Conscience in serving the King;
but where Conscience was not concerned to the contrary, to venture their
Interest* their Lives and Fortunes, to restore the King. Tho Men are but Men,
and if what I said be true, that there were many Reasons which touched their
Interests, why they should not submit to those Usurpations; I cannot see what
Dishonor it is to them, to say that it may be supposed, that the utmost
Despair under a violent Usurpation, and the only possible prospect of bettering
their Condition by the return of the King, might, not influence their
Consciences, but inspire and quicken their Loyalty.

Now that they were not bound in Conscience to submit to those Usurpers, I
proved, because their Government was never settled; and tho the Convocation does
not deny the lawfulness of submitting to Power before a Settlement, yet they do
not make it a necessary Duty, and matter of Conscience to submit, till the
Government is thoroughly settled.

The Convocation alleges two ways, whereby a Government wickedly and unjustly
begun, may be thoroughly settled, viz. By a general Submission, or by
Continuance; that they had not continuance enough to make a Settlement, I
proved, because the Government was frequently changed and new moddelled, which
was no Argument of Settlement; and as for Settlement by a general Submission,
they could not pretend to that, for they never had a National Consent and
Submission.

That they had no such National consent, needs not be proved to any Man, who
remembers the story of those days. I suppose no man will pretend such a consent
to the Government of the Rump-Parliament, when all the Representatives of the
Nation were flung out of the House, excepting those few Rumpers, because they
would not consent.

Nor will it be pretended that Cromwells Dissolving the Rump-Parliament, and
summoning some select Persons out of every County, nominated by himself and his
Council of Officers, without any Election of the People, to be the
Representative of the Nation, had a National consent: Nor had the Council of
State chosen by this Mock-House of Parliament, any greater Authority than their
Masters; nor did their Resignation of their Power to Cromwell again give any
Authority to him, or carry a National Consent with it.

Nor will it be pretended, that the Instrument of Government, agreed on by
Cromwell and his Officers, which made Cromwell Lord Protector of the Three
Nations, had any National Consent: It is plain, it had no National Consent in
framing it, and it is as plain, that it was never afterward confirmed by any
National Consent and Submission.

The Parliaments called according to the directions of this Instrument, never
could make a National Consent or Submission; for they were not chosen according
to the ancient Customs and Usages of the Nation, nor were they the
Representatives of the Nation, but only of a prevailing Party and Faction in
it; for by Article 14. Whitlock's Memorials, p. 555.
it is provided, That all and every Person and Persons, who have aided,
advised, assisted, or abetted in any War against the Parliament, since the
first day of Jan. 1641. (unless they have been since in the Service of the
Parliament, and given signal Testimonies of their good Affections thereunto)
shall be disabled, and be incapable to be elected, or to give any Vote in the
Election of any Members to serve in the new Parliament, or in the three
succeeding Triennial Parliaments. So that a great part of the Nation were
hereby wholly excluded from choosing, or being chosen Members of Parliament:
When they were thus chosen, this Election did not make them Parliament Men,
unless they were approved of by the major part of the Council, to be Persons
not disabled, but qualified as aforesaid. Artic. 21. When they were thus chosen
and approved, they had no Authority to reject this new Model, but it is
provided, Art. 12. That the Persons elected shall not have power to alter the
Government, as it is hereby settled in one single Person and a Parliament.

The first Parliament met Sept. 3. 54. and began to be very busy about the new
Government, Ibid. p. 587.
but the Protector sent for them to the Painted Chamber, and taught them
better, that the same Government that made them a Parliament, made him
Protector, and that as they are entrusted with some things, so is he with other
things. That there were some thing in the Government fundamental, and could not
be altered (tho this Instrument had no other Authority but his own, and his
Council of Officers) as 1. That the Government should be in one Person, and a
Parliament, -- and therefore he was sorry to understand that any of them should
go about to overthrow what was so settled, (it seems then this Parliament at the
beginning was so far from giving their Submission and Consent, that they were
about to overthrow this new Settlement) and to prevent such great
Inconveniences, he was necessitated to appoint a Test, or Recognition of the
Government, which was to be signed by them, before they went any more into the
House, and it was this,

I A. B. do hereby freely promise and engage my self to be true and faithful to
the Lord Protector, and to the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
and shall not (according to the tenor of the Indenture whereby I am returned to
serve in this present Parliament) propose or give any Consent to alter the
Government, as it is settled in one single Person and a Parliament. That day 130
Members subscribed it, and took their Places in the House, how many more did
afterward is not said.

And yet this very Parliament spent near five Months in their debates about the
new Government, and the Protector was glad to dissolve them at last; and this
does not look like a National Submission and Consent: especially considering
the Plot, which was ready to break out upon it, and the Declaration of the free
and wellaffected People of England, Ibid. p. 600.
now in Arms against the Tyrant Oliver Cromwell.

In the second Parliament Sept. 1656. many Persons who were returned by the
Country for Members were not admitted into the House, as not approved by the
Council, which occasioned their publishing a Remonstrance, Ibid. p. 640.
subscribed by near one hundred of them, the reading of which will satisfy any
man, how far that new Government was from having a National Consent and
Submission. But this is enough for my present purpose, to show that those
Usurpations were never settled by a National Submission and Consent, but all the
settlement they had was mere force: and now let us hear what our Author says to
this.

As for the Government being frequently changed, Postscript p. 15.
he says, every one of these changes was a settlement, if the Dr's notion of a
settlement be right: but it is plain according to my notion none of them were
settlements; for none of them had the general Consent and Submission of the
People; and though the Power of the Nation was for some time in their hands,
the continuance of none of these changes was long enough to make a Settlement
by Prescription without Consent.

He adds. But as the National Consent in Parliament, that is indeed part of our
Constitution, but what is that to Usurpation, which may Usurp as well upon all
Branches of the Constitution as upon one. But I do not urge a National Consent
in Parliament, considered as part of our Constitution, but barely considered as
a National Consent, for a National Consent and Submission is necessary to the
settlement of any new Government, and this must be declared by one means or
other. The Consent of a Parliament freely chosen by the Body of the People,
must be allowed to be a National Consent, and that Consent the present
Government has: but where there is no Consent in Parliament, in a Nation which
never gives their consent any other way but by their Representatives, when a
Government dares not call such a Parliament, nor ask their consent, or if they
do ask, are denied it; it is evident there is no National Consent. What he says
indeed is true, that had Cromwell possessed himself of the Authority of Kings,
Lords and Commons; had he been settled in this Possession by the general Consent
and Submission of the People; he had had God's Authority in all those respects,
and ought to have been obeyed; but without such a Consent, though the People
might for a while have silently submitted to Power, they were at liberty to
cast off the Yoke, when they had power and opportunity to do it. This is my
Notion of a thorough Settlement, to which he appeals; and let any Man try,
whether (as he says) it will fit Cromwell in all respects, just as if it had
been made for him, viz. When the whole Administration of Government, and the
whole Power of the Nation is in the hands of the Prince, when every thing is
done in his Name, and by his Authority; had I added no more, the Author might
have pretended, that the Government of the Rump-Parliament, and of Oliver
Cromwell had this Settlement, but what follows spoils this Conceit, when the
Estates of the Realm, and the great Body of the Nation has submitted to him.

So that here was no such Settlement of these Usurpations, as could oblige
Subjects in Conscience to obey them and to submit to them; and when it was not
matter of Duty and Conscience to submit, I showed that there were other very
great Reasons, why they should not submit; not such Reasons as ought to have
overruled their Consciences, had it been matter of Duty, for there are no such
Reasons to be had, but such as were very reasonable and almost invincible
Prejudices against Submission, when Conscience was not concerned; and this
answers all his little Objections.

As, 1. The great Villainies of those days in an open and barefaced Rebellion
-- and in the barbarous Murder of one of the best Princes in the World -- this,
he says, makes no difference in my Arguments. What! not to prejudice wise and
good Men against all Compliances? For who that could possibly avoid it, (that
is, where strict Duty does not oblige, nor irresistible Force constrain) would
submit to such Men?

2. The barbarous usage the Kings Friends met with. This he confesses makes
some difference in point of Interest, but none in point of Conscience; nor did
I say it did, but it justly created a great Aversion to those Usurpations, and
was a reason not to submit, when they were not obliged in Conscience to do it,
since all the Interest they had in the World engaged them, not to settle by
their Submissions, but to do all they could to overturn those Usurpations.

3. The Church of England was overturned, Bishops, Deans, etc. turned out, and
their Lands and Revenues sold; the Loyal Clergy were Malignants for what they
had done, and had no way to keep their Livings, but by renouncing the Church of
England.

To this he answers; the Case is concerning Civil Government, not
Ecclesiastical. But yet whoever loves the Church, will not choose to submit
(when they are not obliged in Conscience) to such Usurpations on the State, as
overthrow the Church: Whether they were obliged to renounce Episcopacy or not,
they saw it destroyed, and not so much as an Indulgence allowed to the Worship
or Government of the Church of England. What he adds, I would desire him
carefully to consider, for it did not concern them; that to be disabled to keep
a Living, though a very good one, is no reason to rebel against a settled
Government. 4. The whole Government in Church and State was overturned, which
was the fundamental Constitution of the Nation; but this, he says, is only
changing the form of Government, as the Dr. knows the Convocation says, when
such degenerate forms of Government are thoroughly settled. I grant it, but when
such degenerate forms of Government are not thoroughly settled, the subversion
of the fundamental Constitution of the Nation, is a reasonable prejudice
against submission, when it is not a duty.

His parting Objection is so very ridiculous, Postscript. p. 15.
that had he begun with it, I should have thought he had only intended it for a
jest, but I am now so well acquainted with his way of reasoning, that I am
satisfied, he is capable of thinking it an argument; and it is this. If
possession of Sovereign Power contary to Law, be God's Authority, and ought to
be obeyed, then whatever Sovereign Power a Prince possesses himself of, is
likewise God's Authority, and ought to be obeyed. -- If therefore a Prince in a
limited Monarchy resolves eo be arbitrary -- to make his will the Law, and to
exercise an Illegal Power, he must be obeyed as Gods Authority.

But where do I say, that possession of Sovereign Power contrary to Law is Gods
Authority? He does not pretend, that I say it in express words, but this he
supposes is the sense of what I say: But I desire he would keep to my words,
for I will answer for none of his senses, unless I were better satisfied both
of his understanding and honesty. I say indeed, that a Prince who is settled in
the possession of Sovereign Power, though he have no legal Title to the Crown,
has God's Authority; and what then? therefore the possession of Sovereign power
contrary to Law is God's Authority; how does this follow? cannot God settle a
King upon the Throne without a legal Title, but he must be presumed to give him
Authority, when ever he has power, to govern by an Arbitrary will, against the
Laws of the Land? cannot God make a King, without giving him Authority to do
all that he has power to do?

But the formal reason of obedience to such a Prince is because he has God's
Authority, and the evidence that he has God's Authority, is because he is
possessed of Sovereign Power. Suppose this, though God's Authority be the
formal reason of our obedience to a Prince, yet it is not the Rule of our
obedience, and therefore we are not bound to obey every thing he commands,
though he have God's Authority.

The Authority of God is only an Authority to govern according to the Laws of
God and Nature, or the Laws of the Land; and tho Sovereign Princes may have
such an Authority, as must not be resisted, yet in a limited Monarchy they have
no more Authority from God to transgress the Laws of the Land, than in an
absolute Monarchy they have to transgress the Laws of God and Nature. Indeed
Arbitrary Government is not the possession of Sovereign Power, which is God's
Authority, but the arbitrary Exercise of it: And tho we must obey God's
Authority, it does not hence follow, that we must obey the Exercise of
Arbitrary Power.

And yet I do not attribute Gods Authority (which we must obey in Conscience)
to the bare possession of Power, but to the settled possession of it; that is,
with the Consent and Submission of the People; and could any Prince change a
limited into an absolute Monarchy by a National Consent, Subjects were then as
much bound in Conscience to submit to an arbitrary Power in all matters, which
have no moral evil in them, as they are now to obey the Laws; but then this
would not be an Authority against Law, but the Law would be changed: Thus it is
not yet, and we are in no danger now it should be so; and therefore the Case of
the Declaration, and of Magdalen-Colledge, etc. are very impertinently alleged
by our Author, and he had better reserve them, till he can bring us under the
Government of a French Power.

But do not I say, That when the Laws of the Land contradict the Laws of God,
they are no Rule to us, but their Obligation must give place to Divine
Authority. He should have cited the whole, That the Laws of the Land are the
Rule of Conscience, when they do not contradict the Laws of God; but when they
do, they are no Rule to us. So that the Laws of the Land must be the Rule of
our Obedience to Princes, unless they contradict the Laws of God, and I do not
know that any of our Laws do that, and then there is no danger in a limited
Monarchy, that we should be obliged by God's Authority to obey Arbitrary Will
and Power.

It is a certain truth, as our Author must confess, that if the Laws of the
Land contradict the Laws of God, they are no Rule to us. But this proves
nothing in particular, without proving what Laws of the Land are contrary to
the Laws of God: If then he can prove, that by the Law of God, we are bound to
obey the Arbitrary Will of the Prince against the Laws of the Land, whenever he
will command things against Law, and has power to crush us, if we will not
obey, I will readily grant, and so must he, that it is our duty to do it; but
till he prove this, he must not take it for granted there is such a Law, and
then we need dispute this matter no further at present. But what he means by
this Argument I cannot tell; if he does think, there is such a Law of God, I
suppose he intended in good earnest to prove, that we must submit to the
Arbitrary Will of our Prince against Law, and to condemn the opposition that
was made in the late Reign to such Arbitrary Proceedings; if he did not believe
there was any such Law of God, how ridiculous was it to pretend, that we must
submit to Arbitrary Will and Power against Law, because when the Laws of the
Land contradict the Laws of God, they are no Rule to us.

I shall only observe farther, that our Author charges me with saying in the
Case of Resistance, that this may easily be (that a Prince in a limited
Monarchy should resolve to be arbitrary) when he has all the Power of the
Kingdom in his hands, and must not be resisted. Whereas I bring this in by way
of objection against Non-Resistance, and only say, it is possible, but show by
several Arguments how difficult it is, and that the Doctrine of Non-Resistance
does not destroy the distinction between a limited and absolute Monarchy: But
at this rate he uses to cite Authors, that unwary Readers will easily be
imposed on, if they give too much credit to him.

Thus I have particularly answered all the little appearances of Reason and
Argument in the Postscript, and made it appear, that according to the Sense of
the Convocation, those Princes who have no legal Right, may yet have God's
Authority, and have so, when their Government is thoroughly settled. And now had
been the proper time to enquire what the Convocation meant by a thorough
Settlement, but he did not like this order, and therefore chose to begin with
the Notion of thorough Settlement; for when once it had appeared, that the
Convocation spoke of the settlement of illegal Powers, he must have been
ashamed to have pretended, that they meant a legal Settlement, by acquiring a
new legal Title, either by the death or cession of the right Heirs, or by a
long Prescription.

I shall only add, that when the Convocation speaks of a Settlement, they mean
the Settlement of the Government within it self, not with respect to foreign
Force and Power; for so they express it, when they have established any of the
said degenerate Forms of Government amongst their own People, and then the
Government may be thoroughly settled within it self, before it have a peaceable
Possession and Settlement; so Alexander's Authority was settled at Jerusalem,
before Darius was finally conquered; and so are K. William and Q. Mary settled
on the Throne, notwithstanding all the expectations some have of a French
Invasion and Conquest.

And since our Author insists so much upon a legal Settlement, Possession of
the Throne, with the Consent and Submission of the Estates of the Realm, gives
a legal Settlement in England, if we will believe our best Judges and Lawyers,
as I shall be inclined to do, till I see a fair Answer to what I have said in
this Cause, in the Case of Allelegiance; and then we have the opinion of our
Lawyers for a Settlement, and of the Convocation for Obedience to a settled
Government.

For the Conclusion of his Answer, he alleges the Authority of Bishop Andrews
and Bishop Buckeridge, two Members of this Convocation, Answer, p. 27.
and of Dr. Iackson, a very learned Divine, against that sense we give of the
Convocation. The thing then he is to prove from these reverend and learned Men
against our sense of the Convocation is this, that those who ascend the Throne
by Usurpation without a legal Right have not God's Authority, and must not be
obeyed; and that such Princes can never, in the sense of the Convocation, be
settled in their Thrones, or have God's Authority, till they gain some new legal
Right, by the Death or Cession of the rightful Prince, or by a long
Prescription: Let us see then, how he proves this to be the judgment of these
Learned Men.

Now what he quotes from B. Andrews has not one word of this matter. The whole
of it is no more but this; that the Bishop will not allow the Name of King to
any but Kings of lawful and true descent; they are Kings, the they reign not,
as Ioash was; others are no Kings, but Usurpers, tho they reign, as Athaliah
did; and what is this to the purpose? Does not the Convocation allow Ioash to
be the true Heir, while he was kept from the Crown, and Athaliah an Usurper,
tho she reigned Six Years? Does not the Convocation call such Kings, Kings de
facto, which is a little softer Name than Usurper, but signifies much the same
thing, viz. One who is possessed of the Throne without a legal Right? And yet
what the Convocation's Doctrine was about Obedience to such Kings, I have
already proved; and Bishop Andrews might be of the same mind, tho he would not
allow them the Name of Kings.

But the Bishop will not allow, that such Kings reigned by God. Right; but then
he does not mean, that such Kings do not exercise God's Authority; but that God
did not by his antecedent Will and Appointment place them on the Throne. Thus
S. Chrysostom, on the 13. Romans allows all Power and Authority to be of God, and
to be ordained by God, and therefore not to be resisted, whoever has it; but
yet will not say, that all Princes, who exercise this Power wickedly and
tyrannically, whatever their Title be, are ordained of God: He thought it a
Reproach and Blemish to the goodness and justice of Providence, to say, that
wicked, impious, tyrannical Princes were ordained by God, but yet granted that
the Authority they exercised was Gods, and must be obeyed: The Bishop and
others will allow what S. Chrysostom would not, That the most wicked Tyrants,
who have a legal Title to their Thrones, are ordained by God, but are afraid to
own, that Princes who ascend their Thrones by unjust and wicked means, are set
up by God; but it does not hence follow, that they denied their Power and
Authority to be Gods, or that Subjects ought to obey it. The Convocation it
self affirms no more, in that mighty place, as our Author calls it, than that
the Authority which is exercised in those Governments, which begun by the
Ambition of Princes, or the Rebellion of Subjects, is always God's Authority,
and therefore can receive no impeachment by the wickedness of those who have
it, and therefore must be obeyed. So that Learned Men may differ in this Point,
whether illegal Usurpers are placed on the Throne by the overruling Counsels
and Appointment of God, or only by his permissive Providence, and yet agree in
the main Conclusion, That the Authority they exercise, when settled in their
Thrones, is God's Authority, and must be obeyed.

We have a very express Determination of this matter by Doctor Iackson, (to
whom our Author appeals) in that very Sermon to which he refers; and tho the
Passage be long, it is worth transcribing, and it is this:

But does this Rule of our Apostle hold as punctually of the Magistrate,
Iackson, Vol. 3. p. 963, etc.
as of the Magistracy? Does every one which resists the Magistrate, or Men
invested with the power of Jurisdiction resist the Ordinance of God as
directly, or in as high a degree, as he that resists the Power it self
wherewith he is invested; as he that seeks to overthrow the Magistracy? It is
the Observation of S. Chrysostom, and Oecumenius upon this place, that S. Paul
does not say, There is no Magistrate but from God, or that the Magistrates that
be, be ordained of God, but that there is no power which is not from God, and
that the powers that be, are ordained of God: That he purposely speaks not of
this or that Magistrate in particular, or of the Person to whom the Power is
annexed, sed de re ipsa, but of the Power it self. But here a Man might well
demand of them; is there any Power here meant by the Apostle, which is not
inherent in some Men's Persons? Is there any Magistracy without a Magistrate? Or
how can the Power be resisted, unless the Party be resisted in whom it is
seated? And so he goes on to prove that S. Paul meant the Magistrate, even Nero
himself, not merely the Magistracy: So that as Magistracy, or the power of
jurisdiction is from God, and must be obeyed, so must the Magistrate who has
this Power. And yet in the next Section he makes a great difference between the
Power it self, and the Acquisition or Exercise of Power, That our Apostle's
Rule does not so punctually hold of the means or acquisition of Power, or of
the exercise of it, as it does of the Power or Magistracy it self. Albeit the
Power or Magistracy be always God's positive and primary Ordinance, always an
effect of his gracious Providence, always a Blessing toward any Land or
People, or the Award of his antecedent Will: Yet the manner of acquiring this
Power, or the annexing it to this or that Person, one or more, is not always
the positive Ordinance of God, no effect of his Bounty and Benignity, no
consequent of his antecedent Will, but sometimes rather the Award of his
consequent Will, and an Act at least permissive of his punitive Justice. So
that all Princes are not from God, in the same sense that all Power is, but all
Princes have that Power, which is from God, and must be obeyed.

His next Testimony is from Bishop Buckeridge, and he speaks exactly the sense
of the Convocation, that Athaliah had not acquired a Right to the Crown,
neither by the consent of the People, nor by the Prescription of six years,
which shows what his judgment was, that such an Usurper as Athaliah, might
acquire a Right to the Crown, either by the consent of the People, or by long
continuance, as the Convocation asserts in the case of Autiochus, the Bishop I
think not with the same reason in the Case of Athaliah; but whether his
Application be proper or not, his Doctrine is the same with the Convocation's.

Our Author did well to cite this passage honestly, but he did not well to
corrupt it with his Comment, as I observed before; for he turns a Disjunctive
into a Conjunctive: the Bishop says neither by the consent of the People, nor
by the Prescription of six years; which supposes, that either the consent of
the People, or a long Prescription would give a Right, and he expounds it of
both together, that a right to the Government is acquired by a Prescription,
and that is a long and uninterrupted Possession, joined with the consent of the
People.

His last Appeal is to Dr. Iaekson, and I allow the Doctor does say what he
quotes from him, that a mere Usurper or a Tyrant by Title may be resisted by
violence even to Deposition or Death -- Our Author Confesses Dr. Iackson will
not allow resistance to be made by every body, but he says it with this
qualification, save in the right and interest of the Right Heir, Or by his
Commission and Command; where he has turned the Tables, and made a Conjunctive
a Disjunctive, Or for And, little Particles, which make no difference with our
Author: But since he has not thought fit to give us this entire Paragraph, I
will do it for him, and let the Reader judge, on which side Dr. Iachson is: it
is this.

So then a Tyrant or Usurper may be Deposed or Resisted; but thus Resisted or
Deposed he may not be by every Man, Page 965.
who knows him to be an Usurper. For a Man may trangress this Rule of the
Apostle, and resist Gods Ordinance, by resisting the Power, wherewith he is
invested, though not simply by resisting him (so that an Usurper has that power
which is Gods Ordinance, and must not be resisted by every body) Aliud est
Magistratum esse, aliud est in Magistratu esse, aut Magistratum gerere: it is
one thing to be a ture and lawful Magistrate, another thing to bear or execute
the Office of a true Magistrate. The Acts of a false Magistrate or Intruder,
whilst he is in Magistratu in the Office it self, are of validity (let our
Author remember this too.) His Person is to be obeyed, not resisted by every
Man, until he be declared to be an Usurper or Intruder by some higher Power or
Authority. Few Tyrants have gotten Investiture or admission to Royal Power by
more indirect means, thou Richard the third in this Kingdom did, yet many Acts
and Exercises of Royal Power, though proceeding from him, were legal and of
validity. Nor did they resist the Ordinance of God that bore Office under him,
that obeyed his Summons, whether for Parliament, or other business of State.
(This confutes great part of our Author's Book, and undermines the Fundamental
Principles of it.) It had been a sin for any man of his own private head to
have killed him, albeit all the space of his Reign he did resist the Ordinance
of God: for every man is not an Avenger of such as resist the Ordinance of God:
this belongs to the Higher Powers only, or unto them to whom the Supreme Power
is by right annexed. And so Henry of Richmond was Authorized by Gods Ordinance
to execute vengeance, or to bring condemnation on this Tyrant, which every one
might not have done, which perhaps no other might have done save only in his
Right and Interest, and by his Commission and Command.

Now who ever doubted, but that a rightful Prince, when dispossessed unjustly,
may recover his Throne again if he can, and dispossess the Usurper, or that
those who lawfully receive Commission from him, may lawfully fight in his
quarrel: but the great question still remains, whether Subjects may lawfully
take Commissions from the dispossessed Prince, to fight against the Prince, who
is settled in the Possession of the Throne; this Dr. Iackson does not say, and
therefore he can do our Author no service.

His next citation from Dr. Iackson is the case of Jehoiada' s Deposing of
Athaliah, urged by the Papists for the power of the Pope to depose Kings. But
this he has so shamefully mangled, that a little discretion would have taught
him rather to have left it out, than to have betrayed so much dishonestly in
his quotations, I shall give the Reader the entire passage.

First, Jehoiada in that he was High Priest, was a prime Peer in the Realm of
Judah, and invested with the power of Jurisdiction next in order and dignity to
the Higher Power. This our Author leaves out, though very material, because it
shows by what Authority he did it, as the Ordinary Supreme Magistrate in the
vacancy of the Throne; that is, not merely in right of his Priesthood, as the
Papists pretended, nor merely as a Subject, but as being the Higher Power and
Authority, to whom the judgment of such matters belonged, as he had observed
before. And this is the very account the Convocation gives of it, Convoc. c.
23. p. 41.
that Iehoiada did this being the Kings Uncle, and the chief Head and Prince of
his Tribe, that is, not a private Subject, but a chief Prince in the Kingdom of
Judah. The Doctor proceeds.

Secondly, The Power Royal, or Supreme, was by right, by the express Ordinance
and positive Law of God, annexed unto the Infant Prince, whom Jehoiada' s Wife
had saved from the Tyranny of Athaliah, as being next Heir now alive unto
David. In the right of this Prince, and for the actual annexion of the Supreme
Power to his person (unto whom it was de jure annexed) Jehoiada, being the
chief Magistrate in the vacancy, did by force and violence Depose her, who had
Usurpt the Royal Scepter by violence, and cruel Murder of her Seed Royal. All
these words, in a different Character, are left out by our Author, and some of
them very material ones, especially those, by the express Ordinance, and
positive Law of God, and the next Heir now alive to David, which plainly refers
to the Divine entail on David's Family, and distinguishes this from the case of
other Usurpers, which is the very account the Convocation gave of it, as I
showed before, and overthrows all that our Author has said about the case of
Athaliah, and for that reason he suppressed them, as any one will easily guess.
Thus he leaves out, Jehoiada being the chief Magistrate in the vacancy, which
shows this was an Act of Authority and Jurisdiction, which private Subjects
must not pretend to; and therefore would not serve his purpose, and I believe
by this time, he thinks he had better have let it all alone.

He concludes his Postscript with rage and venom, and I have no answer to that.
I have indeed changed my Opinion about the Authority of Usurpers, who are
settled in the Throne by the general consent and submission of the People, and
of the Estates of the Realm, and I have Scripture and Reason, the Authority of
the Church of England, and the Laws of the Land (for any thing our Author has
said to the contrary) to justify this change; and I assure him, I will change
my Opinion in any thing else upon the same terms, and despise his censures of
my Honesty for doing so; and as for Authority, I never pretended to any my
self, and will never own any man's Authority, much less my own Opinions, in
opposition to Scripture and Reason, the Church of England, and the Laws of the
Land. But what a charitable Opinion our Author has of the present Government,
and of all that comply with it, we may see in the Parallel he makes between my
case and that of Hazael: as if swearing Allegiance to King William and Queen
Mary were as great, as notorious, as self evident an impiety and wickedness, as
all the villainies, which the Prophet Elisha foretold Hazael, that he would be
guilty of: I know the evil that thou will do unto the Children of Israel, 2
Kings 8. 12.
their strong holds will thou set on fire, and their young men will thou slay
with the sword, and wilt dash their children, and rip up their women woth
child. But let our Author consider, who are most likely to be guilty of these
Villainies, those who quietly submit to the Government, which is now settled
among us, or those who are for overturning all by bringing in a French Power,
to devour and consume with Fire and Sword, and to enslave their Native Country:
if this be Allegiance and Passive Obedience, I am sure, what our Author calls
Perjury and Rebellion are the greater virtues.

As for his parting Request, I do affirm it again, That I never was factious
against taking the Oaths, nor made it my business to dissuade men from it; when
my Opinion was asked, I declared my own thoughts, but never sought out men to
make Proselytes: and in this Profession I am not afraid of his or any other
men's memories so much as of their inventions, for there are some great Wits
among them. Let them produce the man, if they can, whom I endeavored to
dissuade by word or writing from taking the Oaths, where my Opinion was not
first asked; and if my Opinion had any Authority with them then, our Author
knows, it is more than it ought to have had, and that was none of my fault;
unless he means, that my Authority was considerable against taking the Oath,
but none for it; which is the way, that all Parties and Factions judge of men's
Authorities.

But though our Author seems very well acquainted with the thing called
Faction, yet he is not willing to understand the word; and therefore I must
tell him, that when I say, I was never factious against the Oath, I do not
mean, that I was never hearty and zealous against taking the Oath; for I hope
there may be Zeal without Faction; or that when I was pressed to discourse the
matter, I did not talk with as much Warmth and Concernment as other Men.

But Faction is quite another thing, it shows it self in Separations, and
Schisms, in Rancour and Bitterness, Envyings and Emulations, in violent
Oppositions to Government, in changing and confining Friendships with a Party,
in Censures and Reproaches, in stigmatizing all Persons of another Persuasion,
as perjured Knaves; whereas tho there had been a material Perjury, a different
Opinion may excuse from formal Perjury; for no Man is formally perjured, who
does not know it: I shall not explain this by Instances; for if our Author is
for writing Secret Histories, I am not so at present. And now I am at leisure
to attend his motions, and to consider his threatened examination of all my
arguments, whenever his due time for it comes; and if he will promise to
examine them well, before he answers, I shall expect to hear no more from him.

THE END.
BOOKS Published by the Revered Dr. SHERLOCK, and Printed for William Rogers.
AN Answer to a Discourse Entitled, Papists Protesting against Protestant
Popery.

An Answer to the Amicable Accommodation of the Differences between the
Representer and the Answerer, 4o.

A Sermon at the Funeral of the Reverend Benjamin Calamy. D. D.

A Vindication of some Protestant Principles of Church Unity and Catholic
Communion, from the Charge of Agreement with the Church of Rome.

A Preservative against Popery: Being some plain Directions to unlearned
Protestants how to Dispute with Romish Priests, First Part, 4o 5th Edition.

A Second Part of the Preservative against Popery.

A Vindication of both Parts of the Preservative against Popery, in Answer to
the Cavils of Lewis Sabran, Jesuit, 4o.

A Discourse concerning the Nature, Unity, and Communion of the Catholic
Church. First Part. 4o.

A Sermon before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of
London, on Sunday, Nov. 4. 1688. 4o.

A Practical Discourse concerning Death. Fifth Edition. 8o.

A Vindication of the Doctrine of the Holy and ever Blessed Trinity, and the
Incarnation of the Son of God.


