EIPNIKON: OR A Peaceable consideration of CHRIST's Peaceful KINGDOM on EARTH
to come, Rev. 20.4. Rev. 5.10.

To be added to the PPODPOOS or Forerunner.

WHEREIN

The Proof and Confirmation, that such a Kingdom shall be, is abundantly
established, upon a sevenfold foundation; more particularly set down in the
next ensuing leaf.

Whereunto is added an Appendix concerning the first Resurrection spoken of,
Rev. 20.4, 5, 6. compared with, Rev. 11.18. manifesting it to be of the bodily
Resurrection of the Just to begin not long after the glorious appearance of
Christ, and his said Kingdom.

Briefly and plainly set down for the benefit of all faithful Christians.

Ezekiel. 37.24, 25. And David my servant shall be King over them, and they shall
all have one shepherd, they shall also walk in my judgments and observe my
statutes, and do them. And they shall dwell in the land that I have given unto
Jacob my servant, wherein your Fathers have dwelt, and they shall dwell
therein, even they and their children, and their childrens children for ever,
and my servant David shall be their Prince for ever.

Dan. 7.21, 22. I beheld, and the same horn made war with the Saints, and
prevailed against them, Until the Ancient of days came, and judgment was given
to the Saints of the most High, and time came that the Saints possessed the
kingdom

2 Thessalonians. 2.8. And then shall that wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall
consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of
his coming.

Among the (...) or forms of Doctrine in the Council of Nice by Gelas. Cyzicen.
History thereof, this is recorded.

(...).

That is, We expect according to the holy Scriptures the manifesting unto us
the appearing, and Kingdom of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ; and
then the Saints of the most High (as Daniel says) shall take the Kingdom.

Answerably hereunto our Received Nicene Creed; From thence he shall come at
the end of the world to judge the quick and the dead, as it is Rev. 11.18. and
then follows [Whose Kingdom shall have none end] as before explained.

Hoc Omega suis MVNVS and Alpha tulit.

Printed in the Year, 1665.

THE CONTENTS.
THe Proof and Confirmation, That such a Kingdom of Christ shall be, is
established in the sequel of this Treatise, upon the sevenfold foundation
ensuing. First, From a frame of Christian Doctrine, containing the general
consideration of Christ's three great Offices of Mediatorship, as the great
Prophet, Priest, and King of his Church, in seventeen Theses; with six
inferences drawn from them. page 3, to 8. Secondly, By a visional
representation of Old and New Testament Doctrine, suitable thereunto, from the
fourth and fifth Chapters of the Book of Revelations, setting forth God the
Fathers glory as Creator, and the Lambs as Redeemer, whence are also other
seven inferences deduced to confirm Christ's Kingdom to come on earth. p. 9, to
35. Thirdly, By diverse evidences and expressions in those four Apostles
writings, to whom Christ in a special manner manifested his Kingly glory, viz.
to Peter, James, and John, at his tranfiguration, and Revelation to John, and
to St. Paul, at his conversion, from whose writings six several senses of
Christ's comings are observable since his coming in the flesh. p. 41 to 56
Fourthly, From the eminent Chronologers of the holy Ghost; who writ of Satan's
three Babels; namely, Moses of the Tower of Babel, Daniel of the Monarchy of
Babylon, and St. John of the mystical Babylon; all which come to their utter
confusions at the said setting up of Christ's Kingdom on earth. p. 57, to 71
Fifthly, From the other Prophets of all times, with the Psalms in the Old
Testament, and all sorts of Gospellers in the New, Chap. 6, 7, 8. Sixthly, By
other Arguments drawn from the Lords prayer, and the three usual received
Creeds, or Articles of Confessions of Faith. p. 90, to 95. Seventhly, From the
most ancient Orthodox Fathers of the most pure primitive times, who owned this
truth in its untainted purity. p. 96. All which, with many other useful
particulars to be observed, occasionally set down in reference to Christ's
personal reign with his raised Saints, will more fully appear; First, by the
contents of each Chapter premised, and then by the Chapters themselves, in
order unto which, for brevities sake, I refer the Christian Reader. In the
Appendix, the bodily resurrection of the Saints, is first explained from the
distinct consideration of those two parallel Texts of sacred Scripture, Rev.
11.18. and 20.4, 5, 6. confirmed from sundry Texts of Old and New Testament,
and many weighty considerations tendered, to manifest that first resurrection
there spoken of, to intend the bodily resurrection of the Saints at that very
time whereunto that Revelation of Jesus Christ for his Churches benefit has
particular reference; Further showing that the Ancient Doctors and Fathers of
the primitive times of the Gospel were of that judgment.
A TABLE OF CHRONOLOGY.
BEcause the help of some Chronology is very needful, to the understanding of
mystical Prophesies in the holy Scriptures; especially, for such as this small
treatise is intended for; and to that end they may neither be troubled or
discouraged, with too large, or too many, or curious notions, or varieties of
men's opinions, concerning the order of times; I shall here labor to set down
such a general soantling, for the use of ordinary capacities, that by the help
hereof, together with what is all along set down (ofttimes) in the following
Treatise, they may in some sort have pointed out to them the times, the things
they therein read of have particular reference unto: And this we shall
endeavor to set down;

First, More generally, until the beginning of the four Monarchies, set forth
Dan. 2. and Dan. 7.

1. By the great Image, Chap. 2.

2. By the four Beasts, Chap. 7.

Again secondly, To consider particularly the times following them.

1. Then more generally, In the first place consider what Moses compendiously
sets down before the general Deluge, for the space of 1656. years of the old
world, as ordinarily it is computed.

2. From Noah's flood to the promise made to Abraham, about the year of the
world, Anno 2030. is 374. years. Exodus 12.4.

3. From the promise to Abraham to the Israelites departure out of Egypt, 2460.
is 430. years.

4. The beginning of the Assyrian kingdom by Nimrod, about 1788. which
continued to the Chaldean Monarchy by Nebuchadnezzar, about 1700. years.

5. Take notice, the Temple of Solomon was begun about the 3000. year of the
world, as learned Dr. Usher computes it, from whence to the Captivity of
Babylon, he reckons likewise 395. years, being in the year 3395. And may not
the Antitype of Solomon, and his Temble be glorious at the end of 3000. years
more?

6. I shall here add a general computation of Bucholcherus, for the apt
concinnity thereof, reaching first to the Captivity of Babylon, and through all
following times.

1. Israel (says he) divided the land of Canaan in the 50. Jubilee from the
Creation, which was 2500. years, that is, 50. times 50.

2. Again (says he) when the Jews returned from Babylon, after 70. years
Captivity, it was the 70. Jubilee, which was 3500. years, that is, 20. times
50. or 10. hundreds.

Again, concerning the New Testament times, says he as aptly again in brief;
the seventh Seal, and the seventh Trumpet of that seventh Seal; and the seventh
Vial falling under that seventh Trumpet, brings us to the seventh Millenary or
great Sabbatisme of the Saints with Christ, in the thousand years, as it is
called Heb. 4.9.

Again secondly, more particularly, when Nebuchadnezzar had obtained the
Monarchy of Babylon, then in a dream is presented to him the Image of four
Metals, setting forth the four Kingdoms or Monarchies, whereof he was the
first, the head of gold, Dan. 2. after Daniel Chap. 7. has a Vision of four
Beasts, signifying the same Kingdoms succeeding each other: But the Babylonian
Monarchy of gold about 70. years after, ended in the death of Belshazzar, and
Cyrus his taking of Babylon; when began the Persian Monarchy of the silver
Arms and Breast, about the 3390th. year of the world, according to Helvicus,
which continued 230. years, to the year 3620. Whereupon begun the Grecian
Monarchy, upon the speedy conquest of Alexander the Great, which held according
to the said Author 280. years, reaching to the year of the world 3900 when
began the Roman, of the Iron Legs, with Feet and Toes of Iron and Clay, [which
last denoted the state thereof in the Popes time] which Roman Empire began
about 47. years before Christ's birth who was born, says the same Author, the
3947. year of the world.

But thirdly, From Christ's Nativity the account is more certain:

1. The Dragons casting down, when Constantine the Great set up the Christian
Religion, in the room of Heathenish Idolatry, in the Roman Empire, about the
year of Christ 312. or 320. as some conceive; and from thence to the beginning
of the date of the Beast, Vide Excid. Antichrist.
whilst the Barbarous Nations broke in pieces the Western Empire, about 80.
years or more; when soon after the beginning of the fourth Century, it is
conceived the twofold Beasts 42. mouths, Rev. 13. began together with the 10.
Crowned Horns at one hour, Rev. 17. both in the Western Empire. But in the
East, about the 600. year of Christ, the Saracens pushed at the Roman Empire in
the East (as was foretold Dan. 11.40.) called there the King of the South: And
about the year 1300. the King of the North, the Turk overflowed all with his
multitudes, and though Edom, Moab, and Ammon escaped in Arabia Petrea being a
great shelter to the Jews, v. 41. (as Mr. Mede observes) yet (though Egypt long
by the Mamalacks held out) they were at last subdued, and at his steps, as ver.
42, 43. about the year of Christ 1517. and that only remains to the Turk, to
hear tidings to trouble him out of the East (probably) from the Jews, seeking
to get their own Country, and out of the North, which (happily) may be of the
Israelites from Assyria, lying North of Judea, upon the like design; whom in
rage the Turk will go to resist in the glorious holy mountain, but he shall
certainly come to his end, and none shall help him, ver. 44, 45. to be executed
about the sounding of the seventh trumpet, Rev. 11.15.

But as for the Pope's 42. months, the same time with the Woman's time, times
and half a time in her wilderness condition, and with the two witnesses, Rev.
11. their 1260. days of years, their beginning with his, is reckoned about the
406. year of Christ, or 110. as some conceive.

In his, viz. the Popes or Beasts said date, there are considerable,

1. His rise. 2. His reign. 3. His ruin.

1. His rise, to the great darkness of Popery toward the 11. Century, till the
Berengarians and Waldenses discovered him, above 600. years.

2. His reign, whilst he prevailed in his Wars and Massacres, against the
Waldensian, Germane, and French Churches, above 400. years more.

3. The time of his ruin, since he has begun to fall by the hand of God
according to his word; and though he has been killing the witnesses for
considerable time successively; yet at last, by killing the finishing
witnesses, after 3. days of years and an half, they rising, his great ruin
comes on eminently: to be finished at the pouring out of the vial of the
seventh Angel: Whereupon ensues the glorious Kingdom of Christ, reigning
eminently with his Saints on earth the thousand years.

The PREFACE; Containing many instances, whereby it has appeared how backward
many, if not the most of Gods people have been to believe the accomplishment of
the great things that have been promised by God, and for long time believed and
expected by his people, till near the time of their accomplishment; all which,
notwithstand God has fulfilled both in the Old and New Testament; as is still
likely so to be in the great things remaining, hereafter to done for the true
invisible Church, till the mystery of God shall be finished. With an intimation
how wily and watchful Satan has been, is, and it may be expected in these
things remaining, he will still be more so, in opposing and perverting the
Doctrine of Christ's Reign approaching, as knowing that thereby his own Dominion
will be utterly cast down.

THE PREFACE.
To my late well known, and well approved Friends and Brethren, B. D. F. K. N.
S. T. A. P. I. O. C. increase of faith, truth, and consolation, from him that
sits upon the throne, from the Lamb that was slain, and from the seven spirits
before the throne, Amen.
My well beloved Brethren in the Lord,
IT has all along seemed remarkable, that in the great Revolutions of Divine
Providence, when great things have been drawing on to be acted for the good of
Gods Church; though they have been foretold and promised, yet at the time of
their accomplishment, they have been usually by many of God people little
expected, if not gainsay'd, and opposed by most: When the 430. years preceding
Isreal's return out of Egypt, which God had foreshewed to Abraham, were toward
their expiration, the Israelites would not take notice that God would by the
hand of Moses deliver them; and even when the time was almost fully come, that
God should deliver them out of that Egyptian bondage, so long as Pharaoh was
able to resist, they were frequently out of heart, and complained against Moses
and Aaron; and yet upon the self same day, from the promise to Abraham, wherein
the said 430. years were expired, the Children of Israel were actually
delivered, Exodus 12.41. And after that, all the while they were in the
Wilderness, how often, upon how many occasions did the most of them turn back
in their hearts (as the Psalmist speaks) into Egypt? and by their renewed
rebellion so provoked God, that he swear in his wrath against that generation,
that they should not enter into that rest. Yea, Moses himself was so provoked
by them, that he spoke unadvisedly with his lips; and they so tempted Aaron the
Saint of Lord, as Psalm. 106.16. that neither of them came into the land of
Canaan, nor any other of the people, save Josua and Caleb of all that
generation above the age of 20. years, that had been delivered out of the hands
of Pharaoh; yet in Gods own time he accomplished his promise in giving that
people possession of that land, Josh. 23.14. When faithful and holy David was
anointed to be the Captain of Gods people, even he in fighting the Lords
battles found the shield of his faith so shattered, that despondently once he
said, I shall one day perish by the hand of Saul; and thereupon ran himself
upon dangerous rocks of temptation amongst Gods enemies, from which
notwithstanding God graciously delivered him, and at last brought him into full
possession of the Kingdom over all the tribes of Israel and Judah. When Judahs
70. years Captivity in Babylon was almost expired, they despise the day of
small things, and say the time is not yet come to build the house of the Lord,
Haggai 2.2. by whom God yet foreshewed, that the great Mountain of strong
opposition, that stood before Zerobabel, should become a plain, and so it came
to pass. Yea, when Christ himself, the long expected Messiah, came at the time,
in the place, manner, condition, and in every respect, as had been foretold he
should come in the flesh; how few, even in Jerusalem or in Judaea, acknowledged
or regarded his wonderful birth, his holy and wise demeavour, and heavenly
manner of life; after all those divine witnesses of Simeon, Zachary, Anna,
Elizabeth, etc. or the very Angels before and at his birth, or any thing
afterward that set him forth to be wonderful before the time came wherein he
openly manifested himself in the world; and after that how was his person
despised, his doctrine and miracles (though such as never man taught or wrought
in the world before) not only not regarded, but even blasphemed by the great
ones of those times? and by their means likewise, not owned by inferiors, lest
they should be cast out of the Synagogue: and though some of the Priests
believed in him, they durst not confess him. If Nicodemus, a Mr. in Israel,
acknowledge and own him, it must be in the night, when he may not be seen; and
all the strange wonders before and at his death and resurrection, and
afterward for the most part neglected and buried in silence: So strangely in
the worlds view, and even in good men's too many times, Gods greatest
predictions and promises use to take place. And have not since Christ, the six
first Seals of the Primitive times (when Michael and the Dragon fought hand to
hand, as 'twere, whose worship should be set up) and some of the Trumpets after
wards been mystically sulfilled and passed, according to the series of their
several times? which Mr. Mede on the Revelations very appositly applies. How
have those many Synchronisms of Antichrists tyranny 42. months, with the two
witnesses prophecy in sackcloth 1260. days of years, Rev. 11. The Beast out of
the Sea, having seven heads and ten horns, according to his Politic capacity,
the other out of the Earth, with two horns like a Lamb, according to the
Ecclesiastical capacity, Rev. 13. lain hidden from most men's eyes? And has not
the woman the true Church (though gloriously at first adorned Rev. 12.) yet
since as long been forced into the wilderness, Rev. 14. where her place was
prepared; and all that while the Scarlet Whore, the Antichristian or false
Church, sits as a Queen, and not only bewitcheth the Christian World with her
Sorceries, but also with the Cup of her Spiritual Fornications, makes drunk the
Kings of the Earth, till the will of God shall be fulfilled, when they shall
hate her, and make her desolate, and naked, and eat her fiesh, and burn her
with fire, Rev. 17.16, 17. And how few take notice that the time of her
recompense is near? Rev. 18.6, 7. How many of Gods Vials are already poured out
upon her? How far she has done her utmost in killing Christ's witnesses, even
few do seriously ponder. And when the second Woe is past, how soon may sound
the Trumpet of the seventh Angel, such who can delare? And thence forth many
other excellent contemporaries are reveased from Jesus Christ the faithful and
true witness, and set before us under and after the said Trumpet, who as he is
about wonderfully to glorify himself in taking his Kingly power, Rev. 19. When
the Kingdoms of the world shall become the Kingdoms of our God, and of his
Christ, Rev. 11.15. in a far different manner then they have been formerly: So
likewise, how long the earth shall be blessed with that happy Dominion, he as
clearly sets before his people, Rev. 20.4. namely, for the space of a thousand
years, even near or until the last judgment, Verse. 7, 11, 12. etc. And after
the Chronology of the time, and after the time of the said seventh Trumpet in
the 20. Chap. verse. 7. where first having set down Verse. 1, 2. the contemporary
binding of Satan, and casting him into the bottomless pit, and sealing him up
there, during that time (having also subdued before the powers of the wicked
world) while he himself with his Saints, verse. 4.6. will wonderfully,
gloriously, and graciously, more then before, manifest his Kingly power in the
world, the said thousand years, wherein in the said following Chapters, he
evidently and strongly informs his people in the substance of many other
contemporaries; As first, of the new Heavens and the new Earth, for the
thousand years, chap. 21.1. and the New Jerusalem descending down from Heaven,
verse. 10. and the Tabernacle of God being with men for the same time, verse. 3.
again, chap. 22. there is set forth the pure river of water of life, proceeding
out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb, verse. 1. and the tree of life,
bearing twelve manner of fruits, the leaves whereof are for the healing of the
Nations, through the same period, Verse. 2. for in all the Book of Revelations,
where things are not said to succeed one another, as the Seals, Trumpets, and
Vials, but one Table of Chronoligie is assigned to them all, such distinct
visions are contemporaries, as all that concerned the true and false Church in
Antichrists time, have the same measure, though diverslly computed, by Months,
Days, and a times time, and an half; So all these Visions, under and after the
seventh Trumpet, have one Chronological Table to compute their time, viz. a
thousand years, all which particulars, being by Christ's special order so
strongly asserted by the Angel, and the ancient and latter Prophets as
earnestly called in for evidence hereunto, as we shall endeavor (by Gods
assistance to point out afterward,) yet, so Providence has overruled and
ordered, that though the substance of all these things were anciently and all
along promised to the Jews and Israelites, and foretold by the holy Prophets
successively in all ages, and much by the Jews in our Saviors own time (though
both unseasonably and unsuitably) expected; and as Mr. Mede and others, from
Justine Martyr, and other Ancients Testify, how the things in the said
thousand years were usually by Christians believed in the times next after
Christ; yet what by the subtilty of Satan teaching the Jews and others to affix
such vain fables, and sensual delights (somewhat like to a Mahumetan Paradise)
to that time of Christ's glorious Dominion in the world, that occasioned many
ancient and modern worthies, (as may happily more hereafter appear) too much to
have declined from truth to avoid such affixed errors; And since by men's
apprehensions of inconsistency of those things, with some Articles of Christian
faith, some have thereupon endeavored (as may appear) to thrust this thousand
years of Christ's reign into such troublesome corners of times moving
Tabernacle, where it never could long find that rest and peace wherewith it
must notwithstanding in due time be blessed; And to give such harsh and forced
interpretations of many Prophesies, both in Old and New Testament, concerning
that happy time to come, as are unsuitable to the purport of them. And an other
stratagem of late times Satan has used upon the breaking forth of some beams
of light, again appearing, concerning that said happy period to come, to stir
up the owners of such Doctrine to turn Libertines, Spoken according to the then
present apprehension I had tillfurther light (through grace) as after may
appear upon serious view in the sequel
from the bonds of moral obedience due unto Magistrates, as Christ's deputies;
yea, to attempt even to take away Magistracy it self, and Ministry too; whereas
Christ's Saints must not take the Kingdom to themselves, till he, the great King
of Kings, give it to them in his own time, not in theirs (or else so personally
to understand his reign in his humane nature upon earth, in a bodily presence,
that it may seem inconsistent with some Articles of Christian Religion, when
sacred truth allows not so to determine) or as others, by putting unwarrantable
senses upon the Divine Mysteries, not accommodated to the scope of the Spirit
of God therein observable; which Doctrine, when the Spirit of truth shall
defecate and cleanse from all old dreggs and scum of former and late errors,
misapplications and mistakes, I confidently believe for the substance, it will
be owned as a precious truth among the beloved people of God (though we may not
put weight upon the gronndless conceits or fancies of men) and the
sacredwritings both of Old and New Testament, may thoroughly evince it, but
especially this Revelation of Jesus Christ will necessarily enforce it, if
rightly and orderly considered, especially compared with Daniel, Ezekiel, and
other Prophets; My endeavor therefore shall be by the assistance of the Spirit
of grace and truth, who will lead his servants in due time, into all profitable
and comfortable truth, to point out such things tending hereunto (which my own
infirmity may otherwise prejudice) unto others, which notwithstanding, as I
shall endeavor, I humbly request may be done with prayers and faithful
endeavors, by others better fitted for such a work, all prejudices to the
contrary being wholly laid aside in considering the last Will and Testament of
Jesus Christ in the last branch of it, now upon proving; and therefore at such
a time men had need be wary they do not go about even then to disallow and
disprove of it, when it is near to be put in execution; especially, since he
upon earth gave this intimation to the world, to beware of infidelity upon this
occasion, Luke 18.8. as may appear from the former Chapter; When (says he) the
Son of man shall come, shall he find faith upon earth? He knew well what wiles
Satan would use to darken the knowledge of that time (which he the
Archmurtherer of mankind, beleiving trembles at; as is conceived, was the mark
set upon Cain, his firstborn, murderer of his Brother Abel) when he himself
must be shut up in his dungeon of darkness, from seducing men, which will be
his sore torment, all that time, and the forerunner of his speedily ensuing
perpetual unexpressible misery, and that upon his imprisonment the long
promised and hoped for happy light and glory of Gods Church shall arise and
shine forth, Isa. 60.1. which will add to his anguish; And as Cain built
Cities for his cursed posterity, thereby to abate the sense of his trembling;
but the universal deluge both destroyed them and their habitations; so ever
since man's fall, the Devil to abate the sense of his own horror, has been
building many Castles in the Aair, of wicked designs and seducements, but
knows when Christ's reign shall take place, they must all perish with their
Author; And therefore no wonder that Satan should seek to conceal and hide that
period from men, raging the more, because he knows his time is so short; Let us
therefore the rather, by faithful prayers, and diligent search of holy
Scriptures, commend our selves to the guidance of Gods holy Spirit, to be led
into all truth, and particularly in what concern Christ's Kingly rule on earth,
not with respect unto what owning it has by men, but as witnessed unto by the
Word of God, which is the said holy Spirits evidence, which if he once appear
to set his Seal unto, none shall make it void, but it shall powerfully
overcome, and be victorious in the end, as all other witnessings of Christ
Jesus have and do, and shall overcome the opposers of them, though never so
great, many or eminent in the world.

April 24. 1664. MVNVS.

AN Advertisement.
Christian Brethren,
YOu may be pleased to take notice, that after the evidences in the letter of
November. 1663. in the Forerunner, and my serious weighing of many other
Scriptures, especially in the Revelations, compared with Daniel, I was
abundantly satisfied, that such an happy state of the Church was to come on
earth; but yet it seeming difficult to me for a time, to reconcile a personal
presence with Christ's intercession at the right hand of God; and taking it for
a truth, that the coming of Christ was not to be expected till the last
resurrection: And not having so fully discerned (then) the clearness of a
personal appearance above 1000. years before (as since I believe to be evident)
as by the last Paper of the (...) may appear) I thought I had fairly-salved the
matter; and that my reasons against the personal, and only for a mystical
appearance (then) had been good and sufficient with the illustrations thereof,
added (as you may observe) page 35, 36, 37. etc. But besides a remarkable
gracious hand of God upon me (as you may there likewisy discern) both to
discover such remarkable passages in Scripture that seem more strongly to hold
out a personal appearance (then) and to show me such a way to resolve those
difficulties, both by the several senses of Christ's coming in the New
Testament, and to open to me a way of interpreting of what texts seemed
contrary; so as I had no president (that I know of) and yet so evident, as (I
conceive) cannot with good reason be denied; and as for what is said of his
intercession, if Christ will perform that work (thence forward by a presential
intercession, as formerly he did by a supernatural in his mosteminent
improvement of his Preistly Office in heaven: so may be his and the Fathers
good pleasure; and that is all that can be said, since no Scripture gainsays
it.) Or how the remaining part of his Preistly Office shall thenceforth be
performed is known to himself (as of the Prophetical, till that Preistly begun
so eminently to be manifest) but diverse texts (as was said) seem to limit his
sitting at God the Fathers right hand in heaven, to his next appearance or
beginning of his coming to judgment: However, any that are not satisfied [De
modo] may safely (in the interim) resolve of this, that such a glorious Kingdom
of Christ upon earth shall be; and for that the Seripture is both clear and
plentiful, and a truth with much joy and thank fullness to be embraced; though
some cannot (happily) so fully be resolved in what manner Christ will appear to
set it up, though to me the Scriptures spoken of in the and of the Forerunner
makes it evident that it will be personal, andwithal seriously (without
prejudice) consider also what is said of Mat. 28. and Mat. 13. concerning the
sense of the end of the world, with diverse other things of weight to such
purposes as you may find Chap. 4. page 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46. etc. and so I
conclude with my prayer for the guidance of Gods holy Spirit, for all such as
humbly and faithfully seek according to the rule of his sacred Word to be
rightly informed in this particular: To whom I, as to that in special, commend
all such, who is the sole-worker of faith, in every branch of it, for which his
Word has laid any foundation to be received in the season of it, as it was
even with the very Apostles themselves, concerning the receiving of the
Gentiles to grace; first, by miracles, afterward by the Word and all other
means usually.

ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 1. r. after likewise; p. 5. l. 2. r. Chap. 20. p. 8. l. 1. r. is
the, p. 15. l. 22. r. Psalm. 145. p. 24. l. ult. r. is set forts, p. 27. l. 2.
r. of the roll, p. 35. l. 3. r. personal, p. 42. l. 18. r. (...) of the Lord
(...), p. 47. l. 13. r. after end, p. 48. l. 33. r. Saviors, p. 49. l. 1. add
and them that were with him, and Ibid. l. 19. r. Censers, Ibid. l. 24. r. and
an eye, p. 51. l. 3. add of those three and of one, p. 65. l. 25. r. to Saint
John's. p. 73, 74, 75. falsely numbered at top, p. 74. l. 27. r. their, p. 75. l.
19. add will, p. 77. l. 1. r. for the spirit, Ibid. l. 18. r. Testimonies,
Ibid. i. 24. r. others, p. 81, spokan, for spoken, p. 94, l. 7. r. of truth.

CHAP. I.
Of the Method and Order in handling the subject; Which holds out a twofold
consideration of Christ's Kingdom on Earth; First, of the (...); That it is;
Secondly, (...), the things that belong to it. Concerning the first, seven
things to be done.

I Confess, by reason of the stream of Interpreters running contrary, and the
seeming disagreement with some articles of Christian faith, I have been apt to
decline any opinion of Christ's reigning with his Saints the thousand years to
come: But since Gods divine providence by his word and spirit, has guided me
into a more intense and serious consideration of the great emergencies thereof
toward his Church in these latter times; by whose especial grace, upon search
into those mystical Prophesies of Daniel, the Revelation, with other sacred
Scriptures, which doubtless hold out many things in reference thereunto; I have
found much satisfaction in such of Gods proceedings, and by the series of times
decyphered in the Revelation, I see there is a necessity of finding some way of
reconciling or removing such appearing difficulties or differences amongst good
men: For though some by interpreting the day of the Lord to be taken for the
whole time of Christ's reign upon earth; from his first appearing to the end,
complexively, in the sense St. Peter seems to speak of, One day with the Lord
is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day, all which time they
personally conceive him to be with his Church upon earth, in his humane nature;
against which I shall (by Gods assistance) offer some reasons to be weighed in
due place. This then seemed to me, to be a likely way to salve the difficulty;
I then upprehended, etc.
For I conceive Christ's reign these thousand years to be understood mystically,
for some wonderful manifestation of his Kingly power and dominion in his
Church, by the operation of his spirit, although he remain in his humane nature
at the right hand of God, to make intercession for his people till the end of
the world, which may in regard of his infinite power and glory, be manifest any
other way he shall be pleased to magnify himself gloriously in the world, as
before, and since his incarnation some time he has done; But that he will in
those times to come manifest himself in his Kingly glory and Majesty, the
Scriptures are so evident, as it seems not to be questioned; I shall therefore
by his assisting grace, and by the evidence and direction of his holy Spirit
and truth endeavor to manifest the same to be hereafter in the thousand years
of the flourishing state of his Church, when Satan shall be bound under or
about the seventh Trumpet; in the considering of which, we shall proceed in the
order following, by these ensuing steps.

First, to consider the (...), that such a reign and Kingdom shall be.

Secondly, (...), what belong, to the said Kingdom; and that, first,
Spiritually; secondly, Temporally.

Concerning the first, seven things are to be done.

1. I shall lay down such Theses or Positions agreeing to holy Scripture, and
the Analogy of Faith, as may much make way for Doctrines of this nature.

2. I shall offer some reasons against the understanding of a personal reign of
Christ, in a bodily presence with his Saints on Earth.

3. To endeavor to open the sense of the mystical and glorious reign of
Christ, which we understand according to Scripture sense, and give some
illustrations of it.

4. To Parallel some mysteries in Daniel and Ezekiel, with such things as are
set forth in the book of the Revelation of the Lord Jesus Christ the King of
Saints.

5. To point out how earnestly the Holy Ghost does enforce the beleiving of
what is set down in the last part of the Revelation, strongly and frequently
asserting the things in and about those times, to be accomplished with calling
in the Prophets Testimony.

6. Since the Testimony of the Prophets is so earnestly called in for evidence
of what is described to be to come in the thousand years, in the three last
Chapters of that book, we shall endeavor to add some Prophesies suitable
threunto, and tender sundry Texts of the New Testament, speaking to the like
purpose.

7. To make some profitable improvement of this Doctrine for all sorts of
persons.

CHAP. II.
Showing how according to the eternal decree, upon the fall of man, the Office
of Mediatourship, was committed to the second person of the Trinity, Jesus
Christ, the only begotten Son of the ever living God, to be executed in his
three great Offices of a Prophet, Priest, and King, not only in respect of
particular beleiving souls, but in a general consideration more eminently, in
respect of the three great periods of the World: 1. In his prophetical Office
under the Old Testament, revealing by his Spirit, in his Messengers, all the
counsel of his Father, concerning his Church. 2. In His Priestly Office under
the New Testament; By offering himself an oblation for, and after by making
intercession for the sins of his people, at the right hand of God; And 3. will
also execute his Kingly Office, delivering them from all their enemies,
actually in this world, at his appearing, and in the thousand years, unto the
end of the world, and thenceforth for ever.

THe first thing we named to be done, See the quotations of Scripture added in
the forerunner.
was the laying down of those Theses or positions agreeing to the holy
Scripture, and the Analogy of Faith, that may make way for Doctrines of this
nature, which are these that follow.

First, That as the infinite excellency of the nature and being of the Trin-Vne
Dietie, was everlastingly incomprehensible in it self, saving only so far
forth as the same Divine essence has been pleased to communicate any discovery
of it self by word or works, or both, unto any creatures in Heaven or earth; so
has the Trinity of persons in the Unity of the Divine essence, both in the
eternal decrees, and in the execution of all jointly in their order concurred,
and so will do from eternity, through all times, unto all eternity.

Secondly, That all the glory of God the Father, was by the eternal decree to
be manifest in Jesus Christ his only begotten Son, the Lamb slain in the
eternal decree of the Father, before the foundation of the World was said; and
according to the said eternal decree, the Holy Ghost, one God co-essential, and
coequal with the Father, and the Son, proceeds from the Father and the Son,
the Mediator between God and man, as the sole efficacious worker and
accomplisher of all spiritual good, in and for Men and Angels, and all real
good in all creatures, which in their several orders and natures they were
capable of receiving.

Thirdly, Accordingly in the creation God made the world by his wisdom, the
eternal word, Joh. 1. The Spirit sitting, as it were upon the surface of the
waters, then covering the earth powerfully to produce the creatures, then to be
made, and so both the Heavens with the Angels (as Divines conceive) and the
earth were made the first day, Genesis 1.1. as all that were made in the whole
world, afterward in the five following days, which the word Elohim in the
Plural number, put with the Verb Barah in the singular number, denoting the
Trinity of persons in the unity of essence seems to declare, whose concurrence
in the making of man is likewise very remarkably expressed, when God said, Let us
make man in our own image, after our likeness, etc. Genesis 1.26.

Fourthly, The making of Angels in Heaven, and man and all creatures in the
world, was in the execution of the eternal decree of the said incomprehenfibly
glorious Trin-une Diety, in their several orders, natures, stations, and
conditions.

Fifthly, As no other but the holy and good will and pleasure of the
infinitely, glorious, and incomprehensible God was the reason and cause why
they were all made absolutely as they were; so that they should be for himself
(as his word witnesses) as their utmost end, and no other inconsistent reasons
or ends ought to be given or assigned by men.

Sixthly, As the whole creation was all good, suitable to the Author of it; so
the preserving, ordering, overruling and disposing of all creatures according
to his good pleasure, by his infinite wisdom, power, providence, and goodness,
is not to be measured or judged by any scantling of any created capacity, who
will notwithstanding be justified in his saying, and clear when he is judged;
there being in such his proceedings, so many fathomless depths in respect of
creatures, which it is not lawful for any men to search into, further then Gods
word does warrant them, but in things not revealed or forbidden they are not to
enquire.

Seventhly, Since God according to his said eternal decree, and good pleasure
of his will at the fall of our first parents in Paradise, revealed and
testified his wonderful powerful grace; That the blessed^eed of the woman
should break the serpents head, there is sufficient ground for ever to humble
all mankind, and for ever to exalt Gods free and rich grace therein, and all
men are thereby engaged to use all Gods means to obtain their part therein.

Eighthly, According to the declaration of that wonderful rich and free grace
of God, for the salvation of his people, and for carrying on of his great
design therein, as the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, by an eternal decree, had
purposed so to be wonderfully glorified in the powerful redemption and
salvation of his elect people, in such a way of free grace; So in the creation
of all things, all sorts of creatures were made in a capacity to carry on that
design, and from that very period of their first being, holily, and most wisely
overruled and disposed of, in reference thereunto, and so ever since have
been, are and shall be most wonderfully holily and powerfully (though many
times secretly and unsearchably) throughout all ages, by the joint concurrence
of all the said three persons of the most sacred Tri^ity, in their order of
working, to the infallible perfecting and completing of the said design
decree, and purpose.

Ninthly, That the management and administration of the great work of
Mediatorship, between God and man, ever since the said promised seed was
revealed to our first Parents, has been committed to Jesus Christ the Son of
God, who in his Word commands all men to hear him; by acknowledging, receiving,
and obeying him.

Tenthly, that the management and administration of Mediatorship between God
and Man, has ever since been executed by Christ in his three great Offices,
wherein he and he only is to appear most powerful, wonderful, gracious, and
glorious to his Church upon earth, as her great Prophet, Priest, and King.

Eleventhly, Christ's execution of the said three great Offices, is two ways to
be considered.

1. More generaly for his universal Church, in respect of the several seasons,
wherein in order he was to execute them severally, most eminently, until his
work of Mediatorship should perfectly be accomplished, and full reconciliation
made between God and all his elect people; his mystical body, the true Church,
being complete in all the members of it, and perfect union and communion
attained with himself, as their mystical head; together with the Father, and
the Holy Spirit, as also with the glorious Angels, and one with another, in
most happy enjoyment of all good, to all eternity.

2. It is again considerable, particularly and specially, in respect of every
truly beleiving soul, in the particular application of the efficacy of those
three great Offices to them, by his holy Spirit, making good means and
ordinances effi^acious to every faithful soul, so exhibiting himself to them,
1. As their great Prophet inwardly, powerfully, and savingly, teaching them all
necessary truth and doctrine; 2. As their great High Priest, in the like way
evidencing their peace and reconciliation with God, through that expiation he
should or has made for their sins. 3. In the like-way also to evidence to them
at one time or other, that he is their powerful King and Protector, that has,
and does, and will subdue all his and their enemies, and keep them in a loyal
and good condition by Faith and Grace unto salvation.

Twelfthly, Consider that the general, more eminent and glorious execution of
those three great offices for his universal Church more remarkable in the
world, is in those three great periods of his manifesting himself in the world,
according to all that his father had given him to do.

1. As the great Prophet of his Church, by his spirit of wisdom and revelation,
in all his immediate Messengers, till his coming in the flesh, and so Christ is
said to preach in the time of Noah, to the Spirits in prison, as St. Peter
speaks, 1 Pet. 3.19, 20.

2. As the great High Priest, in the second Period after his coming in the
flesh, where putting an end to all the types and shadows of his Priesthood, he
actually undertook in his person, and executed the work and office of
Priesthood, as the great High Priest, having made a full and perfect
atonement, and satisfaction for the sins of all his people, he ascended into
the holy of holies, the highest Heavens, there sitting at the right hand of God
the Father, powerfully and gloriously there to execute and improve that office,
by making intercession for his people till his coming again.

3. In the third great period of the world, under or after the seventh Trumpet,
Christ will appear most eminently in executing the great office of a King, in
this general confideration, in respect of his universal Church, subduing
wonderfully and manifestly in the world, his own and his Churches enemies,
powerfully and graciously enabling his Saints to walk in the obedience of his
laws, taking away in a great degree the evil of sin and suffering, with the
causes of both, by binding Satan, and destroying the wicked powers of the
world, etc.

I say in a great degree, though not then totally nor finally.

Lastly Consider, how Christ has, and does, and will work in these three great
Periods of the world.

In the first he wrought by his Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, making known
the Will of the Father in all things (for substance) respecting Faith and
Obedience.

In the second, by his Spirit of grace and truth, powerfully sanctifying his
people more eminently and largely then in the former.

In the last, when he will take to himself his Kingly power, Rev. 11.15. and
19. He will work by his Spirit of Power and Domination.

Now from the former Theses duly weighed and considered, these particulars
ensuing, or the like, may be inferred, viz. That

1. If the design of the Trin-Une Diety was to be eminently glorified in Christ
the Mediator his three great Offices, of being the great Prophet, Priest and
King of his universal true Church: then that greatest glory must needs shine
forth in the most eminent way of executing of them:

But the general performance thereof, in the said three great periods, is the
most eminent way of executing them:

Therefore, That design has and will be therein most accomplished.

2. If the drift and end of the great works of Creation, Support and Providence
in all things, ever since time was, and until time shall cease to be, was in
reference unto Gods glorifying of himself in such general management of these
Offices of Christ, for his universal true Church, then in that respect he is
most glorified.

But their drift and end is so in reference thereunto.

Therefore, God is most glorified in such management of them.

3. If such general execution of them in reference to the universal true
Church, be the foundation and securing thereof to particular beleiving souls;
or secondly in respect of any more special times or special conditions of the
Church as will hereafter appear; then all the good of the other is procured and
secured by that general execution of them.

But such Christ's general execution of these Offices it he soundation and
securing of both the other.

Therefore, The good of both the other is secured and procured thereby.

4. If the great works of Creation, Support and Providence have been all along
ordered in reference to Chrifts carrying on of his great work of Mediatorship,
chiefly in those three great periods forenamed; then such consideration of them
is of great concernment to the true universal Church.

But all those said great works have been ordered all along in reserence to
Christ's carrying on his great work of Mediatorship therein.

Therefore, Such consideration of these three great periods forenamed, for the
general managing of all the Mediators Offices is of great concernment to the
true Universal Church.

5. If such Christ's general prophetical Office in the first great period, has
revealed the substance of the whole counsel of God, in respect of all to be
done successively, in such Priestly and Kingly Offices, so generally
considered, in the other two succeeding great periods; it shall so be done.

But it has so revealed, and in a great part has been so fulfilled
accordingly, by suitable dispensations at all times hitherto.

Therefore, What is so revealed for the future shall accordingly be fulfilled
also.

6. If according to Scripture, experience has manifested the glory of the
Mediators office, most eminently, for what is past in such general
consideration, and does witness the like for the time to come, then in due time
will be like execution for the general, in regard of what remains to be done.

But according to Scripture it has been so accomplished, in experience in what
is past.

Therefore, According to Scripture it shall be so in the time to come.

The former Doctrine, illustrated from, Rev. 4.
Where first is a brief summary of that Chapter, in respect both of the Vision
and the Doctrine, with the improvement thereof, pointing out in the general,
how that fourth Chapter holds out the Doctrine of the Old Testament, namely,
the knowledge of God our Creator, three in persons one in essence (as the fifth
Chapter a^^^ of the New Testament in the knowledge of God our Redeemer.) By the
Rainbow in the fourth we are minded of the Covenant made in the Second person,
through whom so long time of repentance was allowed to the old World, and mercy
to the new, but special grace to Noah, Genesis 7. and those with him in the Ark:
Concerning which many things are observed; As also of the Ark afterward
appointed to be made by Moses, to evidence the grace of God to his people in
Christ, through whom he was propitious to them; and whose three Offices were
remarkably set before his people in all those times, and wherein the glory of
his Mediatorship was so to be manifested, as appeared by the many and various
types thereof, in several times under the Old Testament, which contains the
substance of all Gods Revealed Will.

IT will not here be needful to multiply Texts of Scripture to confirm the
former Theses or Positions (for the main substance of them) which in most
Systems of Divinity is already done to my hand: Only I shall endeavor in that
which may happily seem more unusual, by the assistance of Christ's Spirit and word
remarkably called, Rev. 19.10. The testimony of Jesus, which is the spirit of
Prophecy, and that (remarkably I say) in diverse respects,

As First, Efficienter, He being the prime worker of it.

Secondly Materialiter, as being the main subject matter of it; Christ Jesus
being held out in the whole Scripture from the begiuning to the end.

Thirdly, Formaliter, as being the essence and substance of it.

Fourthly, Finaliter, As being the drist, end and scope of it.

In which testimony, to the said purpose, for illustration and evidence of what
I say may seem more unusual, I shall endeavor compendiously to consider some
things contained in the fourth and fifth chapters of the book of the Revelation
of Jesus Christ, holding out the sum and substance of Old and New Testament
Doctrine, summarily, and very divinely representing God the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, as the reconciled Father, Savior and Sanctifier of his true
Church, as Creator, Redeemer, and Preserver thereof, who in each regard is
acknowledged and praised by the representative, four living Wights (or
creatures, as Ezekiel 1. they are called) or beasts, as translated; and the twenty
four Elders in the joint concurrence of all the three persons, for the
manifesting and managing of all the contents and affairs of this book of the
Revelation committed to sesus Christ, the sole Mediator of his true Church: Who
being that Lamb that was as it had been slain, chap. 5. had that book delivered
to him, to open it, and look thereon, and to open the seals thereof.

The Vision Ezekiel. 1. and Isa. 6. seem somewhat to be of a like nature to these,
though not so large and full, in Ezekiel. 1. the Prophet saw a great cloud, with
whirlwinds and fire, verse. 4. afterward he had the description of the four
living Creatures, by theirfaces, feet, wings, with their joining by their
wings, verse. 5, to 12. then their proceeding, verse. 12, 14. afterward the
wheels that moved with the living creatures, and wheels within wheels, from
verf. 14 to verse. 26. where there is somewhat a like representation of the
sacred Trinity of persons, to the end of the Chapter, as in Rev. 4. and more
explicitly, Isa. 6. it is said one of the Seraphims cried one to another, Holy,
holy, holy is the Lord of hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory. In both
which Visions whether the four living creatures in Ezekiel were Angels, or as
they are called in Isa. 6. Seraphims, or rather as they seem to be taken, Rev.
4, 5. chap. were men employed by God to wards his Church, or whether the moving
of the wheels, with the living creatures signifies Gods secret and powerful
working by Angels, or men regularly working in his Church by his appointment,
which are sent by him from time to time, I will make no conjecture. Only as to
the business in hand, what light I conceive by any help or assistance from God
or men I have attained through grace, I shall here communicate, and leave to
his blessing.

Those two Chapters Rev. 4, and 5. as to the particular occasion of the Lambs
receiving the book, and his manifesting the contents thereof to the Apostle
John, seems to be the setting of the Scene and Chorus, as it were of a most
admirable Tragi-Comedy, which resemblance Mr. Mede (with others) likewise
uses, whose learning and judgment in opening many mysterious things in the
book of Revelation, seems to decypher him to be such a man as Mr. Brightman
prophesies of, in Rev. 21. That God would stir up in after times to give light
to those dark mysteries; and chiefly Mr. Mede seems such, inregard of his
excellent Synchronisms, which are the curious work in the Clavis Apocalyptica,
much helping to open the formerly locked mysteries, and may serve as a very
helpful guiding thread in passing through many, almost otherwise inextricable
Mazes and Meanders in that Book.

But suitable to our present purpose we shall endeavor to speak somewhat of
these fourth and fifth Chapters, as they seem to be an abridgement of all
Doctrine contained in the Old and New Testament.

In the fourth chapter, God is specially made known and honored in and by his
Church, as Creator, v. 11.

In the fifth Chapter, Christ is specially made known and honored in and by
his Church, as Redeemer, v. 9.

The Doctrine of both is set forth partly, 1. By most sacred visional
Hieroglyphics.

2. By most glorious expressions of words, to the honor 1. of God the
Creator. 2. Of Christ the Redeemer.

First, In the fourth Chapter, as Creator, is he mainly set forth, as in the
Old Testament, and accordingly praised for that work, v. 11. For thou have
ereated, etc.

And that is set forth, 1. By Hieroglyphical Visions, verse. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

2. By Doctrine with the use thereof, v. 8, 9, 10, 11.

Ver.s 2. By Thrones seems to be held out the true Church of God, taken
collectively for such a company of Gods people, serving him after his revealed
Will, which is as a Throne whereon only God is exalted in all the world: For in
Judah was God known, and his name great in Israel, Psalm. 76.1. So Psalm. 147.11.
They tell of the glory of his Kingdom, etc.

Verse 2, 3, and 5. seems an admirable representation of the Trinity of persons
in the unity of essence; the first person like a Jasper and Sardine stone (but
not said what.) The second person, like a Rainbow, like an Emrald (not said
what.) The third person, as Seven lamps of fire, which are the seven spirits of
God, as cap. 1.4.

In Verse 3, 6, 7, 8. seems to be decyphered the superior and inferior
members of the Church.

1. The Inferior, by the twenty four Elders first set down, verse. 4. for whose
use the Superior were sent and given, Ephesians. 4.11.

2. The Superior, verse. 6, 7, 8. described much after the manner of those,
Ezekiel. 1. and Isa. 6. called by Ezekiel, Living creatures; by Isaiah, Cherubims;
here, (...), living Wights, translated beasts, noting here Gods Messengers,
Ambassadors, Officers, standing before his Throne betwixt him and his people,
as Moses, Aaron, the Priests and Levites to minister, etc Heb. 1. 1, 2. for
them A Sea of glass; to show they have need to be washed before they come to
worship, alluding to the legal washing in the Temple.

Secondly, In respect of the Doctrine, three Persons, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God
Almighty, which is, and was, and is to come, verse. 8.

The Use of which, first the four living wights discover, and set before the
Elders the glory of him that fits upon the Throne, though last spoken of, are
yet first in, and leaders of Gods Worship and Service; Verse. 9.

After them the twenty four Elders worship humbly, casting down their crowns,
as acknowledging all their excellency or worth received from him; Verse. 10.

2. Giving him his glory due.

As. 1. Creator of all things for himself;

So 2. Their Creator in special, in whom his end is promoted, they give him
praise and glory accordingly; Verse. ult.

So the true invisible Church of God here set forth, by her constant
representatives, the four living wights, and twenty four Elders, is a Throne of
God upon Earth, where his glorious excellency is discovered as Creator, three
in Persons, one in Essence, according to the Ministration of the Old Testament,
in which the Rainbow minding men of the Son the second person, shows Gods
justice in destroying the Old World in their height of sin, and mercy to those
in his Ark, the Church, at present clean or unclean creatures, and so for
preservation, or reservation, at least of those ever since in the New-World.

The four living wights were in the midst, and round about the Throne, as in
the midst of each square of the Throne, and had each eyes before and behind, to
look to God to have the knowledge of himself and his will in every quarter, and
to look to the people on every part, how they might answerably inform them, and
guide them in all the will and ways of God; They rest not day nor night,
saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, etc. They as Gods watchmen attend upon that, to
discern for, and discover unto his people the Will of God. For the Lord would
do nothing but he revealed it unto his Servants the Prophets; Amos 3.5.
They show unto the people of God, the twenty four Elders, when the Thundrings
and Lightnings of judgments against their enemies, come from the Throne, and
when voices of joy, etc. whence matter of praise and glory to be rendered to
him that sits upon the throne.

And doubtless, if we look upon this Chapter in both respects, of the visional
representations and Doctrine, and Use thereof, we may discern an excellent
abridgement of the old Testament discoveries, set forth to us (not that the Old
Testament differs in substance from the New, but only in clearness, and the
accomplishment of the main thing therein expected, viz. The coming of the
Messiah in the flesh, for the finishing of the work which his father had given
him for to do) there is the Doctrine of the Sacred Trinity, both decyphered and
taught (as was noted before) God is explicitly praised there as Creator. That
man had fallen is signified by the Rainbow, signifying his mercy and judgment;
Judgment to the Old world after his long Patience exercised toward them, and
abused by them; mercytowards Noah in the Ark, and those with him there, with
security of preservation, or reservation at least to the New world, from
drowning any more by a general deluge.

That sin was then grown to an height, it must needs be conceived, when God in
such wrath drowned a world of men and creatures with them; and that sin and
disorders were long in the world before they came to that height, and yet it
was not destroyed, until about 1656. years after God had created it; which
likewise shows God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, who created it, had a way
of redemption for such as Noah, (else in justice it must have immediately
perished) as well as long exercised patience toward them in the old World, and
preservation for those of the New world, from alike flood; And this redemption
and salvation was almost as soon published by God himself, as sin had entered
into the world, to deface and disorder Gods good work of creation, which
Salvation was to come by the blessed seed of the woman, then discovered, which
should break the Serpents head; And no sooner were all the offenders convented
at the fall, before their great Judge in Paradise, and arraigned, and tried,
and sentenced; but this light of divine grace, according to the decree of the
holy and blessed Trinity, which had before in a joint concurrence created the
world, breaks forth, again to enlighten the world, newly darkened by sin and
death, and God himself so shows himself in his way of grace, that he hid the
shame, and covers the sin, of his now new made, and newly lost creatures that
he makes garments of skins of Beasts to cover them, and even of such creatures
as thereby might show to our first parents, that they had deserved death, as
those Beasts did whose skins did cover them, but likewise the death of such
beasts as usually should be for sacrifice, might signify unto them, that they
had such a Savior to dye for them, and by dying should deliver them from the
jaws of the second death, by a more perfect sacrifice, which those beasts did
but typifie, and sacramentally set before them, by whose most precious robes of
righteousness, put upon them by God himself, they should be clothed both to
hide their nakedness and shame, and beautifully to adorn them in his sight, as
he then clothed them with the skins of those innocent beasts, viz. with the
righteousness of the Messiah, that promised seed of the woman, (whence I
conceive may be a good argument, for the salvation of both our first Parents,
Adam and Eve, and that then God did not sorsake them, the work of his own
hands, as Psa. 138.8. in that he himself so covered their nakedness, and
clothed them with those skins) (though their first born Cain perished with his
wicked offspring, for the most part, at least afterward by the flood) After
this, as Christ by sacrifices, and other institutions of God, was from time to
time set forth to his people, by the teachings of his holy spirit, so God the
Creator made known his glory in his Throne, the Church on earth, in the face
of Jesus Christ the Messiah, that was to come (as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor.
3.6) by the workings of the Holy Ghost, in all successions of ages to the
coming of Christ himself actually in the flesh; Still from the Throne to the
four living wights, and by them to his twenty four Elders, in all times has he
so in succession discovered himself; of which discoveries we may observe two
great Periods under the Old Testament (besides many other lesser ones) the two
great Periods were the Old world before the Flood, and the new world after the
flood, until Christ's time, and these two, the Rainbow as we noted, evidently
implies, in drowning the old world, and assuring preservation to the new world
from the like. In the first period, when God did communicate his pleasure to
any living wights, then near to his Throne, it was not by written word, but by
voice, or vision, or dreams, or any ways, he was then pleased to use to any
sorts of persons, either extraordinarily inspired, or to the fathers of
Families, or the first born (as sometimes he used) or such as were eminently
raised up by him, as Enoch, Noah, etc. In regard they lived many hundreds of
years, they might well by tradition and verbal instruction, personally teach
the will and pleasure of God to his people, and then they needed not the use of
writing (so God most wisely orders all things in their due seasons) and indeed
if they had had the gift of writing, it would have been in a manner endless, by
reason of their long lives, and great knowledge, more then in Solomon^ time,
who said, (Of making many books there was no end.) Some of the first Fathers
lived almost two third parts or more of the Old worlds time after Adam, and yet
lived with Adam the man made immediately by God. The other great period from
the flood, till about the year of the Creation, 4000. (as Bp. Usher computes
them) which was, from the time of the flood, computed Anno. Mund. 1656. the sum
of 2344. years more, and for the space of 855. of those years, by the said
Reverend Authors account, till the Law was given by Christ in Mount Sinai, in
the year of the world, 2513. at which time Moses was taught and inspired to
write his Pentetuch, or five books, the substance of the then revealed will of
God to his Church, there was no written word, but then by reason of Gods many
institutious to his late redeemed people of Israel, out of Egypt, and the
shortness of their days, he knew his written word to be needful to them, and
all posterities of his Church, who might thereby from age to age have more of
the Gospel-glory of the Messiah, still breaking out in new glimpses of light,
till the sun of righteousness himself should arise, with healing in his wings,
and that the whole counsel of God concerning him, might in substance be
revealed in writing, and all needful things by his spirit of wisdom and
revelation, till his prophetical office in matter of Revelation of subostantial
truths, was fully accomplished under the Old Testament, before he actually
appeared in his Priestly office, and though Gods Spirit in Noah, Sem, and
others, after the flood, as he was pleased to raise and inspire them, till
Melchisedech (if he was not the same with Sem, as some conceive) Abraham's,
Isaac's, and Jacobs time, and long after, God was pleased to supply them
otherwise without writing; but yet even then he had no less his true and
invisible Church, viz. his four living wights, or living creatures, as Ezekiel
speaks to be his seers, both in respect of himself, and his twenty four Elders,
his faith^^ people, both to see for them, and see to them, to teach them and
rule them, by such special dispensations as he was then pleased to manifest
himself to them by; and round about his Throne, his true Church upon earth,
where only his glorious name is extolled, in all his gracious manifestations
of himself to them, but no where else in the world; as Psa. 145. There his
Saints bless him and talk of his power, etc. we might take occasion from this
abridgement of the Old Testament to speak many things of the Ark, wherein Noah
and they with him were saved from the flood (as salvation is only to be had in
the Church) which God exalts on high above the reach of the worlds calamities,
and so of many particulars of Gods directing Noah to make it, having fitted him
both with grace and worldly wealth and power to accomplish it, to be able to
pay such multitudes of wicked wretches, that though they might deride his
attempt so long, to sail on the Mountains, yet for the reward and recompense of
their labor, would not resist (as is probable) but rather assist him therein,
it was a work doubtless for a Mighty Prince to accomplish; so there are many
other observable things, as his going into the Ark, his staying there, his
shutting up the persons and creatures taken in, seven of clean creatures, some
for sacrifice, and two only of the unclean, and his going out, all appointed
by Christ himself, who is always graciously present with his Church, but
especially more remarkably in the deep floods of her affliction or trouble.
Yea, afterward we may observe that God would have an Ark made, that as his
Church was before saved in the Ark from the Flood; so his Church instituted
amongst his Israelites, must know that the salvation and help was in him that
would have his gracious presence figured to them by an Ark, (...), Sept.
from whence, and by means of which, according to his own direction, he would,
as from a divine Oracle, reveal himself and his pleasure to them, and where
that was by his own order, there his throne of grace and mercy-seat was to be
attended by his four living wights, and twenty four Elders, both in the moving
tabernacle of Moses, Joshua, and the rest, till king David and all his time,
till his other type Solomon did afterward build him an house, ^p. Usher Annal.
p. 118.
where the Ark of God was in the King of Judahs reign, till the Jews Captivity
in Babylon, in the year from the creation, 3395. which was not much more time
after the flood, then the world had being before the flood.

Now as Moses, the great Prophet, who by Gods direction first made that Ark,
foretold of Christ, the great Prophet of his Church, that him the Lord their
God would raise, like unto himself, and that he should be heard in all things
that he said unto them, and as the Father required at his transfiguration, that
they should hear him, Math. 17. whose spirit both informed Moses and all the
Prophets, so by himself he was excellently, and immediately instructed in
making of the Ark, and the Tabernacle, and all that belonged to them, that all
should be made according to the pattern in the Mount; As Moses was the
instrumental deliverer of Abraham's, Isaac's, and Jacobs natural posterity, out
of the boudage of Egypt; so the spiritual gifts and graces of Christ, unto the
spiritual seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, are the only instruments of their
spiritual deliverance from the spiritual bondage of sin and Satan, when they
are conveyed thereby (as the Israelites were) through the Red Sea of Christ's
blood, and spiritually baptized by him (as the Apostle speaks) in the Cloud,
and in the Sea of spiritual Regeneration, and as the Israelites were
circumcised, when they had passed through the Red Sea, the badge of their
Covenant with the Fathers, so the spiritual circumcision was to be on the
hearts of the spiritual seed, and as Moses that was the Minister of
Circumcision, and the Law, could not bring the Israelites unto Canaan, but
Joshua, accompanied with faithful Caleb did; So the Law made nothing perfect
but the bringing in of a better hope did, as the Apostle says, Heb. 7.19. and
even so all the typical Priesthood, and Sacrifices, and oblations, did but seem
to set forth to the faith of Gods people, what was to be done by the true
High Priest, the Lord Jesus Christ, by his once offering up of himself for man's
sin in the end of the world, Heb. 9.

So here likewise by David's providing for the building of Gods house, where the
Ark should rest, as he intended, yet was not permitted, but it was promised to
him, and fulfilled, when the Ark was gloriously placed there in Solomon's time,
and honored by evident manifestations of Gods presence there, (though all the
institutions then used in that Temple, which was a type of Christ's body, were
but likewise typical of his priestly Office, to come under the New Testament)
so these two famous Kings were eminently types of Christ's Kingly Office.

First, As Saul's worldly Kingdom was to be removed to make way for David's, a
man after Gods own heart, who was anointed of God, though sometimes despised
of men; and as David overcame all the enemies of Gods people; as David's Kingdom
was full of troubles at first, yet after he had a complete conquest over all
his enemies round about, and enjoyed peace on every side; So Christ came in a
low appearance into the world, (at least in the worlds eye) yet by humbling
himself, he got the victory; he has been long fighting mystically for his
people, and shall at last gain them a peaceable Kingdom, and all his foes be
made his footstool in Gods due time, Psalm. 110. but till that full victory, his
Ark, as in David's time, will be in a moving Tabernacle, but when the reign of
the true Solomon comes, his Ark will be settled, his Kingdom shall be peaceable
and flourishing; Now that these were but types of Christ's Kingdom, appears by
the eclypsing the glory of both; First, after David's victory he fell, and upon
that succeeded many afflictions from his own house to the end of his days; The
most glorious reign of Solomon at first, afterward ended in as dark obscurity
by sin and sufferings, and his Son Reboboam, grossly provoked Israel to the loss
of ten Tribes, and afterward both Israel and Judah were in a declining
condition, till that whole generation went into Captivity, and the Ark of God
ceased to be any more with the Jews, and though after seventy years, according
to Gods promise, many thousands were brought back to Jerusalem, by the decree
of Cyrus, as God foretold, yet the Ark of God was no more amongst them, nor
they ever after but in a decaying state, though God upheld the race of David,
in the Tribe of Judah, yet much in obscurity till Christ, that lineally was to
proceed out of David's loins, came in the flesh; in whom that promise was so
fulfilled (but yet in the set time when the Scepter was departed from Judah) so
that the glory of David's Kingdom was not to be in himself, or Solomon, or their
posterities, according to the flesh only, but in Christ the great deliverer of
his people, both from spiritual and temporal bondage and captivity (as the
Prophets of old abundantly witness, and the New Testament confirms, as may be
showed hereafter, by Gods assistance) yea, David himself, in many Prophesies,
foretells of Christ's Kingdom, what never was, or can be performed, to his mere
natural offspring, as besides many others, Psa. 72. and Psa. 137. do plainly
show.

Again, Consider that when some of the Jews came back from Babylon, what
numerous multitudes (not many ages after) remained in the Persian Dominion, in
Ahashuerus and Queen Hesters times, scattered (as Haman said) through all the
hundred twenty and seven Provinces that he ruled over, toward whom, as God
showed mercy to them, by Ahashuerus Marriage with Hester, a captive Maid of the
Jews, so thereby seems to be shadowed, how Christ the great King of his people,
though they have been long scattered in the captivities of many generations,
yet will again betroth them unto him in faithfulness, as he speaks by the
Prophet, Hos. 2.19. which flourishing time of Christ's Kingdom, is described by
the Spirit of God, in the thousand years under or after the seventh Trumpet, of
which many things will be revealed, when he shall take to himself his great
power and reign, Rev. 19. and the Kingdoms of the world shall become the
Kingdoms of our God, and of his Christ, Rev. 11.15. then as he the Angel of the
Covenant, shows that at the beginning of the seventh Trumpet, the mystery of
God shall be finished; Christ had wrought mystically in his Kingdom before, but
then he will show himself in his Kingly authority; before, the Ark in the
Temple might not be seen, save by the High Priest, but then the Temple in
Heaven shall be opened, and there shall be seen in his Temple the Ark of his
Testament, Rev. 11.19. The Israelites were of old a generation of Prophets as
David styles them, Psa. 105.15. And do my Prophets no harm; for they had such
discoveries of God and his works renewed unto them by the Spirit of Christ in
the Ministry of Moses, in his five Books, wherein they were taught of the
creation of all things, the destruction of the old world, the fall of man, the
way of salvation for old and new world, what God had done for them, what
service and obedience he required of them, in what way, and by what ordinances
they should be accepted of him, which no other people had besides them, a^l the
time, Gods Ark was amongst them.

Yea, they were also a Generation of Priests then, for though only the Priests
in office, then in reference to Christ, might kill the Saerifices, and place
them upon the Altar, yet in regard they were to bring their own Sacrifices to
lay their hand upon the head of their offering, to ^^stifie their faith, and
acknowledge their sins, to testify their repentance, yet it was only the
faith and repentance of the true Israelites, that through Christ (unto whom
they looked spiritually) by whose only propitiation and atonement, they
expected to be accepted, and so spiritually now; Christ has made all his
servants in his true Church, both the twenty four Elders, and the four living
wights, Kings and Priests unto God, and an excellent Kingdom by faith and grace
they know they shall even upon earth enjoy in due time, as may appear in the
next Chap. 5. Verse. 10. We shall reign upon earth.

And so we have represented what is here said of Gods true Church, under the
Old Testament, by the representatives thereof, praising him as Creator, all
which time it is to be observed that his holy Sabbath was kept in remembrance
of God, as creator of Heaven and Earth, and that he rested on the seventh day
from his work of Creation, which was by our Savior in the New Testament,
changed to the first day of the week, in remembrance of the work of our
Redemption, and for the honor of him our Redeemer, who rose the first day of
the week from the dead, when he had finished that most glorious work, etc.

A few things more I shall commend to your Christian consideration from the Old
Testament, before we come to speak of the fifth Chap. of the Revelation (as to
our forementioned purpose) for whereas in the Vision concerning the Trinity of
persons in the former Chap. the second person viz. God the Son, to whom the
great work of Mediatorship was committed, being set forth as it seems by the
Rainbow, in sight like an Emerald; which Rainbow plainly minds us both of the
Flood and the Ark; the Flood again holding out,

1. Judgment to the Old World.

2. Mercy to Noah and the new World.

Again, the Ark both then and from Moses time, evidencing Christ's gracious
presence with his people, both in the Old and New world; And the consideration
of God the Sons execution of all the Mediators great Offices, as the great
Prophet, Priest, and King of his true Church, are so frequently set before Gods
people in succession of times in the Church, as the great thing to be eyed by
them, therefore besides the general respect of these three offices to the
universal Church, and the particular to every true beleiver in all times, there
seems a third respect to be much taken notice of in Holy Scripture, of many
special manifestations of the said three Offices of Christ, in the several ages
and conditions of his Church, or rather of Christ's, so setting himself forth
before his people, in those several times in these three great Offices.

For as there has been a most large time of his Prophetical Office under the
Old Testament, when Christ by a spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, till his
coming in the flesh, revealed all his Fathers will.

And 2. According to his Priesty Office ever since; And so,

3. Will do in the third period, under or after the seventh Trumpet in his
Kingly office, likewise, as may happily be frequently observable in Scripture,
how by a remarkable divine hand, there have been many shows hereof in many
lesser periods.

First, Even before the flood, there were some shadowings of Christ in all his
offices;

1. Of Prophecy, in that he revealed himself to the Holy Fathers of the first
times, by voices, visions, dreams, and the like, what services would be
acceptable to the Father.

2. As a Priest, in Enoch; in that Enoch, as Christ in the flesh, came to do
the Will of God in the body, Heb. 5.10. Who as Christ's type, so walked with
God, he was translated; as Christ when he had done his Fathers Will, ascended
into Heaven.

3. As a King, in Noah, whom he fitted and enabled him so to preserve his
Family, and all them with him in the Ark, when all his enemies were
wonderfully, and justly destroyed by the Flood.

Secondly, Again, after the Flood in Abraham's time, Christ revealed his Fathers
will to him, as his Prophet, calling him from his Fathers Idolatry, teaching
him to serve the true God, as was agreeing to his will; making him a King by
subduing those Kings that had carried Lot captive, and rescuing him, and those
that belonged to Lot; yea, in that he offered his Son Isaac, he acted as a
Priest, and was blessed by Melchisedeck, the Priest of the most high God, who
was likewise King of Salem, of whose order of Priesthood Christ was to be, who
was without Father, without Mother, without beginning of days, or end of life,
as the Apostle describes him, Hebrews 7.3.

But Thirdly, more remarkably, after God would have an instituted Church in the
posterity of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to whom he had made and renewed his
promise of Canaan, and given them the Sacrament of Circumcision, as a sign and
seal of his free grace promised to them, and had brought their posterity out of
Egypt with an high hand, and conducted them through the Red Sea, to sacrifice
to himself in the wilderness, not as their Fathers had done formerly, but as
Moses told Pharaoh, as the Lord their God should afterward teach them, for
they knew not how he would be served, till they came into the Wilderness, where
he afterward appointed his instituted worship, for till the making of that
Covenant with Abraham and his seed, the Sacrifices that had been used all
along, till then, seemed as much to have had the nature of a Sacrament, to
strengthen and confirm the faith of the beleiving Ancients in the Messiah to
come, (for we read not of any other they had, till Abraham) as to typifie unto
them, that Christ was to dye for their sins. But after Gods instituted Worship
by Moses Ministry, the said three great Offices of Christ seem to be frequently
shadowed out; Moses was his Prophet, who is likewise said to be King in
Jesurun; and Aaron, who was his mouth unto Pharaoh at first, was afterward
actually the High Priest, the first type of Christ, in that order and office;
but all along that Ministration, till Saul's worldly Kingdom was set up in
causeless discontent, by the peoples corrupt will, who would have a King
(instead of good Samuel, and of God himself) who told Samuel, 1 Samuel 8.
they had not cast off him, but God likewise; for they sought a King after
their own corrupt will, not seeking to know Gods pleasure therein; which soon
again fell, when God had sought him a man, even David, whom God set up. And
when the Israelites were actually come out of Egypt, and had miraculously
passed through the Red Sea (whereby was figured, how by Baptism, and spiritual
Regeneration, Gods people are brought out of the bondage of sin and Satan, and
so soon as they were come into the Wilderness (which many ways shadows out the
state of Gods people in the world, etc.) then Moses as a Prophet, makes known
the Will of God to them; Aaron as a Priest makes intercession to God for them,
and Christ himself (as judicious Burgess proves) as the great King gives his
Laws in great Majesty and terror, for all things to be observed by his people,
though Moses was then likewise his Deputy King in Jesurun, and so all along in
the Wilderness, Moses was King and Prophet, and Aaron and his Sons Priests; So
after that, when they were to pass over Jordan, to enter into the promised
Land, Joshua is then made Captain, to fight Christ's Battles, under that great
King, that appeared to him, Joshua 5. the Priests carrying the Ark dry-shod,
through the then overflowing waters of Jordan; and Joshua again, as a Prophet,
reveals the pleasure of God unto them, not only in civil affairs, as to
dividing the i^^eritances, but also in spiritual admonitions and instructions,
upon many occasions, etc.

Again, many times in the Judges days, when Moses and Joshua's counsels were
forgot, and their predictions concerning that peoples revoltings were
fulfilled; yet even then, Christ who was from the beginning the powerful great
King of his Church, ruled many times amongst them and their enemies too,
apparently, as the Scriptures witness, even then likewise he raised up his
Deputies, called Judges, as Gedeon, Jeptha, Deborah, Barack, Sampson, and
others, again to restore his instituted worship, and Priesthood, and be
deliverers to his revolted and oppressed people, as occasion did require,
instructing them by his prophetical spirit therein. But from the beginning of
David's time, as we noted these three great Offices were more remarkably, and
eminently set forth, especially while things continued in any tolerable order,
in the good Kings raigns that followed, wherein the glory of Christ the
Mediator, in his three said Offices, as Prophet, Priest, and King, was still
set forth in their following times, to show that therein consisted the glory of
Christ's Mediatorship, as much more might be observed in this kind.

Rev. Chap. 5.
The further illustration of the former Doctrine, from Rev. 5. chapter, where
after the summary consideration of that Chapter is briefly hinted, the Doctrine
of the New Testament therein comprised, which first was set down largely before
the giving of the Revelation in the writings of the Evangelists and Apostles.
But secondly, there more especially is Christ's the Lambs Revelation, and
execution of the affairs of that book, but so as to erect his Kingdom in the
issue, for which they so exuit, verse. 10. and we shall reign upon earth,
wherein the representative Church does so eminently rejoice, v. 11. and the
four living Wights add their fiduciall, Amen, after the praise of all
creatures; and the twenty four Elders fall down and worship, v. 14.

PRoceed we now to the fifth Chapter (the Scene and the Chorus being so
excellently set in the former Chapter) as respecting God the Creator,
worshipped on the seventh day Sabbath, especially to glorify him for his great
and good work of Creation, who as three in persons, one in essence, Holy, Holy,
Holy, Lord God Almighty, so worshipped in the Old Testament until the coming
of Christ the Redeemer, who having finished the work of Redemption, as the Lord
of the Sabbath changed, it from the seventh to the first day of the week, who
in this fifth chapter is said to be a Lamb that was as it were slain, who is
therefore praised by men, Angels, and all creatures with him on the Throne, for
that most glorious work of Redemption, and acknowledged in the great benefits
that redounded to his Church thereby. Where again consider,

First, The Vision, with the effect of it.

Secondly, The Doctrine and Use of both, 1. By Men. 2. By Angels. 3. By all
creatures.

The Vision for the greatest part is the same in substance; the decyphering of
the Father, the Holy Spirit and the Church, the same; but God the Son who is
represented as a Lamb that had been (as it were) slain, whose glorious work of
Redemption and Grace toward his true Church, is the substance and drift of the
Vision, wherefore he is accordingly praised.

First, Consider the Vision, v. 1. to 8. and the effect on the four beasts, v.
8.

In Verse 1. A book was in the hand of him on the Throne.

In Ver. 2, 3. A proclamation by a strong Angel for one to open the book.

Verse 3. None was found worthy in heaven or earth.

Verse 4. Is the great discouragement of St. John thereupon, he wept much, as
without hope etc.

In Verse 5. One of the Elders comforts St. John, that the Lion of the Tribe of
Judah, the root of David, had prevailed to do it.

In Verse 9. The former description of the true Church, but with the Lamb in
the midst of it; Who is set forth, first, by his suffering, he was slain.
Secondly, By his victory, (...) killed death, and was thence but as it were
slain, and consequently by his dominion over all things in heaven and earth,
therefore set forth by seven horns, denoting his perfect power. Secondly, by
seven eyes denoting his perfect wisdom and providence in all the earth, where,
by his holy Spirit he works as he pleases.

In Verse 7. The Lamb (as was told St. John, verse. 5.) takes the book out of
the hand of him that sat upon the Throne; whereupon follow the effects of the
Vision in the Church.

First, Worship by the Beast and Elders, v. 8.

Secondly, Praise by a song: Where I. The nature of it, A new song, for new
Testament mercies. II. The matter of it, Thou art worthy, v. 9, 10. In the
matter of the new song, consider


1. An acknowledgement that the Lamb, and only he was worthy to take the book,
and open the seals thereof.

2. The reason of the acknowledgement, First, from the greatness and extremity
of his suffering [thou wast slain.] Secondly, By the efficacy and prevalency of
his suffering; Thou have redeemed us unto God. Where 1. The price, by thy
blood. 2. The extent, Out of every Nation, Kindred and Language.



And thirdly, the benefit redounding to the Church by such redemption, verse.
10. Thou have made us to our God, etc. and we shall reign. Where 1. Here is
what all the faithful in the true Church, spiritually here obtain, They are
made Kings and Priests unto God now in this life. 2. For advantage and
advancement, which they shall have in that place where they have served Christ,
or suffered for his name, there they shall reign with him: We shall reign upon
earth.


In Verse 11. A Vision of innumerable company of Angels about the Throne, the
Church.

In Verse 12. Their song of praise, where first the Object, i.e. the Lamb,
whose worthiness they likewise acknowledge, for being slain.

Secondly, The right and due belonging to him thereupon, viz. That he receive
power, and riches, and wisdom and strength.

In Verse 13. is the general concurrence of all creatures, 1. In Heaven, 2. In
earth. 3. Under the earth. In the like acknowledgement and praise to be, 1. To
him that sits upon the Throne. 2. To the Lamb for ever and ever.

In Verse 14. First, The fiducial Amen of the four living Wights.

Secondly, The assent and consent of the twenty four elders, manifested, 1. By
their falling down. 2. By worshipping him that lives for ever.


1. In their falling down, showing their humble subjection.

2. In their worship, their sincere affection to the glorious object; Him that
lives for ever.

So that in this Cap. there is an excellent testimony of Jesus, set forth by
the spirit of Prophecy, being the main substance and scope of New Testament
Doctrine (as in the Gospels are excellently set forth) whereunto the Lamb as it
were slain, has reference, being eternally slain in the Fathers decree, but
then actually slain in due time, and yet alive again, and was but as it had
been slain, being the All-sufficient Mediator, that had conquered Sin, Death
and Hell, and had perfect power and providence over all the earth, but by his
Divine Spirit, holily and wisely ordering all for the good of his universal,
true, invisible Church, and so according to his glorious excellency has thence
forward both the said Testimony and Spirit of Prophecy, and power to reveal
and execute all the holy pleasure of his Father in what remains to be
accomplished upon the earth to the end, namely in revealing and fulfilling all
things contained in the Book of The Book given to the Lamb to look into, and to
open the Seals thereof, viz. The Book of Revelations, is diversely apprehended
by several persons, some describing it as a book bound containing many folio's
or pages, and yet to have seals upon it, closing it up. Others, more probably
to be a Volume or Roll, containing the Prophesies of many things to be
unfolded successively in order, being one rouled upon another, and on the
outside to have 7 seals hanging down each by other as on 7 labels; but it may
seem rather probable they were 7 narrow Scrowls each one sealed down at the end
upon the Roll one by another in the length of the Roll to hold it together,
till all the said 7 seals were loosed, and that at the loosing of each seal the
contents of each Seal-prophesie was made known thereupon successively, but when
the last was loused (in what part soever of the length of the roll it was) upon
the taking of that, came off the larger Volume of the 7 Trumpets, which so
proceeded out of the seventh seal, being thenceforth loosened, to be unfolded
successively, from the whole length the roll, which (in such case) must needs
greatly abate the bigness of the Book or Volume as first delivered to Christ
the Lamb, and thereupon the remainder of the same book might well be stilled
((...)) a little book in the Angels hand, c. 10. which was open, not sealed, as
before, which St. John was afterward bidden to take and eat up; whereupon he
was enabled from that Book-prophesie to set down what concerned the affairs of
the Ceurch more especially, beginning at the same time with the first
Seal-prophesie, all along to the end of the world, contained in Chapter 12. and
so forward to the close of the Book.
Revelation, in two distinct Prophesies through all times, both first, in the
Seal-Prophesie of State matters, respecting the Roman Empire, in chap. 6, 8, 9,
and 11. some things to ver. 15. respecting both Church and State. And secondly,
Of the Book-prophesie, chap. 12. concerning the Church affairs to the end of
the Book, which was in the hand of the Angel, Rev. 10.

1. Concerning the Seal-prophesie, in chap. 6. are contained the six first
seals, containing all to be done in the first three hundred years, till the
woman in travel obtained a man-child from God, to wit Constantine the Great,
the famous Christian Emperor, after all those ten throws of persecution, while
Michael and the Dragon fought hand to hand (as it were whether the Devils
religion of heathenish Idolatry, or Christ's true Religion should prevail; and
out of the seventh Seal proceeded the seven Trumpets, containing all time
succeeding; both the interim until Antichrist arose, and his time, and times,
and half a time, or forty two months took place; wherein, as Christ in the
first Seal rode upon a white horse, and by the preaching of the Gospel went on
conquering, by bringing in the fa^thful to the Gospel thereby, so (to conquer)
afterward all his enemies by the red, black and pale horse, and other
judgments to subdue his enemies successively; and in the three first Trumpets
took away the very seat and mansion of the Dragon, that he that till that time
let might be taken out of the way, that Antichrist might come in his room,
as the Apostle Paul foretold, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. But from the time Antichrists forty
two months begun, to the end of the sixth Trumpet, or the second woe, we have
the fourth Trumpet proceeding in the ruin of the Empire in the West, and the
fifth Trumpet is the beginning of the ruin of it in the East, cap. 10. by the
Mahumetan Saracens, those locusts out of the bottomless pit, hurting all but
the green fruits sealed to be preserved from that first woe Trumpet, as was
foreshewed, chap. 7. who destroyed one half of the Eastern Empire; and after
the other Mahumetan Locusts under the sixth Trumpet, namely the Turks took away
the other part of the Eastern Empire, whose 396 years are not yet expired, till
the end of the sixth Trumpet, and the second woe, as is said, Rev. 11.14. which
is to be at the rising again, and the ascension of the Witnesses. And from ver.
15. of the 11. chap. is a brief comprisal of the seventh Trumpet, to the end of
the Seal-prophesie, which ends all time; yet in the first part of that 11.
chap. is contained a Cronological Table, having reference to both the
Seal-prophesie and the Book-prophesie in the Angels hand, Rev. 10.2. which
begins again chap. 12. and so forward to the end. But here first observe the
table of all the times of both Prophesies, Rev. 11. where the first verse has
reference to the primitive times, when the Temple and the Altar, and they that
worshipped therein were regular and measured. Verse 2. contains the time of
Antichrist, set forth by the Court without, to be left to the Gentilizing
Papists, to be trodden under foot 42 months. From that Verse to the 14. is the
contemporary two Witnesses prophesying in sackcloth, to the finishing of their
testimony, and last great killing and resurrection, at the end of the aforesaid
second Woe, and beginning of the said seventh Trumpet, to the end of the
chapter.

But the second, or Book-Prophesie in the Angels hand, Chap. 10.2. contains all
the former times in the Seal-Prophesie, and to end at the same Period, going
over them again, begins at Chap. 12. wherein was again contained what is given
to Christ the Lamb to reveal and execute, in reference to the affairs of the
Church; In Chap. 12. are contained chiefly in that respect the state of the
true Church in the primative times, before Antichrist arose, both in regard of
her primative glory, and the rage of the Dragon against her, till her flight
into the Wilderness, to be fed there by the two said Witnesses, in Sackcloth,
for a time and times, and half a time.

In Chap. 13. We have the description of the false Apostatical Church, (from
about Anno. 406. as is probably conceived) from Honorius the Emperor, and Pope
Innocent the first his time, set forth in a twofold beast, wherein Antichrist
and his followers are, verse. 1. described in their politic capacity, as
taking possession of the seat of the Roman Emperor in the West, into which,
when the Dragon, who was before dipossessed, cunningly winds in that his
substitute the Beast, giving his power and place unto him, under a new shape of
Idolatry, and so he rises out of the Sea, having seven heads and ten horns
(expounded Cap. 17.) having upon his horns ten crowns, and upon his head the
name of Blasphemy. By the other Beast, verse. 11. he is set forth in his
Ecclesiastical capacity, making up one body with his Clergy, so he is said to
come out of the Earth, of an earthly constitution, having two horns of power,
Ecclesiastic and Civil, like a Lamb, but speaks like a Dragon; But concerning
the twofold Beast, Christ the mighty Angel described, Chap. 10.1. when he gave
the Book to John, containing the Beasts forty two months, speaks, verse. 6.7.
that his time should be no longer; And to that end had his two Sackcloth
Witnesses prepared, Cap. 11. The Pastors to feed the woman in her
wilderness-condition 1260. days, of years; whom in a seeming disgraceful manner
he sets up against this great Beast (which in appearance is, maxim impar
congressus,) they being contemptible in the worlds eye, and yet lets them know
they should have all along such power, that they shall by the spirit of
Prophecy overcome the Beast, with all his worldly grandeur and greatness, and
by suffering and dying, after the Lambs example) at last totally and finally
overcome him; And yet all the while, that false Antichristian Apostatical
Church of spiritual Babylon, that scarlet whore described, Rev. 17. Sits as a
Queen, not only bewitching the Christian world with her Sorceries, but also
making the Kings of the earth drunk with the cup of her spiritual fornications;
the true Church, (though in a wilderness-condition) yet continues to sing a new
song on Mount Sion, with the Lamb, and to follow him where ever he goes, while
the destroying Angels by their judgments, surprise the Whore, Chap. 14. And
therefore while the Whore in all her gay gaudery, promises her self security,
that she should see no sorrow; Christ has his seven Angels, with their seven
last plagues or Viale, to be poured out upon her, bringing her inevitable
destruction by degrees, upon what ever was of worth in her account, even to
destroy the Kingdom, Throne, and Empire of the Beast, and even to make those
Kings which the Scarlet Whore, riding upon the Beast had before made drunken,
to hate the Whore, and make her desolate and naked, and eat her flesh, and burn
her with fire; And lastly, as a mighty Conqueror, Rev. 19. Christ overthrows
in the Armagedon Battle, all the Hosts of the Dragons substitute, and
possesses his Empire, there and in all other the Dragons dominious besides,
and casts the Beast and the False Prophet, the Pope and his counsel, into the
Lake of fire and brimstone, and then as the most puissant King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords, lays hold on the Dragon, Rev. 20. and binds him likewise with a
great Chain, and shuts him in his Dungeon the bottomless pit; And sets up his
own Kingdom, Dominion, and Sovereignty, generally over all persons, places, and
times, of the seventh Trumpet, and thousand years, wherein by his word he
declares, he will reign with his Saints upon earth, Rev. 11.15. and 19.20.
where again, all time will end.

And in this last period are set forth as Synchronals, the binding of Satan,
the reign of Christ with his Saints a thousand years on earth. The new Heavens
and new Earth for the same space of time, and the Tabernacle of God with men;
The new Jerusalem, The pure River of water of life, and the tree of life,
bearing the twelve manner of fruits, whose leaves are for the healing of the
Nations; All which are to be during that happy time, when the Kingdoms of the
world are said to be the Kingdoms of our God, and of his Christ, as was
expressed, Chap. 11.15. And when the Lord God omnipotent reigns, as the great
multitude of his servants are taught, out of the Throne to praise him so
enlargedly, Chap. 19.5, 6. For as we noted before in all the Book of the
Revelations, where things are not said to succeed one another, as the Seals,
Trumpets, and Viols, but one Table of Chronology is assigned to them all such
distinct Visions are contemporaries (as all that concerned the true and false
Church in Antichrists time) have the same measure, though diversely computed, by
months, days, a time, times, and half. So all these Visions, under, or rather
after the seventh Trumpet, have one Chronogical Table to compute their time,
viz. a thousand years, all which particulars being by Christ's special order so
strongly asserted by the Angel, and the ancient and latter Prophets, as
earnestly called in for evidence hereunto, for the stablishment of the Faith of
Gods people herein, since he, the Lamb, that had power to reveal them to his
beloved Disciple Saint John, has likewise power to execute and fulfill them in
their seasons, till all be done which in his Office of Mediatorship is
committed to him, having therefore seven horns, and seven eyes, which are the
seven Spirits of God, sent forth into all the earth, whereby with his perfect
wisdom and providence, he will accomplish all that his undertaking.

Which Synchronismes in the last Period, according to Mr. Mede, (in his Clavis
Apocalyptiea) are as a guiding thread which who so takes, and humbly and
faithfully uses, may greatly (through grace) be helped in passing through many
(otherwise inextricable labyrinths) in many dark passages of this book; for in
this last period, the said Mr. Mede has gone contrary to the stream of
Exposituours, for many hundreds of years (as others since him have done)
wherein for the substance there seems to be much clearness, (though the
mysteries therein comprised are very high and intricate) which in the ensuing,
and now near approaching times, will doubtless be much unfolded, when the
mystery of God shall be finished, at the beginning of the sounding of the
seventh Angel, Chap. 10.7. and when likewise Gods Temple shall be opened in
Heaven, and there shall be seen in his Temple, the Ark of his Testament, Chap.
11.19.

Now seeing in regard of all Christ's other actings past since his taking of the
book of Revelation at his Fathers hand, they have been mystically and
spiritually executed (though all most really and powerfully) so I conceive the
mystical manner of understanding his reign on earth, the thousand years, As I
then apprehended.
seems in regard of the Symetry, proportion and suitableness to what has
already been done, is here to be understood (though as Mr. Mede observes) the
Spirit of God sets forth things of our latter times, more clearly then in the
former.

Now that this may appear more evident, let us diligently weigh and consider
what the representative true Church do in the sequel, who in the unity of Faith
and spiritual Grace, through all the times contained in this book, looking in a
spiritual discovery or vision, through all the series of them, to the utmost
completing of the Lambs victory over Antichrist and his followers, in that
excellent Period of his Kingly power, solely and for ever, thence-forward to be
held in his own hand, and We (say they) shall reign upon earth, as may appear
from the 8. verse of this 5. Chap. to the end.

First, In verse. 8. the said representative true Church, fall down before the
Lamb, having every one Harpes and golden Viols, and Odours, which are the
prayers of Saints.

Secondly, Verse. 9. They sing a new song, for New Testament grace and glory,
To the Lamb, saying, thou art worthy to ^ake the Book and open the Seals
thereof.

Thirdly, They show the ground and matter of their new Song, Thou wast slain
and have redeemed us by the blood, out of every kindred, tongue, and people,
and Nation (where observe whence those representative four Beasts, and twenty
four Elders have their original descent successively to the end of the world,
having all along the same frame of spirit.)

Fourthly, They set forth the promotion and advancement he has spiritually
raised them up to in the earth, in all their successions, by his work of
redemption; Namely,

1. What they were actually possessed of, Thou have made us unto our God, Kings
and Priests.

2. What more especially, fiducially, and in vision, they saw and say they
should have in the last period of time, If any forsake father etc. Mat.
where they had before served Christ, or suffered for him, in the following
words, And we shall reign upon Earth, as 2 Timothy 2.12. if we suffer we shall
also reign with him.

And hereupon comes in the conclusion in a general doxology, set forth in a
vision of an innumerable company of Angels round about the Throne and the
Church, verse. 11, 12. expressing their high praises to the Lamb; and then of
all creatures joining to ascribe, all excellency, blessing, glory, and power,
etc. to him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever;
Whereupon the four Beasts, or living Wights, say Amen; Testifying their faith
and assurance thereof, and the twenty four Elders to declare their assent and
consent (like the people in Solomon's time, when he had prayed at the
consecration of the Temple, and God manifested his glory there, 2 Chronicles. 7.3.)
they bowed and worshipped him that lives for ever. Which words seem to have
special reference to Christ, as having been slain and alive again, and lives
for ever more, as Rev. 1.18. who has the Keys of Hell and death, and in the
end will cast the Dragon, Satan, Hell, and Death, into the Lake that burns
with fire and brimstone, which brings in the destruction of the world, and last
judgment, Rev. 20.11. When Heaven and Earth will flee before him, that then
will sit upon the throne, and all shall be raised that are then dead, to come
to be judged, etc. verse. 12, 13, 14, 15. So that the Spirit of God teaches the
representative Church to look upon their reign on the earth, as the main thing
that is driven at, in respect of themselves, in the Book of Revelation, as a
thing all along to be eyed by them, from the first giving of it, and which
shall be accomplished in all time, till the consummation thereof; And
thereupon, both they, Angels and all creatures break forth into praises, as was
showed.

Inferences from Rev. 5. which will be proved in the Sequel.
1. If the beginning and ending of the Visions given by Christ to his beloved
Disciple St. John, hold out the great glory of Christ's kingly Office with his
Saints in the last period, under or after the seventh Trumpet, then such glory
thereof is yet to come in the said Period.

But he has therein so revealed such his Kingly glory to him, both in the
beginning Chap. 5. Verse. 10. and in the end thereof, Chap. 20. and elsewhere:

Therefore, It shall so be fulfilled in the said third period.

2. If the representative true Church are taught by Christ's Spirit, to look
upon such his reign on the earth, as a great fruit of the redemption wrought by
Christ; yea, as the completing of his Mediators office in the world, and as a
great honor and recompense (through grace) in time for their service and
suffering for him in the world; For as they have there suffered with him, so
there they shall reign, 2 Timothy 2.12. Then they shall accordingly attain in due
time the end of their expectation and confidence.

But Christ's Spirit has there so taught them, so to look upon such Christ's
reign on Earth:

Therefore, In due time they shall accordingly attain the end of such their
expectation and confidence.

3. If Christ's taking of his kingly power to himself at the seventh Trumpet, be
the fulfilling of the Prophesies of the Old Testament, and his answering to the
types therein contained of David chiefly, delivering the Jews and Israelites,
and in Ahashuerus marrying captive Hester, and so delivering all the dispersed
Jews, and Israelites, then it must: ^eeds be so undertaken and performed.

But it will be the fulfilling the Prophesies, and answering to the types of
the Old Testament:

Therefore, It must needs be so undertaken and performed.

4. If the Spirit of God is eminently large and vigorous in setting out the
glory of what belongs to Christ's Kingly Office upon earth, in the said last
period, then there is the more sure ground to believe and expect it;

But he is eminently large and vigorous therein.

Therefore, There is the more sure ground to believe and expect it.

5. If Christ's Office of Mediatorship must end when he resigns up the Kingdom
to the Father [ when full reconciliation is made, and the perfect union of
himself with his Church (as her spiritual head) is fully accomplished] then
before that time the eminency of his Kingly Office upon earth, must needs
appear, as there has been of his Prophetial and Priestly Offices hitherto:

But there is no Period left for it, but that under or after the seventh
Trumpet, before his Mediators office shall so be finished at the said time:

Therefore, It must necessarily be in that third period to come, under or after
the seventh Trumpet.

6. If the great glory of such reign of Christ will then appear in the
multitude of his subjects, both of the Israelites, Jews, and Gentiles [As the
Scriptures abundantly winess] then the greatest glory of his powerful grace,
and the greatest confluence of redeemed and saved souls shall then come in.

But the glory of such Christ's reign, will then appear in the multitude of such
his subjects, in the glory of his powerful grace, and the confluence of such
redeemed and saved souls:

Therefore, Such reign of Christ remains still to be executed by him.

7. If without such reign of Christ on earth, the mystical body of Christ will
not be completed, and that in the far greatest part of the members thereof,
then to come in; then it must necessary come in its time to make his mystical
body complete in the members thereof.

But otherwise it will not be complete in the far greatest part of the members
thereof:

Therefore, It must come in, in that its due time.

CHAP. III.
NOw let us come to consider in what manner it may or shall be (wherein the
great difficulty of the reign of Christ seems to lie) which we shall endeavor
to hold out two ways. These Reasons were writ the contrary way in the Original
Copy.


First, In setting down some reasons, which may seem to make against the
personal reign in his humane nature.

And Secondly, To show that it probably may be understood in a mystical manner,
(for that some way it shall be according to Scripture is not to be denied) but
because that such as his reign shall be, such will his coming be, when he is to
reign, and take the Kingdom to himself, and set it up in the world; we shall
therefore in reference thereunto (by Gods assistance) show the several senses
of his coming, according to Scripture, since his Ascension into Heaven, and
endeavor to open this particular sense of his coming to reign under or after
the seventh Trumpet, and to give some illustrations thereof.

The first of these we shall now endeavor under this head; namely, to offer
some reasons against a personal reign in his humane nature, which are these
that follow. Unto which, upon more serious consideration, I have added these
ensuing Answers.

Answer to that, [But such as his reign shall be, such will his coming be,]
That though that may hold true in a general sense, These Answers were added to
the eleven Reasons, in Apr. 1665.
yet not in a special; for though he will personally appear, according to
Scripture, in the Clouds; Visible to the sight of all at his coming, yet it is
not manifest (in so much As I can discern) that Christ will (at least
ordinarily) be personally visible to any, save those in the New Jerusalem the
thousand years, though the whole world will then be his Kingdom, and at his
pleasure he may then stay at, or visibly enlighten that City of him the great
King, as it is called, Mat. 5. and show forth his glory there, how, and as long
as he pleases, or otherwhere; likewise, as to Paul, Stephen, or as in the
story related by Mr. Mede, in his Answer to Dr. Twisse his second Letter, of
his visible appearing on a purple Cloud, and speaking to the Jews in a great
contest with the Christians in the Kingdom of the Omerites, about three hundred
years after his Ascension, for as he has manifested his Kingly glory in the
world, in the time of his sitting at the Right Hand of God the Father in
Heaven, so may be, as he and the Father pleases, some way manifest himself
personally Visible in the World, (though probably veiled) save unto the raised
Saints, in the time of his reign upon earth.

Answer in general to all the Reasons; First, and in general to those seeming
reasons against Christ's personal coming, and appearing at the last ruin of
Antichrist, which I first tendered, according to my then present apprehension,
but afterward by a remarkable hand of God upon me, was further resolved from
his word, as in the sequel may appear; Whereupon is likewise considerably
offered, that in case of a new dispensation, a great part of these Reasons will
fall void.

Sep. 27. 1664.

But to come to answer them particularly in order, for the tendering of things
contrary, often occasion the clearing up of truth, which I wholely herein aimed
at, or at least then groaped after for some time, And thinking it more safe
(then) to prove that such an appearance and reign of Christ should be then,
which in order of nature was first to be proved, and only offer things
considerable (at least in appearance) why I conceived it to be in this or that
manner, as both before and after may be observed; But the paper, Sep. 27. 1664.
in the (...), may sufficiently show my mistake in that seeming reason.

Secondly, Because the interpretations to that purpose do not seem convincing.

Thirdly, Because such interpretations do seem to gainsay some articles of the
Christian faith, and such interpretations are not to be given, that have not
Scripture warrant, especially if they oppose the received Articles of Christian
Religion.

Answer to the second and third Reasons; That the interpreting of Christ's
coming, or appearing to be personal, and visible about the destruction of
Antichrist, and afterward gloriously to be manifest, at least to the raised
Saints in the World, is not contrary to Scripture, but a Scriptural explication
of an Article of Faith; See in the (...), the latter end of two papers of, Dec.
7. and Sep. 27.

Fourthly, There seems to be no necessity of any such personal presence, since
the Scriptures witness how that by a wonderful, powerful, and glorious
presence, many great things have been accomplished effectually for the Church,
in former and latter times, as all along when Israel came out of Egypt, Christ
wonderfully showed himself to be their King, in plagueing Phar^ah, in
destroying him and his Host in the Red Sea, while Israel passed safely through
it, in conducting them wonderfully and graciously by a Pillar of a Cloud by
day, and a Pillar of fire by night, all the time they sojourned in the
wilderness, as signs of his presence with them, to guide them, provide for
them, and protect them; And when Christ so evangelically gave to them the Law
on Mount Sinai, Vide, Mr. Ant Burg. Vin. Log. p. 145, 146.
(as Divines do evidence) thereby declaring himself their King and Lawgiver,
with such Majesty and terror, by thundering and lightning, and burning of the
Mount, with shaking and trembling, and a mighty voice, which made Moses himself
exceedingly to tremble and quake, and the people so affrighted, etc. And
afterward appearing unto Joshua with a Sword in his hand, he declared to him,
he would go with him to subdue the Canaanites, saying, he himself was the
Prince of the Host of the Lord, when Joshua likewise worshipped him, as is
recorded, Josh. 5.13, 14. So Rev. 19.11, 12. there is a glorious description
how he goes against Antichrist at the Armageddon Battle, when he will deliver
his people from that spiritual Egyptian, and Babylonian bongage, etc. as in
many other instances of the Old and New Testament, which hereafter we may set
down.

Answer 4. God in his own institutions and determinations is sole judge of what
is necessary for the accomplishment of the whole work of redemption by Christ;
and as to that the holy Scriptures only can resolve us; and for what is
alleged in the fourth Reason concerning the Old Testament may be answered,
that such things then which were mystical, though wonderful, were more suitable
to the Old Testament, in that regard Christ had not then actually taken upon
himself his humane nature; and since his ascension I think none can
considerately deny, but be spoke personally to Saul, why persecutest thou me?
and was personally seen of Steven at his death (if the Text be duly weighed)
and why not afterward, when the Scripture is so evident? yea, Mr. Mede makes
his appearance and speaking unto Saul at his conversion to be a type of the way
and means of the conversion of the Jews in time to come. And for that of the
Armageddon battle it is to be considered as a prophetical Vision and revelation
of what will be really performed hereafter.

Fifthly, Christ's bodily presence upon earth was only so far forth necessary
as made for the accomplishment of what his Prophetical Spirit did foreshew in
the Old Testament, w^ a^ hereby done as to his Priestly Office (till the day of
judgment) inputting an end to all the typical Sacrifices, by the once
offering up of himself for the sins of his people, and to bring in an
everlasting righteousness (as the Prophet Daniel speaks) until he come as the
great Judge of quick and dead.

Answer 5. The Prophet Daniel does as clearly speak of Christ's personal coming
at the destruction of Antichrist; and Zachary of his being seen by every eye
(then) as other Scriptures of the Old Testament spoke of his coming to take our
nature of the blessed Virgin and seed of David. And for the day of Judgment,
this appearing will be the beginning of it, as Mr. Mede abundantly proves, and
then coming to be personally and gloriously, as a King in the world, will so
continue while the world endures ( though how, at all times, in any place,
saving in the new Jerusalem) we cannot so fully according to Scripture resolve.

Sixthly, Ever since his ascension into Heaven, he has and will improve his
perfect oblation of himself for the sins of his people at the right hand of God
his Heavenly Father, by making intercession for his people personally in his
humane nature, till the work of his mediation be fully perfected.

Answer 6. The improving of his Office of Priesthood at the right hand of God
the Father in Heaven, seems limited to the time of his appearing, when he will
begin eminently and visibly to make his foes his footstool, as Psalm. 110. and
if in another way by a presential intercession for his people, when his Kingly
glory shall more eminently shine forth, he may then do what God has appointed,
and in what concerns his Priestly Office accordingly, what shall remain for the
accomplishment of his work of Mediation, and as God has determined, it shall
most certainly be done, but the holy Scriptures seems to limit his sitting at
Gods right hand to that time.

Seventhly, By his so remaining there to that purpose is really fulfilled in
him, the Antitype, what was typified by the High Priest in the Old Testament,
as the Apostle expounds it, Heb. 9.26, 27, 28. As the High Priest went once a
year into the Holy of Holies to offer; so he was once offered in the end of the
world, but not to appear bodily again till the Judgment, having put away sin
by that once offering up of himself, which the High Priest under the Law by
offering the blood of beasts every year could not do, as the Apostle shows.

Answer. 7. What is there held out does nothing contradict the former answer,
being considered in the Scripture sense, for so he does it till the time spoken
of, the day of judgment, as was before said.

Eighthly, While there is sin in the Saints upon earth, there will be need of
Christ's personal mediation and intercession for them at Gods right hand; for as
this was done typically from Adams fall, in Sacrifices and Oblations, by Gods
direction; and more especially under the Ceremonial Law, according to his
special appointment in all particulars, until his once offering himself in the
flesh; so it is by him alone who is able to save his people to the uttermost,
really and perfectly performed in the said Office of mediation and
intercession, and will be so till his mystical body shall be made perfect in
all the members of it.

Answer 8. That it will be done for place and continuance whatsoever shall be
needful for the accomplishment of Christ's Priestly Office, it is not to be
questioned: But in every thing, how after his great and glorious appearing
formerly spoken of, that Office shall be executed, happily we cannot yet fully
determ^ne. But for the place, of doing it at Gods right hand in heaven (as
before was said) the Scripture seems to limit to that period, of the eminent
manifestation of his Kingly Office in the world.

Ninethly, Because he promised when he was ascended he would draw all his Elect
to him, Joh. 12.32. which promise seems will not be fulfilled while any of them
remain upon the earth, or till the end of the world.

Answer 9. That he has spiritually and evidently drawn all sorts of the Saints
to him, has in all ages, according to Scripture, been abundantly manifest many
ways to beleiving souls; and that he will hereafter powerfully, not only draw,
but authoritatively and effic^^iously command his people to be obedient to him,
their heavenly King, by a more eminent manifestation of his Divine grace to
them and more powerful conferring his spiritual grace upon them, in that time
of his glorious Kingdom in the world, the Scripture is abundant in giving
Testimony thereto, as in many Promises and Prophesies in this Tract may appear.

Tenthly, He is gone to prepare a place for all his Elect; now the Apostle
shows that none shall prevent one another; so that the mystical body of Christ
must be comprea^ and perfect, that an the members thereof may ascend into glory
together at once, with Christ Jesus their mystical head.

Answer 10. The Doctrine of Christ's Kingdom the thousand years, does nothing
gainsay what is therein alleged; neither shall the Saints prevent one another
in the sense there intended, but jointly at the sounding of that last Trumpet
at the end of the world shall be changed in a moment, at the twinkling of an
eye, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 15. and be rapt up to meet Christ in the air
at once together, and thenceforth ever be with the Lord.

Eleventhly, The glory of Christ in heaven is such as men in a mortal condition
are not able to behold, as the Apostle shows, 1 Timothy 6.15, 16. Who (says he)
only has immortality, dwelling in the light, which none can approach unto,
whom no man has seen, or can see. Now we may not conceive that Christ should
again denude himself of his glory which he has so dearly purchased by his
former humiliation and sufferings, or at least greatly diminish it, to come to
remain with men personally upon earth.

Ans. 11. Though Christ shall not diminish his glory to be in the world, and be
seen of men, when the Tabernacle of God is said to be with men, Rev. 22. but
rather accomplish the end of his sitting in glory with his Father in Heaven
till that time, namely, to receive to himself a Kingdom, and then to return as
be himself speaks, Luke 19.12. Yet at his glorious appearing, he will
manifest himself visibly unto men, as vailing his glory with clouds for a time
at least, to be discernable by them: And how often or how long he may do so
(being then in his Kingdom, the World, through whom even Abraham also is styled
Heir of the world by the righteousness of says, as the Apostle speaks, Romans
4.13.) I see no sufficient ground to determine; And I believe many things will
then be done by him that we cannot yet apprehend, neither are necessary for us
to know, but as he shall be pleased to reveal any of them, as useful to his
Church hereafter.

CHAP. IV.
Wherein are set down six several senses of Christ's coming recorded in the New
Testament since his Ascension, whereof the fifth is taken for his coming or
appearing at the destruction of Antichrist, which whether it be to be
understood mystically or personally (how-ever wonderfully) diverse things are
offered to be considered, but left to the judicious Reader, duly to weigh and
determine, as God by his. Word and Spirit may direct, only resolving that most
surely one way of the two it will be at that time, and to that purpose, many
evident Testimonies are occasionally added, from those four Apostles to whom
Christ manifested his Kingly glory, namely, first to the three Discipls, Peter,
James, and John, in the Mount, and afterwrads to St. Paul, at his conversion,
and in the last place are many considerable resolves, many ways represented to
such as may seem to reason again-such mystical Doctrine.

THus having briefly tendered some reasons against Christ's personal coming and
appearing in the time when his Kingdom shall be eminently set up in the world,
in the thousand years spoken of, Rev. 20. The thing we shall now endeavor
concerning it, is to show, that it is to be understood mistically, though it is
probably, wonderfully, and gloriously, and powerfully, to be fulfilled, when
that time is come, though in many respects it may not be understood fully, till
it be in actual being, but to that end we may the better understand what the
Scripture speaks in reference hereto, we shall endeavor to represent the
several senses, wherein the coming of Christ is taken in several places, since
his Ascension into Heaven.

First, It is taken spiritually for his gracious coming unto his faithful and
obedient Servants; So it is, Rev. 3.20. If any man hear my voice, and open the
door, I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with me; Such shall find
spiritual refreshment in Christ's, gracious approaches unto him.

Secondly, Christ's coming is taken for that glimps or show of his glorious
coming in his Kingdom, when he was transfigured before his Disciples, Peter,
James, and John, Mat. 16. ult. When his face shined as the sun, and his raiment
was white as the light, So Mark 9.1, etc. Luke. 9.27. Concerning which Saint
Peter speaks remarkably, 2 Pet. 1.16, 17. For we have not followed cunningly
devised fables, when we made known unto you the power, (...) the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his Majesty. For he received from
God the Father honor and glory, when their came such a voice to him from the
excellent glory, this is my well beloved son, in whom I am well pleased, and
this voice which came from Heaven we heard, when we were with him in the holy
Mount.

Thirdly, Sometimes the coming of Christ is taken for his visional presence, as
he fore-signified, he would come to his Apostle John in vision, John 21.22. If
I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee; Some thereupon
conceived that John should not dye, from those words, which sense John denis
there, but it was spoken of his outliving the rest of his Apostles, even to the
time that he was banished by Domitian into the Isle of Patmos, for the
testimony of Jesus, toward the end of the first century, at which time Jesus
Christ came unto him in vision, under diverse appearances, as Chap. 1. when he
began to give the Revelation to him, afterward as a Lamb, Chap. 5. afterward
as a Warrior on a white Horse, conquering and to conquer, Chap. 6. as a strong
Angel, Chap. 10. and as the Mighty King of Kings, Rev. 19. and as the great
Judge of all men, Chap. 20.

A fourth sense of Christ's coming may be that of Saint James, Chap. 5. the
coming (...), the Lord draws nigh, (...) the word is, And behold the Judge
stands before the doors, which verse. 8.9. seems to be meant of that special
dispensative coming, our executive coming to fulfill his sentence at Jerusalems
destruction by Vespatian and Titus, by which words the Apostle James writing to
the twelve Tribes scattered, viz. the beleiving Jews that were then Pilgrims
from their own people for Christ's Religion, stirs them up to patience, in
regard Christ would fulfill his threatening against the obstinate Jews, which as
Josephus and others relate, he then terribly did by fearful fights, voices, and
horrible desolation, when an eleven hundred thousand were destroyed and cast in
jakes, etc. in that populous wicked City, besides, above seventy thousand
carried Captive and sold for slaves; so this was a dispensative or executive
coming at that time.

5. It is taken again for his wonderful powerful appearing, and glorious
coming, to destroy Antichrist and his adherents, and deliver his people, and
set up his Kingdom, at the beginning of the seventh Trumpet, Rev. 11.15. to the
end. And Rev. 19, and 20. Set forth by those three Apostles, that were at his
transfiguration in diverse expressions, by his appearing, and coming, and the
like, and likewise by St. Paul to whom he appeared gloriously, to convert him,
who very remarkably speaks of this coming, at the destruction of Antichrist,
whom he first says, he shall consume with the Spirit of (...); his messengers,
and witnesses, by testifying against his errors, and from the word declaring
his desolation, shall first bring him low into a deep consumption, by all the
Vials to be poured out to his destruction, but then again he will powerfully do
it, (...) with the appearance of his coming, as a Learned Linguist renders it,
which our translation turns, with the brightness of his coming, but that it is
the same coming, Rev. 19. The Apostle here plainly shows concerning Antichrists
destruction, called the battle of Armageddon, Rev. 16. The not well observing
of this has occasioned some, otherwise learned men, to conclude Antichrist
should continue to the end of the world; and Pareus often mentions the place in
that sense, which occasioned him to set down the thousand years, Rev. 20. from
the destruction of Jerusalem, to Pope Gregory the seventh; As Mr. Brightman
from Constantine, to Auno. 1373. Though he speaks of a glorious Church of the
Jews, wherein the other does not agree with him; it is like upon the former
account, that the world should end with Antichrist; from 2 These. 2.8. which
coming of Christ's seems to be that that Saint John speaks of, Rev. 1.7. where
he says, he comes with Clouds; which coming with Clouds seems necessary then
to vail his glory, too great for mortal eyes other wise to behold, as St. Paul
says, (otherwise) no man has seen him, nor can see him, 1 Timothy 6.16.
therefore, Psa. 18.9, 11, 12. speaks much of clouds to that purpose, and every
eye shall see him, they ye also which peirced him, which seems to be in
reference to the promise, Zac. 12.10. when his people shall mourn, with
penitent contrition though many others then mourn, with bitter lamentation for
the heavy judgments then upon the world, and great distrinction of evil men,
etc. of which again St. Paul speaks very Emphatically, 2 Timothy 4.1. Who shall
judge hoth the quick and the dead at his appearing, and at his Kingdom; the
wicked quick with temporal destruction, the faithful dead with recompense, as
Rev. 11.18. for which he is there praised in a special manner, by the twenty
four Elders at the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, Verse. 15, 16, 17.

Sixthly and Lastly, his coming is taken for the last great day of Judgment,
decyphered by St. John, Rev. 20.11, 12. when sitting upon a great white Throne,
from whose face the Earth and the Heavens fled away, and there was found no
place for them, when all the dead, small and grout, shall stand before him.

Now the fifth sense of Christ coming since his ascension into Heaven, is that
we are to consider; which seems to be set forth in Scripture, by many
expressions, which coming of Christ was described to the Apostle John, in that
Vision, Rev. 19.11. to the end, where Christ as a most mighty and powerful
King, going to overthrow and utterly ruin his enemies, that is, Antichrist and
his Accomplices, at the sounding of the seventh Trumpet in the Armageddon battle,
which coming is sometimes expressed by (...) the appearance, from hence says
St. Paul, 2 Timothy 4.8. There is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which
the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and not to me only,
but to all them that love his appearing; So the former place, 2 These. 2.8. but
again, very remarkeably, 1 Timothy 6.14, 15, 16. applying the title then given to
Christ, Rev. 19.11, 12, 13. Until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
in his time he shall show, who is the blessed and only Potentate, King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, who only has immortally, etc. so again, Tit. 2.13.
waiting for the blessed hope, (...) and appearing of the glory of the great
God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ; Sometimes it is set forth by his presence
or coming (...), 1 Cor. 15.23. afterward they that are Christ's at his coming;
the same word before, 2 These. 2.8. At the appearing of his coming; Sometimes it
is expressed by (...) a Revelation, 1 Cor. 1.7. Waiting for the coming (the
word signifies) the Revelation of Jesus Christ; to the like purpose, 1 Pet.
1.7, That the trial of faith might be found to praise, and honor, and glory,
(...), at the appearing, i.e. the Revelation of Jesus Christ, which till it
shall be revealed, we shall not happily know many things concerning such his
revealing, and therefore we may not be peremptory, de modo, this way or that
way, though that such a reign and coming of Christ shall be, is very evident,
as we hope to make appear from the Revelations, where it is so frequently
spoken of, and so strongly asserted and confirmed, and likewise from multitude
of places in Old and New Testament, therefore, de modo, I only offer my
reasons, and say what may seem on the other part, and what instances might be
added in Scripture, for such a mystical coming or reign may be easily conceived
from many appearances of Christ, to the Fathers, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, to
Gideon and Sampsons Parents, to some of the Prophets and others, in the Old
Testament, but in the New, more to our purpose, we have a glimps of Christ's
Kingly glory, at his transfiguration, when Moses and Elias talked with Christ,
and what a strange Revelation was that of Christ to Paul, before a Jewish
Persecutor, at his Conversion by a light at Noonday above the brightness of
the Sun, to strike him down and make him blind, till miraculously healed by
Ananias, and by an audible voice, saying, Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou me?
What a wonderful Revelation was that of Christ to Stephen at his death? for to
strengthen his sight to see the Heavens open, and Christ sitting at the right
hand of God; God our Savior, who is Lord and Christ, can fulfill his pleasure
any way he will, and he will infallibly do it, in that way his spirit has
foretold it, though the weak understandings of men, may not in some things, or
the enlarged capacity of Angels, may not reach in every respect how God will
fulfill his predictions, as it was at the Birth of Christ in many particulars.
And that I may deal truly and ingeniously herein, I was the more engaged in
such a tenderness and moderation in this though greatly useful yet hitherto
somewhat mysterious point of Doctrine, in that when I had drawn up the
substance of my Reasons against the personal reign in a foul copy, by I know
not what hand of Providence, I suddenly and unwittingly fixed mine eye upon
these words, Rev. 10. where is said, When the seventh Angel begins to sound,
the mystery of God should be finished; which finishing, I ever before that time
conceived should not be till the last Judgment; and then comparing that with
what is said at the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, chap. 11.18. where to the
like effect it is said, The Temple of God was opened in Heaven; Now the Temple
of old signified Christ's body, wherein the Godhead dwelled bodily; and he
Temple in heaven might signify some appearance of Christ's humane nature then,
which in the next words seem more evident, And there was seen in the Temple the
Ark of his Testament; which phrase imports some evident demonstration of Gods
grace in Christ [de modo] I determine nothing peremptorily: And further
considering what is said Rev. 21.22, etc. to this purpose of of the same time I
observed, Rev. 21. at the new heavens and the new earth, the Tabernacle of God
is said to be with men, which may denote a near communion in a more unusual
manner then formerly; and in the new Jerusalem that came down from heaven, the
Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are said both to be the light and the Temple
thereof, chap. 21, 22, 23. which may import some excellency both of worship and
discovery then to be in the Church. Again c. 22. the pure river of water of
life, out of the Throne of God and the Lamb, which may note the abundant and
constant overflowings of the graces of the Holy Ghost with power in that time
proceeding from the Father and the Son; and so the tree of life by that river,
etc. to note Christ will be gloriously and graciously present with his Church
then, to preserve it in that excellent condition, as in Paradise, if man had
eaten of that tree; and like to those in Ezekiels Visions in the nine last
Chapters, of the Temple, the New Jerusalem, the waters flowing thence, and the
trees there, etc. all which Texts seriously weighed, occasioned me to apprehend
some wonderful new dispensation of grace, under the reign of Christ upon the
earth, which whether it may be some only mystical appearance of Christ glory
and Majesty, shining from Heaven upon earth, either spiritually wrought, or
visibly apparent, as the lighten-from one end of the earth to the other, Mat.
24.27. or in what manner, or how long, that time only may manifest, yet Master
Brightman, who is large upon a flourishing state of the Church of the Jews,
has a learned and large exposition of the precious stones in the new
Jerusalem, applies them spiritually to such a Church to come in earth, wherein
Paraeus dissenteth from him, upon the ground fore-hinted; And that Text, Psa.
110.1. Sit thou on my right hand, until I make thy foes thy footstool; which in
the New Testament seems sundry times to have reference to the ruin of
Antichrist and his accomplices, seems to limit Christ's sitting there to that
season. And St. Paul's five parts of the mystery of Godliness makes the last to
be his taking up into glory, as if in that was the finishing of that mystery, 1 Timothy 3.16. as the Angel Christ, Rev. 10.7. likewise speaks Antichrists time
shall be no more.

But some Scriptures speaking of the end of the World, Lo I am with you to the
end of the World, Mat. 28. ult. and so the parable of the Tares, the Harvest is
the end of the world, seemed to oppose any new way of dispensation; but setting
against those Texts, the Angels, viz. Christ's swearing time should be no more,
Rev. 10. which some learned Divines expound of wicked Dominion, at the end of
the fourth Monarchy, by the Popes perdition, which agrees with a like vision,
Dan. 12.7. where likewise he swear for a time times and a half, when he (that
is Antichrist figured before in Antiochus Epiphanes, and here again spoken of)
shall have accomplished to scatter the power of the holy people, all those
things should be finished, i. e. the Kingdom should be given to the Saints of
the most high, as before, and Michael the great Prince, stand up for Daniels
people, verse. 1. which evidently agree with the times of the seventh Trumpet.
But for further resolution, I considered Mat. 28. ult. and Mat. 13. where
(...), which signifies the finishing together, (while the Tares and the Wheat
grow together; till all that offend be gathered out of Christ's Kingdom) of the
age, as Gods finishing his mystery, Rev. 10. and in both those places appeared
to be remarkably, the same in sense with (...) often used for the present state
of things, till evil Dominion, end as may be seen in many places of the new
Testament, as first for worldly men, Luke 16.8. (...), hujus seculi, the
Children of this world are wise in their generation, so of the Devil, 2 Cor.
4.4. (...), bujus seculi, in whom the God of this world has blinded the minds
of them that believe not; So Ephesians. 6.12. The Rulers of the darkness of this
world; So Joh. 12.3. Stan is called (...) the Prince of this world; So also,
John 14.30. which is only until the same time; and so in that sense those
phrases seem to be taken, till the end of the prevalency of evil men and
Devils, when Gods mystery shall be finished at the seventh Trumpet, when
glorious light of grace and truth will shine in the Church of God, and for the
Parable of the Tares, where the Harvest is expounded to be the end of the
world, it seems manifestly to be meant of such a coming wonderfully at the
setting up of his Kingdom; where it is said, he will then send his Angels to
gather out of his Kingdom all things that offend, and the order of proceeding
seems contrary to the last destruction, for here the Angels must first gather
the Tares, and bind them in bundles and burn them, before the Wheat be gathered
into the Barn, the true Church; but at the last judgment, when Heaven and
Earth, and all the works in them shall be burnt, which is called then the
destruction of the ungodly men, Christ by a change before, in an instant
delivers the faithful then alive, from that temporal destruction, and the ruin
of Antichrist seems agreeing, with that of the Tares burning, first in order by
taking of that hurtful brood out of the way, etc. And in Luke 17. The examples
of the Flood in Noah's time, and the destruction of Sod^^m and Gomorrah in Lots
time are instance, in which were the taking away of ungodly men, but not the
destruction of the Universe; so here, it is said, all that offend and work
wickedness, shall be taken out of Christ's Kingdom.

But as we hinted before of Christ's giving the Kingdom to the Saints, that it
must be his certain gift to them, not any men's daring attempts will carry it;
so if any new dispensations shall be, which we but darkly guess at, Gods
present Institutions must necessarily be observed and prized, till in such
regard his will is clearly made known to his people; for all such affairs are
the flowers or jewels belonging only to his celestial crown, that none other
may order but himself, and in his own appointed time only; and it is a snare
of Satan to concieve otherwise thereof; and in case Satan know any such truth,
his malice of late is the more remarkable in his seduced followers, who to
their own and others mischief have cried down and rejected Gods sacred
Ordinances in the times when they are most useful and needful for them and
others: Or by any other ways or means then to make them unprofitable or
ineffectual. If some Ordinances shall not continue in those times of light, it
is like because they will not then be needful (as Mr. Archer conceives of the
Lords Supper, which was to show the Lords death till he come (as when Christ
came in the flesh, typical worship ceased) yet the promise for those times in
this is clear, Thy teachers shall not be removed into corners any more, but
thine eyes shall see thy teachers, Isa. 20.20. yea, The watchmen upon her walls
shall never hold their peace, Isa. 62.6.

But after all, when I was transcribing my said Reasons, and was to begin the
last page of a sheet unwittingly I wrote them [inverso ordine] from bottom to
top, which made me think happily I must retract as to them hereafter, which in
case of a new dispensation in a way of grace before not known, may take off the
force of all such reasons; Especially if our Savior promise to be with his
Ministers to the end of the world, in the foresaid way of Ministration, by
baptizing and teaching them to observe all that he commanded them before, was
meant by him, but till that time he himself in vision swore time (namely, of
the evil world) shall be no more, Rev. 10. but at the seventh Trumpet the good
new world should begin; and such a pattern was that new dispensation to the
Israelites, when God had by a mighty hand plagued, and at last destroyed
Pharaoh and them, when Israel were passed through the Red Sea, by Christ's
conduct, then into the wilderness (as Moses had signified to Pharaoh) we know
not with what the Lord will be served there, until we come thither, but there
were new Revelations to Moses, new given Laws in Tables of stone, again and
again, new Ordinances of justice in the civil government, new institutions
appointed for ceremonial and divine worship, new orders of priests of Aarons
race in several branches, in the rooms of the first born, besides occasional
appointments, as the brazen Serpent, the Sensors of Corah, Dathan and Abiram,
etc. so when God shall deliver his people from the spiritual Egyptian bondage
of Popish tyranny, and set them in the ready and safe way to the Heavenly
Canaan, though they have but a moving Tabernacle where he is worshipped in this
world, yet he may make such new Heaven and earth, of ordering matters of Church
and State, and so feed his Israel, while he guides them the sure way to Canaan,
and the heavenly Sion, with Heavenly Manna (as in that former type) which we
may no more know how in particulars, then the Israelites did in Egypt, and
therefore though the thing be most certain, that such a glorious reign of
Christ is to come on earth, which we shall now here contrary to former purpose,
a little here insist upon; yet (de modo) though I would choose what is least
offensive, so far as I may, yet I must have an ear, an eye open to receive
further instruction and light from the word and spirit of grace and truth. But
at present accordingly for confirmation of the (...), I shall (I say) endeavor
these two ways to show the certainty thereof.

First, from the witness of St. John the Angel, the Spirit, yea, Christ, and of
him that sits on the Throne, as ratified in the Revelation.

Secondly, by the other two with Christ at his transfiguration, viz. James and
Peter, and from St. Paul, to whom Christ did so eminently reveal himself at his
conversion.

First, the Apostle John one of the three, at Christ's transfiguration, which
seemed to be with him (a secretis, as we may say) that beloved Disciple, to
whom the Revelation was given, he sets down in sundry places there, that the
Kingdoms of the world, should be Christ's, Chap. 11.15. And the Lord God
omnipotent reigns, Chap. 19.6. And the twenty four Elders give him thunks
that he has taken to himself his great power, and has reigned, Chap.
11.17.20. the Saints shall reign with Christ a 1000. years, and so often and
strongly the things concerning his Kingdom are asserted; first, concerning the
marriage of the Lamb, Chap. 19.7, 8, and in verse. 9. he concludes these are the
true sayings of God, again, concerning the New Heaven and the new Earth, when
he that sat on the throne had said, Behold I make all things new, he adds
again, write for these words are true and faithful, Chap. 21.5. and after the
vision of the pure River of the water of life, and the tree of life by it, with
twelve manner of fruits, with leaves for the healing of the Nations, his
servants are said to see his face, and his name is in their foreheads, and
they shall reign for ever and ever, Chap. 22.4, 5. he adds, verse. 6. These
sayings are faithful and true, and the Lord God of his holy Prophets has sent
his Angel to show unto his servants the things that must shortly be done, then
in time; for eternity has no such distinction of shortly, or long time to
come; again, verse. 10. John must not seal the saying of the Prophecy of this
book, for this reason, the time is at hand; and Christ concludes verse. 20.
Surely I come quickly. And further observe, how the Prophets Testimony is often
called in to these things, Chap. 10.7. for at the finishing of the mystery of
God, it is said, as he had declared to his servants the Prophets; So Chap.
11.18. that then he should give reward to his servants the Prophets, and Chap.
18.20. The Apostles and Prophets are bidden to rejoice at Babylons ruin,
because God has avenged them on her; and one of the seven Angels that had the
seven Vials full of the seven last plagues that came to John, Rev. 21.9. and
showed him the new Jerusalem, the Lambs wife, the bride descending down from
Heaven, and after that the pure River and tree of life, Chap. 22. and having
there asserted the truth of the things he showed and told her, adds and the
Lord God of the Holy Prophets has sent his Angel, etc. and when St. John was
about to worship him, he refuses, saying, I am thy fellow servants, and of thy
brethren the Prophets, and of them which keep the sayings of this book, and of
the new Heavens and the new earth; The Prophet Isaiah speaks plainly, Isa.
65.17. and Peter speaks of the same (with a nevertheless) before the last
destruction, 2 Pet. 3.13. which seems by his words to have been again promised
by Christ to him and other Disciples, says he according to his promise, and so
we have enterd upon the Testimony of another, those three of Disciples that
were with Christ in the Mount, and in Chap. 1.16. he speaks of that power and
coming of Christ, in that his transfiguration in the Mount, as a glimpse of the
glory of his coming in his Kingdom, verse. 17, 18. and Chap. 2.5, 7. How God
delivered Noah from the destruction of the Old world, and Lot from the
destruction of Sodom, which as they were for examples of vengeance to those
that live ungodly, so he thence declares how that the Lord knows how to deliver
the godly out of temptation, both which will be evident at such coming, or
appearing of Christ; To this purpose Peter likewise, Act. 3.19.21.

First, speaks of times of refreshing from the presence of the Lord, which
verse. 21. he calls the times of restitution of all thing, where the particle
((...)) as Beza notes, is not to be referred to (...), but to (...), which
(says he) namely, times, God has spoken of by the mouth of all his Prophets,
since the world began, and therefore there is great reason, and good warrant to
inquire into all the Prophets since the world began, concerning those things
that concern such Christ's appearing and Kingdom, the third of those three in
the Mount, is the Apostle James, whose eminent Testimony we have, Act. 15. when
Peter had declared the conversion of the Gentiles, James takes occasion to
speak of raising up the Church of the Jews, and with them, as is probable the
remnant of the Gentiles, that that fullness might then come in, and to this end
quotes, Amos 9.11. for says he, verse. 15, 16. to this agree the words of the
Prophet, After this I will raise up the Tabernacle of David, which was fallen,
that they may possess the remnant of Edom, and all the Heathen; namely, when
the Jews shall be again converted, that the residue of the men (says St.
James) might seek after the Lord, and all the Gentiles upon whom my name is
called, and then adds this excellent foundation, v. 18. Known unto God are all
his works, from the beginning of the world; And so for the Testimony of St.
Paul, to whom after his ascension, Christ wonderfully and graciously revealed
himself.

First, In that eminent place of the destruction of Antichrist, 2 These. 2.8.
Whom he shall destroy with the breath of his mouth, and with the appearance of
his coming; So 2 Timothy 4.1. who shall judge the quick and dead at his appearing
and Kingdom; the quick, destroying the enemies then living; the dead, by
rewarding his servants, when he takes his Kingdom, as Rev. 11.18. 1 Timothy 6.15.
Keep (says St. Paul) the commandment, without spot, unrebukeable, until the
appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, which in his time he shall show, who is the
blessed and only potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; as likewise
he is deciphered, Rev. 19.16. at the very same time of Antichrists destruction,
and in diverse other places of his writings. Now if we understand all such
places of a wonderful glorious appearing or coming, at that time of the setting
up of his Kingdom upon earth, as before we said, (if he will in any such way
glorify himself) he can then appear, as glorious to his people upon Mount
Sion, so as he did appear to Moses and Israel, to be their Lawgiver upon Mount
Sinai, and what near and happy communion may be in these blessed times between
Heaven and earth, when the Tabernacle of God shall be with men, under the New
Testament, as when the Ark was in the Temple in Solomon's times, when Christ was
so glorious under the Old Testament, may not be hard to conceive, but probably
much more excellent, in regard of the clearness of divine grace and prevalency
thereof. If Stephen was so strengthened in faith, or sight, at his death, to
see the Heavens opened, and Christ in glory, sitting at the right hand of God,
Christ the great God, can make all, good and bad to behold his Majesty, in what
ever way he will then manifest himself, he can make the beams of his glory,
besides the divine light of his grace and Spirit stream down, and rest as he
pleases, to inlighten his New Jerusalem, come down from Heaven, (as to St.
Paul at his conversion) to inlighten it, I say, far above the Sun at Noonday;
though his Humane Nature should remain in the highest Heavens, he can make his
Angels his Heralds to execute his judgments upon his enemies, making those
Ministers a flaming fire to them, and as Reapers, to gather out of his Kingdom
all things that offend, as those Tares, the Children of the wicked one, Matthew.
13. for what execution of judgment is done by the Kings appointment and
authority, though he is not pleased to be present in his person, is as well his
execution as if he were so present, or did it with his own hand (as Samuel did
to King Agag) what acts of Sovereignty, power or grace are performed, according
to his pleasure and order, though in his personal absence, are nevertheless to
be acknowledged to be derived from him, and as the star at Christ's birth
(though not a star in the ordinary course) yet served to lead the Sages to the
place where Christ was: It was thought by the writer hereof to be the safest
way not to determine [de modo] of the manner of Christ's appearing, whether
personally or mystically; yet in the (...), or Forerunner, which like a porch
framed to the house since the building of the house, upon more mature
consideration determines for the personal appearance especially in the paper
Sept. 27. 1664. in the clouds, and at least some personal, glorious
manifestation of himself to the blessed and holy raised Saints in the New
Jerusalem on earth, in the thousand years, he being the visible light thereof:
In the light of which the Nations that are saved shall then walk, Rev. 21.22.
and Isa. 60.3, 11.
So Christ can show any glorious appearance to set forth his kingly Majesty and
excellency suitable to his own sacred pleasure and purpose, however, in what
way Gods Spirit has foretold that his appearing or coming, it shall be so
accomplished in its time, though we cannot fully resolve of the manner; but as
the two Sackcloth Prophesiers cannot be freed from their mournful condition,
until the date of the Beast be fully expired; so neither can the prosperity of
Gods people be hindered one moment when once the time of Christ's Kingdom on
earth shall take place.

Object. But why should we meddle with such mysteries? or trouble our own or
others heads with things we cannot resolve? or what good comes there by so
doing?

Answ. To be curious or peremptory in what is not clear to us in the Word of
God, is indeed hurtful and dangerous; but in such things as God has set down
largely and fully in his Word, and likewise strongly confirmed (as may
abundantly be showed concerning Christ's reign on the earth the thousand years
to come, both in Old and New Testament) ought not to be over-looked or
neglected by us; but concerning the glorious estate of Gods Church upon earth
under or after the seventh Trumpet in the said reign of Christ upon earth, in
what manner soever he will execute it, the Scripture is plentiful in asserting
the same, as in part we have showed already. Does God by his Spirit, of his own
goodness reveal so much for his Churches benefit and comfort, and shall any
think it not worth his enquiring into? What is not that wonderful Majesty and
glory of Christ to be considered and observed? Is the peace and grace, holiness
and happiness of his Church, held out in Scripture abundantly in those times,
not worthy to be highly esteemed and prized? Yea, shall such multitudes of
Saints have their portion in that heaven-born Jerusalem, and shall they not
take notice of their privilege? Is not the coming in of such multitudes of
Subjects to their great King of Kings, both of Israelites, Jews and Gentiles,
there seriously, faithfully and thankfully to be acknowledged, believed and
improved, which in comparison of the other times will be as an harvest to the
after-gleanings, or the Vintage to the after-gatherings; Is not the salvation
of such vast numbers of beleiving souls in these grace-prevailing, sanctified
seasons, that shall greatly honor Christ Jesus in their times, and enjoy
eternal happiness afterward with him in heaven, be a matter of exceeding
rejoicing to the fellow members of Christ's mystical body? If the glorious
Angels in Heaven rejoice at the conversion of one sinner that repents, as our
Savior speaks; how should Gods people rejoice by faith aforehand to see so
many millions of millions that are then to come in to that glorious
Church State on earth? If Gods faithful Servants have rejoiced in their seasons
past, when God has prospered their labors to bring home poor souls to Christ
(though but a few many times) how should it make the hearts of believing souls
to exult, but even by faith to foresee that day of salvation to come to Gods
people (and with faithful Abraham, so foreseeing Christ's first coming) so to
rej ice beforehand as he did? Yea, is that the mainfruit of the travel of
Christ's soul, Isa. 53.11, 12. When he shall see his seed, and prolong his days,
and the will of the Lord shall prosper in his hand, and wherein he himself
shall be satisfied (as the Prophet there shows) and shall it not be the great
satisfaction of all Gods people in these times to be assured thereof? If from
about 600000 natural Israelites, and such as were born of them in forty years
space in the Wilderness, there is computed by learned and judicious Divines to
have died above six millions in the Wilderness, when almost the same number
entered into Canaan that came out of Egypt. How many millions then, yea how many
millions of millions may be conceived to spring up, and be educated in the
faith of Jesus Christ their King and Savior in that thousand years space, when
there shall be such confluence of all Nations into the true Church, and when
they will not be cut off in judgments, by untimely deaths (as many times great
numbers of those Israelites were) and is not such blessedness and happiness of
Gods Church reserved for those times upon many considerations (if we duly weigh
the many and large promises and evidences of Scripture thereunto to be
referred) of great concernment as many ways, to all such as rejoice in the
happiness of Gods chosen, and would glory with his inheritance? It is then
likely there will be a strange holy contention upon earth, between God and his
people, (as the holy Spirit seems to imply concerning those times, Rev. 22.3)
saying, (And his servants shall serve him) whether God or his people should do
better each toward other, that is, as I may say, what is within the reach and
sphere of their activity; For Christ will greatly exalt his people under that
his dominion, and they by his grace will be such, as the more he exalts them,
the more they will rejoice to exalt him; and the more they exalt him, the more
he will enlarge them both with grace and glory; and the larger their portion of
grace shall be, the greater will be their peace, security, and happiness.

And this will be the more and more constant in that regard, the interrupting
and corrupting causes thereof, which might otherwise hinder as formerly, shall
then in a very great degree by his kingly power and goodness, be removed and
taken away; when Satan the Tempter is bound and shut up in his bottomless pit,
and strong tentations proceeding at other times from the prevalency of the
corruption of men, shall be much abandoned; provocations much removed, natural
corruption manacled and fettered, and in many (as it is probable) very greatly
suppressed, and accordingly grace, holiness, inward peace, and with them
consequently outward peace, prosperity, and all kind of security that is
suitable to that condition, and how will this work upon the sanctified spirits
of that happy seed and generation, blessed of God, to consider still with holy
David, What shall we render unto the Lord our King and Savior, for all such
his goodness conferred upon us? So that if men have any Christian frame of
spirit upon them, they cannot but upon such considerations think of, and
inquire into the Kingdom of Christ to come on earth; as many ways worth the
while; except they be only carnal Gospellers, that only make worldly
merchandise thereof, but otherwise regard neither grace nor glory for
themselves or others, or at least are conscious to themselves, that they have
no part in either; Yet even such by the due consideration of these things (by
Gods mercy) may learn to be wise hereafter, and show themselves men, and not
like such the Prophet David speaks of, being in worldly honor, have no
understanding, but are like the beasts that perish; and thus much for answer to
the vain pleadings of such persons.

CHAP. V.
Which declares how the three great Chronologers of the Holy Ghost, to wit,
Moses, Daniel, and St. John, do successively foretell of the Kingdom of Christ,
at the end of the fourth Monarchy, set forth in that Image, expounded by
Daniel, Chap. 2. and how that the three Babylonish designs of Satan in the
three Babels, they severally speak of, the first to promote confusion of
tongues in Moses record, at the Tower of Babel; the second to erect oppressive
tyranny against Gods people, by the Monarchy of Babylon, in Daniels time; and
thirdly, to advance spiritual delusion and seducement by the mystical Babylon
in the latter times; all which will be at last, by the setting up of Christ's
Kingdom, altogether brought to confusion, so that thence the Stone cut out of
the Mountain without hands, that smote the Image before, while there was regnum
lapidis, will then become a great Mountain, filling the whole earth, when there
will be, regnum montis, as Mr. Mede appositely speaks.

FIrst, then for the evidences of Christ's Kingdom and reign on earth to come
under or after the seventh Trumpet, out of the Chronology of Moses and Daniel
more darkly given, but further cleared in the book of Revelation (as we
observed) in which book we showed the Spirit of God does so much, and in so
many places refer us to the Prophets, and as St. Peter says directly, that all
the prophets since the world began, have spoken of those times of refreshment,
and restitution of all things, Act. 3.19, 21.

Proceed we therefore to consider the Predictions of these two great Prophets
in the Old Testament, in reference to what is said by them of Christ's Kingdom
in the new, at the erecting whereof, all evil dominion, and wicked power must
be subdued, when God according to his promise, Psa. 110.1. will make Christ's
foes his footstool, and till which time he must fit at Gods right hand, which
is the more to be observed in that the holy Ghost in six several places in the
N. Test. has since his ascension recorded it, viz. Mat. 22.44. Mark. 12.36.
Luke 20.42. Act. 2.34. 1 Cor. 15.25. Heb. 1.13. and in the fulfilling thereof
the wonderful glory of God ever since man's fall, is and will be very
remarkable, overruling the evil and mischief of Satan and wicked men, to his
own glory and his Churches good, but more especially at that great
accomplishment, when he will take to himself his great power, as Rev. 11.17.
for as the arch-murderer at first, who ever since has been, and till that time
will be, by usurpation (for the most part) the God of the powers of this world,
Ephesians. 2.2. The Prince of the air, ruling in the children of disobedience) when
he had seduced our first parents to the loss of that happy condition in
Paradise to themselves and all their posterity, by that only postern gate
alone left for that evil one to enter by, viz. The eating of the forbidden
fruit, and upon that deluding bait of pride to be like God knowing good and
evil, God then both frustrated his and the offenders designs; for by knowing
good and evil in that way, they became like to the Devil, and not like to God,
and to frustrate the Tempters design (through the wonderful goodness of the
incomprehensibly glorious God) there was even then a way made known for a most
happy and gracious design of the Almighty, by publishing the first promise of
Free grace to lost mankind in a sure work of redemption by the Messiah, who
should fully overcome Satan at the last, and break that old Serpents head. And
thenceforward Christ Jesus, as Mediator, having undertaken that office, the
Devil ever since likewise (as cursed Cain, his firstborn murderer of his
brother, by building of Cities, as is conceived) so he by building of Castles
of confusion in the worlds air, as it were to abate his trembling, by working
what mischief he can, all the time of his usurped Dominion, in all the long
Periods of his wicked rule, wherein he has been remarkably erecting three
great Babels of confusion therein, as towers and powers, to carry on his own
wicked designs.

First, The Tower of Babel, in Shinar, Gen 11.4. for dividing of tongues, the
main source of confusions.

Secondly, The Babylonian Monarchy in Daniels time, for oppressive tyranny over
Gods people.

Thirdly, The mystical Babel in the last times, for spiritual seducement and
thraldom, until Christ set up his own perpetual Kingdom.

The mischief of the first has continued through all times since of Satan's
wicked rule, and will do till his binding by Christ. The misery of the second
has been felt of Gods people ever since, For we read not the Kings of Assyria
infested Israel from about An. mun. 1700 until Pull and Tiglath Pilesur about
the year 3170. in the time of Zacharia, Shallum and Menahen, 2 King. 15. which
is above 1400 years; and Nineveh is conceived to be built by Nimrod, which was
all along the Metropolis of the Assyrian Kingdom.
and will so be while any part of that Image of the four Monarchies remains
unbroken: and the spiritual infatuation bondage and thraldom of the third, viz.
The mystical Babel has lain heavy upon the Church of Christ many hundred of
years past, as many talents of lead to crush in pieces that weak woman, the
Church, and her spiritual seed (if it were possible.)

And as God and Satan have had their designs in these; so God in his word has
used three eminent Chronologers, to keep records of these three Babylonian
designs of Satan, and to record such things concerning them all, whereby the
Devils evil purposes might be discovered, and the mischief ensuing to the
seduced might be apprehended, and the help and remedies which God ever since
has provided against them might be made known for his Churches support and
comfort.

These three eminent Chronologers are first the Prophet Moses, in whose
writings three parts are observable.

First, B. Usher, p. 33.
An historical revelation (as we may say) of what was done before his time from
the beginning, for about 2553 years:

Secondly, An historical relation of what things God wrought and taught his
people to observe in his time morally, politically and ceremonially, as his
then revealed will.

Thirdly, A prophetical revelation of things concerning Gods Church, and Christ
the Messiah to come, and concerning his three great offices of a Prophet,
Priest and King, though in some things darkly, yet very certainly (as by Gods
assistance we may show) for we must observe that the Spirit of Christ by the
ministry of Moses in his Pentateuch, or five books written by him, has set
down the substance of all Christian Religion (though in some things darkly)
concerning the times of the Gospel, and that, and all the Old Testament is but
Novum Velatum, the New veiled, as the New Testament afterward is but in
substance Vetus Revelatum, the Old revealed, Christ having by his Prophetical
spirit in the first revealed the whole counsel of his Father, for the benefit
of his Church.

The second Chronologer, concerning the second and third Babel, is the greatly
beloved Prophet Daniel, and in his record we may observe that he says nothing
of what was done before his time, as Moses did from the beginning of the world,
having none before him, (for that God from Moses writings, had done by others
successively in Scripture, to Daniels time) therefore his records were first of
things in his own time; secondly, of all times after to come, though somewhat
more clearly then Moses therein; the third of those eminent Chronologers, was
the beloved Disciple St. John, who beginning at his own time toward the end of
the first Century after Christ, from thence proceeds to make known the pleasure
of God concerning all times afterward, as Christ Jesus by his Angel in the
book of his Revelation had declared unto him, to the end of the world,
mystically set before him in many visions, to be sent unto the Churches, for
their information and comfort unto the end.

And as these three Chronoclers of Gods spirit speak remarkably of those three
Babels, under several considerations. Yet our main drift at present is to show,
how that these three famous servants of the Lord, have in all their times
foreshewed Christ's Kingly glory, yet still the latter more clearly then the
former; Yet here take notice of one Prophecy before any of these (as it were
handed all along by a known tradition, recorded by Jude in his Epistle
concerning the said times of Christ's Kingdom, namely, that of celestial Enoch,
both living and dying (if at all he may be said to dye) set forth by the said
Apostle, Jude 14. Behold the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints; So
Moses in his time, gives Testimony to all Christ's offices in their seasons.

1. Of his being a Prophet (says he) Deuteronomy. 18.18. I will raise them up a
Prophet from among their brethren, like unto thee, and will put my word in his
mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I command them, which testimony
delivered to Moses by the Spirit of Christ, was applied to Christ, John 1.45.
Act. 3.22. and 7.37.

2. He foreshews Christ's Priestly office in Melchisedecks, and in Abraham's
sacrificing of his Son, besides all typical and ceremonial worship, which was
to cease when Christ the substance thereof was come, and the records of his
Kingly Office, he first sets down in Jacobs prophecy, Genesis 49. concerning the
Tribe of Judah, whence he was to spring according to the flesh, and at what
time, though darkly, yet really sulfilled in the season thereof; and so of his
Kingly Office, in giving them laws, and defending his people, verse. 10. whereby
the great gatherings of people, Israelites and Gentiles should be, and that in
the times of great prosperity in the promised Land, abundance of Wine and Milk,
verse. 11, 12. which are the Viands which Christ affords his people, Isa. 55 1.
And after expresses his waiting for such salvation; (...) ^eptuag. (...).
which his speaking of the last times, verse. 1. seems chiefly to have reference
unto, and as for the gatherings of the Jews, and Gentiles, together in the
Apostles times, seems but to be but the first fruits, and preludium of what the
Scriptures speak of, neither was that in such a prosperous condition, as it is
there expressed, and a like Prophecy Moses himself left concerning Judah,
Deuteronomy. 33.7. which seems to respect Christ's Kingdom, whom he prays the Lord to
bring unto his people, and that his hands may be sufficient for him, and that
he would be an help for him, from his enemies, which will be fully answered,
when Christ has made his foes his footstool; And the like he utters ^n
Joseph's blessing, verse. 16, 17. for the good will of him that dwelt in the
bush, foretelling his glory, and the bornes of his strength, to push the
enemies to the end of the earth, which the greatness of Ephraim and Manasse
were but shadows of, and was to be really in Christ.

So diverse of his prophetical threatenings and tenders of mercy appear to have
the force of prophesies, as in other things, so in things respecting the grace
of God to the Jews in Christ's Kingdom on earth; As first Lev. 26. of the
captivity of Babylon, and their return, from verse. 30. to 43. but then with an
emphasis, he seems to speak of another captivity, out of which he will deliver
them, out of free grace, as being beloved for their fathers sake, as Romans 11.
in the former he told them, they should call and he would answer, they should
cry and he would hear, Jer. 39. but this should be in regard of the covenant
with their fathers, as is remarkeably set down, verse. 33, 34, 35. and is
applied by the Apostle, to the general calling of all Israel, Romans 11. in an
other such manner, the Prophet Moses brings in a like promise, (...)
Deuteronomy. 4.30, 31. making likewise the Covenant with the Fathers, to be the
reason of such their reducement, and says expressly, it should be in the latter
days; But a very large prediction of this nature is set down, Deuteronomy. 30. from
verse. 1, to 11. where he speaks of the manner of their turning unto God with
all their heart, and all their souls, verse. 2. and how he would gather them
from all the Nations of the earth, verse. 3. even from the uttermost parts of
Heaven, verse. 4. and how they should have good, and be multiplied above their
Fathers, (which yet we read not to have been done) as verse. 5. and the ground
of all, Gods powerful grace upon their souls, circumciting both their hearts,
and the hearts of their seeds seed, verse. 6. and then sets down their freedom
from curses, and the abundance of prosperity, verse. 7, 8, 9, 10. etc. And so
likewise in that excellent prophetical Song, which Moses was inspired to write,
and to command to be taught in Israel, and left for posterity, wherein are
included sundry prophesies of Isreal's sins, and sufferings, and bondage, and
deliverances; But the 39. verse. seems to be a description of the last
destruction of the Jews, joined with a prophetical prediction of their
restoring, where God says, he kills and makes alive; as likewise he decyphers
the destruction of all sorts of enemies in the latter days, till Jews,
Jsraelites, and Gentiles, should rejoice together, for verse. 40. alludes to
Christ's swearing, Rev. 10. I lift up my hand to Heaven, and say, I live for
ever, and verse. 41, 42. follows the most terrible destruction of the enemies;
and verse. 43. ends the Song with the joyful union of Israelites, Jews, and
Gentiles; Now as Gods appointing rules and laws, for a King for his people (as
Deuteronomy. 17.) though he never directed them to ask one, but declared his
displeasure, telling Samuel they had not cast off Samuel, but himself, 1 Samuel
8. yet the giving those laws were vertually a prophecy of a King; so the
former propounding of threatenings and promises were vertually prophesies, and
so they have proved, and will do, and there are therefore of Christ's Kingdom,
because they concern those most beloved Subjects the Israelites, in such
multitudes, with the Gentiles their fellow subjects, in Christ's most prosperous
reign on earth.

Secondly, but Daniel the second eminent Chronologer of the holy Spirit speaks
much more clearly, who lived under the dominion of Satan's second Babel.

1. He expounds the Image which Nebuchadnezzar saw in his dream, to be four
great worldly Monarchies, which should successively pass away in the world,
before Christ's glorious Kingdom should appear in the world; the first was set
forth therein by the head of Gold, the then present Babylonian Monarchy. The
2d. By the Breasts and Arms of silver, the Medes and Persians. The 3d. By the
Belly and Thighs of Brass, the Grecian. The 4th. By the Legs of Iron, and the
Feet and toes of Iron and Clay, the Roman Monarchy; Mr. Mede.
first, Heathen; secondly, Christian; thirdly, Antichristian, as Dan. 2. from
verse. 30, to 44. where is explained Christ's Monarchy, which though it has
wrought long secretly from the eye of the world, as it has been, regnum
lapidis, yet at last shall prevail over all, and break the most terrible and
long continued Roman power, now under her last head, and even ready to expire,
and as that had broken the former, and that the preceding, but this in most
dreadful manner, after which, never any such shall be any more under Satan's
rule, should be utterly broken in pieces, and fall in perdition, after which
Christ will set up his own Kingdom, which shall stand for ever; when it shall
be, regnum montis, and fill the whole earth.

Again, In Chap. 7. Daniel, after the Vision of the four Beasts, has the
exposition of the fourth specially given him, which though as some conceive,
there is an historical and literal sense in some respects observeable; and
Antiochius Epiphanes signified by the little horn, etc. which (happily) may not
be denied, for many Scriptures have both an Historical and mystical sense, and
Prophesies of several things, are sometimes much interwoven, (as Mat. 24. of
the destruction of Jerusalem, and the world) yet again, by some learned and
judicious men, these things are either applied literally, or at least
mystically or typically, to the times of the Roman Monarchy, to which it is
very aptly applicable, both in regard of the strength and prevalency of the
Roman Monarchy, and the long continuance thereof, and in the special
resemblances of the Antichristian power, and state afterward, and even the very
phrases in Daniel, are applied to the Pope, Rev. 13. but after this, verse. 27.
it follows, the Kingdom, the Dominon, the greatness of the Kingdom (note the
expressions) shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most high, whose
Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey him;
and this can belong to no other but Christ, as in Rev. 11.15. and of these
times all the Prophets speak successively, Rev. 10.7. Act. 3.21. and further,
Chap. 12. which seems to be a further explication of several things concerning
those times of the Roman Monarchy, and Christ's Kindom succeeding it, wherein
seems first to be set forth secretly, by the standing up of Michael their
Prince, what the book of Revelation gives light to in sundry particulars,
therein briefly couched; The appearing or coming of Christ, or standing up for
his People (as Daniel, to destroy Antichrist; the Feet and toes of the Roman
Monarchy, together with the remainder of his ten horns) with such a terrible
destruction as never was since there was a Nation, to that same time, and then
his people should be delivered, and verse. 2. having spoken briefly and darkly
of the resurrection of the dead, which is more largely explained, Rev. 20.
(which happily may be meant of the last general resurrection, after the
finishing the happy times, after his peoples delivery beforesaid) or rather, to
be understood of the civil resurrection of Israel and Judah prophetied, Ezekiel.
37. when they should become one stick; when such as are faithful and strengthen
others will be renowned, but back-sliders contemptible. And verse. 3. having
spoken somewhat of the recompense that should be given to the faithful
messongers of the Gospel, and all such as turn many to righteousness, then at
the beginning of the 4. verse. Daniel is commanded to shut up the words, and seal
the book, even unto the time of the end, and when Daniel was desirous to know
the end of these things, in the latter end of the 4. verse. and in verse. 7.
there seem two marks of the time of the end fore spoken of, which verse. 8.
Daniel says, though he heard, yet he understood them not, and yet though he
desired to know, it was not then granted, for verse. 9. the words are sealed,
etc. Now the first of those marks of the times, that should be before the said
time of the end, in verse. 4. is [ many shall run ton and fro, and knowledge
shall be encreased] which seems by the series of times, in the book of
Revelation, to set forth the character of the times next after Christ, and so
by many running too and fro, was showed the Apostles, and other evangelical
Messengers of Christ, that went then to publish the Gospel in all parts of the
Roman Empire, then called the (...) (as Luke 2.) and to cause the knowledge of
Christ and his Gospel to abound. Or else, by running too and fro, may be
signified, that though then many received the Gospel, and took up a profession
of it for a time, yet by tentations and persecutions, many left again the
owning of that profession, and yet notwithstanding abundance of light and
knowledge did then shine out in the primative Churches, though they were
greatly persecuted.

The other mark of the times before the said end, which Daniel acknowledged, he
then understood not, seems to be set forth, not only by the said Series of
times given to St. John in the Revelation, but to make the sense of the former
more suitable to the truth in verse. 7. there is the peculiar stamps, set upon
those next times, that in the Revelation are plainly explained what times they
be, viz. The date of the Beast, or times of Antichrist, which succeeded the
said primitive times (as Rev. 12.14. namely, the time and times, and half,
wherein the woman, the true Church, was to be in her wilderness-condition, by
reason of his tyranny and wickedness, and to make it more evident, there is
described one in white Linen, who is said to swear, that those things should
be finished then, when (he) that is Antichrist, shall have accomplished to
seatter the power of the holy people, the Saints; Then (says he) these things
shall be. So the Angel, Rev. 10.7. which denotes Christ (as the learned and
judicious do conceive) swears that time should be no more, that is (say they)
the worlds time under Satan's rule, under such powers as formerly, for the most
part. And that the mystery of God should be finished, even at the beginning of
the seventh Trumpet. Yet though Daniel understood not the said marks of the
said time, in respect of the Gentile Church, yet he has others given,
respecting the Jewish Church, which set forth the conversion of his people the
Jews, which though unto us it seems difficult to find the Epoch thereof, the
thousand two hundred and ninety days, which is conceived to be about the
Emperor Julians time, and if so, seems to approach nigh, pointing out the Jews
first conversion, and forty five years after, the glorious times expected to
appear, or happily about the pouring out the seventh Vial, Antichrists last
destruction, etc. Only in the conclusion Daniel has this consolation given
him, that he shall stand in the lot at the end of the said days, verse 12. Now
what these famous prophetical Chronologers have so foreshewed, formerly more
darkly, Christ has since, by his beloved Disciple St. John, more clearly and
largely revealed concerning the excellency of Christ's Kingdom on earth, as we
have in some measure set down before.

And thus the main pillars and work of this building being erected; I suppose
with other usual materials (to wit) the Prophesies and Promises concerning
Christ's Kingdom in the rest of the Prophets in the Old Testament (and other
pertinent Texts in the New) it may (by Gods goodness) be easily finished. Four
main Pillars thereof there have been set up;

First, by a frame of Doctrine tending this way, whence sundry arguments
according to Scripture might be drawn.

Secondly, By a Visional representation of new and old Testament Doctrine,
suitable thereunto, Rev. 4, 5. chap.

Thirdly, By the passages and expressions of Scripture in the Apostles
writings, holding out such a Kingdom of Christ in one sense or other.

Fourthly, By the frame of the main historical and prophetical Chronocles of
the three eminent Chronologers of all times, viz. of Moses, Daniel and the
Apostle John.

And now having (through Gods special grace) proceeded hitherto, we shall
endeavor a little to represent somewhat of that we hinted before, concerning
the three Babels, in those three eminent Chronicles, and according to their
several distinctions in the several times made relation of.

1. Of the Tower of Babel in Moses story. 2. Of the Monar^^y of Babel in
Daniels time. 3. Of the mystical Babel, revealled to St. John, being the feet
and toes of the great Image, Dan. 2. all which, with the evil of them by Satan's
designs, Christ's Kingdom destroys, to all their utter confusions; according as
St. John's resolve, 1 John 3.8. For this purpose the Son of God was manifest, to
destroy the works of the devil.

In all which three we may observe, First, Satan's design in each of his Babels
of confusion [for wickedness shall not be established upon earth] Secondly, The
way of Gods crossing and confounding his designs in them. Thirdly, Christ's
remedy against them all.

God promised Christ the Mediator to overthrow Satan's first and great attempt
against all mankind in our first parents.

Secondly, Ever since Christ as Mediator, has been fitted to help his Church
against all Satan's attempts, ever since that in his justice such emnity was put
between the seed of the Serpent and the seed of the woman.

First, The building the first Babel, another instigation to pride, lifting up
man against God (as at the fall) because the people were before of one language
and one speech, and being then so long lived for many hundreds of years, could
largely relate at all times, in all places, and to all sorts of persons upon
any occasion, the works and wonders of God, and what they had received
concerning the Creation and fall of man, and the promises of grace, and what
worship God had instituted among them from time to time, Satan knew this was a
great advantage to the first Fathers to fit them to serve God and glorify his
name, which was the end of all his mercies and wonderful works; therefore his
design then seemed to be by tempting them by such pride and seeking their own
glory, by building a Tower to get them a name, and as if they did emulate God
himself, to reach up to heaven, and so to prevent their dispersion on the
earth, or drowning by another deludge, that so by their abusing their oneness
of language, to provoke God, they might by that means be deprived of that great
benefit; for Satan too well knows if men will be seduced to abuse the greatest
mercies, its the ready way for them to lose them: thereupon God confounds their
pride in building their Babel, and so deprives them of their former advantage
of knowledge and happiness in their former oneness of language, and by that
confusion of tongues inflicted the saddest judgment upon mankind that ever
befell them since the first fall, taking from them thereby the advantage of
Piety, of commendable Policy, and even in a great degree the exercise of
Humanity and Civility, and Satan has improved the mischief of this judgment
manifold ways ever since through all ages, which the stories of all times may
set down large and sad Comments of, by divisions, quarrels, wars, and all
manner of injuries and violence of parties against parties, of several tongues
and languages, and consequently hindering Religion thereby; as also by the
hardness to get knowledge, even with great study and labor, and the danger
when gotten to be abused, to maintain Errors and Heresies, and to eclipse the
truth more often then to clear it (as experience has manifested) whence
endless mischeifs have proceeded through all times, which we can now only hint
at.

But Christ's help against this for the Church, has been by sending more
largely the holy Spirit of Wisdom and Truth in his Church, to reveal unto his
servants, and by them unto his people in all successions of ages, such things
as in the counsel of the Father he had to reveal: And when he had finished the
work of Redemption, and once made his perfect oblation for the sins of his
people, he gave testimony of his helping (as by a preludium) the confussion of
tongues at the first Babel, by the gift of tongues to the Apostles, Acts 2.
when cloven tongues like fire sat upon each of them, and by other gifts of the
holy Ghost conferred on others in those primitive times, as in a glimpse (as it
were) to foreshew what he would do in his Kingdom for that people of the Jews,
who had but then their first fruits at that time come in to Christ, and (as it
were) to declare what he will more plentifully do, when all Israel shall be
saved, and when they shall be a people of a pure language, as the Prophet
speaks, Zeph. 1.9. and when they shall be of one language and one speech, and
the Lord One, and his Name One, Zac. 14.9. as if then when Satan is cast into
his prison, his design in the confusion of Languages should end, and utterly
fail, and thither seem those spiritual promises, mainly to have their drift.
That they should not need to be taught any more to know the Lord, Jer. 31.34.
and that they should all be taught of God, Isa. 54.13. which is now only in a
lesser degree, and but comparatively hitherto for the most part fulfilled,
unless in the Apostles times, and such as were extraordinarily inspired, but I
shall only here hint at these things.

2. Satan's design in the second Babel seems to be upon the advantage he had by
the first, to wit, the division of tongues and confounding language, for though
God discovered and preserved all needful truth for his Church, among such as
were faithful and holy persons, and all such needful knowledge, by reason of
those long lived first Fathers, by a very few hands from Adam to Abraham, might
be conveyed, as from Adam, to Jared, Enoch, Noah, and Melchisedech, in Abraham's
time (which Melchisedech, some conceive to be Shem the Son of Noah) or by a few
others; yet after this, when the Israelites became slaves under Egyptian
bondage (unworthily from men, though happily they might have provoked God) they
might loose much of their traditional knowledge; Yet withal it is remarkable,
that the Egyptians were famous for Hierogliphick learning (happily by Joseph's
means) who interpreted many Dreams and Visions, which might occasion such kind
of studies, which afterward they grossly abused; And Moses by means of Pharaohs
daughter, was afterward trained up in all the learning of the Egyptians; But
when God used the Ministry of Moses and Aaron, to bring his people out of that
bondage, he set up an instituted Church, and as he wrote the tables of the Law
himself; So he directed Moses in writing his five Books for the benefit of his
Church; Yet doubtless that excellent faculty of writing has been likewise much
after that time abused by Satan and evil men likewise, to eclipse truth, and
promote errors amongst all Heathen people; For that as God had by that means
set down the sum of his true Religion, for that generation of the children of
the godly Patriarchs and Fathers, and after forty years made their posterity a
famous Nation and people, and by degrees were formed into a glorious state and
Kingdom, in the end of David's, and begin^ing of Solomon's reign; So Satan had
all along an apparent design to raise huge Mountains of tyranny in the world,
to serve his own purposes in his wicked Dominion, thereby to promote Atheism
and Idolatry, and what ever was evil, and to overpower, oppress, and subdue (if
it were possible) Gods Church, and professed people, and so far as their sins
gave advantage from time to time, they did so; by the just hand of Gods
providence, most wisely and powerfully steering and ordering all the affairs of
the world, to his own glory, and the fulfilling of his own holy pleasure, when
Satan and evil men least intend it; making them in such cases, like refiners to
his people, to cleanse them from their dross, and though several Infidel and
Idolatrous Nations, afflicted and oppressed Israel, soon after Moses and
Joshua's time (as in the Book of Judges, and the following stories in Scripture
may appear many times) until David's victorious, and Solomon's flourishing
Kingdom, which in the next succession Satan by his engines of Idolatry and
wickedness, soon found a way to divide, to make way for his own rule in the
world, and upon the ten tribes revolting, got the greatest part, even of Israel
it self, to turn to his side, and promote his design for the most part, Helvic.
till at the last the height of their sins, and the fullness of their iniquity,
delivered them up into the hands of their Assyrian conquerours, under which
captivity they have lain above 2400 years; and still by the like means and
actings Satan afterward raised a greater mountain of opposition against Gods
Church, when advantage against them might be obtained, and Judahs sin was
likewise ripe, so that the Assyrian rod that scourged Israel, before being
burnt in the Babylonian furnace, these also might be cast and fashioned that
head of gold, the Babylonian Monarchy, which by its massy weight, meeting
together with Judahs sins, written with a pen of Iron, and with the point of a
Diamond, might grind that people almost to powder, wherein Satan's designs
seemed to attain their end.

But now for a remedy for this, God reveals by Daniel, as was fore-shewed, that
though Satan at the present seemed wholly to have wone the victory, yet he
should not always wear it; but that first he would break in pieces that head of
gold, by a meaner mettle, (and so make use of the succeeding breasts and arms
of silver) viz. the Medes and Persians, and that not only to destroy the said
golden head, but also as he promised graciously by his Prophet concerning
Cyrus, whom he therefore styled his Shepherd, Isa. 44.28. to reduce his people
in a wonderful manner again to Jerusalem, and rebuild by a strange munificence
and assistance his Temple there, and though for their crying sins, they were
afterward in the two following Monarchies of Brass and Iron, namely, the
Grecian and Roman, long and soar afflicted, they were also at length, (after
the Promises of the Messiah were fully completed) by the Iron legs and thighs
of the most terrible Roman power, wholly made desolate, upon their rejection
and crucifying the Lord of life and glory, the true King of Israel, (as
Nathaniel had acknowledged him) Joh. 1. But when diverse heads of that
monstrous Roman Beast, explained to Daniel, Chap. 7. but more to St. John, Rev.
17. had successively passed their seasons, and when he that let, 2 These.
2.7. was taken out of the way, Satan then found advantage to erect another, and
worse then the former Babel; namely,

That which is the third Babel, to wit, the Mystical, under the great
Antichrist the Pope, wherein Satan's design by winding that proud, cruel, and
wicked Tyrant cunningly into his own seat and authority, by hypocritical
pretenses, to make that foul beast to defile and poison the waters of life, and
by strong and strange delusions, so to hinder and abolish both the truth and
power of Christ's new constituted Religion in the world, as far as he could
reach, wherein his evil design has likewise greatly prevailed for above twelve
hundred years past.

But for help and remedy against this mystical Babel also, Christ aforehand
showed unto his beloved Disciple John, and by him to his Churches successively,
the utmost period of his continuance, and manner of his now approaching ruin,
as of the Dragons before; and that the said Beast likewise, when the term of
his Kingnom was out, must with it, go into perdition, and be cast into a Lake
of Fire and Brimstone; denoting the perpetual ruin of all Antichristian
Tyranny, and an utter end of all wicked dominion, being the last and lowest
parts of the said Image (to wit) the feet and toes according to the
interpretation given to Daniel, Chap. 2. and at whose destruction the mystery
of God should be finished in the world, as the expression of the Spirit of
Christ is, Rev. 10.17. and Dan. 12.7. when the whole of what was revealed to
St. John, concerning the Beasts rise and ruin (as was before noted) should all
in such ways as he has set down, be accomplished; viz. by the prophecyings of
the two sackcloth witnesses, and the pouring out of the seven last plagues
upon all the Beasts worldly excellency, as Rev. 11, and 15, 16. Chap. So that
then the Kingdoms of the world shall be the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his
Christ, and be given to the Saints of the most high, as before, Dan. 7. Rev.
11.15. So that as all the Devils designs, and Gods had run counter before; so
by Christ these have all along been so managed, that at length the usurped
Dominion of Satan, will be utterly subverted, and the decreed Monarchy of Jesus
Christ, must be completed in this world, under or after the seventh Trumpet,
as a step to his eternal perfection of glory and happiness with his whole
mystical body, the true Church in the Kingdom of his father, which as
mediator, he will resign up to him at the end, as St. Paul teaches, 1 Cor.
15.4.

Now as by the miracles of Moses the first of Christ's Chronologers, the
Egyptian Magicians were confounded: As by the spirit of Wisdom, given by Christ
to Daniel, the second Chronologer, the Astrologers, Caldeans and South sayers
of Babylon were overcome: So by the Spirit and Word of Christ's Testimony, in
the mouth of his sackcloth Prophets, according to Saint John the third
Chronologer, the subtilty of the man of fin is quite defeated, and he himself
with his chief followers made utterly desolate, and cast into the lake of fire
and brimstone; so that thenceforward, as the Devil, the wicked one, usurped a
rule in the world in the hands of his evil powers abusing such their authority,
for the most part, for the promoting of evil, and hindering or preventing of
any good; so afterward Christ will put all his authority under his reign and
dominion in the world into good hands, to remove and hinder evil, and to
maintain and advance good: which (happily) may be the advantage Satan may take
at the end of the 1000 years, to stir up the wicked at that time in the world,
to attempt against Christ's true Church at the last, to cast off their iron yoke
(as to them it may seem) which they have been so long held under by, and to
strive to break those bands asunder, and to cast away such cords of good
Government from them, as Psa. 2. But then, He that sits in heaven will laugh
them to scorn, and by such means destroy both Satan and his followers; and
while so they seek to encompass the camp of the Saints, they will find Christ
come at last against them, for ever to destroy both Satan and them, when the
Devil with his host of evil men shall be sent after the Beast and false Prophet
into the lake of fire and brimstone, which is the second death; never any more
to commit or work, or even further to attempt any mischief in the world, and so
casting Death and Hell with them into the same destruction, Revl 20.10, 14.
Christ will have the perfect victory when all his enemies are so put under his
feet.

And thus we may observe how notwithstanding all Satan's Babels of confusion,
Christ's Kingdom shall be set up, both to put an end to all such his designs,
and to put an end to all such attempts, save only that which after he shall be
loosed for a little season, will put an end to all his actings in the world,
and of all his seed, and usher in all their misery eternally in Hell; but in
all the thousand years before that, neither he nor they shall be suffered to
annoy Gods servants, but that will really be fulfilled in the time of the New
Jerusalem which shall come down from heaven, which will be her privilege, Rev.
22.3. [And his servants shall serve him.]

CHAP. VI.
Wherein are briefly and summarily set down the Testimonies of the Prophets in
all the ensuing times after Moses, which have been sufficiently cleared, from
what has been formerly said to the contrary, to belong to the said time of the
Kingdom of Christ, in the said Thousand years.

HAving considered what in the three great Chronologers is observably spoken of
our Saviors Kingdom upon earth, we shall by Gods gracious assistance proceed
in the method, concerning the rest which our Savior himself after his
resurrection directs us unto, Luke 24.43. It is written (says he) of me in
Moses, the Prophets and the Psalms; endeavoring to observe some things further
out of the other Prophets to this purpose; and to come to speak of what is
recorded in the Psalms likewise of the Kingdom of Christ, wherein that eminent
sweet singer of Israel did so abundantly tune forth such melodious streins
thereof, and even upon occasion of his own Kingdom and Solomon's, delivers
such great things in reference to Christ's Kingdom, which could not have their
accomplishment in any other then him that was the eternal son of God.

And the like may be observed in all the ensuing Prophesies of Gods ancient
people of Israel and Judah, the subjects (in chief) of that Kingdom, as
likewise of their most glorious King and Governor, who will then be manifest
to them; and we have the covenant of God in respect both of these Subjects and
of their great King made with David for Solomon, as a type, 2 Samuel 7. but
looking at Christ, wherein consisted the sure mercies of David, which are
largely illustrated both by Gods free and gracious promise by both; in Nathans
message, from verse. 10. showing that Israel should be planted in their own
place, and move no more, nor afflicted any more by the sons of wickedness,
verse 11, And after speaking of the establishing of David's house, though as in
Solomon and in his successors, his natural race might sorely suffer, yet in a
heavenly King the Son of David, and the Son of God, verse. 13, 14. applied Heb.
1.5. there is stability ascertained: and so David's faith and prayer improve it
with much grateful acceptance, verse 19. Thou have spoken of thy servants
house a great while to come, and v. 26. Let thy servants house be established
for ever; and so again verse. 29. this covenant, Psalm. 89. could be in none but
Christ the Messiah. That the Prophesies and Promises that follow concerning
both, never yet had any suitably fulfilling, nor can have, other ways then in
such a wonderful way and glorious manner, as is peculiar to the Kingdom of
Christ at such his appearing, 2 Timothy 4.1. which as they have been strangely
wrested to avoid a litteral sense by some, so have they been sufficiently
cleared by others to contain it; so that the evident clearness, and great
vigor in so many Scripture Testimonies, cannot but work upon such teachable
spirits as this abridgement is intended for. It is counted policy, though
wicked, in slandering (calumniare audacter, haerehit aliquid;) So, in so great
abundance of Testimonies of truth, upon good Christian policy we may
confidently assert, for in such clearness something will remain, to wit, to
such as are not more disposed to shut their eyes against Scripture light, then
to open them to behold it: I shall but as it were, pass through them, because I
aim at brevity, the large discussion being done by others already, and
especial in the second and third books of The dawning of the Day Star,
composed by Dr. Nath. Homes, wherein very learnedly and judiciously such
Scripture-Prophesies and Texts respecting the quod sit, That there is such a
Kingdom of Christ to come on earth in the thousand years, are very clearly and
convincingly opened and applied thereunto, which I had opportunity to peruse
since these brief collections, who both strongly asserts the truth therein, and
very satisfactorily afterward answers what things have been objected to the
contrary, where I am well assured that intelligent persons (by Gods assistance)
may find more clear resolution, as respecting those mystical Scriptures and
Prophesies through the whole book of God, then in many large Commentaries of
most Writers on them, for many hundred of years last past, which differ therein
from the most pure Primitive times.

Now among the Prophets look first into that Evangelical Prophet Isaiah, who is
abundant to the purpose, where we shall only take some few at present, to prove
that such a Kingdom of Christ is to come, and refer the great things foretold
by him and others concerning that Kingdom to be considered in another place.

First, In the second of his Prophecy, verse 2, 3, 4. It shall come to pass in
the last days, the mountain of the Lords house shall be established in the top
of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills, and the nations shall
flow unto it. And many people shall say, Come ye and ^st us go unto the
mountain of the Lord, unto the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us
of his ways, and we will walk in his paths, for out of Sion shall go the law,
and the word of God from Jerusalem. And he shall judge among the Nations; and
shall rebuke many people, etc. So Isa. 9.7. Of the increase of his Grvernment
and peace there shall be no end, upon the Throne of David, and upon his
Kingdom, to order it and to establish it with judgment and with justice, from
hence forth even for ever. Again Isa. 11.10. In that day there shall be a root
of Jesse, which shall stand as an ensign of the people, to it shall the
Gentiles seek, and his rest shall be glorious, as Heb. 4. And verse 11. It
shall come to pas^ that the Lord shall set his hand again the second time to
recover the remnant of his people which shall be left from Assyria and from
Egypt, and from Pa^hros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and
from Hamath, and from the Islands of the Sea; and verse 12. He shall set up an
ensign of the Nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather
together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth; with much
more to that purpose in that place before and after these words, etc. And very
remarkable is that Prophecy, Isa. 24.23. Then the Moon shall be confounded and
the Sun ashamed, when the Lord of Hosts shall reign in mount Sion, and in
Jerusalem before his ancients gloriously. So again, Isa. 59.20. And the
redeemer shall come to Sion, and unto them that turn from transgression in
Jacob; and very much to this purpose, Cap. 60. but for this Kingdom more
especially, verse. 14. The Sons also of them that afflicted thee shall come
bending unto thee: and all they that despised thee shall bow themselves down at
the soles of thy feet, and they shall call thee, The City of the Lord, The Zion
of the holy one of Israel. Verse 15. Whereas thou have been forsaken and hated
so that no man went through thee, I will make thee an eternal joy of many
generations, Verse. 16. They shall also suck the milk of the Gentiles, and shall
suck the breasts of Kings, and thou shall know that I the Lord am thy Savior,
and thy Redeemer, the mighty one of Jacob, and so forward to the end of the
chapter, where many glorious things are spoken of this City of God, as likewise
very leargely in the following chapter, and likewise in many others both before
and after wards, which may be considered in there place.

The next is the Prophet Jeremiah, who in chap. 3.17. tells us At that time
Jerusalem shall be called the throne of the Lord, and all the Nations shall be
gathered to it to the name of the Lord to Jerusalem; neither shall they walk
any more after the imagination of their evil heart. Another clear and vigorous
Prophecy is set down, Jer. 23.5, 6. Behold the days, says the Lord, that I
will raise unto David a righteous Branch, and a King shall rise and prosper,
and execute judgment and justice in the earth. Verse 6. In his days Judah
shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, and this is the name whereby he
shall be called, The Lord our Righteousness. And to the like purpose again,
Jer. 33.15, 16. In those days and at that time will I cause the branch of
Righteousness to grow up unto David, and he shall execute judgment and
righteousness in the land. Verse 16. In those days shall Judah be saved, and
Jerusalem shall dwell safely, and this is the name whereby he shall be called,
The Lord our righteousness; and verse 17. Thus says the Lord, David shall
never want a man to sit upon the Throne of the House of Israel; and verse 21.
If ye can break my Covenant of the day, and my Covenant of the night, and that
there shall not be day and night in their season, then may also my Covenant be
broken with David my servant, that he shall not have a Son to reign on his
Throne; and the like again repeated in the, 25, and 26. verses. The places are
so clear and full, I spare to speak any thing to apply them, because they
cannot justly and rationally be applied otherways, and such as understand them
only spiritually, say something, but not all, nor that which they principally
drive at, namely, that special period of Christ's reign upon earth, whither the
current of Such Scriptures lead; and after all, our Savior himself abundantly
in the Revelation, instructs his people, and all such as will not wilfully
shut their eyes against the light.

The Prophet Ezekiel. likewise speaks very clearly, Chap. 24.23, 24. And I set up
one Shepherd over them, and he shall feed them, even my servant David, he shall
feed them, and he shall be their Shepherd, and verse. 24. I the Lord will be
their God, and my servant David a Prince among them, I the Lord have spoken it.

Again, As evidently does he speak of Christ's reign, Chap. 37. After that he
had spoken of the joining of the stick of Judah, and Ephraim into one, he
says, verse. 22. And I will make them one Nation in the land, upon the Mountain
of Israel, and one King shall be the King to them all, and they shall be no
more two Nations, neither shall they be divided into two Kingdoms any more at
all, and verse. 24. David my servant shall be King over them, and they shall
have one Shepherd, and they shall also walk in my judgments, and observe my
statutes, and do them, and verse. 25. And they shall dwell in the land that I
have given unto Jacob my servant, wherein your Fathers have dwelt, and they
shall dwell therein; they and their Children, and their Childrens Children for
ever, and my servant David shall be their Prince for ever. And in those nine
last Chapters of Ezekiel, which learned and judicious men conceive to be the
Revelation of the Old Testament, where the holy Prophet had high mysteries of
the New Jerusalem imparted to him, and amongst the rest, there are observeable
many things set forth concerning the Prince, and what order of state belonged
to him, and in conclusion, he says, The City shall be called at that day, viz.
the time of Christ's reign (Jehovah Shamma) the Load is there.

The Prophet Hosea, in Chap. 1. Verse. 11. Then shall the Children of Israel,
and the Children of Judah, be gathered together, and shall appoint themselves
one head, and shall come up out of the land, for great shall be the day of
Jezreel, which never yet was fulfilled, but shall be in its time; So again,
Chap. 3.5. Afterward shall the Children of Israel return and seek the Lord
their God, and David their King, and shall fear the Lord and his goodness in
the latter days, which can have no adequate accomplishment, but in Christ's
Kingdom.

To the like purpose the Prophet Joel, Chap. 2. ult. having in verse. 31. showed
what a terrible destruction shall be, when Christ shall make his foes his
footstool, and set up his Kingdom, verse. 32. he says, It shall come to pass,
that whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be delivered; for in
Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the Lord has said, and
in the remnant whom the Lord shall call, and Chap. 3.2, last Verses, And Judah
shall dwell for ever, and Jerusalem, from generation to generation; for I will
cleanse their blood, that I have not cleansed, for the Lord dwells in Zion.

The Prophet Amos also fully witnesses to this Kingdom of Christ, Chap. 9.11,
12. In that day will I raise up the Tabernacle of David, which was fallen, and
close up the breaches thereof; and I will raise up the ruins, and will build
it, as in the days of old; and verse. 12. That they may possess the remnant of
Edom, and all the Heathen, that are called by my name, says the Lord that does
this, and verse. 14. I will bring again the captivity of my people of Israel,
and they shall build the waste Cities and inhabit them, and they shall plant
Vineyards, and drink the wine thereof, they shall also make gardens, and eat
the fruit of them, and I will plant them upon their Land, and they shall no
more be pulled up out of their Land, which I have given to them, says the Lord
God.

Even Obadiah in his short Prophefie, has high expressions of the deliverance
on Mount Sion, verse. 17. And there shall be holiness, and the house of Jacob
shall possess their possessions. But more direct to our present purpose, verse
ult. And Saviors shall come up to Mount Zion, to judge the Mount of Esau, and
the Kingdom shall be the Lords.

Herein is likewise the Prophecy of Micab very evident, Chap. 4.1. In the last
days it shall come to pass (which words, the last days, we may observe
frequently to be used to this purpose and the like) that the Mountain of the
House of the Lord, shall be established in the top of the Mountains, and it
shall be exalted above the hills, and the people shall flow unto it, and verse
2. Many Nations shall come and say, let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord,
to the House of the God of Jacob and he will teach us of his ways, and we will
walk in his paths, for the law shall go forth of Sion, and the Word of the Lord
from Jerusalem; and verse 3. He shall judge among many people, and rebuke
strong Nations afar off, etc. and Chap. 5. when he had spoken of smiting the
Judge of Israel with a rod on the cheek; verse. 2. he then shows that out of
Beth-leem Ephratah, shall go, he that was to be ruler in Israel, whose going
forth have been from of old from everlasting; and verse. 4. He shall stand and
feed in the strength of the Lord, and in the Majesty of the name of the Lord
his God, and they shall abide, for now shall be be great unto the ends of the
earth.

Again, when the Prophet Zephaniah, Chap. 3. had foretold how Christ will
destroy his enemies (as seems probable) at the Armageddon battle, mentioned,
Rev. 16. and 19 (...) former verse, he then adds, verse. 9. For the will (...)
the people of a pure language; that they may all (...) the name of the Lord,
and serve him with one consent; (...) verse. 14. Sing O Daughter of Zion, shout
O Israel, (...) Lord has taken away thy judgment, he has cast (...) enemy,
the King of Israel, even the Lord in the (...) thee, thou shall not see evil
any more; verse. 17. The (...) God in the midst of thee is mighty, he will
save thee, he will rejoice over thee with joy, we will rest in his love, he
will j^y over thee with singing, etc. and so forward to the end of the Chap. to
the purpose, which like expressions are much above all succeeding times, save
these our Savior has revealed in the time of the new Jerusalem, etc.

In the next place amongst the Testimonies of the Prophets in the Old
Testament, proceed we to the Prophet Zechariah, who is as clear herein as any
of the former (and being after the Captivity of Babylon, can least be
interpreted of that which was past) Zach. 6.12. Thus speaks the Lord of
Hosts; Behold the man whose name is the Branch, and he shall grow up out of his
place, and he shall build the Temple of the Lord, and he shall bear the glory,
and shall sit and rule on the Throne (So that Zerubbabel to whom this was
spoken, was but a dim shade to this mighty Prince) and he shall he a Priest
upon the Throne, and the counsel of peace shall be between them both; So Chap.
8.8. I will bring them, and they shall be in the midst of Jerusalem, and they
shall be my people, and I will be their God, in truth and righteousness; Again,
Chap. 9.16. And the Lord their God shall save them in that day, as the flock of
his people, for they shall be as the stones of a Crown lifted up, as an ensign
upon his land. Verse. 17. How great is his goodness, how great is his beauty!
etc. And Zach. 12.7. The Lord also shall save the tents of Judah; First, that
the glory of the house of David, and the glory of the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
do not magnify themselves against Judah; Verse 8. in that day shall the Lord
defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and he that is feeble among them at that
time, shall be as David, and the House of David shall he as God, as the Angel
of the Lord before them.

Lastly, Consider the Testimony of the Prophet Malachi, Chap. 3.2, 3. But who
may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appears? for he
is like a refiners fire, and fullers soap, etc. Upon which Text, let the words
of that judicious Gillespy be observed, in his Sermon to the Lords, Aug. 27.
1645. which happily has not been taken notice of by many, Page 3. After
diverse things spoken to our purpose before, he adds, How ever the Scriptures
teach us, that the Lord Jesus will be revealed mightily, and will make bare his
holy arm, as well in the confusion of Antichrist, as in the conversion of the
Jews, before the last judgment and the end of all things. Again, Page 5. he
says of this Text, this, I doubt not to aver, does principally belong to the
Jews, for to them pertain the promises, says the Apostle, And the natural
branches shall be grafted into their own Olive tree. I shall only add here,
that both terrible and comfortable Prophecy, in Chap. 4.1, 2, 3. Behold the
day comes that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, and all that do
wickedly shall be as stubble, etc. Verse. 2. But to you that fear my name, shall
the sun of righteousness arise, with healing in his wings, etc. So that by all
these evidences, we may see what exceeding great reason there was or the Spirit
of God to call in the Testimony of the Prophets of the Old Testament, to give
witness to the reign of Christ in the thousand years under or after the last
Trumpet, and concerning his new Jerusalem come down from God, Rev. 20. and 21.
(as we formerly observed) and are here in brief set before the eyes of all such
as are not resolved to shut them against them, and when the excellency and
privileges of this Kingdom, both spiritually and temporally come in their
place to be considered, much more may appear, but these may suffice at present,
as to the (...), that such a Kingdom of Christ is to come in the thousand
years, whereunto the Spirit of God in the Prophets of all times has had a
peculiar respect (as Act. 3.21. Rev. 10.7.) and may much more appear in what
further might from the Prophets be hereunto added.

CHAP. VII.
Showing upon several enforcing consideration^, that David in many Psalms,
prophetically spoke of the said Kingdom of Christ on Earth.

WE come unto the last head of Testimony (according to our Saviors own
distribution) concerning himself, and those are the Psalms, wherein David
chiefly, the man after Gods own heart, and therefore more like to be (a
secretis) one of his Privy Counsel (as we may say,) and unto (...) the Counsel
of God, concerning the Kingdom of his So I upon earth, was largely revealed
above many other, and this might come to pass for diverse reasons.

1. Because the great promises made to David, of his seeds succession to
perpetnity, he foresaw could not be fulfilled in any other but the great
Messiah.

2. That the said messiah, and great King of Jerusalem, was to come of his race
and lineage.

3. Should so have a right (according to promise) to rule the people of Israel.

4. Because David's Kingdom was a type of his, from a low beginning, in
appearance to the worlds eye at first; Yet God setting it up against Saul's, it
grew stronger and stronger, but the other weaker and weaker; So with the
beginning and increase of Christ's Kingdom, Isa. 9.

Again, as David was victorious at last over all enemies, and had peace round
about; so will it be with Christ's Kingdom in the world, over Satan and all his
wicked dominion in the issue: And by the spirit of Prophecy King David has
declared much to this and the like effect in the book of Psalms above others,
and hence the following Prophets (as in the preceding chapter may be observed)
so often call Christ not only the Branch, the offspring of Jess, the Father
of David, but oftener by David's own name, and was foretold to sit upon the
throne of David, to be of the house, and over house of David, to build the
Tabernacle of David, and the like; so it is no wonder to have David's heart full
of such matter, and his tongue in this respect like the pen of a ready writter.
And the breathings of the Spirit of God in David's Psalms seem to vent
themselves much in such delightful harmony concerning the Kingdom of Christ,
who in all the former considerations, spiritually foresaw him, not only as his
Antitype and seed, but as the great Messiah and Savior of him and his people,
in whom both the great promises both to him and the foresathers should both
spiritually and temporally in due time have their full accomplishment; And
therefore if any persons by the guidance of Scripture, and chiefly of the
Revelation (by the assistance of Gods Spirit) consider such Texts, it may
evidently appear to such unprejudiced and serious teachable spirits, that a
great part of the Psalmody of holy David is warbled out according to such
celestial Ditties, as might magnify and exalct Christ the Son of David; yet so
as he might also appear to be the root of David, as Rev. 5.5. even the eternal
Son of God: and therefore so many expressions are used in the Psalms, which are
incompetible to himself; or his mere natural seed. So that all the gracious
beams of Divine light, that to such purpose reached any time unto David's soul,
seem to be concentered in the Son of Righteousness, from whom they had their
original; who may fitly be observed to be the Alpha and Omega of that Book of
psalms.

To begin with the second Psalm, which usually is acknowledged to be of the
Kingdom of Christ (though some will not acknowledge that Kingdom to come on
earth) though God there promises to set (him) his King, upon his holy hill of
Sion: After Satan with his wicked worldly powers have done their worst, yea,
and suffered their worst too, at the destruction of Antichrist, even as it was
with their type also, the Jewish Hierarchy, that when he came in the flesh
would not have him reign, but would destroy him, which brought their
destruction about forty two years after: but when the other go about to destroy
his people, they shall utterly be destroyed themselves by him; and in both
respects, Yet (says God) have I set my King upon my holy hill of Sion: And
therefore he shall break his enemies with a rod of iron, and dash them in
pieces as a potters Vessel. And likewise he has verse 8. the Heathen promised
for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession;
which then will be fulfilled, when he shall set up that his Kingdom upon earth.

That the 8. Psalm. refers to Christ's Kingdom, the subject matter declares,
since he regains that sovereignty over the creatures which the first Adam lost,
besides the Apostles testimony Heb. 2. The 9. Psalm contains much of the great
works of God against his enemies, and for his people, which will be fulfilled
at the setting up of Christ's Kingdom. And so also Psalm the 10. toward the
latter end; and the 11. Psalm seems to be of the like nature. But in Psalm. 18.
holy King David does largely sing of Christ under the type of his own Kingdom,
but in such a way as was not competible to it, saving in reference unto that
King of Kings. And Psalm. 21. is very much of the same nature, but far exceeding
what could be applied to David's temporal Kingdom. The latter end of Psalm 22.
is remarkably of Christ's Kingdom upon earth: And so likewise Psalm 24. where
the King of glory is to enter (as seems probable) the everlasting doors of the
New Jerusalem coming down from heaven, etc. The 45. Psalm is eminently of
Christ's Kingdom, under the type of Solomon, and in part applied by the Apostle
Heb. 1.8. And Psalm 46. of the like nature; and so likewise the 48th. and also
the first part of the 50th. and the latter part of the 53. The 67th. seems
wholly to be prophetical of the time of Christ's reign. But the 68. Psalm.
contains much of the glory and grace of Christ then to be manifested. And the
latter end of the 69th. is to the like purpose. Psalm. 72. Is a very glorious
illustration of Christ's Kingdom above what could be fulfilled either in David
or Solomon or any other but the Son of God, who shall be feared through all
generations, in whose days righteousness and peace shall flourish so long as
the Moon endures, and shall rule to the ends of the earth; and all Kings and
Nations shall serve him, and his name shall continue for ever, and as long as
the Sun endures, etc. The 80. Psalm contains an excellent prayer for Gods
Israel to use, for the coming of the Messiah to take his Kingdom. In the 89th.
such promises are made to David and his seed, that could not be wholly
fulfilled in any but Christ and his Kingdom. And the 96. is likewise
prophetical of the Kingdom of Christ; and the 97. to the like purpose; and the
99. contains high expressions of Christ's reign; and also the 102. The 110.
Psalm is an eminent prediction of Christ's Kingdom, and applied often in the New
Testament. The 132. evidently concerns the Kingdom of Christ. And not to insist
upon diverse others, where there are notable expressions that seem to tend to
the same purpose, take for a conclusion the 148, and the 149. which eminently
relate unto Christ's reign on earth, according to what in many former Scriptures
and prophets have been foretold thereof; so from the beginning (almost) to the
end we may observe how the Spirit of God stirred up the spirit of holy King
David, to set forth the glory and excellent greatness of the kingdom of Christ,
as his Antitype, seed and Savior, in whom the greatest promises of God shall
be fulfilled, which could not have accomplishment in any other.

CHAP. VIII.
Containg other evidences out of the New Testament, to wit, of the Gospel, and
Acts of the Apostles, besides what was occasionally spoken of Chap. 4. by the
four Apostles, Peter, James, and John, and the Apostle Paul, to all which
Christ gloriously appeared.

ANd now to appeal to the last sort of witnesses (having seen such clearness in
the Prophets of the Old Testament, and the Psalms) we may in like manner
consider the testimonies of the Gospellers in the New: But here the like course
might justly be taken with us men of this generation (for I put my self in the
number, who have but even lately received the truth) which our Savior did with
his Disciples going to Emaus, Luke 24.25. O fools and slow of heart to believe
all that the Prophets have spoken concerning his suffering, and entering
intoglory! so now of the beleeiving the things concerning Christ's Kingdom to
come onearth: yea, we might henceforth turn our argumentation into a vehement
expostulation with our selves: What? was not the Angel Gabriel the first
Gospeller we read of, at the time of his annunciation before our Saviors
conception by the Holy Ghost, when he told the blessed Virgin of the holy,
glorious, wonderful, heaven-bred Babe that should shortly after that be born of
her, an evident witness of Christ's Kingdom to come? Or does he to no purpose
(after he had informed the blessed mother of our Lord of many unspeakable glad
tidings, Luke 1.30, 31. other ways) then after adds, verse 33. And the Lord
shall give him the throne of his Father David, and he shall reign over the
house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be no end. Surely this
holy Angel well understood the meaning of the many Prophets, yea of the
Prophets of all ages before, as being contemporary with them all along from the
beginning to that time. And did not that glad child John Baptist, as one right
bred of his believing mother Elizabeth, upon this good news leap for joy in his
Mothers womb, when the Virgin came with it to her house; whereupon good
Elizabeth told the Mother of our Lord, that assuredly there should be a
performance of those things which were told her, Verse 45. and was not this
Kingdom of Christ one (if not the main) of them? And that blessed Virgin her
self in an holy rapture of Spirit, breaks out in no less then the Angel had
foreshewed to her of this matter, Verse. 54, 55. He has helped his servant
Israel, in remembrance of his mercy, as he spoke to our Fathers, to Abraham and
his seed for ever, beleiving all in that Covenant would be performed, whereof
the promised inheritance and Christ's Kingdom therein was part: And this again
good Zachary (though upon occasion of the Angels good news of his own son,
which at first he believed not) he had been till then so dumb, that both the
Mother and the Babe acknowledged Christ before him; yet when he had gotten the
use of his speech again, like a channel dammed up before, the living waters of
the spirit soon run in a stronger current from his beleiving soul, then happily
otherwise they would have done, and very much concerning the Kingdom of his
Lord and Savior, Verse. 69. He has raised up an born of salvation for us in
the house of his servant David, and this he confirms from the general
successive Testimony of the Prophets (which we in part set down in the two
preceding Chapters, Verse. 70. As he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets,
which have been since the world began, And V^^^. 71. he declares how general
the redemption was by Christ, the mercy promised to the fathers, the covenant
with them, the oath to Abraham (as we noted out of Moses his prophesies) to
free them from all enemies, and even from the fear of them, Verse. 74. which is
the privilege of Christ's Kingdom on earth. Again, when the Angelimparted unto
the Shepherds, when Christ was born, his very glad tidings of great joy to all
people, he tells them first of that, that he was born in the City of David, who
by descent was the Son of David according to the flesh; where also the Priests
informed Herod that he should be born, when under pretense of worshipping, he
thought to destroy him (and thereupon made there many young Martyrs for him)
yet upon that occasion was found that great testimony of Micab Chap. 5.2. And
thou Bethlehem in the land of Judah, art not the least among the Princes of
Judah: for out of thee shall come a governor that shall rule my people Israel,
Mat. 2.6. But the Angel tells the Shepherds, Luke 2.8. that he was of David's
house a Lord (as before Mat. 2.6.) So in the regard of his present coming in
the flesh, he was born to them that day a Savior, Christ: Moshiach the Messiah
implying likewise his threefold anointing, as Prophet, Priest, and King, and
also for all people, Jews and and Gentles. So the Angel before, as this
likewise now, acknowledge and declare him, the Christ, the Lord, the great
Messiah, the great Ruler (though he was then a weak Babe in appearance, in mean
outward condition in the worlds view, wrapped in swaddling cloths, having a
Crath for a Cradle, a Manger for a Couch, being not received in the dwelling
house, but lodged in a Stable, and that (O prodigy of abasement!) at that time
the most blessed Mother brought forth the most glorious infant King, her Son
and Savior (as was said) of all people: Yet even then a multitude of the
heavenly host (Genethlia celebrant) and Carole loud and sweetly the happiness
of his Nativity: Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will
toward men. Whereupon said an Ancient aptly, Quis tam parvus, tam magnus,
Infans jacens in praesaepi voce Angelorum celebratus: What wonderful celestial
Kingly glory in all that outward abasement at his birth, is here by the eye of
faith to be discerned; the glorious Angels are the Heralds to publish his
Kingly dignity over and over again, to set forth his Royal descent, yea, his
Divine Majesty, when he seemed only a despised weak new born babe; and others,
and that a multitude too, sing forth the high praises of his Nativity, the Holy
Spirit fills the hearts of old and young, great and small, poor and rich, men
and women with joy, and enlarged Discourses of his Kingly excellence, before
and about his birth. The Star and the Sages soon after, with speedy course,
come out of the East, to give this much more glorious day star, yea, Sun of
righteousness, a timely visit: And to tender that glorious object to the
unbelieving world, that they might take a view with them of that King and
Savior, even then new born to Gods faithful people, and after their example
worship him, and bring their offerings to him. And they make inquiry of the
place of this new Kings birth, Where is he that is born King of the Jews? and
such was their zeal toward him, that no outward meanness hinders them from
yiedling him all due homage and observance of worship, with oblations of gold,
frankincense, and myrrh.

Thns God in his weakest estate of life in the world, would have all sorts in
heaven and in earth assist in some meet Equipage suitable to his Kingly
Dignity. And after that he is no sooner presented unto God in the Temple, where
his Mother (as the badge of her present meanness of condition in the world)
offers according to the law a pair of Turtle Doves, or two young Pigeons,
answerable to her poor estate (though sprung from the lineage of David.) But
even then old Simeon divinely inspired, and spiritually enlarged with
satisfying joy, is now well pleased to sing his swan-like song to welcome
death: Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, etc. and the main
substance of his song, or the highest strain in it, is the Kingly glory of
Christ on earth, Luke 2.32. A light to enlighten the Gentiles, and the glory of
thy people Israel, answerable to the prophecy, Number. 24.17. A star shall come
out of Jacob, and a Scepter shall rise out of Israel, etc. He had ground from
many Prophets, with such rejoicing to utter it: Yea, Simeon again blessing
Joseph and Mary; tells them, That Child was set for the falling and rising of
many in Israel. First to that perverse generation, He was a stumbling block, as
the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 1.23. for their falling to the future Israelites;
when he shall come to reign gloriously, he will likewise be for the rising of
many. Old Anna in public declares the like to all that look for redemption in
Jerusalem, and there it was in some respect too well known, temporal redemption
was expected as well as spiritual, though they did it unseasonably, for which
they had sufficient Scripture ground, though then misapplyed by them. And
though it was common amongst the Jews in those times to neglect the spiritual
redemption by Christ, and vainly seek to anticipate the temporal, then long
after to come by their great King the Messiah; yet even then that true
Israelite Nathaniel had learned better concerning Christ, and made confession
thereof unto him of both: Thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel,
John 1.49.

The mother of Zebedees children acknowledged no less, though unwarrantably
applied, when she would have her two Sons promoted, The one at his right hand,
and the other at his left in his kingdom, Mat. 20.21. Yet afterward our
Savior promises no less to them, and the rest of his faithful disciples, Luke
22.29, 30. I appoint unto you a kingdom, as my father has appointed unto me:
That ye may eat and drink at my Table in my Kingdom, and sit on Thrones judging
the twelve Tribes of Israel. And because that opinion much prevailed amongst
the Jews then, that the Kingdom of God should immediately appear, Luke 19.11.
thereupon in the next verse. and forward our Savior resolves the matter by a
Parable, comparing himself to a Nobleman that was to go into a far Country, and
to receive to himself a Kingdom, and to return. Consider here how usual a thing
it was among all sorts to style Christ the Son of David; the two blind men,
Mat. 9.27. Thou Son of David, have mercy on us. All the people say, Mat. 12.23.
when he had cast out the blind and dumb Devil; Is not this the Son of David?
The woman of Canaan, Mat. 15.22. O Lord thou Son of David. So other two blind
men, Mat. 20.30. Have mercy on us O Lord, thou Son of David. And Chap. 21.9.
The multitudes cry Hosanna to the Son of David: The disciples themselves could
not deny that the Christ was the Son of David, Chap. 22.42. so Luke 20.30, 31.

Christ being the King of the Jews was such a noted thing, that when he was to
dye, it was mentioned either in scorn or earnest, or attested by God and Men,
and Christ himself at every turn after he came before Pilate (the chief Priests
and Elders having examined him about destroying the Temple, and his being the
Son of God) but the main accusation against him, was his being a King, which he
never denied: though they falsely added, he thereupon forbad to pay tribute unto
Caesar: yet in that wherein the strength of the temptation lay, he fairly
resolved Pilate, that his Kingdom was not from hence, or of this world (his
Kingdom will be from God and not from men) but besides that, as ost as Pilate
mentioned him to be the King of the Jews, and asked him if he were so, he never
denied it: Yea, when the Jews. did poison this dart so in Pilates sight and
hearing, that either it must kill Christ or greatly hazard Pilate; after many
clearings of Christ, and offers to release him, and propounding him or Barabbas
a notorious offender, that Christ might escape; which when he failed in, he
would know what he should do with the King of the Jews? Yea, when he had
scourged Christ, and suffered the Soldiers shamefully to abuse him as a King,
in scorn putting on him a Scarlet Robe, a Crown of Thorns, a Reed for a
Scepter in his hand, bowing the knee in mockage, crying, Hail King of the Jews
(and according to his wives admonition from her dreams, and his own conviction
to have freed Christ) and lets the Soldiers bring him before the Jews in that
garb, saying, himself, Behold the man [as thinking (probably) all this would
satisfy, since he was innocent, and knowing for envy they did accuse him (as
Mar. 15.10.)

Yet at last by that poisoned dart (I say) they would strike home; If thou let
this man go, thou art not Cesars friend; for whosoever makes himself a King
speakethagainst Caesar: and yet after that he bad them Behold their King, and
when they cried Crucify him, He urges, Shall I crucify your King? And when he
was enforced still upon his Loyalty to Caesar, and to avoid tumult, having
washed his hands as guiltless of Christ's blood, and the Jews taking it upon
themselves and their children, he delivered him to be crucified. But after all,
to witness to all the world, what Christ was, and what was the accusation that
carried the cause, Mar. 15.26. against him;

First, Pilate is overruled by God to write his Title in Greek, and Latin,
and Hebrew, Luke 23.36. [This is the King of the Jews] as if the successions of
the Greek, Latin, and Heorew Churches, in order might read and acknowledge it
till he took his Kingdom: And when the Jews envied this ^itle, and would have
Pilate write He said I am; God overrules again, and Pilate resolutely refuses,
with [what I have written, I have written and observe Pilate was too much
convinced, and netled, and galld to mock in the mat^^er of that Title, as a the
other persecuters then did, whom therein he did not (then) seek to please but
resist, etc. And (happily that earnest enforcement of that truth (as our
Savior said to him before, Joh. 18.37.) when Pilate perceived that though he
was not a worldly King, yet he would not deny himself to be a King: He
thereupon urges him further in that respect; Art thou a King then? says
Pilate, he Answers with such a double asseveration, and as if this was the
main thing he had now to bear witness to, and a main cause of his coming into
the world, saying, For this end was I born, and for this end came I into the
world, to bear witness to the truth, which seems to be mainly the truth that he
was a King, and that of Israel ( us afterward, the Priests, Scribes, and
Elders, at the Cross, called him, Mat. 27.42.) and King of the Jews, as the
Soldiers likewise then mocked, verse. 44.)

And after that, above all (not to insist upon many other passages) take notice
here of that wonderful Confessor, if not first Martyr of, and with Christ, the
formerly infamous, but since famous good thief, that when the world sought to
cast the greatest ignominy and contempt upon Christ, he most of all to their
faces, set forth his honor, and even then by putting forth his right hand of a
true faith upon the Cross, to lay hold upon his last and best booty, to steal
unexpectedly the Kingdom of Heaven, condemns then both himself and his
fellow-thief, and the wicked world which condemned and crucified our Savior
and King, in the lowest dejection of his present condition, acknowledging then
Christ's Sovereignty and right to his Kingdom, and power to give it to others,
yea, even to himself, when he was so vile and miserable in other respects,
saying [Lord remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom happily, he had been
before a well principled Jew, but had for a time withheld the truth in
unrighteousness, but now (by grace) such good education breaks forth with
light of truth and comfort in him, and he looks for no less then a Kingdom at
the hands of a crucified Savior and Sovereign; here was a glory above the
wonted brightness of the Sun, when the Sun himself for shame hid his face in
darkness, from the then darkened and spiritually hardened world; Thus the Kingly
glory of Christ was (even then) so held out by the Spirit of power to the says
of Gods people, so that from the first humiliation of Christ at his birth, and
even conception too, all along to the very hour of his death, his Kingly
excellency was strongly attested by all sorts of Angels, and men, young and
old, high and low, good and bad, Creator, and creatures, in Heaven and Earth,
the star at his birth, the sun at his death, the Rocks, the Earth, the Vale of
the Temple, the dead Saints that slept and rose again, and went into the holy
City, Jews and Heathens, enemies and friends; what evidence in all respects
could be more glorious in such an ebb of seeming dejection of the true Son of
God, the true King of Israel, till by his glorious conquest over sin, death,
and Hell, whereby it was impossible for him any longer to be held under, he
wonderfully at his resurrection declared himself to be a most powerful King;
and that all-conquering King that will set up his Kingdom in the world, when he
will yet further make his enemies to feel his Kingly power, by making them his
footstool, as his Father had promised, after the set time of his sitting at
his ^ight hand, when that shall be fulfilled, Psa. 110. th at he may triumph
with his people in his glorious reign, according to the promises and covenant
made unto the Forefathers, and recorded by the holy Prophets since the world
began.

And once more, after his resurrection, he once again to his Disciples implies
no less, having finished almost the forty days in speaking to them of the
things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, Acts 1.3. when they would know of him,
whether at that time he would restore the Kingdom to Israel, though he repels
their curiosity in respect of the time which God (then) kept in his own power,
to make known, verse 7. that it was not for them to know the time then, yet he
does not at all gainsay the thing; but in the next verse he shows they should
receive power by the Holy Ghost, which accordingly they did in that particular,
as appeared in James, Peter, Jude, then in Paul, being converted, and last of
all, he gave to St. John the Revelation of things to come to the end of the
world, he sets down in the due place, in the series of times ensuing, when that
his Kingdom should be set up, namely, under or afthe seventh Trumpet, and in
that thousand years particularly specified, Rev. 20. when he would reign with
his Saints on the earth, and when the new Jerusalem shall come down from God
out of Heaven, Rev. 21.2.

By all which it may appear, that in the whole body of the Book of God, the
lifeblood and spirits (as it were) of the Scriptures, concerning Christ, seem
chiefly to run in this vein, to set forth the excellency of his kingly Office,
and that even the eminent use of Prophecy in the first period, and the
execution of Priesthood in the second, do in a great part make way for, and
usher in the most eminent glory of his Kingly Office in the third Period,
whereupon Christ's mediatorship will be perfected, full reconciliation made with
God, and abundant entrance to the mystical body of Christ, together with
himself their head, administered into eternal and perfect blessedness.

Thus having offered unto the consideration of serious and truly Christian
Spirits, all the forementioned evidences to confirm this glorious, excellent
truth (wherein the main difficulty of the matter seemed to lie) as respecting
the (...), to show that most certainly the reign and Kingdom of Christ in the
world eminently, is to come (as our Savior has made known to Saint John) in
the thousand years, under or after the seventh Trumpet.

We should here proceed to the other part, which concerns (...), those things
fore-promised to be enjoyed by. Gods people in the time of such his reign; And
that both spiritually, viz. Abundance of grace, spiritual peace, joy, security,
large communion with God, Christ and the holy Spirit; Together with much
benefit and comfort, by the perfected Saints; perfected I say, in respect of
their real happiness, and the security of it, Rev. 22.9. on such the second
death shall have no power.

And also temporally, viz. abundance of outward plenty, peace, security,
comfort, in the enjoyment of the temporal blessings and good things of this
life, more then ever any ages of the world, since the fall obtained, whereunto
the Scriptures likewise give large Testimony. But because there have been in
sundry Proofs already many things set forth to this purpose, concerning the
things of Christ's Kingdom, and in the (...) or forrunner hereof, already
published (as in a short abridgement thereof) contained many great things of
such nature, from evident Texts of holy Scripture; We shall not at present
proceed any further therein, but as the Providence of God may further lead
thereunto; But [de modo now we shall add nothing, fearing to be either too
curious or peremptory therein; only at present resolving that either
mystically, or personally (in case of a new dispensation,) that Kingdom of
Christ will in its time appear, that we may not gainsay such as have obtained
more light therein, nor seem to diminish from the glory of it, or any ways
resist the truth.

We should likewise (in the last place) add some improvement of this to all
sorts of persons, which we shall only at present in two words (as it were)
adjoyn: First, to warn all opposers to take heed that either by denying or
opposing Christ Kingdom in Doctrine, practice, or project, least when Christ
comes in his Kingdom they should be found resisters thereof, and fighters
against it; or particularly comes in wrath against any such in the interim, by
sending any swift messenger thereof unto them: remembering his sentence against
those old rebels the Jews, Luke 19.27. But those mine enemes, that would not
that I should rule over them, bring hither, and slay them before me. For it is
a desperate danger to be found fighters against Christ upon any account, or
engagement in the world whatsoever; at any other time, but more especially at
that time when he shall come in his glory, and will manifest his great power
and wrath upon them.

Secondly, To encourage all Christ's over-comers to be valiant and resolute in
fighting against and resisting of, all Satanical frauds, and Antichristian
oppositions against Christ and his Kingdom, and to plead Christ's right for the
strenghening of others to stand on Christ's part (but always according to
Christ's warrant and direction) in the pleading of this his last clause in the
last part of his New Testament-will left amongst us, in special mercy to poor
unworthy sinners. And for their encouragement they may observe from his word,
that it seems not to be long before he will make it good: Surely (says he) I
come quickly, Rev. 22.20. and this is according to the order of things
therewith described, probable in its order to draw on very fast: For
Antichrists ruin will make way for Christ's reign on earth, in that his eminent
Kingdom, Office, and Authority; and to that end, let both sorts seriously
consider, that excellent closure of the Prophecy of that Evangelical Prophet
Esaias Chap. the last, verse. 5. and so forward, which seems very apposite to that
purpose, and seriously to be weighed upon sundry considerations, both
respecting the latter time; of Antichrist, and diverse matters concerning
Christ's Kingdom then to come: And so we conclude with the Churches earnest
request unto Christ for the hastening of his coming. Even so come Lord Jesus,
come quickly, Amen.

Arguments for Christ's Kingdom upon earth from the Lords Prayer. First from the
three first Petitions.


But that Gods Name should be Hallowed, his Kingdom come, his will be done on
Earth as in Heaven, is by him given as the chief rule of their prayer, and
ground of their faith.

Therefore, These things shall most surely have their accomplishment on Earth
as in Heaven.

That is, intra spheram activitatis, and quoad statum: which in this respect is
like to be remakable; though corruption then be in the Saints, yet will be then
strongly and powerfully resisted; the more grace, the more glory to God then,
and after to themselves.



But in Christ's reign on earth, they are most eminently promised and foretold,
that they shall be, Rev. 11. Rev. 20. Therefore, In that time they shall be
fulfilled and performed.

Argument from the fourth Petition.
Gods people may then pray most comfortably and confidently for daily bread,
when they find all such grace most enlarged on his Church, unto which the
entail of all needful temporal blessings is chiefly made; [yea, and upon that
account are in great abundance promised.]

But such entail of needful supply of temporals, [or daily bread] upon the
abundance of spiritual grace in the time of Christ's said reign, upon that
account is more strongly then made unto them; yea, and abundance of temporal
prosperity, unto the abundant measure of grace, which then will be given.

Therefore, Gods people will most comfortably and confidently then pray for it.

Argument from the fifth Petition, Forgive us our debts as we forgive our
debtors.
When Gods people are most ascertained, that they shall attain the end of this
Petition; they will most comfortably and confidently pray according to the
tenor of it.

But in the time of Christ's reign on earth they shall be most ascertained that
they shall attain the end of this Petition.

Therefore, They shall then most comfortably and confidently pray according to
the tenor of it.

Now this Petition has a double respect. First, to the obtaining of the
assurance of their own pardon. Secondly, to engage them to pardon others; and
both these ends will then be most promoted. First, their eminent measure of
faith and love, zeal and sincerity, etc. will upon their prayer of truth,
assure them of their own pardon. And secondly, the exercise of diverse of their
graces, besides obedience to Gods command, which requires them to do so, will
engage them likewise to forgive others.

Argument from the sixth Petition, Lord lead us not into temptation, but
deliver us from evil.
Gods faithful people may then best pray for their deliverance from the evil
one, and from the evil of his temptations, when they know most assuredly by the
world, that they are for along time removed from them.

But in the said Thousand years they shall most evidently know from the word,
that the evil one, and the evil of his temptations, are so removed from them.

Therefore, They shall then best pray for such their deliverance, both from the
evil one, and the evil of his temptations.

[Yea^, their prayer in truth or sincerity will be then both a means of their
deliverance and of the assurance thereof, as being Gods ordinance for his
Church to that end.]

Argument from the enforcement, For thine is the Kingdom, and the power, and
the glory, etc.
The consideration of these enforcements will then be most vigorous and strong
unto the Saints, when they are assured from the word, that there is such a
time, wherein God will most evidently and fully manifest them unto good and bad
on earth, at the time of his next coming.

But he will most evidently and fully manifest them unto good and bad upon
earth, [according to the word.] Therefore, The consideration thereof gives the
greatest enforcement, and vigor then unto the prayers of the Saints, or in
reference to that time.

Arguments from four Articles of the Creed. First, From thence shall he come to
judge the quick and the dead. Secondly, I believe the holy Catholic Church.
Thirdly, I believe the Communion of Saints. Fourthly, The Resurrection of the
body of the righteous.
Argument from the Article, From thence shall he come to judge the quick and
the dead.


But the Scripture teaches that he will do this after the seventh Trumpet, at
the beginning of the thousand years, Rev. 11. Rev. 19. Rev. 20.

Therefore, They that believe it rightly, must believe he will then do it.



But the Scripture has set down Christ appearance, or first coming of Christ
to judgment, at the beginning of the said thousand years.

Therefore, They that deny his first coming then to judgment, deny it in that
order the Scripture has set it down in.

Besides, the manner of his proceeding is different at the first and second
coming of Christ to judgment: At the first, he will begin with the Temporal
destruction of his enemies; First, with fine and sword, so taking away those
Tares by Bundles, and then cast them into Hell; and then the Angels shall
gather the Wheat into his Barn. Matthew 13.
But at his last coming, he will first gather the good; the dead in Christ
shall rise first, and the raised before, and the quick living upon earth, at
the voice of an Archangel, and the trump of God, shall be all changed in a
moment, in the twinkling of an eye, and be caught up to meet Christ in the Air,
and so being freed from the destruction of the wicked, they shall be ever with
the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.2 Pet. 3.10
when the Heavens shall pass away as a seroll, and the Elements melt with
fervent heat, and the earth with the works thereon shall be burnt up, as the
Scriptures witness after the thosand years is past.

Argument from the belief of the Holy Catholic Church.
Such as rightly believe that they are essential properties of the Church of
Christ to be holy and Catholic, ought to believe it to be such in reference
to those times chiefly wherein Gods word declares it shall be chiefly such.

But in the said thousand years, his word declares it shall be chiefly such.

Therefore, They that rightly believe those properties, must then according to
Gods Word chiefly believe it to besuch.

The Pseud-Holy, and Pseud-Catholique Harlot of Rome, has long falsely assumed
those properties to her self, all that time the Scripture has foretold the
world should wonder after the beast, Rev. 13. The seducer knowing that they
belong to the true Church, has so ascribed them to the false Church, that the
true holy Catholic Church might not be expected; But that hereafter in the
said thousand years, the Church of Christ will be holy above all former times,
the Scriptures abundantly show, as before is set down, and much more follows.
And secondly, that it shall then be most Catholic, from East to West, from
Sea to Sea, from one end of the world to the other, there are also plentiful
Testimonies which never yet were fulfilled.

Argument from the belief of the Communion of Saints.
They that believe the Communion of Saints aright, must believe it in that
manner, and in that time the Scripture sets it forth on earth.

But the Scripture sets it forth most eminently in the said thousand years to
come.

Therefore, according to Scripture they must believe it will then be most
eminent upon earth.

They will then be of one heart, and one way, the Lord one, and his name one;
Ephraim shall not envy Judah, nor Judah vex Ephraim.

Argument from the Resurrection of the body.
Such as rightly believe the resurrection of the bodies of the just, must
believe it in the same time and order the Scripture of true had set it down.

But the Scripture of true sets down the beginning of the resurrection of the
just, to be at the beginning of the thousand years of Christ's reign on earth;
first, the Martyrs and eminent Saints, and then every one in his own order.

Therefore, they that rightly believe the resurrection of the Saints bodies,
must so then believe it.

Argument from the Article of the Nicene Creed; He shall come again with glory
to judge both the quick and the dead, whose Kingdom shall have none end.
THose that acknowledge a Kingdom of Christ, as Mediator after his first
glorious appearance, or coming to judge the quick and the dead, plainly
acknowledge his Kingdom of the thousand years.

But the composers of the Nicene Creed, plainly acknowledge such a Kingdom of
Christ, after his first glorious appearance or coming to judge the quick and
the dead.

Therefore, The composers of the Nicene Creed plainly acknowledge Christ's
Kingdom in the thousand years.

This is proved from the quotation of that (...), in the Title Page, grounded
upon the Prophecy of Daniel, and after the thousand years, Christ as Mediator
will have no kingdom, it being at the end of the world, to be given up to God
the Father, etc.

Arguments from the Article of the Nicone Creed, I believe in the Holy Ghost,
the Lord and Giver of life, who proceeds from the Father and the Son, who
with the Father and the Son is to be worshipped, and glorified, who spoke by
the Prophets.
At what times the Scriptures foretell that the Holy Ghost, who spoke by all
the holy Prophets, will most inlighten his Saints and Servants in the right
understanding of them, and will most be manifest to be the Lord and Giver of
spiritual life, and consequently to be most evidently to be worshipped and
glorified, with the Father and the Son; all Gods faithful people are bound
specially to believe in him, in reference to the fulfilling of all such
Prophesies concerning those times.

But the Holy Ghost in the Scriptures has expressly and particularly foretold,
that such things shall be eminently fulfilled in the time of Christ's said
Kingdom upon earth, when he will most evidently appear to be the Lord and Giver
of spiritual life, and consequently most eminently to be worshipped and
glorified with the Father and the Son.

Therefore, All Gods faithful people ought specially to believe in the Holy
Ghost, in reference unto such eminent fulfilling of such spiritual promises
concerning those times.

He first spoke by the Prophets more rarely till Christ was come in the flesh,
namely, only to those few special messengers from time to time whom he
immediately inspired: He was given more plentifully unto his Saints and
Servants after Christ was glorified; for so says the Apostle Joh. 7.39. But
after our Savior commanded his Disciples to tarry at Jerusalem, until they
were endued with power from on high; (...). The Phrase is Emphatical; the same
with Romans 13.14. Put on the Lord Jesus Christ; and they were so soon after
endued with the holy Ghost, Act. 2. which in verse 33. St. Peter calls the
receiving of the promise of the Holy Ghost; hence the Apostles had a spirit of
power, 2 Timothy 1.7. and so had all the company of the beleivers that prayed with
Peter and John, Act. 4.31. when the place was shaken, and they were filled with
the Holy Ghost; So was Steven, Act. 6. and many others, not only Jews, but
Gentiles, which then seemed strange to the Christian Jews, Act. 10.45, 47. but
this held not long, but for the first settling and ratifying the Gospel of
Christ in such extraordinary manner, which is by judicious men conceived to be
as a preludium of the great fulfilling of the prophesies, fully to be
accomplished in the thousand years to the end, which were applied likewise for
that time, by the Apostle, Act. 2. out of Joel 2. and Esa. 44.3. unto which
great fulfilling, seems the applying, Psa. 8. in Act. 4.24. and Act. 2.25. in
that prayer when the place was shaken, verse. 31. to the end; both which places
have reference mainly unto those times, as Heb. 2. and the context of Psalm. 2.
does evidently make manifest; then all Gods Saints will more evidently (with
open face) behold the glory of the Lord, and be changed into the same Image by
the Lord the Spirit; that Spirit of power that was in those first times sent
down upon the Apostles, and others extraordinarily: And if Christ shed forth
his Spirit so wonderfully at that time, when he went to receive his Kingdom,
how will he pour it out upon all his Saints, when he shall come gloriously to
rule and reign in his Kingdom, in a different and more eminent way then ever
before manifest unto the world? which will be executed every way irresistibly,
and prevalently toward enemies, and his people of all sorts by his spirit of
Power and Domination, as Tremel. upon 2 Cor. 3.18. who will then likewise be
more fully and evidently manifest to be our God, with the Father and the Son,
proceeding from the Father and the Son, who with the Father and the Son is to
be worshipped and glorified, as the Ni^ene Creed excellently: For the glory of
the whole Trinity will wonderfully shine out in that Kingdom of Christ upon
earth, when the Tabernacle of God is with men, So Rev. 11.19.
and the pure river of the water of Life shall run through the New Jerusalem
come down from heaven, which is the place our Savior tells his Disciples, Joh.
14.13. that he went to prepare for them, when he would receive them to himself,
that they might be where he is (as diverse Scriptures evidence) where he injoyns
them, that as they believe in God they should also believe in him; and
presently after in the same Chapter does twice promise to them the Holy Ghost.
First, to be a Comforter to them. Secondly, to lead them into all truth Verse.
16. and afterward again, Verse. 26. and so God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
will be then made evidently manifest unto the Saints, when they shall possess
that place which Christ there promised to prepare for his Disciples, etc. even
to all the faithful in their degree, for they shall all then know him from the
least unto the greatest, Jer. 31.34. Heb. 8.11.

As for Testimony of Primitive Churches and Doctors, take the evidence of the
Nicene Council, and therewith the Nicene Creed; of whose Kingdom there shall be
no end, set down in the Title page; with sundry quotations of Ancients and
Fathers, briefly set down in the Appendix following, concerning which
particular it is not needful here to be large, because it is so plentifully,
learnedly, and judiciously already performed by Dr. Nathaniel Homes, in the
first part of the Dawning of the day star, and in diverse other parts of that
Book, whither the Judicious Reader may be referred in this point for abundant
satisfaction therein, whereby this Doctrine of Christ's reign is abundantly
vindicated from novelty, and manifested to be purely primitive.

THE APPENDIX.
Wherein is briefly considered what Rev. 20. Chap. sets down concerning the
thousand years, but more especially voncerning the first resurrection, verse 4,
5.6. compared with the other parallel Text, having reference to the same time,
Rev. 11.15, 16, 17, 18. Setting forth diverse reasons for such resurrection of
the Saints bodies, then spoken of in the said Texts, with sundry other
Scriptures and instances both in the old and new Testament, pertinent to that
purpose; And that the Doctrine of the resurrection, which was all along in
Scripture taught gradually before, is most fully cleared by the two last
Apostles, St. Paul in his Epistles, and St. John in the book of the Revelation.

NOw because that Matutina resurrectio, which Mr. Mede speaks of, called the
first resurrection, Rev. 20.4, 5. By way of Antithesis to the last more general
resurrection, of the good and bad before not raised, is of great concernment to
the then living godly, and Saints departed before; let us confider what the
Scriptures set before us concerning the same; And because Christ has more
fully revealed to his Church, Rev. 20. the pleasure of his father therein, more
then formerly was made known in the word (for the Doctrine of the resurrection
in diverse things in the Old and New Testament, was revealed by degrees, and
St. Paul shows some mysteries of it, and our Savior there more.) Let us
therefore in the first place consider the context of what is there said
thereof, Rev. 20. and then come to the verses wherein it is contained.

Verse. 1, 2. The Angel Christ, lays hold on Satan, and binds him a thousand
years; which thousand years, by the most learned on all hands, is agreed to be
literally taken, for many reasons; Vide Parae. on Rev. 20.2. besides the
emphatical expressions after several times the mention of a thousand years; the
Spirit of God sets them out with an Article, (...) three times, verse. 3, 5, 7.
as if he should say, these thousand years beforementioned indefinitely, are
now so often spoken of demonstratively, punctually setting down what was done
before, what in and after them, in all which the word clears the literal sense.

Verse 3. He shuts him up in the bottomless pit, and seals, or secures him
there during that time, but shows he must after the thousand years be loosed
for a little season. And the fulfilling of that his loosing is set down (as
this matutina, or first resurrection is decyphered, verse. 4, 5, 6.)

For Verse. 7. Shows when Satan is accordingly loosed out of Prison.

Verse. 8. Shows how he prevails to gather his hosts of Gog and Magog, in great
numbers, in all the four quarters of the earth.

Verse. 9. Sets down their design to compass the camp of the Saints, and their
disappointment, by fire from heaven, that devours them.

Verse. 10. Shows the judgment of Satan, in the lake of fire and brimstone,
where the beast and false Prophet were cast before the thousand years.

Verse. 11. And so forward to the end, is described the ensuing last judgment,
where the judge is set down in this 11. verse, and his Throne he sat on; Verse.
12. the persons judged, all sorts, small and great, the ways of their trial, by
opening the books, and according to their works.

Verse 13. How they came to the judgment, The Sea, and Death, and the Grave
gave up all the dead.

Verse. 14, 15. Shows who were cast into the lake of fire at the last, namely,
Death the last enemy, 1 Cor. 15. and Hell, or the grave, with all whose names
were not written in the Book of life.

Now concerning this first resurrection, it is largely described in many
particulars, Verse 4. In the first place are thrones; and they that sat on
them, and judgment was given unto them; which seems to be such eminent holy
persons, as the Apostles or great Prophets, assessors with Christ then, that as
our Savior promised should sit and judge on thrones at his Kingdom, Luke
22.29, 30. Secondly; All other faithful Saints that lived and reigned with
Christ the thousand years.

Verse. 5. declares the different conditions of all others, there called the
rest of the dead, that had not part in that first resurrection.

Verse. 6. Contains the condition, quality, and privileges of all the then
raised Saints; First, they are blessed; Secondly, they are holy, and therefore
blessed; Thirdly, They are thereupon secured; the second death shall have no
power on them; they are most safe from the judgment of the wicked that will
come. Fourthly, the excellency of their promotion; First, to be Priests of God
and Christ, to offer praise, etc. continually. Secondly, Kings to reign with
him the thousand years.

And this the Parallel Text, Rev. 11.15. and so forward, at the sounding of the
seventh Trumpet, does likewise confirm, where, verse 15. is set down the
beginning of Christ's reign upon earth, and the continuance for ever, while the
earth continues. Secondly, the praise of the Church thereupon, namely, the
twenty four elders, now without mention of the four beasts, (as formerly) verse.
16.

Verse. 17. There is the object of their praise, Lord God Almighty, which is,
and was, and is to come, and then reigned. Secondly, The ground of that their
praising him for taking his great power and reigning.

Verse 18. The occasion, opportunity, and advantage, that Christ took then to
take his great power, and to reign. First, of evil unto the evil; the Nations
were provoked to anger and rage by the Devil, against the Saints (as also he
will do to compass the Camp of the Saints, when Satan is loosed, Chap. 20.9.)
and here Gods wrath came upon them, in devouring fire, and destroyed them that
destroyed the earth in the end of the 18. verse. Secondly, in the middle part of
the same verse, we have the advantage or opportunity Christ takes of good to
the good. First, of the dead before that; They should then be raised; and they
are of two degrees; First, Gods eminent servants the Prophets, that should have
suitable reward to their great service or sufferings, or both; And Secondly,
less eminent Saints. Again, good to the good, then alive on earth, such as fear
Gods name, small and great; for the blessed and holy dead raised then will be
above sear; there perfect love (as Saint John speaks) has cast out fear.

Lastly, Verse. 19. There is described the spiritual glory of the grace of God,
discovered in Christ above what was before, so as peculiar to Jerusalem that
comes down from heaven. The temple of God was opened in heaven, and there was
seen in his temple the Ark of his Testament; and on the other hand, is set
forth the terror of Gods wrath, manifest then against ungodly men, to be
horribly destroyed from the earth, as is set down at this time, So Psalm. 50 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, etc.
Dan. 12.1. which likewise referres both to the good and the wicked.

Now for the condition or state of the raised Saints, it is probable to be
like, or suitable to what was in Christ before he ascended to his Father, that
appeared and disappeared as he saw good for his Disciples, and sometime eat and
drank with them, as both the Gospel manifests, Vide Mat. 26.29. compared with
Luke 22.18, 19. one verse speak of the Passover, the other of the Lords Supper.
and the Apostle Peter says expressly, Act. 10.41. But not so glorious as will
be after in the highest heavens, which the Saints on earth could not abide, as
being too great for mortal eyes, etc. And in that state our Savior is recorded
to have spoken to them in the 40. days after he arose from the dead, concerning
this Kingdom of God we speak of, as is likely Acts 1.3. which might occasion
the Disciples asking Verse. 6. whether at this time he would restore the Kingdom
to Israel: And he also might then promise to them the New Heavens, and the New
Earth, as 2 Pet. 3.13.

And whereas some make great stir against the manifest drift and scope of Rev.
20.4. because the souls are said to live; besides that in Scripture, Idem,
souls are taken for persons frequently, Genesis 40.20. Psalm. 16.10. Luke 12.19
etc. How fitly may that be resolved by considering them vissionally, in the
state they were represented to Saint John then, and were to be in, when they
were to have their bodies quickened, which is plainly the drift of that
Revelation in that text^! for it had been no Revelation to have said their
souls only lived, nor that their souls thence should reign, unless in a state
suitable to Christ with bodies, and to be with them on earth. And the like
Decypherings of the deceased Saints were then also, Rev. 7.13, 14. where they
are said to be arrayed in white robes, etc. Namely, as they shall be when they
shall be raised and reign with Christ on earth; and so Chap. 6.11. White r^bes
were given to every one of them, which is spoken of the same souls, but then
represented unto him in vision, in what manner those souls will appear, when
their bodies shall be raised at Christ's Kingdom.

And this is further evident from the Antichesis of them that lived not again
then; namely, in respect of their bodies, so that these must then live again in
respect of their bodies. Thirdly, They must live again in that respect they
were before dead, that is, of their bodies, for their souls always lived; only
their bodies were dead; therefore those, and only those, then lived again.
Fourthly, They must then so live, as will be most suitable to Christ's state of
reigning on earth, as being their head, who is therefore the first fruits of
the resurrection; he eminently showed his power and pleasure in this at his
very death, as a preludium what he would do when he came to reign more
generally for the Saints, Mat. 27. when many dead Saints arose and went into
the holy City; when Christ for a time after his resurrection was in such a
middle condition in regard of his body; and who would have thought of such a
thing to be done then, if the Scripture had not so clearly recorded it. So that
as Paul said before King Agrippa, Act. 26.8. Why should it be thought a thing
incredible with you, that God should raise the dead? So why that then he will
so raise them, when his word fully testifies it sormerly more and more clearly,
and at last most clearly; therefore (says he) when the Son of Man shall come
(namely, at that coming we speak of) shall he find faith on the earth. This was
prophesied by Zach. chap. 14.5. typified in the Israelites, as buried in the
Red Sea, Exodus 15. alluded to in this particular case, Rev. 15.3. besides the
places spoken of above.

Again, on the other side, that those souls living (or as is said of the other
sort v. 6.) living again, is not to be understood Spiritually, lay together all
the ensuing considerations. First, It is not agreeable to the Prophecy, for
they always so lived since the departing out of this life. Secondly, To
understand it spiritually was no new Revelation, for that was a plain known
truth, ever believed and acknowledged in the Church of God. Thirdly, The
(living) there is not of the souls spiritually, because this is of a (living)
peculiar to that time, not to be before nor after, but at the last more general
resurrection. Fourthly, Because they can only in a particular manner to that
time only live, in such sense as they could before be said to be dead; not
spiritually but only bodily. Fifthly, They cannot spiritually be said to reign
with Christ that thousand years, in such a spiritual manner as the Text
imports; because, spiritually they did so before. Sixthly, They are not
suitable to the outward glory of Christ's Kingdom in the world then, if they
have not their bodies. Seventhly, Many peculiar promises to the Fathers and
Prophets, etc. imply it must be bodily, and not ^piritual only. Eighthly, (as we
before hinted) the spiritual reign without the bodily will not be suitable to
the state, nature, and end of Christ's Kingdom; for then according to his
prayer, Job. 17.24. Father, I will that they be with me where I am, that they
may behold my glory; not only spiritually but bodily, wherein that vision will
much consist. Again, add, as he is the first fruits of the resurrection, in
regard of body, not soul, so they in respect of their bodies will be a great
part of the harvest hallowed by that first fruits.

Again, consider the Doctrine of the resurrection, as we hinted before, has
been set forth by degrees; it was but rarely and darkly taught in the Old
Testament; hence our Savior to confute the Sadduces out of Moses (who would be
his Disciples in presence) by an inference, repells their error, not by plain
words: God is the God of the living, not of the dead; but he is the God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; therefore they live; and little we find but Jobs
profession of his own faith, and the promise to Daniel, and Esays mystical
prophecy Chap. 26. and some few miraculously raised by the Divine power of
Christ, as types of that to come, which the most of them (if not all) seem to
have reference unto this very time of Christ's beginning to reign (as we shall
endeavor by and by to make evident) and for Saint Paul in the New Testament,
he sets forth many things concerning the resurrection, after he had 1 Cor. 15.
in the beginning of the Chapter strongly proved it against that Sadducaical
opinion; especially, by the resemblances betwixt the first Adane and the
second, and by the dying and quickening of grain, which was our Saviors own
resemblance for his own death, Except a Corn of Wheat he cast into the earth,
etc. So when the Apostle in the said Chapter goes on to speak of the Doctrine
thereof, he sets forth many particulars of it; the ground or cause, Christ the
first fruits; the order first, Verse. 23, 24, 25, 26.
those that are Christ's at his coming, namely, this coming when only the Saints
will be raised; then shows what will be before the end; namely, all rule, all
authority of the evil world, must be subdued by Christ; and even the last enemy
to be subdued will be death; and then shows a mystery afterward about that
point; yea, many mysteries, as follow largely Verse. 51, 52, 53, 54. having in
the middle of the Chapt^r showed those sund^y particulars of it. First, For the
order, Christ should rise as the first fruits and cause of the Saints holy
resurrection, ver. 23. Secondly, The time, when the Saints in a special manner
alone should be so raised by him; namely, at this his coming, ver. 23. Thirdly,
He gives an intimation how long he must reign after that coming, till all
enemies be put under his feet. Fourthly, He sets down the last enemy to be
subdued, that is, death, which came by the first Adam, and at last shall be
destroyed by the second Adam. Fifthly, In verse. 27. is employed his invincible
prevalency, when all enemies are destroyed; and verse. 28. how as Man or
Mediator Christ will be subject to the Father to this purpose, Psalm. 110.
gives a clear evidence, which is concerning the reign of Christ on earth; after
which Paul shows as Mediator he delivers up the Kingdom to God the Father,
verse 24. When death and hell shall be cast into the lake of fire, as was said,
Rev. 20.14. read what will then be at the last most general resurrection hinted
before, verse. 51, 52, 53, 54. Consider the many particulars there taught in
this point not known usually before, and so in like manner in the 20. Chapter
of the Revelation, Christ reveals to Saint John more fully and clearly what
Saint Paul had taught before obscurely and darkly, till hereby explained;
namely, that under the seventh Trumpet, when Christ shall come to reign on
earth, and show himself there gloriously in his Kingly Office, there shall be
such a first resurrection of Martyrs, Apostles, Prophets, and such holy persons
of all sorts, as was observed before; and this Gods faithful people ought to
know and believe, to their great comfort and rejoicing, as well as any thing
concerning the Doctrine of the resurrection so gradually made known to the
Church before, as Christ was pleased any way before to dispense the knowledge
thereof to the glory of him who shall so raise them to raing with him here,
where they have served him in faithfulness, or suffered for him, or with him.

And now we shall by Gods gracious assistance proceed to consider other
Scriptures, that seem to confirm this which we have delivered from Christ, Rev.
20.4. And this doubtless was revealed to the holy Fathers and Prophets in the
Old Testament, concerning the raising of the deceased Saints at Christ's Kingdom
on earth, as really, though not so clearly, as it is now to us in the New
Testament, as being the chief glory of that his Kingdom, wherein they were to
have their part; therefore, God is the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and
that should be his memorial for ever; to whom, and their posterities with them,
the land of Canaan was promised and shadowed out, to be accompished at this
time fully, wherein all the great promises to that purpose are to have their
compeat accomplishment, vid. Deuteronomy. 30, to verse. 11. Deuteronomy. 4.20, 21. Eze. 37.25.
This Jobs expectation had particularly respect unto, When the Judge should
stand on the earth at the last day (as the original carries it) and Daniel was
to stand in the lot at this time (as before we showed) and which seems to be
our Saviors drift in the Text, Rev. 20. and for this end the great promises of
circumcising the heart of the seed of those holy Fathers tend to this, Deuteronomy
30.6. when they had been driven to the utmost parts of heaven, and brought into
the lands which their Fathers possessed, that they might possess it, verse.
4.5.6. in their sight. So that Evangeligal Prophet Esaias Chap. 26. professes of
himself, and the faithful with him, in that his excellent Song to this purpose,
verse. 19. where having spoken in order of the condition of Gods people in the
time now past, unto the time of the resurrection of Gods people at this very
period (as may appear from the Context) for having spoken of their condition in
the captivity of Babylon, ver. 13. When other Lords besides the Lord Jehovah
had had Deminion over them, and yet they would by him only make mention of his
name. Concerning those Lords (he says) They are dead, they shall not live;
they are deceased, they shall not rise; therefore, he had visited, and
destroyed them, and made all their memory to perish, verse. 14. though they
themselves were removed, that were his Nation, into all the ends of the earth,
and though a long time after they had prayed, and been like a woman with child
in pangs and hopes, yet had brought forth nothing but wind, since for long time
there was no deliverance wrought in the earth, neither did the inhabitants
thereof fall, v. 16, 17, 18. yet that both would come to pass he professes his
says, saying of Gods people and of himself: Thy dead men shall live together,
with my dead body shall they arise; awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust
[as Ephesians. 5.14. Awake thou that sleep, and rise from the dead, and Christ
shall give thee life, as also Esaias 60.1.] and then it follows, for thy dew is
as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead; where he fully
shows his faith concerning this first resurrection, where he shows the Jews
should be a herbs after winter is past, quickened by the reviving dew of the
springtime; whereas the Lords spoken of verse. 13. were such as are mentioned
not then to rise, Rev. 20, 5. the inhabitants that had not fallen till that
time those Rev. 19.11. to the end, but the Jews Church and himself, as at the
first resurrection, when those said inhabitants of the earth, among the rest of
the dead that lived not, should have no part in that first resurrection, when
unto himself and Gods people, both a temporal and spiritual resurrection will
be both of body and soul, and outward condition at that time; hence the
Israelites and Jews, as two sticks joined into one, though like dead bones
before scattered, yet then God shows they should be raised with flesh and skin;
and be and stand up as a great army, Ezekiel. 37. [and hereunto may be referred
the mystical resurrection of the two sackcloth witnesses as typical thereof.]
And this the Apostle Paul seems to declare by the Allegory of the two
Testaments, Gal. 4.26. resembled by Hagar, which was Mount Sinai in Arabia,
that gendred to bondage; and Sarah the Jerusalem that is above, that is the
Mother of all the faithful; that Mother City prepared for them, Heb. 11.16.
that will then come down from God, being the City of the living God, Heb.
12.12. with all her children, The children of the resurrection, as our Savior
styles the faithful, Luke 20.36. shall possess, unto which purpose he applies
Gods being the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in verse. 37. next following;
yea, moreover our Savior describs the faithful, v. 35. by being counted worthy
to receive that world, and the resurrection from the dead; observe the
expressions; so the Apostle to the Hebrews speaks of a world to come, Heb. 2.5.
which is applied hither with Psalm. 8. as appears from the context. And Act.
2.29, 30. the Apostle applies the promise to the Patriark David, Psalm. 130.11.
of his Seeds sitting upon his throne to Christ's resurrection, who is the
resurrection, and life to all that are his, which then will be fulfilled; and 2 Samuel 7.16. his seed is said to be established before him. And as for such as
were wonderfully raised from the dead in the Old and New Testament, being all
raised by the power of Christ, and by the virtue of his resurrection, in its
time to be accomplished, were to strengthen the faith of Gods people in all
times, following that Christ in his due time which now is revealed, would raise
up from the dead all his believing Saints and faithful servants. Yea, that
eminent manifestation of Christ's kingly glory, before his three disciples at
his transfiguration, having Moses and Elias then so talking with him of his
decease, which he was shortly after to accomplish at Jerusalem, seems
remarkably to set before us that we now speak of, namely, that when he will
appear in the world to be the great King of his people on earth the said
thousand years, that then such as Moses and Elias shall appear with him, and be
greatly honored by him, etc.

It is an observation of godly and learned men upon the promises made in the
Epistles to the seven Asian Churches, that some of them signify the state of
the Church in the Primitive times, as it were adumbrated and resembled in the
two first Epistles; in the five last the times of Antichrists date of 42.
months; but all the promises in those seven Epistles relate to the New
Jerusalem. As first, as our Savior told his Disciples that followed him, that
in the regeneration, they should sit on Thrones, judging the 12. Tribes of
Israel, answerable to that promise, Rev. 3.21. where Christ says, He will
grant to him that overcomes to sit with him on his Throne, even as he also
overcame and was set down with his father in his Throne; and that will be
fulfilled, Rev. 20.4. And whereas it is said, Rev. 1.6. Christ has made them
Kings and Priests unto God and his Father, who is himself there stilled the
Prince of the Kings of the Earth: So in Christ's kingdom upon earth that will be
fulfilled, Rev. 20.6. where it is said, The Saints shall be Priests of God, and
of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years. So that promise Chap.
2.7. where promise is made, To him that overcomes to eat of the Tree of Life,
in the midst of the Paradise of God, by allusion to the tree in Paradise,
whereby eternal life should have been confirmed to Adam, if he had stood, that
is applied to such as shall have their part in the New Jerusalem, Chap. 22.14.
who shall have right to the tree of life: so Chap. 3.4, 5. promise is made to
walk with Christ in white, and white raiment. So such as shall come into the
New Jerusalem, Rev. 7.9, 13. and Chap. 19.8. Christ's armies that followed him,
were cloathod in fine linen, white and clean. So Chap. 3.12. promise is made
to be a pillar in the house of God, and go no more out, etc. and to have the
name of God written on them, etc. Answerably again, Chap. 22.3, 4. His servants
shall serve him, and they shall see his face, and his name shall be in their
foreheads. Again, Chap. 2.11. They shall not be hurt of the second death.
Answerable to that Chap. 20.6. On such the second death shall have no power. So
it is promised to such, Their name shall not be blotted out of the Book of
Life, but be confessed before the Father, and before his Angels, Rev. 3.5. So
Chap. 21.27. They enter the New Jerusalem whose names are written in the Book
of life. All which, and diverse other promises, the Saints, to whom all along
from Saint John's time, these promises have been made, they cannot have
fulfilled to them in the New Jerusalem upon earth in Christ reign, if they be
not raised then from the dead. And that promise Of raising such up at the last
day, Joh. 6. To such as his Father has given him, verse. 39. To such as see the
Son, and believe on him, verse. 40. To such as the Father draws to come to
him, verse. 44. To such as eat his flesh, and drink his blood, v. 54. four times
repeated in that latter part of that Chap. is manifest to be under stood of
that first matutina resurrectio, called the last day in respect of the world,
at the (...), the finishing together of that age, while evil men are mixed with
good, like tares in the field; when as our Savior speaks, Rev. 10. the world
time shall be no more, when he will raise all his people that then sleep in the
grave, to reign on earth with him, till the great multitude of their
fellow members be come in.

This Doctrine many of the ancient Fathers acknowledged in the first Primative
times, as Justine Martyr reckoned by Master Mede in his Dialogue with Trypho
the Jew, Irenaeus in his 5. Book and 5. last Chap. Nepos B. of Egypt,
Tertullian in his 3. book against Marcion, Lactanti. in his 7. book of Instit.
chap. 23. etc. even Augustine sometime held it, though by the subtilty of
Satan, forgeing lies to asperse the Millenary opinion, and stirring men up to
foyst in offensive errors in those times, both Saint Augustine and others laid
it down after him, etc. But Christ in these latter times has again discovered
it, after so many hundred years of its lying hid for the most part in the
Church, to be a doctrine really to be embraced by his faithful people, who
shall have the good of it, and wherein he will appear wonderful, in and toward
his Saints in the said Kingdom.

Again, it is observable in Heb. 3, and 4. Chapters, after he had spoken of
that rest of the people of Isreal's entering into the Land of Canaan, and of Gods
rest from the work of Creation, and Christ's resting from the work of
Redemption, he speaks of an other rest from David's words; To day, after so long
a time, it is said to day, if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts,
etc. and then concludes, there remains a rest or Sabbatisme for the people of
God, which they should have in this world, and that seems to be in the New
Jerusalem, both Jews and Gentiles then living, or raised from the dead, etc.

And for that Text, Dan. 12.2. Many that sleep in the dust of the earth shall
awake, here take notice, it is said (many) not all shall awake, some to
everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt; may be answered
one of these three ways, either as an abridgement of both resurrections, the
matutina and vespertina, as he sometimes speaks in brief of things far distant,
as Verse. 4. and Verse. 7. one of the Primitive times, the other of the end of
Antichrists time; or else of the resurrection after Christ's reign on earth
only, at the last judgment, which will then be general, both of quick and dead,
good and bad. But thirdly I conceive, the best answer is according to the
fittest analogy of the two Prophets Ezekiels and Daniels Prophesies, and
reality of the matter of which they both speak, that it is to be understood of
both the civil and spiritual resurrection of the twelve tribes, that in
appearance had long lain like dead bones, Eze. 37. but according to both
Prophesies, should then be as raised from the dead; of which at first there
will be some of two sorts (as we formerly noted) some continuing to shine
gloriously by their perseverance; others falling to shame and contempt, by
therievoltings, about that time of the matutina resurrectio.

Now for improvement, only these two hints.

First, How should the consideration of this Doctrine comfort Christ's faithful
Saints and Servants against all worldly discouragements, which they may for his
cause hereafter meet with in any kind? for even in respect of this recompense
here set before them, which they shall enjoy in this world the said thousand
years; all their sufferings will not be to be compared to that glory, which
will then be revealed and enjoyed, over and above that which will after be
added and perpetuated unto them to all eternity.

Secondly, How should it quicken and incite them diligently to endeavor to
live to him here, with whom they have so abundant evidence, that they shall
live and reign hereafter?

Yea, and not only to incite them to dye with him too, but likewise for him (if
he require it) as is storied of Christians in the Primitive times, who from
their strength of faith, as respecting this Doctrine, were desirous of
Martyrdom; that as the Apostle Paul speaks, Phil. 2.10. they might obtain a
better resurrection, even to have their part in this resurrection of the just,
whereby will be further most certainly secured to them, That on them the se^ond
death shall have no power, Rev. 20.6. but being perfectly holy, they
thenceforth perfectly happy will doubtless certainly know, that upon their
rapture to meet Christ, they shall be perfected in glory for evermore in heaven.

THE Penmans Humble Cordial, and thankful acknowledgement unto God the fountain
of goodness.
MOst holy and heavenly Father, most glorious and merciful Savior,
grace-working, and truth-teaching sanctifier, three in persons, one in essence;
I bless and magnify that great and glorious name, that thou have been
graciously pleased, by any of thy wise and holy dispensations of providence, by
any help of other means, so far by degrees to work any apprehensions of these
things, concerning the glorious Kingdom of my Savior with his Saints to come
on earth, as thou have been pleased through many ages of the world, to publish
and record therein thy word by thy holy Prophets, faithful Servant and
Apostles, and to affect the soul of thy poor servant therewith, who of himself
(otherwise) was every way unfit and unable for such a work, being abundantly
sensible of his own manifold infirmities, both of body and mind, above many
hundreds or thousands of his brethren, in the office of the Ministry. But it
is thy way whereby, as thou art wont by Babes and Sucklings, so by other weak
instruments to set forth thy praise; The glory thereof belongs to thy Divine
Majesty (who have therein strengthened me with strength in my soul) unto whom I
desire ever to ascribe it, for the many strange workings and ^pp^ehensions of
these things, upon my spirit in the silence of the night, suitable to what thy
word held out, and for strengthening thy servant in the often recalling and
inlargeing, in the day-times, the things impressed before upon his mind, with
frequent burnings of his heart within him (as sometime upon thy Disciples of
old) upon the discovery of the evidence of these things, and of thy grace
toward him therein, who may not conceal thy goodness, nor much less take the
praise thereof unto himself, which is thy due; as thou have been graciously
pleased to strengthen and comfort his soul with this good Gospel news, above
what earthly prosperity could have have done; So bless thy own work by such a
weak and unworthy instrument, to thy own good ends in respect of all sorts of
thy faithful people; That we may (together) learn, by faith (with faithful
Abrabam) aforehand to rejoice in the goodness of thy chosen, and glory with
thine inheritance, and by thy divine and gracious assistance, accordingly walk
in new obedience, that so abundant entrance may be administered unto us, not
only into the New Jerusalem, in Christ's Kingdom upon earth, but with him and
all the members of his mystical body, together in its time, may sing our
perpetual Halelujahs, with all the blessed and glorious Angels, to thee the
most blessed and glorious Jehovah, to all eternity, Amen.

To' Glory's God, all Glory's due for aye,
To him alone this due let all his pay.
(...). The End.
(...).
THe Doctrine of the Kingdom and Reign of Christ under the seventh Trumpet, is
in this tract by the Reverend Author, learnedly discussed, and the (...) of it
clearly and convincingly proved, by demonstrative arguments from the holy
Scriptures, both in the Old and New Testaments, especially of the Revelation of
St. John, into which mystical book, much light is given in this Treatise; and I
judge it worthy of public view.

T.P.


