(...): THE WORLD TO COME, Heb. 25. OR, The Doctrine of the Kingdom of GOD and
his CHRIST, to come on Earth, Rev. 11.15. which shall shortly be over all
Nations.

Tendered in the mean-time out of faith in his own Soul, and love toward all
Men, First, In the Principles or Foundations thereof, in four parts. Secondly,
In the Practicals or Improvements of it on several Texts, as is more
particularly specified in the next leaf.


By W. S. Minister of the Gospel, whose faith thereof is supported [besides
many others] by the Twelve special ensuing Foundations, as by so many Divine
Gradations of Gods Revealing Confirming and Completing the same in its due
time. [Here also set down for the good of all men.] -- As being I. Promised by
God the Father, Gen 3.15. The Seed of the Woman, etc. Psalm. 110.1. 1 Cor.
15.25. See Treat on Genesis 3. II. Prophesied of by Enoch in the old world, Jude
14, 15. III. Foretold by Jacob in the New World, Gen 49.1. with 10, 11, 12 in
Judah's Blessing. IV. Wonderfully manifested by Balaam's the Sorcerers Parable,
Numb. 24.17, 18, 19. and when, verse. 23, 24. V. Typified by two partial Types
in the Old World, viz. by Enoch and Noah, the Types of the first and second
state thereof. VI. Typified also in the New World by three pairs of partial
Types; the first of Abraham and Melchisedeck, the second of Moses and Joshua,
the third of David and Solomon: The three first of the Kingdom of the Stone,
Dan. 2.34. The three last of the Kingdom of the Mountain; As more fully appears
in the following Explication, page 9, etc. VII. Confirmed also both to David
and Solomon by a Divine Charter, very eminently illustrated a Sam. 7.8. to the
end. VIII. Proved by a sevenfold Evidence in the Irenicon, with its Adjuncts
formerly, by many sorts of Arguments, etc. IX. Twice also strongly ratified to
Daniel: First by Revelation only, after Nebuchadnezzar's dream, in the two
states thereof, viz. of the Stone, Chap. 2.34. and of the Mountain, verse. 35.
Secondly, By both Vision and Revelation, where after the four Beasts Dan. 7.
was showed to him when Christ shall receive his Davidical Kingdom, (verse. 14.)
over all Nations. X. App^ied by our Savior himself to the Son of Man's Kingdom,
Matthew. 13.4. His coming in his Kingdom, Matthew. 16.28. Called the Kingdom of
God, Luc. 21.31. XI. Explained by St. Paul at ^he destruction of the Man o^
Sin, 2 Thessalonians 2.8. And Saints Rest, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. Appeara^ce and Kingdom, 2 Timothy
4.1. XII. By Revelation m^st (...) to the belo^ed Apostle John. Chap. 19.11.
and Chap. 20, 21, ^2. (...) ^xplained page 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, etc.]


LON^^^ (...) the year 1671.

The STATIONER's Advertisement TO THE READER.
Ingenuous Readers,
BE pleased to take notice in reference to your better satisfaction in some
respects, That the Testimony of diverse Grave and Judicious Doctors of Divinity
verst in such Studies, is given to this Work, with many other Ministers of the
Gospel, and Learned Doctors of Physic, and other knowing Persons, of its
present usefulness in the Church of God; wherein the Truth is carefully
vindicated from ancient and modern Errors; and Scripture-Evidence given for
many Excellencies belonging to that state, etc. And who have also by their
Subscriptions encouraged the speedy completing of the said Work.

Here Reader observe as to the first Part of the general Title Page, -- That
according to the reference before,
FIrst the said Doctrine is proved -- In the Principles or Foundations of it,
contained in the foresaid four parts, which are these following:

First, The Prodromos or Forerunner, consisting of seventeen Thesis of D
vinity, leading in the said Doctrine, page 9, 10, 11, 12. and of some useful
occasional Letters and Papers there set down, whereunto reference is afterward
often fitly made in the ensuing parts.

The second is the Irenicon, or the peaceable consideration of Christ's peaceful
Kingdom on Earth to come, chiefly proving from Scripture, and many sorts of
Arguments, that such a Kingdom and state of things shall be in the world, upon
a sevenfold foundation, set down in the beginning thereof. Whereunto is added
an Appendix of the first blessed Resurrection of the Just, Rev. 20.6, to be in
the time of Christ's said Reign with his Saints on Earth.

The third is entitled, The Parallel of the Prophetical Visions of Daniel, for
aftertimes, and of the Revelation of Jesus Christ; respecting and unfolding
the matters of the same times, very briefly and divinely couched before in
Daniel's said Visions, to be shut up and sealed unto the time of the end, i. e.
until Christ came, who afterward by his so wonderful giv ng the Book of
Revelation to the Evangelist St. John, opened and unsealed them, and gave them
a special command not to seal them any longer, Rev. 22.10. Which said Parallel
was the fourth thing propounded to be considered in this subject, in the second
page of the Irenicon, and afterward, as an Additional thereof, was annexed to
it, to make up that part of the said Irenicon, as containing the main ground
thereof, both from that greatly beloved Prophet Daniel in the Old Testament,
and the beloved Disciple John in the New: To prepare for which Parallel (being
of so very great concernment in the said Doctrine) first there is set down an
abridgement of the chief Prophetical Visions of Daniel, wherein are comprised
the times, fates, and successions of the four Mettle. Kindgoms or Monarchies,
Dan 2. and of the four Beasts, Dan. 7. in substance the same; yet each being
not only a strong confirmation, but also an enlargement, and in some things an
explication of the other, as in both the summary of Daniel, and in the Parallel
is to be observed. Also a like Abridgment of the Revelation, was to such
purpose before set down, Chap. 5. page 26, 27, 28. of the Irenicen, to be
compared with the Letter to Mr. Call. May 20. 1664 page 22, 23, etc. of the
Prodromos: and last of all, to such parpose thereto is prefixed the Scheme of
the whole Book of the Revelation, and a summary of Daniel's Visions, further to
make the way more plain to so useful a part as the Parallel may prove to such
as with these or the like helps may further and more fully (by Gods goodness)
improve it hereafter, as there is great reason and divine engagement for
Christians so to do, Rev 1.3. and 22.10.

Fourthly, The last part consisting chiefly of 3^ useful Observations to
understand mystical Prophesies, with answers to sundry Objections made by some
persons against these Doctrines, which being of ^^^^ddle nature, subservient to
both the said Principles and Pract calls, they are now conjoined with the
latter: And unto the said Principles is presixed in the stead thereof, The Word
written, or eight convineing Arguments for these Truths, set in the first
place, before the Prodromos or Forerunner, as containing a short Abridgment of
much Divine Truth of this nature, etc.

And Secondly, The said Doctrine is improved to many good purposes in the
Practicals.

The first whereof is the Treatise upon Genesis 3.15. The Seed of the Woman shall
break the Serpents head. The Abridgment of which, as the first part of the
Everlasting Gospel, with the Treatise also, are presixed before the rest.

The second part of which everlasting Gospel being the second Practical piece,
given by God the Son and the Holy Ghost, is contained in a Tract upon Rev.
22.20. Behold I come quickly: Amen: Even so come, Lord Jesus. Setting forth the
different names, times, natures and purposes of Christ's second coming at the
beginning of the thousand years, Rev. 19.11. And of his descending from Heaven
at the sounding of the last Trump, at the general Rapture and Change of all the
Saints, when the little space of Satan's losing is ended, and the last Gog and
Magog destroyed by fire from God out of Heaven, after the thousand years, when
he shall come to sit on the great white Throne, and Heaven and Earth shall flee
away before his face, and no place be found for them, Rev. 20.11. And all
wicked men shall be raised to be judged, and the irrevocable Sentence in Gods
order shall be passed upon Good and Bad to all Eternity. Unto which are
adjoined nine Uses of the same Doctrine.

The third practical piece is on Jer. 3.17. At that time Jerusalem shall be
called the Throne of the Lord, and all Nations shall come to the Name of the
Lord at Jerusalem: Which is now placed after the aforesaid Observations and
Answers to Objections, as being the Topstone of this Doctrinal Edifice, and
which will reach at length to the highest Heavens.

And now, Prudent Christian Reader, I hope thou will indulge me in some matters
thy just excuse; for though some are clear and evident from sundry Texts of
holy Scripture, yet others are only probable, and some but merely conjectural
(as was fore-advertised, Prodrom. page 44.) and consequently the grounds thereof
are suitably either evident, probable, or conjectural only: Whence it will be
imprudence and unequal judging, to reject many evident truths of this nature,
because of some other mistaken conjectures: But having long since set to sail
in such a vast and rough sloating Ocean, wherein it was to be expected
(notwithstanding any hoped advantage) I was like to be much tossed with various
winds and tempests, before I could look to atrive at the Cape of good Hope: and
being also to travel far in a much untraced Wilderness, or which was worse, to
fall into such Mazes and Meanders wherein many have lost themselves; yet since
that such a Wilderness was my way to come to the promised Land; though the
Cloud by day, and the Pillar of Fire by night, did not always appear to go
before me; yet I may not say but that I have in a gracious manner many times
found their guidance: But yet have met with many Amalakites, Moabites, and
Ammonites, to hinder my passage thither; besides the Sons of Anak, and also the
stinging siery Serpents, which caused me often to look up to the true Brazen
Serpent, for my needful cure: VVhereupon I have by comfortable experience
found, That Creature Obstructions have sometimes proved to me Gods
Instructions; and some men's hindrances have often (to them unwittingly)
produced Gods help for me, who by remarkable Providence has many times turned
great seeming difficulties to real useful advantages: Otherwise I could not
have hoped so far by faith to have seen the New Jerusalem's Beauty and
Blessedness on Earth, (as they Heb. 11. and as now through the mercy and
goodness of my God, is here offered to thy view: [To which happily much may be
added, if God give opportunity, by Explications or Discourses] Wherein I hope
I my self, with the many ten thousands and ten times ten thousands of saithful
Christians shall attain a long lasting habitation as appointed of God, In that
time The Tabernacle of God shall be with men upon Earth Rev. 21. etc. where we
shall all behold Christ's glory, which the Father has given him, and he to
them, by his last Will and Testament, John 17.24. when the said Lamb shall be
the Light of that City. To which I groundedly by faith say, Amen. For
confirmation whereof, for others benefit, I desire still to be by all good
means subservient,

September. 11. 1671. W. S.

Of the XII forenamed Foundations of the said Doctrine, in the second part of
the general Title Page believed: -- As being,
I. FIrst promised by God the Father, Genesis 3.15. as the most eminent breaking
of the Serpents [Satans] Head, both natural, (as I may say) and politic, of
his Craft and Dominion, when all his former Babylonish Designs shall be
defeated and utterly destroyed; which was, says the Apostle John, 1 Epist.
3.8. one end of Christ's coming into the world, to destroy the works of the
Devil; which in an especial manner will most evidently and powerfully be done,
when Christ comes from the right hand of the Father, whither (as that Nobleman
in the Gospel, Luke 19.) he went at his ascension into Heaven, te receive his
Kingdom, and to return, as he himself speaks; to wit, when he will so come,
and in such wonderful manner make his foes his footstool; until which said time
he will continue there, according to that Divine Oracle so frequently mentioned
and improved in the New Testament, Psalm. 110.1, etc. Sit thou on my right hand
until I make thy soes thy sootstool: Where, as the Apostle says, he sits
still, expecting till his foes are made his footstool, Heb. 10.13. which at
Christ's said coming in the Clouds will most certainly and powerfully be
accomplished above 1000 years before the last Resurrection and General
Judgment, as is most orderly set down in that divine and glorious Revelation to
St. John, Chap. 19 11. and Chap. 20. to v. 11. when he will cause his most
proud and mighty foes to hide themselves again in the holes of the Rocks, as in
some measure in Constantines ruining of the Paganish Powers, Rev. 6.15.16, 17,
was terribly fulfilled: but at the last ruin of the most abominably tyrannous
Kingdom of the Beast and false Prophet, at the appearance of Christ's said
Coming and Kingdom will much more terribly by himself be accomplished, 1 These.
2.8. 2 Timothy 4.1. As then the Prophet Isaiah twice of those times confirms the
terror of it, Chap 2. verse 19, 21. That the loftiness of man shall be bowed
down, and the haughtiness of man shall be made low, and the Lord alone be
exalted in that day, when he wid utterly abolish Idols, that they may go into
the holes of the Rocks, and into the caves of the Earth, for fear of the Lord,
and for the glory of his Majesty, when he arises to shake terribly the Earth:
And the forcible efficacy of this his Prophecy he again further illustrates and
confirms verse 20, 21. Yet observe though he says there, He will shake
terribly the Earth, twice; yet he says not that then he will utterly destroy
the world, which neither will be till the said 1000 years, and little space of
Satan's loosing, be afterward fulfilled, as Rev. 20.8, 9, 10, etc. But then the
Lord, as the Psalmist speaks, will send the Rod of his strength out of Sion,
and he shall then rule in the midst of his Enemies, Psalm. 110.6, etc. and smite
(...) the Head, not Heads (as translated) of diverse Countries, viz. the Pope or
Turk, (or both, as making in several respects the whole Antichrist of the
latter times) but much more upon the said Text Genesis 3.15. may be observed to
the same purpose in the Treatise thereupon.

II. Secondly, Prophesied of by Enoch in the Old World, Jude 14, 15. Behold
the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute Judgment upon all,
and to convince all that are ungedly among them of all their ungodly deeds
which they have ungodly committed, and of all their ungodly speeches which
ungodly sinners have spoken against him. Where observe how general he declares
this Judgment shall be in the issue of it; and then how thoroughly he will
discover ungodly men, though now they hide themselves in the Crowd, and for a
time toward godly men shift off and excuse and hide their ungodliness, yet
then Christ will convince themselves which were the concealers and hiders; and
not some few only, or many, but all of them; and not of few, or only some sorts
or numbers of their deeds, but of all their ungodly deeds; nor only of the
substance of them, but of all the circumstances and aggravations of them, as
ungodlily committed by them; and not only of their deeds, but of their words
also, yea of their most secret thoughts subservient to both; for they shall be
convinced of them, which conviction will reach the most secret workings of
their spirits; and both and all in the most large extent, whatever has been
done or spoken against him, that is Christ, whereby men's sins are most
hainously aggravated many ways, though they little at present consider it; but
in Christ's execution of Judgment upon all in his own order, manner and time,
they must know all these.

This excellent Prophecy seems to have been handed in a wonderful way of
gracious divine Providence from Enoch to the Apostle Jude, by whose hand
Christ's spirit has made it to become holy Scripture. And it is no marvel that
God should so preserve that Prophecy of the last times and things, since he
would, for the warning of all, have all his Prophets witness thereto, as his
Spirit in the Apostle Peter manifested Acts 3.20, 21. As (says he) he spoke by
the mouth of all his holy Prophets since the world began; He would not have
even the old wicked world without such an eminent warning: nor such as godly
Enoch then to be without the comfort of that Deliverer of his people then to
come, to recompense their sufferings for him with a suitable happiness with him
afterward, as the Apostle Paul declares, 2 Timothy 2.12. for his said coming
then is to both those purposes, wherein the same Spirit could enlighten such as
Enoch then, as he did Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Sarah, afterward, who by
their faith saw those Promises afar off, while they lived on earth, which they
believed to see accomplished in their due time, Heb. 11.13. viz. which will be
at the said coming of the Lord with ten thousand of his Saints, and at the
Resurrection of the Just (as Isa. 26.14, 19) which as it will be the year of
the Lords recompense to take vengeance on the wicked (quick) by a sudden
destruction to send them to hell; so also of recompense to the godly, to whom
they will be times of refreshing from the presence of the Lord, and of the
restitution of all things, for their real good and comfort in all that God has
before promised or revealed to such purpose, Act. 3.19, 20, 21. though
particular Saints have not or may not in many things attain to the knowledge of
them, nor (happily) any one shall in many things more till the fruition of them:
Even as the most knowing before Christ's coming, knew not of many things done at
that his coming, as of the Star, the Shepherds, of Herod's trouble at his
birth, nor the earthquake, darkness, the cleaving of the Vail of the Temple, or
dead Saints rising at his death, etc. (besides the many things which happened
in his life) although much more of these last times since our Savior ascended
(as he said a little before it, Acts 1.8 ^is now revealed of his second coming,
as also was before in the Old Testament concerning the same, than at any time
was of his first, as is easily to be observed, etc.

III. Thirdly, Foretold by Jacob in the New World, Genesis 49. who verse 1.
speaks of things to be in the latter or postremity of days; which is
especially applicable to what he ^aith afterward, verse 10, 11, 12. in his
Prophecy of Judah, to which Tribe is therein ascribed the pre-eminence with
plenty and peace (as is therein manifest) chiefly to be enjoyed after Shilo's
coming, to whom the gathering of the people should be, but most especially in
their greatest gatherings, when Jews and Gentiles shall rejoice together (most
eminently) as Deuteronomy. 32.43. is by Moses also foretold to be in the latter or
postremity of days; of which times also our Savior says, There shall be one
sheepfold under himself that one Shepherd of them both, John 10.16.

IV. Fourthly, Wonderfully and graciously manifested by Balaam's Parable, not
being an holy Prophet, as others Acts 3.21. but a Sorcerer, hired by Balaak
King of Moah to curse Gods People, who turned his attempting of the worst of
Cursings into the choicest of Blessings to them; giving him thereby to know,
That there was no enchantment against Jacob, neither any divination against
Israel: for Satan cannot hurt those whom God undertakes to preserve, as Numb.
23.20, 22. But when he had further tried his Enchantments, Chap. 24, he is
further in special forced to pronounce greater blessings for them. verse. 6, 7,
8, 9. saying, How goodly are thy Tents, O Jacob, and thy Tabernacles, O Israel!
But being further urged by Balaak, he shows what that People should do against
his People in the latter days; and then verse. 17. falls upon the coming of the
Messiah far off, saying, I shall see him, but not now; I shall behold him, but
not nigh: There shall come a Star out of Jacob, and a Scepter shall rise out of
Israel, and shall smite all the Corners of Moab, and destroy all the Children
of Sheth, and Edom shall be a possession, Seir also shall be a possession for
his Enemies, and Israel also shall do valiently: And verse 19. Out of Jacob
shall come he that shall have Dominion, and shall destroy him that remains in
the City, etc. But after all, he comes to the last terrible times, verse 23,
24. saying, Alas who shall live when God does this! And verse. 24. he fore-tells
ships shall come from the coasts of Chittim; which Mr. Mede evidently shows to
be meant of the Roman Navy coming from Italy, and are so applied in the order
of accomdlishment by Daniel, Chap. 11.30. and then declares what the Romans
shall do, viz. They shall afflict Ashur, and shall afflict Eber, which they
have long done; but since they were to be the last Oppressor of the Jews, he
further adds, And he also shall perish for ever, or shall go into perdition, as
is otherwise expressed by the holy Ghost, Rev. 17 8. that is, the Roman
Monarchies being the last, shall utterly be ruined when Christ shall destroy
the man of sin, when all wicked and tyrannous Dominion shall utterly cease, and
the Kingdom of the Stone shall become a great Mountain filling the whole Earth;
when that Star, and that Scepter, and that Dominion he spoke of before, verse
17, 19. which are often in Scripture afterward spoken of, shall continue for
ever, viz. to the end of the world. These things are obvious, I shall not
therefore here insist further on them.

V. Fifthly, Typified first by one pair of partial Types in the Old World,
secondly by three partial pairs in the New.

First the said pair of partial Types in the Old World, are Enoch's ascending,
showing the bginning of the Kingd^m of the Stone, at Christ's ascension into
Heaven, Dan. 2 34. And Noah's saving his by the Ark, shows how Christ at the
general Rapture of all Saints, as the true Ark will save them, when all wicked
men shall perish at the finishing of the Kingdom of the Mountain, Dan. 2 33.


First, Enoch was a Type of Christ in his walking with God, who (as the Apostle
says, Heb. 11.5.) before his Translation had this Testimony, That he pleased
God, and therefore was translated that he should not see death, in a wonderful
manner, Body and Soul, in a way unknown to man, into an ever-blessed and happy
condition: Even as Christ having fulfilled the work God gave him to do on
earth, and fulfilled all the wills of his heavenly Father, in the Body which he
gave to him, Heb. 10.5, 7, 8, 9. who therefore had this Testimony from the
Father, That he was his beloved Son, in whom he was well pleased, Matthew. 3.17.
and after all things were done in order by him, to the last finishing of the
work of Redemption, and the witnessing of his Resurrection from the dead to his
Apostles, and other faithful Witnesses thereof, he then ascended visibly into
Heaven, in the sight of his Disciples, Acts 19. Luke 24.51. which was his
eminent beginning of the Kingdom of the Stone, which is the first state
thereof; when he so triumphed gloriously over all the spiritual Powers of
Darkness, as the Apostle teaches, Col. 2.15 so leading Captivity captive, to
give his Kingly Divine Gists unto men.

Secondly, Noah also, that Preacher of Righteousness, as he is styled Heb. 11.
may be added unto Enoch, being another partial Type of Christ; Kingdom in the
second state of it, or the Kingdom of the Mountain; who by faith (says the
Apostle Heb 11.) performed that Princely or Kingly service, to make the Ark in
the sight of that wicked Generation in the Old World, that after perished by
the Flood, thereby to save himself and all his Relations that entered with him
into it: So Christ, who shall be called (says the Prophet Jeremiah, Chap. 23)
by his Church, The Lord our Righteousness, and has long sent abroad the
Preachers of his Righteousness into the wicked World, who regards it not:
when the time of their perishing at last shall inevitably come upon them by a
deluge of fire, as it did on the old world by water: He will himself become at
that time the true Ark prepared for all his true Members united spiritually
unto him, at the general Rapture or Change of all the Saints, when the wicked
remaining on Earth shall all perish at the worlds lost destruction by fire,
where all the other shall abide with Christ, in the greatest safety and
security, above all worldly dangers sufferings, or changes, even when the
Heavens and Earth shall be dissolved for ever.

VI. Sixthly, Again also typified by three pairs of partial Types in the New
world. First of the Kingdom of the Stone, First, In Abraham, toward the first
times of the new world. Secondly, In Moses his Conduct from Egypt, and in the
Wilderness afterward. Thirdly, In David's Conquest and Kingdom which God set
up and gave him.
Secondly of the Kingdom of the Mountain, First, In Melthisedeck King of Salem,
that is, King of Peace. Secondly, In Joshua's Conduct of Gods People into the
promised Land. Thirdly, In Solomon's peaceful Kingdom, the immediate Seed of
David's Loins.



First, In the New world God said a new foundation with Abraham of Christ's
Kingdom, in his free Covenant with him, to be his God, and the God of his Seed,
which the Apostle says was one, namely Christ, Gal. 3.16. and by no other way
was Abraham capable of that mercy, that God should become his God: Indeed God
both promised and bestowed many Benefits and Privileges upon Abraham's,
Isaac's, and Jacob's natural Seed, upon the renewing or repeating of the
substance of that Covenant; but all upon that Foundation-Truth wherein their
Souls were divinely illuminated, that the Son of God should become the Son of
Abraham in a wonderful divine manner, and so by him in a spiritual way of
grace, such his Children by faith should become the Sons of God; and both he
and they by such a way of faith and grace, should inherit all the promises, as
the Spirit of God revealed and parposed so to fulfill them: And therefore the
Apostle Heb. 11. does remarkably show how Abraham, Isaa^, Jacob, and Sarah, by
such illuminat on of their Souls, saw afar off by faith the promises to be
fulfilled in Christ's Kingdom, and at the Resurrection of the Just: when Abraham
shall be heir of the world actuaily, which he was but only by faith whilst he
lived in the world, as he also teaches, Rem. 4.13. and ^nely from that ground
all Gods Servants are interessed in any ^^mpora. Promises or Blessings. And in
such time of his living but (...) Abraham was a great conqueror of his
Enemies, when he d^^vered his Brother Lot and his house, and those with him,
from there Kings that carried them Captives. So Christ whilst he is fulfilling
the Covenant m^de with the Faithful, he is a great Conqueror, and delivers
all his Prethren, whose flesh he took, from their nature, and gives them his
Spirit from his own Divine Nature, which mak^s them ne^^ly related to him, and
dearly beloved of him, and in whose behalf and for whose deliverance he did not
only venture himself, as Abraham did for Lot and his, but actually suffered
death, to deliver them from their spiritual bondage and erernal misery.

The other of this first pair of partial Types in the first times of the New
World, is Melchisedeck, who is not improbably conceived to be Shem the eldest
Son of Noah, who both of them lived in both the Old and the New Worlds; by both
holding out unto us the Eternity of God the Father and the Son, from whom the
Worlds deliverance was fully in time to be accomplished. But Melchisedeck, as
also Abraham, was both a Priest and King; even as Abraham, who seemed not only
to be a King by his said Conquest, but a Priest^n offering his Son Isaac, whom
(says the Apostle) he received again from death in a figure, and was then
appointed really to offer the Ram in the Bush in his stead; and was also said
in some sense to be a Prophet, to pray for Abimelech, Gen 20.7. Also
Melchisedeck was Priest of the most high God, without Father and without Mother
(then known in Abraham's days) typifying the eternal Priesthood of Christ after
his order, Heb. 7. and also King of Salem, that is, King of Peace; typifying
also thereby Christ the great King of the New Jerusalem, to come from God out
of Heaven, (as he style, himself, Matthew. 5.) which as the Son and Heir of
Abraham, does also according to Gods Covenant belong unto him; and sion it, it
is very observable, that Christ's Office and Title to his Kingdom is cont^aally
confirmed and renewed in all the renewed Promises and Types made by God to and
by the faithful foreFathers successively; as also Melchisedeck is here expressly
said to be King of Salem, an evident Type of Christ the great King of
Jerusalem, (as was said) who does and will bless his People with all desirable
peace, as Melchisedeck blessed Abraham returning with the spoi^s from the
slaughter of the said Kings; as Christ will also more fully confirm to them,
when all his and their Foes are made his footstool.

Secondly, Christ's Kingdom in the said two-sold state of it, was evidently
deciphered in Moses his Conduct of Israel out of Egypt, and in the Wilderness;
and then by Joshua's Conduct into Canaan: But Christ, to answer both, does not
only spiritually, by his Death, Resurrection and Ascertion, deliver his
Israel, and leave them then in their Wilderness condition; but as the true
Joshua also, or JESUS, will save them from all evil, and from all their
enemies, Luc. 1. and bring them into possession of the heavenly Canaan, as it
is styled Heb. 3. being the City whose Builder and Maker is God, prepared for
the faithful forefathers Heb. 11.

And first for Moses, who was then styled King in Jesurun, as to Christ's Ch
rches first sta^e, during the Kingdom of the Stone, set up by his first coming,
Dan. 2.34. In respect of which, though Moses, as the Apostle Paul speaks, was
faithful in all Gods House, Heb. 3.2. yet but as a Servant and M^nister of the
Lord, the Antitype; for he made or gave no Laws (then) of his own to Gods
people, but what he received from God for them; nor executed Judgment in
extraordinary cases, but by Gods direction as in the gathering sticks on the
Sabbath day. But Christ was as a Son (when he came) in his own House, Heb. 5.6.
whose House his People are: What Gospel Moses taught Israel, or set before them
(then) was but in the ^ype, till the t^me of Reformation, Heb 9.10. till Christ
put an end to a^l typical worship: Bu^ Moses could not bring them to the
promised Rest, that he left for Jos^ua to perform: So all the life and
substance of all Moses ^ypes and Ceremon^s was only to be sound in Christ; He
the true and only Son of God, carr^ed ^ll those things to their full and
perfect end, who will be the true peace and rest of his People in the Land of
the Living (as that World to come, Heb. 2 5. is most properly so styled) where
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob must then live again, with all the Faithful in their
order and time.

But that latter stare of Christ's said Mediators Kingdom on Earth, as we noted,
was further typified in part by Joshua, though in the better part, under whose
Cond^ct Israel obtained their promised Inheritance of Canaan, wherein Moses
carre sh^rt; but be brought them in^o the possession of it: Which Rest was
after po^^u^ed by them, as says the Prophet, Mich. 2.10. which caused by
degrees the utter expulsion of that People from it: Yet as the Apostle proves
Heb 49. There remai^s still a (Sabbatism, or) Rest for the People of God, with
whom one day is as a thousand years, and a theusand years as one day (as the
Apostle Peter informs us, 2 Pet. 3.9) and through the said true Jeshu^ or
JESUS, this Rest remairs to the People of God; upon w c^, ^s on all former
Sabbaths, the Word and Works of God usually were appointed to be considered in
them (as he was always p^eased in ^he six ^oregoing Millenniums to give
occasion and command) so that long conti^ned Sabbatism or holy Rest of his
people from sin and sorrow, will be a time to contemplate on the Word and Works
of God, when their great hinderers, viz. evil men and Devils, will be removed
ou^ of their way, and all requisite helps from God, Men, and (...), will be
afforded them, for that long continued Sabbatism of that (...) thousand years;
whence Men and Angels too will be more fitted for perpetual Hallelujahs in
Heaven afterward, by so much more than they could have been from all that was
possible to be learned by them to such purpose by all they had seen, or known
or heard before; (as I don't not but might largely be made manifest through all
the six thou (and years of the worlds being before:) Which Sabbatism may be
thereupon sitly styled Gods highest School to train up his Children of the
highest form for their best employment of their most eminent and enlarged
praising of God through their most happy Eternity thence to ensue.

In which Rest or Sabbatism Christ will infeoff his People, and give them
possession thereof with himself; even as the Father has appointed such a
Kingdom unto him, so he will appoint it unto them, as Luc. 22.29. not as a
Substitute only, or Type, like Jeshua, to give them their Lots therein; but as
Lord of the Inheritance, and by his own Gift; and not as to such as may cast
away, or spoil, or lose their said Inheritance; but as to such as shall there
find a sure Rest and Dwelling Place, from which neither inward nor outward,
spiritual or temporal Adversaries shall expel them: so certainly blessed shall
they be then that partake of that first blessed Resurrection, Rev. 20.6. when
they shall be (...), like Angels of God in Heaven, as our Savior speaks of
those Children of the Resurrection, Matthew. 22.30. in that and many other
respects; and such of the Saints as live in the animal Life then under the
Protection of Christ the great King, will be as safe as his Disciples were, of
whom he said, Of those which thou gave me, have I lost none, John 17. Yea
more, his Word seems in many places to hold out that the Seed of the Righteous
shall then literally and lineally be blessed; yea blessedness shall then (it
seems) be intailed upon them succeshvely, to them, their Seed, and Seeds Seed
for ever, as is very remarkably let down at the great Restoration of Israel in
Ezekiel. 37. when Christ, there called by David's name, as his Type and
Progenitor, who by a lineal de^cen^ from him shall then obtain the
long-before-promised Right of David's Kingdom, and sit upon the Throne of David
his Father, as the Angel told the blessed Virgin, Luc. 1.32. both Kingdoms of
Israel and Judah, being for ever then to be again united into one under him,
that then the very Land given unto Jacob his Servant, out of whose Loins
immediately the Heads of all the Twelve ^ribes of Israel were derived; and
therefore it is further added, that Land where their Fathers dwelt, that they
also shall dwell therein; and then add a perpetuity of successive inheritance,
which only he who is the absolute Proprietor, and every way able to make it
good, and to make nullities of men's perpetuities as often as he pleases, He (I
say) then tells them fully at this period, when David's Kingdom shall then be
so fully restored to Christ upon the old everlasting Covenant made to their
forefathers, (which carries all promised mercies with it) that they, their
Children, and their Childrens Children shall dwell in the said promised Land
for ever, ver. 25, etc. And this may further appear by the improvement of Gods
promise by Abraham's says Heb. 11. who (though he overlooked no dram of
promised mercy to any of his Seed, even in temporal respects) yet his faith, as
the Apostle teaches, wrought upon the main, that one promised Seed [Christ] as
he is called Gal. 3.16. in whom particularly all Nations of the Earth should be
blessed, which at the said time will be most fully and really accomplished, in
whom he foresaw (with the others there named) the fulfilling of those promises
was (then) afar off; and that by virtue of such divine and spiritual grace, all
temporal good must be advanced and enjoyed: Yet his faith fixed so upon that
sure Foundation of all blessings really good, which will be so derived to, and
preserved for all such his said blessed Seed then, that there will be a
wonderful uninterrupted blessedness at that time continued to them. In seeing
the accomplishment whereof, a great measure of Abraham's happiness through
Christ will (then) actually consist, when he shall eminently be Heir of the
World actually, by a blessed fruition thereof for a long season above 1000
years, who as the Apostle speaks Romans 4.13. was in his life time but Heir
thereof by faith only; which yet he was then sure should not be frustrated.
Much enlargement might be added to this effect if it were requisite, and many
Divine Rea^ons given from the Covenant to Abraham, and Promises repeated to his
Seed as spiritually so invested with all the temporal blessings of the
Mediat^^rs Kingdom, when God and Christ are so often said to dwell with them,
and to set his Tabernacle among them, which will carry along with it both the
remov^l of evils, and conferring all suitable good for that state. We shall
only name a few more Promises belonging to the same state; as Isa. 61. which
whole Chapter is a lon^ and large prediction and prom^e made to that
then-blessed Race, for their Fathers sa^es, (as ^s noted by the Apostle Romans
11.) yea there also by way of distinction from the Gentiles, he says verse. 9.
to make it more evident of what generation of men he spoke, Their Seed shall be
known among the Gentiles, and their Offspring among the People; but for what
shall they be so known? It follows, All that see them shall acknowledge them
that they are the Seed which the Lord has blessed: The old intailed Covenant
from Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, will then be found of force, and Gods truth and
faithfulness then acknowledg^d; wherefore the Apostle there relates that
promise, Isa. 59.20. When the Deliverer shall come out of Sion, and shall turn
away unged^iness from Jacob, Romans 11.26. So that all Israel then (says he)
shall be saved: and v.27. he adds the reason thereof; For this (says he) is my
Covenant with them, when I shall take away their sins: So it is the covenanted
Mercy of God to that people, which is of so large extent, that when as a
Foundation-mercy therein, he shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob, and so
take away their sins (for only Godl^ness has the promise of this life, and
also of the world to come) in that he is such a De^iverer that he will first
work such spiritual deliverance in them; the other also upon that his said
coming, will follow unto the utmost extent also; for all promised temporal
mercies in the same Covenant contained, even as a shadow will follow the
substance of the spiritual. And a like Promise of the same state of Gods
Israel, is given Isa. 66.22. speaking of the New Heavens and the New Earth
which shall then be and ^e^^ain before him, (which he spoke also of creating,
Chap. 65.17. even for that said blessed condition) so of their posterities
perpetuity in that happy estate, while that world continues: So says he shall
your Seed and your Name remain, when wicked men shall be destroyed aforehand,
and their careales shall then most prob^bly at the Arm^ggedon Battle, a^ by the
Context appears) be an abhorring to all flesh, verse. uit.

So that by what has been said, it may appear, That though the Rest which
Joshu^ brought Israel into, was by them polluted, as was said Mu^ yet he was a
I (...) them of their great Messiah, when he shall come to them the second time
without sin unto salvation, Heb. 9 ^^t turning away ungodliness from Jacoh, (as
was said) so beginning his Kingdom of the Mountain, Dan. 2.35. and the New
Jerusalem state, Rev. 21. which is that other Rest which David spoke of,
mentioned Heb 4.7, 8. which is that Sabbatism or Rest remaining for the people
of God, verse 9. called by the Apostle Paul, Rest with us, when our Lord Jesus
Christ shall be revealed, 2 Thessalonians 1.7. and all this again at his appearance and
his Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.1. wherein the fullness and great evidence of holy
Scripture appears to these purposes, and that upon most sure soundations, if
duly considered. See Sir Rich. Finch his book, setting forth very largely those
Promises belonging to that ancient People of God.

There are many other things observable in the Parallel of Moses with Christ,
and some others in Joshua's, which I shall here also set down as follows.

First Moses was ordained of God to be a Deliverer of his People; So was Christ
the great Redeemer of all Gods Chosen, etc.

Secondly, When Moses was new born, he was in danger of his life by the Edict
of Pharach King of Egypt: So Christ when new born, was in danger of his life by
the Command of Herod a strange King, and forced to flee into Egypt.

Thirdly, As Moses was wonderfully preserved, and so by a gracious Providence
nobly trained up to be fitted for his Office; so was Christ divinely preserved
from his danger, and fitted for his increasing in wisdom and stature, says the
Evangelist, and favor with God and man, Luc 2.52.

Fourthly, When Moses was grown up, and his Brethren were in great bondage, he
sought to deliver them; but they rejected and betrayed him, but owned him not
for their Deliverer: So Christ coming in the fullness of time, was not received
by his own people, John 1. but they took counsel against him, to reject and
betray him; and actually killed the Lord of Life, who came to deliver them from
Death.

Fifthly, When Moses was thereupon removed into a far Country, there he had
Jethro, Prince or Priest of On, a loving and wise Father, having taken his
Daughter a stranger to Wi^^^ So Christ after the Jews rejection and betraying
of him, went in^^ a far Co^^^^ey, as he speaks. Luc. 19. to sit at the Right
Hand of his leavenly Father; and upon his own peoples rejecting of him as their
God or Red^emet, Acts 13. he esp^useth to himself the strangers of the Gentiles
to be his Church or Spouse, during his former peoples ^strangement from him.

Sixthly, But when the fullness of time was come, that God would m^ke Moses his
Peoples Deliverer, he divinely, gr^^^^sly and wonderfully reveals himself to
him, sends him on that his Errand, furnishes him with divine power, conrage,
gifts, assistance, and above all guides him by his own counsel in the
management of all, how and what course he should stear, or means he should use,
what particular miracles he should work from time to time, and shows him what
success or want of success he should have; and so Moses did all by Gods
appointment in that whole work of bringing his People the Children of Israel
out of Egypt; in which work afterward in the Wilderness he was Gods faithful
servant in all his House, Heb. 2. in all the time he led them in the
Wilderness: So when the time was come that the Father by his Spirit had
declared in his Prophets that his Son should be the Deliveter of his People,
and as he h^d likewise typifi^d and many ways man^fested to them, he
accordingly undertook that work, with that fullness of wisdom, grace, and of his
Spirit and power, from the Father, and had the falness of his love so always
coutinued unto him, that he de^ied him nothing he asked, yea he had ever fully
manifested his whole pleasure to him; and in him and by him all things were
accordingly fulfilled to deliver his People from their sins being the bondage
of their spiritual Pharaoh and w^rse than Egyptian bondage; and w^ll come as
the great Messiah of his ancient People in special, and wonderfully save those
that are beloyed for their Fathers sake, with a greater deliverance from the
Land of the North, than the former from Egypt was, Jer. 23.7, 8. spiritually,
temporally, eternally, etc. So Jer. 3 14 18 also Isa 53.10. and 66 14, 15.
Ezekiel. 37. the weole chapter, etc. which deliverance now hasteneth, etc.

Seventhly, What under Moses ministration Israel came short of obtaining, under
Joshua's Conduct, the other Type of Christ, they soon after enjoyed; but yet
only as the Lieutenant (as I may say) of that Grand Captain of the Lords Host,
that appeared to him, Josh 5.13, 14, 15. from whom then he received his
particular order for the besieging of Jericho, with encouragement therein, etc.
And who by Gods divine ordering of his Lots, afterward assigned to every Tribe
their portion, called in Scripture, The Lot of their Inheritance: So it is from
Christ the grand Captain of his Peoples salvation, not from any strength,
works, or worth of their own in any respect, that they obtain any mercy or
favor from God: But through the grace, power, and merit of their true Joshua
or JESUS, always both able and willing, and ever remains present in readiness
to conduct them through their Wilderness condition in this World, even when
they are at the greatest stand, and who can in the most unlikely manner, and by
the most contemptible means (as by Rams-Horn Trumpets he destroyed high-walled
Jericho) confound or destroy the greatest Enem^es of his People, (as he is now
consuming the great Beast and false Prophet by the prophesying of his despised
fackcloth-Witnesses, Rev. 11.1^ hes. 28) and will in his appointed time bring
his Pilgrims into possession of their happy promised Rest that remains to them
and all the faithful forefathers into the City prepared for them, with other
Saints, of which God is the Maker and Builder himself, Heb. 11.10 as in
manifold promises he has through many Ages in his word declared; when likewise
will begin his Kingdom of the Mountain, which shall fill the whole Earth, when
all Nations shall serve and obey him, Dan. 7.27, etc. with many other holy
Scripture-Testimonies, which might here be added if it were needful.

Proceed we then to the third pair of partial Types in the N^w World, viz. Of
David's Kingdom raised by God from a low beginning, to become great, like the
great men of the Earth, as God speaks of it, 2 Samuel 7. though as a man that
shed much blood, in a warring condition, till God gave him peace in the end,
etc. And of Solomon's Kingdom, that peaceful Prince, when his Subjects were
said to sit under their own Vines, and under their own Fig. Trees; though by
the cloudy darkness of both their falls, they were manifest to be only Types
of their most perfect Antitype.

And first of the first of them, namely of David's Kingdom set up by God;
wherein Christ was typified in these respects:

1. As David was low and mean at first; I took thee (says God to him) from the
Sheepsold 2 Samuel 7 8. So Christ at his first appearing in the worlds view,
taking our nature, was little regarded of them, called commonly, The Son of
Joseph and Mary, and afterward disgracefully. The Galilean, from which
Country they expected no good to come, and another while reputed him the
Carpenters Son; and even his own Kindred believed not on him; though especially
amongst them, both before his birth, at his birth, and afterward, glorious and
radiant Beams of Divine Majesly wonderfully shone out in him, whereby God
evidently manifested, and wrote as it were with a sun beam of Light as was also
plainly told) That that Child before promised and prophesied so often to come,
was his own and only Son.

2. After David's Kingdom began, there was at first no outward probability
appearing to stand against King Saul; saving that Saul was rejected, and David
was by Gods appointment anointed by Samuel for the Kingdom: But otherwise, in
outward respects, Saul was in possession, had the present command of all his
Subjects, and of all they had in the world outwardly; but David forced to flee
for his life, manless, monyless, helpless in a manner, saving only not
faithless nor hopeless; but for outward appearance of means very poor and mean.
He after had men, but such as could in appearance yield him little comfort,
afford him little relief; we hear not of their Money nor Arms; yea, it appears
they were men in debt, and in decayed conditions, how should they live? They
fled to him in a Wilderness, where should they have Arms? And had they had
them, what skill were they like to have to use them? Wha interest could such
have in men that were considerable, saving su^^ as might cause them to pursue
them for their debts or for leaving their Masters service (as Saul affirmed)
which must make Dav d's first estate appear to be the be ^nning of a very
pitiful Principality. So when the usurping god of this present world, and that
most tyrannous Prince of the power of the Air, was by Christ to be thrown down
from his Regency, after his so long and mani^old rebellion against his Creator;
and Gods anointed King which he had decreed (mangre all the vain opposition of
Mon and Devils) should sit upon h s holy Hill of Sion Psalm. 2. vet he comes
into the world in the form of a Servant, was born of a Mother a Virgin, but in
a present mean condition, though inwardly glorious in holiness and grace,
though lineally descended from the Loins of King David, yet that was a thing
little then observed or regarded by most at that time; a Carpenter being her
Husband, and the reputed Father of Christ our Savior, as little acknowledged,
it is probable, to be the Son of God: Therefore Christ being in our weak nature,
in such a low condition, the world was incapable of discerning or conceiving
how he should be able to overcome that old Beelzebub, the Prince of the Devils,
with all his Principalities, and powers of spiritual wickednesses in high
places.

3. When the envy and malice of Saul was grown so great against David, that by
force or fraud, by policy or treachery, or by any means possible to rid David
out of his way, by his Daughter, by his Servants, by the Philistines, his
Javelins, his Son Jonathan; or by Doeg, and other bad Instruments of Readiness
Court; or whoever was David's Enemy, was thereupon to be owned as Readiness
Friend: Yet God ever preserved David from all his attempts, by strange and
unlikely ways and means, as the sacred Story therein declares. So as soon as
Christ appears in the World, Satan from a Divine Oracle of Christ's birth at
Bethlehem the City of David, tempts Herod upon that ac^ount to seek to take
away his life then, as was noted, stirs up many slightings of his Person,
Parentage, Kindred and Country; then when he appeared more public, sets upon
him in hunger to tempt God; from ambition of a world, to worship the Devil,
etc. But still Christ overcame that strong man armed, being stronger than he,
when he appeared the weakest.

4. As David by such weak and unlikely instruments overcame or frustrated Saul,
assaults: So Christ by poor Fishermen subdued the World to the obedience of the
Gospel, thereby making them Fishers of men, and himself to be owned as the
Savior of mankind, by those they were sent unto, conquering and to conquer in
the first Seal, Rev. 6. and so through the following Seals till Constantines
coming, about anno 320 all that time where n Michael sought with his Angels
against the Dragon and his Angels, who prevailed not, Rev. 12 7 8. when those
poor persecuted Christians then converted to the fa^th^^ Christ (that are
stor^ed to be strongly then encouraged by the Doctrine of reigning with Christ
the thousand years) suffered with such unshaken says and constant patience,
and gloriously overcame that most devilish cruelty and tyranny of their bloody
Persecutors in the Ten first Paganish Persecutions, till the Dragon was cast
out of his Heaven to the Earth: Since which time he could not by such
persecuting turn Christians into Pagans, he has attempted by iving his Seat,
Power, and Authority to the Beast, to Paganize Christianity it self, and under
many devised pretexts of Piety and Devotion by means of his said Substitute in
his seat and authority, to act in detestable hypocr sie, in such horrid
wickednesses against God and man, that cannot appear in their true colors
without some Vail of Hypocrisy cast over them Whence it was anciently observed
since that time, Sub nomine Christi militant contra Christum; and after, when
in a more intense degree tha was apparent, complaint thereof was made, not
without just cause, In nomine Domini incipit omne malum: which how manifold it
is, and by what cunning Contrivance, with paganish Cruelty carried on, would
require a large volumn but even fitly to set down in what large volum^s it is
already done. And yet Christ by his poor Saints sufferings, and his despised
Sackcloth-Witnesses prophesying has and does, and will overcome more and more
both Dragon, and B^^st, and false ^rophet also, by whom the other was revived
after his former deadly wound, unto their last destruction come, and both are
sent unto their own p^a^^, when Christ will most eminently make his Foes his
Footstool, and the Kingom of the Stone be changed into the Kingdom of the
Mountain, in the next partial Type, with this of David, to be now considered.

And that is in Solomon, David's natural Seed, derived immediately from his
Loins, as promised to David, named by God, owned by him in a gracious manner,
appearing to him twice, making him large offers, giving him unparalled Gifts
of Wisdom and Knowledge, eminent Grace, transcendent worldly Glory, Dignity,
Riches and Revenues, on the face of the earth; admired far and near, most
famous for building the most glorious Temple or House of God, and other Houses,
and in writing excellent Books of holy Scripture, and many other Books: But
that he was but a Type of David's blessed Seed to come in the Kingdom of the
Mountain, may appear by his so sad declining for a time toward his elder
years; yet after, through grace, returned. But that he was his Type, his Name
denotes, his Office, his Works, his Wisdom, his Peace, his Glory, Wealth, and
Dignity, his Religion, his executing of Judgment, his Peoples Peace, Plenty,
Security, under him, etc. whilst he walke^ wisely, and stood upright, do
abundantly declare. And in regard we are to consider the great Char^er of David
and Solomon's Kingdom, in the next place, we shall here add no more, but come
to our next foundation.

VII. Seventhly, Which is the seventh, as being confirmed both to David and
Solomon by a Divine Charter, very eminently illustrated 2 Samuel 7.8. to the end,
in that most gracious Message that God sent by Nathan, upon occasion of David's
secret intent and purpose to build God an House, for which he made great
provision; which though it was not in particular accepted, for some reasons
afterward specif^^d in the sequel, yet God so approved of his pious affections
of love ^o his Divine Majesty, and Zeal for his Glory and Worship, that
thereupon he made to David the most blessed return of Love, and Riches of
Goodness to him and his House, with the longest Entail with it, and surest
security of it, that ever was made to any mere mortal man: We may here observe,
first the said Message of God, from verse. 8. to 17. concerning Gods sure
mercies to David, in respect of his Kingdom, People, and House: Secondly. We
may note David's improvement of each part of the Divine Message by Faith,
Prayer, and thankful Acknowledgment, from verse. 17. to the end.

First, In Gods Message, verse. 8. He directs the Prophet Nathan to make to
David a rehearsal of mercies past; namely, How he exalted him from a low
estate, even from the Sheep-coat, from following the Sheep, to an excellent
Dignity; not only to be a Ruler in ordinary way, but that which added much to
his exaltation and honor, was, he let him over his own People, even over
Israel, chosen out of the whole World for his own Inheritance: This special
trust God committed to David, to whom great Privileges did belong, and for
whom great things formerly had been done by God, upon whom his Name was called.

Secondly, Verse. 9. He minds him how he had been with him in a special manner
in a way of grace, to wit, to be for him, and against his Enemies; and so
effectually as to cut them all off in his own sight, and that thereupon he had
made him a great Name, as the great Men that are upon the Earth.

Thirdly, Verse. 10. He sets down (as in a Parenthesis) a most wonderful mercy
promised to his said People, long after to take place, and to be in fulfi^ling
to the end of the world: saying, I will appoint a place (not what he had done
before, or unto that time (as afterward is explained) for my people Israel,
and I will plant them; but how? First that they may dwell in a place of their
own, (for formerly they drove out others, though but as Gods Instruments, yet
with many failings, and then by their sins they forfeited their own interest
therein:) Secondly, He declares they should move no more; which settlement then
must needs be yet to come, the same with Ezekiel. 37. and many other promises:
Thirdly, The Children of wickedness should not, in that Land which he
promises, afflict them any more, (which has not hitherto been fulfilled)
formerly such Children of wickedness, which in their d^sobedience to God they
spared, were in judgment made Thorns in their Sides, and pricks in their Eyes,
to chastise them; and other sone of wickedness, by reason of their many
provocations, greatly from time to time, before and till David's time,
afflicted them, as before time in Egypt, and in the Wilderness, as the end of
verse. 10. seems to intend, -- as before time.

And verse. 11. in the beginning of it, he adds another distinct time of the
prevailing of such Sons of Wickedness over them: And (says he) as since the
time that I commanded Judges to be over my people: And that he might the better
take notice of his own so good different state at present, and from whence it
came, he shows to him again that he himself had caused him to rest from all his
Enemies.

And in the end of verse. 11. he appoints Nathan to deliver a further Message of
wonderful grace concerning David's own House; saying, Also the Lord tells thee
[there was his insallible security] that he will make thee a sure House; which
must needs be a sure House, when God both tells him so, and tells him he will
make it so: Greater certainty could not be; Therefore rightly is this styled,
The sure Mercies of David.

Verse. 12. concerns Gods promise to be fulfilled after David's death,
concerning his Son Solomon, as is applied by Solomon himself, 1 Kings 2.24. The
Lord (says he) has made me an House, as he promised; which promise follows in
this 12th verse, I will set up thy Seed after thee, which shall proceed out of
thy own bowels; and I will establish his Kingdom: which must be his immediate
Seed. Besides, he was designed by God to build that House for Go^ is Name which
David purposed, till God now declared his pleasure therein to him, to the
contrary, which was accordingly executed, as Solomon acknowledged, as was noted
before.

And verse. 13. latter part, God adds a wonderful mercy, That Solomon the Type
of Christ, whose Kingdom in his days should be a Type of Christ's Kingdom,
should build that House that should prefigure the Body of Christ; till he came
in the flesh and fulfilled all that was signified in and by that House and
Priesthood exercise^ therein, whereby it seems to be signified, That that House
which he built, and the Services to be upheld in it, should typifie to his
People his glorious Person and work of Redemption to be wrought by him for
them, where the Ark of Gods gracious Presence with his People was at that time
preserved: Which Temple, though afterward it should be destroyed for their
great sins and provocations, and the Ark of Gods gracious presence be taken
away from among them; yet the Temple should afterward by the wonderful power
and grace of God be again rebuilt, as Isaiah foretold, and was (as we rea^ in
Ezra and Nehemiah) accordingly fulfilled: by the former denoting the death of
Christ bodily, which he suffered for his Peoples sins; and by the latter, that
divinely powerful and glorious Resurrection of Christ from that death of the
Body. Which said second Temple, by the divine work of God upon the spirit of
Cyrus, being so rebuilt, should so continue (only after repaired and adorned
by Herod) thenceforward many hundred years, until all things were sully
accomplished by him who was before so long time, and many ways before-typ^fied
by it; at the death of whose b^dy, the Vail of that Temple actually was rent
from top to bottom, wherewith Moses veiled Gospel of Ceremonial Worship ceased,
and upon whose Resurrection and A^cention the Gospel of the Son of Man's Kingdom
was speedily, and powerfully, and evidently preached by the commissionated
Ambassadors of Christ through the whole world; when also the Kingdom of the
Stone foretold in Daniel d^d begin, o^ the spiritual Throne and Kingdom of
Christ was se^ up, and has, and is, and will be powerfully upheld, while
Christ in the Gospel rides o'n conquering and to conquer, as he began under
the ^^st Seal, till he eminently, when he cease to sit at his Fathers Right
hand in Heaven, Psalm. 110.1. shall make his foes his footstool; and
thenceforward gloriously and powerfully on David's and Solomon's Throne (as
here promised) in the Kingdom of the Mountain, to the worlds end and la
Judgment, Dan. 2 35. And so the great King of the New Jerusalem, will
undoubtedly succeed lineally from them both, in whom the House and Throne of
the Kingdoms of both shall be established for ever, as in Psalm 45. is largely
illustrated with many excellencies belonging to the g^orious state of the
Messiah's Kingdom with his Saints, his Spouse styled the Kings Daughter, and
gloriously there described and enfe^ffed with her Dowry, very divinely in a
great part of that Psalm.

But verse. 14, 15. In regard God fore-knew Solomon would greatly fall by his
own heinous sins, which would deserve great Judgments; even as the great
Messiah was first to suffer and satisfy for Solomon, before the visible glory
of his Kingdom should shine forth, and for all penitent and truly believing
persons; and that therefore God fore-shews how he would fatherly chastise
Solomon, but not take his mercy from him, as he took it from Saul, (which is a
very evident proof that Solomon was saved) and secondly typifying therein that
Christ should be saved in his suffering for man's sin, and overcome death by
dying, in regard that Christ should personally come in the flesh to that end,
which was signified by that House which was to remain then in its use; and that
till then, those services to be performed in that house did de note that work
of Redemption of his people which he was to accomplish at that his coming,
whereby full Reconciliation should be made with God for them, and then that
said House, and the services therein performed, were thereupon to cease:
Therefore in verse. 16. the last of Gods said Message to David by Nathan, he
twice confirms the perpetuity of the said Mercy, not only to ratify the
sureness thereof, as is usual in holy Scripture, as in the four
Mettle-Kingdoms, Dan 2. and 7. and the four Beasts, but it seems in verse. 16.
he first through the said Reconciliation made when he put an end to the
services of the said House, whereby the influence of all promised mercies to
the Saints reached in all Ages to them, sets down there over and over for
David's comfort, this that concerned Christ's Davidical Kingdom of the thousand
years Reign with the Saints, that it should be BEFORE DAVID; that is, at the
blessed and holy Resurrection of the Just, Rev. 20.6. when David and Daniel
shall stand up in their Lots,; though there was a Resemblance of it, as some
observe, in that Solomon was in the Throne before David died: Yet this promise
is of transcendent excellency above that matter; neither did that state last
for ever, i. e. to the worlds end, which is so many times insisted upon, both
from Gods Riches of Mercy toward David, and David's une pressible gratitude
(as he said verse. 20) due unto God: Wherefore he speaks in such a full
comprehensive manner, verse. 16. Thy House and thy Kingdom shall be established
for ever BEFORE THEE: and again. Thy Throne shall be established for ever;
which is only possible in Christ, and in him is necessary, according to that
prophecy Isa. 9.7. That of the increase of his Government there should be no
end, upon the Throne of David, to order it and to establish it with judgment
and with justice from henceforth even for ever: And the reason hereof is very
remarkable: The zeal of the Lord of Hosts will perform this; his Truth, his
Faithfulness will not lie unto David, for whom he has this sure mercy to
perform, to raise up his Tabernacle which was fallen, as Acts 1.5. is
explained: and as the Angel told the blessed Virg^n. Luc. 1.23, 3.3. The Lord
shall give unto him the Throne of his Father David: The Scripture is so full in
this point, that if men's eyes be not sh^t, it is obvious to be seen. And thus
much of Gods message by Nathan.

Now from verse. 17. to the end of the Chapter, we have David's most grateful
acceptance of the said Message, and very pious improvement of it by ^aith,
prayer, acknowledgment and thankfulness, and well might he do so, seeing he so
well understood, and so fully believed every branch by the tea^hing of Gods
Spirit, and every particular therein contained, viz. That he should have a
Kingdom, and such a Kingdom confirmed to him, and not to him alone, but to him
and his People of Israel, and for them with his Seed; and not to his notural
Seed only, ^s such, coming out of his own Bowels, but as typical of a Seed and
Kingdom divine and be^venly, to be given in a wonderful manner, and as he says
verse. 19. for a long time to come, and upon such security from God himself, who
undertook to do it himself, with the greatest assurance imaginable, yea above
all imagination or capacity of ^eatures, in such a way, under such Types, in
such order, time and manifold miraculousness, that i^ all men and all Creatures
should join all their Skill and Power, Wealth. Strength, and Interests, to
confer a Kingdom upon a Person, by right of Covenants, Purchass, Ch^rter,
Prowess, Pol^cy, Prudence, Conquest, Merit, or whatever they could contrive or
procure to such intent, it would be but nullity instead of security, compared
with this, and not worthy even to be named in the same day with it: Yea men's
Kingdoms on the contrary, the greater they are, are therefore many times the
more uncertain and tottering. Whereas this, in the greatest extent, should be
the most stable, being founded in Righteousness, which is the habitation or
stability of Christ's Throne, Psalm. 97.2. whilst the greatest combination of men
and creatures to uphold by any means Kingdoms and States in unrighteousness
against God and his People, do thereby the sooner bring them to their periods,
and by such means oft-times more certain ruin befalls them, as in
Nebuchadnezzars great Monarchy, whether we look upon him personally, as that
great Tree then flourishing, Dan 4. but suddenly cut down, under whose Branches
all Creatures (then) sheltred themselves; or lineally, which ended in his
Granchild Belshazzar, Dan. 5. as that Kingdom was then the Head of Gold, in
respect of the other Mettle-Kingdoms succeeding it, even so it was but of short
continuance for that reason, Dan. 5.20, 21, 22, 23. for some of the said short
continuance: But such a title, and of so long continuance, yea such a secure
perpetaity God passes over by his Divine Charter to David his Seed and People
here, of that his most excellent Kingdom in the world (that though in some
sense it should be interrupted for a time) yet should certainly stand good in
due time to them, when all merely worldly Monarchies shall be worn out, yet
that should remain for ever, as often was repeated, even to the worlds end; the
like assurance was never made before David's time, never since, of any Kingdom
in the world, nor ever will be, when that universal visible Dominion shall
hereafter begin to take place in the world, (as it was said of it, Dan. 2.28)
it never shall be destroyed in the world, but be translated into, or perfected
in celestial Glory: And therefore it is no marv^il that holy David from such
Divine Illumination, and from such suitable strength of faith, does answerably
(as we hinted) receive with humble acceptance and enlarged thanksulness and
acknowledgment, that blessed news thereof from God, and accordingly improve it
as follows.

1. For verse. 18. In the first place David retires himself into the alone
presence of his most gracious God, and in a most humble manaer acknowledges
before him his wonderful mercy and goodness to himself and his House, both past
and present: Who am I (says he) O Lord God! And what is my House, that thou
have brought me hitherto!

2. In verse. 19. He sets it forth for the time to come, further observing and
explaining the long continuance thereof, not to himself alone, but to his
House, upon a most true and certain perpetuity, upon the best security, in an
unparalled manner; (for his words are weighty) saying, And yet this was a small
thing in thy sight, O Lord God, but thou have spoken also of thy Servants House
for a great while to come, viz. whise time shall continue, which he revolves
again with a holy admiration, -- And is this the manner of Man, OLORD GOD!

3. In verse. 20. he declares that he was at a loss for verbal expressions of
due thankfulness for his mercies, but tenders his enlarged heart to Gods view,
saying, And what can David say more unto thee? For thou, Lord God, know thy
Servant.

4. In verse. 21. he illustrates, in his wayof gratitude, the truth of Gods
promise, the reeness of his mercy to him, with the greatness thereof in all
respects, in all those great things which were still illustrated by their
present manifestation of them unto him: -- To make (says he) thy Servant to
know them.

5. In verse. 22, 23, 24. he farther illustrates with his own, Gods wonderful
glorious and rich mercy to his people of Israel; first for time past,
magnifying the greatness of the unparallelled mercy of God to them, extolling
him above all gods, and as the only true God, and that he had proved himself
so by his works, recorded in his word, or related by his people, verse. 22.
Wherefore thou art great, O Lord, and there is none like thee, etc.

And verse. 23. He sets forth the great honor he had procured to his people of
Israel, by signs and wonders for them, etc. whom he redeemed out of Egypt, that
in them he might be glorified above the heathen gods, etc.

And in verse. 24. He gratefully rehearses his now-confirmed mercy to his
people of Israel for perpetuity, and his Covenant renewed with them to be their
God; as with Abraham. Genesis 17.7, 8. so now to them by the Messiah the Son of
David, much after the ame tenure of words; even as this Message is much the
same with that recorded in 1 Chronicles. 17 7, 8, 9, etc.

6. Now as to verse. 25. David had made his graceful acknowledgement of so
transcendent a mercy to Himself, his People, and House; so now he proceeds
further to improve it by frith and prayer, verse. 25, 26. And first jointly for
Himself and his House, verse. 25. Now O Lord, establish thy word for ever
concerning thy Servant, and concerning his House, and do as thou have said.

And then verse. 26. He adjoyns Gods Covenant with his people of Israel, to be
their God for ever, with his continued prayer for his House, as before (...)
^omited so in Gods presence implored by prayer upon that ground, for believing
the Promise, he pours out his Prayer.

7. In verse. 27. He sets down the particular reason of this present exercise of
his faith and prayer, namely, Gods present so grations Revelation of his said
wonderful mercy to him: For (says he) thou, O Lord God, have revealed to thy
Servant, saying, I will build thee an House; therefore has thy Servant ^ound
in his heart to pray this Prayer unto thee.

In verse. 28 he ruminates upon the former grounds of his faith, viz. First that
this Promise was from that God that was the great and most glorious God of
Israel; and secondly from the truth of all his words, found experimentally to
be true; and at present applies both to his part^cular promise then made to
himself: Thou (says he) art that God, and thy words be true.

9. In the last verse he improveth his special says in reference to the said
s^ecial promise to Him^el^ and his House, by a twofold Amen, or so be it, (as I
may term them) twice running again over the same: the one seeming to refer (as
before) to Christ's said Davidical Kingdom of the thousand years, That God would
bless his Servants House, that it may continue for ever before God: and the
other to eternity, That it might be blessed with his blessing for ever: Or else
for further enlargement of his prayer, That it might not only continue before
him, but be blessed also with his Blessing for ever.

And thus by so grateful acknowledgement manifested by special faith and
fervent prayer, this humble, holy, kingly Prophet improved Gods so great and
mavelous mercy, by the Prophet Nathan revealed to himself, for his House and
People of Israel for ever. Amen.

VIII. Ei^hthly, Christian Readers, If you shall reckon with me the eight said
Ty^es in the Old and New World, as the Fifth Foundation o^ Faith, and this from
Ezekiel to be the Eighth, the number will be ^^e same, an^ the strength much
greater: For as the other two greater Prophets, Isaiah and Jeremiah foretold
Israel's and Judah's Captivi^y, as also d^d some of the smaller; and by the
same Prophets did God also, for the ^om^^rt of the faithful Jews, foretell their
great Rest^uration: for Is^^ah is large concerning the New Jerusalem, chap. 60.
applised by the holy Ghost to the New Jerusalem, Rev. 21. And as Jeremiah has
many threatenings of Judgment and Captivity, so he has many Promises of
wonderful mercies, not only concerning their Reduction from Bab^l^n, but of
many more ^ar excelling them, particularly, That Jerusal^m shall be the Throne
of the Lord Chap. 3.17. [See our Tract on that Text etc] So al^o Ezekiel that
was set as a sign in in his Person had many signs in his Ministry appointed by
God on special occasions; yea very much of his Prophecy was symbolical, fraught
with Divine Hieroglyphics, with sacred Figures and Types, not only as to
Judah and Jerusalem's sad Calamities, then further and further prevailing, etc.
but more especially Ezekiel, from Chap 36, 1, 2, 3, etc. to the end of that
Book, is in many Prophecies, Visions, Explications, large decipherings, so full
concerning Israel's and Judah's mercies at their last great Restoration, that
both Daniel and Christ in his Revelation apply, improve, and explain many
things in Ezekiel very remarkably; so extraordinary glorious were many of
Ezektel's Revelations, as in Chap. 1. and 10, much to be parallelled with Rev.
4 setting forth a like glorious and gracious manifestation of God unto his
Church through Jesus Christ, and by h^s holy Spirit, set forth by Resemblances
of such Appearances, like Fire, Precious Stones, Rainbow, Wheels, Cherubims,
Living W^ghts, and the like; and the New Jerusalem in the nine last Chapters of
Ezekiel, which Learned Men have styled formerly the Revelation of the O^d
Testament: and indeed it appears to be a Revelation of the Promises of former
Prophets, and of some of his own Predictions concerning the happy estate of
Israel and Judah to come, when the Tabernacle of God will be with men, Rev. 21.
and the City which he had described shall really be Jehavah Shamma, because the
Lord our Savior will be personally there: And as many differences are
observable in that foretold by Ezekiel for the comfort of the Jews, and that by
the Apostle John respecting especially the Gentiles that were beheaded for the
Name of Jesus, and resisted Antichrist, etc. And hence Ezekiel speaks as to a
people in that state, under such dispensations as the Jews were used to; but
the other is eminently more gloriously described I conceive for some Reasons,
as in regard that part of Christ's Subjects and Servants that eminently th^n
will serve him, as Rev. 22.3, being int he natural life, first Jews, then
G^n^^les converted (being the Nations of those that are saved) will wa^ in the
light of the other Jerusalem, Rev. 21. that came from God out of Heaven, by a
Metouymie of the subject being the Spirits of just men made perfect which
Christ r^ngs (...) him at his second coming, and upon the taking their Bodies,
they become Inhab tants of the Jerusalem whose Maker and Builder is God, Heb
11.10. prepared for the forefathers, and all that without us shall not be ma^e
perfect^^ 40. or perfect in one, as our Savior prayed, John 17.23. when they
shall b^hol^ Christ's glory, v. 24 See ^ract on Jer. 3.17. and other parcels,
etc. And Daniel declares in a set order of Prophecy, first more generally, in
Chap. 2. and Chap. 7. and after more particularly in Chap. 8. v. 13. to 20.
with v. 26. and chap. 10. as in Rev. 1. Christ's resemblance, and chap. 11. much
of the Roman Kingdom, from v. 36, as Mr. Med accurately and evidently explains:
and chap. 12 v. 5 6, 7. the same in substance with Rev. 10. and Daniel's Lot
notes the first Resurrection, Rev. 20.6. and to the same purpose Ezektel (chap.
36.) foretells largely the happy estate of the Jews then, to whom the Gentiles
will flow in, being both in the natural life, and shows the sure foundation of
that mercy, verse. 25, 26, 27. viz. Gods sprinkling clean water upon them, and
giving them a new heart, and putting his Spirit into them: in the next Vision,
chap. 37 the said Promises are confirmed by two visions and explications
plainly and distinctly set down by God himself, as in our Word written, page
10.11. In the next Vision he shows how Gog their great Oppressor shall be
destroyed, who is aptly there described to the life, and said to come in the
latter days twice, Ezekiel. 38.8, 16. and chap. 39. and from theace to the end of
that Book deciphers in reference to the Jews their happy estate in the
Davidical Kingdom of Christ, who being that Jehovah, will personally be there,
as we showed before upon many considerations, etc. So that Ezekiel's evidence
being rightly understood, as in many of those may appear, compared with like
portions of Scripture, his Testimony may well be applied as a very strong
Foundation of Faith, bearing its weight with all the rest.

IX. Ninthly, Twice strongly ratified to Daniel two ways: First, By Viou only,
Dan. 2. upon Gods revealing to him the Exposition of Nebuchadnezzar's Dream,
viz. That after the four Mettle Kingdoms were past, there should succeed the
twofold state of Christ the Sonof man's Kingdom; namely, 1. The Kingdom of the
Stone, verse. 4. 2. The Kingdom of the Mouat^in, verse. 35.
Secondly, Both by Vision and Revelation, Chap. 7. 1. By Vision of four Beasts,
or four Kings, as v. 17. ruining each other, before the Kingdom of the Son of
man should take place, at his coming in the Clouds of Heaven, when Dominion
over all Nations shall be given to him, to the worlds end, verse 13, 14. 2. By
Revelation, from verse. 16, to the end of the Chapter, especially verse. 17. the
four Beasts are said to be four Kings, and verse. 27. and as Luc. 22.29. they
shall be made his Delegates, yet so as all shall obey him.



Both Daniel's said Revelations and the several Visions either seen or recorded
by him concerning Christ's Davidical Kingdom, are not only consonant to former
Prophecies and Types thereof; and especially with Gods gracious Message by
Nathan, lately insisted upon from 2 Samuel 7. but also with all the particular
Branches following to be considered in their order and nature, which manifest
more and more this said so divine and glorious Scripture-Truth respecting the
said Kingdom, which is the main subject of our third part, viz. the Parallel
with its appendants, as thereby may be seen and considered, being of very great
use rightly to understand much of holy Scripture etc. Therefore we shall here
say no more thereof, but refer the Reader thereunto; only admonishing him
against two learned Errors, [for learned men's authority has been much pleaded
for them, and has long upheld them] First of such as will have the Book of
Revelation to begin where Daniel ends, as if both those Books were a
continuation of the same History, etc. Secondly, Of such as make the Selucidae
and Lagidae, which were but the broken parts of the Greek-Kingdom, to be the
fourth Monarchy in Daniel; which the Spirit of God recko ^eth no further than
Antiochus Epiphanes, who was repulsed by the Roman Navies appearance before
Alexandria, which Mr. Mede manlfests to be those Ships of Chittim, foretold by
Balaam, Numb. 24.24. and fulfilled then, as Dan. 11.30. Unto which two, a third
late mistake may be added, of them that would make the Book of Revelations to
be an History of things much past when given, and not a Prophecy of things to
come to the end of the world: Whereas contrary to all three, the Book of
Revelation is merely a divine mystical Comment or Exposition of that hidden
part of Daniel, then shut up and ^ealed up t^ll the time of the end, as we
showed in our preface to the Parallel, and elsewhere. So that the right
understanding of Revelation-Prophecy must necessarily be shut out thereby to
all such as retain any of those mi^s-opinions. See for this also the contrary
Judgment and Reasons of many learned men in our fifth convincing Argument in
the Word Written.

X. Tenthly, Applied often by our Savior in the Gospel, to the Kingdom of the
Son of man, Matthew. 13 41. and the Son of man's coming in his Kingdom, Matthew.
16.28. And, It is your Fathers good pleasure to give you a Kingdom, Luc. 12.32.
Again, Now is my Kingdom not from hence, John 18.37. And, I have appointed unto
you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me; which is the same which
Daniel in vision saw him coming to receive, Dan 7.13, 14. and was promi^ed
before to him, as the Son of David, 2 Samuel 7. which was also styled by Christ,
The Kingdom of God, that was foretold by him should draw near at hand when
Israel's great Redemption (so often spoken of in the Prophets) shall be
accomplished, and upon the beholding the signs thereof, he bids the Jews lift
up their heads, because their Redemption then draws near, (as is very evident
from Luc. 21.31.) of which our Savior spoke in a Parable, Luc. 21.11, 12 24
27. the time whereof is explained in the order of accomplishment, Rev. 11.15.
as is easily discernable to such as are acquainted with the Series of that
Book; which said Davidical Kingdom of the Son of man shall begin in the world,
as Daniel declares, Chap. 7.13, 14. at his coming in the Clouds of Heaven,
which Christ himself also further illustrates, showing it shall be with his own
Glory, and of the Fathers, and of his holy Angels, Luc. 9 2^. when ten thousand
times ten thousand shall minister to him, and stand before him, Dan. 7.10. when
the Judgment is set to destroy the ^^ast, and give his Body to the burning
^l^me, verse. 11. All which Tex^s (...) holy Scripture will be fulfilled above a
thousand years before the Resurrection of wicked men to the general Judgment,
as is most evident from the series and order of things set down ^oth by Daniel,
and more fully explained in the Book of Revelation especially in the twentieth
Chapter the most clear Table of these last times and order of things to be done
in them, for which purpose also consider the foresaid Parallel.

XI. Eleventhly, Being also so Expounded by the Apostle Paul, and others of the
Apostles; concerning which Doctrine, first the Apostle Paul delivers many
things by way of explication thereof, we shall touch upon some of them briefly.

First, When he comforts the troubled Saints, that they shall have Rest with
him and other Apostles and Sairts, whilst Christ will ^e^der tribulation to
such as troubled them, ^e s^^s down that time to be when the Lord Jesus shall
be revealed with his mighty Angels, in ^laming (...) taking vengeance on them
that know not God, and they not the Gosp^^ of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. 2
These. 1.7, 8 9. and in Chap 2.8. (...) further from Dan. 7. that Mother-Text,
(as M^. Mede (...)) of all such Scriptures in the New Testament, That Christ
will particularly destroy that man of (...) the same appearance of (...) coming
or presence, when the body of the s ame Beast, a^ was sai^ shall be ^^ven to
the burning ^l^me, as Dan. 7.11. which ^e al^o ^art^^r d^c^^^^reth by his
Appearance and Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.1. as also was by Daniel seen in vision, etc.

Again, He further informs us strongly, That Christ must reig^ till he has put
all his Enemies under his ^eet, 1 Cor. 15.25. Now when he most eminently begins
to do this, ^is said Reign begins, for ti^l ^h^n he sits at the Fathers right
hand, yea and sits there exp^cting til^ th^^ time come, (as the same Apostle
manifestly declares, Heb 10.12, 13.) and at that time the Beast is expressly
said to be cast into the lake of fire burning with brimston, after the language
of that most acred Prophecy. And to make his Exposition yet more clear and
forcible, he further teaches, That the last Enemy that shall be destroyed in
the said Reign of Christ, shall be Death; viz. Bodily Death, that separates
Soul and Body; not the death of Soul and Body, for that thereupon will begin
most to reign, and to reign over the Damned eternally: but the other, namely
the death of the Body, shall be destroyed and cast into the lake burning with
fire and brimstone, that is, in its capacity, and after the language of Cods
Spirit in that Book, the very being of it, as the general Destroyer of humane
Nature in this life, will be taken away, when no such matter will remain for it
to work upon; when all Saints are rapt up to meet Christ in the air in a
moment, and wicked men stand in their state to be judged, the present being of
Humane Nature, separable of Soul and Body, will be utterly abolished: Now this
said destruction of bodily Death, that last Enemy, will not be effected till
above a thousand years after the coming of the Son of man in the Clouds of
Heaven, as was said, and after the said casting of the Beast and false Prophet
into the said lake burning with brimstone, as is very evident from Rev. 19.20.
compared with the order of the said Table of the Times, in Chap. 20. to verse.
14. where Death and Hell are also said to be cast into the lake of fire, that
is, Death and the Grave in the said sense, have no more use, or matter to work
upon, and by consequence no more being in the world. And whosoever faithfully and
seriously endeavors rightly to weigh and consider these things without
partiallity or prepossession (which at first may seem an hard thing for some
sorts of men to perform) yet upon such endeavor, with humble seeking unto God
for direction in these truths, and faithful and patient waiting upon him in the
use of pertinent means, I doubt not but in Gods good time they may be well
satisfied from h^s Word and good Spirit of Grace in the reallity and truth of
the su^stance of them: for which purpose I conceive it not needful here to say
more for information or conviction (which is mainly my business) and for
particul^r application hereof, it will be obvious to all knowing and pious
Christ^ans, which I am forced to leave to themselves at present, for
brevity-sake, (publishing by Press having long been to me a difficult task) and
when a Doctrinal Foundation in this case is once surely laid, application of
these, with some points of such nature, will in some respect, be made a
fortiori, as from an additional consideration, but yet a very weighty and
moving consideration (i^ particularities therein to be considered in their
several kinds and natures, be duly improved by Scripture-guidance) and the holy
Spirit of Gods gracious assistance, the infallible means of being rightly
guided into all needful profitable Divine Truth, as all holy Scripture-Truths
are, and these in particular (though too much overlooked and sl^ghted by some)
though the great things of God, and an excellent and glorious part of the
Gospel of Christ, a rich and long inheritance of the Saints, yea (as we noted)
the highest form of God-glorifying Creatures (then) viz. Saints and Angels, to
fit them wonderfully above all other means in the preceding six thousand years,
to glorify him more excellently for ever and ever. We shall but even mention
some like evidences from the other Apostles, Peter, James and John, the
Witnesses at Christ's Transfiguration, who then jointly saw that representation
of Christ's glory at his coming in his Kingdom, (for he calls that his coming in
that sense, Matthew. 16.28. Mark 9.1.) when those eminent glorified Saints and
Prophets, Moses and Elias, appeared talking with him: First, Peter sets forth
the beginning of that state by the Restitution of all things, and the times of
refreshment from the presence of the Lord, Acts 3.19 20, 21. and as witnessed
by all the holy Prophets of God since the World began. And the Apostle James
styles it from the Prophet Amos 9.11. The raising of the Tabernacle of David
that was fallen down, with some explication of the said Prophecy, Acts 15.16,
17. Also the Evangelist John makes a telation of Christ's Kingdom not being of
this world, proving it not so to be, in regard his Servants did not fight that
he should not then be delivered to the Jews; Now therefore (says he) my
Kingdom is not from hence, John 8.36, 37. I might add Jude's old Tradition,
turned by him into sacred Scripture, v. 13, 14. but that was spoken of before
particularly.

XII. Twelfthly, Come we now to the twelfth and last Foundation of our Faith,
named in our general Title Page, and that is from the most full and strongly
evidenced Revelation, in that many ways most excellent part of the h^ly
Scripture given by Christ to his beloved Disciple John, concerning the ending
of the fourth Monarchy, at the Beasts destruction, Chap 18.11. to the end, and
the beginning and continuance of Christ's Kingdom or Reign with his Saints
succeeding it, Chap. 20.4. thereby very evidently explaining by his best
authority what Daniel saw and said more darkly and briefly before, both of them
being Gods beloved Witnesses of the same Divine Truth; but Christ's by his
beloved Disciple John, is the true and infallible Comment of the other: Which
said last Visions, Chap. 19.11. and Chap. 20, 21, 22, now are hastening in
order of accomplishment (as we said) to take place, (as upon many
considerations may appear probable) when that heavenly General of all Gods
Hosts (whose Name is, THE WORD OF GOD, (as he is there styled) JESUS CHRIST the
Great Messiah and Deliverer of his People, THE KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS,
verse. 16. will then come the second time without sin unto salvation, Heb. 9
ult. for them: not only as in the Kingdom of the Stone, spiritually and
divinely to save their Souls from the hands of their spiritual Enemies, which
he fulfilled at his first coming, and has improved and carried on ever since,
in their suffering ^^ndition, and will do whilst that Kingdom of Patience shall
en^ure; but when he will work an outwrad visible temporal salvation, with the
spirit al, for all his people, from all their Enemies, to serve him without
fear of them, in righteousness and holiness before him, all the days of their
lives, Luc. 1.75. (which with the context has been but in a small measure yet
fulfilled, in the aptest sense, in comparison of what it will in several
respects then be) for then will be the great Vintage or He^vest of Believers,
which is to come in unto Christ in the said thousand years reign, when Isa 53.
chiefly shall (it seems) take place, that he shall see his seed and the
pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand, in the prolonging of his days,
even in all that time, as also he speaks Chap. 9.10. wherein he shall sit upon
the Throne of David, and uphis Kingdom (mark that expression) to order it; that
is, David's Kingdom: for what end? namely, in such a way as to establish it,
namely, by Justice and Judgment: and the Psalmist excellently speaks thereof
particularly, Justice and Judgment shall be the habitation (or establishment,
or stability) of thy Throne, Psalm. 89.14. and especially Psalm 97.2. which
particularly sets down the beginning of Christ's Kingdom, so explained Heb. 1.8.
for Kingdoms are so to be established, (says the wi^^st Solemon, Prove. 16.12.
The Throne is established by Righteousness, and 25 5.) the contrary whereunto
being acted by the ten Kings that give their power to the Beast, with others at
the last, will bring destruction both upon him and them together, Rev. 19.18,
19, 20. like as some of them before that time had bewailed the burning of the
Whore of Babylon with their Alas, alas, Chap. 18.9 10 But Christ being that
Great King that [with an ^^^e] is foretold shall eminently rule in
Righteou^ness, Jer. 23.5, 6. Therefore he will so establish his Davidical
Throne (as was said) in Righteousness and Judgment, the sure establishment
thereof: For all their great temporal Promises then (as we showed before) shall
appear to be founded upon their spiritual endowments of Grace, when God will
circumcise their hearts, and the hearts of their Seed, Deuteronomy. 30. v. 1. to 11.
because Israel then shall be a most holy people, therefore they shall be a most
happy People; their Dominion then will be founded in grace; and thereby
preserved also for ever, as God promised in that eminent Text 2 Samuel 7. and all
their outward mercies will appear then to be derived to, and preserved for them
and their Seed, from that spiritual Covenant with Abraham, and through that one
Seed Christ, and from their interest therein, from whence the temporal will
flow in unto them, according to their large measure of grace and
sanctification. But at the fulfilling of that said Vision, Rev. 19.11. when
that Great General with his holy and celestial Army shall overcome and utterly
destroy the Beast and false Prophet, thereupon will ensue Satan's binding, and
that securely, for 1000 years, that he may not deceive the Nations any more,
till the said thousand years be fulfilled, etc. Chap. 20. which also will be
contemporaneous with Christ's Reign with his Saints on earth, the same thousand
years, which is Christ's Davidical Kingdom, of which God gave such assurance to
David that it should continue for ever, to the end of the world in the said 2 Samuel 7. From which ground, with others all such as have but a small measure of
David's faith thereof, may by the due reading, improving, and the right and
serious considering of his security therein, (through Gods mercy) be
sufficiently satisfied in it. And in very deed, so much has by many learned
persons been written to this purpose, and preached upon this Text, Rev. 20.4,
5, etc. that I judge it needless to add any more here upon that account: Only
observe how Daniel and the Revelation agree in our Parallel of the Ruin of the
Roman Empire, (which is now hastening under the last head thereof) when Christ's
said Reign will begin: Whose abominable wickedness, veiled under such
hypocritical pretenses of piety and charity, varnished over with a seeming
colorable antiquity, propt up by the Popes so long falsified infallibility,
under which and other false Vizards, whilst the said Pope with his Accomplices
pretend most zeal for Christ's Religion and Souls Salvation, even then they
really sight most against the one, and really seek to ^est^oy the other, (as
woeful experience ^th long manifested) one the one part undermining the Truth,
making void the Ordinances and Institutions of Christ, by adding to then, or
taking from them, pollute his Worship, dishonor his Gospe^, and cause his
Religion to be reproached, and his Name blasphe^ed, amongst (...) Paganish and
Barbarous Nations, that know him not: And on the other part, by their many
Cra^ts and Cruel^ to (...) and persecute poor ignoran: Souls, or others tha^
fall into their Nets, or by their tyrannous Practices, (the mysterious in quity
whereof will be revealed when their Inquisitors shall come to be anatomized)
whereby they have earnestly labored to force them to yield to their evil
designs; Yea how have they violently for many hundreds of years past killed the
Saints? How many most barbarous massacres and bloody persecutions have they
acted in against those meek Lambs of that (now alive, yet once was) slain Lamb
of God Christ Jesus, who shortly to their terror shall appear to be the Lion of
the Tribe of Judah, Rev. 5.5. when they have filled up their measure, which
they have ever been doing from the time the great red Dragon gave unto that
multi-form'd Beast his Seat, with great power and authority to act therein for
his forty two months, Rev. 13.1, 6 7. which he has accordingly improved, as
both History and Experience has abundantly (though sadly) discovered; and will
do so more and more to his power, (which is the heavy spiritual Judgment of
that man of Sin, and therefore more heavy, because so senceless of it) even
until his time shall be no longer, Rev. 10.6 7. as the Angel (probably Christ)
forewarns that strange Creature, and when it will be: And does not the height
of those prodigious impieties and prevailing abominations too too conspicuous
in that whole Antichristian Body, and every Limb thereof, in the sight of all
observant persons and people appear evidently to hasten the destruction
thereof, together with that said Beast, who as Daniel also foresaw should be
then slain, and his body given to the burning flame, chap 7, 11. Of which
Prophecy and Vision this glorious appearance made by Christ of his next
coming, chap. 19 11. is a clear comment and decyphered completion shortly to
take place (as we have reason to expect and also to be fully accomplished
accordingly.

And then likewise together with Babilons ruin will happily hasten the raising
up of Sion. And upon Antichrists destruction will certainly succeed Christ's
said so wonderful exaltation in in the world, in that his Divine and Kingly
visible Glory and Majesty then to be manifest, namely to be the Prince of the
Kings of the earth (as Rev. 1.5. though formerly rejected by such many times)
and that in the sight of men, angels, and all creatures, Rev. 5.9, 10, 11, 12,
13. who shall then bow the knee and acknowledge him to be the Lord, Phil. 2.9.
for which at present the whole creation most he^vily groaneth, Romans 8.22, 23.
When that blessed new Jerusalem state shall appear, which then will be
replenished with its holy and happy new raised Inhabitants, with all that
blessed communion of doubly saved Saints and holy Angels in such great and
innumerable multitudes, which said Angels as in heaven before they were wont to
rejoice in sinners conversion, and even to be serviceable therein, so will they
then much more rejoice in such happy communion of such multitudes of saved
Saints, Jews and Gentiles then to come in, and of the perfectly holy communion
of the before deceased Saints, but then invested (happily) with their new
raised bodies by the same power of Christ, whereby then he will perfectly
subdue all things (in their due order) unto himself (as the Apostle Paul
instructs us, Phil. 3. ult.) Then shall they be Isangeloi, as our Savior
speaks, like to the Angels of God (before) in heaven, when the said
Hiero-metropolis, or holy mother City, as the Prophet Esaias foretold, will arise
and shine because her light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon
her, chapter 60. ver. 1. as in those large and various descriptons of the manifold
excellency of that City, both in former and following chapters are set down, as
also in many other portions of holy Scripture may be observed: Some of which
are applied, Rev. 21. to that City particularly (as we noted) whereby the
Spirit God teaches us evidently their proper meaning and literal sense, riz.
respecting the happy estate of that great and holy New Jerusalem, whose beauty
and glory; and blessedness on earth would require a large volumn aptly to
display, in what from Scripture grounds might to that purpose be evidenced,
respecting the same, and yet many things more than what now we can attain to,
may be groundedly expected. For that time when the Temple of God shall be
opened in heaven, and men shall see in his Temple the Ark of his Testament,
Rev. 11.19, and the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the
light of one day shall be sevenfold as the light of seven days, as is foretold
thereof, Es. 30.26. many mysteries of Christ and his Religion, of his works of
Creation, Redemption and Providence, and many mysteries now in the varieties of
the creatures (many ways till then little understood as is probable) when the
Lord shall be unto that City her everlasting light, and her God her glory, Isa.
60.19. And the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the
Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea. Hab. 2 14. It will then be a filling of the
Earth with knowledge, and that of the glory of the Lord, and in such measure as
shall be to the uttermost capacity of it, as the Sea, ready to overflow where
it has any passage, and would cover every place with its waters; so in that
time there will be a knowledge of all then knowable, as we may say. Besides
those Excellencies set down to be before, in, and after the thousand years of
Christ's said Reign (as in our first convincing Argument in the Word Written are
to be seen) concerning which a Body of Divinity respecting that world might
usefully be written from Scripture warrant, from all which as from an excellent
School reserved for the highest form of those than so excellent God glorifying
Creatures, raised Saints and Angels, with others, when all things by Christ
shall then be made new, as Rev. 21 5. I doubt not but abundant matter of
everlasting pra^se will strong y for that state enforce the same, yet with the
greatest will^ngness and complacency, upon all such or the like advantager.
Whereupon these afterward everlasting Hallelujahs will most amply and
perpetually be sung to the Trin-Une Deity of Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
eternally most blessed holy and glorious, by men and Angels (as was said) for
ever and ever. Amen.

To Glory's God all Glory's due for aye:
To him alone this Due let all such pay.

AMEN.
FINIS.

