Imprimatur, Hic Liber cui Titulus, The Life and Trial of Sir Walter Raleigh.

Ab. Campion, Reverendissimo Domino GILB. Arch. Cant. a Sac. Domest.

Aug. 30. 1676. Ex Aed. Lambeth.

THE LIFE Of the Valiant and Learned Sir WALTER RALEIGH, Knight.

WITH HIS TRIAL AT WINCHESTER.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Benj. Shirley, and Richard Tonson, under the Dial
of St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet, and under Gray's Inn Gate next Gray's Inn
Lane, 1677.

THE LIFE OF Sir Walter Raleigh.
I Determine to write the Life, the Rise, Fortunes and End of Sir Walter
Raleigh, Knight; his Memoirs being certainly worthy to be transmitted to
Posterity, who has been so successfully industrious in retrieving the Actions
of former Ages from the Ruins of Time, even in its very Infancy, in a
well-compil'd, masculine, and learned History of the World. The Image of so
great a Person should not be quite lost, though drawn in little, which deserves
to be pourtraid by the greatest Masters of Policy, and with the boldest
Touches. Indeed his Shadows cannot now well be left exact, seeing they must be
taken so long after his Death; when Time has defaced his best Features, and
shed Oblivion on the most beautiful of his Actions. Who follows Truth (as Sir
Walter has wisely remarqu'd) too near the heels, In his Preface to the History
of the World
may have his teeth struck out: and he that goes after her, often loses her
sight, and himself too. Distance of time does sometimes, like some mediums,
make the streightest Actions seem crooked, and sometimes gives them the
advantage of Landscapes, which appear taking and agreeable afar off, tho when
nearly searched, and pried into by a curious and intelligent Eye, they seem
rude, harsh, and unpleasant. We must therefore despair of a just and exact
Account of him, unless we could by some Magick-Power (as the Author of a
Pamphlet has done, to terrify and make Gondamore speak the Truth) raise him
from the dead, and converse a while with his Ghost. I shall however with what
imperfect Clue our Histories have bequeathed, trace him through the various
Labyrinths of Fortune, and take a Prospect of him in the several Scenes of
Court and Camp, Peace and War, till I have followed him to the Scaffold, the
place of his much lamented and unhappy End; keeping as near as I can a medium
between Those who in their Annals drive on with an implicit faith; and Those,
who to get the reputation of Observers and Men of Reach, steal into the private
Recesses of Princes, and disrobe Majesty it self to find some Deformities;
which love to their Prince, and Interest of State should cover; The best Vail
for all deformed Actions.

I find him born at a place, called Budely, or Budleigh, in the County of
Devon, in an House which his Family had long possessed, called Hays: A County (as
Mr. Cambden has observed) renowned among foreign Nations for the Valor of its
Inhabitants in Sea-Services of all sorts. In his Britannia.
That Spain thought so, Sir Francis Drake, with many others of that County, as
well as our Sir Walter, are very convincing Arguments.

That he was well descended, was never yet questioned, but by my Lord of Oxon,
who indeed was wont to call him the Jack, and Upstart. But these were words
which only Envy and Emulation could extort, and every one very easily confute.

Indeed that he was a Gentleman, because a Favorite, was no ill Argument
amongst the Politicians of those Times, if we may believe a Secretary of State,
Sir Rob. Nanton.
who has left this as a Maxim then, That the Queen through her whole Reign
never was guilty of creation, never in her choice took into her Favor a mere
New-Man, or a Mechanic.

That he was but poor in the beginning seems not strange, if we consider him
the youngest Brother, and the Fortunes of his Family much diminished by the
Generosity (if not Prodigality) of his Ancestors. But the wants of Fortune are
often recompensed with the richer gifts of the Mind; Nature foreseeing the
disability of his Estate, stocked him with a larger portion of Sense,
bequeathed him the fairer Patrimony of a faithful Memory, plausible Tongue,
strong Wit, and solid Judgment.

But because the natural Endowments of the Mind, though never so great, are
capable of Advancement by the help of Education, he resolved for one of the
Universities. Oxon had the happiness to own him, where I find him in Oriel
College. His slender Fortune, and his active Genius, always pointed with a
restless Ambition, would not let him settle here, so that he could only (like a
Spy) take a transient view of, or (like an hasty Enemy) make some incursions
and inrodes into those parts of Learning, which he afterward conquered, and was
entirely Master of.

Therefore that he might the better feed those Hopes Ambition had kindled in
his thoughts, and remove nearer to the Mistress he courted; He resolved for one
of the Inns of Court, which he knew were always Places of Esteem with the
Queen, who would say, they fitted Youth for the future. Here he spent his time,
and improved himself in the intricate knowledge of our Laws, and in the studies
of all Manly and Real Accomplishments.

But he staid not long here neither; for Fate it seems would have him of the
Sword first. Yet though he laid aside his Gown, it was not with a design of
never reassuming it; for through the frequent Vicissitudes of his whole Life,
he challenged a Reputation amongst the most Eminent Statesmen, being upon all
Emergencies of Affairs consulted, as one of the best Oracles of Government and
Policy in his time. It Is true he was never sworn, for some Reasons of State
which Courts spread a Vail over, but was frequently called to Council. Through
his Life he made good his Motto, Tam Marti, quam Mercurio: and it is still a
Question, Whether he was the better Statesman or Soldier? incomparably
excelling in both the Arts of Peace and War. To rise by his Studies, probably
his Condition and Ambition would not let him judge the speediest course; much
time and a considerable Fortune being often spent in climbing up the tedious
steps of Preferment that way. He thought it more easy to fight, than talk
himself into a Reputation. Active-Times, and a busy Warlike Princess, pointed
him out the readiest way to the Temple of Honor. The Sword he judged, with
Alexander, the quickest Instrument to unty all the Knots and tedious Obstacles
of Greatness.

Nor could he want Occasions enough to draw forth his Spirits into Action.
France was engaged in a Civil-War; And the Queen, whether out of concern for
the Protestants, or for Reason of State, to divert the Giant-Enemy the
Spaniard, assisted the poor distressed Dutch. And the Spaniard by a Policy of
the same nature, raises Rebellions in Ireland; which, like subterranean Fires,
broke out over all that Kingdom at several times; When one Mac had in one place
spent his Force, presently we hear of the eruption of another. This Fire was
kept in to the end of her Reign, being maintained by that lasting fuel of
Rebellion, and common pretext of change in Government, RELIGION: the Pope
pretending the Kingdom belonged to St. Peter.

1569.
Of his first Public Appearance Mr. Cambden has given us this Account: The
Queen though imbroil'd in a Rebellion at home of the Earl of Northumberland and
Dacres in the North, yet failed not to relieve the Protestants in France, who
were now brought into a distressed and almost desperate condition; she exhorted
all the Protestant Princes to assist the Common-Cause, supplied the Queen of
Navar with Money, taking Jewels in pawn; Permitted Henry Champernoun to carry
into France a Troop of Gentlemen-Volunteers, who were resolved to make good the
Motto their Colors bore, Finem det nobis Virtus. Among these Sir Walter
engaged himself, though (as Mr. Cambden goes on) very young, and now first
beginning to be of any note. So soon the early blossoms of his Valor began to
appear, which afterward grew up to an exact ripeness and perfection. France
was the first School, wherein he learnt the Rudiments of War; and the
Low Countries and Ireland (the Military Academies of those Times) made him
Master of that Discipline; for in both places he exposed himself afterward to
Land-Service: But their slender Pay discouraged him from staying long in
either. The Service of Ireland especially, scarce supplying the necessities of
a Military Life.

Being restless and impatient of a narrow and low Condition, and his Services
being not so successful as his Hopes were great, and his Merits not answered
with a Fortune strong enough to buoy up his Reputation, he was resolved to
leave no stone unturned, nor any Method of living unexperimented. And since his
Land-Expeditions could make no Additions to his Fortunes, Novelty, and a desire
of putting himself into a better capacity, urged him to a Sea-Voyage. At both
Sea and Land he was the true Pattern of Industry; and if any Man ever managed
Necessity to its furthest Improvements, it was He. No expert Soldier or
Mariner escaped his Acquaintance or Enquiries; nothing that related to the Arts
of War and Navigation missd his perusal: and one who was Master of those parts
he enjoyed, could with no great difficulty make those Arts his own. Add to this
the Methods he used to improve himself: He slept but five hours; four he spent
in reading and mastering the best Authors, two in a select Conversation and an
Inquisitive Discourse, the rest in Business. He underwent all the labors that
attend a Soldier, and fared as the meanest. No common Mariner took more pains,
or hazarded more in the most difficult Attempts.

What his Sea-Voyages produced Histories are silent in; but not long after his
return I find him got again into Ireland, appearing with his own Colors flying
in the Field, 1580.
under the command of the Lord Gray, who succeeded Pelham in the Deputyship of
that Kingdom. He had not been long there, before a Quarrel was raised between
the Lord-Deputy and our Captain, (for with that Title he went into Ireland)
which being complained of to a Council of War, was referred to the
Council Table in England. Our Historians would make the Lord Grey's Cause the
fairest; but Justice, and the Result of the Council, gave Raleigh the Victory.
What were the occasions of this Quarrel our Annals slip over, and have only
left a large Field for Conjecture to tire it self in. Whether an eager pursuit
after Honor, without exact obedience to Military-Command, occasioned by a
restless desire of doing something Great, or what ever else it might be, we
leave the Reader to fancy: However if his Cause had not been good, no Apology,
how well soever managed, could have bribed the Judgment of so wise a Council,
wholly strangers to his Worth and Person.

About this time Authors place the Era of his Rise, but cannot well agree
about the occasion of it. Some would have Leicester to be the chief Agent in
it, and that he related the whole business at Council to the Queen with no
little advantage to our Captain. Not so much probably out of respect to
Raleigh, as to his own Interest. For Favorites, like their Princes, seldom
espouse any Cause upon any other ground than what advances or stands with their
own Designs. His own Designs indeed on the Queen were blasted, and finding the
burden and envy of a Statesman too heavy for his aged shoulders, he was willing
handsomely to impart them to a more active Genius. Though great Favorites
seldom admit of a Partner, till Age makes them willing to withdraw, and leave
the trouble of Business to more spritely years. They care not to have new
Plants set, till themselves are almost withered and sapless.

Others would have his Rise attributed to Sussex, who brought him to Court to
outshine Leicester, and eclipse the splendour of his Enemy. But what was the
strongest Argument and only Persuasive with the Queen was his Merits* which she
soon saw, and presently encouraged. Nor must I here pass by one small step to
his future Height, which our Chronicles have overlooked, as below the Pen of
an Historian, tho some have judged an Account of some little transactions the
best Inlets to Truth and Mysteries of State. The occasion was thus: Our Captain
coming over out of Ireland upon the afore-mentioned Cause to Court, in very
good habit, (which it seems was the greatest part of his Estate) which is often
found to be no mean Introducer where Deserts are not known, found the Queen
walking, till she was stopped by a plashy-place which she scrupled treading on;
presently he spread his new Plush-Coat on the Ground, on which the Queen gently
trod, being not a little pleased, as well as surprised with so unexpected a
Complement. Thus, as one remarks upon this Story, Fuller's Worthies
An Advantageous Admission into the first Notices of a Prince, is more than
half a degree to Preferment. For he presently after found some gracious Beams
of Favor reflecting on him, which he was resolved, and well knew how to
cherish and contract. To put the Queen in remembrance, he wrote in a Window
obvious to her Eye, Fain would I climb, yet fear I to fall.
Which her Majesty either espying, or being shown, under-wrote this Answer, If
thy heart fail thee, climb not at all.
But his aspiring Soul could not rest in the lower, though safer way of living;
He could not be mean, whose Resolutions were so great, and whose Prudence and
Activity made him capable of the highest Preferments. Inspired with a restless
and ambitious Genius, he designed nothing but what was extreme; and had rather
not be, than not be one of the most Eminent. And to the greatest height
probably he had arrived, had he lived in any other Princes Reigns than that of
Queen Elizabeth and King James; the former being not overhasty to raise any to
any great Honor, and the latter not caring for Men of War and Blood.

Raleigh was so towardly an Apprentice in the Court-Trade, that he soon set up
for himself, and would have improved this stock of Favor to a great advantage,
had he not lost by those common Enemies to it, Envy and Jealousy. In a short
time he is become a Minion, obtains the Queens Ear, is often consulted, and
nothing done without him. Her Favor and his Parts began to alarm his Rivals,
who like some envious Neighbors will not easily permit any Fabric to stand
long that hinders their own Prospect. Jealous Favorites, like wise Planters,
will not suffer the Under-Wood to rise, which may obstruct the growth of taller
Trees.

Leicester began to repent his choice of his Creature, and thought he grew too
fast in his Mistresses Favor. To stop the current of her Affection, he
privately endeavors to undermine his Esteem, and introduce a new Favorite
that might be his Rival. To bring about this Design, Leicester thought there
would be nothing wanting, if by Raleigh's absence he could have opportunity to
introduce the Earl of Essex; nor did he long expect before one offered it self:
for the Queen being willing to encourage Raleigh, (who, as Mr. Cambden is
pleased to tell us, was never sufficiently to be commended for the great pains
he took to discover remote Countries, and to advance the Glory of the English
Navigation and Trade) sent him on a Voyage to Sea. Nor did he make a vain and
fruitless one; for at his Return he brought news of a new Country, discovered
by him in the Year 1584, called in honor of the Queen Virginia, before called
Wingandacoa by the barbarous Inhabitants. A Country that has been since of no
inconsiderable Profit to our Nation. But though Patents were granted to him to
settle a Plantation there, it grew not famous till the Reign of King James:
Wherein this Nation quickly found out the Excellency and Fruitfulness of the
Place, so agreeable to our English Bodies, and profitable to the Exchequer.
Nature there is prodigal, and makes amends for her parsimony to other parts of
the World. An Acre there yields often forty Bushels of Corn; and, which is
more strange, there being three Harvests in a Year: For, their Corn is sowed,
ripe, and cut down in little more than two Months.

For this, and other beneficial Expeditions and Designs, 1584.
this Year her Majesty was pleased to confer on him the honor of Knighthood,
which in her Reign was more esteemed than in her Successors. The Queen keeping
the Temple of Honor close shut, and never opened but to Virtue and Desert. Nor
was she indeed ever hasty to reward; for she seldom paid in any other Coin than
Patents and good Words. So that the greatest number of those who might pretend
to Favor, were the Architects of their own Fortunes, and had little or no
Encouragement from her, more than that of a Spectator, who praises the
Workmanship, and commends the handsome Contrivances of a Building, but is at no
part of the Expenses of raising it. Hence our Sir Walter's Rewards are quickly
enumerated, for he got nothing after all his Exploits and Designs, but the
Wardenship of the Stanneries, Command of the Guard, and the Government of
Iersey and Virginia; Places of no very great Profit, nor answerable to his
Worth, or just Ambition.

1588.
In 1588, the grand Clymacterick of Spain, (for Bodies Politic have their
Critical Times) I find Sir Walter by his Example encouraging others of the
Gentry to set out Ships at their proper Charges, and by his admirable Conduct
and Courage to put them to the best use. Which hired Ships were Actors of no
small use in that fatal Blow given to the Invincible Armada. Three Years this
Giant had been growing to that portentous Greatness, with infinite Expenses and
Industry; but was beaten, ruined, and dishonourably overthrown in less than a
Months space: the Spaniards finding that our Ships as well as the Heavens could
fight against them.

But this Shock, like some Aguefit, was easily recovered, and in a short time
after the Spaniards began to renew their former Designs. For in the Parliament
which began Febr. 19. 1592, 1592.
I find Sir Walter Raleigh informing the House, that the Queen could not
without Subsidies prevent the eminent dangers threatened from the Spaniard. Of
which Subsidies he spoke (as he protested) not only to please the Queen, to
whom he was infinitely obliged, but for the necessity he both saw and knew; He
told them, he very well discovered the great Strength of the King of Spain; and
to show his Mightiness, he informed the House how he possessed all the World. And
that his Malice and ill purposes against this Realm might be evident, he showed
how on every side he had beleaguered us; In Denmark, the King being young, he
had corrupted the Council and Nobility; so it was very likely he would speed
himself of Ships from thence. In the Maritime Towns of the Low Countries, and
in Norway he has laid in great store of Shipping. In France he has the
Parliament-Towns at command; In Britanny he has all the best Havens; and in
Scotland he has corrupted the Nobility, and promised them Forces to assist the
Papists, and that they were ready to join with any Foreign-Aids, that would
make them strong enough to be by themselves, and to resist others; for, as he
thought, there were not six Gentlemen of that Country of one Religion. In his
own Country there are all possible Preparations making, and he is coming with
sixty Galleys besides other Shipping. If our Subsidies are not sudden, he may
with ease invade us riding at Anchor; but all will be little enough to
withstand him. At his coming he fully resolves to get Plymouth, or at least to
possess some of the Havens this Summer within our Land. And Plymouth is in most
danger; for no Ordnance can be carried thither to remove him, the Passages will
not give leave. Now the way to defeat him, is to send a Royal Army and supplant
him in Britanny, and to possess our selves there; and to send a strong Navy to
Sea, and to lie with it on the Cape, and at Lambuck; to which places come all
his Ships with Riches from all places, and there they may set upon all that
come.

What success this Speech alone had I know not, but the Subsidy was granted
with the general Consent of the House, to carry on the War against Spain. His
Expedition a little after demonstrates that the Queen took his Advice, which
was to afflict the Spaniards at a distance; and whilst she could not handsomely
assault his more neighbourly and guarded parts, to disturb those that were more
naked and further off, his Indies. The Moneys brought from thence being the
Nerves and Sinews of his Power, and the chiefest Incendiary in the Irish
Rebellion, which if handsomely stopped, would put an end to his Greatness, and
humble the Mighty Monarch.

That he might not want an opportunity to show his Valor and Conduct in this
Affair, the Queen sends him to Sea to manifest both; thinking none more fit to
be employed in a Business, than the Person that counseled and started it;
having the Courage of a Soldier to put in execution the sober Advices of the
Gown-man. To America he is sent with 15 Men of War to possess himself of
Panama, where the Spaniards ship their Riches, or to intercept them in their
passage homewards. But he found more Encouragement from the willingness of the
Seamen than from the Winds, which held the Ships in their Havens for three
Months: A Circumstance which put an ill look upon the Enterprise, and had
almost made it vain. But nothing could allay the Courage of the Seamen, who
were bouy'd up with the hopes of Prey, and the success of their Commander.
Having set sail at last, they got beyond the Spanish Cape, called the
Lands-end, where they met with unwelcome Intelligence, viz. That by express
command from his Catholic Majesty no Ship was to stir from the West Indies
that Year. Together with this News, instead of meeting with the longed-for
Enemy, they were attacqu'd with a more invincible one, a furious Tempest, which
dispersed and disordered the Fleet, and sunk their Ship-Boats. Thus being on all
sides assaulted with Tempests, Disasters, and the worse news of the Spaniards
stay in the other World, he thought the Heavens had dashed his Designs, and
rendered a well-ordered Contrivance abortive. Upon which at first he intended to
make for home with the whole Fleet; but another Project offered it self after
second thoughts, of dividing the Navy into two Squadrons, from the hope that
tho while together they had been successless, yet Fortune might offer to them
when separated something worthy their patience and desires. Immediately one
Squadron is committed to the Conduct of Sir John Buroughs, Son to the Lord
Buroughs; the other to Sir Martin Forbisher, with their respective
Commissions. Sir Martin's charge was to lie off and on the Coast of Spain, to
hinder the coming in of their Vessels. Sir John's to wait at the Azores for the
coming of the Caracks out of the East Indies.

Sir Walter was much blamed for this Action, and thought short in his
Politics, in giving over the hopeful part of the Design to Sir John Buroughs,
and retiring himself to Court. But the Success was the only Argument of his
Oversight, and nothing but the Event could charge him with Imprudence. The
Division of the Fleet proved a wise Design, and amazed the Spaniard. For while
the Spanish Admiral eyed Forbisher, the mighty Caracks were unregarded, and
left to the mercy of Burrough's Men of War as an easy Prey. Who having
according to Order arrived at Sancta Cruce, a small Town in the Isle of Azores,
a little after got sight of a Portugal Merchant-man, (briskly pursued by a
Privateer of the Earl of Cumberland's) but could not reach her, an unhappy Calm
keeping him at too far a distance. But a more welcome Storm arising in the
night, forced both to weigh Anchor. As Soon as day appeared, the Portuguees was
unlading as fast as she could at Flores, and upon the approach of the English
fired their Carack: But though their Designs were ruined as to that Ship, yet
the news they got from some Prisoners taken, gave them fresh hopes, and
heartned them with the Information, that several other Merchantmen were behind
coming for Spain. This put Sir John Buroughs upon placing his Men of War at
several distances, to reach as far about as was possible. But they had not long
waited, before their diligence was rewarded with the surprisal of a large
Vessel, called The Mother of God, which was 165 foot long from Head to Stern,
and seven Decks high, laden with Goods to the value of 150000 l. English,
besides what the Seamen privately took for their own use.

Sir Walter having now deserted his Naval Employ, and become again a Courtier,
it was not long before he was seized with the idle Court-Disease of Love,
the unfortunate occasion of the vvorst Action of his whole Life. For in the
Year 1595, 1595.
I find him under a Cloud, banished the Court, and his Mistresses Favor
vvithdrawn, for devirginating a Maid of Honor. But why for this one Action he
should lie under the imputation of an Atheist, and from a single crime get the
denomination of a Debauch, is the Logic of none but the Vulgar. By the same
reason the other Favorites of those Times ( Leicester, Cecil, and Essex) bid
as fair for those titles, the latter making the Parallel good in this Vice with
his successor Buckingham, tho in other Circumstances there was a great
disparity. Neither ever was it accounted any great Crime in the Orb of Courts.
But to stop the Mouth of Fame, which is always open on such occasions, and to
wipe out the Infamy of the Fact, he was shortly after married to the Object of
his Love, the defloured Lady. And to get Reputation among the People, who
always were unjust to him in their sentiments, he put himself on a Voyage to
Guiana, for the Improvement and Honor of his Country. Having therefore
obtained his Liberty, (for, for this Action he was imprisoned some months) and
finding all things with an unpleasant Aspect, he followed his Genius of
discovering New Places, and tracing Nature in her more retired and hidden
Paths; thinking that Absence, and a Fortunate Voyage, might reinvest him in his
Mistresses thoughts, and merit a new Esteem.

Guiana had been talked of much by the Spaniards as an excellent Country, and
for one Commodity the Spaniards had a great reverence for, very famous, GOLD,
which put Sir Walter upon the Attempt, judging it besides a place (if mastered)
very convenient for its situation to annoy and disturb the Spaniards American
Traffic, and would be no little help in building his Fortunes, and what was
more estimable, place him in his Mistresses Favor again.

From Plymouth he set sail on the sixth of February, and on the 22d of March
arrived at the Isle of Trinidado, eight degrees on this side the
Equinoctial-Line; where he soon made himself Master of St. Joseph's, a small
City; and, which was more considerable, of the Governor Antonio Bereo, from
whom he got the best account of those Parts, and its Trade. Leaving his Ship at
Trinidado, with some Pinaces and an hundred Men, and the small stock of
Knowledge he obtained of Bereo, he made up the great River Ormus, in search of
Guiana. What he found, saw, and performed there, his most Ingenuous History of
those Parts may satisfy the Curious.

In his Return he fired Cumana, because the Inhabitants would not redeem it
with Money; besides several Cottages at St. Mary's, and Rio de la Hach. Neither
did he desist in this Design of Guiana, for once or twice Mr. Cambden tells us
afterward he prosecuted it with vast Expenses, although the Spaniards had
placed a Colony at Trinidado to hinder his further Attempts.

Whilst Sir Walter is searching for a new World, Hawkins and Drake are
attempting fresh Things in those parts of America which the Spaniards were
already possessed of. But their old Fortune had left them, and the unhappiness of
the Action put an end to their Lives; 1596.
In the Year 1596 both died with Grief, and bequeathed their Hatred of the
Spaniard to Sir Walter Raleigh to revenge their Quarrel.

Who this Year returned, being satisfied with his Expedition, and much more
with the Reception he found at Court. The Storm was blown over, and his
Mistresses Brow was more smooth than at his departure; after his Eclipse he
shone brighter at Court, and the Death of those two famous Seamen, put them
upon courting Sir Walter, whom the necessity of State forced them to cherish
and encourage. It Is strange, that what was Essex's Ruin should confirm Sir
Walter in Favor, frequent Absence from his Mistress. But Sir Walter's
Obsequiousness worked much upon the humor of the Queen, who loved Pliantness,
and exact Obedience, which Essex could not always counterfeit.

The Spaniard being encouraged with the possession of Cales, from whence it was
but a short cut over into England, the Death of Hawkins, and their former
scourge, Drake, and the earnest Solicitations of the Irish, (who through her
Reign had got the Itch of Rebellion, which was fed and maintained by the
Spaniard, tho they had been sufficiently blooded by the English;) And the Queen
foreseeing a Storm gathering, thought 'twas the best way to scatter it before
it grew too great, and came too near. She resolved therefore to begin with the
Spaniard first, and fairly set on the Enemy in his own Ports. She speedily
riggs a brave Fleet, consisting of 150 Ships, Manned by 6360 Soldiers, 1000
Volunteer-Gentlemen, 6772 Seamen. Robert Earl of Essex, and the Lord Howard
were Commanders of equal Authority, having been both at an excessive charge in
carrying on the War. To these were joined a Council of War, consisting of
several eminent Seamen and Soldiers, among whom was our Sir Walter. The Fleet
was divided into four Squadrons; the first commanded by the Lord Admiral
Howard; the second by Essex; the third by Sir Thomas Howard; the fourth by Sir
Walter Raleigh.

In the beginning of June they set sail, and got to Gades the 20th: their
Design being perfectly unknown, as well to their Enemies as their own Men.
Essex heated with Youth, and an ambition of doing bravely, would have presently
landed and assaulted the Enemy: but this heat was allayed and corrected by Sir
Walter's Advice, who impugned all such rash Attempts. At last a fit
Opportunity presented it self, and by all it was resolved to fight them. At
which News the Earl threw up his Hat for joy. The Ebbing-Waters would not
permit the great Ships to engage, the Shelves being of greater hazard than the
Enemy. Therefore Raleigh is pitched on as the most proper Person in the midst
of the Channel to provoke them, who accordingly in a little Ship, called the
Wastspight, directed his* Prow against the Spanish Men of War, who thereupon
presently fell back. Upon this the rest of the Feet came in, and burnt and took
several of their Ships. After this Victory at Sea, the Men were very
importunate to go on shore, whom Essex landed at Puntal, a league from the
City. At first the Spaniards received them with a great deal of Courage, but
the English charged so warmly, that they thought it their prudentst way to
retire with more speed than they came out. The English pursued so close that
they had almost recovered the City-Gates as soon as they. The Earl got upon a
Bulwark near the Gate, and from thence he espied an Entrance into the Town, but
very hazardous, it being down a very steep Precipice: but this did not affright
several of our English, who leaped from thence into the Town, and engaged the
Enemy in the Streets. In the mean time Sir Walter and others having forced the
Gates, entered the Town, and the Castle was surrendered upon Merciful Conditions.
But Sir Walter was not idle, or eager after the enjoyment of his Conquest; for
whilst others were reaping the plentiful Harvest of War, he with some small
Ships who could pass up the Chanel, fired their Merchantmen which were
withdrawn to Port-Real, although they offered two millions of Ducats for their
Redemption. Great were the Losses to the Spaniards by this War; and if we may
believe our Histories, amounted to no less than Twenty Millions of Ducats. Upon
Consultation it was resolved to quit the Town, though contrary to the Opinion
of Essex, who was for keeping it, as a future Annoyance to the Spaniards.
After this they took Faro in Algarbe; and being weary at last of their
Victories, they resolved for home, though much against Essex's will, whose
youthful heat was but inflamed by their Successes, but was wisely slack'd by
the Prudence of the Admiral, and the sober Advice of Sir Walter: who finding
their Men sick, and having gotten so ample Rewards, were not again for
hazarding their Fortune upon hopes of a future Prey.

At their Return the Queen welcomed and encouraged her Soldiers with new
Honors. All but Essex were pleased, who found State-Preferments not disposed
of according to his mind. Vere was made Governor of the Briel, and Sir Robert
Cecil Secretary of State.

To recover their Losses at Gades, the Spaniard riggs out a new Fleet, which
were baffled alone by the Winds; for the greatest part were cast away and
wrecked. With the Relics of this Fleet, in the Year following I find him upon
his old Designs of Ireland: But the Queen was always too nimble for the grave
Don, whose Designs, like his Ships, moved slow and heavy.

Twenty Ships were rigged out at present, 1597.
and afterward increased to an hundred and twenty Men of War and Victuallers;
five thousand Men raised, besides a thousand old Soldiers brought from the
Netherlands by Vere. To appease Essex, the whole Conduct of the Expedition is
committed to him. The Navy was divided into three Squadrons; The first led by
Essex himself; The second by Howard; The third by Sir Walter, who now was
esteemed the ablest Seaman of his Age. To enoble this Expedition, several
Persons of quality of all sorts engaged themselves, who looked rather like
Courtiers than Soldiers, being more adorned with Feathers and gay Clothes,
than armed with Courage and Resolution. On the ninth of July they set out with
these Instructions, viz. To steer to Farol and the Groine, to surprise the
Spaniards in their Harbors, and to intercept their Indian Fleet (the Bait of
the War) at the Azores. Which Design was built upon very good Maxims of State:
For it would hinder the Fleet intended against England; Their Merchantmen
wanting Convoys, might be seized on; The Azores vvon, (where the Indian Fleet
always called for fresh Water in their Return); the Queen have the Dominion of
the Seas, and the Spaniard be obliged to a Treatment of Peace. Essex gave out
that he was resolved to sacrifice Himself and the Navy for his Country: But his
brisk Resolutions were quickly daunted by a dismal Tempest, which astonished
the Mariners themselves, and forced home our gaudy Volunteers, who thought no
Enemy so terrible as a Tempest, and the severe motions of a Sea-sick stomach.
Thus by this Contradiction of Heaven their Ships were torn* their Victuals
spent, and they upon this Emergency forced to a Consultation what to do. Some
were for laying aside the Farol and the Groine Attempts; others for a Voyage to
the Azores, which was contradicted by Vere. So that at last Essex and Raleigh
were pitched on to ride Post for Advice to the Queen. Essex talked to the Queen
of strange Chimaera's; how that if he were permitted to have the Fleet, he
would with ease fire the Spanish Navy, and perform many other bold Designs;
about which the Queen cautioned him, and desired the whole Business should be
managed as their joint discretion should prompt, and opportunity offer it self.
But if it were possible, if any occasion courted them to it, they should fire
the Ships in Farol Haven, and intercept what other Ships they could from the
Indies; And upon all Occasions manifest their Conduct and Valor. With these
Instructions they set sail again from Plymouth, (whither they were returned the
seventeenth of August) but were separated by a Tempest near the Landsend. A
cross Yard in Raleigh's Ship was broken by the impetuousness of the Storm, and
fell, which forced him to stay behind to make it good; And having been falsely
informed that the Spanish Fleet was bound for the Azores, after having repaired
his Ship, he steered his course thitherwards. In the mean time Essex's
Jealousy, and the pernicious Insinuations of Raleigh's Enemies, had wrought him
into a belief that this Division of the Navy was on purpose laid and
foredesign'd by Raleigh: But however the business was put up at his Arrival,
and Essex welcomed him, making an Apology for acquainting the Queen with the
Division falsely represented, and built (as it appeared) on wrong suppositions.

Here wanting Water, Sir Walter landed without leave, and scarce had taken in
Water before he received Orders immediately to follow Essex to Fayal, whither
he repaired: but not finding Essex there according to his Order, he spent his
time in taking an exact survey of the Haven, and of the People there, who from
the fear and apprehension of what followed, were hastily packing away their
Goods. This fair Opportunity, upon Consultation, puts him upon taking the Town,
and egged on the Soldiers in hopes of an ample Prey. Sir Gilly Merrick (one of
Essex his Creatures) dissuaded Sir Walter from the Design, alleging it would
rob the Earl of the Honor of taking it, and so confirm him his Enemy. But Sir
Walter's desire of Glory, and the Soldiers Avarice, urged him (after he had
staid some time for Essex's Arrival) to the Assault of the Place, which was at
last taken. The next day after this Exploit Essex arrived at Fayal, where he
was quickly informed of what Raleigh had done, and that the whole Business was
transacted with no other design than to rob him of the Glory, which his
Jealousy made him easily believe.

Some persuaded the Earl to try Sir Walter by a Council of War, and Cashier
him; others without more ado would have him put to Death, for landing without
Orders: At last some of Raleigh's Officers were Cashiered, He himself frowned
on, and severely reproved by Essex. But he never wanted an Apology for his
Ambition; instancing that he was not obliged to the Orders the inferior
Officers and Soldiers were; that the Commission did not reach Him, being one
of the three Generals; Moreover, that he staid for him four days; and that he
was necessitated at last to land, being in extreme want of Water, which was
not to be had without fighting. However, the Lord Howard became his Mediator,
and persuaded him to an honorable submission; which was performed, and accepted
of; and thereupon both himself, and the cashiered Officers and Soldiers were
again admitted into favor. But this was only laying their Passions asleep
awhile, which in the sequel of our story were again awakened. I cannot here
omit a speech of the Earls upon this occasion, (which Sir Henry Wotten calls a
Noble Word) who being urged to put Sir Walter on Martial Law: That I would do,
said he, if he were my Friend.

However, this Expedition was not so glorious and great as at first they hoped
it might have been. For after burning the Town, and taking Flores, Gratiosa,
and Villa Franca in St. Michaels, with three American Spanish Ships, together
with the burning of a Carack, they came home much torn, leaky, and
weather-beaten about the end of October. This Expedition was commented on
variously by the People, who were strangely carried on with a blind Passion for
Essex, and so very prone to misconstrue Raleigh's Actions, from a Prejudice
they had entertained, that because he was not Essex's friend, he must be an
enemy to his Country. However, the Queen looked on him with another eye, and he
grew faster in her favor than his Rival, who from this time began rather to
decline, by a fault Sir Walter was afterward guilty of, Insatiable Ambition; a
Principle that put him on those Practices which brought him afterward to the
Block. Essex was incensed that Sir Robert Cecil, Raleigh's Friend, was
preferred in his absence. And because the Earl's Concerns are woven amongst Sir
Walters, it will not be impertinent to give some Account of him here.

Essex was arrived to the height of Favor, and might have staid there, had he
taken his Measures aright; had he owned an Obsequiousness to the Queen, or been
Master of the great Requisite in a Courtier, Dissimulation; but it was a part of
his Character to be a great Resenter, and a weak Dissembler of the least
Disgrace. His Ireland Transactions were ill construed, and his Miscarriages
nicely dissected by the curious Eyes of those State-Anatomists, the
Lord-Treasurer Buckhurst, the Lord-Admiral Nottingham, and his mortal Enemy
Secretary Cecil, who began to remove him out of that Favor he had long
possessed. But it was true, as the Earl of Clarendon has observed, That though he
was Rivaled by a strong and subtle Faction, which cared, consulted for his
Ruin; yet the Danger was thus allayed, that they were all his public and
professed Enemies, and so known to the Queen, that they durst never
impertinently urge ought against him, since they were sure that Malice was
concluded, when the Reason of their Objection happily might not be considered.

However, in 1601 the Earl drew near his Ruin: for being hurried on by Cuffs
ill Counsel, and his own Discontents, he projects new Plots against the State,
and tampers with the King of Scots to remove his Enemies at Court by force,
informing him that the Power of the Nation lay in their hands, Raleigh being
Governor of Iersey, etc. and other of his Enemies having the strength of the
Nation at their command. And vainly presuming upon the Love of the Citizens, he
projects to seize the Court, and secure Raleigh, as the most considerable Enemy
he had. Of which Designs Gorges informs Sir Walter. The better to carry on his
designs, Essex goes into London, where he endeavored to excite the Citizens to
an Insurrection: But the City then being Rich, was not so apt to rebel;
Rebellion being usually the Daughter of Poverty and Discontent. For these
Treasonable Actions, being found guilty, he was condemned and executed.

That he died bravely and like a Gentleman, is not to be questioned; but that
Sir Walter Raleigh should come openly to see him die, on purpose only to fat
his Eyes with the Sacrifice of his Enemy, can never be granted, if we may
believe himself in the same circumstances on the Scaffold, where he told his
Auditors on the words of a Dying-man, he only came there to defend himself if
any thing had been urged against him by the Earl.

Thus ended that Favorite, whose Death struck a damp on the Queens prosperous
days, and gave blackness to her declining Reign. This Blow, like that of
Gunpowder, not only blew up his Friends and Neighbors, but shook his Enemies
at a distance; for it reached Sir Walter too, who wanting strength to grapple
with his Rival the Treasurer, and not owning humility enough to be his Servant,
perished at last in the Encounter. This himself presaged (if we may believe
Osborn) as he came from the Execution of Essex, in a Boat, when he was heard to
say, That it was more safe to have many Enemies at Court of equal power, than
one false and ambitious Friend who has attained to the absoluteness of Command.

The Queen could not long survive her Favorite; for I find her Death to be the
next year following. A Queen who had enriched the Nation, reformed Religion,
curbed the Pride of Spain, supported France, preserved Scotland, protected the
Hollander against the Spaniard, and had vanquished his Armies by Sea and Land,
reduced Ireland to obedience notwithstanding all the subtle Practices of Spain,
and open Assistance given in Arms to her Irish Rebels; with many other things,
which might seem too much to be the Achievements of one Reign.

1602
King James her Successor came to the possession of a Kingdom arrived at the
height of Prosperity, which like other Bodies when they are at their (...)
tend to Corruption, and degenerate. This Sir Walter perceived, and would have
(as he thought) remedied. Sir John Fortescue, the Lord Cobham, Sir Walter, and
others, would have obliged the King by Articles before his coming to the Crown,
that his Country-mens number should be limited: But this was stopped by the
prudent Treasurer, and the bold Northumberland. Sir Walter feared that the
Scots, like Locusts, would quickly devour this Kingdom; it being probable that
(like the Goths and Vandals) they would settle in any Country rather than their
own, and would make it their business to render our Nation as poor as their
own: for this, he, with the rest of them, was afterward frowned on by the
King, and lost his Command of the Guards.

However, Sir Walter still pursued the Good and Glory of his Country; and as
formerly in Active Times, gave his Advice against the Peace with Spain, which
might now with no great difficulty be brought on its knees. At the entrance of
the King he presented him with a Manuscript of his own writing, with no weak
Arguments against the Peace. But Sir Walter was mistaken; for his Counsel was
ill timed, and a new Part was now to be acted, the Scene being changed. Peace
was the King's Aim, whether out of Fear, or Religious Principles I determine
not. But with Spain a Peace is concluded, with an Enemy already humbled, who
now had time given them to recover their former Losses, and were as it were
cherished to assault us with the greater vigor: which how true it proved every
Man can tell. And as if the King would quite run counter to the Queens
Politiques, the Estates of the Netherlands are despised, slighted, and
deserted, under pretense that it were of ill example for a Monarch to protect
them.

The King is hardly warm in his Throne, but there is a great noise of a Plot,
generally called Sir Walter Raleigh's Treason; but upon what Grounds I know
not, since he had the least hand in it, as by his Trial will appear. A Plot
that is still a Mystery, and has a Vail spread over it; A Plot composed of
such a Hodgpodg of Religion and Interests, that the World stands amazed Sir
Walter Raleigh should ever be drawn into it; A Plot so unlikely to hurt others,
or benefit themselves, that as Osborn tells us, If ever Folly was capable of
the title, or Pity due to Innocence, theirs might claim so large a share, as
not possibly to be too severely condemned, or slightly enough punished. Envy
and Disdain, as Sir Walter has told us in his Remains, seek Innovation by
Faction. Discontent is the great Seducer, which at first put him to search into
a Plot, he afterward was betrayed into. The chief Ingredients in this Medley
were two Priests, Watson and Clerk, and Count Arembergh, Ambassador
Extraordinary for the Archduke, who brought in Cobham, and he his Brother
George Brook, both Protestants, at least seeming so; George Brook hooked in
Parham and others, and they the Lord Gray of Wilton, a rank Puritan; then came
in Sir Walter, the wisest of them all according to Sanderson, who as he tells
us, dallied like a Fly in the flame till it consumed him. Willing he was to
know it, and thought by his Wit to overreach the Confederates, whom he knew
well enough, tho he dealt with none but Cobham, as I can find out. One Mr.
Lawrency an Antwerp-Merchant, was the property made use of by Arembergh, and a
Crony of the Lord Cobhams. These carried on the Contrivance a long while, which
(as Sanderson tells us) was betrayed by Lawrency, and the vigilance of Cecil.
And indeed it was morally impossible that so many disagreeing weak Souls should
carry on a Project without taking Air; the least glimpse being enough to give
light to the Statesmen of those times. Their Designs were, 1. To set the Crown
on the Lady Arabella; or to seize the King, and make him grant their Desires,
and a Pardon. 2. To have a Toleration of Religion. 3. To procure Aid and
Assistance from Foreign Princes. 4. To turn out of the Court such as they
disliked, and place themselves in Offices.


Watson to be Lord-Chancellor.

George Brook Lord-Treasurer.

Sir Griffin Markham Secretary of State.

Lord Gray Master of the Horse, and Earl-Marshal of England.

But it seems they made no provision for Sir Walter; which is no inconsiderable
Argument of his Innocence, who could have deserved, and might have expected as
great a Reward as any of them, had he been engaged in the Plot.

To oblige to Secrecy, Watson draws up an Oath. But all is betrayed; they are
seized, examined, and tried. How well or ill Sir Walter has acquitted himself,
we shall leave to the Opinion of the Readers of the following TRIAL, which was
exactly and faithfully taken.

THE ARRAIGNMENT OF Sir Walter Raleigh, Knight.
AT Winton, Thursday the 17th of November, Anno Dom. 1603, before the Right
Honorable, The Earl of Suffolk, Lord Chamberlain.

Earl of Devon.

Lord Henry Howard.

Lord Cecil, Earl of Salisbury.

Lord Wotton.

Sir John Stanhope, Vice-Chamberlain.

Lord Chief Justice of England, Popham.

Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Anderson.

Justice Gaudie.

Justice Warburton, and Sir William Wade Commissioners.

First, The Commission of Oyer and Terminer was read by the Clerk of the
Crown-Office; and the Prisoner bid hold up his Hand.

And then presently the INDICTMENT was in effect as follows: THat he did
Conspire, and go about to deprive the King of his Government; to raise up
Sedition within the Realm; to alter Religion, to bring in the Roman
Superstition, and to procure Foreign Enemies to invade the Kingdoms. That the
Lord Cobham, the ninth of June last, did meet with the said Sir Walter Raleigh
in Durham-House, in the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields, and then and there
had Conference with him, how to advance Arabella Stuart to the Crown and Royal
Throne of this Kingdom; and that then and there it was agreed, that Cobham
should treat with Aremberg, Ambassador from the Archduke of Austria, to obtain
of him 600000 Crowns, to bring to pass their intended Treasons. It was agreed
that Cobham should go to the Archduke Albert, to procure him to advance the
pretended Title of Arabella: from thence knowing that Albert had not sufficient
means to maintain his own Army in the Low Countries, Cobham should go to Spain
to procure the King to assist and further her pretended Title.

It was agreed, the better to effect all this Conspiracy, that Arabella should
write three Letters, one to the Archduke, another to the King of Spain, and a
third to the Duke of Savoy, and promise three things: First, to establish firm
Peace between England and Spain. Secondly, To tolerate the Popish and Roman
Superstition. Thirdly, To be ruled by them in contracting of her Marriage.

And for the effecting these Traitorous Purposes, Cobham should return by the
Isle of Jersey, and should find Sir Walter Raleigh Captain of the said Isle
there, and take Counsel of Raleigh for the distributing of the aforesaid
Crowns, as the Occasion or Coffeehouse of the Subjects should give cause and
way.

And further, That Cobham and his Brother Brook met on the 9th of June last,
and Cobham told Brook all these Treasons: To the which Treasons Brook gave his
Assent, and did join himself to all these; and after on the Thursday following,
Cobham and Brook did speak these words: That there would never be a good World
in England, till the King (meaning our Sovereign Lord) and his Cubs (meaning
his Royal Issue) were taken away.

And the more to disable and deprive the King of his Crown, and to confirm the
said Cobham in his Intents, Raleigh did publish a Book, falsely written against
the most just and Royal Title of the King, knowing the said Book to be written
against the just Title of the King; which Book Cobham after that received of
him. Further, for the better effecting these Traitorous Purposes, and to
establish the said Brook in his Intent, the said Cobham did deliver the said
Book unto him the 14th of June. And further, the said Cobham, on the 16th of
June, for accomplishment of the said Conference, and by the traitorous
Instigation of Raleigh, did move Brook to incite Arabella to write to the three
forenamed Princes, to procure them to advance her Title; and that she, after
she had obtained the Crown, should promise to perform three things, viz. Peace
between England and Spain. 2. To tolerate with impunity the Popish and Roman
Superstitions. 3. To be ruled by them three in the contracting of her Marriage.

To these Motions the said Brook gave his Assent. And for the better effecting
of the said Treasons, Cobham on the seventeenth of June, by the Instigation of
Raleigh, did write Letters to Count Aremberg, and did deliver the said Letters
to one Matthew de Lawrency, to be delivered to the said Count: which he did
deliver for the obtaining of the 600000 Crowns; which Money by other Letters
Count Aremberg did promise to perform the payment of; and this Letter Cobham
received the eighteenth of June. And then did Cobham promise to Raleigh, that
when he had received the said Money, he would deliver 8000 Crowns to him: to
which motion he did consent; and afterward Cobham offered Brook, that after he
should receive the said Crowns, he would give to him 10000 thereof; to which
Motion Brook did assent.



To the Indictment Sir Walter Raleigh pleaded Not Guilty.

The JURY.
Sir Ralph Conisby, Knights. Sir Thomas Fowler, Knights. Sir Edward Peacock,
Knights. Sir William Row, Knights. Henry Goodyer, Esquires. Roger Wood,
Esquires. Thomas Walker, Esquires. Thomas Whitby, Esquires. Thomas Highgate,
Gentlemen. Robert Kempthon, Gentlemen. John Chawkey, Gentlemen. Robert Brumley,
Gentlemen.
Sir Walter Raleigh Prisoner, was asked, whether he would take Exceptions to
any of the Jury?

Raleigh. I know none of them; they are all Christians, and honest Gentlemen, I
except against none.


E. Suff. You Gentlemen of the Kings Learned Counsel, follow the same course as
you did the other day.


Raleigh. My Lord, I pray you I may answer the Points particularly as they are
delivered, by reason of the weakness of my memory and sickness.


Popham, Chief Justice. After the Kings Learned Counsel have delivered all the
Evidence, Sir Walter, you may answer particularly to what you will.


Heal, the Kings Sergeant at Law. You have heard of Raleigh's bloody Attempts
to kill the King and his Royal Progeny, and in place thereof to advance one
Arabella Stuart: The particulars of the Indictment are these. First, That
Raleigh met with Cobham the ninth of June, and had Conference of an Invasion,
of a Rebellion, and an Insurrection, to be made by the King's Subjects, to
depose the King, and to kill his Children, poor Babes that never gave offense:
Here is Blood, here is a new King and Governor. In our King consists all our
Happiness, and the true use of the Gospel, a thing which we all wished to be
settled after the death of the Queen. Here must be Money to do this, for Money
is the Sinew of War. Where should that be had? Count Aremberg must procure it
of Philip King of Spain, five or six hundred thousand Crowns, and out of this
Sum Raleigh must have eight thousand. But what is that Count Aremberg? though I
am no good Frenchman, yet it is as much as to say* in English, Earl of
Aremberg. Then there must be Friends to effect this: Cobham must go to Albert
Archduke of Austria, for whom Aremberg was Ambassador at that time in England.
And what then* He must persuade the Duke to assist the pretended Title of
Arabella. From thence Cobham must go to the King of Spain, and persuade him to
assist the said Title. Since the Conquest there was never the like Treason. But
out of whose Head came it? Out of Raleigh's, who must also advise Cobham to use
his Brother Brook to incite the Lady Arabella to write three several Letters,
as aforesaid in the Indictment; all this was on the ninth of June. Then three
days after Brook was acquainted with it: After this Cobham said to Brook, It
will never be well in England till the King and his Cubs are taken away.
Afterward Raleigh delivered a Book to Cobham, treacherously written against
the Title of the King. It appears that Cobham took Raleigh to be either a God,
or an Idol. Cobham endeavors to set up a new King, or Governor. God forbid
mine Eyes should ever see so unhappy a change. As for the Lady Arabella, she
upon my Conscience has no more title to the Crown than I have, which before
God I utterly renounce. Cobham a Man bred in England, has no experience
abroad: but Raleigh, a Man of great Wit, Military, and a Swordman. Now whether
these things were bred in a hollow Tree, I leave to them to speak of, who can
speak far better than my self. And so sat him down again.


Sir Edward Cook, the Kings Attorney. I must first, my Lords, before I come to
the Cause give one Caution, because we shall often mention Persons of eminent
Places, some of them great Monarchs: What ever we say of them, we shall but
repeat what others have said of them; I mean the Capital Offenders in their
Confessions: We professing Law, must speak reverently of Kings and Potentates.
I perceive these honorable Lords, and the rest of this great Assembly, are
come to hear what has been scattered upon the Wrack of Report. We carry a just
Mind, to condemn no man but upon plain Evidence. Here is Mischief, Mischief in
summo Gradu, exorbitant Mischief. My Speech shall chiefly touch these three
Points; Imitation, Supportation, and Defense.

The Imitation of Evil ever exceeds the Precedent; as on the contrary Imitation
of Good ever comes short. Mischief cannot be supported but by Mischief; yea, it
will so multiply, that it will bring all to confusion. Mischief is ever
underprop'd by Falsehood of foul Practices. And because all these things did
concur in this Treason, you shall understand the Main, as before you did the
Bye.

The Treason of the Bye, consists in these Points: First, That the Lord Gray,
Brook, Markham, and the rest, intended by Force in the Night to surprise the
King's Court: which was a Rebellion in the Heart of the Realm, yea in the Heart
of the Heart, in the Court. They intended to take him that is a Sovereign, to
make him subject to their Power, purposing to open the Doors with Muskets and
Calievers, and to take also the Prince and Council. Then under the King's
Authority to carry the King to the Tower; and to make a Stale of the Admiral.
When they had the King there, to extort three things from him: First, A Pardon
for all their Treasons. Secondly, A Toleration of the Roman Superstition:
Which, their Eyes shall sooner fall out than they shall ever see; for the King
has spoken these words in the hearing of many, I will lose the Crown, and my
Life, before ever I will alter Religion. And, thirdly, To remove Counselors:
In the room of the Lord Chancellor, they would have placed one Watson a Priest,
absurd in Humanity, and ignorant in Divinity. Brook, of whom I will speak
nothing, Lord-Treasurer. The great Secretary must be Markbam, Oculus Patriae. A
Hole must be found in my Lord Chief Justice's Coat. Gray must be Earl-Marshal,
and Master of the Horse, because he would have a Table in the Court: marry, he
would advance the Earl of Worcester to an higher Place. All this cannot be done
without a Multitude. Therefore Watson the Priest tells a Resolute Man that the
King was in danger of Puritans and Jesuits; so to bring him in blindfold into
the Action, saying, that the King is no King till he be Crowned; therefore
every Man might right his own Wrongs: but he is Rex natus, His Dignity descends
as well as yours, my Lords. Then Watson imposes a blasphemous Oath, That they
should swear to defend the King's Person; to keep secret what was given them in
charge, and seek all ways and means to advance the Catholic Religion. Then
they intend to send for the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen, in the King's Name, to
the Tower, lest they should make any Resistance, and then to take Hostages of
them; and to enjoin them to provide for them Victuals and Munition. Gray,
because the King removed before Midsommer, had a further reach, to get a
company of Swordmen to assist the Action: Therefore he would stay till he had
obtained a Regiment from Ostend, or Austria. So you see these Treasons were
list Sampson's Foxes, which were joined in their Tails, though their Heads
were severed.


Raleigh. You Gentlemen of the Jury, I pray remember I am not charged with the
Bye, being the Treason of the Priest.


Attorney. You are not. My Lords, you shall observe three things in the
Treasons: First, They had a Watchword (the King's safety) their Pretense was
Bonum in se, their Intent was Malum in se. Secondly, They avouched Scripture;
both the Priests had Scriptum est; perverting and ignorantly mistaking the
Scriptures. Thirdly, They avouched the Common Law, to prove that he was no King
till he was crowned; alleging a Statute of Eliz. 13. This, by way of
Imitation, has been the course of all Traitors.

In the 20th of Edw. the 2 d, Isabella the Queen, and the Lord Mortimer, gave
out, that the King's Person was not safe, for the good of the Church and
Commonwealth.

The Bishop of Carlisle did preach on this Text, My Head is grieved: meaning by
the Head, the King; that when the Head began to be Negligent, the People might
reform what is amiss.

In the 3 d Hen. 4. Sir Roger Claringdon accompanied with two Priests, gave
out, that Richard the Second was Alive, when he was Dead.

Edward the 3 d caused Mortimers Head to be cut off, for giving counsel to
murder the King.

The 3. Hen 7. Sir Henry Stanly found the Crown in the Dust, and set it on the
King's Head; when Fitzwater and Garret told him that Edward the 5 th was alive,
he said, If I be alive, I will assist him. But this cost him his Head.

Edmond de la Pool, Duke of Suffolk, killed a Man in the Reign of King Henry
the 7 th, for which the King would have him hold up his hand at the Bar, and
then Pardoned him. Yet he took such an Offense thereat, that he sent to the
Noblemen, to help to reform the Commonwealth; and then said, he would go to
France, and get Power there. Sir Roger Compton knew all the Treason, and
discovered Windon and others, that were Attainted.

He said there was another thing that would be stood upon, namely, that they
had but one Witness. Then he vouched one Appleyard's Case, a Traitor in
Norfolk, who said a Man must have two Accusers. Helms was the Man that accused
him; but Mr. Just. Catlin said, that that that Statute was not in force at that
day. His words were [ Thrust her into the Ditch.]

Then he went on speaking of Accusers, and made this difference: An Accuser is
a speaker by Report, when a Witness is he that upon his Oath shall speak his
knowledge of any Man.

A third sort of Evidence there is likewise, and this is held more forcible
than either of the other two; and that is, when a Man by his Accusation of
another, shall by the same Accusation also condemn himself, and make himself
liable to the same Fault and Punishment: this is more forcible than many
Witnesses. So then so much by way of Imitation. Then he defined Treason; there
is Treason in the Heart, in the Hand, in the Mouth, in Consummation: comparing
that in Cord to the Root of a Tree; in Ore, to the Bud; in Manu, to the
Blossom; and that which is in Consummatione, to the Fruit.

Now I come to your Charge, you of the Jury. The greatness of Treason is to be
considered in these two things, Determinatione finis, and Electione mediorum.
This Treason excels in both, for that it was to destroy the King and his
Progeny. These Treasons are said to be Crimen laesae Majestatis; this goes
further, and may be termed Crimen exterpandae Regiae Majestatis, and totius
Progeniei suae. I shall not need, my Lords, to speak any thing concerning the
King, nor of the Bounty and Sweetness of his Nature, whose Thoughts are
Innocent, whose Words are full of Wisdom and Learning, and whose Works are full
of Honor; although it be a true saying, Nunquam nimis quod nunquam satis. But
to whom do you bear your Malice? to the Children?


Raleigh, To whom speak you this? You tell me News I never heard of.


Attorney. Oh Sir, do I? I will prove you the Notoriousest Traitor that ever
came to the Bar. After you have taken away the King, you would alter Religion:
as you, Sir Walter Raleigh, have followed them of the Bye in Imitation; for I
will charge you with the words.


Raleigh. Your words cannot condemn me, my Innocence is my Defense: Prove one
of these things wherewith you have Charged me, and I will confess the whole
Indictment, and that I am the horriblest Traitor that ever lived, and worthy to
be Crucified with a thousand thousand Torments.


Attorney. Nay, I will prove all: Thou art a Monster, thou have an English
Face, but a Spanish Heart. Now you must have Money: Aremberg was no sooner in
England (I Charge thee Raleigh) but thou incitedst Cobham to go unto him, and
to deal with him for Money, to bestow on discontented Persons, to raise
Rebellion on the Kingdom.


Raleigh. Let me Answer for my self.


Attorney. Thou shall not.


Raleigh. It concerns my Life.


Lord Chief Justice Popham. Sir Walter Raleigh, Mr. Attorney is but yet in the
General, but when the Kings Counsel have given the Evidence wholly, you shall
Answer every Particular.


Attorney. Oh! do I touch you.


Lord Cecil. Mr. Attorney, when you have done with this General Charge, do you
not mean to let him answer to every Particular?


Attorney. Yes, when we deliver the Proofs to be read. Raleigh procured Cobham
to go to Aremberg, which he did by his Instigation: Raleigh supped with Cobham
before he went to Aremberg; after Supper, Raleigh conducted him to Durham
House; from whence Cobham went with Lawrency, a Servant of Aremberg's, unto
him, and went in by a Back-way. Cobham could never be quiet until he had
entertained this Motion, for he had four Letters from Raleigh. Aremberg
answered, the Money should be performed, but knew not to whom it should be
distributed. Then Cobham and Lawrency came back to Durham House, where they
found Raleigh. Cobham and Raleigh went up, and left Lawrency below, where they
had secret Conference in a Gallery, and after Cobham and Lawrency departed from
Raleigh. Your Jargon was Peace! What is that? Spanish Invasion, Scottish
Subversion. And again, you are not a fit Man to take so much Money for
procuring of a Lawful Peace, for Peace procured by Money is dishonorable. Then
Cobham must go to Spain, and return by Iersey, where you were Captain: And then
because Cobham had not so much Policy, or at least Wickedness as you, he must
have your advice for the distribution of the Money. Would you have deposed so
good a King, lineally descended of Elizabeth, Eldest Daughter of Edward the 4
th? why then must you set up another? I think you meant to make Arabella a
Titular Queen, of whose Title I will speak nothing, but sure you meant to make
her a Stale: Ah good Lady! you could mean her no good.


Raleigh. You tell me News, Mr. Attorney.


Attorney. Oh Sir! I am the more large, because I know with whom I deal: For
we have to deal to day with a Man of Wit.


Raleigh. Did I ever speak with this Lady?


Attorney. I will track you out before I have done: Englishmen will not be
led by persvvasion of Words, but they must have Books to persuade.


Raleigh. The Book was written by a Man of your Profession, Mr. Attorney.


Attorney. I would not have you Impatient.


Raleigh. Methinks you fall out with your self, I say nothing.


Attorney. By this Book you would persuade Men that he is not the Lavvful
King. Now let us consider some Circumstances: My Lords, you know my Lord
Cobham (for whom we all Lament, and Rejoice; Lament in that his House, which
has stood so long unspotted, is now Ruinated; Rejoice, in that his Treasons
are Revealed): he is neither Politician nor Sword-Man; Raleigh was both, united
in the Cause with him, and therefore cause of his Destruction. Another
Circumstance is the secret Contriving of it. Humphry Stafford claimed Sanctuary
for Treason. Raleigh in his Machivilian Policy has made a Sanctuary for
Treason. He must talk with none but Cobham, because (says he) one Witness can
never condemn me. For Brook said unto Sir Griffith Markham, Take heed how you
do make my Lord Cobham acquainted; for whatsoever he knows, Raleigh the Witch
will get it out of him. As soon as Raleigh was examined on one Point of Treason
concerning my Lord Cobham, he wrote to him thus; I have been examined of you,
and confessed nothing. Further you sent to him by your trusty Francis Kemish,
that one Witness could not condemn; and therefore bad his Lordship be of good
Courage. Came this out of Cobham's Quiver? No: But out of Raleigh's Machivilian
and Devilish Policy. Yea, but Cobham did retract it; Why then did you urge it?
Now then see the most horrible Practices that ever came out of the bottomless
Pit of the Lowest Hell. After that Raleigh had Intelligence that Cobham had
Accused him, he endeavored to have Intelligence from Cobham, which he had
gotten by young Sir John Payton: But I think it was the Error of his Youth.


Raleigh. The Lords told it me, or else I had not been sent to the Tower.


Attorney. Thus Cobham by the Instigation of Raleigh, entered into these
Actions: So that the Question will be, Whether you are not the principal
Traitor, and he would nevertheless have entered into it? Why did Cobham retract
all that same? First, because Raleigh was so Odious, he thought he should fare
the worse for his sake. Secondly, he thought thus with himself, If he be free,
I shall clear my self the better. After this Cobham asked for a Preacher to
Confer with, pretending to have Doctor Andrews; but indeed he meant not to have
him, but Mr. Galloway; a Worthy and Reverend Preacher, who can do more with the
King (as he said) than any other; that he, seeing his constant Denial, might
inform the King thereof. Here he plays with the Preacher. If Raleigh could
persuade the Lords, that Cobham had no Intent to travel, then he thought all
should be well. Here is Forgery. In the Tower Cobham must write to Sir Thomas
Vane, a worthy Man, that he meant not to go into Spain; which Lettter Raleigh
devised in Cobham's Name.


Raleigh. I will wash my hands of the Indictment, and die a true Man to the
King.


Attorney. You are the absolutest Traitor that ever was.


Raleigh. Your Phrases will not prove it, Mr. Attorney.


Attorney. Cobham writes a Letter to my Lord Cecil, and does will Mellis his
Man, to lay it in a Spanish Bible, and to make as though he found it by chance.
This was after he had Intelligence with this Viper, that he was false.


Lord Cecil. You mean a Letter intended to me, I never had it.


Attorney. No, my Lord, you had it not. You, my Masters of the Jury, respect
not the Wickedness and Hatred of the Man, respect his Cause; if he be guilty, I
know you will have care of it, for the Preservation of the King, the
Continuance of the Gospel authorized, and the Good of us all.


Raleigh. I do not hear yet, that you have spoken one word against me, here is
no Treason of mine done: If my Lord Cobham be a Traitor, what is that to me?


Attorney. All that he did was by thy Instigation, thou Viper; for I thou
thee, thou Traitor.


Raleigh. It becomes not a Man of Quality and Virtue, to call me so: But I
take comfort in it, it is all you can do.


Attorney. Have I angered you?


Raleigh. I am in no Case to be angry.


Popham. Sir Walter Raleigh, Mr. Attorney speaks out of the Zeal of his
Duty, for the Service of the King, and you for your Life; be valiant on both
sides.

Now they proceed to the Reading the Proofs.

The Lord Cobham's Examination Read.

He confesses he had a Passport to go into Spain, intending to go to the
Archduke to confer with him about these Practices; and because he knew the
Archduke had not Money to pay his own Army, from thence he meant to go to
Spain, to deal with the King for the 600000 Crowns, and to return by Iersey,
and that nothing should be done, until he had spoken with Sir Walter Raleigh
for distribution of the Money, to them which were discontented in England. At
the first beginning he breathed out Oaths and Exclamations against Raleigh,
calling him Villain and Traitor; saying he had never entered into these Courses,
but by his Instigation, and that he would never let him alone.

Here Mr. Attorney willed the Clerk of the Crown Office to read over these
last words again ( he would never let him alone.)

The Lord Cobham's Examination.

Besides he spoke of Plots and Invasions: Of the Particulars whereof he could
give no Account, though Raleigh and he had conferred of them. Further, he said,
He was afraid of Raleigh, that when he should return by Iersey, that he would
have him and the Money to the King. Being Examined of Sir Arthur Gorge, he
freed him, saying:

They never durst trust him, but Sir Arthur Savage they intended to use,
because they thought him a fit Man.


Raleigh. Let me see the Accusation: This is absolutely all the Evidence can be
brought against me; poor shifts! You Gentlemen of the Jury, I pray you
understand this: This is that which must either condemn, or give me Life; which
must free me, or send my Wife and Children to beg their Bread about the
Streets. This is that must prove me a notorious Traitor, or a true Subject to
the King. Let me see my Accusation, that I may make my Answer.


Clerk of the Council. I did read it, and show you all the Examinations.


Raleigh. At my first Examination at Windsor, my Lords asked me, what I knew of
Cobham's Practice with Aremberg? I answered Negatively: And as concerning
Arabella, I protest before God, I never heard one word of it. If that be
proved, let me be guilty of ten thousand Treasons. It is a strange thing you
will impute that to me, when I never heard so much as the Name of Arabella
Stuart, but only the Name of Arabella.

After being Examined, I told my Lords, that I thought my Lord Cobham had
Conference with Aremberg, I suspected his Visiting of him: For after he
departed from me at Durham House, I saw him pass by his own Stairs, and passed
over to St. Mary Saviors, where I knew Lawrency, a Merchant, and a Follower of
Aremberg, lay, and therefore likely to go unto him. My Lord Cecil asked my
Opinion concerning Lawrency; I said, that if you do not apprehend Lawrency, it
is dangerous he will fly; if you do apprehend him, you shall give my Lord
Cobham notice thereof. I was asked likewise, who was the greatest Man with my
Lord Cobham? I answered, I knew no Man so great with him, as young Wyat of Kent.

As Soon as Cobham saw my Letter to have discovered his Dealing with Aremberg,
in his Fury he accused me, but before he came to the Stair-foot he repented,
and said he had done me wrong. When he came to the end of his Accusation, he
added, That if he had brought this Money to Jersey, he feared that I would have
delivered him and the Money to the King. Mr. Attorney, you said this never came
out of Cobham's Quiver, he is a simple Man. Is he so simple? No: He has a
Disposition of his own, he will not easily be guided by others, but when he has
once taken Head in a Matter, he is not easily drawn from it; he is no Babe. But
it is strange for me to devise with Cobham, that he should go to Spain, to
persuade the King to disburse so much Money, he being a Man of no Love in
England, and I having resigned my room of chiefest Command, the Wardenship of
the Stanneries: Is it not strange for me to make my self Robin Hood, or a Kett,
or a Cade? I knowing England to be in better Estate to defend it self than ever
it was. I knew Scotland United; Ireland Quieted, wherein of late our Forces
were dispersed; Denmark assured, which before was Suspected. I knew, that
having a Lady whom Time had surprised, we had now an active King, a lawful
Successor, who would himself be present in all his Affairs. The State of Spain
was not unknown to me. I had written a Discourse, which I had intended to
present unto the King* against Peace with Spain. I knew the Spaniard had six
Repulses, three in Ireland, and three at Sea, and once in 1588 at Cales, by my
Lord Admiral. I knew he was Discouraged and Dishonored. I knew the King of
Spain to be the proudest Prince in Christendom; but now he comes Creeping to
the King my Master for Peace. I knew whereas before he had in his Port six or
seven score Sail of Ships, he has now but Six or Seven. I knew of Twenty five
Millions he had from his Indies, he has scarce one left. I knew him to be so
Poor, that the Jesuits in Spain, who were wont to have such large Allowance,
were fain to beg at the Church-Door. Was it ever read or heard, that any Prince
should disburse so much Money without a sufficient Pawn? I knew her own
Subjects, the Citizens of London, would not lend her Majesty Money without
Lands in Mortgage. I knevv the Queen did not lend the States Money without
Flushing, Brill, and other Towns for a Pawn. And can it be thought, that he
would let Cobham have so great a Sum?

I never came to the Lord Cobham's but about matters of his Profit, as the
Ordering of his House, Paying of his Servants Board-vvages, etc. I had of his
when I was examined, Four Thousand Pounds vvorth of Jewels for a Purchase; a
Pearl of three thousand Pound, and a Ring vvorth five hundred Pound: If he had
had a fancy to run away, he would not have left so much to have purchased a
Lease in Fee Farm. I savv him buy three hundred Pounds vvorth of Books to send
to his Library at Canterbury, and a Cabinet of thirty Pound to give to Mr.
Attorney, for dravving the Conveyances; and God in Heaven knovveth, not I,
whether he intended to travel or no. But for that Practice with Arabella, or
Letters to Aremberg framed, or any Discourse with him, or in what Language he
spoke unto him; if I knevv any of these things, I would absolutely confess the
Indictment, and acknovvledge my self worthy ten thousand Deaths.

Cobham's second Examination read.

The Lord Cobham being required to Subscribe to an Examination, there was
shevved a Note under Sir Walter Raleigh's hand, the which when he had
perused, he paused, and after brake forth into these Speeches; Oh Villain! Oh
Traitor! I will now tell you all the Truth: And then said, His purpose was to
go into Flanders, and into Spain, for the obtaining the aforesaid Money, and
that Raleigh had appointed to meet him in Iersey as he returned Home, to be
advised of him about the Distribution of the Money.


Popham, Lord Chief Justice. When Cobham answered to the Interrogatories, he
made scruple to subscribe, and being urged to it, he said, If he might hear me
affirm, that a Person of his Degree ought to set his Hand, he would; I lying
then at Richmond, for fear of the Plague, was sent for; and I told he ought to
subscribe; otherwise it were a Contempt of a high Nature: Then he subscribed.
The Lords questioned with him further, and he showed them a Letter, as I
thought written to me, but it was indeed written to my Lord Cecil: He desired
to see the Letter again, and then said, Oh Wretch! Oh Traitor! Whereby I
perceived you had not performed that Trust he had reposed in you.


Raleigh. He is as passionate a Man as lives, for he has not spared the best
Friends he has in England in his Passion. My Lords, I take it, he that has
been examined, has ever been asked at the time of his Examination, if it be
according to his meaning, and then to subscribe. Methinks, my Lords, when he
accuses a Man, he should give some Account and Reason of it; it is not
sufficient to say, we talked of it. If I had been the Plotter, would not I have
given Cobham some Arguments, whereby to persuade the King of Spain, and answer
his Objections. I knew Westmorland and Bothwell, Men of other Understandings
than Cobham, were ready to beg their Bread.

Sir Thomas Fowler, one of the Jury. Did Sir Walter Raleigh write a Letter to
my Lord before he was examined concerning him, or not?


Attorney. Yes.


Lord Cecil. I am in great Dispute with my self to speak in the Case of this
Gentleman: A former Dearness between me and him tied so firm a Knot of my
Conceit of his Virtues, now broken by a Discovery of his Imperfections. I
protest, did I serve a King that I knew would be displeased with me for
speaking, in this Case I would speak whatever came of it: But seeing he is
compacted of Piety and Justice, and one that will not mislike of any Man for
speaking a Truth, I will answer your Question.

Sir Walter Raleigh was staid by me at Windsor, upon the first News of Copley,
that the Kings Person should be surprised by my Lord Gray, and Mr. George
Brook; when I found Brook was in, I suspected Cobham, then I doubted Raleigh to
be a partaker. I speak not this, that it should be thought I had greater
Judgment than the rest of my Lords, in making this haste to have them examined.
Raleigh following to Windsor, I met with him upon the Tarras, and willed him,
as from the King to stay, saying, The Lords had something to say to him: Then
he was examined, but not concerning my Lord Cobham, but of the Surprising
Treason. My Lord Gray was apprehended, and likewise Brook; by Brook we found,
that he had given notice to Cobham of the surprising Treason, as he delivered
it to us, but with as much sparingness of a Brother as he might: We sent for my
Lord Cobham to Richmond, where he stood upon his Justification, and his
Quality; sometimes being froward, he said he was not bound to subscribe,
wherewith we made the King acquainted. Cobham said, if my Lord Chief Justice
would say it were a Contempt, he would subscribe; whereof being resolved, he
subscribed. There was a Light given to Aremberg, that Lawrency was examined,
but that Raleigh knew that Cobham was examined, is more than I know.


Raleigh. If my Lord Cobham had trusted me in the Main, was not I as fit a Man
to be trusted in the Bye?


Lord Cecil. Raleigh did by his Letters acquaint us, that my Lord Cobham had
sent Lawrency to Aremberg, when he knew not he had any Dealings with him.


Lord H. How. It made for you, if Lawrency had been only acquainted with
Cobham, and not with you. But you knew his whole Estate, and were acquainted
with Cobham's Practice with Lawrency, and it was known to you before, that
Lawrency depended on Aremberg.


Attorney. 1. Raleigh protested against the surprising Treason. 2. That he
knew not of the Matter touching Arabella. I would not charge you, Sir Walter,
with a matter of Falsehood: You say, you suspected the Intelligence that Cobham
had with Aremberg, by Lawrency.


Raleigh. I thought it had been no other Intelligence, but such as might be
warranted.


Attorney. Then it was but lawful Suspicion. But to that whereas you said,
that Cobham had accused you in Passion, I answer three Ways: 1. I observed
when Cobham said, Let me see the Letter again? he paused, and when he did see
that Count Aremberg was touched, he cried out, Oh Traitor! Oh Villain! Now
will I confess the whole Truth. 2. The Accusation of a Man on Hearsay, is
nothing: Would he accuse himself on Passion, and ruinate his Cause and
Posterity, out of Malice to accuse you? 3. Could this be out of Passion? Mark
the manner of it: Cobh. had told this at least two months before to his Brother
Brook, You are Fools, you are on the Bye, Raleigh and I are on the Main, we
mean to take away the King and his Cubs; this he delivered two months before.
So mark the manner and the matter, he would not turn the Weapon against his
own Bosom, and accuse himself to accuse you.


Raleigh. Has Cobham confessed that?


Lord Chief Justice. This is spoken by Mr. Attorney, to prove that Cobham's
Speech came not out of Passion.


Raleigh. Let it be proved that Cobham said so.


Attorney. Cobham says, He was a long time doubtful of Raleigh, that he
would send him and the money to the King. Did Cobham fear lest you would
betray him in Iersey? Then of necessity there must be Trust betvveen you. No
man can betray a man but he that is trusted, in my understanding. This is the
greatest Argument to prove that he was acquainted with Cobham's Proceedings.
Raleigh has a deeper reach than to make himself, as he said, Robin Hood, a
Kett, or Cade, yet I never heard that Robin Hood was a Traitor; they say he
was an Outlavv. And whereas he says, that our King is not only more Wealthy
and Potent than his Predecessors; but also more Politic and Wise, so that he
could have no hope to prevail. I answer, There is no King so Potent, Wise and
Active but he may be overtaken through Treason. Whereas you say Spain is so
Poor, discoursing so largely thereof: it had been better for you to have kept
in Guiana, than to have been so well acquainted with the State of Spain.
Besides, if you could have brought Spain and Scotland to have joined, you might
have hoped to prevail a great deal the better. For his six Overthrows, I
answer; He has the more Malice, because Repulses breed desire of Revenge. Then
you say, you never talked with Cobham but about Leases, and letting Lands, and
ordering his House; I never knew you Clerk of the Kitchen, etc. If you had
fallen on your Knees at first, and confessed the Treason, it had been better
for you. You say, he meant to have given me a Cabinet of thirty Pound, perhaps
he thought by those means to have anticipated me therewith. But you say, all
these are Circumstances. I answer, all this Accusation in Circumstance is true:
Here now I might appeal to my Lords, that you take hold of this, that he
subscribed not to the Accusation.


Lord H. How. Cobham was not then pressed to subscribe.


Attorney. His Accusation being testified by the Lords, is of as great force,
as if he had subscribed. Raleigh says again, if the Accuser be alive, he must
be brought face to face to speak, and alleges 25 th Edw. 3 d. That there must
be two sufficient Witnesses that must be brought face to face before the
Accused, and alleges 10. and 13. Eliz.


Raleigh. You try me by the Spanish Inquisition, if you proceed only by the
Circumstances without two Witnesses.


Attorney. This is a Treasonable Speech.


Raleigh. Evertere hominem justum in Causa sua injustum est: Good my Lords, let
it be proved either by the Laws of the Land, or the Laws of God, that there
ought not to be two Witnesses appointed; yet I will not stand to defend this
Point in Law, if the King will have it so: it is no rare thing for a Man to be
falsely accused. A Judge condemned a Woman in Sarum for killing her Husband, on
the Testimony of one Witness; afterward his Man confessed the Murder, when she
was executed. Who after being touched in Conscience for the Judgment, was used
to say, Quod nunquam de hoc facto animam in vita sua purgaret. It is also
commanded by the Scripture, Allocutus est Iehova Mosen, In Ore duorum aut trium
Testium, etc.

If Christ requires it, as it appears, Matthew 18. If by the Canon, Civil Law,
and God's Word, it be required, that there must be two Witnesses at the least,
bear with me if I desire one.

I would not desire to live, if I were privy to Cobham's Proceedings: I had
been a Slave, a Villain, a Fool, if I had endeavored to set up Arabella, and
refused so Gracious a Lord and Sovereign: But urge your Proofs.


Lord Chief Justice. You have offered Questions on diverse Statutes, all which
mention two Accusers in case of Indictments; you have deceived your self, for
the Laws of 25. Ed. 3. and 5. Ed. 6. are repealed. It suffices now if there be
Proofs made either under Hand, or by Testimony of Witnesses, or by Oaths; it
needs not the Subscription of the Party, so there be Hands of credible Men to
testify the Examination.


Raleigh. It may be an Error in me, and if those Laws be repealed, yet I hope
the Equity of them remains still; but if you affirm it, it must be a Law to
Posterity. The Proof of the Common Law is by Witness and Jury, let Cobham be
here, let him speak it: Call my Accuser before my Face, and I have done.


Attorney. Scientia sceleris est mera Ignorantia: You have read the Letter of
the Law, but understand it not. Here was your Anchor-hold, and your Randesvouz:
you trust to Cobham, either Cobham must accuse you, or no body; if he did, then
it would not hurt you, because he is but one Witness; if he did not, then you
are safe.


Raleigh. If ever I read word of the Law or Statute before I was Prisoner in
the Tower, God confound me.


Attorney. Now I come to prove the Circumstances of the Accusation to be true.
Cobham confessed he had a Passport to travel, hereby intending to present
Overtures to the Archduke, and from thence to go to Spain, and there to have
Conference with the King for Money: You say he promised to come home by Iersey,
to make merry with you and your Wife.


Raleigh. I said, in his return from France, not Spain.


Attorney. Further, in his Examination he says, nothing could be set down for
the Distribution of the Money to the Discontented, without Conference with
Raleigh. You said it should have been for procurement of Peace, but it was for
raising Rebellion. Further, Cobham says, he would never have entered into these
Courses, but by your Instigation, and that you would never let him alone. Your
Scholar was not apt enough to tell us all the Plots, that is enough for you to
do, that are his Master: You intended to trust Sir Arthur Savage, whom I take
to be an honest and true Gentleman, but not Sir Arthur Gorge.


Raleigh. All this is but one Accusation of Cobham's, I hear no other thing; to
which Accusation he never subscribed nor avouched it, I beseech you, my Lords,
let Cobham be sent for, charge him on his Soul, on his Allegiance to the King;
if he affirm it, I am Guilty.


Lord Cecil. It is the Accusation of my Lord Cobham, it is the Evidence against
you, must it not be of force without his Subscription? I desire to be resolved
by the Judges, whether by the Law it is not a forcible Argument of Evidence.


The Judges. My Lord, it is.


Raleigh. The King at his Coronation is sworn, In omnibus Iudiciis suis
Aequitatem, non Rigorem Legis, observare: By the Rigor and Cruelty of the Law
it may be a forcible Evidence.


Lord Chief Justice. That is not the Rigor of the Law, but the Justice of the
Law; else when a Man has made a plain Accusation, by Practice he might be
brought to retract it again.


Raleigh. Oh my Lord, you may use Equity.


Lord Chief Justice. That is from the King, you are to have Justice from us.


Lord Anderson. The Law is, if the Matter be proved to the Jury, they must find
you Guilty; for Cobham's Accusation is not only against you, there are other
things sufficient.


Lord Cecil. Now that Sir Walter Raleigh is satisfied, that Cobham's
Subscription is not necessary: I pray you Mr. Attorney go on.


Raleigh. Good Mr. Attorney be patient, and give me leave.


Lord Cecil. An unnecessary Patience is a hindrance, let him go on with his
Proofs, and then refel them.


Raleigh. I would answer particularly.


Lord Cecil. If you would have a Table, and Pen, and Ink, you shall.

Then Paper and Ink was given him.

Here the Clerk of the Crown read the Letter, which the Lord Cobham did write
in July, which was to the effect of his former Examination, further saying, I
have disclosed all; to accuse any one falsely, were to burden my own Conscience.


Attorney. Read Coplies Confession the 8 th of June, he says, He was offered
1000 Crowns to be in this Action.

Here Watson's Additions were read.

The great Mass of Money from the Count was impossible, says Brook, etc.

Brook's Confession read.

There have Letters passed, says he, between Cobham and Aremberg, for a great
Sum of Money, to assist a second Action, for the surprising of his Majesty.


Attorney. It is not possible it was of Passion; for it was in talk before
three Men being severally examined, who agreed in the Sum to be bestowed on
discontented Persons. That Gray should have 12000 Crowns, and Raleigh should
have 8000, or 10000 Crowns.

Cobham's Examination, July 18.

If the Money might be procured (says he) then a Man may give Pensions. Being
asked if a Pension should not be given to his Brother Brook, he denied it not.

Lawrency's Examination.

Within five days after Aremberg arrived, Cobham resorted unto him. That Night
that Cobham went to Aremberg with Lawrency, Raleigh supped with him.


Attorney. Raleigh must have his part of the Money, therefore now he is a
Traitor. The Crown shall never stand one Year on the Head of the King (my
Master) if a Traitor may not be condemned by Circumstances: For if A. tells B.
and B. tells C. and C. D. etc. you shall never prove Treason by two Witnesses.

Raleigh's Examination was read.

He confesses Cobham offered him 8000 Crowns, which he was to have for the
furtherance of the Peace between England and Spain; and that he should have it
within three days. To which, he said, he gave this Answer, When I see the Money
I will tell you more; for I had thought it had been one of his ordinary idle
Conceits, and therefore made no account thereof.


Raleigh. The Attorney has made a long Narration of Copley, and the Priests,
which concerns me nothing, neither know I how Cobham was altered. For he told
me, if I would agree to further the Peace, he would get me 8000 Crowns. I asked
him, Who shall have the rest of the Money? He said, I will offer such a
Nobleman (who was not named) some of the Money. I said, he will not be
persuaded by you, and he will extremely hate you for such a Motion. Let me be
pinched to Death with hot Irons, if ever I knew there was any Intention to
bestow the Money on discontented Persons. I had made a Discourse against the
Peace, and would have printed it: If Cobham changed his mind; if the Priests,
if Brook had any such intent, what is that to me? They must answer for it. He
offered me the Money before Aremberg came, that is difference of time.


Sergeant Philips. Raleigh confesses the Matter, but avoideth it by
distinguishing of Times. You said it was offered you before the coming of
Aremberg; which is false. For you being examined whether you should have such
Money of Cobham, or not: You said yea, and that you should have it within two
or three days. Nemo moriturus presumitur mentiri.


Lord Hen. How. Alledg me any Ground or Cause, wherefore you gave ear to my
Lord Cobham for receiving Pensions, in Matters you had not to deal with.


Raleigh. Could I stop my Lord Cobham's Mouth?


Lord Cecil. Sir Walter Raleigh presses, that my Lord Cobham should be brought
face to face. If he ask things of Favor and Grace, they must come only from
him that can give them. If we sit here as Commissioners, how shall we be
satisfied whether he ought to be brought, unless we hear the Judges speak.


Lord Chief Justice. This thing cannot be granted, for then a number of
Treasons should flourish: The Accuser may be drawn by Practice, whilst he is in
Person.


Judge Gaudy. The Statute you speak of, concerning two Witnesses in case of
Treason is found to be inconvenient, therefore by another Law it was taken away.


Raleigh. The common Trial of England is by Jury and Witnesses.


Lord Chief Justice. No, by Examination: If three conspire a Treason, and they
all confess it; here is never a Witness, yet they are condemned.


Judge Warburton. I marvel, Sir Walter, that you being of such Experience and
Wit, should stand on this Point; for so many Horse-stealers may escape, if they
may not be condemned without Witnesses. If one should rush into the King's
Privy-Chamber, whilst he is alone, and kill the King (which God forbid) and
this Man be met coming with his Sword drawn all bloody; shall not he be
condemned to Death? My Lord Cobham has, perhaps, been labored withal; and to
save you, his old Friend, it may be that he will deny all that which he has
said.


Raleigh. I know not how you conceive the Law.


Lord Chief Justice. Nay, we do not conceive the Law, but we know the Law.


Raleigh. The Wisdom of the Law of God is absolute and perfect, Haec fac, and
vives, etc. But now by the Wisdom of the State, the Wisdom of the Law is
uncertain. Indeed where the Accuser is not to be had conveniently, I agree with
you; but here my Accuser may, he is alive, and in the House. Susanna had been
condemned, if Daniel had not cried out: Will you condemn an innocent Israelite,
without Examination or Knowledge of the Truth? Remember, it is absolutely the
Commandment of God: If a false Witness rise up, you shall cause him to be
brought before the Judges; if he be found false, he shall have the Punishment
which the Accused should have had. It is very sure for my Lord to accuse me is
my certain Danger, and it may be a means to excuse himself.


Lord Chief Justice. There must not such a Gap be opened for the Destruction of
the King, as would be if we should grant this. You plead hard for your self,
but the Laws plead as hard for the thing. I did never hear that Course to be
taken in a Case of Treason, as to write one to another, or speak one to another
during the time of their Imprisonment. There has been Intelligence between
you, and what underhand Practices there may be, I know not. If the
Circumstances agree not with the Evidence, we will not condemn you.


Raleigh. The King desires nothing but the knowledge of the Truth, and would
have no advantage taken by Severity of the Law. If ever we had a Gracious King,
now we have; I hope, as he is, such are his Ministers. If there be but a Trial
of five Marks at common Law, a Witness must be deposed. Good my Lords, let my
Accuser come face to face, and be deposed.


Lord Chief Justice. You have no Law for it: God forbid any Man should accuse
himself upon his Oath.


Attorney. The Law presumes, a Man will not accuse himself to accuse another.
You are an odious Man: For Cobham thinks his Cause the worse that you are in
it. Now you shall hear of some Stirs to be raised in Scotland.

Part of Coplies Examination.

Also Watson told me, that a special Person told him, that Aremberg offered to
him a thousand Crowns to be in that Action; and that Brook said, the Stirs in
Scotland came out of Rawleigh's Head.


Raleigh. Brook has been taught his Lesson.


Lord H. How. This Examination was taken before me; Did I teach him his Lesson?


Raleigh. I protest before God, I meant it not by any Privy Counselor; but
because Money is scant, he will juggle on both sides.

Raleigh's Examination.

"The way to invade England, were to begin with Stirs in Scotland.


Raleigh. I think so still: I have spoken it to diverse of the Lords of the
Council, by way of Discourse and Opinion.


Attorney. Now let us come to those words of Destroying the King and his Cubs.


Raleigh. O barbarous! if they, like unnatural Villains, should use those
words, shall I be charged with them? I will not hear it, I was never any
Plotter with them against my Country, I was never false to the Crown of
England. I have spent 4000 Pounds of my own against the Spanish Faction, for
the Good of my Country. Do you bring the words of these Hellish Spiders, Clark,
Watson, and others against me?


Attorney. Thou have a Spanish Heart, and thy self art a Spider of Hell; for
thou confessest the King to be a most Sweet and Gracious Prince, and yet have
conspired against him.

Watson's Examination read.

He said, that George Brook told him twice, That his Brother, the Lord Cobham,
said to him, that you are but on the Bye, but Raleigh and I are on the Main.

Brook's Examination read.

Being asked what was meant by this Jargon the Bye and the Main? he said, That
the Lord Cobham told him, that Gray and others were in the Bye, he and Raleigh
were on the Main. Being asked what Exposition his Brother made of these Words?
he said, he is loath to repeat it. And after says, by the Main was meant the
taking away of the King and his Issue; and thinks on his Conscience, it was
infused into his Brother's Head by Raleigh.

Cobham's Examination read.

Being asked, if ever he had said, It will never be well in England, till the
King and his Cubs were taken away. He said, he had answered before, and that he
would answer no more to that Point.


Raleigh. I am not named in all this: There is a Law of two sorts of Accusers,
one of his own Knowledge, another by Hearsay.


Earl of Suffolk. See the Case of Arnold.


Lord Chief Justice. It is the Case of Sir Will. Thomas, and Sir Nicholas
Arnold.


Raleigh. If this may be, you will have any Man's Life in a Week.


Attorney. Raleigh says, that Cobham was in a Passion when he said so. Would
he tell his Brother any thing of Malice against Raleigh, whom he loved as his
Life.


Raleigh. Brook never loved me; until his Brother had accused me, he said
nothing.


Lord Cecil. We have heard nothing that might lead us to think that Brook
accused you, he was only in the Surprising Treason; for by accusing you he
should accuse his Brother.


Raleigh. He does not care much for that.


Lord Cecil. I must judge the best. The Accusation of his Brother was not
Voluntary; he pared every thing as much as he could, to save his Brother.

Cobham's Examination read.

He says he had a Book written against the Title of the King, which he had of
Raleigh, and that he gave it to his Brother Brook: and Raleigh said it was
foolishly written.


Attorney. After the King came within twelve miles of London, Cobham never came
to see him; and intended to travel without seeing the Queen and the Prince. Now
in this Coffeehouse you gave him the Book, and he gave it his Brother.


Raleigh. I never gave it him, he took it off my Table. For I well remember a
little before that time I received a Challenge from Sir Amias Preston, and for
that I did intend to answer it, I resolved to leave my Estate settled, therefore
laid out all my loose Papers, amongst which was this Book.


Lord Howard. Where had you this Book?


Raleigh. In the old Lord Treasurers Study, after his Death.


Lord Cecil. Did you ever show or make known the Book to me.


Raleigh. No, my Lord.


Lord Cecil. My Father being employed in the Affairs of State at that time, it
was like enough, he had many Books and Papers written against the then Queen
and State, which might come to his hands by the Discovery of such Offenses.


Attorney. I observe there was Intelligence between you and Cobham in the
Tower; for after he said, it was against the King's Title, he denied it again.


Sir William Wade. First my Lord Cobham confesses it, and after he had
subscribed it, he revoked it again: To me he always said, that the Drift of it
was against the King's Title.


Raleigh. I protest before God, and all his Works, I gave him not the Book.


Nota. Sir Robert Wroth speaks, or whispereth something secretly.

Attorney. My Lords, I must complain of Sir Robert Wroth, he says this
Evidence is not material.


Sir Robert Wroth. I never spoke the words.


Attorney. Let Mr. Sergeant Philips testify, whether he heard him say the
Words or no.


Lord Cecil. I will give my Word for Sir Robert Wroth.


Sir Robert Wroth. I will speak as truly as you, Mr. Attorney, for by God, I
never spoke it.


Lord Chief Justice. Wherefore should this Book be burnt?


Raleigh. I burned it not.


Sergeant Philips. You presented your Friend with it, when he was discontented.
If it had been before the Queens Death it had been a less matter; but you gave
it him presently when he came from the King, which was the time of his
Coffeehouse.


Raleigh. Here is a Book supposed to be Treasonable; I never read it, commended
it, or delivered it, nor urged it.


Attorney. Why this is cunning.


Raleigh. Every thing that does make for me is cunning, and every thing that
makes against me is probable.


Attorney. Lord Cobham says, that Kemish came to him with a Letter torn, and
did wish him not to be dismayed, for one Witness could not hurt him.


Raleigh. This poor Man has been close Prisoner these eighteen Weeks; he was
offered the Rack to make him confess. I never sent any such Message by him, I
only writ to him, to tell him what I had done with Mr. Attorney; having of his
at that time a great Pearl and a Diamond.


Lord H. Howard. No Circumstance moves me more than this. Kemish was never on
the Rack, the King gave charge that no Rigor should be used.


Commissioners. We protest before God, there was no such matter intended to our
knowledges.


Raleigh. Was not the Keeper of the Rack sent for, and he threatened with it?


Sir William Wade. When Mr. Solicitor and my self examined Kemish, we told him
he deserved the Rack, but did not threaten him with it.


Commissioners. It was more than we knew.

Cobham's Examination read.

He says, Kemish brought him a Letter from Raleigh, and that part which was
concerning the Lords of the Council* was rent out; the Letter contained, that
he was examined and cleared himself of all; and that the Lord H. Howard said,
because he was discontent, he was fit to be in the Action. And further, that
Kemish said to him from Raleigh, that he should be of good Comfort, for one
Witness could not condemn a Man for Treason.


Lord Cecil. Cobham was asked, whether, and when he heard from you? he said,
Every Day.


Raleigh. Kemish added more, I never bad him speak those Words.


Nota. Mr. Attorney here offered to interrupt him.

Lord Cecil. It is his last Discourse. Give him leave Mr. Attorney.


Raleigh. I am accused concerning Arabella, concerning Money out of Spain. My
Lord Chief Justice says, a Man may be condemned with one Witness, yea, without
any Witness. Cobham is guilty of many things, Conscientia mill Testes; he has
accused himself, what can he hope for but Mercy? My Lords vouchsafe me this
Grace. Let him be brought, being alive, and in the House; let him avouch any of
these things, I will confess the whole Indictment, and renounce the King's
Mercy.


Lord Cecil. Here has been a touch of the Lady Arabella Stuart, a near
Kinswoman of the Kings. Let us not scandal the innocent by confusion of Speech:
She is as innocent of all these things as I, or any Man here; only she received
a Letter from my Lord Cobham, to prepare her; which she laughed at, and
immediately sent it to the King. So far was she from Coffeehouse that she
laughed him to scorn. But you see how far the Count of Aremberg did consent.

The Lord Admiral (Nottingham) being by in a Standing, with the Lady Arabella,
spoke to the Court.

The Lady does here protest upon her Salvation, that she never dealt in any of
these things; and so she willed me to tell the Court.


Lord Cecil. The Lord Cobham wrote to my Lady Arabella, to know if he might
come to speak with her, and gave her to understand, that there were some about
the King, that labored to disgrace her; she doubted it was but a Trick. But
Brook says, his Brother moved him to procure Arabella to write Letters to the
King of Spain; but he says, he never did it.


Raleigh. The Lord Cobham has accused me, you see in what manner he has
forsworn it. Were it not for his Accusation, all this were nothing. Let him be
asked, if I knew of the Letter which Lawrency brought to him from Aremberg. Let
me speak for my Life, it can be no hurt for him to be brought; he dares not
accuse me. If you grant me not this Favor, I am strangely used. Campian was
not denied to have his Accusers face to face.


Lord Chief Justice. Since he must needs have Justice, the Acquitting of his
old Friend may move him to speak otherwise than the Truth.


Raleigh. If I had been the Infuser of all these Treasons into him. You
Gentlemen of the Jury, mark this, he said I have been the Cause of all his
Miseries, and the Destruction of his House, and that all Evil has happened
unto him, by my wicked counsel. If this be true, whom has he cause to accuse,
and to be revenged on, but on me? And I know him to be as revengefull as any
Man on Earth.


Attorney. He is a Party, and may not come; the Law is against it.


Raleigh. It is a Toy to tell me of Law. I defy such Law, I stand on the Fact.


Lord Cecil. I am afraid my often speaking (who am inferior to my Lords here
present) will make the World think I delight to hear my self talk. My affection
to you, Sir Walter Raleigh was not extinguished, but slaked, in regard of your
deserts. You know the Law of the Realm (to which your Mind does not contest)
that my Lord Cobham cannot be brought.


Raleigh. He may be, my Lord.


K. Cecil. But dare you challenge it?


Raleigh. No.


L. Cecil. You say that my Lord Cobham, your main Accuser, must come to accuse
you. You say, he has retracted: I say, many particulars are not retracted.
What the Validity of all this is, is merely left to the Jury. Let me ask you
this, If my Lord Cobham will say you were the only Instigator of him to proceed
in the Treasons, dare you put your self on this?


Raleigh. If he will speak it before God and the King, that ever I knew of
Arabella's Matter, or the Money out of Spain, or of the surprising Treason; I
put my self on it. God's Will and the King's be done with me.


Lord H. Howard. How if he speak things equivalent to that you have said.


Raleigh. Yes, in a main Point.


Lord Cecil. If he say, you have been the Instigator of him to deal with the
Spanish King, had not the Council cause to draw you hither?


Raleigh. I put my self on it.


Lord Cecil. Then Sir Walter Raleigh, call upon God, and prepare your self;
for I do verily believe my Lords will prove this. Excepting your faults (I call
them no worse) by God, I am your Friend. The Heat and Passion in you, and the
Attourney's Zeal in the King's Service makes me speak this.


Raleigh. Whosoever is the Workman, it is reason he should give account of his
Work to the Work-master. But let it be proved that he acquainted me with any of
his Conferences with Aremberg: he would surely have given me some account.


L. Cecil. That follows not. If I set you on work, and you give me no account*
am I therefore innocent?


Attorney. For the Lady Arabella, I said she was never acquainted with the
matter. Now that Raleigh had Conference in all these Treasons, it is manifest;
The Jury has heard the matter. There is one Dyer, a Pilot, that being in
Lisbon, met with a Portugal Gentleman, who asked him if the King of England was
crowned yet? To whom he answered, I think not yet, but he shall be shortly.
Nay, says the Portugal, that shall never be, for his Throat will be cut by Don
Raleigh and Don Cobham before he be crowned.


Dyer was called and sworn, and delivered this Evidence.

Dyer. I came to a Merchants House in Lisbon, to see a Boy that I had there;
there came a Gentleman into the House, and enquiring what Countryman I was? I
said, an Englishman. VVhereupon he asked me, if the King was crowned? And I
answered, No, but that I hoped he should be so shortly. Nay, says he, he shall
never be crowned; for Don Raleigh and Don Cobham will cut his Throat ere that
day come.


Raleigh. What infer you upon this?


Attorney. That your Treason has wings.


Raleigh. If Cobham did practice with Aremberg, how could it not but be known
in Spain? Why did they name the Duke of Buckingham with Jack Straw's Treason,
and the Duke of York with Jack Cade, but that it was to countenance his Treason?

Consider you Gentlemen of the Jury, there is no Cause so doubtful, which the
Kings Counsel cannot make good against the Law. Consider my Disability, and
their Ability: They prove nothing against me, only they bring the Accusation of
my Lord Cobham, which he has lamented and repented as heartily, as if it had
been for an horrible Murder: for he knew that all this Sorrow which should
come to me, is by his means. Presumptions must proceed from precedent or
subsequent Facts. I have spent 40000 Crowns against the Spaniard. I had not
purchased 40 Pound a Year. If I had died in Guiana, I had not left 300 Marks a
Year to my Wife and Son. I that have always condemned the Spanish Faction,
methinks it is a strange thing that now I should affect it! Remember what St.
Austin says, Sic judicate tanquam ab alio mox judicandi; unus Iudex, unum
Tribunal. If you would be contented on Presumptions to be delivered up to be
slaughtered, to have your Wives and Children turned into the Streets to beg
their Bread; If you would be contented to be so judged, judge so of me


Serj. Philips. I hope to make this so clear, as that the Wit of Man shall have
no Color to answer it. The Matter is Treason in the highest Degree, the end to
deprive the King of his Crown. The particular Treasons are these: First, To
raise up Rebellion, and, to effect that, to procure Money; to raise up Tumults
in Scotland, by divulging a Treasonable Book against the Kings Right to the
Crown; the Purpose, to take away the Life of his Majesty and his Issue. My Lord
Cobham confesses Sir Walter Raleigh to be guilty of all these Treasons. The
Question is, Whether he be guilty as joining with him, or instigating of him?
The Course to prove this was by my Lord Cobham's Accusation. If that be true,
he is guilty; if not, he is clear. So whether Cobham say true, or Raleigh? That
is the Question. Raleigh has no Answer, but the Shadow of as much Wit, as the
Wit of Man can devise. He uses his bare Denial; the Denial of a Defendant must
not move the Jury. In the Star Chamber, or in the Chancery, for matter of
Title, if the Defendant be called in Question, his Denial on his Oath is no
Evidence to the Court to clear him, he does it in propria causa; therefore much
less in Matters of Treason. Cobham's Testification against him before then, and
since, has been largely discoursed.


Raleigh. If Truth be constant, and Constancy be in Truth, why has he forsworn
that that he has said? You have not proved any one thing against me by direct
Proofs, but all by Circumstances.


Attorney. Have you done? The King must have the last.


Raleigh. Nay, Mr. Attorney, he which speaks for his Life, must speak last.
False Repetitions and Mistakings must not mar my Cause. You should speak
secundum allegata and probata. I appeal to God and the King in this Point,
whether Cobham's Accusation be sufficient to condemn me?


Attorney. The Kings Safety and your Clearing cannot agree. I protest before
God, I never knew a clearer Treason.


Raleigh. I never had Intelligence with Cobham since I came to the Tower.


Attorney. Go too, I will lay thee upon thy Back, for the confidentest Traitor
that ever came at a Bar. Why should you take 8000 Crowns for a Peace?


Lord Cecil. Be not so impatient, good Mr. Attorney, give him leave to speak.


Attorney. If I may not be patiently heard, you will encourage Traitors, and
discourage us. I am the King's sworn Servant, and must speak: If he be guilty,
he is a Traitor; if not deliver him.


Nota. Here Mr. Attorney sat down in a Chafe, and would speak no more, until
the Commissioners urged and entreated him. After much ado he went on, and made
a long Repetition of all the Evidence, for the direction of the Jury; and at
the repeating of some things Sir Walter Raleigh interrupted him, and said, He
did him wrong.

Attorney. Thou art the most vile and execrable Traitor that ever lived.


Raleigh. You speak indiscreetly, barbarously and uncivilly.


Attorney. I want words sufficient to express thy viperous Treasons.


Raleigh. I think you want words indeed, for you have spoken one thing half a
dozen times.


Attorney. Thou art an odious Fellow, thy Name is hateful to all the Realm of
England for thy Pride.


Raleigh. It will go near to prove a measuring Cast between you and me, Mr.
Attorney.


Attorney. Well, I will now make it appear to the World, that there never
lived a viler Viper upon the face of the Earth than thou, and therewithal he
drew a Letter out of his Pocket, saying further, My Lords, you shall see, this
is an Agent that has writ a Treatise against the Spaniard, and has ever so
detested him; this is he that has spent so much Money against him in Service;
and yet you shall all see whether his Heart be not wholly Spanish. The Lord
Cobham, who of his own nature was a good and honorable Gentleman, till
overtaken by this Wretch, now finding his Conscience heavily burdened with
some Courses which the Subtilty of this Traitor had drawn him into, my Lords,
he could be at no rest with himself, nor quiet in his thoughts, until he was
eased of that heavy weight; out of which Passion of his Mind, and Discharge of
his Duty to his Prince, and his Conscience to God; taking it upon his Salvation
that he wrote nothing but the Truth, with his own hands he wrote this Letter.
Now Sir you shall see whether you had Intelligence with Cobham, within four
days before he came to the Tower. If he be wholly Spanish, that desired a
Pension of 1500 Pound a Year from Spain, that Spain by him might have
Intelligence, then Raleigh is a Traitor. He has taken an Apple, and pinned a
Letter unto it, and threw it into my Lord Cobham's Window; the Contents whereof
were this, It is doubtful, whether we shall be proceeded with or no, perhaps
you shall not be tried. This was to get a Retractation. Oh! it was Adam's
Apple, whereby the Devil did deceive him. Further, he wrote thus, Do not as my
Lord of Essex did; take heed of a Preacher; for by his Persuasion he confessed,
and made himself guilty. I doubt not but this day God shall have as great a
Conquest by this Traitor, and the Son of God shall be as much glorified, as
when it was said, Vicisti Galilaee; you know my meaning. What though Cobham
retracted, yet he could not rest nor sleep till he confirmed it again. If this
be not enough to prove him a Traitor, the King my Master shall not live three
years to an end.

Nota. Here Mr. Attorney produced the Lord Cobham's Letter, and as he read it,
inserted some speeches.

I have thought fit to set down this to my Lords, wherein I protest on my Soul
to write nothing but the truth. I am now come near the period of my time,
therefore I confess the whole Truth before God, and his Angels. Raleigh, four
days before I came from the Tower caused an Apple ( Eves Apple) to be thrown in
at my Chamber-Window; the effect of it was to entreat me to right the wrong
that I had done him, in saying, that I should have come home by Iersey; which
under my hand to him I have retracted. His first Letter I answered not, which
was thrown in the same manner, wherein he prayed me to write him a Letter,
which I did. He sent me word that the Judges met at Mr. Attourneys House, and
that there was good hope the Proceedings against us should be stayed; He sent
me another time a little Tobacco. At Aremberg's coming Raleigh was to have
procured a Pension of fifteen hundred Pounds a Year; for which he promised that
no Action should be against Spain, the Low Countries, or the Indies, but he
would give knowledge beforehand. He told me the States had Audience with the
King. ( Attorney. Ah! is not this a Spanish Heart in an English Body?) He has
been the Original Cause of my Ruin; for I had no dealing with Aremberg, but by
his instigation. He has also been the cause of my Coffeehouse; he advised
me, not to be overtaken with Preachers, as Essex was; and that the King would
better allow of a constant Denial, than to accuse any.


Attorney. Oh damnable Atheist! he has learned some Text of Scripture to
serve his own purpose, but falsely alleged. He counsels him not to be
counseled by Preachers, as Essex was: He died the Child of God, God honored
him at his death; thou wast by when he died. Et Lupus and Turpes instant
morientibus Ursae. He died indeed for his Offense. The King himself spoke these
words; He that shall say Essex died not for Treason is punishable.


Raleigh. You have heard a strange Tale of a strange Man. Now he thinks, he
has matter enough to destroy me; but the King, and all of you shall witness by
our Deaths, which of us was the Ruin of the other. I bid a poor Fellow throw
in the Letter at his Window, written to this purpose, You know you have undone
me, now write three Lines to justify me. In this I will die, that he has done
me wrong: Why did not he acquaint me with his Treasons, if I acquainted him
with my Dispositions?


Lord Chief Justice. But what say you now of the rest of the Letter, and the
Pension of 1500 l. per annum?


Raleigh. I say that Cobham is a base, dishonorable poor Soul.


Attorney. Is he base? I return it into thy Throat, on his behalf: But for
thee, he had been a good Subject.


Lord Chief Justice. I perceive you are not so clear a Man, as you have
protested all this while; for you should have discovered these Matters to the
King.

Nota. Here Raleigh pulled a Letter out of his Pocket, which the Lord Cobham
had written to him, and desired my Lord Cecil to read it, because he only knew
his hand; the Effect of it was as follows.

Cobham's Letter of Justification to Raleigh.

Seeing my self so near my End, for the discharge of my own Conscience; and
freeing my self from your Blood, which else will cry Vengeance against me: I
protest upon my Salvation, I never practiced with Spain by your procurement;
God so comfort me in this my Affliction, as you are a true Subject, for any
thing that I know. I will say as Daniel, Purus sum a sanguine hujus. So God
have merry on my Soul, as I know no Treason by you.


Raleigh. Now I wonder how many Souls this Man has! he damns one in this
Letter, and another in that.


Here was much ado, Mr. Attorney alleged that his last Letter was politickly
and cunningly urged from the Lord Cobham, and that the first was simply the
Truth; and that lest it should seem doubtful that the first Letter was drawn
from my Lord Cobham by promise of mercy, or hope of favor, the Lord Chief
Justice willed that the Jury might herein be satisfied.

Whereupon the Earl of Devonshire delivered that the same was mere voluntary,
and not extracted from the Lord Cobham upon any hopes or promise of Pardon.

Nota. This was the last Evidence: whereupon a Marshal was sworn to keep the
Jury private. The Jury departed, and staid not a quarter of an hour, but
returned, and gave their Verdict, Guilty.

Serj. Heal demanded Judgment against the Prisoner.


Clerk of the Crown. Sir Walter Raleigh, Thou have been indicted, arraigned,
and pleaded not guilty, for all these several Treasons, and for trial thereof
have put thy self upon thy Country; which Country are these, who have found
thee guilty. What can thou say for thy self, why Judgment and Execution of
Death should not pass against thee?


Raleigh. My Lords, the Jury have found me Guilty. They must do as they are
directed. I can say nothing why Judgment should not proceed. You see whereof
Cobham has accused me. You remember his Protestations, that I was never
guilty. I desire the King should know of the Wrongs done unto me since I came
hither.


Lord Chief Justice. You have had no wrong, Sir Walter.


Raleigh. Yes, of Mr. Attorney. I desire my Lords to remember three things to
the King. 1. I was accused to be a Practiser with Spain. I never knew that my
Lord Cobham meant to go thither; I will ask no mercy at the Kings hands if he
will affirm it. 2. I never knew of the practice with Arabella. 3. I never knew
of my Lord Cobhams practice with Aremberg, nor of the surprising Treason.


Lord Chapter Justice. In my Conscience I am persuaded that Cobham has accused you
truly. You cannot deny but that you were dealt with to have a Pension to be a
Spy for Spain; therefore you are not so true to the King as you have protested
your self to be.


Raleigh. I submit my self to the King's Mercy; I know his Mercy is greater
than my Offense. I recommend my Wife, and Son of tender years, unbrought up, to
his Compassion.


Lord Chief Justice. I had thought I should never have seen this Day, to have
stood in this place to give Sentence of Death against you; because I thought it
impossible, that one of so great Parts should have fallen so grievously. God
has bestowed on you many Benefits. You had been a Man fit and able to have
served the King in good Place. You had brought your self into a good State of
Living, if you had entered into a good Consideration of your Estate, and not
suffered your own Wit to have intrapped your self, you might have lived in good
comfort. It is best for Man not to seek to climb too high, lest he fall; nor
yet to creep too low, lest he be trodden on. It was the Posie of the wisest and
greatest Counselor of our time in England, In medio spatio mediocria firma
locantur. You might have lived well with 3000 Pound a Year, for so I have heard
your Revenues to be. I know nothing might move you to be discontented; but if
you had been down, you know Fortunes Wheel, when it is turned about, rises
again. I never heard that the King took away any thing from you, but the
Captainship of the Guard, which he did with very good Reason, to have one of
his own knowledge, whom he might trust, in that Place. You have been taken for a
wise Man, and so have showed Wit enough this Day. Again, for Monopolies for
Wine, etc. If the King had said, it is a Matter that offends my People, should
I burden them for your private Good? I think you could not well take it
hardly, that his Subjects were eased, though by your private hindrance. Two
Vices have lodged chiefly in you; one is an eager Ambition, the other corrupt
Covetousness. Ambition, in desiring to be advanced to equal Grace and Favor,
as you have been before-time; that Grace you had then you got not in a Day or
Year. For your Covetousness, I am sorry to hear that a Gentleman of your Wealth
should become a base Spy for the Enemy, which is the vilest of all other;
wherein on my Conscience Cobham has said true: by it you would have increased
your Living 1500 Pound a Year. This Covetousness is like a Canker, that eats
the Iron Place where it lives. Your Case being thus, let it not grieve you, if
I speak a little out of zeal, and love to your good. You have been taxed by the
World, with the Defense of the most Heathenish and Blasphemous Opinions, which
I list not to repeat, because Christian Ears cannot endure to hear them, nor
the Authors and Maintainers of them suffered to live in any Christian
Commonwealth. You know what Men said of Harpool. You shall do well before you
go out of the World to give satisfaction therein, and not to die with these
Imputations on you. Let not any Devil persuade you to think there is no
Eternity in Heaven: for if you think thus, you shall find Eternity in
Hellfire. In the first Accusation of my Lord Cobham, I observed his manner of
speaking; I protest before the Living God, I am persuaded he spoke nothing but
the Truth. You wrote, that he should not in any case confess any thing to a
Preacher, telling him an Example of my Lord of Essex, that noble Earl that is
gone; who if he had not been carried away with others, had lived in Honor to
this Day among us. He confessed his Offenses, and obtained Mercy of the Lord,
for I am verily persuaded in my Heart, he died a worthy Servant of God. Your
Conceit of not confessing any thing is very inhumane and wicked. In this World
is the time of Confessing, that we may be absolved at the Day of Judgment. You
have showed a fearful Sign of denying God, in advising a Man not to confess the
Truth. It now comes in my mind, why you may not have your Accuser come face to
face: for such an one is easily brought to retract, when he sees there is no
hope of his own Life. It is dangerous that any Traitors should have any Access
to, or Conference with one another; when they see themselves must die, they
will think it best to have their Fellow live, that he may commit the like
Treason again, and so in some sort seek Revenge.

Now it rests to pronounce the Judgment, which I wish you had not been this
day to have received of me: For if the Fear of God in you had been answerable
to your other great Parts, you might have lived to have been a singular good
Subject. I never saw the like Trial, and hope I shall never see the like again.


The Judgment.
But since you have been found guilty of these horrible Treasons, the Judgment
of this Court is, That you shall be had from hence to the Place whence you
came, there to remain until the Day of Execution; and from thence you shall be
drawn upon a Hurdle through the open Streets to the Place of Execution, there
to be hanged and cut down alive, and your Body shall be opened, your Heart and
Bowels plucked out, and your Privy Members cut off, and thrown into the Fire
before your Eyes; then your Head to be stricken off from your Body, and your
Body shall be divided into four Quarters, to be disposed of at the King's
Pleasure: And God have Mercy upon your Soul.


Sir Walter Raleigh besought the Earl of Devonshire, and the Lords, to be
Suitors on his behalf to the King; that in regard of Places of Estimation he
did bear in his Majesty's time, the Rigor of his Judgment might be qualified,
and his Death honorable, and not ignominious.

Wherein after they had promised him to do their utmost Endeavors, the Court
rose, and the Prisoner was carried up again to the Castle.

Here follows the Continuation of the Life.
IT was observed, that before the Lords (principally to my Lord Cecil) at
Winchester (for there he was tried, the Sickness then reigning in London) he
was humble, but not prostrate; dutiful, but not deject: For in some cases he
would humbly thank them for gracious Speeches; in other acknowledge that their
Honors said true, as in relating some Circumstances. And in such points
wherein he would not yield unto them, he would crave pardon, and with reverence
urge them, and answer them as in points of Law, or essential matters of Fact.
To the Jury he was affable, but not fawning; hoping, but not trusting in them;
carefully persuading them with Reason, not distemperately importuning them with
Conjuration; rather showing love of Life, than fear of Death. What made ill for
Sir Walter was his Discovery of Lawrency and Cobham's frequent private
Conferences; which so incensed Cobham, that he positively accused him: though
the single Evidence of one already convicted of what Sir Walter was but yet
impeached, could only make a Circumstance, and not convict him. The Judges and
the King's Counsel did what they could to bawl him out of his Life; and since
they vvanted Proof, they would endeavor to tire him out. If we may believe
Osborn, several of the Jurymen, after he was cast, were so far touched in
Conscience as to ask of him pardon on their knees.

A further Confirmation of his Innocence may be a Passage of his own in a
Letter to Secretary Winwood, wherein he tells him, That the worthy Prince of
Wales was extreme curious in searching out the nature of his Offenses. The
Queens Majesty had informed her self from the beginning. The King of Denmark at
both times of his being here, was thoroughly satisfied of his Innocence; they
would otherwise never have moved his Majesty on his behalf. The Wife, the
Brother, and the Son of a King do not use to sue for Men suspect. Nay, further
yet, the Scots themselves declared in favor of him, if we may believe him in
another Letter of his to Sir Robert Car, after Earl of Somerset, wherein are
these words: I have ever been bound to your Nation, as well for many other
Graces, as for the true Report of my Trial to the King's Majesty, against whom
had I been malignant, the hearing of my Cause could not have changed Enemies
into Friends, Malice into Compassion, and the Minds of the greatest number then
present into Commiseration of mine Estate: It is not the nature of foul Treason
to beget such fair Passions; neither could it agree with the duty and love of
faithful Subjects (especially of your Nation) to bewail his Overthrow that had
conspired against their most natural and liberal Lord.

Two days after Raleigh's Trial, were sentenced Brook, who pretended his
intention was only to try faithful Subjects, and said he had a Commission for
so doing, but produced it not; Markham, who confessed the Indictment, pleaded
Discontent, and desired Mercy; Watson, who confessed he drew them all in, holding
the King to be no Sovereign till he were crowned, instancing in Saul and
Jeroboam; And Clark, who said the like. Parham and Brooksby were acquitted by
the Jury. Watson, Clark, and Brook were executed; Markham, Cobham, and Gray
brought severally on the Scaffold to dye, and at the instant on the Block, had
their particular Executions remitted, by a Letter to the Sheriff under the
King's own Hand, without the knowledge of any, save Mr. Gibbs, Gentleman of the
Bedchamber, that brought it. However an evil Fate did attend these Men; Gray
died in the Tower, the last of his Line; the rest were discharged but died
miserably poor: Markham and some others abroad; but Cobham (as Osborn tells us)
in a Room ascended by a Ladder, at a poor Woman's house in in the Minories
(formerly his Landress) died rather of hunger than a natural disease.

Sir Walter was left to his Majesty's Mercy, who thought him too great a
Malcontent to have his Freedom, and probably too Innocent to lose his Life.
Therefore in the Tower he is confined, but permitted to enjoy Libera Custodia;
where he improved his Imprisonment to the greatest advantage of Learning and
Inquisitive Men. Since his Majesty had civilly buried him, and as it were
banished him this World, he thought it no Treason to disturb the Ashes of
former times, and bring to view the Actions of deceased Heroes. And certainly
none was so fit to comment on their Achievements, and so able to raise
excellent Maxims from them, as he who had been brought up in so wise a Court as
Queen Elizabeth's, and read so many wise Men. After some time past there, he
was delivered of that great Minerva, the History of the World; a Book which for
the Exactness of its Chronology, Curiousness of its Contexture and Learning of
all Sorts, seems to be the Work of an Age. An History which never yet met with
a Detractor, and was the Envy, if some Authors may be credited, of King James
himself, who thought none could outdo him at the Pen. That a Man who had been
the greatest part of his life taken up in Action, should write so judiciously,
so critically of Times and Actions, is as great a Wonder as the Book it self.
It still remains a Dispute whether the Age he lived in was more obliged to his
Pen or his Sword, the one being busy in conquering the New, the other in so
bravely describing the Old World. An History wherein the only fault, or defect
rather, is, that it wants one half thereof; which was occasioned, as our
Story tells us, thus: Some few days before he fuffered, he sent for Mr. Walter
Burr, who formerly printed his first Volumn of the History of the World, whom
taking by the Hand, after some other Discourse, he asked how it had sold? Mr.
Burr returned this Answer, It sold so slowly that it had undone him. At which
words of his Sir Walter stepping to his Desk, reaches his other unprinted Part
of his History, which he had brought down to the Times he lived in, and
clapping his hand upon his breast, said with a sigh, Ah, my Friend, has the
first Part undone thee? the second Part shall undo no more; this ungrateful
World is unworthy of it: and immediately going to the Fireside, threw it in,
and set his foot upon it till it was consumed. As great a loss to Learning as
Christendom could have sustained; the greater, because it could be repaired by
no hand but his. It often happening to Authors, as to great Masters in
Painting, their Pieces are not valued till they are dead, and the succeeding
Age find the Originals inimitable.

Whilst Sir Walter was thus confined, Death took away his and Essex's mortal
Enemy, Sir Robert Cecil, after Earl of Salisbury, who had purchased the
monopoly of Favor, and being jealous of Sir Walter's Parts, had some fear he
might supplant him; which was the Cause, according to Osborn, that he was
brought to the aforementioned Trial. However Sir Walter outlived his Enemies
designs and hatred, and for all his kindnesses bestowed upon him the following
Epitaph, which I am upon very good grounds assured to be his. King James was so
much taken with the smartness of it, that he hoped the Author would die before
him. The Verses are these: Here lies Hobinal, our Pastor while here,
That once in a quarter our fleeces did shear.
To please us, his Cur he kept under clogg,
And was ever after both Shepherd and Dog.
For Oblation to Pan his Custom was thus,
He first gave a trifle, then offered up us.
And through his false Worship such power he did gain,
As kept him 'oth Mountain, and us on the Plain:
Where many a Hornpipe he tuned to his Phillis,
And sweetly sung Walsingham to's Amarillis;
Till Atropos clapped him, a Pox on the Drab,
For spite of his Tarbox he died of the Scab.
If the Reader desires a Key to these Verses, he may meet with it in Osborn's
Memoirs, who yet for all his Intelligence has not informed us, that his
Mistresses Name was Walsingham.

Fourteen Years Sir Walter had spent in the Tower, and being weary of a state
wherein he could be only serviceable by his Pen, but not in a capacity of
serving and enriching his Country any other way, (Of whom Prince Henry would
say, that no King but his Father would keep such a Bird in a Cage;) At length
he fell upon an Enterprise of a Golden Mine in Guiana in the Southern Parts of
America. The Proposition of this was presented and recommended to his Majesty
by Sir Ralph Winwood the Secretary of State, as a Matter not in the Air, or
Speculative, but Real, and of certainty: for that Sir Walter had seen of the
Ore of the Mine, and tried the richness of it, having gotten a pound from
thence by the hands of Captain Kemish his ancient Servant.

Sir Ralph Winwood's Recommendations of the Design, and the earnest
Solicitations for his Enlargement of the Queen, the Prince, and the French
Lieger (with much affection to his Deserts, not without some Politic Designs
on Spain) together with the Asseverations of Sir Walter of the Truth of the
Mine, worked upon his Majesty, who thought himself in Honor obliged, nay in a
manner engaged (as the Declaration which he published after the Death of Sir
Walter tells us) not to deny unto his People the Adventure and Hope of so great
Riches to be sought and achieved at the Charge of Volunteers, especially since
it stood so well with his Majesty's Politic and Magnanimous Courses in these
his flourishing Times of Peace, to nourish and encourage Noble and Generous
Enterprises for Plantations, Discoveries, and opening of a new Trade.

Count Gondamor (an active and subtle Instrument to serve his Master's ends)
took Allarm at this, and represented to his Majesty the Enterprise of Sir
Walter to be hostile, and predatory, intending a breach of the Peace between
the two Crowns. But notwithstanding, Power at last is granted to Sir Walter to
set forth Ships and Men for that Service. However, the King commanded him upon
pain of his Allegiance to give him under his Hand (promising on the Word of a
King to keep it secret) the number of his Men, the burden and strength of his
Ships, together with the Country and River which he was to enter; which being
done accordingly by Sir Walter, that very Original Paper was found in the
Spanish Governors Closet at St. Thoma. So active were the Spanish Ministers,
that Advertisement was sent to Spain, and thence to the Indies, before the
English Fleet got out of the Thames.

But as we have just Cause to admire the more than usual Activity of the
Spanish Agents, so may we vvonder no less at the Miscarriage of his Majesty's
present Ministers, who notvvithstanding he had past his Royal Word to the
contrary, yet they did help Count Gondamor to that very Paper; So much both
King and Court were at Gondamor's service.

A Commission indeed is granted, but by Gondamor's means is limited; that the
Fleet should commit no Outrages upon the King of Spain's Subjects by Land,
unless they began first; with other limitations in the Commission, which for
the Readers Curiosity and Satisfaction I have here inserted.

JAMES, by the Grace of GOD, etc. To all to whom these Presents shall come, to
be read, heard, or seen, and to every of them greeting: Whereas Sir Walter
Raleigh Knight, intends to undertake a Uoyage by Sea and Shipping, unto the
South parts of America, or elsewhere within America, possessed and inhabited by
Heathen and Savage People; to the end, to discover and find out some
Commodities and Merchandises in those Countries, that be necessary and
profitable for the Subjects of these Our Kingdoms and Dominions, whereof the
Inhabitants there make little or no use or estimation; whereupon also may ensue
by Trade and Commerce, some propagation of the Christian Faith, and reformed
Religion amongst those Savage and Idolatrous people: And whereas We are
credibly informed, that there are diverse Merchants and Owners of Ships, and
others, well disposed to assist the said Sir Walter Raleigh in this his
Enterprise, had they sufficient Assurance to enjoy their due parts of the
Profits returned (in respect of the Peril of Law wherein the said Sir Walter
Raleigh now stands:) And whereas also We are informed, that diverse other
Gentlemen, the Kinsmen and Friends of the said Sir Walter Raleigh, and diverse
Captains and other Commanders, are also desirous to follow him, and to
adventure their Lives with him in this his Journey, so as they might be
commanded by no other than himself.

Know ye, that We, upon deliberate Consideration had of the Premises, being
desirous by all ways and means to work and procure the benefit and good of Our
loving Subjects, and to give our Princely furtherance to the said Sir Walter
Raleigh, his Friends and Associates herein, to the Encouragement of others in
the like laudable Iourneys and Enterprises, to be hereafter prosecuted and
pursued; and especially in advancement and furtherance, as well of the Conversion
of Savage People, as of the increase of Trade, Traffic, and Merchandises used
by Our Subjects of this Our Kingdom, being most famous throughout all Nations:
Of Our special Grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, have given and
granted, and by these Presents for Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, do give and
grant unto the said Sir Walter Raleigh, full Power and Authority, and free
License and Liberty out of this Our Realm of England, or any other Our
Dominions, to have, carry, take, and lead, for and toward his said intended
Uoyage unto the said South parts, or other parts of America, (possessed and
inhabited, as aforesaid) and to Travel thither, all such, and so many of Our
loving Subjects, or any other Strangers that will become Our loving Subjects,
and live under Our Obeisance and Allegiance, as shall willingly accompany him,
with sufficient Shipping, Armor, Weapons, Ordnance, Munition, Powder, Shot,
Habiliments, Uictuals, and such Wares and Merchandises, as are esteemed by the
wild People in those parts, Clothing, Implements, Furniture, Cattle, Horses and
Mares, and all other such things as he shall think most necessary for his
Uoyage, and for the use and defense of him and his Company, and trade with the
People there; and in passing and returning to and fro, and in those parts, to
give away, Sell, Barter, Cxchange, or otherwise dispose of the same Goods,
Merchandises, and Premises, to the most benefit, and at the will and pleasure
of the said Sir Walter Raleigh and his Company, and such other Person or
Persons, as shall be Adventurers or Assistants with, or unto him in this his
intended Uoyage, and from thence to Return, Import, Convey, and bring into this
Our Kingdom, or any other Our Dominions, such Gold, Silver, Bullion, or any
other Wares, or Merchandises, or Commodities whatsoever, as they shall think
most fit and convenient; and the same being so Returned, Imported, Conveyed,
and Brought into this Our Kingdom, or any other Our Dominions, to have, take,
keep, retain, and convert to the only proper Use, Benefit, and Behoof of the
said Sir Walter Raleigh, and his said Company, and other Persons Adventurers
and Assistants with, or to him in his Uoyage, without the Let, Interruption,
Molestation, and Disturbance of Us, Our Heirs or Successors, or any the
Officers, or Ministers of Us, Our Heirs or Successors whatsoever; Paying and
Answering unto Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, the full fifth part, in five
parts to be divided, of all such Gold, and Silver, and Bullion, and Oar of
Gold, or Silver, and Pearl, and precious Stones, as shall be Imported over and
besides; and together with such Customs, Subsidies, and other Duties, as shall
be due for, or in respect of any other Goods, Wares, or Merchandises whatsoever
to be so Imported by the true meaning of these Presents. And to the end the
said Sir Walter Raleigh may be the more Encouraged to go forward in this his
Enterprise, and all Our loving Subjects desirous to be Adventurers with him, or
Assistant unto him, may be the more incited to further his Proceedings: We do
hereby in verbo Regio, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, Covenant, Promise, and
Grant, to and with the said Sir Walter Raleigh, and all other Persons that
shall accompany him, or to be attendant upon him, or to be Adventurers or
Asistants with, or to him in this his Uoyage, that no Gold, Silver, Goods,
Wares, or Merchandises whatsoever, of what kind or sort soever, by him or them,
or any of them to be Imported into this Our Kingdom of England, or any other
Our Dominions, from any the said South, or other parts of America, (Possessed
or Inhabited, as aforesaid) shall be attached, seized, or taken by Us, Our
Heirs or Successors, or to the use of Us, Our Heirs or Successors, or by any
the Officers or Ministers of Us, Our Heirs or Successors whatsoever; But that
the same, and every of them (the fifth part of the said Gold, Silver, or
Bullion, and Oar of Gold and Silver, and Pearl, and precious Stones, and other
the Customs and Duties aforesaid, being truly answered and paid) shall be, and
remain to the sole and proper use and behoof of the said Sir Walter Raleigh,
and his said Company, and such Persons as shall be Adventurers with him, or
Assistant to him in this his Uoyage; any Law, Statute, Act of Parliament,
Proclamation, Provision, or Restraint, or any Right, Title, or Claim of Us, Our
Heirs or Successors, or any other matter or thing whatsoever to the contrary in
any wise notwithstanding. And further, of Our more especial Grace, certain
Knowledge, and mere Motion, We do hereby for Us, Our Heirs and Successors,
ordain, constitute and appoint the said Sir Walter Raleigh to be the sole
Governor and Commander of all Persons that shall travel, or be with him in the
said Uoyage, to the said South, or other parts of America, (so possessed and
inhabited as aforesaid) or in returning from thence. And we do hereby give unto
him full Power and Authority to Correct, Punish, Pardon, Govern, and Rule them,
or any of them, according to such Orders, Ordinances, Constitutions,
Directions, and Instructions, as by the said Sir Walter Raleigh shall be from
time to time Established, as well in cases Capital and Criminal, as Civil, both
Marine and other; So always as the said Statutes, Ordinances, and Proceedings
(as near as conveniently may be) be agreeable to the Laws, Statuts, Government
and Policy of this Our Realm of England, and not against the true Christian
Faith now professed in the Church of England. And because that in such and the
like Enterprises and Uoyages, great Inconveniences have grown by the mutinous
and disorderly carriage of the Mariners and Saylors employed in the same, for
want of sufficient Authority to punish them according to their Offenses: We do
therefore by these Presents for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, give full Power
and Authority to the said Sir Walter Raleigh, in case of Rebellion or Mutiny by
Sea or Land, to use and exercise Martial Law (upon just ground and apparent
necessity) in as large and ample manner as our Lieutenant General by Sea or
Land, or our Lieutenants in Our Counties, within Our Realm of England, have,
had, or ought to have by force of their Commission of Lieutenancy. And we do
further by these Presents, give full Power and Authority to the said Sir Walter
Raleigh, to Collect, Nominate and Appoint such Captains, and other inferior
Commanders and Ministers under him, as shall be requisite for the better
ordering and governing of his Company, and the good of the Uoyage. And further,
We do by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, straightly Charge
and Command the Warden of Our Cinque Ports, and all the Customers,
Comptrollers, Surveyers, Searchers, Waiters, and other Officers and Ministers
of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, for the time being, that they and every of
them do quietly permit and suffer the said Sir Walter Raleigh, and all Person
and Persons that shall be willing to Travel and Adventure with him in this
Uoyage with their Ships, Munition, Goods, Wares, and Merchandises whatsoever
out of this Our Realm, or any other Our Dominions, to pass into the said South
or other parts of America, (Possessed and Inhabited as aforesaid,) and from
thence to return and import into this Our Realm, or any other Our Dominions,
any Goods, Wares, or Merchandises whatsoever, and there to Sell, or otherwise
dispose of the same, to the best benefit and advantage, and to the only use and
behoof of the said Sir Walter Raleigh, and his Company, and such other Persons
as shall be Adventurers with him in this Uoyage; paying the fifth part of all
Gold, and Silver, and Bullion, and Oar of Gold, and Silver, and of Pearl, and
precious Stones imported, and other the Customs and Duties aforesaid. And these
Presents, or the Inrolment thereof, shall be unto the said Wardens of the
Cinque Ports, Customers, Comptrollers, and other the Officers and Ministers
aforesaid, for the time being, a sufficient Warrant and Discharge in that
behalf. And Our Will and Pleasure is; And by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs
and Successors, We do grant unto the said Sir Walter Raleigh, That these Our
Letters Patents, or the Inrolment thereof, and all and singular Grants,
Clauses, and things therein contained, shall be firm, strong, sufficient, and
effectual in Law, according to Our gracious Pleasure and Meaning herein
expressed; Any Law, Statute, Act, Provision, Ordinance, or Restraint, or any
other Matter or Thing to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.
Although express mention, etc. In Witness whereof, etc. Witness Our Self at
Westminster the six and twentieth Day of August, in the fourteenth Year of Our
Reign of England, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland the fiftieth.

Per breve de privato Sigillo.

With this Commission, and the Company of several brave Captains, and other
Knights and Gentlemen of great Blood and Worth, he set out in Quest of the
Mine, with a complete Fleet of Twelve Sail; letting fall a Speech at his
Departure, which was rather an Argument of his Wit than his Wisdom, That his
whole History of the World had not the like President: Of a Kings Prisoner to
purchase Freedom, and his bosom Favorite to have the Halter; but in
Scripture, Mordecai and Haman: Meaning himself and the Duke of Sommerset. To
which he was told, that the King replied, He might die in that Deceit; which he
did, for Sommerset was saved. Of whom was made good what Sir Walter used to say
of Favorites; That Minions were not so happy as Vulgar Judgments thought them,
being frequently commanded to uncomely, and sometimes to unnatural Employments.

On the 17 th of November, he arrived at Guiana, having been much retarted by
contrary Winds, and having lost several of his Volunteers in the Voyage, by a
violent Calenture. But of the whole Transactions, Sir Walter has given us an
exact Account, in his Letter to Sir Ralph Winwood, Secretary; which I have here
transcribed.

Sir,
AS I have not hitherto given you any Account of our Proceedings and Passages
toward the Indies, so have I no other Subject to write of, than of the
greatest Misfortunes that ever befell any Man. For whereas for the first, all
those that navigate between Cape de Verd, and America, do pass between Fifteen
or Twenty Days at most, we found the Wind so contrary, and (which are also
contrary to Nature) so many Storms and Rains, as we spent six Weeks in the
Passage; by reason whereof, and that in so great Heat, we wanted Water. For at
the Isle Prano of Cape de Verd, we lost our Anchors and Cables, and our
Water-Casks; and being driven from the Isle with a Hurricane, we were like all
to have perished. Great sickness fell amongst us, and carried away great
numbers of our ablest Men, both for Sea and Land. The 17th of November, we had
sight of Guiana, and soon after came to Anchor in five Degrees of the River
Galliano; here we staid till the fourth of December, landed our Sick-men, set
up our Barges and Shallops, which were brought out of England in Quarters,
washed our Ships, and took in Fresh Water, being fed and cherished by the
Indians of my old Acquaintance, with a great deal of Love and Respect. My self
being in the hands of Death this six Weeks, and not able otherwise to move,
than as I was carried in a Chair, gave order to five small Ships to sail into
Orinoque, having Captain Kemish for their Conductor toward the Mines: And in
those five Ships, five Companies of fifty, under the Command of Captain Parker,
Captain North, Brethren to the Lord Monteagle, and the Lord North, valiant
Gentlemen, and of infinite Patience, for the Labor, Hunger, and Heat which
they have endured: My Son had the third Company; Capt. Thornix of Kent the
fourth Company; Capt. Chidley, by his Lieutenant, the fifth. But as my Sergeant
Major, Capt. Piggot, died in the former miserable Passage; so my Lieutenant,
Sir Warham Saint Leiger, lay sick without hope of Life, and the Charge
conferred on my Nephew, George Raleigh, who had also served long with infinite
Commendations; but by reason of my absence, and of Sir Warham's, was not so
well obeyed as the Enterprise required. As they passed up the River, the
Spaniards began the War, and shot at us, both with their Ordnance and Muskets;
whereupon the Companies were forced to charge them, and soon after beat them
out of the Town. In the Assault my Son (more desirous of Honor than Safety)
was slain; with whom, to say truth, all the respects of this World have taken
end in me; and although these five Captains had as weak Companies as ever
followed valiant Leaders, yet were there among them some twenty or thirty
valiant adventurous Gentlemen, and of singular Courage; as of my Sons Company,
Mr. Knivet, Mr. Hammond, Mr. Langworth, Mr. John Pleasington; his Officers, Sir
John Hambden, Mr. Simon Leak, Corporal of the Field, Mr. Hammond, the elder
Brother, Mr. Nicholas of Buckingham, Mr. Roberts of Kent, Mr. Perin, Mr.
Tresham, Mr. Mollinax, Mr. Winter, and his Brother, Mr. Wray, Mr. Miles
Herbert, Mr. Bradshaw, Captain Hall, and others.

Sir, I have set down the Names of these Gentlemen, to the end that if his
Majesty shall have cause to use their Service, it may please you to take notice
of them for very sufficient Gentlemen. The other five Ships staid at Trinidado,
having no other Port capable of them near Guiana. The second Ship was commanded
by my Vice Admiral Capt. John Pennington, of whom (to do him right) he is one
of the sufficientest Gentlemen for the Sea that England has. The third by Sir
Warham Saint-Legier, an exceeding valiant and worthy Gentleman. The fourth by
Sir John Fern. The fifth by Capt. Chidley of Devon. With these five Ships I
daily attended their Armada of Spain, which had they set upon us, our Force
divided, the one half in Orinoque 150 miles from us, we had not only been torn
in pieces, but all those in the River had also perished, being of no force at
all for Sea Fight. But we had resolved to be burnt by their sides, had the
Armada arrived: But belike they staid for us at Margaret, by which they knew we
must pass to the Indies. For it pleased his Majesty to value us at so little,
as to command me upon my Allegiance, to set down under my hand the Country, and
River by which I was to enter it; to set down the Number of my Men, and Burden
of my Ships, and what Ordnance every Ship carried: which being known to the
Spanish Ambassador, and by him unto the King of Spain, a dispatch was made, and
Letters sent from Madrid, before my departure out of the Thames. For his first
Letter, sent by a Barque of Advice, was dated the 19th of March, 1617. at
Madrid, which Letter I have here enclosed sent to your Honor; the rest I
reserve, not knowing whether they may be intercepted or not. The second by the
King, dated the second of May, sent also by a Colonel of Diego de Polonioque,
Governor of Guiana, Elderedo, and Trinidado. The third by the Bishop of
Perericho, and delivered to Polonioque, the 15th of July at Trinidado. And the
fourth was sent from the Farmer and Secretary of his Customs in the Indies. At
the same time by that of the Kings Hand sent by the Bishop, there was also a
Commission for the speedy Levying of 300 Soldiers, and ten Pieces of Ordnance,
to be sent from Portriche, for the Defense of Guiana. One 150 from Nueno Remo
de Grando, under the Command of Captain Anthony Musica; and the other 150 from
Portricho, to be conducted by Captain Francis Landio.

Now Sir, if all that have traded to the Indies since his Majesty's time, knew
that the Spaniards have flayed alive all the poor Men which they have taken,
being but Merchant Men, what Death and cruel Torment shall we expect, if they
conquer us? Certainly, they have hitherto failed grossly, being set out thence
as we were, both for Number, Time, and Place.

Lastly, To make an Apology for not working the Mine (though I know his Majesty
expected it, whom I am to satisfy as much as my self) having lost my Son and
my Estate in the Enterprise; yet it is true, that the Spaniards took more care
to defend the Passage leading unto it, than they did the Town, which by the
King's Instructions they might easily do, the Countries being Aspera and
Nemorosa.

But it is true, that when Capt. Kemish found the River low, and that he could
not approach the Banks in most places near the Mine by a mile, and where he
found a descent, a volley of Musket shot came from the Woods upon the Boat,
and slew two Rowers, hurt six others, and shot a valiant Gentleman of Capt.
Thornix, of which Wound he languisheth to this day. He, to wit, Capt. Kemish,
following his own Advice, thought it was in vain to discover the Mine; and he
gave me this for an Excuse at his return, That the Companies of English in the
Town of St. Thoma were not able to defend it against the daily and nightly
Assaults of the Spaniards; That the Passages to the Mines were thick and
unpassable Woods; and that the Mine being discovered, they had no Men to work
it, did not discover it at all. For it is true, the Spaniards having two Gold
Mines near the Town, the one possessed by Pedro Rodrigo de Paran, the second by
Harmian Frotinio, the third of Silver by Capt. Francisco, are useless for want
of Negroes to work them: For as the Indians cannot be constrained, by a Law of
Charles the 5th, so the Spaniards will not, nor can endure the labor of those
Mines, whatsoever the Bragadocio the Spanish Ambassador says. I shall prove
under the Proprietors hands, by the Custom-Book, and the King's Quinto, of
which I recovered an Ingot or two: I shall also make it appear to any Prince,
or State, that will undertake it, how easily those Mines, and five or six more
of them, may be possessed, and the most of them in those Parts, which have
never as yet been attempted by any, nor by any Passage to them, nor ever
discovered by the English, French, or Dutch. But at Kemish's return from
Orinoque, when I rejected his counsel and his course, and told him he had
undone me, and wounded my Credit with the King past recovery, he slew himself:
For I told him, seeing my Son was slain, I cared not if I had lost 100 more in
opening the Mine, so my Credit had been saved. For I protest before God, had
not Captain Whitney (to whom I gave more countenance than to all the Captains
of my Fleet) run from me at the Grenades, and carried another Ship with him of
Captain Woolastons, I would have left my Body at St. Thome, by my Sons, or have
brought with me out of that or other Mines, so much Gold Oar as should have
satisfied the King. I propounded no vain thing, what shall become of me I know
not. I am unpardoned in England, and my poor Estate consumed, and whether any
Prince will give me Bread or no, I know not. I would desire your Honor to hold
me in your good Opinion, to remember my Service to my Lord of Arundel and
Pembroke, to take some pity on my poor Wife, to whom I dare not write for
renewing her sorrow for her Son. And I beseech you to give a Copy of this to my
Lord Carew; for to a broken Mind, a sick Body, and weak Eyes, it is a torment
to write many Letters. I have found many things of Importance for discovering
the State and Weakness of the Indies, which if I live I shall hereafter impart
unto your Honor, to whom I shall remain a faithful Servant.

WALTER RALEIGH.


Whilst this Action of St. Thome was performed, and the Repulse in the way to
the Mine, Sir Walter staid at St. Point de Gallo the space of nine weeks, where
the unwelcome news was brought him of the loss of his Son, and the Defeat they
met with in their Design upon the Mine. However this ill News could not alter
the Resolutions of Sir Walter, of Returning to England, though he knew he
should meet with several Enemies there, who had by their Calumnies rendered the
Voyage nothing but a Design; and though several of his Men were for landing at
New Foundland. For if we may believe himself at the hour of his Death, the two
Noble Earls, Thomas of Arundel, and William of Pembroke, engaged him to return;
and Sir Walter was resolved, tho inevitable Danger threatened him, to keep his
Promise.

No sooner had they arrived upon the Coasts of Ireland, but the Taking and
Sacking of St. Thome, firing of the Town, and putting the Spaniards there to
the Sword (though in their own defense) was noised abroad in all parts, and was
by special Advertisment come unto the knowledge of Count de Gondamor: Who
thereupon desiring Audience of his Majesty, said he had but one word to say:
His Majesty much wondering what might be delivered in one word; when he came
before him, he only bawled out, Pirates, Pirates, Pirates. A very pretty short
Speech for an Ambassador. Whereupon his Majesty published his Royal
Proclamation, for the discovery of the Truth of Sir Walter Raleigh's
Proceedings, and the Advancement of Justice. But after all this Noise, Sir
Walter is not questioned for his Guiana Action. For it is believed, not
without very good Ground, that neither the transgression of his Commission, nor
any thing acted beyond the Line, where the Articles of Peace between the two
Crowns did not extend, could have in a legal course of Trial shortened his days.

When Sir Walter was arrived at Plymouth, Sir Lewis Steukly, Vice Admiral of
the County of Devon, seized him, being Commissioned by his Majesty to bring him
to London; which could add no Terror to a Person who could expect nothing less;
and was now forced to make use of all the Arts imaginable to appease his
Majesty, and defer his Anger. To which intent, Manowry, a French Quack at
Salisbury, gave him several Vomits, and an Artificial Composition, which made
him look ghastly and dreadful, full of Pimples and Blisters, and put the Cheat
upon the very Physicians themselves, who could not tell what to make of his
Urine (tho often inspected) being adulterated with a Drug in the Glass, that
turned, it even in their very hands, into an earthy humor of a blackish
color, and of a very offensive savor.

While he lay under this Politic disguise, he penned his Declaration and
Apology, which have sufficiently proved his honorable Designs in that Voyage,
and answered the little Calumnies of his Enemies. When he was brought to
London, he was permitted the Confinement of his own House: But finding the
Court wholly guided by Gondamor, he could hope for little Mercy; therefore he
wisely contrived the design of an Escape into France, which Sir Lewis Steuckley
betrayed. But the fate of Traitors pursued him, and brought him to a
Contemptible End, to dye a poor distracted Beggar in the Isle of Lindey, having
for a Bag of Money falsified his Faith, confirmed by the tie of the holy
Sacrament, (if we may give credit to Mr Howel, who has given us this Story;)
as also before the Year came about, to be found clipping the same very Coin in
the King's own House at White Hall, which he had received for a Reward of his
Perfideousness: for which, being condemned to be hanged, he was forced to sell
himself to his Shirt, to purchase his Pardon of two Knights.

King James was willing to sacrifice the Life of Sir Walter to the Advancement
of Peace with Spain, but not upon such Grounds as the Ambassador had designed:
for he desired a Judgment upon the pretended Breach of Peace, that by this
Occasion he might slily gain from the English an Acknowledgment of his Master's
Right in those Places, and hereafter both stop their Mouths, and quench their
Heat and Valor. Hence upon his old Condemnation (for having had experience
upon a former Trial, they cared not to run the hazard of a second) he was
sentenced: The old Judgment being only Averred against him; and from
Westminster Hall he was carried to the Gate House; and from thence the next
Morning to the Parliament-Yard, where he had the Favor of the Ax granted him.
But all Persons have wondered how that old Sentence, that had lain dormant
sixteen Years and upwards against Sir Walter, could have been made use of to
take off his Head afterward: Considering the then Lord Chancellor Verulam told
him positively, (as Sir Walter was acquainting him with that Proffer of Sir
William St. Geon for a Pecuniary Pardon, which might have been obtained for a
less Sum, than his Guiana Preparations amounted to) in these words: Sir, the
Knee Timber of your Voyage is Money; spare your Purse in this particular, for
upon my Life you have a sufficient Pardon for all that is passed already, the
King having under his Broad Seal made you Admiral of your Fleet, and given you
Power of the Martial Law over the Officers and Soldiers. It was the Opinion of
most Lawyers, that he, who by his Majesty's Patent, had power of Life and Death
over the Kings Liege People, should be esteemed or judged Rectus in Curia, and
free from all old Convictions. But Sir Walter has made the best Defense for
his Guiana Actions, in his Letter to his Majesty, which I have here inserted.

May it please your most excellent Majesty.
IF in my Journey outward bound, I had my Men murdered at the Island, and yet
spared to take Revenge. If I did discharge some Spanish Barques taken, without
spoil. If I did for bear all parts of the Spanish Indies, wherein I might have
taken twenty of their Towns on the Sea Coasts, and did only follow the
Enterprise I undertook for Guiana, where without any Directions from me a
Spanish Village was burnt, which was new set up within three miles of the Mine;
by your Majesty's favor, I find no Reason why the Spanish Ambassador should
complain of me. If it were lawful for the Spaniards to murder 26 Englishmen,
binding them back to back, and then cutting their Throats, when they had traded
with them a whole Month, and came to them on the Land without so much as one
Sword; and that it may not be lawful for your Majesty's Subjects, being charged
first by them, to repel Force by Force; we may justly say, O miserable English!
If Parker and Metham took Campeach and other Places in the Honduraes, seated in
the Heart of the Spanish Indies, burnt Towns, killed the Spaniards, and had
nothing said to them at their Return, and my self forbore to look into the
Indies because I would not offend; I may justly say, O miserable Sir Walter
Raleigh! If I spent my poor Estate, lost my Son, suffered by Sickness, and
otherwise a world of Miseries; if I have resisted with the manifest hazard of
my Life, the Robberies and Spoils which my Company would have made; if when I
was Poor, I might have made my self Rich; if when I had gotten my Liberty,
which all Men, and Nature it self do so much prise, I voluntarily lost it; if
when I was sure of my Life, I rendered it again; if I might elsewhere have sold
my Ship and Goods, and put 5 or 6000 Pound in my Pocket, and yet have brought
her into England. I beseech your Majesty to believe, that all this I have done,
because it should not be said to your Majesty, that your Majesty had given
Liberty and Trust to a Man whose End was but the Recovery of his Liberty, and
who had betrayed your Majesty's Trust. My Mutineers told me that if I returned
for England, I should be undone; but I believed in your Majesty's Goodness more
than in all their Arguments. Sure I am, that I am the first that being free,
and able to enrich my self, have embraced Poverty and Peril: And as sure I am,
that my Example shall make me the last. But your Majesty's Wisdom and Goodness
I have made my Judges, who have ever been, and shall ever be,

Your Majesty's most humble Vassal, WALTER RALEIGH.


But this Apology, though never so persuasive, could not satisfy Gondamor's
Rage, who was resolved to sacrifice the only Favorite left of Queen Elizabeth,
to the Spanish Interest: And who, as Osburn remarks, was the only Person of
Essex's Enemies that died lamented; and the only Man of Note left alive, that
had helped to beat the Spaniard in the Year 1588.

Upon Thursday the 29th of October. 1618. Sir Walter Raleigh was conveyed by the
Sheriffs of London to a Scaffold in the Old Palace at Westminster, where he was
executed about nine of the Clock in the Morning of the same Day, Whose
Confession and several Speeches there delivered, with his Gesture and
Behavior, were as follows.

His first appearance upon the Scaffold, was with a smiling Countenance
saluting the Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, with others of his Acquaintance
there present; when after a Proclamation of Silence by an Officer appointed, he
addressed himself to speak in this manner.

I desire to be born withal, because this is the third Day of my Fever: And if
I show any weakness, I beseech you attribute it to my Malady, for this is the
hour I look for it.

Then pawsing a while, directing himself toward a Window, where the Lord of
Arundel, and the Lord of Doncaster, with some other Lords and Knights sat,
with a loud Voice he said as follows:

I thank God of his infinite Goodness that he has sent me to dye in the sight
of so Honorable an Assembly, and not in Darkness. But by reason the place
where they sat was some distance from the Scaffold, that they could not easily
hear him, he said, I will strain my self, for I would willingly have your
Honors hear me. The L. of Arundel answered, We will come upon the Scaffold;
where after he had saluted every one of them severally, he began as follows:

As I said, I thank my God heartily that he has brought me into the light to
dye, and not suffered me to dye in the dark Prison of the Tower, where I have
suffered a great deal of Adversity, and a long Sickness; and I thank God that
my Fever has not taken me at this time, as I prayed God it might not.

There are two main Points of Suspicion that his Majesty has conceived against
me, wherein his Majesty cannot be satisfied, which I desire to clear and
resolve you in:

One is, That his Majesty has been informed that I have had some Plot with
France, and his Majesty had some Reason to induce him thereunto. One Reason
that his Majesty had to conjecture so, was, that when I came back from Guiana,
being come to Plymouth, I endeavored to go to Rochel; which was because I
would fain have made my Peace before I came to England. Another Reason was,
that upon my Flight I did intend to fly to France for saving of my Life, having
had some terror from above. A third Reason was, the French Agent's coming to
me; and it was reported I had Commission from the King of France.

But this I say, for a Man to call God to witness to a Falsehood at any time is
a grievous sin, and what shall he hope for at the Tribunal Day of Judgment? But
to call God to witness to a falsehood at the time of death, is far more grievous
and impious, and there is no hope for such an one. And what should I expect
that am now going to render an Account of my Faith? I do therefore call the
Lord to witness, as I hope to be saved, and as I hope to see him in his
Kingdom, which will be within this quarter of this hour, I never had any
Commission from the King of France, nor any Treaty with the French Agent, nor
with any from the French King; neither knew I that there was an Agent, or what
he was, till I met him in my Gallery at my Lodging unlooked for. If I speak not
true, O Lord, let me never come into thy Kingdom.

The second Suspicion was, That his Majesty has been informed; that I should
speak dishonourably and disloyally of him. But my Accuser was a base Frenchman,
a kind of a Chemical Fellow, one whom I knew to be Perfidious; for being drawn
into this Action at Winchester, in which my Hand was touched, and he being sworn
to secrecy over Night, revealed it in the Morning.

But in this I speak now, What have have I to do with Kings? I have nothing to
do with them, neither do I fear them: I have now to do with God, therefore to
tell a Lie now to get the Favor of the King were in vain. Therefore, as I hope
to be saved at the last Day, I never spoke dishonourably, disloyally, nor
dishonestly of the King; neither to this Frenchman, nor to any other; neither
had I ever in all my Life a thought of ill of his Majesty. Therefore I cannot
but think it strange, that this Frenchman being so base, so mean a Fellow,
should be so far credited; and so much for this Point. I have dealt truly, and
I hope I shall be believed. I confess, I did attempt to escape, and I did
dissemble and fain my self sick at Salisbury, but I hope it was no sin. The
Prophet David did make himself a Fool, and did suffer Spittle to fall upon his
Beard, to escape the hands of his Enemies, and it was not imputed to him as
sin; and I did it to prolong Time till his Majesty came, hoping for some
Commiseration from him.

I forgive this Frenchman, and Sir Lewis Steuckly, and have received the
Sacrament this Morning of Mr. Dean, and I do also forgive all the World. But
thus much I am bound in Charity to speak of this Man, that all Men may take
good heed of him: Sir Lewis Steuckley, my Kinsman and Keeper, has affirmed
that I should tell him, that I did tell my Lord Carew, and my Lord Doncaster of
my present Escape; but I protest before God, I never told Steuckly any such
thing, neither did I tell my Lord Carew, or my Lord Doncaster, of my pretended
Escape. It was not likely that I should acquaint two Privy-Counsellors of my
purpose; neither would I tell him, for he left me six, seven, eight, nine or
ten days to go where I listed, while he rode about the Country.

Again, he accused me, that I should tell him, that my Lord Carew, and my Lord
Doncaster would meet me in France: which was never my speech or thought.

Thirdly, He accused me, That I showed him a Letter, and that I should give him
10000 l. for my Escape: but cast my Soul into everlasting fire if ever I made
him offer of 10000 l. or 1000 l. but merely I showed him a Letter, that if he
would go with me, his Debts should be paid when he was gone; neither had I 1000
l. for if I had had so much, I could have done better with it, and made my
Peace otherwise.

Fourthly; When I came to Sir Edward Pelham, who had been sometimes a follower
of mine, who gave me good Entertainment; he gave out that I had received some
dram of Poison in Sir Edward Pelham's House: when I answered, that I feared no
such thing; for I was well assured of them in the House. Now God forgive him,
for I do, and desire God to forgive him: I will not only say God is the God of
Revenge, but I desire God to forgive him, as I hope to be forgiven.

Then he looked over his Note of Remembrance; Well (says he) thus far I have
gone; now a little more, and I will have done by and by.

It was told the King I was brought per force into England, and that I did not
intend to come again: Whereas Captain Charles Parker, Mr. Tresham, Mr. Leak,
and diverse others that knew how I was dealt withal, shall witness for me: for
the Common Soldiers (which were 150) mutined, and sent for me to come into the
Gun-Room to them, (for at that time they would not come to me) and there was I
forced to take an Oath, that I would not come into England till they would have
me, else they would cast me into the Sea and drown me; afterward they entered
my Cabin and set themselves against me. After I had taken this Oath, with Wine
and other things I drew the chiefest of them to desist, and at length persuaded
them to go into Ireland: Then would they have gone into the North parts of
Ireland, but I told them they were Redshanks: yet at last with much ado I
persuaded them to go into the South parts; promising to get their Pardons: but
was forced to give them 125 l. at Kinsale to bring them home, otherwise I had
never got from them.

There was a Report that I meant not to go to Guiana at all; and that I knew
not of any Mine, nor intended any such matter, but only to get my Liberty,
which I had not the wit to keep. But it was my full intent to go for Gold, for
the benefit of his Majesty, and those that went with me, with the rest of my
Countrymen: But he that knew the Head of the Mine, would not discover it when
he saw my Son was slain, but made himself away. Then he turned to my Lord of
Arundel and said, Being in the Gallery in my Ship at my Departure, Your Honor
took me by the hand, and said you would request me one thing, that was, That
whether I made a good Voyage or bad, yet I should return again into England;
when I made you a Promise, and gave you my Faith that I would: And so you did
(answered my Lord) it is true, they were the last words I spoke unto you.

Another Opinion was, that I carried to Sea with me 1600 Pieces, and that was
all the Voyage I intended, only to get Money into my Hands, and that I had
weighed my Voyage before: whereas I protest I had but 100 Pound in all the
World, whereof I gave 25 Pounds to my Wife: the Reason of this Speech was this;
there was entered 20000 Pound, and yet but 4000 Pound in the Surveyors Book;
now I gave my Bill for the other 16000 Pound for diverse Adventurers, but I
protest I had not a Penny of Money more than 100 Pound, as I hope to be saved.

Another Slander was raised, that I would have gone away from them and left
them at Guiana, but there were a great many of worthy Men that accompanied me
always, as my Sergeant Major George Raleigh, and diverse others (which he then
named) that knew my Intent was nothing so. And these be the Material Points I
thought good to speak of; I am now at this instant to render my Account to God,
and I protest as I shall appear before Him, this that I have spoken is true.

I will speak but a word or two more, because I will not trouble Mr. Sheriff
too long.

There was a Report spread, that I should rejoice at the Death of my Lord of
Essex, and that I should take Tobacco in his presence; when as I protest I shed
Tears at his Death, though I was one of the contrary Faction; and at the time
of his Death I was all the while in the Armory at the further end, where I
could but see him; I was sorry that I was not with him, for I heard he had a
desire to see me, and be reconciled to me. So that I protest I lamented his
Death, and good cause had I, for it was the worse for me as it proved, for
after he was gone I was little beloved.

And now I entreat you all to join with me in Prayer, that the great God of
Heaven, whom I have grievously offended, being a Man full of all Vanity, and
have lived a sinful Life, in all sinful Callings, having been a Soldier, a
Captain, a Sea-Captain, and a Courtier, which are all places of Wickedness and
Vice; that God (I say) would forgive me, and cast away my Sins from me, and
that he would receive me into everlasting Life. So I take my leave of you all,
making my Peace with God.

Then Proclamation being made that all Men should depart the Scaffold, he
prepared himself for Death, giving away his Hat and wrought Nightcap, and some
Money to such as he knew that stood near him: Taking his leave of the Lords,
Knights, and other Gentlemen, and among the rest taking his leave of the Lord
of Arundel, he thanked him for his Company, and entreated him to desire the
King, that no scandalous Writing to defame him might be published after his
Death; saying further unto him, I have a long Journey to go, and therefore will
take my leave.

Then putting off his Gown and Doublet, he called to the Headsman to show him
the Ax, which being not presently showed him, he said, I pray thee let me see
it* Do thou think that I am afraid of it? And having it in his hands, he felt
along upon the Edge of it, and smiling spoke to the Sheriff, saying, This is a
sharp Medicine, but it is a Physician for all Diseases. Then going to and fro
upon the Scaffold, on every side he prayed the Company to pray to God to assist
him and strengthen him.

And so being asked which way he would lay himself, on which side the Block, as
he stretched himself along and laid his Head on the Block, he said, So the
Heart be right, it is no matter which way the Head lies. And then praying,
after he had forgiven the Headsman, having given him a Sign when he should do
his Office, at two blows he lost both Head and Life, his Body never shrinking
nor moving. His Head was showed on each side of the Scaffold, and then put into
a Red-Leather Bag, and his wrought Velvet Gown thrown over it, which was
afterward conveyed away in a Mourning Coach of his Ladies.

The large effusion of Blood which proceeded from his Veins, amazed the
Spectators, who conjectured he had stock enough left of Nature to have
survived many years, tho now near fourscore years old.

He behaved himself at his Death with so High and so Religious a Resolution,
as if a Christian had acted a Roman, or rather a Roman a Christian: And by the
Magnanimity which was then conspicuous in him, he abundantly baffled their
Calumnies who had accused him of Atheism.

Various were the Resentments of his Death, and several Pasquils (as it always
happens on such Occasions) were scattered abroad.

Of the Gallantry of his Behavior on the Scaffold, these following Verses may
give a Confirmation, and a Taste of the Poetry of those Times.

Upon Sir Walter Raleigh's Execution and Death.
Great Heart! who taught thee so to die?
Death yielding thee the Victory.
Where took'st thou leave of Life? If here,
How could thou be so far from Fear?
But sure thou dyed'st, and quitd'st the state
Of Flesh and Blood, before that Fate.
Else what a Miracle were wrought
To triumph both in Flesh and Thought.
I saw in every Stander by
Pale Death, Life only in thy Eye.
Farewell; Truth shall this Story say,
We died, Thou only livd'st that Day.
Or if the Reader pleases, he may take this following Elegy, composed on the
same Subject, by a Sacred Wit of those times.

An ELEGY on Sir W. R.
I will not weep: for 'twere as great a sin
To shed a Tear for Thee, as to have bin
An Actor in thy Death. Thy Life and Age
Was but a various Scene on Fortunes Stage;
With whom Thou tugg'st and strov'st, even out of breath,
In thy long Toil, never mastered till thy Death;
And then, despite of Trains, and cruel Wit,
Thou did at once subdue Malice, and it.
I dare not then so blast thy Memory,
As to say I do lament or pity Thee.
Were I to choose a Subject to bestow
My Pity on* he should be one as low
In Spirit as Desert: That durst not dye,
But rather were content by Slavery
To purchase Life: Or would I pity those
Thy most industrious and friendly Foes,
Who when they thought to make Thee Scandals story,
Lent Thee a swifter Flight to Heaven and Glory.
They thought by cutting off some withered Days,
(Which thou could spare them) to eclipse thy Praise;
Yet gave it brighter Foil, made thy aged Fame
Appear more white and fair, than foul their Shame;
And did promote an Execution,
Which, but for them, Nature and Age had done.
Such worthless Things as these are only born
To live on Pities Alms, (too mean for Scorn.)
Thou dy'dst an env'ous Wonder, whose high Fate
The World must still admire, scarce imitate.
Thus died that Knight who was Spains Scourge and Terror, and Gondamor's
Triumph; whom the whole Nation pitied, and several Princes interceded for;
Queen Elizabeth's Favorite, and her Successors Sacrifice. A Person of so much
Worth and so great Interest, that King James would not execute him without an
Apology. One of such incomparable Policy, that he was too hard for Essex, was
the Envy of Leicester, and Cecil's Rival; who grew jealous of his Excellent
Parts, and was afraid of being supplanted by him. His Head was wished on the
Secretaries shoulders, and his Life valued by some at a higher rate than the
Infanta of Spain, though a Lady incomparably excelling in both the Gifts of
Mind and Body.

Authors are perplexed under what Topic to place him, whether of Statesman,
Seaman, Soldier, Chemist, or Chronologer; for in all these he did excel. He
could make every thing he read or heard his own, and his own he could easily
improve to the greatest Advantage. He seemed to be born to that only which he
went about, so Dexterous was he in all his Undertakings, in Court, Camp, by
Sea, by Land, with Sword, with Pen. Witness in the last, his History of the
World. History of Guiana. His Remains. Judicious and Select Essays, and
Observations on the first Invention of Shipping, the Misery of Invasive War,
the Navy Royal and Sea-Service, with his Apology for his Sea-Voyage to Guiana.
Wars with foreign Princes dangerous to our Commonwealth, or Reasons for
foreign Wars answered. An excellent Manuscript of the present State of Spain,
with a most Accurate Account of his Catholic Majesty's Power and Riches; with
the Names and Worth of the most considerable Persons in that Kingdom.


FINIS.
Books lately published.
THe Courtiers Calling: Showing the ways of making a Fortune, and the Art of
living at Court, according to Polity and Morality. In two Parts. The First
concerning Noblemen; The Second concerning Gentlemen. By a Person of Honor.
Price bound 1 s. 6 d.

Don Carlos, Prince of Spain, a Tragedy, as it is Acted at the Duke's Theater.
Written by Thomas Otway. Price 1 s.

Titus and Berenice, a Tragedy, as it is Acted at the Duke's Theater, with a
Farce, called the Cheats of Scapin. Written by Tho. Otway. Price 1 s.

The Portugal History; or, A Relation of the Troubles that happened in the
Court of Portugal, in the Years 1667, and 1668: In which is to be seen that
great Transaction of the Renunciation of the Crown, by Alphonso the Sixth; The
Dissolution of his Marriage with the Princess Maria Frances Isabella of Savoy;
The Marriage of the same Princess to his Brother, the Prince Don Pedro, now
Regent of the Realm of Portugal; And the Reasons alleged at Rome for the
Dispensation thereof. By S.P. Esquire. Price bound 1 s. 6 d.

The Art of making Love; or, Rules for the Conduct of Ladies and Gallants in
their Amors. Price bound 1 s.

Antony and Cleopatra, a Tragedy, as it is acted at the Duke's Theater.
Written by the Honorable Sir Charles Sedley, Baronet; in 4to. Price 1 s.

A Treatise concerning Statutes, or Acts of Parliament: And the Exposition
thereof. Written by Sir Christopher Hatton, late Lord Chancellor of England.
Price bound 1 s.

Published this Term.
Circe, a Tragedy, as it is acted at his Royal Highnesses the Duke of York's
Theater. Written by Charles Davenant, L. L. D. in 4to. Price stitcht 1 s.

All sold by R: Tonson, at his Shop under Grayes-Inne-Gate, next
Grayes-Inne-Lane.


