(...): OR The TIMES of RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS, WITH THEIR Near Approach
upon the RUIN OF THE BEAST.

MANIFEST By two Tracts on Rev. 20.5. and Rev. 21.5. Containing the main Scope
of all Revelation Prophecy: Upon both which our former whole work is, now by
Divine Disposal, become a very Useful Commentary. 1. For Explication. 2.
Confirmation. 3. Illustration and Application. As will after more appear.

Which said two last Tracts may fitly be Entitled An Alarm to this present
World, Bidding adieu to all wicked Grandeur, and all sinful enjoyments thereof:
Not of 120 years as Noah's, but now of about 20 years in a fit latitude, upon
many weighty Scriptural Considerations, following. Therefore, First, I. Lay not
up for your selves Treasure upon Earth, Mat. 6.19. II. Kiss the Son least he be
angry and ye perish from the way, Psalm. 2. III. Make to your selves friends of
the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye fail they may receive you into
everlasting Habitations, Luke 16.9. And that ye may not hear Christ say to you,
Go ye cursed, for I was hungry and ye fed me not, etc. Mat. 25. IV. Seek first,
chiefly, constantly, the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, Mat. 6.33.


By William Sherwin, Minister of the Gospel.

London, Printed in the Year 1675.

Clauis abstrustoris SS.ti Euangelij partis opera et vigilijs Guilielmi Sherwin
ejusdem ministri et assidui, quibusdam abhinc annis, ind agatoris excusa,
tandemque propitio (...) et hominum adjuuamine hucusque Ecclesice vsui prolata,
jamque dicata. Cujus effigies ^^em praefigitur Anno: Dom: 1672o. Annoque
Aetatis 65o.



The Contents of the ensuing Treatise.
1. THe Parallels of the Text, Rev. 21.5. with Acts 3.19, 20, 21. in four
respects.

2. Is showed how the first Bodily Resurrection of the Saints is their inlet
into that happy state of the 1000 years Reign, etc.

3. Some Questions Answered, showing 1. That all Saints deceased until then
shall arise, and not Martyrs only: of which seven Reasons are given.

2. Who are the rest of the dead that rise not till the said 1000 years be
finished, and that they are many ways distinguished from the former.

3. Such Texts of Scripture answered, as seem to speak of one Resurrection, and
one Judgment, and that at once not so distant; whence it may appear that it is
a Divine Rule from Christ's Revelation, chapter 20. that those last things, viz.
concerning Resurrection and Judgment, are from thence to be surely resolved, in
what was not so resolved before in other Scriptures, for sundry reasons.

4. Some Answers to other Questions, to remove some difficulties upon former
mistakes, and to make way for the clearer handling of that Text of Gods
Renovation of all things; and reasons why the last Judgment, chapter 20.11. to the
end, is set before the said Renovation, and the New Heavens and New Earth,
which are proved to be in time 1000 years before: with the consideration of the
dependency which the three last ch have upon chapter 19. wherein the general heads
of them are briefly hinted; with diverse pertinent observations in the
explication thereof: and that chapter 20. is especially to be considerdered as the
Table of the good times, as chapter 11. to v. 15. was of the bad times: with many
other matters affording much light to many things in those four last chapter
preparatory to the Text.

5. The Consideration of Gods declared Renovation in the Text, with its
Illustrations and Confirmations.

6. The Explication thereof, showing what it is, and wherein the said
Renovation consists three ways.

1. Negatively, That it is not Gods making a new material frame of the World,
etc.

2. Positively, What it is: and that two ways. 1. By Gods removal of the evils
brought into the world by Sin, Satan, and wicked men: as the Curse, Corruption,
Bondage, Enmity, etc. 2. Positively, By making Prophetical New Heavens and
New-Earth, viz. in what is to be renewed or restored by and for Christ, with
his said Saints the Lambs Wife at that great solemnity, etc. according to
former Predictions, Promises or Covenants agreeing with Divine Revelations,
concerning the same in sundry particulars, etc.


7. Many Scriptural Explications setting forth what the said times of
Renovation are, upon several accounts decyphering the same in many parts and
portions thereof, and what Scriptures chiefly manifest the near approach of the
said times, and how they do it, in sundry computations in Old and New Testament.

8. The Use and Improvement of all to several purposes.

1. To discover the manifold errors and mistakes concerning this Text and
Context.

2. To set footh, 1. The Excellency. 2. The Usefulness: And consequently the
great and weighty Reasons for the studying of this sacred Book: and especially,
in regard we have in a fit latitude from thence the ends of two great
Mysteries: first of Mystery Babylon, and her great Mystery of Iniquity: and
secondly, the finishing of the great Mystery of God, etc. The former many ways
pointed out, and especially by her ending term of 666. as by the wisdom of the
holy Scripture [for diverse reasons it appears to be not from Christ's Birth but
by a necessary addition of the whole number of one thousand [for other reasons]
to begin from his Ascension, as we published twice, An. 1665. as follows etc.

3. And after some reference to other former improvements in former parcels: A
Use of Admonition to all sorts, to beware of insnaring themselves in the too
eager persuit of worldly affairs and projects: 2. To sit loose from them: 3. To
do good with them whilst they are theirs; viz. only for a short time.

4. To exhort all that bear the name of Christ upon them from the consideration
of the near approach of the said times, as Esa. 1. to be very watchful and
diligent: 1. To cease from evil: 2. To learn to do well: which that they may
perform, they must be very industriovs in the use of all good means to be
madegooad, that they may be able acceptably to do good, and that they may be
capable of all kind of promised good here, in the world to come, at the said
times of Renovation of all things, and thence-forward unto all Eternity.

An Addition to our former Comprisal and Systeme of Promised Mercies, etc.
WHereas our former whole Work of this Nature (as we said) is now by Divine
disposal become a very Useful Commentary to Explain, Confirm, and Illustrate,
etc. what of these Divine Mysteries is contained or briefly couched in our two
last Tracts on Rev. 20.5. of the Saints bodily Resurrection, whereby they will
be made capable of the happiness of Christ's Davidical Kingdom, and also in
this Tract upon Rev. 21.5. which sets forth the particularities making up the
happiness thereof: It being the main scope of all Revelation Prophecy (after
the suffering times of the Church are over) to point out in their due order the
fulfillings of the most ancient Promises and Covenants made to and with the
faithful Forefathers, for themselves and their Spiritual Seed, etc. then to
take place; being (as we observed formerly) that excellent use of our Saviors
said Divine Key in the four last Chapters of this Book: Wherefore we prefixed
to the former Tract, our Comprisal and System, to illustrate these matters,
with the Picture of the said Divine Key, p. 63, and 64. of the same, which are
also as much to be looked to in this, because they both stand upon the same
Foundations (as we hope sound and judicious Christians will be much by this
Tract helped farther to discern) for Divine Gospel Truths of this nature are
not slightly to be passed over, but seriously pondered by all such, as
containing now in these times more Mercy and Divine Grace in them than the
world is aware of; because they have been formerly less discovered, and their
times more remote, but are now near approaching (as we hope to many such may
hereby be made manifest) etc.

Now that our former said whole work may be really found thereunto more
subservient, we shall here add unto the said Comprisal of the same work,
somewhat more particularly to point out what therein serves chiefly, 1. For
Explication. 2. For Confirmation. 3. For Illustration and Application.

1. For Explication chiefly serve, our Key by many Distinctions, and short
Assertions referring to many parts thereof, with the Account next following,
and all Summaries of these Dectrines, as the Letter of Nov. 3.63. in the Prodr.
with 16 Divine Theses in the Iren and the Addition there, to which belongs the
Treatise on Genesis 3.15. also the two Folded Leaves at the end thereof, and all
other Letters and Papers in the Prodr. which with the Scheme thereof and
Parallels, give much light to the Book of Revelation, and also what in the
Irenicon is said upon the 4, and 5, chapter which considered with the Book of
Parallels of Daniel and the Revelation do jointly give the greatest light to
regulate men's minds in these Mysteries, and from whence (amongst many others)
the strongest Confirmations may be drawn, (as in part was showed in our
Account) and the want of some competent light therein makes some persons
strangly averse from such Truths, which otherwise (I believe) would not be so,
etc. And also for Explication much serve the 31. Useful Observations after the
Tract on Rev. 22.20. whereby may be observed how the Spirit of God has
Divinely couched matters of this nature in holy Scripture, etc. with other
things following: Also the Paper of the Jews and Israelites great Restoration,
Printed May 1.74. and much also for Explication serve the three former
Practicals upon 1. Rev. 22.20. the ground whereof, See Assert. 6. of our Key,
and of Genesis 3.15. in the 17th Assert. and upon Jer. 3.17. the ground of which
is from the 14th Assertion.

2. For Confirmation chiefly serve first the seven Foundations in the Contents
of the Ireni^, and in the two first leaves of the Abridgment of the same, also
that happy and glorious state of Christ's said Kingdom is confirmed by the 12
Foundations of the Faith thereof from the beginning of the Holy Scriptures to
the end: which is also farther again confirmed in many particularities thereof
in the 8 Convincing Arguments in the Word written, occasionally drawn up.

1. Because the Holy Scripture sets down many things to be at the beginning,
and in the time, and after the end of the said thousand years Reign of Christ
with his Saints: of which, 36. Particulars are specified, Arg. 1.

2. Because many such things in the Old Testament respecting the same time and
state are by Christ and his Apostles so explained in the New Testament.

3. Because those times and things belonging to them are so stamped and marked
out by the Spirit of God in the Old Testament, which have also their
Explications and Confirmations in the New Testament, respecting the same times
and things.

4. Because concerning them both the Apostle Peter divinely teaches us, Acts
3.20, 21. [That God has spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets since the
world began] which is largely proved chapter 5, 6, 7, 8, etc. of the Irenicon,
which Testimonies are again quoted in the Treatise on Genesis 3.15.

5. Because they are especially confirmed by the double Testimony of Daniel,
and the Revelation, as is abundantly manifest by the Parallels of both Books.

6. Not here to mention any more: Because Christ has encouraged all his
Overcomers in all the suffering times [until the said happy peaceful times
shall come] with many special Promises of things to be enjoyed by them in the
said state, as by the 7th Argument is manifest.

All which Grounds and Arguments may be abundantly sufficient to all such unto
whom God shall give Faith to believe them: but in the mean time, those that do
not, or will not, cannot be able to overthrow the strength of them: But I hope
serious and judicious Christians will upon due and impartial consideration of
them, judge them too weighty to be neglected or disregarded.

3. For Illustration and Application of these Doctrines all the 5 said
Practicals on several Subjects and Texts, as Genesis 3.15. Rev. 22.20. Jer. 3.17.
with these two last also on Rev. 20.5. and Rev. 21.5. may sufficiently and
aptly serve, etc. and do not only much illustrate the Doctrines of the said
state and times, but point out many excellent Uses of them.

It may here (happily) be advantageous to some to hint at least in what way God
has been graciously pleased to lead us to these last great Discoveries in
these two last Treatises, as first by two Principles laid by a Reverend and
truly Religious Person, Mr. H. P. then my Tutor, when I was about 20 years of
age, who was much owned and honored in his time, etc. viz. First, That many
great Promises, such as Es. 60. and others like, were neither yet fulfilled,
nor were to be interpreted only in a spiritual sense, but would be literally
fulfilled in their time. Secondly, By informing me of what Mr. Mede had then
lately written, on Rev. 20. to be in the 1000 years which was owned in the
Primitive times, which occasioned me to look into things of that nature diverse
years following; but about 30 years after, when I had left the University, I
was so taken up in the work of my Ministry, and especially in the latter part
thereof, in Preaching, Expounding, Catechizing, public Fasts, etc. so that all
that time I had little freedom for such an intense business, when by a double
necessity, I being very much then spent, was then laid aside: But in that my
Retirement I began again to reassume my former notions, and pursue them, about
Anno Dom. 1662.

1. By that Essay in my Irenicon, to prove that such a Kingdom of Christ would
be, from the seven Foundations therein, in that method set down chapter 1. which
was after altered by the discovering that Christ's Reign being in the great day
of Judgment would be personal, etc. For in searching such Mysteries it was hard
to keep any set Method then and all parts after were occasional, not first
intended: to which I first added those occasional Letters and Papers in the
Prodromus, to give light to the order of Revelation Prophecy; to supply the
want of which and of the Abridgment of the Rev. on chapter 5. in the Irenic. we
framed the Scheme of the whole Rev. and Summary of Dan. in one sheet, of very
great use, when many hundred of both, Prod. and Irenic. were burnt, An. Dom.
1666. and of the Parallels, from which, with the Abridgment of Daniel, was the
Book of Parallels framed, suiting to the 5th chapter of the Irenicon, which I found
to be of exceeding great use both to ground and regulate all such studies ever
since: After these I was diverse years stopped in my proceeding by the loss of
two Coppies of the two first Practicals on Genesis 3.15. and Rev. 22.20. until I
was forced by an unexpected Law-sute to continue some time in London, about An.
Dom. 70. I then again (as I had formerly) found so much encouragement and
engagement, both from God, and many Honorable, Learned, Religious and Worthy
Persons of several Ranks and Conditions, to proceed in these Studies, that
thereupon I drew up the 12 said foundations of Faith, and published the same,
with the said 8 Convincing Argument, containing the substance of the chief
Argumentative parts of all the former: Unto which, the Tract on Jer. 3.17. was
added, to explain the Distinction from Scripture of the two New Jerusalems, or
the two fold state of New Jerusalem then for the raised, and then converted
Saints of one happy Communion, on Rev. 21. gloriously described the Great,
Holy, and Beloved Jerusalem, which, as the Apostle says, Heb. 11. God is the
Maker and Builder of, which has Foundations, upon its Inhabitants coming down
from God out of Heaven, which will by the immediate hand of God be made for the
Forefathers then which Abraham expected, and for all that die in the Faith
till Christ's second coming without sin to Salvation, v. 10, 16, 39, 40.
Secondly, The other, that Jerusalem to be built by men, whose Walls Strangers
and their Kings, says the Prophet Esaias, shall build, (probably) that described
in the 9 last chapter of Ezekiel, for the then Converted and Reduced Jews,
Israelites and Gentiles coming in, in the natural life, which Rev. 21. are
called the Nations of them that are saved, walking in the light of the other
said great, holy, and beloved new Jerusalem: wherein are those fifteen
well-approved Reasons, why it will be then in the world suited wonderfully to
the condition of the then raised Saints.

And lastly, from those gradual Discoveries in all the other parts and parcels
by the superaboundant Grace of God to so weak and unworthy an Instrument, we
more lately obtained that great Discovery of the main Scope of all
Revelation-Prophesie, in the 4 last Chapters of the Revelation, as the Divine
Key left by Jesus Christ for his Church, opening that state of the 1000 years,
to be the fulfilling of the most ancient Promises, Mercies, and Covenants made
to the faithful Fathers and their spiritual Seed, then in both their said
conditions, etc. which we have here, according to Grace received, endeavored
further to open and explain in this last Treatise also: commending the same
with all the former in our Prayers to his blessing for the benefit of all true
Believers, who only have interest in all Gospel-consolations, whether laid down
in Holy Scriptures more evidently or more mysteriously, whose Servant I more
especially profess my self to be in this their so great concernment, and of the
Great Lord and Master of us all, the Lord Jesus Christ.

William Sherwin.

Revel. 21.5. And he that sat upon the Throne said, Behold, I make all things
new: And he said unto me, write, for these words are true and faithful.


WE now being to consider in our present proceeding, that great, gracious, and
glorious work of God's renovation of all things in reference to the said
Kingdom of Christ to fill up those times reserved for those mercies belonging
to that state and world. We shall still therefore refer the Reader to the
serious perusal of our said Comprisal and System in reference to this also, as
being a Subject standing upon the same foundations (as was said,) The
Declaration whereof is so gloriously illustrated by him that is said to sit
upon the Throne, as in the Text.

As our blessed Savior did first in his lifetime doctrinally teach many
things concerning that state and world, which the children of the Resurrection
should then be counted worthy of (as we showed from Luke 20.35, 36.) and
afterward very punctually explained his said Doctrine in many particulars in
the Revelation, respecting the same in the order of accomplishment.

1. Even so the Spirit of God guided the Apostle Peter, Acts 3.19, 20, 21. to
teach diverse things concerning the times of restitution of all things, which
our Savior here has as punctually in this Revelation of the renovation of all
things also explained, concerning that time in the order of accomplishment;
when God (as in this Text) will make all things new; for all the links in the
Chain of Revelation-Prophesies have their unalterable measures of their
proportioned times, many ways through Divine wisdom and goodness accommodated
to the benesit and happiness of the Church of Christ in the world, until all
promised mercies be fully performed in the issue: Wherefore so much reference
is made to the Prophets to the end of that Divine Book, as is very observable.

2. As the Apostle Peter particularly teaches, that the Heavens must receive
Christ until those times of restitution of all things. So Christ in the
Revelation order places those times upon his own coming from the right hand of
his Father to destroy the Beast and false Prophet, and of the Resurrection of
the said Saints to reign with him, Chap. 19. and 20.

3. As the same Apostle informs us further, that God has spoken of these
times, not things (as Beza well notes on that Text) by the mouth of all his
holy Prophets since the world began: So here the Prophets are not only referred
unto, and often mentioned upon these accounts, but the particulars are
therefore many times asserted to be true and faithful, as being before foretold
or promised in the Writings of the Prophets.

4. As the said Apostle uses that expression of them (...), the times of the
restitution of all things; and using that Decompound word, that fitly denotes a
placing things in order out of a discomposed state of them: so pointing out the
particularities to be renewed in those times, wherein both the ancient
Prophesies and the said Revelation-key do both concur and agree, the last
giving both clearness and evidence to the former: only in this said Key of
Christ's, we have the last promised mercy of Christ's Kingdom as the Son of
David. First, set down, as being the chief thing, which all the rest serve to
make to make up, into the possession whereof the Resurrection of all his Saints
which he brings with him as his Spouse or new Jerusalem coming down from God
out of Heaven, Rev. 21.9. is the Inlet (as we noted) to bring them into a
capacity to partake of in such restitution of all things; so speaking first of
that restoring the Kingdom to Israel, as Acts 1.6. or raising up David's
Tabernacle, Acts 15. and then speaking of the said new Jerusalem. Chap. 21.
which contains the Marriage of the Lamb, spoken of Chap. 19.7. wherein will
also be that Paradise of God in that state, and the pure River and Tree of
Life, Chap. 22. and all these in the times of the new Heavens and new Earth,
when God will, as in this Text, make all things new.

Quest. But here a Question may arise, which it may be requisite to resolve at
present, viz. If the said Resurrection be such an Inlet to the said Saints to
enjoy the happiness of that state, why are only the Martyrs that suffered death
for Christ here said to live and reign with him the 1000 years, as some have
conceived?

Ans. It is true, that Chapter 20.4. speaks only of two sorts of
Revelation-Martyrs, as was answered to the cry of those Souls under the Altar,
Rev. 6.10. to whom it was said, that they should rest till their
fellow servants and brethren should be killed: the Souls are there said to be
(...), of such as were before beheaded under the red Dragon in the Pagan
Persecutions of the Sts. but those that were called (...), the fellow servants
and Brethren after to be killed, were such as suffered since under the Beast,
as Chapter 20.4. describes them; of which, though very many suffered death, yet not
all: neither are they only Martyrs of Christ that suffer death actually, but
all such as have had a willingness and resolution of mind to suffer for Christ,
if called to it, are reckoned by him for Martyrs; and though others have
suffered in a less degree than death, yet are also to be counted such. We know
Ishmael's mocking of Isaac, is called Persecution by the Apostle; and all the
Saints have suffered one way or other for God and Christ; for which cause they
are all to be esteemed Martyr, as they have been sufferers under the Beast, or
under any other Persecutors in any times before, and that all suffering Sts.
deceased before the time of the Beast shall also rise at the first said
Resurrect. of the just, when both the Martyrs blood will be avenged, as Deuteronomy.
33.42, 43. and they all rewarded, as may from these following considerations be
made to appear.

1. Because when Christ comes he will come with all such his said Saints,
whether they have actually suffered death for him, or othertherwise, as the
Apostle speaks expressly 1 These. 3.13. with Zech. 14.5. He comes with all his
Saints. And again, says he, All that then sleep in Jesus, will God bring with
him, 1 These. 4.14. namely, to raise their bodies from the dead: the Scripture
then is clear for the resurrection of all then.

Secondly, That parallel Text, Rev. 11.18. that respects the time and occasion
of judging the Saints, viz. with a Judgment of reward or recompense at Christ's
appearance, makes a full enumeration of all sorts to be then rewarded, of Old
Testament Saints or sufferers, as well as of the New; yea, of all Saints in
that capacity, as sufferers; and Prophets, as well as Apostles, and even all
that fear Gods Name, both sinall and great, shall then have their peculiar
reward, though in the natural life then (which I conceive is meant of the last
sort of all such as are said to fear Gods Name:) So says Christ then, Behold,
I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give to every one according to his
works. But all deceased Saints are then made capable of their proper reward in
that state they rise into, by the first bodily Resurrection, viz. to reign with
Christ the 1000 years in his Davidical Kingdom.

Thirdly, In Chapter 21.2. When the new Jerusalem comes down from God out of
Heaven; which v. 9. is called the Lambs wife, as containing all the Spirits of
just men made perfect upon that Resurrection to be united to their own bodies
to inhabit that City which God himself then makes for them, when that great
Voice says, Behold, the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with
them, etc. Now that Jerusalem will contain all those raised Saints which had
died before, and it will be the general privilege of them all which God had
given to Christ that they shall behold his glory which his Father has given
him in his said Kingdom, John 17.24.

Fourthly, All Saints that have lived in suffering times, as all times, have
been and will be from Abels death to the Saints said Resurrection; who as they
have suffered with or for Christ from the world and Devil; so all such
sufferers, says the Apostle, shall then reign with him, 2 Timothy 2.12. and they
must all first rise bodily, before they can be capable of reigning with him in
that state, or of enjoying the promised mercies belonging thereunto.

Fifthly, All the 24 Elders, and the four living Wights which represent the
whole Church of Christ, Rulers and People, exult aforehand, Revel. 5.10. that
in the issue of Revelation-prophesie, they shall reign upon earth, who
acknowledge themselves to be such as Christ has redeemed by his blood out of
every kindred, tongue and people, and Nation, who shall have their part with
Christ in the sure mercies of David, according to the promise Esa. 55.3. which
they must be made capable of by the said first Resurrection.

Sixthly, All Christ's overcomers since the Revelation-prophesie began to take
place in all that is said there shortly to be done, that is in the due order of
times to be accomplished: they are all encouraged by something belonging, to
the Jerusalem state, which only by the said Resurrection they attain to their
shares; as is particularly manifest in our seventh convincing Argument in the
Word written: now all faithful Christians are Overcomers, though they suffer
not death, as those said Martyrs, Rev. 6.9, 10, 11. but only by lesser trials.

Seventhly, Christ who is appointed by the Father then to be heir of all
things, promises in special to each Overcomer without exception, that he shall
also inherit all things with him, v. 7. which privilege belongs to all Saints,
as the Spouse of Christ, or Lambs wife; and therefore belongs to them as
Saints, to which purpose says St. Paul, If children, then heirs, and
joynt-heirs which Christ, which without the Resurrection they cannot enjoy, no
more than the separate Spirits of good men enjoy them now.

Quest. If Christ to the said purpose bring all the Saints with him, to raise
their dead bodies that they may reign with him the 1000 years, how are the rest
of the dead said not to live again till the 1000 years are ended, ver. 5. are
not some of those called the rest of the dead Saints, at least, I say, some of
them?

Answ. All Saints that died in the suffering times before Christ's coming, he
then brings with him, to raise them to reign with him; but such Saints as live
or die afterward, seem not to be in that rank or capacity; but at last when
Christ descends with a shout, and the voice of an Archangel, will in a moment
be rapt to meet him, and be changed with all other Saints raised before, 1 Cor.
15.51, 52. it is twice there asserted by the Apostle, and we shall all be
changed; and the wicked then to be raised after them at the last Trump, seem to
be some of those called before the rest of the dead that lived not again till
the 1000 years are finished: and the former raised suffering Saints are many
ways distinguished in Scriptures from the other Saints. First, they are
expressly termed all such as slept in Jesus before that his coming, when the new
Jerusalem comes down from God out of Heaven, etc. 1 These 4.14. Secondly, they
are distinguished by their sufferings for Christ in the former suffering times,
upon which account they must reign with him (as was said.) Thirdly, the
Scripture describes them by the meek that have a promise to inherit the earth,
and delight themselves in the abundance of peace, Psalm. 37. which yet is not
fulfilled, but our Savior says, shall be, Matthew. 5.5. Meek Moses, Abraham,
Jacob, David, yea, Christ himself, and all his Martyrs so killed, as was said,
Rev. 6.10, 11. as meek Lambs were led to the slaughter, etc. who neither
inherited the earth, but were pilgrims and strangers in it; nor much less
delighted themselves in the abundance of peace therein, etc. But as for all
other Saints that shall live in the following peaceable happy times, and all
that die before the last Trump, and that live then, shall enjoy the benefit of
that promise, who were not numbered with the former sufferers in the suffering
times; but yet as the Seed of Shem and Japhet, or of Abraham's or David's
spiritual Seed at least, if not of their natural race also (as many of the
converted Jews and Israelites will then be) shall all enjoy their proper
portion by promise and Covenant: whence the Apostle seems to call redemption of
the Saints bodies (especially Gentiles) the receiving of the Adoption, even the
redemption of their bodies, viz. by the first said Resurrection, Romans 8.23. and
such as these that shall die in those future happy peaceable times, the same
Apostle seems to intend by those dead in Christ, that shall rise first, 1 These.
4. though in a general sense it is true likewise of those that rise at the said
first Resurrection: but I conceive the particular intent of that Text respects
the later sort of the Saints last raised at the general rapture and change at
the last Trump.

Object. But are not the Resurrections of good and bad joined together both in
Old and New Testament, and both are said to arise to Judgment, as that noted
Text Dan. 12.2, 3. where some are said to awake to life, and some to shame and
everlasting contempt; and our Savior also joins them both, John 5.29. They
that have done good shall come forth of the Grave to the resurrection of life,
and they that have done evil to the resurrection of Damnation.

Answ. As for Dan. 12. that seems particularly to respect the restoration of
Israel, as appears by the end of the former Chapter, concerning Gogs the Turks
destruction, spoken of also Ezekiel 38, and 39. who then shall come to his end,
and none shall help him, when Daniels people shall be delivered, Chap. 12.1.
and ver. 2. it is only said many shall then awake, viz. out of the dust of
their dispersion and bondage, like the dry bones, Ezekiel. 37. but not said all,
which should have been said, if all, good and bad were to be raised as at a
general Resurrection (as some use to speak) and whereas that Text speaks of
turning many to righteousness, which will not be done at any general
Resurrection, but is to be done at such Civil Resurrection of Jews and
Israelites to own a Righteousness of Justification by faith in Christ which
they did not before: and the wise that are there said to do it, are in the
Original said to be Teachers, which cannot be supposed to do any such thing for
any upon such general Resurrection, when all time of Grace will be past, from
the death of all that were not converted before; for, as the tree falls so it
will lie, etc. But if it were granted that this Text, and that of John 5. and
many otherlike Texts did comprise both first and second Resurrection, to the
first and second acts of both said Judgments of the great day (as Jude was
directed by the Spirit of God to style it) and our Savior in a general sense
speaks there of both; for ver. 27. he says, the Father had given him Authority
to execute Judgment, because he is the Son of man: and as the Father gave him
the Son to have life in himself to raise the dead in sin spiritually, ver. 26.
so he had power also hereafter to raise both good and bad out of the graves
bodily to Judgment. For answer whereunto and many like passages in Scripture,
we are to consider that many such Texts deliver only some general truths of the
whole Doctrine delivered in this Book by our Savior more fully and
particularly concerning both the said Resurrections and Judgments with what is
to be known of matters to intervene betwixt both, which are always to be
referred to such future explications of them, as the holy Spirit has from time
to time given forth to any of Christ's servants to make further known; for the
Doctrines of these last things have been made known but by degrees. Of the
first Resurrection, Esai. 26. spoke darkly, showing the Heathen Tyrants that
oppressed the Jews were dead, they should not live, they were deceased, they
should not rise; ver. 14. but Gods Saints should live, and with his dead body
they should arise, ver. 19. which (with other Texts in our Treatise on Rev.
20.5.) could not be understood without Christ's Revelation of the first bodily
Resurrection of the Sts. there decyphered in many particulars, at what time, to
what ends, how long before the rest of the dead, as was showed: and so for
Judgment, after God had at the fall declared, the Seed of the woman [so to be
true man, and only of the woman, and not of the man, and so was to be
necessarily the Son of God;] that is, God to be manifest in the flesh; which is
the first part of that great Mystery, which was 4000 years in carrying on, to
lay the sure foundation of breaking the Serpents head at his first coming: that
by the Judgment of the great Day, he might break it 1. eminently at the first,
and 2. totally and finally at the last Judgment: the next ancient Prophecy for
removing the power of Satan, etc. was given to Enoch in the old World, recorded
by Jude, ver. 13, 14. concerning Christ's coming to Judgment, which has direct
reference to Daniels Vision of the first Session of Judgment at the destruction
of the Beast, Dan. 7. which our Savior confirms and explains in part, Rev.
11.18. and Rev. 19. but Daniel speaks not there of the last general Judgment,
that is left for Christ to do, Rev. 20.11. to the end 1000 years and more after
the former: and hence as Daniel of the said first act had said, The Judgment
was set, and 2dly the books were opened: and the Apostle Paul who had much of
these mysteries revealed to him, tells us, 3. Christ would judge the quick,
viz. temporal destruction; and 4. the dead Saints with reward (as was showed)
and so says the Apostle, Christ will judge the quick and dead at his appearance
and Kingdom, in 2 Timothy 4.1. and all these four marks of that part of Judgment
are the proper Characters of the Judgments of the said great Day, which belong
also to the last Judgment above 1000 years after Daniels, as Rev. 20.11. to the
end, after the last Gog and Magog shall be destroyed: and here we find not any
of these marks of that Judgment at any other time when the Old World or Sodom
and Gomorrah were destroyed, though these are both in some respects made
patterns of the other by our Savior, Luke 17. Sodom and Gomorrah probably of
the first when many terrible Judgments will find out many sorts of wicked men,
etc. and the other a pattern of the general destruction of the world by fire,
as the other was by a Deluge of Water. Jerusalems first and second destructions
are also patterns, and the Pagan-Idolators and Persecutors destruction, which
is set forth like a day of Judgment, Rev. 6.12. to the end; and so in that
large description of the desolation of the Churches enemies, Esai. 34.
throughout the whole Chapter: but in none of these or any other do we find
these four Characters peculiar to the Judgments of the said great Day; but only
in Dan. 7. and Rev. 20. we read of many excellent points Christ informed such
as lived in the visible Church, or such as have to do with his Servants there;
as by him that had not the Wedding garment, Matthew. 22.11. showing that nothing
will serve Professors, but being by faith invested with his righteousness; and
by three Parables together, Matthew. 25. First, that the foolish Virgins were
shut out for want of true faith and grace, though they were formal Professors;
and his own Servants (whether Ministers, Magistrates, or other Christians in
the Church) to whom the Talents were delivered to improve when he went into a
far Country, viz. to Heaven as he expounds it, Luke 19. when one failed he was
condemned; and in that 3d which is more general but yet restrained to the
visible Church likewise, or such as had to do with his Servants, whom in their
afflictions or persecutions they should have fed, clothed, visited, which he
looks as done to himself; but for the want of this all such will be condemned:
And alas! alas! how few consider any such proceeding of Christ in Judgment,
that are deeply in such case concerned; men are in these days far short of the
love, compassion and zeal of the Primitive Christians, who sold their
possessions, Acts 4.37. But to omit many passages to like purposes, as some to
be condemned by the Law, some without the Law by their own Conscience, some by
the Gospel, etc. but above all, Christ has in the said Revelation made many
great points known, not known before of the said Judgment of the Great day; as
that there is a second act or general Judgment to be celebrated by Christ, as
well as that Daniel had the Vision of, and he had before confirmed; and shows
what distance of time shall be betwixt them, viz. above 1000 years, and what
things are to intervene betwixt them in the 1000 years, and how the last shall
be brought on by Gods raining fire from Heaven upon the last attempt of the
last Gog and Magog, and at his sitting on the Throne, Heaven and Earth should
be dissolved, and the Earth, the Sea, and the Grave shall give up their dead,
that they shall be judged by their several distinct books, the elect out of the
Book of life, and the Devil first be cast into the lake of fire, where the
Beast and false Prophet were cast before 1000 years, and more, and so should
death and hell afterward; which in such respects seems to show their utter end
in the world, as in Chap. 17.11. but more to them that are capable of more:
these by Christ are Divinely delivered of the said Judgment, no where in
Scripture so made known before; and so of both Resurrections, after Esaias, and
David, then Daniel had much mystically showed him in Vision; that they sat on
Thrones set for them, and Judgment or power of judging was given then to the
Saints; but that the suffering Saints should come at that time with Christ,
coming in the Clouds of Heaven, and be raised by Christ to reign with him 1000
years before the raising of the rest of the dead good or bad, and that all the
promised mercies should then be fulfilled to them, none could reveal these but
Christ, who had this Book with seven Seals given to him by the Father in such a
glorious manner, when none else in Heaven or earth was found worthy to open it,
or look into it, or much less to fulfill the contents of it, but only the Lamb,
that had, as it were been slain, and lived again, but will then appear to be
the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, the Root of David, as well as the Branch: the
Father only reserved these things to be made known by his Son, the Wisdom of
the Father, the Eternal Word, in the bosom of the Father; and therefore these
his Divine Oracles concerning all such last things are chiefly to be attended
to as Gods and Christ's utmost infallible resolution of all such things as were
not so fully and particularly explained concerning Resurrections or Judgment of
all sorts before; or what is to be fulfilled upon the foundations of the
Prophets in the interim of the 1000 years betwixt both: the Apostle Paul who
was rapt into the third Heaven, reveals many things of the Resurrection, and
shows some Mysteries of that and the Judgment, 1 Cor. 15 1 These. 4. and
elsewhere, but much thereof cannot from thence be rightly expounded without
Christ's said Revel. chapter 20. which therefore seems in these respects much more
clearly and distinctly delivered than any of that Book before or after, as we
hope to show: and therefore these Revelations of all such last things are not
to be explained by other Scriptures that speak not of such things, but all
others that either speak in general of them, or not explicitly of many of the
said particulars, are in those respects to be explained by our Saviors
Revelation, whose wisdom is infallible, his truth unerring, being the saithful
and true witness, and all such his Revelations are utmost resolutions in the
case, and sure foundations therein to rest upon: and the rather, because of the
Divine charge to the contrary, with the terrible penalty annexed unto these
Doctrines, which is very evident does respect the same especially, Chap.
22.18.19. concerning willing at least, or much more willful, adding to or
taking away any thing from the Prophecy of this Book, which ought not slightly
to be overlooked, besides, many other considerations which might be added: that
of 1 Cor. 15. ver. 23. as the Revelation explains it, Christ was the first
fruits of the Saints Resurrection above 1600 years before his coming at
Antichrists destruction, when the suffering Sts. shall rise which he brings
with him [ ita deinde, as says the Apostle] then comes the end: as in Rev.
20.1000 years after and more; and a reason is added, all Christ's enemies must
first be put under his feet; viz. first, Ezekiels Gog and Magog, Turk and Pope,
as we showed, and all taken then out of Christ's Kingdom that offend, and 1000
years after, when the last Gog and Magog, Rev 20. shall be destroyed, and the
Devil that seduced them cast into the lake of fire, then will the last enemy
death also be destroyed; but in the interim all the said thousand years, says
the Apostle, he must reign, till that last enemy death be also destroyed; after
which he will deliver up his Davidical Kingdom to the Father, as was said ver.
24. but at ver. 51, 52. he declares certain mysteries not known before
concerning the general sudden rapture and change at the last Trump, and last
Resurrection, which suit with Revelation order also (though those mysteries and
Christ's last descending with a shout at the same time, 1 These. 4. seem to be
only revealed to the Apostle Paul) yet the distinction of Christ's bringing his
said Saints with him at his next coming, 1 These. 3.13. and 4.14. and his sudden
rapping them up above 1000 years after, to meet him in the Air when he descends
with the said Trump of God, v. 16. at the coming of the Lord (as it is also
called, ver. 15.) from which time they shall ever be with the Lord, which was
not true from the former, as by Revel. 20. is manifest; which is also another
evident ground of distinguishing the same, and by the Revelation-order, so to
be explained; which is not to be understood according to any men's apprehensions
of other Scriptures: but other Scriptures to be explained by that in all such
matters as God has given unto Christ in that most Divine Book to resolve his
Church of in such particulars therein held out: and as for that of Peter. 2.3.
upon which some mistaken apprehensions of some seem to have put some
difficulties, by the help of the Revel. may easily be resolved, if we consider
he speaks both of the Scoffers of the last times, and to faithful Christians
likewise, and suits considerations useful for both: to the Scoffers he offers
the consideration of the day of the Lord; that is the great day of Judgment
wherein is the morning Judgment contained; when Christ is said to come as a
thief, at the end of the 6th Vial, Rev. 16.15. about the Armageddon battle, as
here he is said, also to come as a thief in the night, then will be the
consuming of the body of the Beast by fire, Dan. 7. and ver. 10. a fiery stream
issued from the Ancient of days at that Judgment: but this seems by our Savior
(besides other considerations) to be a partial destruction, chiefly falling
upon wicked men, compared Luke 17. to Sodoms and Gomorrahs destruction, that
will find out such where they are. But then the deluge of fire, and the passing
away of the Heavens, as Rev. 20.11. both which by Revelation-Prophesie are
manifest to be above 1000 years after the Armageddon-battle: (when the Beast
and salse Prophet were taken, and said to be cast into the lake of fire burning
with Brimstone, Rev. 19.20.) but both these burnings, the first partial, the
second general and ultimate are contained in the day of the Lord, or the
Judgment of the Great Day, as Christ's Revelation also teaches, without which
this Text, with many others could not be soundly resolved: and for his bringing
in the exception of the New Heavens and New Earth, v. 13. that is, on the
Saints part to comfort them against the Scoffers in these bad times, not that
they will be after the last destruction of the World, but that there was such
an happy state coming on wherein they were interessed (though both at the
beginning and ending of the day of the Lord such fiery Vengeance was in store
for such wicked Scoffers, hardened by Gods long sufferance in these last Days
which the Apostle prophetically spoke of) and this Exposition from the warrant
of this Divine Book given particularly for many such purposes, and therefore
styled the Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him to show unto his
Servants, etc. is more satisfying to my Conscience than all the differing
apprehensions of men whatsoever concerning the same.

Quest. And whereas it may be questioned by some, whether these Interpretations
being mysterious be according to the intent of the Writers of those, or the
like. said portions of Scriptures.

Answ. That is not so much to be respected, as that they be according to the
minds of the Inditer of them, who taught all his Messengers and Amanuenses to
write and deliver what was Divine and sacred truth whether he gave them full
Interpretations of them at the same time or not, sometimes it is evident he did
not, as when Daniel was denied the knowledge of the times of the end; therefore
he said, I heard, but I understood not, Dan. 12. and the Disciples could not
understand the fulfilling of the Prophecy of Hosea, Chapter 1. of the calling of
the Gentiles then, till by Vision to Peter, and and gifts of the Spirit, and
the like he had resolved them; and it seems probable, that neither Moses in his
Song for Posterity, Deuteronomy. 32. or threatenings in order, Lev. 26. or in penning
Jacobs Prophefie, or Balaams Parable, as they all respected the last times did
so understand them: so whether the Apostle Paul or Peter in those things, being
guided by the Spirit of Christ to write concerning matters directly respecting
the last times did know the particular meaning of them in those respects as
they are explained since by the Book of Revelation: I must ingeniously
acknowledge that in things which were so by the same Spirit of Christ, further
in due time to be revealed, I believe they did not: for first, it is probable
they would then, with the said things, have given the Interpretation of them if
they had then known them: And secondly, the Holy Spirit of Christ would not
have given particular Revelations to open and explain the particular meanings
if they had not been necessary so to have been revealed in respect of the
hidden parts of them, and especially that God the Father in a glorious
wonderful manner, Rev. 5. should so give that most Divine Book to his beloved
Son the Lamb so to reveal them (as he has done) without which the Church had
been in the dark, in regard of many excelent points of Heavenly Doctrines now
only knowable by the help and use of the said Book (especially in what concerns
the main Scope of all Revelation-Prophesie) which is therefore highly to be
esteemed and diligently to be studied by all wise and good Christians for the
right understanding of the darkest portions of Scripture which are not rightly
discovered by any other means but by these Divine Oracles of Jesus Christ; and
let it henceforth stand as an irrefragable Rule amongst all sound Christians,
that all those Texts of holy Scriptures concerning those last things, viz.
Resurrections and Judgment are to be explained by Christ's Revelation and not
the Revelation by them.

From the former said sure Rule, and the many foundations formerly laid down in
the whole work, these Divine Conclusions or Christian Doctrines will evidently
follow:

First, That Christ's Davidical Kingdom on earth will begin with the first act
or session of the Judgment of the Great Day, above 1000 years before the Last
Judgment, Esa. 9. Luke 1.32. with Dan. 7. Rev. 11. and 19.6, 9, 11, to the end.

2. That at the first said Session the quick, namely the Beast and falls Prophet
with other great and small enemies then living will be judged by temporal
destruction from the earth, Dan. 7. Ezekiel 38.39. Dan. 11.45. Matthew. 13.41. And
the deceased Saints will then also be judged with a Judgment of reward or
recompense at their holy and blessed bodily Resurrection, when they shall rise
to reign with Christ, who will then so Judge both quick and dead at his
appearing and Kingdom, Dan. 7. Rev. 11.18. 2 Timothy 4.1.

Thirdly, Christ will reign with his said raised Saints on earth in his said
Kingdom all that same 1000 years, wherein (as he has both strongly and
emphatically taught us) that Satan shall be bound from deceiving the Nations
any more until the said 1000 years shall be sulfilled. See Treatise on Rev.
21.5. page 37, 38. and page 8. of this.

Fourthly, The said 1000 years space to be so fulfilled beginning from the
first said Session, or Matutinum Judicium (as Mr. Mede speaks, or a greater
than he, Psalm. 49.14. and a greater than them both, Luke 19.18, 19. Rev. 2.26.)
before the little space of Satan's loosing again, is that interim before the
last Judgment wherein shall be the performance of Gods most ancient promised
Mercies and Covenants to the faithful Forefathers, and to their spiritual Seed
[ viz. the then raised Saints and others then converted] through their Divine
promised Seed Christ, by whom they shall all then have their sure Mercies of
David, Esa. 55.3. and as the Lambs wife, then inherit all things with him, Rev.
21.7.

Fifthly, The New Jerusalem state, the Marriage of the Lamb, the Paradise of
God with the pure River and Tree of Life therein and the Nations of them that
are then saved walking in the light of the said great holy and beloved New
Jerusalem, wherein consists the New Heavens and new earth, when God will make
all things new, as in this Text, are the contemporaries of the said happy times
and state in the said 1000 years, and will make up that happiness in the said
Davidical Kingdom of Christ, both to the said Saints then raised, and to the
then converted Jews and Gentiles in the natural life, when also the two second
great calls of them both will be accomplished, Deuteronomy. 32.43. Romans 15.10. that
Jews and Gentiles will rejoice together.

Sixthly, Satan's last most wicked attempt with his last Gog and Magog against
the said holy City and the Camp of the Saints after the said 1000 years are
ended, will occasion fire from Heaven to consume them, and probably the earth
and the works upon it, etc. and thereupon also the destruction of the last
enemy death, when all the Saints both raised before, and then living or lying
in the grave (to free them (as is probable) from the destruction with wicked
men then) shall be rapt up together, and all be changed in a moment or
twinkling of an eye to meet Christ in the Air, etc. when also all the wicked
shall be raised at the last Trump to the last general Judgment and final
sentence, etc. upon whose sitting upon the great white Throne will be the utter
dissolution of the whole created world, as Rev. 20.11, etc.

And these (I believe) are upon the many said accounts from holy Scripture, the
Divine truths of Jesus Christ, not contradicting any thing taught in Gods Word
before, but only explaining many things formerly darkly, yet Divinely couched
therein, and especially things respecting the said first and second bodily
Resurrections, and the proceedings of the Judgment of the great day of the Lord
at above a 1000 years distance, with the performance of the promised mercies in
the interim (as was said.)

And thus have I given an account of my faith as respecting these things for
which I bless and magnify the glorious Name of God the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, three Persons, and one true and everliving God, and I do believe that
all Saints will do the same here or hereafter. Amen.

And thus for the Questions concerning the first Resurrection, as being the
Inlet to the Sts. that Christ brings with him when he comes into the happy said
approaching state 1000 years before the said rest of the dead shall live again;
and that answers to sundry portions of Scripture that are by some otherwise
expounded, but are only to be understood by the help of the most Divine Book of
the Revelation of Jesus Christ, as we have showed.

And now before we proceed to speak particularly of the words or matters of
this Text of the Renovation of all things, which are to make up the happiness
of Christ's said Reign with his Saints upon the said first Resurrection: we
shall consider the preceding and following context thereof with its
dependencie, to remove some other seeming difficulties, which for the greater
evidence we shall endeavor to do by Answering some other Questions, and
resolving some doubts upon weighty reasons concerning the same.

Quest. 1. Are not the New Heavens and the New earth the renovation of all
things the New Jerusalem and Paradise of God, etc. Chapter 21.22. to be after the
last Judgment, which is set down before them in Chapter 20.11.

Answ. Although the last Judgment is there placed in the end of the foregoing
Chapter, it does not follow that it will be in time before those great things
spoken of in the two following Chapters, but it will appear to be there placed
upon other special reasons. One Reason is from the reference of diverse things
spoken of Chap. 19. which are further explained in their order in the three
following Chapters, and consequently of their dependence thereupon.

A second Reason is from the special consideration of Chap. 20. to ver. 11. as
the Table of the good times of Gods Church, as Chap. 11. to ver. 15. was the
Table of the bad times, as after we hope to make manifest in the Divine
contrivance of this sacred Book to the good advantage of right enquirers.

But first, for the Reason of such things Chap. 19. as refer to the three
following Chapters:

The first is from ver. 6. after many great Hallelujahs for the the Whores
destruction, ver. 1, 2. redoubled again, ver. 3. and again, they said
Hallelujah. Thirdly, of the representative 24 Elders and four Beasts, or four
living Wights worshipping God, and adding their Amen, to their Allelujah (for
such will be the high praises of God in the hearts and mouths of Gods people
then for his destroying of Babylon, called here his judging of the great Whore
for her great provocations) [mark that expression, for then will begin Christ's
great day of Judgment] v. 2. and v. 5. there is a Divine general enforcement to
the like praise to all Gods Servants not only for this said ruin of Babylon,
but for the ensuing reign of Christ thereupon, set forth in wonderful
expressions, ver. 6. saying Allelujah for the Lord, God Omnipotent reigns;
which is the first general referring to the future Chapters, and this is
further explained Chapter 20. of Christ's reign with his Saints 1000 years, and the
same 1000 wherein Satan was to be bound, which for its certainty is six times
said to be so three times absolutely, and three times relatively.

The second general, Chap. 19. ver. 7. is the coming of the Marriage of the
Lamb, which is explained Chapter 21.2, 9, 10. in the New Jerusalem state, unto
which matter of joy and thanksgiving there is a third addition in general, that
the Lambs wife has made her self ready in the same verse, which seems
specially to respect the calling of the Jews, then to be betrohed for ever,
when the Tabernacle of God is also said to be with men, c. 21.3, 4. at that his
coming which the many Hallelujahs in the Hebrew tongue then to be sung seem to
point out to us, and not only Jews and Israelites will then be brought into
Christ's sheepfold; but all the Nations of them that are saved and shall all
walk together in the light of the Jerusalem that came from God out of Heaven
(being all to be then of one Communion of Sts. though in several capacities
celebrating accordingly the Marriage of the Lamb the said 1000 years, v. 2.9,
10, 22, 24, 26. and as from the Throne of God and the Lamb, then and there
proceeds that pure River of the water of Life, viz. all Divine Grace, John
7.37, 38. so in the midst of the street of the City then will be the Tree of
Life in that blessed state of that Paradise of God, chap. 22.1, 2. as chap.
2.7. is also explained, which will be more gloriously restored then by and for
Christ the second Adam than the state of that was which the first Adam lost in
many respects, when God, as in the Text, makes all things new.

Now concerning such a near Union of all Gods Saints and Servants at the said
Marriage of the Lamb according to their several capacities, we have much in the
Prophets observable; we shall only name a few texts, as Hos. 2.19, 20. I will
betroth thee unto me for ever, in Righteousness, in Judgment, in Loving
Kindness, and in Mercies: the whole 45th Psalm, and much in Esa. 60, and 62,
and 65, and 66. all respecting the same time and state, and is in part applied,
Rev. 21. And thus much of the reference of these three last chap. to the said
general heads mentioned chap. 19. of Christ's said Reign, the Marriage of the
Lamb, and his Wives making her self ready, which is usually in Scripture, and
especially in this book, to mention Generals, and after particularly to explain
them: and beside these observe that there is no distinction of order or times
in the three follow-Chapters by first second or third, or after this I saw, as
chap. 18.1. at the Whores destruction, or after these things I heard, chap.
19.1. but from thence to the end of the book all the Visions are of the same
time, as we may after show. But because the opening of this Rereference in
chap. 19. is of great use to the understanding of all the rest of this book to
the end, we shall endeavor according to what by Divine Grace we have received,
to resolve these Questions following.

1. Why these great things should here be inserted, chap. 19.5, 6, 7. after
Babylons destruction?

2. Why the destruction of the Beast and false Prophet from ver. 11. to the end
of the Chapter is decyphered before them?

3. What is meant by that in v. 9 where it is said, Blessed are they that are
called to the Marriage Supper of the Lamb, which is set forth with so much
Divine Illustration? Much after the manner that Gods Renovation is set forth in
this text. The first is to teach us, that Babylons ruin is the beginning of
Christ's Reign, chap. 11.17. he then takes to himself his great power and
reigns, as here, ver. 6. which seems to be the that beginning of Revenges,
Deuteronomy. 32.40, etc.) and when God begins then he will also make an end) for by
this God prepares for a greater and more general revenge upon the Enemies, by
provoking them to gather to the Armageddon Battle, as chap. 16. ver. 13, 14,
15. by sending the three unclean Spirits, or Spirits of Devils afterward to
the Kings of the Earth, and of the whole world, to gather them to it, which is
here gloriously decyphered, ver. 11. to the end.

2. To manifest to the Churches Consolation, that as the Beast had scattered
the power of the holy people, Dan. 12.7. for his time, times, and half a time;
so then his power should be so scattered, that there remains no more but to
prepare for the greatest Vengeance at his last destruction: he shall never more
hurt or molest them.

3. To instruct us how the Morning Judgment of the great day, described by
Daniel, chap. 7. will be brought on: First by judging the Whore. 2dly, the
Beast and false Prophet, with their Followers, as is written, Deuteronomy. 32. Psalm.
149. Rev. 19. the last: for Christ, says the Apostle, shall destroy the man of
Sin at the appearance of his coming: so when Christ comes from the right hand
of his Father, he makes his soes his footstool, Psalm. 110.1. whom the Heavens
receive till the times of Restitution of all things, says the Apostle Peter,
Acts 3.19, 20, 21. [for they all contemporate.]

4. To assure us of the beginning then also of that said happy state of Christ's
Church, chap. 11.18, 19, and 19.6, 7. for when Christ comes in the Clouds he
brings all his Saints with him; who probably may have that honor to execute
that wrath in part upon those Enemies, who shall then also in that Judgment
receive their reward, Dan. 7.13, 14. ver. 22. Rev. 11.18. to teach all Gods
people then to lift up their heads, as our Savior directs, Luke 21.28.31.
because their Redemption is near; and that Kingdom of God also: and though
there will be then great shakings of the Enemies, out of the world, as Numb.
25. Es. 2.17, 18, 19. yet God will send his Angels then to gather his Elect
from the four corners of the Earth, Mat. 24.3. and two shall be then in the
field, the one shall be taken the other left v. 40, etc.

To the third Question we Answer, That these generals of Christ's Kingdom are
explained in the following Chapters after Antichrists ruin, to show the first
eminent act of power Christ will manifest when he begins to reign, will be to
remove that great offender out of the way, who has so long obstructed the
happy communion of God and Christ, with all the Saints, which they shall enjoy
upon his removal, when the said Marriage of the Lamb takes place, and Gods
ancient people are turned to him, (as was said.)

2. Because that is the eminent breaking of the Serpents head by the first
Judgment revealed to Enoch, seen in Vision by Daniel, Dan. 7. explained and
confirmed, and to be fulfilled by Christ, Rev. 11.18. and chap. 19. as may
farther after appear, etc. which first Judgment of the wicked quick, is that
removens pr^hibens, removing the hinderance, and therefore seems first
necessary to be done, to make way for that said happy ensuing state, as Mat
13.41, 42. and is an eminent breaking of the Serpents head, as the destroying
the last Enemy Death will be the total and final breaking thereof.

The next Question is, What is meant ver. 9. by that they are said to be
blessed that are called to the Marriage Supper of the Lamb?

2. Why the Apostle John is commanded to write it?

3. Why the Angel adds as he testifiedth, These are the true sayings of God?

4. Why the Angel resisting his attempt to worship him, enjoins him to worship
God, as in chap. 22.9.?

5. Why he tells him he is his fellow Servant, and of his Brethren, [the
Prophets, chap. 22.] and here adds, That have the Testimony of Jesus: and then
adds, Worship God: giving this reason; For the Testimony of Jesus is the Spirit
of Prophecy?

To resolve the first Question, these three things are to be considered; First,
What is meant by the Marriage Supper of the Lamb.

2. What is their Calling to it.

3. How they are said to be blessed that are called to it: and these we desire
a little to explain, though but in our passage, because they have been
misapplyed formerly.

1. The Marriage Supper of the Lamb is the ensuing destruction of the Beast,
and the like wicked Enemies shortly after the Whore chap. 18. for which the
many said Halelujahs were sung, when in such a terrible, powerful and glorious
manner Christ comes to destroy them with his heavenly Armies, and his Garments
dipped in blood, and takes the Beast and false Prophet, and casts them into the
fiery lake for ever; and that is denoted by the great Voice of the Angel
standing in the Sun to call all the Fowls to the same Supper, ver. 18. who also
were filled with their flesh, ver. last., who were slain with the Sword of
Christ's mouth, that is, according to his Word: who is therefore said in
Righteousness to Judge, and make War, ver. 11. and then to judge, because it
will be the first act of his Judgment, as chap. 11.18.

2. This sense may farther appear from other like expressions in Scripture, of
a Sacrifice God will make of his Enemies, or a Supper or Feast, as here; so
Esa. 346. a great part of that c. and v. 4. is applied to the destruction of
those Pagan Persecutors, Rev. 6. the like also Jer. 46.10. Gods day of
Vengeance is called a Sacrifice: But most pertinent is that of Gogs the Turks
destruction, at or about the same time, Ezekiel. 39.17, 18, 19, etc. yea and of
Magog likewife, [the Pope] v. 6. briefly there mentioned, because it was to be
farther explained in the New Testament, as the Jews Enemy [the Turk] is largly
in the Old [ see our 4th Obser.] of both which those hints of Reasons seem
considerable, besides many others both in Ezekiel. Dan. and the Book of Revelation.

1. Because the Turk is styled Gog in the Land of Magog, ver. 1. that is, in
the Roman Empire, a great part whereof he should subdue unto himself.

2. This is farther manifest in that he is designed by God to be the great
Ruiner of that Empire, to revenge upon it the blood of the Saints shed before
under the Red Dragon, being acknowledged by many to be the 2d Woe, or 6th
Trumpet, falling chiefly on the Eastern Empire.

3. He is a greater Ruiner of it than the Saracens before him who did but push
at it, and got scarce half so much as he has since over-flowed in it by his
multitudes, Dan. 11.40, 41, 42, etc.

4. Magog, v. 6. is described to be in the Isles, as the Jews reckoned all
remote from their own continent to live in the Isles.

5. God says there he will send fire on Magog, which will also be the means of
the Beasts destruction, Dan. 7.9, 10. when his body will be given to the
burning flame.

6. As was hinted what was spoken largly of Gog the Jews enemy, that holds
their Land also from them in the Old Testament; is left for Christ largly to
explain of the ruin of Magog, the Pope, the great Enemy of Christians in the
New Testament, who has all his 42 months trampled the holy City under foot
till then.

7. Both are said to be in the latter or postremity of days, Ezekiel. 38.8, 16.
with the Revelation, and both to be ruined about the Jews Conversion to be as
we showed in the latter days, Jer. 23.20. and Jer. 30.24. for at Christ's
appearance the Jews will be delivered Dan. 12.1. and the man of Sin will be
destroyed at the appearance of Christ's coming, 2 These. 2.8.

2. They are called to it, namely, to that Marriage Supper, who have the word
of God for their sure ground of coming to it; for Christ will then slay such
with the sword of his mouth, which is the Judgment written, when all
predictions of the Beasts destruction shall take effect: 2. When by his
providence he remarkably points out that work to be done by them, the Angel is
said then to stand in the Sun to call all the Fowls to that Supper, which seems
to note the clearness of their call, as well as the generality; hence when that
Lord of Lords, and King of Kings so conquers his Enemies: those that are with
him are said to be called, and chosen, and faithful, Rev. 17.14. called as
having Christ's Commission for it; chosen as being Saints; and faithful to do
his said work against all discouragement or opposition.

3. They are blessed as being first come out of Babylon, for that they partaked
not of her Sins before, nor her Plagues then, Rev. 18.4.

2. They are also blessed in doing Gods work then, and executing his just
Judgments written of before, Psalm. 149. ult. upon his and his Churches great
enemies: So was Jael blessed, Jud. 5. so they shall be blessed that dash that
Babels little ones, viz. her doubly spurious offspring against the stones,
Psalm. 137. for so will Christ's Church not only be freed from that Tyranny, but
much happiness will ensue thereupon to all Saints in Christ's Kingdom, and the
Marriage of the Lamb, with the happy Restitution of all things, etc.

Now for the other annexed Questions respecting the illustrations in of the
Angels revealing that matter, we answer briefly first the Apo. Joh. must write
what concerns the said Marriage Supper, as a thing most sure from Gods
predictions, Genesis 3.15. from Enochs Prophecy, Daniels Vision, chap. 7. and
2dly, a suitable reason is given by the Angel: These are the true sayings of
God, not said faithful as of the promised Mercies twice afterward, which is
heedfully to be observed: for this only respects the predictions (as we said)
of the Enemies removal, here for the expressions of the Holy Spirit are very
curious concerning both.

3dly, he engages him to worship God now and afterward, chap. 22. by reason
varieties of salse Worship would come up in the world by Heathens and
Antichristians, till those times he spoke of should come.

4. He says, he was of his Brethren, viz. the Prophets, chap. 22. and that he
had also the testimony of Jesus; for all that we are to believe of Jesus is
testified by the Prophets, as were all these mysteries here made thus known to
him by the Angel: whereupon

5. he adds this reason of all these Revelations, That the Testimony of Jesus
is the Spirit of Prophecy, so surely resolving both here and in the following
chapters, that we must look to the Prophets for the foundations of all these
things concerning Christ's Reign and Kingdom, and the preparations to it, and
all that belongs unto it, and to all such as shall have part with him therein:
of all which the Angel Christ (probably) in Vision had generally taught, chap.
10.7. when the Mystery of God should be finished, as he has declared (says
he) by his Servants the Prophets, so that all these Revelations must be
understood concerning Christ, according to that Spirit of Prophecy, Nothing to
be added, nothing to be taken therefrom, chap. 22.18, 19. and also manifesting
they must all be fulfilled before the end of the world, when all Prophecy will
be accomplished: But I only touch upon these things to prepare for the better
unfolding of the Text, being very needful to that purpose, and also give much
light being rightly understood, not only to that text, but in a good part to
much that concerns that whole state of Christ's said Reign with his Saints the
1000 years.

The Second Reason of such placing them is from the special Use which is here
to be observed, namely in regard the 20th chap. to ver. 11. is first placed as
the table of the good times of Gods Church to come, in reference whereunto the
great things that follow are after considered; and the last Judgment from ver.
11. is there added as the boundary of the same table, according to the
excellent Divine contrivance of this book, even as that former Table of the bad
times, chap. 11. which contained about 1700 years under the Dragon, and others
to the end of the Beasts 42 months, to the end of those suffering times of the
Saints, which table has also for its boundary from ver. 14. the happy times
and state following in some generals to the end of the chap. but not as
included in the same Table: and as the chief measure of those times after the
Red Dragons persecutions is the two Witnesses 1260 days of years their
Prophesying in Sackcloth, whom God calls, my two Witnesses, and to whom I will
give power against the great a Beast though Prophesying in Sackcloth; so the
chief measure of these good times is the Reign of Christ with his raised Saints
in the 1000 years, whom he calls, my King upon my holy Hill of Sion, Psalm 2.
when the world has done its worst, yet, says he, etc. I will set my King,
etc. by which also all those things that follow, chap. 21, and 22. are to be
measured for their continuance, which is another reason of such placing that
Table before the last Judgment, which is the boundary following the times
thereof, and so in both the said Tables, Primum in utroque genere est mensura
reliquorum: and so both these Tables have their distinct considerations, as
containing in them both, all the times of Revelation Prophecy, viz. about 2700
years, besides the little space of Satan's loosing, chap. 20. all to precede the
last Judgment. The first Table links together the double Scheme; first of the
Civil Roman state under the seven Seals, in the times of some of which the
Heathen stare persecuted and killed the Saints, chap. 6. whereupon out of the
7th Seal proceed the seven Trumpets, bringing on the ruin of that wicked Roman
state; First by the four first Trumpets that felt mostly upon the Western Roman
Empire, and deadly wounded it by the incursion of the Barbarous Nations, as
Almands, Goths, Vandals, Huns, Alanes, Burgundians, Frankes, and the rest;
breaking the Empire, ruining the Government, of Emperor, City and Senate, in
chap. 8. for about 200 years, and by the two following Woe Trumpets of Saracens
and Turks, first half the Eastern Roman Empire was harased and lost, chap. 9.
to ver. 11. and after wholely overflowed by the Turks: First by the Saracens
till about the 1300 year of Christ, when the Turks day, and hour, and month,
and year began, when the Ottaman Family obtained the power, for 396 years by
that computation: both which are contained in chap. 9. but the 7th Trumpet,
which will dispatch them both, is added after this first Table, chap. 11.15.
whereby is linked with this the Scheme of the Ecclesiastical state, running
again through all the said times, respecting that also, as contained in the
little open book, chap. 10. beginning chap. 12. with the primitive state of the
Church in her purity, but soon set upon by the Dragon and his Angels, fighting
against Michael and his Angels, till God by that famous Emperor Constantine
the great cast down the Dragon, but after, upon the Dragons flood, the Woman
entered into her Wilderness condition, for her time, times and half a time,
contemporating therein with the twofold Beasts 42 months, chap. 13 raised out
of the Sea and Earth in those fluctuating times of the said Barbarous Nations,
as also with the Witnesses 1260 days (...) ^ears, till the seven Angels have
poured out their Vials to destroy the Beast; likewise chap. 15, 16. concerning
which matters there is an explication, chap. 17. executed chap 18, 19. when the
last head is ruined of that Ecclesiastic state also: unto both which Schemes
of both Civil and Ecclesiastic state the same Table of the bad times has
reference, and links them so together as Contemporaries. But besides the said
Series or order of the first said Table, in the Divine contrivance thereof
referring to the said double Scheme of the times thereof, beginning with the
Regular state of the Church that was as was said chap. 11.1. these things are
farther to be observed from chap. 1.19. first concerning the things the beloved
Apostle John had then seen, viz. how Christ in all those times walks in the
midst of the Candlesticks the Churches and holds the stars the true Ministers
thereof in his right hand, chap. 1. and 2dly the things that then were
concerning the then present seven Churches of Asia, chap. 2.3. which are also
conceived to adumbrate or shadow out seven Intervals contained in the said
first Table of the suffering times: and 3dly, the things to be hereafter, which
are Epittomied in some sort before the 24 Elders, and 4 living Wites, in chap.
4, and 5. first in chap 4. is set the Prologlue and Chorus of all that
Tragy-Comody (as Mr. Mede speaks) and in the 5th is representzed the glorions
manner of the Father's delivering this Book to his Son the Lamb, that had been
as it were slain and lived again, to reveal and fulfill the contents thereof,
with a glimps of the ishue of the times of the said first Table of Revelation
Prophecy, when the Representative (say they) shall Reign upon Earth, ver. 10.
whereupon Angels, Saints, and all Creatures in their kinds shall adore and
magnify the Lamb, as worthy to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom and
Strength, ver. 8. to the end; and in chap. 7. we have the Sealing of the 144000
spiritually in the East, under the Tyranny of the Saracens and Turks, as chap.
9.4 in the times of the two first Woe Trumpets, from about Anno Dom. 600. to
about 1700 [for we must conjecture in a Latitude perhaps of about a decad under
or over the said times, by reason of some defects in Chronologie] and in chapter
14. wherein with the same times of the Beasts said 42 months; the true Church
had her 144000 Spiritually Sealed also, and preserved in the West: All which,
with the Angels warnings there following, Christ has now almost accomplished
in this so excellent a contrivance of this Divine Book in all these respects:
And therefore Faithful Christians need not much trouble themselves as to the
remaining Prophesies of this Book in respect of the suffering times, save only
they must watch, and keep the Garments of Justification and holy conversation,
as Christ warnes, chapter 16.15. when the Whore, or Babylons end draws near, as
chap. 18. and chap. 14. only after is to be expected the gathering to the
Armageddon Battle, chap. 19. before which, some good time (I conceive) will be
the falling of the tenth part of the City, wherein the 7000 names of men as in
the Original are foretold to be slain to the strange affrightment (probably by
some Divine appearance of that remnant that are thereupon said to give glory to
the God of Heaven, chap. 11. v. 13. by acknowledging his hand therein: to such
I would commend St. Peter's counsel, Acts 17.18, 19, etc. Brethren, I wot that
through ignorance ye did it, as did also your Rulers, etc. [who were the
Leaders and Guiders of the rest, as has been usual, at least by the Engineers
of such evil contrivance, who are skilful to draw into them more innocent
persons, etc.] Repent ye therefore, etc. and the rather, because the remnant
when affrighted, v. 13. hopefully shall so do: for the thing is to be done upon
a great Earthquake [or Commotion of Nations] when the last finishing Witnesses,
decyphered from ver. 6. to ver. 13. did begin to ascend upon their hearing of
the great Voice, viz. of a person eminent in public Authority, saying come up
hither in the Plateia, or street of the City [where they were before civilly
killed in the second war of the Beast (of which Mr. Mede conceived there was
only one) resembled to Jerusalem in Judea many ways] where our Lord was
Crucified, rose again, and ascended, etc. being then a tenth Province or tenth
part of the Dition of that great City, etc. of which many things may appear
considerably evident, if the said Plateia prove to be the said tenth part of
the City, which in its final falling off from Rome, shall utterly cast out of
it all Romish Idolatry, Superstitions, and Errors, etc. which for many Reasons
may seem more probably (and whereof an account may (probably) be after given)
And not the falling of the City Rome it self, (as some have conjectured)
because it is but a tenth part now of what it was in the Heathen Emperors
time, (as Mr. Mede from Lipsius declares) which latter (more probable) by some
computations may seem to be about a dozen years after this falling, or more,
upon which the gathering to the Armageddon Battle may be expected; for Romes
ruin is like highly to provoke the Beast and false Prophet to that Battle,
though to their own ruin. Rev. 19.20. although they will not believe it, which
is the means to bring it on them. But upon the falling of the tenth part here
the said 2d Woe or sixth Trumpet is said to be ended, ver. 14. under which Mr.
Mede most probably places most of the Vials, during the Turks 396 years, who
is usually reckoned the 2d Woe, and if this falling of the tenth part of the
City was meant by the 5th Vial upon the Throne of the Beast (as some have
conceived) whereby seems more probably to be pointed out that ancient
Apocryphal Episcopacie, as the Mystical Throne of the Beast, [upon which he
has sitten to kill Christ's Witnesses from first to last] viz. in respect of
the old pretended Jus Divinum thereof, as being more suitable to the
mysteriousness of the Vials, and to experience] (as the 4th was upon his
Universality) whereby all Popish Prelacie, with many Errors depending thereon
have been pretendedly supported all along) which seemed much to be shaken by
that 5th Vial, and near to falling, etc. upon advantage whereof, the Pope
afterward as Bishop of Rome, it being the chief City, has since most falsely
pretended to be Peter's Successor, who yet from Scripture is manifest never to
have been Bishop there; and Christ's Vicar general on Earth [though Christ
promised he would never be non-resident from his Church there, but present with
them to the end of the World, Mat. last, and last.] So that as he needs no
such, so he ordained no such Officer, as shortly he will be taught to know (and
all the deluded part of the world that follow him) to their cost. But if that
had been this tenth part of the City, I conceive it would have been past before
this time.) But it seems there will be some good and peaceable times in that
Plateia at the fall of this tenth part of the City in the West, though, though
the 2d. Woe continue longer in the East; because at the end thereof, before the
7th Angel begin to sound, it is said, the 3d Woe comes quickly (no remarkable
occurrents then and there said to intervene) for the word (...) quickly or
swiftly is in this book to be understood in the due order of accomplishment
whereby Christ has inseparably linked together the first and last things of
near 1700 years distance, hence he says in the beginning, Rev. 1.1. that they
are things which must (...) shortly or swiftly come to pass, viz. in the
said-determined order, (which due order [N. B.] is in this Book Doctrinal
(being the Divine purpose of setting it so down, etc.) and likewise it is again
said, Behold I come quickly, or swiftly, (the same word (...) being used) about
the end of 1700 years after in the end of the last chapter the most of which said
1700 years from Christ's birth is contained in the 19 first chap. of this most
Divine Book before the 1000 years being chap. 20.] but is not said to come
presently or immediately and the ending of the great Earthquake before the fall
of the said tenth part of the City with the 100 slain in the West, and that
glory then to be rendered unto God by that said remnant there [all which imply
the completing of the said ascension of the finishing Witnesses] and therewith
some respite from former sufferings before the 7th Trumpet, [called by some the
Woe joy Trumpet] shall actually begin to sound, (besides the time of that
coming quickly not presently may be considerable there) for when that sounded,
ver. 15. great Voices of Joy were heard in Heaven, saying, the Kingdoms of the
world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and at the
beginning thereof (as we showed from chap. 19.9, 11; etc.) Christ will destroy
the Beast and false Prophet, the interim before which, and after the said fall
of the tenth part of the City, when the second Woe ended, v. 14. seems (I say)
to import some intermission of the Churches trouble in the West; before that
time oppressed by the Beast there, though some of those Sealed ones in the
East, chap. 7. may continue that interim under the pressures of the Turk,
during the second Woe there, etc. Which brings in also the good times of the 2d
Table which we spoke of in chap. 20. wherein is contained Satan's binding,
Christ's and his Saints Reign, so exactly, strongly, and clearly asserted by
Christ to be 1000 years, with its Contemporaries; first, before it, chap. 19.
viz. the coming of the Marriage of the Lamb, and his wifes making her self
ready, ver. 7. and after it also, chap. 21. and 22. when will be the New
Heavens and the New Earth, the New Jerusalem, with the Nations saved walking in
the light thereof; also the pure River, and Tree of Life in the midst of the
street of the City, all to continue that said 1000 years in the world, until
Satan's loosing: which are after expounded c. 21, 22. as depending on c. 19.7
and it is agreeable as was said to that Ancient Prophecy, Deuteronomy. 32.41, 42. of
the beginning of Revenges upon the Whore and Beast, before Jews and Gentiles
then rejoice together, etc. when many Halelujahs will be Sung upon those
accounts in the beginning of chap. 19. to ver. 7. when the Lord God Omnipotent
reigns.

So then these two excellent Tables have their distinct considerations in the
said Divine contrivance for diverse excellent purposes, and the said boundaries
of the times of each are not to be taken into them as set in their proper order
and place, so as what follows must needs therefore be after them in time: It
was not so in the experience of the former Table, and it will not be so in the
latter, which being well understood, with what we have here said upon that
occasion, may accordingly be as we desire, and endeavor whilst time and
opportunity serves to give light to this part of this most Divine Book, and
the rather, being of late very sensible of the Infirmities of old Age, now fast
incroaching upon us; and this more especially because the very Cream and Marrow
of all faithful Christians Interest included in these mystical parts of the
Gospel of Christ may hereby be made more conspicuous, and comfortable unto
them: which also, we hope, by resolving other following Questions may farther
appear: and hereunto Mr. Medes judicious Synchronisms are very subservient, as
in our Scheme of the whole Revelation may be observed: but the main business is
there set down in this last table, viz. the reign of Christ with his raised
Saints, for which Reign their said bodily Resurrection makes way (as was
showed) being the chief thing in reference whereunto all that are after
explained, chap. 21, and 22. to belong to that state, as to their time are
determined by Christ, to be to continue 1000 years; and from thence he sets
down Satan's loosing, with the last Gogs and Magogs destruction, leading in the
last judgment, which seemed necessary to be so explained according to our
Saviors Divine Wisdom, as the most full Revelation of what should be useful to
be known by his Church for the most full explication of Enochs Prophecy or
Vision of the great day of Judgment, as Jude speaks of which Daniel, chap. 7.
seems only to explain the first act or matutinum judicium, at the destruction
of the Beast above 1000 years before; but by this Divine Table we are directly
brought in this order of Prophecy, to the last act or Vespertinum judi^ium, of
all sorts good and bad, much more clearly than was revealed before in sundry
particulars, etc. but he then returns back to the predictions of the Prophe^^
concerning the said 1000 years reign of Christ with his said Saints, or times
of Gods making all things New, (as the Context before and after manifest.) And
this will appear in that which concerns the first particular, viz. of the New
Heavens and New Earth, Esa. 65. from ver. 20, 21, 22. where many things are
named respecting those in the natural life (as is observable) for ancient
Prophesies are the Foundatiocs of them all, etc.

But 2dly, if it were supposed they were after the general Judgment, it might
then be enquired what use in reason they could be conceived to serve for, since
Scripture gives no ground for any such matter; but contrarily resolves us the
world will then be dissolved, chap. 20.11. all Creatures destroyed or removed,
the Saints rapt in a moment to meet Christ before, and all be changed, and
thenceforth ever to be with him, the Lord; the Devil cast into the Lake of
Fire, and wicked men sent into Hell, etc. What use can be then of the New
Heavens and New Earth after the great day of Judgment? But these Heavens will
not be the making a new frame of the material Heavens, when the old are passed
away (as after may be showed) but will be Prophetical Heavens, grounded upon
Gods Word, both for the Nature, Times, and Use of them: when, as follows, there
will be no Sea, viz. such an unsteady state of things as the seven headed and
ten horned Beast rose out of, when the Barbarous Nations had broken the Western
Empire in pieces to make way for the ten Crowned Horns: or such Waters as the
Whore sat on ever since unsteady rolling Ways: No such Mystical Sea will have
room then in that Kingdom of Christ and his Saints, that cannot be moved or
shaken, Heb. 12.9. as the frustrating of Satan's attempt with his last Gog and
Magog will certainly manifest: But the New Heavens will be those Heavenly
Creatures coming with Christ, when he removes his Court from Heaven into this
World for the time of his great day of Judgment, which were formerly the
Inhabitants thereof; in which sense our Savior, upon the Whoren destruction,
calls upon the Heaven of Saints to rejoice, Rev. 18.20. Rejoice over her thou
Heaven: then to manifest what Heaven he meant, he adds, and ye Apostles and
Prophets which shall be Inhabitants of the New Jerusalem, chap. 21. v. 2. So
also the Heaven of Angels that comes th^n with Christ to attend on him in his
Davidical Kingdom, when the Tabernacle of God will be with men: (And where
Christ will then be, there Heaven must needs be) And there will also then be
such a Prophetical New Earth too, wherein will dwell Righteousness, as the
Apostle Peter speaks, 1 Pet. 3. for a King shall then Rule in Righteousness, as
the Prophet speaks, and Princes in Judgment, Esa. 30.1. among the Nations of
them that shall then be saved, their Rulers shall be Peace, and their Exactors
Righteousness, Esa. 60.17. which will be the stability of Christ's Throne then;
and such Heavens and Earth appear to be the Object of this Holy Apostles
Vision, ver. 1. and the 2d verse confirms the same; I John saw the Holy City
descending, etc. (as we may have occasion afterward more fully to show) and
the Tabernacle of God is then said to be with men, and he to dwell with them,
viz. for that said 1000 years reign in his personal presence in that body which
God gave him, Heb. 10.5. which was typified by the Tabernacle of old, wherein
the then acceptable services of God were performed, and that body whereby at
Christ's death all acceptable Sacrifice for sin was wholly fulfilled to which
purpose is that expression of this holy Evangelist, John 1.14 of Christ's
living, but (...), a little while here lower than the Angels, as Heb. 2. that
he Tabernacled amongst us, as the words (...) do properly signify: Now that
Tabernacle of his body in the Type and Antitype being perfected in glory at the
Fathers right hand in this said state and time, personally comes in the Clouds
of Heaven in his own glory, and of the Fathers, and of all his holy Angels; and
that is the blessed Tabernacle there said to be with men, etc. as we have many
ways proved; namely, that that coming will be personal: his appearance to the
Jews personal: his feet standing on Mount Olivet personally: his bringing his
Saints with him, his personal act: his command to slay his Enemies before him
personally: his raising the said Saints, his peculiar personal act: his sitting
on David's Throne as the Son of David personally; and the many great things
wherein he will be admired of his Saints then in all his said great day of
Judgment, will be all personal, 2 These. 1.10. Se farther, Assert. 7. of our
Key, for his Personal Appearance and Reign.

A second Question may be, Why the Reign of Christ in his Davidical Kingdom
with his raised Saints being the last promised to the Posterity of Shem,
Abraham and David, is here the first spoken of, as performed in the 1000 years?

Answ. It is the chief thing promised to Christ as the Son of David; And the
Promise of Canaan made to Abraham and his spiritual Seed before (wherein the
Holy City Jerusalem is said to be prepared for the Forefathers was also
contained therein, as Heb. 11.16.) and hence the state of his people in Canaan
did by degrees grow up into a Kingdom (as the Scripture manifests) as the main
thing intended: for after the Promise to Abraham, both he, Isaac and Jacob were
Pilgrims and Strangers in the world a long time, and their natural race long
after in bondage in Egypt, 400 years in their Wilderness condition; and when
they possessed Canaan, they were under many oppressors above 400 years, in the
times of the Judges: but at last they grew up into a Kingdom in David's and
Solomon's time, etc. but when their Posterity had forfeited both Land and City,
etc. they have since remained in bondage all the times of the Gentiles
Monarchies, almost 2300 years, and so must (probably) do till David's Tabernacle
(as the Apostle James speaks, from Amos 9.11.) shall be raised up again: for
Christ with his raised Sts. at the times of Restitut. of all things; that
therefore being the last and chief thing promised, and the rest seem to make up
the glory and happiness thereof, it is therefore here first spoken of again in
the table of the good times: So that where God left off before in fulfilling
Ancient Promises to the Fathers for the sins of their natural Race in that
chief Mercy of the Kingdom there likewise, he here in revealing his
Restoration for the comfort of their spiritual Race begins with again in that
said glorious Kingdom of Christ to come: in both which respects it being the
chief thing promised, and also shortly now to be performed for Christ and his
Saints, it may appear very meet and congruous that it should here be set in the
Table of these good times in the first place, as the measure of all the rest
that follow, which do all but make up the happiness of that Kingdom; as Christ
reckoned his Sufferers and two Witnesses chief in the bad times, Rev. 11. which
times also are chiefly measured by the 1260 days of years, during their
Prophesying in Sackcloth: So in the Renovation God seems to begin chap. 20.
where in their natural Race by reason of their sins, he had left, and in chap.
21, and 22. proceeds backward to speak of the rest, and lastly, of the Paradise
of God, the first lost, and last to be restored by Christ the second Adam, in
that state in the world.

2. And for the bringing on of this Kingdom of Christ the Son of David with
his raised Saints, God has ever since the fall of that Tabernacle, overturned
all the Gentiles States and Kingdoms successively in their orders, (as in
Nebuchadnezzars Image, Dan. 2. and Daniels Visions of the four Beasts
destroying each other, Dan. 7. was signified) and will still do so till the God
of Heaven set up this Kingdom as the top of these Mercies, that should never be
destroyed; but as the Kingdom of the Stone should destroy all others in the
world, till it became a Mountain filling the whole Earth, (which Christ has
now almost fulfilled) and which will be that state thereof in the 1000 years of
the reign of Christ with his Raised Saints, for which the said Restitution of
all things will be accomplished, which was spiritually and powerfully begun at
Christ's first coming, upon his Resurrection and Asoention, when he led:
Captivity Captive, tryumphing gloriously over all the powers of Darkness, Col.
3.15. and though ever since the Prince of the power of the Air, that rules
effectually in the Children of Disobedience has prevailed in all the suffering
times under the Dragon and Beast, now almost for 1700 years to bring on
Persecutions and Sufferings of the Saints, who notwithstanding by Christ's
Divine and Powerful Grace have been carried on to suffer with him or for him;
yet in that state approaching, he will not only free them from all such
Miseries, and Evils now in the world through Sin, but bring them into that
happy state of Reigning in the world with himself as his Spouse, that with him
shall then in her it all things, with their sure Mercies of David. in this
Univer salo and perpetual Kingdom in the world: in reserence unto which, the
Renovation of all things will then be made by God himself, as in the Text.

The third Question: But how does it appear that such a coming and Kingdom of
Christ shall be above 1000 years in the world, before the last general
Judgment, when he will descend with a shout, etc. 1 These. 4.16.

Answ. It will most manifestly appear, not only from our Saviors Table of the
good times, which we spoke of but now, and from the litteral sense of the 1000
years, which we spoke sufficiently of, page 38. of the Saints bodily
Resurrection, which is constantly granted by all sound Expositors, to be
literally so understood: neither is it other vise taken in the Beasts 42
months: nor are the Prophetical days of the two Witnesses, Rev. 11. [or Sons
of Oil, Zech. 4. standing before the Lord of the whole Earth, ver. 14. to which
that Prophecy seems chiefly to have reference, etc.] understood otherwise than
for 1260 days of years: and there is much less reason to pervert Christ's words
of his own, and his said Saints Reign from their litteral sense, when he most
plainly says they are 1000 years: and where are any numbers of years in
Scripture to be found, but for that individual number they are set for: the
lives of all Ancients, Patriarks and Fathers, the times of Judges, Reigns of
Kings, continuance of States are set down by their peculiar number of years,
without which nothing could be resolved of: and in chapter 20. (as Mr. Mede
observed) that Christ set down things more plainly there, than in all that book
before: and because men have been averse to think so of these last parts, there
have come up many mistaken conceits of anticipating Satan's binding in the
primative times of Persecution, and the Saints reigning under their greatest
sufferings, but not in the sense here intended, which will also be performed:
and the taking the New Jerusulem state for the Kingdom of Heaven, and the New
Heavens and New Earth to be after the last Judgment, and the like: which being
resolved by the Scripture Foundations to which this part of the Revel. has
particular referonce, they will upon due consideration appear very evidently to
belong to this set time of the 1000 years us by our 15 Reasons why they shall
be in the world may also be manifest, and by our first Convincing Arg. of 36
Particulars to be according to Scripture, before, in, and after the said 1000
years; and by our many distinctions of Christ's appearance or coming at
Antichrists destruction, and of his descending above 1000 years after with a
shout, and the voice of an Archangel, and the Trump of God at the Saints
General Rapture, and Resurrection of the wicked: peruse them seriously, they
have Scripture warrant, etc. And as Mr. Mede observed it, to be the usual
Error of the Jews to confound the first and second coming of Christ;
overlooking the Humility of the first, which was not often before clearly
distinguished, except by Daniel, and in some few places: so Christians do much
in these times over look the Mercy of the Jews at Christ's second coming little
regarding Christ's irrefragable resolutions of many things of the last times,
which were given to him alone by the Father to instruct his Church in, yea
though they be founded upon many other parts of Scripture, and refer
unseasonably to what concerns both Jews and all promised Mercies to the raised
Saints to the times of the last General Judgment, above 1000 years most
evidently, after their set times.

Object. But many Learned men have conceived that gloriouss City decyphered,
Rev. 21. and the Paradise of God to be the Kingdom of Glory in the highest
Heavens.

Answ. Besides our former said approved Reasons that it will be in the World,
the Apostle Paul, Gal. 4. calls that the Jerusalem that is now above, the
Mother of all Saints, being the peculiar Mansion at present of all the Spirits
of Just men made perfect, where they remain in happy Security, Peace and
Blessedness in their present state, expecting the time of the said first
Resurrection of their bodies, which when Christ comes and brings them with him
to raise and unite their Spiritual Bodies with them, will be the Jerusalem here
said then to come down from God out of Heaven, which glorious place and City is
prepared by God for the Fathers then, and all such; as the Apostle teaches,
Heb. 11.16, 40. that without us shall not be made perfect, or perfect in one,
as our Savior prayed, John 17. which are called the Lambs Wife; of the
solemnity of whose Marriage the Kingly Prophet David foretold, Psalm. 45. when
that Bride, instead of Fathers, shall then have Children whom she may make
Princes in all Lands: and as Solomon in his most excellent Song in the book of
Canticles divinely illustrateth it, of the return of the Shulamite, and the
like; which will be the fulfilling of the Covenant to Abraham and his Spiritual
Seed, by that one Divine Seed Christ in that state and time: and for the
Paradise of God annexed to that state which Christ will then restore instead of
that lost before in the world by the first Adam; it will be part of the
Restitution which God will then effect, as we hope in due place farther to
manifest from this Text.

But for the clearer discovery of what has been said, let us a little look
back again to the beginning of this Chapter, where it is said this Holy Man had
the Visions of the New Heavens and the New Earth, which as to their time was
not after the last Judgment, as was said; neither is there placed before it
that usual expression in this Book, when things which follow are spoken of:
[After this I saw] as chap. 18.1. and chap. 19.1. but are 1000 years before it,
as is very evident: neither is it any New making of the Material frame of them;
but they will be Prophetical Heavens and Earth, (as was said) suitable to that
Kingdom wherein Christ will reign with his raised Saints (as the wood
witnesses) of which Kingdom these are to be considered as the integral parts:
for never came such a King into the world before, that must not only have all
Nations to do him service, and the Heathen to be given to him for his
Inheritance, and the utmost parts of the Earth for his possession: but when he
comes, all the Elohim, Angels or Gods must Worship him; yea, all knees in
Heaven and Earth, and under the Earth, must then bow and be subject to him,
owning him to be Lord: but he must also then have those New Heavens and New
Earth then made for him and his Spouse: As Satan had his Mystical Heavens
before, when the Pagans worshipped Sun, Moon and Stars: Their Mercury, Jupiter,
Mars, Apollo, with the multitudes of their Heathenish false Deities. And hence
it was under Christ's spiritual Kingdom of the Stone, that there was in the
primitive times a great Battle in Heaven betwixt Michael and his Angels, and
the Dragon and his Angels, Rev. 12. but the issue thereof was, that the Dragon
was cast down from his Heaven to the Earth: And as God very remarkably by the
Ministry of the Prophet Jeromiah, caused it to be proclaimed before the
Captivity of Babylon, chap. 10.11. and that verse is only written (as Mr. Mede
well observes) in the Caldean Language: whither that People was shortly after
to be led Captives: [The Gods, said he, that made not the Heavens nor the
Earth, even they shall perish from the Earth, and from under these Heavens:]
and accordingly, chap. 25. God sent by him a Cup of Wrath to be drunk by those
many Nations that owned such Gods: And afterward, neither Bell nor Merodach of
the Caldeans could save themselves or their Worshippers from their Enemies; nor
the Grecian Monsters, and multitudes of feigned Gods and Goddesses could
deliver themselves, or those that served them: and when Pagan Rome had
engrossed the Idol Gods of all Nations which they subdued, they were at Christ's
first coming struck dumb, and ceased to deliver their Oracles, as formerly; and
after by Constantine the Dragon was cast out of his Heaven to the Earth; and
likewise that Beast that rose out of the Earth afterward, with all his
Paganized Christianity of Popish Idolatry will shortly also find Jeremiahs
Proclamation true, That such Idol Gods shall perish from the Earth, and from
under these Heavens: for not only all such, supposed Heathen Gods, but all
Pagano-Christian Idols also will be then totally and finally casheired for ever
out of the World, Psalm. 97.7. Esa. 2. And such like Heavens were ascribed in
Scripture to Kingdoms and States, according to many Oriental Notions, (as Mr.
Mede observed) who reckoned what was Superior in their States were their
Heavens; as Monarchs, and Governors, and what was Inferior their Earth: But
these New Heavens and New Earth being of an Heavenly Excellency; not only
(...), according to the Opinions or Customs of the vain World, but (...),
according to Truth, are to be taken for what God has promised then, and as his
Word sets them forth: the Heaven of Angels will come with Christ then to wait
upon him and to worship him: and Christ coming personally with them then will
make it an Heaven indeed: and then also he brings all his Saints that sleep in
Jesus with him: so that there will also be then an Heaven of Saints also, as he
speaks at the Whores Destruction, chap. 18.20. Rejoice thou Heaven, ye
Apostles and Prophets, and even that Mystical Heaven, the New Jerusalem shall
then come from God out of Heaven, as is explained v. 2. which is called the
Bride, the Lambs Wife, ver. 9. and for her also with the Lamb be made then also
the New Earth, wherein will dwell Righteousness, 2 Pet. 3. when not only the
Tabernacle of God will be with men, as ver. 3. but her Officers shall be Peace,
and her Exactors Righteousness, Esa. 60.17. and all that happiness in that time
of refreshment from the presence of the Lord, Acts 3. and as follows, ver. 4.
that God will not only wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be
no more death nor crying, nor pain, but Christ will personally dwell with them
in that Tabernacle wherein he was before [(...)] only for a little while made
lower than the Angels (as we said) but then he will be exalted far above all
Principalities and Powers, and every Name, etc. and continue to dwell with
them, and be their God, and they shall be his people: and for the assured
making of these Integral parts of Chtists said Kingdom, viz. the New Heavens
and the New Earth is Gods great glorious and gracious undertaking at that time
set forth in this text: and he that sat upon the Throne, said, Behold, I make
all things new, etc.

Now having thus prepared the way by removing these former difficulties, and
opening the context, we shall by Gods assistance proceed to consider the Text
it self, both in respect of the words and sense thereof; which is a farther
step and degree of that most excellent Vision given to this beloved Apostle,
and (says he) he that sat upon the Throne said, behold, I make all things New.
In which words we have a most excellent declaration of the completing of
Christ's outward visible work of Redemption in the world, with its Illustration
and Confirmation: the Declaration is of the happy Renovation of all things in
that very determined point of time, and occurrence of affairs, which the Series
and order of this Vision leads to. [I make] that is, I now make [when the great
Enemies are destroyed, and Christ's Davidical Kingdom is to take place, and the
Saints raised, even in that state of things, I make all things New: for Christ's
unalterable order of these things is a doctrinal Foundation as was said] and
this most Divine Declaration is first Illustrated from the person that spoke
the words, and undertakes the work, whole speaking then will be doing, as at
first, so said the Psalmist, He spoke the word and they were made, he commanded
and they were created: so when the period of this present State shall come, God
will as by speaking a word of Command make all things new.

2. Again in respect of the excellency of his person he is here said to be he
that sat upon the Throne, who is Hieroglyphically and gloriously described in
chap. 4. as God made known in his Church, as on a Throne; for in Judah is God
known, and his Name is great in Israel: at Salem is his Tabernacle, and his
dwelling place in Zion, Psalm. 78.1. and he is known to them in the face of
Jesus Christ in all his glorious Attributes, Nature and Persons, as revealed in
the Word, 2 Cor. 4.4, 6. as here compassed with the Rainbow, the Token of the
Covenant, made with Noah through Christ for all Creatures, to the end of the
world, etc. and also has 7 Lamps burning before the Throne, which are the 7
Spirits of God, or the Holy Ghost, chap. 1.4. and about the Throne 24. Seats
for the 24 Elders, and within the Throne 4 living Wights, full of eyes within,
continually saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and
is to come: So that there God is set forth as very gloriously made known in his
Church to be three in Persons, one in Essence to be ever so worshipped and
glorified by them before and since, for his great and good work of Creation,
ver. 11. For as at first he Created the world by Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 3.9. the
Holy Spirit moving upon the face of the Waters, Genesis 1.2. so he has, and does,
and will redeem and fully work his Renovation of the world by the Lamb that was
slain, and has since lived again, and the book with 7 Seals is delivered to
him, to open and execute the Contents thereof, as in chap. 5. by the power and
effectual working of the Holy Ghost, one God with the Father and the Son, and
proceeding from the Father and the Son: So the 24 Elders, and the 4. Beasts or
living Wights worshipped him at the Whores Destruction, as sitting on the
Throne, chap. 19.4, etc. and in the end of chap. 4. and 5. though this last was
upon assurance of the fulfilling of all Revelation Prophecy: But in the Text
he that sits upon the Throne with a Rainbow about it, and seven Lamps burning
before it, says, Behold, I make all things new, etc.

Thus then Almighty God, Three in Persons, and One in Essence, so manifest in
his Church, that so Created the World, and also by his Son and Holy Spirit
carries on his work of Redemption, and full Renovation of the World, who
makes known this Divine Declaration thereof by his Servant John for the use of
his Church, in these latter times to be fulfilled most certainly (as will after
appear) in the near approaching times of the Restitution of all things, the
next Illustration of it is that usual note of Attention and Observation,
Behold: but here to be more highly considered as a notation of Admiration and
Adoration; Behold, Admire the wonderful Mercy herein contained, adore him in
the Divine excellency thereof: the like is done in many like Notations set
forth by God respecting his wonderful work begun, and by degrees carried on,
and to be perfected by his Son Jesus Christ, as first especially in laying his
great Foundation in Sion, Esa. 28.16. Behold I lay in Sion a chief Corner
Stone, Elect and Precious, as says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.6. which the said
Prophet sets forth with a great deal of Illustration in the Heberew, etc. (...)
and aptly rendered by Arias Montanus, Ecce ego fundo in Sion Lapidem, Lapidem
munitionis anguli preciosi fundamenti fundati, etc. Behold I found in Sion a
Stone, a Stone of defense, of a precious corner of a foundation, founded and to
be adored and admired likewise therein. The like of the Woman's Seed promised
without Man, Behold a Virgin shall bear a Son, Esa. 7.14. and yet a Virgin when
she has a Son; but such a Son as should be God as well as Man, who should be
called Immanuel, God with us: here was likewise matter of Admiration, and
Adoration, that he that was the Eternal Father, as well as the Prince of Peace;
of the increase of whose Kingdom upon the Throne of David there shall be no
end, should yet in such a time be born of a Virgin, etc. Esa. 9. The like by
the Angel is used to the Shepherds at the birth of that said Virgins Son, Luke
2.10, 11. Behold I bring you tidings of great joy, which shall be to all
people, etc. So when God will make the New World for his said Son, Behold I
make, etc. and the season of this work is the Alpha and Omega of this book of
Revelation, to be observed, and admired, and desired too by the Saints, chap.
1.7. Behold he comes with Clouds at the Jews Conversion, who are there said to
have pierced him: which I conceive will not only be in mercy to the Jews, as
Zech. 12.10. but all Kindreds also of the Earth shall wail because of him
penitently also, when he then comes the second time without sin to Salvation,
because the Heathen shall be given then to him for an Inheritance, and the
utmost parts of the Earth for his possession, and they shall also then serve
him, Dan. 7.27. and as the Prophet says in those times, ten men shall take
hold of the skirt of a Jew, Zech. 8.32. to join themselves to them in the
service of the God of Israel; and the great shakings and dessolations in the
world when the glorious Majesty of Christ shall then appear, as Esa. 2.17, 19.
so shaking terribly the Earth (probably) may much prepare all the Kindreds of
the Earth that remain then so to wail with Contrition that they have not known
Christ before, and then so wailingly mourn after him; therefore is added by the
Holy Spirit, Even so Amen to both, Rev. 1.7. [N. B.] to teach us ever after to
pray for the fulfilling of these so strongly promised Mercies then, which is
therefore the chief drift of that Petition, Thy Kingdom come; that also then
Gods Will may be done in Earth as it is now in Heaven; for which in that state
there is great ground to believe: and so his Name will be hallowed then as now
in Heaven, which is the great end of all Prayer. And then he comes also with
reward for his Saints, as chap. 22.12. and 11.18. The way to love Christ's
appearance, as the Apostle Paul persuades all sound Christians, is to know the
happy advantages that all such shall have thereby at that time, when God will
make all things New that pertain to Christ's Davidical Kingdom, as here, etc.
The next thing considerable respecting this comfortable Declaration of God, is
the Confirmation of it. 1. by commanding the Holy man to record it for the
comfort of his Church, Write, says he. 2. He gives a twofold ground of such
Confirmation or Record of it, first in regard that the words were true as
anciently delivered by the God of Truth, that cannot lie, or deceive, or be
deceived: but secondly, they are likewise faithful, grounded upon many gracious
promises and Covenants, as we hope farther to manifest. Come we now to consider
the main thing declared that God at such a time or state of things occurring in
the world, makes all things new, being Emphatically called by the Apostle
Peter, The times of Restitution of all things: which Renovation of all things
is three ways considerable: first, Negatively, what it is not. Secondly,
Privatively, in respect of what God will then remove or take away. Thirdly,
Positively, in respect of what God will do in the performance of that great and
gracious work.

1. Negatively, in respect of what he will not do; it does not imply that God
will then bring a total destruction upon the Created World, by destroying it
and the Creatures in it, with wicked men then to be destroyed out of it, and
other Creatures to be placed in a New world, which we have no Scripture grounds
for; but for the contrary: for that is to be done at Christ's sitting upon the
great white Throne at the dissolution of all things, Rev. 20.11. above 1000
years after; neither in reason can it be conceived; for what use Creatures
should serve when good and bad men were removed before out of it, etc.

2. Privatively, by Gods removing and taking away many evil things out of the
world, which have been brought into it (since he first in 7 days Created
finished his great and good work of Creation) by Satan, Sin, and wicked men;
such as the Curse, Corruption, Bondage, and Enmity of the Creatures since
abiding in it, in an eminent degree with the causes thereof, by destroying many
wicked men out of the Earth, Rev. 11.18. and binding Satan for the 1000 years
in the bottomless pit, that he deceive not the Nations any more till that 1000
years shall be finished: therefore (I say) with the causes thereof; for sublata
causa tollitur effectus: and contrarily; to bring the world into a capacity to
be made better, and to be put into a New and better frame than when they
prevailed in it, he will then also eminently remove and take away those many
evils caused and brought into the world by them: first, the curse brought in by
them will then be taken away: for says Christ, there shall then be no more
curse, Rev. 21.3. the earth which was cursed by these means upon the Fall,
shall be eminently restored unto its native fruitfulness, peculiar to that time
and state, Ezekiel. 34.26, 27. There shall then be showers of blessing upon it,
and the trees of the field shall yield her fruit, and the Earth shall yield her
increase: and with that fruitfulness they shall then have safety and peace, for
they shall be safe in their Land, and shall know that I am the Lord, being
delivered from their Enemies, as there follows, etc. So also Ezekiel. 36.8. Ye
Mountain of Israel, ye shall shoot forth your branches, and yield your fruit to
my people of Israel: and ver. 11. I will multiply upon you man and beast, and
they shall increase and bring fruit: and ver. 29, I will call for the Corn and
increase it, and lay no famine upon you, etc. yea their Land shall become for
fruitfulness like the Garden of Eden, ver. 35. and Joel 3.18. The Mountains
shall drop down with New Wine, and the Hills shall flow with Milk: which are
high expressions of the fruitfulness of those times: also Hos. 2.21. In that
day will I hear, says the Lord, I will hear the Heavens, and the they shall
hear the Earth, and the Earth shall hear the Corn and the Wine and the Oil,
and they shall hear Jezreel. Again, the Enmity of men and other creatures will
then be also removed, which have prevailed in the world from the fall: first
among men there has been (since the fall, Murder, and Slaughter, and Blood
shed prevailing and so will still until those times) amongst them: but then
Nation shall no more rise against Nation, neither shall they learn War any
more; yea they shall beat their Swords into Plowshares, and their Spears into
Pruning hooks, Esa. 2.4. and Hos. 2.18. I will break the Bow, and the Sword,
and the Battle out of the Earth, and will make them to lie down in safety: and
for the peaceableness of other Creatures which not only Allegorically (as some
understand the Promises to that purpose, but they will literally be performed)
when that Savage Cruelty in their corrupt natures since the fall, will then be
taken away, that the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, as the Prophet Esa.
speaks, chap. 11.6. and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, etc. and they
shall not hurt or destroy in all my holy Mountain: and Esa. 65.25. The Wolf
and the Lamb shall feed together, and the Lion shall eat straw like the
Bullock, etc.

So the hurtful influence of the Heavens, and the distempers of the 4 Elements,
and the noxious qualities of the Creatures will be then wonderfully refined:
that the Heavens, as God promises, may hear the earth, and they hear the Corn
and Wine and Oil, etc. And the Inhabitants of Jerusalem shall not then say, I
am sick, when the people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity,
Esai. 33.24.

The Creatures which since the Fall have been held under the bondage of
corruption, under which the whole Creation still groaneth, shall, as the
Apostle teaches, Romans 8.21. in that state be delivered from it, and that also
into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God.

The bodies of all Saints (saving some few, as Enoch, Moses, Elias) have lien
rotting in the Grave, and so will till then, but they shall all in that time
and state receive the Adoption, Romans 8.21. the [faithful Gentiles then
receiving that with all benefits belonging to them as the spiritual Seed of
Abraham, Gal. 3.29. as well as to his faithful natural Seed both Jews and
Israelites] which he explains in the next words, even the redemption of our
bodies [N.B.] which (as was showed before) will be the inlet to all those
Saints into the happiness of that time and state, etc. And thus briefly of Gods
removing the said evils or the like, with the causes thereof. When Christ the
Universal King of Kings, and Prince of the Kings of the earth, Rev. 19. and
Rev. 1.5. will not only rescue the great and excellent building of the World
out of the power of the Prince of the Air, but repair the ruins and
desolations he and his retinue of wicked men and Devils have wrought in it, and
reduce it for himself and his Spouse the Saints into a far better condition
than ever it was in before, which will be by Gods said removal of the said
evils, then when he makes all things new. Thirdly, this renovation is to be
considered Positively in respect of Gods conferring good upon them at those
times of restitution of all things, Acts 3. viz. upon Christ the Lamb and his
Bride then, which I conceive is taken for both sorts of Saints both then
raised, and in the natural life (though then in their proper different states)
yet by gracious dispensation will probably be both of one Communion, which we
are taught to believe according to Gods Word, suitable to that of Christ and his
Disciples forty days after he rose from the dead.

Secondly, The Positive part is included in the same declaration, Genesis 13.15.
after explained by many gradual Promises and Covenants. We shall begin with the
last at first in this Divine Key of our Saviors, viz. the Kingdom promised to
David and his Seed for ever, which is the main thing here spoken of, that
Christ with his Saints should enjoy in that state, comprehending all the rest,
which all the other tend unto and are to be conferred with it, before the
enjoyment of which the raised Saints have their spiritual bodies then, whereby
they are put into a capacity to enjoy all the happiness of that time and state,
and the Jews, Israelites, and Gentiles shall be converted and united into one
sheepfold etc. This Kingdom was foretold by Jacob, Genesis 49. and by Balaam,
Numb. 24. and often prophesied of by David, confirmed in Nathan's Message, seen
in Vision by Daniel, at what time Christ should receive it over all Nations
under the whole Heavens, Dan. 7.27. with many other confirmations by the
Prophets, and declared by Christ that it was his Fathers pleasure to give it to
his little little flock, Luke 12.32. that they suffering with Christ should
reign with him: which in the 1000 years they are said to do, Rev. 20.4. of
which more is said in our twelve foundations of the faith thereof, and in the
Word written, and elsewhere from Scripture-Authority. For this great King are
the New Heavens and earth to be made, without such a mystical moveable Sea out
of which the Beast arose in the times of the Barbarous Nations Cmmotions, and
the Whore has sitten upon those many troubled waters ever since: but this
Kingdom that Christ with his Saints shall receive, is such, as cannot be shaken
or moved, Heb. 12.28. this said Kingdom is the first and main thing here spoken
of by Christ (though the last promised to David and his Divine spiritual Seed)
which the Apostles expected should be restored, Acts 1.6. and will be at that
time of the raising up of David's Tabernacle, which had been fallen in his
natural Race 2300 years (probably) before, Acts 15.16. Amos 9.11.

The next thing belonging to this Kingdom for which the integral parts thereof
the New Heavens and the New Earth are then to be be made, as Rev. 21.1. is that
which is contained in the Covenant to Abraham and his Seed respecting the
promised Land, as the Mother City thereof typified by that Jerusalem of old
which is now in bondage with her Children, Gal. 4. And is now above till the
time of the descending of it from God out of Heaven, when Christ comes in the
Clouds of Heaven, and brings all his Saints with him, till the Marriage of the
Lamb spoken of Rev. 19. and 21. which is called the great, and holy, and
beloved Jerusalem, that City with foundations that Abraham expected, and is
said to be prepared for the forefathers, and all the faithful since, Heb.
11.16.40. whose Maker and Builder is God: which appears to be in great part the
New Heavens, as Rev. 18.20. as we in part showed before, with the Heaven of the
glorious Angels coming to attend on Christ when his Tabernacle of his bodily
presence will be with men, not for a little time, as Heb. 2. at his first
coming, but he will dwell with them the space of the 1000 years.

Then will also be according to many Promises to the Saints in the natural life
of all the Nations that shall then be saved, the New Earth wherein will dwell
righteousness, when Christ that great King shall reign in righteousness, and
Princes shall rule in judgment, Esa. 32.1. whose Officers shall be peace, and
whose Exactors shall be righteousness, Esa. 60.17. when Christ sits upon the
Throne of David, to order it, and to establish it with Judgment and with
Justice, from thencforth and for ever, viz. unto the end of the world, Esa.
9.7. the Prophesies and Promises which respect that state of Gods peoples
mercies, benefits and Privileges therein are exceeding great and manifold,
that would require a large Volume to explain them, respecting Saints then in
the natural life; both in being greatly freed from the evils we now spoke of,
with the manifold enjoyments of good; but especially in regard of their large
measure of Grace then promised as in the New Covenant, first made in their Book
of Deuteronomy, after the first Tables had been brok on, remarkably set down
Deuteronomy. 30. to ver. 11. for circumcising the heart of that people and their Seed
after all their great dispersions; who shall be settled in their own Land then,
and remove no more, as 2 Samuel 7. and Gods Sanctuary shall be with them for
evermore, Ezekiel. 37.28. when God will pour his Spirit on them generally, Joel 3.
as he did upon his Disciples and some few at his first coming, and those
expressions of the New Covenant, Jer. 31.33, 34. and 32.39, 40. and Ezekiel.
36.25, 26, 27, etc. do chiefly belong to that people, and such as are united to
them in the natural life in those times that shall then walk in the light of
the said beloved Jerusalem, Rev. 21. (though we Gentiles have now our share in
them) through faith in some degree, but they then in the times of Restitution
much more by far, and this will then be that special great foundation of all
other temporal enjoyments, as the strong entail that Christ will make them of
all promised good.

And to all Saints in those times it is probable will arise that great
enlargement of Joy for the enlarging Christ's Kingdom with praise to God in
Christ for it, by the powerful operation of the Holy Spirit in that, together
with the inheriting of all promised mercies to themselves, they will see and
know then the great confluence of saved Souls then abundantly coming in upon
the like foundations from the Word of God, when all Nations shall see the
salvation of the God of Israel, and the Heathen shall be given to Christ [Gods
King then set upon his holy hill of Sion] for his inheritance, and the utmost
parts of the earth for his possession Psalm. 2. for if the Angels in Heaven
rejoice at one sinners conversion now: how will both Angels and Saints then
rejoice, when so many thousands and millions which will then be saved in the
prolonging of Christ's days, when he shall see his numerous seed (as promised to
the Fathers) and the will of the Lord shall prosper in his hand, Esa. 53. and
his City prepared will be large enough to contain all raised Saints being as it
is described a perfect Cube of 1500 miles in length, breadth, and heighh,
fitted for the motion and benefit of their spiritual bodies, yet said then to
have foundations, because then they will have their bodies, who needed no
foundations when they were Jerusalem above, only the spirits of just men made
perfect, Gal. 4.2. and for the other in the natural life they shall lengthen
their cords, and strengthen their stakes, Esa. 54.2. God has prepared fit
places for both, who fully knows the number of them all: Now many things in
Scripture are said to be prepared by God or Christ that will not have their
peculiar existence at present till the times come: So our Savior went to
prepare the beloved great Jerusalem for his Disciples, John 14.1, 2, 3. where
they shall behold this his glory which his Father has given him, John 17.24.
and this is the City prepared for the Forefathers, Heb. 11.16. and for us, v.
40. so says Christ, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, Matthew. 25.34. and
the eternal happiness which eye has not seen, ear has not heard, and which
God has prepared, 1 Cor. 2.9. and on the contrary, Hell torment is prepared
for the wicked, Matthew. 25.41. and Tophet is prepared of old for the King, Esa.
30.33. probably meant of the great Assyrian which will at that time be
destroyed, viz. the [Turk] called the Assyrian, Mich. 5.5. when the Assyrian
shall come into our Land, that is, possessing the Assyrians Kingdom then: now
all these so said to be [prepared] shall have their existence certainly in
their times; and it seems probable that this last Tophet with the River of
Brimstone, Esa. 30. will be out of the matter of the earth dissolved at last,
etc. which will yet make for the happiness of the Saints, that they have not
only escaped all such sufferings, but shall inherit such wonderful, manifold,
and everlasting happiness.

And now we come Fourthly to the last great Privilege of the said New
Jerusalem state, and the said Kingdom of Christ with his Saints, namely the
Paradise of God then likewise to be restored instead of that which was first
lost by the fall of the first Adam: last mentioned in this Divine Key, or bunch
of Keys of our Savior, of which (though from the fall intended) yet we hear
nothing particularly of it until our Savior by his death had purchased it, and
then promised it to the penitent Thief upon the Cross with him. This day thou
shall be with me in Paradise; whither Christ's Soul then went to take possession
of it for all his Saints: before he said, the Angels are said to carry Lazarus
into Abraham's bosom: but the Apostle Paul explains it afterward to be the
third Heaven, and Paradise where then it was, but after when the New Jerusalem
comes down with Christ from God out of Heaven, that Paradise of God is
described to belong to that Holy City, where is the Tree of Life, which
yields fruits every Month, and whose Leaves are for the healing of the
Nations, with the pure River flowing from the Throne of God and of the Lamb,
Rev. 22. which are Divine expressions of the happiness of the Saints then
spoken in resemblance unto the first Paradise, and to the living waters spoken
of by Christ, John 7.37, 38. which all the Saints shall in that state enjoy.
And so we have given a touch of these several parts of Gods Renovation of all
things at that time of the restitution of all things spoken of by the Apostle
Peter, Acts 3.21. But one thing more the Scripture speaks of to belong to the
same renovation, and that is the Dominion over the Creatures to be restored
then also when God shall put all things in subjection under Christ's feet, Psa.
8.4. and Heb. 2.8. together with the Creatures freedom from the bondage of
corruption into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, of which much in
Scripture, when the emnity shall be taken away from amongst them, as was said,
when Christ's rest shall be glorious, ver. 10. Now all these great Privileges
are founded upon the ancient Promises and Covenants of God to the faithful
Fathers, and thus Divinely unlocked by this said Key of our blessed Savior so
graciously left for his Churches consolation in these latter days, when the
evil suffering times are almost at an end, and that happy state of things for
the Saints is near approaching, as we hope many ways to manifest in considering
what those times of renova^ion or restitution are which is next to be
considered: And how should the evidence of these things stir up all Christians
to believe and act as to secure their own interest in them, and to cast off
every weight that presses down, that might hinder them in running their
Christian race to obtain the Crown with all such precious Jewels wherewith it
is so richly adorned: for these Scriptures for this happy state cannot be
broken.

We proceed to the third Head, namely, to consider what are the the times, or
in what state or occurrence of affairs in the world God will work this
renovation or restitution of all things.

Obj. But here an Objection must first be answered: Does not the Apostle Paul
tell us the times of renovation are past, 2 Cor. 5.17. If any man be in Christ
he is become a new Creature, old things are past away, says he, Behold, all
things are become new: in the very words of this Text.

Answ. The Holy Apostle speaks there of the great spiritual renovation of the
Souls of the faithful, the foundation whereof was laid at Christ's first coming:
and which will be the real ground to all Saints of obtaining their shares in
the great renovation which God will work for them in that state to come we
speak of, wherein all such shall have their part; for if Christ had not by his
Death, Resurrection and Ascension then laid the happy foundation by leading
captivity captive, triumphing gloriously over the powers of darkness, there
could have been no obtaining of this other, but since he has, this will
necessarily in its order and time follow thereupon, in that perfecting of the
work of Redemption in the world. Again, old things were then by that means
passed away, and all things become new then comparatively in respect of what
they were under the Old Testament before he actually came in our nature, before
Gospel Grace was dark and more rare, less efficacious, under many types,
shadows, and Ceremonial observances and Old Testament dispensations: under the
New Testament is a new and better Covenant, new and better Promises, new and
better Ordinances, new and better Dispensations, as might largely be set forth:
So then by his first coming was the chief foundation laid of all following
renovation of the world to come, then was indeed the inchoation and powerful
beginning of all happy renovation and the foundation laid of all the other, the
hopes whereof will be but building upon the sand without that founding upon the
Rock Christ by faith wrought in believers Souls by the powerful operation of
the Holy Ghost: but these times of restitution of all things we speak of are
quite another thing to be fulfilled for Christ and his Saints at his second
coming, which the first made way for when the outward visible total and final
Redemption will be fulfilled as well as the inward; for Satan remains still the
God of the world, and Prince of the Power of the Air, and works effectually in
the Children of disobedience ((...)) which will not believe, and he and they
both bring much suffering and persecutions upon the Saints, but in the
following renovation they will both be taken off, so that the Servants of
Christ shall then serve him in righteousness and true holiness before him
without fear of their enemies all the days of their lives, which is the mercy
promised to the Fathers, as Zacharias sweetly sings out, Luke 1, 72, 74, 75.
for then the inward and spiritual work of Redemption will be much more
perfected in the Saints, as well as the outward and visible for the Saints: And
thus much for answer to that Objection.

Now to proceed to consider what these times are, how set forth in Holy
Scripture, and how it does appear that they are now near approaching: for the
resolution whereof we must chiefly make use of this most Divine Book of
Revelation with some of Daniels Visions respecting the same times, as they are
by Christ more fully explained in their due series and order, which is a matter
of very great use in all the sufferings times of the Church, to Chap. 19. but
after of much advantage and benefit for the Church of God in those good and
happy times, to which our Saviors Divine Key of these things has special
reference, and is graciously given by him to open the Mysteries of them, for
the great use and consolation of his people in these later days, to which
purpose we shall consider those principal Texts of Scripture that have their
reference unto those latter days. The first is that great declaration of God
upon the Fall of man, Genesis 3.15. which is the most comprehensive of all others
both containing removal of evil, and conferring of good in the Restitution of
all things, upon which accounts Christ has ever since proceeded in the
execution of all his three great Offices, of the great Prophet, Priest, and
King for his Universal true Church, as the work his Father gave him to do,
until he make his great enemies his footstool, eminently by destroying of
wicked men that destroyed the earth, and binding of Satan, so to still the
enemy and the avenger: and finally at his casting him into the Lake of fire, as
was showed from Holy Scripture, when he will be utterly stilled, for by reason
of prevailing sin he brought the old world to suffer the Vengeance of the
Deluge by Waters, and Sodom and Gomorrah to be consumed with fire and brimstone
from Heaven, and even Gods people to be led captive by the Assyrians and
Caldeans with all other miseries befalling for sin before and since Christ
stilled him in good measure at his first coming, when he was struck dumb and
his Oracles put to silence, and more stilled him under the sixth Seal when he
was cast down from his Regencie of Heathenish Idolatry in his Heavens under the
Pagan-Rulers unto the earth, whereupon in his great wrath he betook him to his
last design of setting up the twofold Beast to continue till the said great
stilling of him in the 1000 years; also that great Oracle of God, Psalm. 110.1.
much spoken of in the New Testament has also direct relation unto the said
times when Christ shall cease to sit at his Fathers right hand in Heaven, and
his enemies, as was said, be made his footstool: till which times says the
Apostle Peter also, Acts 3.31. the Heavens must receive Christ, viz. till these
times of restitution of all things deciphered in the Text by him that sits upon
the Throne, when his Church will be refreshed with Christ's presence and the
Tabernacle of God then be with men, and he dwell with them that space of the
1000 years, etc. in the third verse of this Chapter, till which times the
Apostle says, Heb. 10.13. Christ sits there expecting till his foes be made
his footstool, when Turk and Pope who stand in the way to hinder Christ's said
Kingdom, shall be destroyed.

Unto these times also relates that great promise made by God unto Abraham upon
that great act of his faith and obedience, in sacrificing his Son Isaac, Genesis
22. that his seed should possess the Gates of his Enemies (though it was
partially and typically performed in subduing such as would have stopped their
passage, or hindered their possession of the promised Land above 400 years
after, when the iniquities of the Amorites were arrived to their fullness, but
the great possessiou will be given to the Divine Seed, Christ at his second
coming, and by him to all the spiritual seed, and that so as never to be cast
out again, as 2 Samuel 7. when they shall remove no more from it: as also many
other Scriptures manifest.

Then also shall be performed from the beginning of revenges upon the Whore of
Babylon, and the great vengeance upon the enemy [Antichrist] fore prophesied by
Moses in that excellent Song for Posterity, Deuteronomy. 32.41.42. when God will whet
his glittering sword, and make his arrows drunk in blood, that Jews and
Gentiles may rejoice together, as Romans 15. [then also will be fulfilled that
great Promise Esa. 51.20, 21, 22, etc. respecting those times also, made upon
occasion of the destruction of old Babylon, the Type of this and much of
Jeremies Prophecy there is by the Spirit of God applied in the Revelations to
mystical Babylons destruction; but we read not of Gods peoples being then Gods
Battle-Axe and Weapons of War then, etc. for they came home then by Gods
working powerfully upon the Spirit of Cyrus, and they were ever low upon that
reduction; but when they shall be again restored, all that great prevalencie
over all enemies will take place fully; for they, as says the Prophet Malachy,
shall then be as ashes under the soles of their feet, Chap. 4.3. and all
Nations that will not then be subject to the beloved great and holy Jerusalem
shall be destroyed, Esa. 60.12.

And when the same Prophet Esaias, chap. 26.19. shows that Gods Saints shall rise
at the first bodily Resurrection, explained by our Savior Luke 20.35, 36. and
Rev. 20.5. Esaias declares the contrary of such as tyrannized over Gods Church
before, ver. 14. they, says he, are dead, they shall not live then, they are
deceased, they shall not rise then, etc. for the enemies shall be so taken away
for ever from the Land of the living, that they shall ever after be incapable
of good with the Saints in the world, and to all eternity: when those Children
of the Resurrection, as our Savior styles them, that shall then be counted
worthy of that world, (...), like the Angels of God, and be manifest to be the
Children of God, and shall not only be freed from all the evil formerly brought
upon them by men shall be made or Devils, but also shall by that blessed
Resurrection be made capable of all promised good belonging to that state. It
is very observable how the Spirit of God guided the Apostle Peter to set forth
many Divine Doctrines concerning those times, in that excellent portion of
Scripture, Acts 3.19, 20, 21. first, in that apt title he gives them, (...),
that they are the times of the restitution of all things; when God himself
says he will make all things new, in this Text, by putting them into their due
order and frame. Secondly, they will be times of refreshing. Thirdly, that
their sins will then be blotted out, that is one great refreshing. But
fourthly, a greater will be from the presence of the Lord, when the Tabernacle
of God will be with men, and he shall dwell with them. Fifthly, that God has
spoken of these times by his holy Prophets. And sixthly, by all his holy
Prophets since the world began, as we have showed largely concerning the
Kingdom of Christ, in the said 12 foundations of the faith thereof, and in the
Iren, and much may be done respecting the Jews and all Gods peoples Privileges
and Mercies belonging to those times, which we have or shall farther speak of:
so that wherever we may find the holy Prophets have spoken any thing tending to
break the Serpents head by the promised Seed of the woman, his head of Policy
or his head of Power, which shall in the issue chiefly and fully be performed
by him in his execution of the Judgment of the Great Day, which was preached to
the Old World by Enoch, and has been since the great Tradition, through
alltimes till the Apostle Jude recorded it in his Epistle, stiling it (as the
Spirit of God then taught him) the Judgment of the Great Day; which since by
our Savior in this most excellent Divine Book is explained to have a first Act
or the Matutinum Judicium according to what was long before revealed to Daniel,
Chap. 7. confirmed also by himself, Revel. 11.18. and Rev. 19. later end, at
the ruin of the Beast and false Prophet. But the other Act of the Great Day
has fince been by the Father only left to be made known by Christ himself to
explain and confirm most fully, for the use of his Church, concerning the last
finishing Act of the said Great Day of Judgment or the Vespertinum Judicium
thereof, without which his Church had been much in the dark in respect of such
great Points of the Doctrine thereof delivered by himself in this most
excellent Book, which he has so strongly, clearly, and exactly done beyond all
Parallel, in that Divine Table, respecting the 1000 years, of which and the
little space following, his Doctrines of the last Act, are the boundary (as we
showed before) and was needful to be explained, as being included in Enoch's
said Vision or Prophecy thereof: which said 1000 years include all those
promised Mercies most anciently laid down in the Word of God respecting the
Saints in those times, either privitively, in respect of the evils to be
removed; or positively, in respect of good things to be obtained by them in the
particulars beforesaid, so unlocked by our Saviors said Divine Key, or rather
Bunch of Keys (as they may be called) unlocking the several Cabinets wherein
the said Mercies are contained.

And on the other hand whatsoever of these Mercies for good we find the
Prophets have spoken of as to be obtained by Gods people in those times upon
any such notion respecting them, they are by the Apostle Peter's rule so to be
understood with respect thereunto, and the words of my Text are a sure Key to
open the meaning of them. Now since from the fall of the first Adam, the
Dominion lost by him has been usurped by the Prince of the Power of the Air
that has all along ever since effectually worked in the Children of
disobedience, and will not according to the word be fully taken away from him,
and his Vassels the evil Powers in the world, till those two said Acts of
Judgment be finished by the said promised Seed the Son of God; and since
likewise the Word of God gives so manifold evidence of the said promised Seed
the Son of God, his so taking to himself his great Power and Reigning, which
Kingdom of David was the highest mercy promised formerly to the Fathers as a
Type, and from whom Christ's Title has ever since been strongly confirmed, and
that for the sins of David's Posterity and people his Tabernacle fell at the
Babylonian Captivity, so as not to be raised till the time of the Antitype of
David's said Kingdom come, when the Tabernacle of David is said again to be
raised, as Amos 9.11. so expounded by the Apostle James, Acts 15.16. let us
from the fall thereof consider what discoveries of the seasons of the raising
thereof, we can find from the Word of God, which are these said times of the
restitution of all things, spoken of by the Apostle Peter, and the renovation
of all things spoken of in the Text by God himself. Now from the falling of
David's seid Kingdom in the Type, to the raising of Christ's Davidical Kingdom in
the Antitype, we have (as Mr. Mede observes) a twofold Calendar in Daniel
leading thereunto, the great Calendar passes through all the times of the four
Gentile Monarchies set forth by four Mettle Kingdoms, Chap. 2. in
Nebuchadnezzars Image which he saw, and the same again revealed to Daniel by
four Beasts destroying each other, Chap. 7. so that by these two testimonies
both to Jews and Gentiles, it might be in due time manifest what was there
fore-shewed shall in due time ensue, both for Christ's Kingdom of the Stone, or
Kingdom of Patience, from Christ's ascension, being that which God set up then,
Dan. 2.44. to his coming again, in which time it should Divinely and powerfully
destroy all other Kingdoms, at which said second coming it should become the
Kingdom of the Mountain, or Kingdom of Power, filling the whole earth upon
Christ's taking possession of it, Dan. 7.13, 14. and there seems to be an exact
Table of the times of this great Calendar, Chap. 8. of 2300 years, and that
upon that account ver. 17, 19. as almost is now by experience explained, with
the series of Revelation-Prophesie in the 1700 years therein contained; the
reasons thereof we have set down in our summary of Daniels Visions: and for the
lesser Calender of the 70 Weeks of years, Dan. 9 viz. 490 years, the Key of the
Times, whereof appears to be the 1335 years, after the full taking away of
Sacrifice, Chap. 12. and the setting up of the abomination of desolation most
remarkably done by Julian the Apostate Emperor; the Epoca whereof was about
365. or as Learned Bishop Usher conceives 363. to which the said 1335. being
added (probably) makes up the times of the great restoration of Jews and
Israelites at Christ's appearance, when the Turk is destroyed, Dan. 11.45. and
Chap. 12.1, 2. which is further explained by the 1700 years of
Revelation-prophesie, until that time, viz. about 320 years, under the six
first Seals, until Constantine the Great cast Satan from his Heaven to the
earth, by abandoning his Heathenish Idolatries of his Sun, Moon, and Stars,
worshipping his Jupiter, Mars, Mercury, etc. with the Pagan Worshippers and
Promoters thereof, unto which sueceeded the other Christian Emperors for their
short space spoken of, Rev. 17.10. viz. about 80, or 90 years, till the Dragons
flood, about the Woman's, the true Churches entering into her wilderness
condition, and from thence under the four first Trumpets proceeding out of the
seventh Seal, when began the sealed Judgments of the Trumpets, which carry on
the ruin of the Roman Civil state for their Persecution of the Saints in the
Primitive times, which four first are conceived to take up about 200 years
more, wherein the barbarous Nations by degrees broke in many pieces the Western
Roman Empire, giving opportunity for the Crowning of the ten Horns, turning the
Provinces thereof into so many Kingdoms, whose Power has since been given to
the Beast: But for the 2 first woe Trumpets, of the Locust Mahumetans, first
under the Saracens in the East, from their beginning about An. Dom. 600. to the
beginning of the Turkish Mahomitans in the Ottoman. family about 1300, which
was 700 more, and the Turks day, and hour, and month, and year, since
prevailing over the Easterm Empire, which by computation are 396 years more,
altogether will make up the whole account of about 1700 years, till the seventh
Trumpet begin to sound, when the Kingdoms of the world will become the Kingdoms
of our God and of his Christ, Rev. 11.15. And the same 1700 years of Revelation
Prophecy may also be computed by the Table of the suffering times under the
Dragon and the Beast, as they were pointed out before from Rev. 11. to ver. 13.
viz. the regular Primitive times, Chap. 11.1. contained about 320. when was the
Battle betwixt Michael and the Dragon and their Angels, Chap. 12. whereupon the
Dragons flood was poured out, but dried up by the earth, at the woman's entrance
into her Wilderness-condition about 90 years, when with her time, times, and
half a time begins the Beast to trample under foot the holy City for his 42
months, and also during the two witnesses time of 1260 days of years for all
these 3 are contemporaries, and end with the second Woe, ver. 14. when it is
said, the third Woe comes quickly, at the end of the last Gentile Monarchy;
the first of which Monarchies, viz. the Caldean, by Scripture is reckoned to
continue 70 years: the Mede or Persian, computed in Chronology about 230
years: the Grecian, about 280. until about 48 years before Christ's birth (says
Helvicus) or according to our former Computations of them in our Parallel of
the ruin of the Roman Empire: in the Caldean 70: about 70 or 80 more: in the
Persian Monarchies to Daniels weeks, which are 490 years more, in all, 640. to
the end of the last week, An. Dom. 5.38 years after Christ's birth; which last
38 years are to be deducted on our usual account: in which Parallel consider
well that conjecture of 1666. to the ruin of Antichrist from Christ's
ascension; though as Bishop Usher conceives we have lost therein four years,
etc. See there also our four mystical numbers, leading to the Jews deliverance,
Dan. 12.1. and the great Enemies ruin at the end of the 4 Monarchy, all which
have their periods about Ann. Dom. 1700. But as there were different
conjectures, 1. about eleven years or more, as before said, of the Jews
deliverance from Babylon, so should some like latitude be allowed to probable
conjectures now.

Thus having set down a scantling of these times, by which it may appear upon
these and many other accounts that the times of the restitution of all things
cannot be far off, which should make all men be careful to prepare for them,
and thereupon to be engaged the more to fight against their spiritual enemies,
the flesh, the would, and the Devil; and as Christ upon that account exhorts to
exercise Christian watchfulness, that their hearts be not overcharged with
surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, lest these times come upon
them unawares, Luke 21.34, 35, 36. and the rather, because, as he tells us,
they will come as a snare upon them that are in the whole earth. See to this
purpose the 9 Uses after the Tract on Rev. 22.20.

Now as God created the world at first, as the Apostle speaks, by Jesus Christ,
the Spirit moving upon the face of the Waters, Genesis 1.2. And as God was in
Christ reconciling the world unto himself, 2 Cor. 5.12. and also upon Christ's
Resurrection from the dead, whereby he was declared to be the Son of God with
Power, according to the Spirit of holiness, Romans 1.4. has committed all power
to Jesus Christ, and accordingly afterward gave him the Book with seven Seals,
Rev. 5. to open and execute the contents thereof to the end of the world and
last Judgment.

So at the times of this New State God creates this New World for, and gives it
to his Son as a boon, or (...), for doing all his Wills (as was said of David)
and to his spiritual Seed with him, as joynt-heirs thereof, which will also be
their sure Mercies of David, Esai. 55.3 and therefore it is said, at his coming
in the Clouds, Dan. 7.13, 14. there was given to him, viz. by the Father,
Dominion and Glory, and a Kingdom, that all Nations, People, and Languages
should serve him; and therefore he also says, John 17.24. that the Glory he
has therein his Father has given him; and upon this great account also, he
bids his little flock not fear, for it is his Fathers pleasure to give them the
Kingdom; and in reference unto both, will all things then be made new; for as
God has appointed him heir of all things; so then he shall actually possess
them: as also ver. 7. he promises to his overcomers, that they shall inherit
all things; and the Apostle teaches, 2 Timothy 2.12. that those that suffer with
him, shall reign with him: So that New State and Kingdom then is first and
chiefly given to Christ which comprehends all the rest, and is then prepared
for Christ, and those he then brings with him as his Spouse or Bride the Lambs
Wife, as her dowry at that great solemnity of the 1000 years. And this the
Fathers New Creation, as it is deciphered Esai. 65. will be a greater work than
the first (as the making of the spiritual New Creature is, 2 Cor. 5.17.)
because here is a great incapacity in the world, much resistance, much
depravation, much disorder, opposition in men and Devils, in all the Creatures
in it, saving that God has given Christ Power and Authority by degrees
aforehand to take it away; for which end our Savior in this excellent Book
(besides other Scriptures) has much therein set forth the usefulness of
Preaching the Crown as well as the Cross (though that in the first place) but
this as a motive to take up the Cross, which was formerly of great prevalencie,
as is storied of the Primitive sufferers, that desired Martyrdom that they
might reign with Christ in that his Kingdom on earth; surely they had much
greater faith of these things than is usually found in our days, when that
world is near approaching: and in this whole Book something is propounded to
all the Sufferers in their several times respecting the Jerusalem-state, as to
the Asian Churches to the Sealed ones, Chap. 7. etc. for their encouragements,
as we have showed in our seventh Convincing Argum. page 28, 29.

But we proceed to some other remarkable portions of Scripture that one way or
other point out these times unto us. To which purpose we may in a special
manner observe that peculiar mark in the the curious Divine contrivance of
Revelation-prophesie twice set down therein at the pouring out of the last
Vial, Chap. 16, 17. upon the Air of the Beast, probably taking away or binding
the Prince of the Power of the Air. Then came a great voice out of the Temple
of Heaven from the Throne, saying, it is done; which appears also to be at the
time of the sounding of the seventh Trumpet; when the Kingdoms of the world
become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ, Rev. 11.15. (which shows
their coincidence) about the same time; and likewise that this great work of
Gods renovation concurs in truth with both; for the binding of Satan and the
Reign of Christ with his raised Saints are fully contemporaries. So it is added
in the words next following this Text: as being here again spoken by him that
sat upon the Throne. And he said unto me, It is done: which declares the same
time that Satan is bound, and Christ reigns this great work will be effected:
and therefore is another evidence that all things contained in Chap. 21. and
22. belong to the time and state of the said 1000 years of Christ's Reign with
his raised Saints in his said Davidical Kingdom upon earth.

But the Question here may be moved, What is that that then will be done? Ans.
In General, many great enemies and workers of iniquity shall be destroyed, but
more especially it seems to have respect unto that great Divine Oracle
forenamed, The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my right hand, until I make
thy foes thy footstool, Psalm. 110.1. at which time likewise Christ receives his
Kingdom (for his enemies ruin is the beginning of Christ's Reign) so that in
respect of both, God himself says, It is done: viz. what he himself had
promised unto David's Lord before: and this time and day seems to be set forth
very emphatically upon occasion of the destruction of Gog (the Turk) then
likewise, and there also the Holy Ghost seems to use the same Watchword, for
the time thereof, as here was at the Beasts ruin, and that with a great deal
of Divine illustration: Behold it is come, and it is done, says the Lord God:
this is the day whereof I have spoken, Ezekiel. 39.8. the said Text appears to be
of great weight. N. B.

Quest. But how does it appear that the Turk shall then also be destroyed?

Answ. By Daniels last great Vision, Chap. 10.11.12. in Chap. 11. having spoken
something briefly of the Persian, and more of the Greek Monarchy, he comes to
the Roman, ver. 36. and of the Roman Antichrist, ver. 37, 38, 39. and then he
proceeds to speak of the two Ruiners of the Roman Monarchy, viz. the two
Woe-trumpets, Rev. 9. that is, the Saracens and Turkish Mahumitans: the first
styled the King of the South, the last the King of the North, whose History is
set down, as almost accomplished, ver. 41, 42, 43, 44, 45. as Mr. Mede
judiciously applied it, except the last, his setting his Tabernacle of his
Palace in the Holy Land, when he comes to his end, and none shall help him: and
then immediately follows [then stood up Michael the Prince of Daniels people]
and in that troublous time delivers them at his appearance (probably) when his
feet shall stand upon Mount Olivet, Zec. 14. and that mourning be, Zec. 12.10.
and ruin of both the first Gog and Magog, as well as the last is prophesied
very near together, etc. And this mark of destruction of both, It is done, etc.
seems the more to be observed, besides diverse others, both in Ezech. 38. and
39. and in the Revel. because as the Apostle shows, Heb. 10.13. Christ had
sitten to that time above 1600 years, expecting till such his foes should be
made his footstool. Therefore how fitly is it by God himself so punctually
declared both to the Jews and Gentiles, that he is not unmindful of his promise
to his Son Jesus Christ, but as he promised so at that set time: It is done: as
if he should say, my Beloved Son has many hundred years sitten at my right
hand expecting this particular season for my fulfilling such my promise to him;
and now that time is come, and it is done, this is the day whereof I have
spoken. Hence also the Holy Spirit directed the Apostle Peter to assert the
same thing for time: The Heavens must receive him (says he) till the times of
the restitution of things, Acts 3.21. as we showed formerly more fully and
remarkably. And since Christ has left the Book of the Revelation to open
Daniels before, shut up and sealed Mysteries, until the times of the end;
whilst the Roman Monarchy should continue after God had set up the Kingdom of
the Stone from Christ's first coming, in the 19 first Chapters of that Divine
Book, unto his second coming, Chap. 20. and has also given the remainder of
that Book as a Divine Key, or Bunch of Keys to open also the Mysteries of the
most ancient promised Mercies and Covenants to the Fathers, as we have showed,
which are to have their completing from his said second coming in that state of
the 1000 years, and those times of the restitution of all things, in my Text.
What pity is it that such matters of so great concernment to all Saints now
near approaching, are no more considered or understood, or duly prized or
improved: and now indeed is the proper and seasonable time to publish them, and
make them known: when Gods wonderful Grace and Goodness therein with his Truth
and Faithfulness in the performance of them, shall shortly be beheld with
admiration and adoration, as in the Text, Behold, I, etc. Another remarkable
deciphering of these times is the finishing of the Mystery of God, when the
seventh Angel begins to sound, Rev. 10.7. as he has declared to his Servants
the Prophets; so that the Prophets are here alleged as the foundation of what
ever should be fulfilled from the sounding of the last mystical Trumpet; and
therefore I conceive this finishing of the Mystery is not only applicaple to
the Jews conversion, though to that in special, yet to all others then to be
fulfilled in their their time; I rather conceive it includes the completing of
all the parts of the great Mystery of Godliness, which the Apostle Paul sets
forth so particularly in order concerning Christ, 1 Timothy 3.16. And without
controversy great is the Mystery of Godliness, God manifested in the flesh,
etc. he concludes with his receiving up into Glory, as signifying, that when
that state of Christ's session at his Fathers right hand was ended, all such
Scripture. Mysteries would end, and be finished, etc. the times of Revelation
of all things would follow thereupon, as well as the times of the restitution
of all things, when the Temple of God will be open in Heaven, and there shall
be seen in his Temple the Ark of his Testament, Rev. 11.^9. and says that same
Apostle, We know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall
see him as he is, 1 John 3.2. and it seems upon Christ's sitting there, he had
the Book of Revelation, in due time to be made known by his Servant John to the
Churches, containing the order and temper of all the times ever since to his
second coming, when this Mystery of God will be finished: which the same
Apostle there briefly recounteth in order, which we shall a little touch upon
particularly. First, God was manifest in the flesh at his first coming, which
was 4000 years in fulfilling, says Bishop Usher, from the first promise made
to Adam and Eve at the fall, and carried on all along that time by many
confirmations and explications thereof, by many Types, Prophesies, Promises,
Services, and Sacraments, till that great accomplishment of them all at his
said first coming, whereof that late many ways eminent and Reverend person
Bishop Brownrig speaks acurately upon that Text, as follows: All the Prophets
(says he) from Samuel, and those that followed after, as many as have spoken,
have foretold his coming, Acts 3.24. Of this Salvation all the Prophets have
enquired and searched diligently. He is Abraham's promised Seed, Moses his Great
Prophet, Jacobs Shilo, Esays Immanuel, Jeremie's Man compassed by a woman,
Ezechiels Shepherd, Daniels Holy One, Zechariah's Branch, Solomon's Lilly,
David's Lord, Malachy's Angel; all that prophesied looked at him: he is the
end, and body, and substance of all their Rites and Ceremonies: He was Abels
Sacrifice, Abraham's first Fruits, Isaac's Ram, Jacobs Ladder, Moses his
Passover, Aarons Rod, The Israelites Rock, The Patriarchs Manna, David's
Tabernacle, Solomon's Temple, all Types and Representations of his Incarnation:
all their Kings were Figures of this Great King: all their Deliverers and
Judges Types of this great Savior: all their Priests were Ushers to bring in
this High Priest of our Profession: all the Mysteries in Scripture serviceable
to this Mystery. So the time of his coming, the place of his birth, the Tribe,
the Progenitors, the Person of whom he was born, with all things that mainly
concerned the excellency of his Person, or the greatness of his humiliation
were foretold by the Prophets; yea, and his exaltation too; though the greatest
part remains to be fulfilled in his 1000 years reign, and afterward.

Again, 2ly. Justified (says the Apostle) in the Spirit, he was powerfully
with him from his birth, continued with him in his life, in his increasing in
wisdom and favor with God and men, which was observably by his disputing with
the Doctors in the Temple at 12 years of age, and in the Spirits descending
upon him in the shape of a Dove and sitting upon him at his Baptism. In his
Tentations in the wilderness 40 days, in his holy and gracious conversation in
his whole lifetime: in his Divine Doctrine which he taught, in his many
wonderful Miracles that he wrought in both powerfully declaring him to be the
Son of God, in fulfilling the whole Law, and Prophesies of himself, in
satisfying fully by his sufferings for man's sin: in powerfully raising him from
the dead: in instructing his Disciples in the forty days after, in the things
pertaining to the Kingdom of God, etc.

3ly, Seen of Angels, proclaimed by them to be the Savior of all people at his
birth: attended on by them all his life: honored by them at his Resurrection:
testifying his coming again at his Ascension, Acts 1. And shall also be
worshipped by all those Elohim at at his second coming again, Heb. 1.6. Psalm.
97.7.

Fourthly, Preached unto the Gentiles at their first calling upon the rejection
of the Jews: when as said the Apostle, the sound thereof went into all parts of
the world, etc. which has been continued for almost 1700 years, and will till
they that pierced him shall penitently behold him as is hopeful, Rev. 1.7.
Zech. 12.10.

Fifthly, Believed on in that world by all Nations, none excluded, according to
his Command to his Apostles to preach the Gospel to every Creature capable of
the Grace of God by him therein to be so offered unto all, Mark 16.15.

And lastly, received up into Glory, wherein Gods said great Mystery was to be
perfected at his coming again, viz. when those Mysteries in the Revel. will be
accomplished that are to precede it, and all the other said revealed Mercies
then to be fulfilled in their seasons, as the Prophets have foretold respecting
those times (as we said) which the Angel [Christ] there declares should then be
finished, when the seventh Angel begins to sound, etc. Chap. 10.7. accordingly
the raising up the Tabernacle of David, also points out those times prophesied
of Amos 9.11. and applied Acts 15.16. remarkably to these very times, pointing
out Christ's Davidical Kingdom in due time to come, whereby the great fullness of
the Gentiles will come in at the Jews second call, when Jews and Gentiles will
both rejoice together.

Upon which we may observe how the Spirit of God inspired the holy Apostle to
deliver that greatly useful Divine truths, known unto God are all his works
from the beginning of the world, as if especially he would teach that glorious
Kingdom of Christ which was to be set up in the end of the world, was Gods
design from the beginning, for then the Serpents head will be eminently
broken, and that till then God fills up all times with all his foreknown works,
because to every purpose there is time and judgment, etc. as Eccles. 8.6, 7.
whence we should labor to have our thoughts, words, and actings regular; for
he has showed us what is good, Mic. 6.8. then and we may be sure the issues of
Providence will be good to us; which will be a good improvement of that Divine
truth, and of that occasion of delivering it.

The threefold consideration of Noah in our late Systeme preceding the Saints
Resurrection: 1. respecting Noah as a Type of Christ's saving his, as their true
Ark, at the overflowing de uge of the wicked worlds destruction, at the
beginning and end of the 1000 years. Secondly, in respect of that Covenant made
with Noah, for the worlds and Creatures preservation, till those last times,
when the Scriptures also testify the greatest fruitfulness also will be. And
thirdly, in respect of his Prophecy, Genesis 9. that the Posterity both of Shem
the Jews, and of Japhet the Gentiles (as now we hinted) should both in those
times at both their second calls, spoken of in Scripture, Deuteronomy. 32.43. rejoice
together, applied also, Romans 15. to those times with other Scriptures
respecting the same, etc.

The same times were pointed out by our four Computations of the Jews
deliverance, and the great enemies destruction out of Daniel and Revelation,
formerly explained in our Parallels.

The like may be observed from what we said before of the Tabernacle of God, at
the same time, being with men, and his dwelling with them, etc. ver. 3, 4.
wherefore also the name of the City then seems to be called Jehovah Shamma, the
Lord is there, Ezekiel. 48 last. And at the same time the Sun is ashamed, and the
Moon confounded, when the Lord of Hosts shall reign in Mount Zion, and in
Jerusalem, and before his Ancients gloriously, Esa. 24.23. which all ^^spect
the same times.

The New Covenant upon the New giving of the Law after the first Tables were
broken, Deuteronomy. 30. to 11. especially respects Gods People the Jews in those
times, which seems to be the ancient foundation in Moses writings, of which
diverse like in the following Prophets are the confirmations and explications,
as Jer. 31.33 Ezekiel 36. more especially belonging to that people after their
reduction from their great dispersions: though applicable to all Abraham's
spiritual Seed in the times of the Gentiles also, Heb. 8.9, 10, 11.

These times are also pointed out by the great solemnity of the Marriage of the
Lamb with his Bride the 1000 years, at the New Jerusalems coming down from God
out of Heaven; which great solemnity was prophesied of by the holy Kingly
Prophet David, Psalm. 45. when she shall have Sons whom she may make Princes in
all Lands: To which purpose is that excellent Song of Songs by Solomon, as
respecting the return of the Shulamite in the Book of the Canticles (probably)
about the time the Bride is said to make her self ready, Rev. 19.7. And
Solomon's peaceable Kingdom of old was but a Type of that peaceful and glorious
Kingdom and state which Christ with his Saints at the said times of restitution
of all things shall enjoy the 1000 years.

The Scepter and Dominion prophesied of by Balaam, Numb. 24. and according to
Jocobs Prophecy placed in the Tribe of Judah, said by him to be a Lions whelp,
and the Ensign thereof was also the Lion: accordingly Rev. 5. Christ is styled
the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, and in Chapter 22. styles himself so, when in those
times he shall be as a strong Lion to destroy his enemies, Ps. 110. who also is
both the Root and Offspring of David, Rev. 5. as will wonderfully (...)
manifest in the same times, etc.

The first Adams casting out of Paradise compared with Christ's Key for the
restoring all the spiritual Seed to a Paradise in that State, manifests it to
be Gods design from the beginning, by that Goel or Deliverer promised to be at
his second coming a more perfect Restorer of all things (then) than the Serpent
Satan was or could be a corrupter or destroyer: before it was called Abraham's
bosom, whether (Christ said) the Angels carried Lazarus his Soul: but after by
our Savior was called Paradise at his death, when he had purchased it, and
promised the Penitent Thief, as we noted, that he should be with him there that
day: and so the Apostle Paul said, he was rapt up into the third Heaven or
Paradise, 2 Cor. 12. called after the Paradise of God in the world the 1000
years of Christ's Reign with his Saints; and so is coincident in the same times
of the Restitution with the other.

The same times are also set forth by the world to come, Heb. 2.5. and 1.6. as
the general Deluge ended the Old World, and began the New, so the ruin of that
last wicked Roman Monarchy, in respect of each of those long God-provoking
States therein, viz. both Civil and Ecclesiastical, with all the broken parts
of the three former Monarchies, Dan. 2. will end this world in the present
state of things; and Christ's said 1000 years Reign in those times will begin
that World to come: and the Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 1.21. uses the same
distinction which by our Savior had been laid down before, when he taught,
that the sin against the Holy Ghost should neither be forgiven in this world
nor in the world to come, Matthew. 12.32. which will begin (...), when the Father
brings the Son again into the world, viz. the second time (as both Ancients and
even Papists understand it) when all the Elohim (Angels) shall worship him, as
Psalm. 97.

Likewise the 42 Stages in the Childrens of Israel their passing through the
Wilderness to possess the Land of Canaan was a Type of the woman's the Christ
ans's Church passing in her wilderness condition in the times of the Beasts 42
Months to attain in the issue to the New Jerusalem state, in the said times of
the restitution of all things, or that redemption of the purchased possession,
as it seems, Ephesians. 1.14.

The restoring the Dominion over the Creatures lost by the fall of the first
Adam was foretold by David to be obtained by Christ the second Adam, Psalm. 8.4,
5, 6. etc. as is explained and so applied by the Author to the Hebrews, Chap.
2.6, 7, 8. which is another part of the Restitution of all things in the said
times (as we showed) And the said Creatures freedom from the bondage of
corruption into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, Romans 8.21. will be
another ingredient to make up that blessed state, and although the same holy
man, Heb. 2.7. did acknowledge that they did not then see all things in
subjection unto him; yet he declares in due time, Phil. 2.9, 10. That every
knee of things in Heaven and Earth, and under the earth shall bow, and be
subject unto that great King of the whole world. And can it be conceived by
rational men, that these Divine truths are written in vain? and that Christ
when he takes to himself his great power, shall not reign in these respects
also unto the end of the world, and have that honor reserved for him by Angels
men, and all Creatures in the world then? It appears also to be the end and
drift of all Revelation Prophecy, by that general Doxolog^^ Chapter 5.10. to the
end; by Angels, men, and all Creatures upon the fulfilling of the contents of
the Book given unto the Lamb. We might be (...) in many particular Promises to
this purpose respecting the (...) in that time, with many excellenties
respecting tha^ (...), as we have specially showed, how concerning Christ's
Dividid a Kingdom and people, then, God has spoken by the mouth of all his
holy Prophets since the world began, as is manifest by the third of our 8
Conving Arguments in the Word written. And the great design of the All knowing
and All working God in giving such Prophesies to his Church from the beginning,
concerning such great things to be fulfilled at the end of the world in that
said Great Day of Judgment, appears to be made manifest by such Divine
Chronology, first set down by Moses and other Penmen thereof before the
Captivities of Israel and Judah; but after that are in their discoveries
chiefly carried on by those Mystical Prophesies of those two beloved Servants
of God and Christ, the Prophet Daniel and the Apostle John, but chiefly by the
last, to whom these hidden secrets of God respecting those times, wore
particularly (as we showed) commisted, to open Danichs sealed Mysteries, to Chapter
19. and from thence to the end the most ancient Predictions and Promises, etc.
when God would raise unto David that righteous Branch, that King that shall
reign and prosper, and execute Judgment and Justice in the earth, in whose days
Judah shall be saved and Israel shall dwell safely, Jer. 23.5, 6. when they
shall have the Mercies promised to their Forefathers performed to them, as
Zechary is taught Divinely to sing out, and in such a manner he would grant
unto them, that being delivered from the hand of their enemies they might serve
God without fear of them in righteousness and true holiness all the days of
then lives, Luke 1.7, etc. which will be the stability of all the happiness of
that state, when that New Kingdom of Israel will be restored, the Tabernacle of
David that was fullen new raised up again, for that said righteous Branch,
which God then said he would then raise unto David; for whom with his Bride God
will then make New Heavens and a new earth in that new world to come, wherein
shall be that New great, holy, and beloved Jerusalem, that City that has
foundations whose Maker and Builder is God: for those new Inhabitants that came
from God out of Heaven, and came with Christ to receive their spiritual bodies
at the first blessed Resurrection of the Saints, where also will be the New
Paradise of God: Also the converted Jews and Israelites shall then enjoy their
New Jerusalem also, built upon its own heaps, when strangers shall build her
Walls, as the Prophet foretells; upon the return of the Shulamite, who instead
of Fathers shall have Children whom she may make Princes in all the earth;
being the Seed then which the Lord has blessed, Esai. 61.9. then shall be her
new guides and watchmen upon her Walls (probably the new raised Saints) that
shall not hold their peace day nor night: new dispensations, new peace, plenty,
security, new privileges, new pleasures and delights in heavenly visions,
comunion, discoveries in the revelation of such things as are appointed then to
be known, and in the restitution of all things promised then to be done, as in
the forenamed particulars we before set down, and the times of these things are
chiefly made known in their fit latitudes by Revelation-prophesie: for when we
read of the coming of Christ; at his appearance and Kingdom, the times thereof
are so set forth (as was showed) by Revelation-prophesie. We read of the Saints
first bodily Resurrection, but the time thereof is only deciphered by
Revelation Prophecy; we heard of raising David's Tabernacle which was fallen,
but the time is only pointed out by Revelation prophecy, and that the Saints
shall receive their sure mercies of David, Esa 55.3. but when, can only be
resolved by Revelation prophecy: we read of Gods setting up the Kingdom of the
Stone that should destroy all others, and it self become a Mountain filling the
whole earth, but the times and order of his carrying on these great works by
Jesus Christ, is in the fittest proportion made known to the Church by
Revelation-prophesie. The Lord said to David's Lord, Sit at my right hand until
I make thy foes thy footstool, which he has long expected, Heb. 10.13. and the
Heavens must receive him till the times of the Restitution of all things: but
the best resolution of both is to be had from Revelation-prophesie: Glorious
things are spoken (says the Psalmist) of the City of God, of the new, the
holy, the great, the beloved Jerusalem; but what, and when, and where, and for
whom we are chiefly informed from Revelation-prophesie. We read of the ruin of
Gog and Magog the Churches greatest enemies before that City Jehovah Shammah
shall be set up, but when it shall be, we chiefly learn from Daniel and
Revelation-prophesie.

Object. But did not Christ reprehend his Disciples, Acts 1.6. for inquiring
the time of his Kingdom, etc.

Ans. Though this and such like has been sufficiently answered; yet know it is
only whilst God keeps such things in his own power:and in the next Verse he
said, But ye shall be endued with power, which was done about ten days after at
the Feast of Pentecost, and all that wrote after speak something thereof, but
chiefly the beloved John.

And though Christ as man, then said, he knew not the day and hour of his
coming; which none now pretend to, yet in a fit latitude Christ has revealed
the near approach thereof, with many things to be done before, very useful for
the Church to know, and wherein all Saints are greatly concerned; which are
great mercies in many respects to be known and believed in these later days,
for which there is great cause of thanksgiving, but no reason of cavilling with
our mercies or the goodness of the Author of them.

Thus for the Doctrinal part of this Text, wherein we have considered this most
gracious Divine Declaration of the set time of such its performance, with the
glorious illustrations and confirmations thereof, and showed from Scripture
wherein it does consist, and the many decipherings of the times of the
renovation of all things, with Scripture evidences accordingly referring
thereunto, both manifesting the thing, and showing in a latitude the near
approach thereof: We shall now by Gods gracious assistance endeavor to make
some pertinent improvement thereof.

1. We may hence be informed of the many mistakes that have been both of this
Text and the Context thereof, as respecting the matter, time and place thereof;
the matter, not the making new these visible Heavens and earth, but the
Prophetical Heavens and earth, as we have showed.

For the time, not after the last Resurrection and Judgment, but in the
interim, betwixt the first and last, wherein the anciently declared and
promised mercies are to be performed to the faithful Fathers and their
spiritual Seed, through the Promised Seed of the Woman alone without man, the
Mighty One to save, which God has laid help on for that purpose, Psalm. 89.19.

Thirdly, for the Place, not in the highest Heavens, for that time (during the
Judgment of the Great Day) but in the world until Christ's Kingly Office and
Business fore-prophesied of in the Word be there sulfilled, in destroying or
removing the causes of evil in the world, viz. wicked men and Devils out of it,
with their evil effects by sin; namely, the curse, bodage, corruption, emnity
brought upon the Creatures therein, under which both men and other Creatures
have long (...) do groan; and accomplished all that promised good appo^ved for
that time and state in the parts of that great restoration and renovation,
respecting both the raised Saints and those in the ^^^ural life, according to
Predictions and promised Mercies belonging to both sorts then, etc. which are
all most surely confirmed Doctrines to be true and faithful by him that is said
to sit upon the Throne in this Text, and all as belonging to the Davidical
Kingdom of Christ; into the possession whereof the raised Saints are brought by
the first blessed bodily Resurrection as their Inlet thereinto.

Secondly, This may inform Christians, first, of the Divine excellency of this
Book. 2. Of the incomparable usefulness thereof, in those many great respects
of the Saints great concernments in that time and state, leading them into and
securing also unto them their eternal happiness in the highest Heavens, upon
the completing thereof: and thirdly, thereupon of the great Reasons they have
to stir them up to the frequent reading, diligent study, and profitable
improvement of the matters set before them by God and Christ therein.

First, the excellency thereof appears from the Author of it, and the manner
of delivering it for the benefit and information of the Christian Church; God
the Father gives it to the Son, and he to the beloved Apostle John, when he was
in the Spirit on the Lords Day in time of his banishment for the word of God
and the Testimony of Jesus to be sent unto the Churches, being also for that
end sent and signified by his Angel, Chap. 1.1.

Secondly, It was given with wonderful great solemnity in respect of things
then to come, to the end of the world, Chap. 4. and 5. God the Father as
sitting upon his Throne, the Church represented by the 24 Elders, and four
living Wights about him, representing all faithful Christians and
Church-guides, with whom is the Lamb and the seven Spirits ever present: and
when none could be found in Heaven or earth worthy to look into that Book, or
open the Seals thereof, it was given to the Lamb to open and fulfill, who by his
infinite wisdom and perfect power has, and does, and in due time will both
perfectly open and fulfill the same, in the set order for the accomplishment
thereof, which will bring unexpressible rejoicing and praise by Angels, Saints,
and all Creatures in their capacities thereupon, etc. Chap. 5.10. to the end.

Thirdly, The matter is profound and contains highly profitable Mysteries: the
form is very excellent, in a wonderful Divine contrivance, as in some small
measure we have pointed out, as we have in Mercy received, etc.

Secondly, for the usefulness; it gives encouragement in the worst times of
sufferings, from many memorandums of Christ's Kingdom for the suffering Saints,
and of the New Jerusalem-state observable in all these times, as in our 7th
Argum. of the Word written is showed.

Secondly, Useful in opening the hidden Mystical part of the Gospel, and the
great Subjects of the last things respecting the first and second said
Resurrection of the bodies of just and unjust in their orders, and of the first
and second Acts of the Judgment of the great Day, contained in general in
Enochs Vision or Prophecy, and in many things explained by Christ and his
Apostles, but in many other could not be understood without this Book,
therefore called the Book of Revelation with an Emphasis, as the whole holy
Scriptures, called the Bible, and the name of Christ is added to it, being the
Revelation that only could be made by Jesus Christ the Son of God, the eternal
word, but as manifest in the flesh: therefore much is to be looked for from it,
not to be attained by any other Writings, nor many things in the Holy Bible
understood aright without the explications of this most Divine Book, etc.

And therefore in the third place, hence may all serious and found Christians
see what great Reasons there are for them to use all careful endeavors to
understand the weighty matters held out and revealed therein, they are not
secret things, forbidden, as some in the Old times, when men might not look
into the Ark of Gods Testament, nor things shut up and sealed, as many of
Daniels Mysteries that were reserved for Christ thus to open in the times of
the end, or Gospel Times, but they are of things whereunto a blessing is
annexed to the due reading and search into them; and therefore the beloved
Apostle is commanded contrarily not to seal them, Chap. 22.10.

This Book with Daniels Prophetical Visions (the hidden part whereof this in
good measure is a Divine explication, viz. during the Revelation said
suffering-times, to the 19th Chapter, and they are both together given to
regulate all Chronology in the world for 2300 years and more, to the end of
this sacred Book: without which little truth in all times since in that respect
could have been found or discerned by all humane Authors; so that all
Prophetical Chronology by the Revelation of God the Spirit is given in them
both for so long a time, viz. from the Captivity of Babylon to the end of the
world; even as Moses had likewise received his Divinely revealed Chronelogy of
all times past to and in his own time for the space about 2490 years, when
there was nothing but Tradition to have supplied that want, which was after in
the Books of Joshua, Judges, Kings, and Chronicles contiued upon record until
the said Prophetical Chronology of Daniel and Revelation took place, which have
been since Divinely carried on, and so will be (as was said) unto the end of
the world, and because Moses and many of those that followed had likewise (as
the Apostle Peter teaches) distinct Prophesies of those last times in the Book
of Revelation, therefore God in wonderful wisdom, faithfulness and goodness
has in that last Table of of the happy times of Christ's Church in the world,
revealed unto us those sure foundations of such unspeakable goodness, then to
be performed and accomplished, not otherwise to be known or believed in many
respects, which are the peculiar excellencies belonging to and benesits
accrewing to the Christian Church, by this so Divine Book; and are not these
great engagements to the study of the same?

In this Divine Book we have the revelation in a latitude of the end of two
special great Mysteries, viz. the end of the great Mystery Babylon, and of the
great Mystery of her iniquity, and the finishing the great Mystery of God,
bringing in the Revelation of all things, as we showed, as well as the
Restitution of all things spoken of in the Text; which because they are both
matters of great and universal concernment of the Saints, are earnestly to be
enquired into; and for the difficulties that may appear in such endeavor,
serious and judicious Christians may by such conscientious endeavors in the
use of good means find them much removed, especially by the help of Christ's
Divine Key in our late Tract on Rev. 20.5. and in this on Chap. 21.5. and as
for the bad times to Chap. 20. though things respecting them were at first much
more darkly delivered, yet by the long continued endeavors of many Ages past,
and by the experimental accomplishments already of most things therein
contained, much light is now given to them: But now Christians ordinarily need
not trouble themselves much in respect of those bad times of the man of sin,
because upon all accounts they are now almost expired, whether we respect the
Seal, Prophecy, holding out the ruin of the Roman Civil State, or the Book
Prophecy, pointing out the like of the Ecclesiastical State, or the Table of
suffering times, Rev. 11. relating to them both, containing about 1700 years
(as was before showed) and fitly in a latitude concur with the two former
Mystical Numbers in Daniel, leading in the same until Isreal's great
Restoration, viz. first that of Dan. 8. ver. 17, 19, 26. of 2300 years, from
the Captivity of Babylon to Christ's appearance, leading to the end of 1700
years since Christ's birth: the second of the Jews and Gentiles blessed times,
Dan. 12.12. to be 1335 years after the last taking away of Sacrifice (very
probably in Julian the Apostate Emperors time, about Ann. Dom. 365.) unto which
if we add 1335 it makes up the full number of 1700 years ending at the same
period, only we must remember some error (as was said) is found in our ordinary
account from Christ's Nativity: yet in a latitude they all concur and agree:
whence the ending number of the Beasts 666 years, to which the whole number of
1000 being added, (as is usually understood by many Nations:) so making up 1666
years from Christ's Ascension, not from his Birth, to about the end of the said
1700 by vulgar account, when (probably) as the Apostle says, he will destroy
the man of Sin with the appearance of his coming, 2 These. 2.8. and that Epoca
of his Ascension which we also twice published Ann. Dom. 1665. first in our
Parallels, page 37. Secondly in the large Note on Rev. 22.20. page 10. seems
also more congruous than of Christ's Nativity, that as he had at his ascending
powerful and glorious Victory and Triumphs over the spiritual powers of
darkness, as Col. 3.15. so at the end of that date upon his descending again,
he should have a Visible and glorious Conquest over all his visible soes, by
making them his footstool: (when that man of Sin especially is to be destroyed)
when he will take to himself his great power and reign in the world, Rev. 19.
Now by such computation of the said suffering times of the Church, to Chap. 20.
an apt way is offered to apply the Table of them to both Schemes of the Civil
and Ecclesiastical Roman-state, and of the true Churches condition under the 2
last Heads of Government therein, namely, under Emperors and the Papacy. Now
for the manifesting that the chief intent of that number of the Beast 666. Chapter
13. is to decipher in a Divine mystical way the ending term of his date we
shall further by Gods assistance add some other weighty considerations [yet
withal acknowledging the diverse usefulness of other conjectures upon several
distinct accounts] as by (...) of old, wherein the said number was found, may
fitly be pointed out the Country of the Beast, whose Language, and Laws, and
Liturgy, and even whole Religion are Latin, formerly also called the Latin
Church, and his Country Latium, etc. which fitly agrees to him in that respect.

Also 666, for so many Popish Errors (as Mr. Durham intimates) may point out to
us the grosness of his Mystery of Iniquity, being a long continued source of
multiplied heresies, seducements, and errors through the course of many
hundreds of years, against which Christ's two sackcloth witnesses have all along
born their Testimony, even till his measure is almost full.

And for Dr. Potters late Arithmetical observation, setting forth the
opposition of the Root of 666, which is 25. and much observable in the Beasts
concerns, to the root of 144000 of Christ's sealed ones, being after to be the
New Jerusalem-inhabitants both in the East, Chap. 7. and in the West, Chap. 14.
whereof the root is 12. by which their concerns are deciphered also, etc.

And so by many other Notations of the name or number of the Beast in Hebrew,
Greek, and Latin, many observable things answerable to the diversity of men's
enquiries have been found out; as Romagnosh, denoting the place of his Seat, at
Rome; (...), noting the glory of his state, like the Sun above the Stars, etc.
as his flatterers would have it; and even near blasphemy spoke one of them,
Paulo Quinto Vice Deo, setting him in Gods stead; but to pass by many others
like mentioned by Mr. Bernard in his Key of Knowledge, and by others; let us
now offer our considerations, whereupit may appear that the chief intent of the
said number 666, is to set forth the end of the said Beasts date. Though in
respect of some of the other, the wisdom, power and providence of God may
appear in setting forth and fulfilling, upon such considerable accounts what
concerns such a manifold Monster in iniquity as he is described Dan. 7.24, 25.
thereby not only prevailing against three Kings or Kingdoms, but also in daring
to speak great words against the most High, by his strange Heresies and
Blasphemies (as may be seen in in our Abridgment of Daniel on that Verse) and
think to change times and Laws, and persecute the Saints of the most High, for
his time, times, and dividing of a time, till Christ's appearance, Dan. 12.1, 7.
when he shall be destroyed, 2 These. 2.8.

But (I say) that the chief intent of the said number of the Beast 666. is to
set forth the said time of his end, these further reasons induce me to believe,
besides what we said before.

First, we have the like in Dan. 5.26. at the end of the Caldean Monarchy at
Belshazzers death, God has numbered thy Kingdom and finished it, viz. for 70
years, foretold, Jer. 25, etc.

Even as Dan. 12.7. the Beasts date was explained to be a time, times, and a
dividing of a time.

2. The Epoch or beginning of his 1335 years, Chap 12.12. referring to the
times of the end, when such as were faithful should be blessed, were to take
their beginning from the third and last most effectual taking away of Sacrifice
(most probably in Julian the Apostate Emperors time, by a remarkable hand of
God, about 365 years after Christ's birth) unto which 1335 years being added,
makes up 1700, viz. all the times of Revelation prophecy, to Ch 20. (which the
former 2300, Dan. 8. also wholly contain) but what darkness there has been
from Julians said time and before is hard to resolve by reason of like
confusions before and since, and what errors may be in our vulgar account may
not easily be found; four years Bishop Usher observes to be lost in it, happily
more, since it was (as is acknowledged) 500 years after Christ's birth, before
it came in common use.

Thirdly, The Turks said day, and hour, and month, and year, Rev. 9. or his 396
years are not so exact as that we can certainly resolve whether the Ottoman
family obtained the full power some few years before, or some few years after
1300, who having the latest Epoch of all the rest by much, should therefore
seem more easy to be resolved, but for the like reasons still some darkness
remains therein; but counting his 396 years back (as was before said) may so
bring us nearest (probably) to his truest Epoch. The said Beasts rising at one
hour with the said ten crowned Horns, Rev. 17.9, 12. being as we said, in times
of great confusions, likewise when the Empire in the West was so broken by the
Barbarous Nations, that the Writers of such affairs then or after must needs
speak of them more uncertainly, a latitude therefore of conjecture must needs
in reason be allowed, (especially besides former considerations, that that one
hour Rev. 12. may be an opportune season (as was said) and not a Prophetical
hour when the stories of such are differently penned for such times and things
as often they are, etc.) but Divine wisdom from the Scripture, such as in
Daniels said Numbers with (...) Paul's Doctrine seem to be for that purpose the
Divine directions, as the Holy Spirit informs us is needful as such true wisdom
to direct us in an especial manner in these above all the rest, viz. to
discover both the Beasts beginning and ending; which we may only expect to find
in a convenient latitude, but not to be exact therein, which God is pleased to
keep only in his own power, as Acts 1.6. yet it is Christians duty to inquire
after them, and much light and benefit comes to themselves and others by so
doing, etc. and if by his said date of his ending number about 1700, we count
his 42 months backward upon the former ground and considerations, our
conjecture may be so made (most fitly as we conceive) of his Epoch, and the
said Woman's, etc. to be about 430, but the exact time we cannot thereby know;
and so the Period of both (happily) may be about 20 years hence, in a fit
latitude from An. Dom. 1675. upon all former said considerations whereunto
succeed the happy times of renovation there spoken of in this Text: yet Chapt.
18. and 19. declare the burning of the Whore to be some small time before the
last ruin of the Beast, which in Chapt. 16. is for his preparation (probably
upon this account) to the Armageddon battle by his three unclean spirits like
frogs (as we showed) croaking in the Courts of Kings.

Use of Exhortation. We shall not here be large in the improvement of this
Subject, because of what we have formerly done upon Doctrines of this nature in
our former Treatises, only we shall add some brief admonition and exhortation
to all such as the Name of Christ is called upon; that upon this weighty
account that the great changes of the world, are so many ways manifest to be
near approaching; first, that as the Prophet Esai, Chapt. 1. exhorted sinful
men in his time, that they would cease to do evil, and learn to do well. And
therefore 2ly, to labor to be good, that they may be fit both to do good
accepably and receive good infallibly. Let all profane wicked, carnal,
worldly, and unregendrate men be hence admonished to forsake their evil,
licentious, and ungodly practices, let them from the ruionous state of this
wicked world be think themselves what precipices of destruction they walk upon,
from whence they are every moment in danger to fall into an irrecoverable
ruin; and if they should not otherwise be cut off, yet who knows how suddenly
the great Changes of the world may come upon them; let them well weigh for
times past, what good they have gotten in the ways of sin, whereby they have
long (happly) provoked God already, and for which much guilt lies upon their
Souls and Consciences, and for which they are liable to the heavy wrath and
Judgments of God continually to seize upon them; besides (as we said) all
wickedness will shortly have an end, and what good can the sinful profits,
pleasures, or honors of the world do them, if they had the longest continuance
that this world can afford them (I say) sinful profits, pleasures, or honor,
if either sinfully obtained, or not rightly used, or wickedly abused to evil
purposes, as for the most part they are by such persons.

But secondly, it is not enough for such to cease to do evil, which yet will be
hard for them to do; for so long as they are evil Trees, they will bring forth
evil fruits, and must needs be nigh to cursing whose end is to be burned, as
Gods word plainly (...) also learn to do well, and that speedily too, lest the
evil (...) come upon them unawares, which cannot be far (...) Changes in the
world, although they be not (...) before, from which they can have no security,
(...) their sinful ways, have rather much reason continually to expect; for
indignation and wrath (says the Apostle) tribulation and anguish shall be upon
every Soul of man that does evil, Romans 2.8, 9.

And therefore in the third place that they may rightly learn these two
Lessons, to cease to do evil, and learn to do well, they must add the third,
viz. labor earnestly to be good, that they may do good, and consequently be
made capable to receive good; they must be made good Trees that they may bring
forth good fruit, they must get Faith and Grace and become new Creatures, else
all will come to no effect: men may out of some fear of wrath be sometime in a
pang, and so be restrained from some evil practices, and be also forced to do
some good works, materially good; but they will neither continue in well-doing,
nor can they do any such good works as are acceptable unto God, if they be not
converted unto him from their sins, and be reconciled to him by faith in Jesus
Christ.

Object. But Faith and Grace are Gods gifts, it will be said, and they cannot
of themselves obtain teem.

It is true they are so, but such should now, especially now, even now in these
last and worst times know if they have them nor; and be convinced of the
necessity of them; they should seriously consider that they are therefore by
this exhortation specially called the more earnestly to labor to obtain them
whilst God is pleased to afford them a little time and opportunity for that
purpose, such should consider now God and Christ call them to Faith and Grace,
therefore to day, whilst it is called to day let them hear his voice, and take
need they be not longer hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, nor follow
any longer their own ways, or the evil example of the wicked world, but wait
upon Gods call, use his means to obtain his Grace, hear, read, meditate, pray,
inquire the way to Sion, and walk therein; let such give ear to no
discouragements that might divert them, and flight not any
Scripture-encouragement that God does or may afford them. Wisdom cries, and
utters her voice in the streets, understand ye simple, etc. This Wisdom is
Christ Jesus, that came to save sinners; and it is life eternal to believe in
him whom the Father has sent: Go unto him, O sinner, as the true and able
Physician of thy Soul, to cure thee: he never sends away Souls rightly sensible
of their misery without help and cure if they continue to wait upon him in the
use of due means, such he will by no means cast out, as he himself assures with
a double asseveration, John 6.37. this time how short soever it be, is yet a
time of Grace; improve it therefore well whilst thou have it, for it cannot be
recalled nor any way purchased when it is past; what would lost Souls give (if
they had where withal to do it) to obtain thy present opportunity, etc.

But if thy lusts are more prevalent with thee that thou art like the deaf
Adder to these Calls of God, and thou rather hearkenest to the Calls of Sin and
Sinners, of Satan and the wicked world; if thou do with the scoffers of these
last times deride all good admonitions and exhortations) as many now do, which
is the special Character the Scripture gives of these last times) then take
notice there is fiery indignation coming out from God against all such shortly;
and such as have drunk deep of the Cup of the Whore of Babylon, are chiefly
intoxicated with this fronzie, by despising all true Religion and such as
profess it, and casting reproaches and slanders, with bitter scoffs and
mockings upon it and them, and even on Christ Jesus himself in so doing, whose
peculiarly they both are; and since the Beast has put such a real scoff and
mockage upon all at once, by burning by his wicked Instruments of late, our
Chief City upon a falsely supposed 666.) though our warpings backward in places
of Public Worship in bestial Superstitions there may mind us (happily) of Gods
Justice in permitting such a thing then and there so to be done by them) yet
let the Beast and his followers know, that for that very reason that they have
made such a mock of Christ's real and most certain Prediction of the Beasts
ruin at the end of his number 666. (so mistaken at that time by some from his
Nativity) yet he and they shall most surely feel the force of that Prediction of
the said Beasts ruin at Christ true 666. infallibly determined, and now
shortly approaching; as also the Scarlet Whore of Babylon will in her visition
most certainly find before him, Rev. 18.6. for so runs Christ's Commission to
his Officers then, Reward her as she has rewarded you, double her double
according to her works, in the Cup which she has filled, fill to her donble,
for can it be conceived that Christ Jesus the King of Kings and Lord of Lords,
the Prince of all the Kings of the earth will suffer such an horrible affront
to his Divine Majesty to pass unrevenged, or such a blasphemous scoff against
his Divine Oracle to go scot-free; most certainly he will not, but Londons
burnings will make Romes names more fierce and devouring when her day is fully
come; and such actings may fitly for warn men that the burning of the
Scarlet-Whore draws nigh, who may then look (as was showed) that her Cup which
she filled for others will then be doubly doubled unto her self, and that by
Gods own Command, who has aforehand engaged his All mighty power in that work,
and to show himself strong in judging that Whore, Rev. 18.8. for he will in an
especial manner put forth his Almighty power in execution of his Sentence upon
her: Read Gods Commentary of her Ruin in that whole 18th Chapter; therefore
they must carefully avoid her sins of spiritual and corporal fornication,
cruelty, lying, slandering, reproaching, and scoffing at the ways of God, with
all other her abominations and seducements, and even blaspheming Gods Name, and
his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven, Chapter 13. that would escape her
plagues; the great Judge that will give also the body of the Beast to the
burning flame, has his Throne fiery, and Wheels as burning fire, and a fiery
stream issued and came from before him, to that purpose Dan. 7.9, 10, 11. and
when the Lord will give his people rest, 2 These. 1.7. is it not chiefly against
the Man of Sin that Christ will then be revealed from Heaven with his mighty
Angels in flaming fire taking, vengeance on such as obey not the Gospel; and
who is especially, particularly, and exactly deciphered Chap. 214. to sit in
the Temple of God as God, etc. and the time of such his destruction also is set
down. ver. 8. to be at the appearance of Christ's coming, which upon many
Scripture grounds we have made manifest now to be near approaching, when God
will arise in his Glory to shake terribly the earth, Esa. 2.17, 19. and what
joy will be to all Saints at that day, we showed from Chap. 19. O what an
excellent design would it now be for Princes and People and all sorts of
Persons in the Church to promote the Whores burning and Beasts ruin. The
Pulpit and Press here have long been improved by many zealous and faithful
Servants of Jesus Christ for many Ages past by preaching, praying, and
printing, to detect such wicked enemies, to search out and foretell their ruin;
and now that it is so near approaching, it may encourage all faithful
Christians prayers for the hastening thereof, not but that Gods set time will
stand, but when such a spirit of Prayer is stirred up in them from such
encouragement that this time draws near, it is not only a good sign of such
approach of her ruin, but will prove like the battering Rams of old, or the
Constantinopolitan Cannons of great force to batter Babylons Walls, etc. and
let such as look upon the filthiness of that Mother of Abominations prepare
aforehand their Songs of Triumph over her at her desolation: Christ will have
such Songs sung in the New Heavens, Rev. 20.18. and let the old Mystical
Heavens prepare aforehand to bear their part in those Divine Halelujahs
likewise.

And it may not be unseasonable even for Poets and Painters, Picture-drawers
and Printers upon such apprehensions with a Christian sobriety and seriousness
to prepare materials for the solemnity of that approaching funerals of the
infamous Harlot, great Mystery Babylon, the Mother of Harlots and Abominations
of the whole earth, Rev. 17.5. next to take place before the Beasts final
destruction come upon him. Let them therefore that would be free from sharing
in their hastening destruction hasten speedily to flee from sharing in their
enormous sins and great provocations.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN the Contents, add, 2ly, privatively, 3ly, positively, r. pursuit, read,
all.

Page 7. line 25. r. their. p. 9. l. 11. r. shares in. p. 10. l. 21. add, the.
p. 12. l. 15. add, with temporal. p. 14. l. last, (...), not, ita. p. 15. l.
10. r. at that coming. p. 19. l. 22. r. and the answers. p. 18. line 8. read,
page 20. at. l. 24. and p. 31. l. 19. to. l. 26. but chiefly. p. 38. l. 11. to
l. 27 p. 27 l. 17. r. Almans. p. 28. l. 24. r. representatives say. p. 29. l.
2. r. of not or. p 30. l. last, r. 7000. p. 34. l. 29. r. 40. years. p. 41. l.
30. add, will be made. p. 45. l. 30. r. in 6 days finished. p. 63. l. 20. r.
truth. p. 55. l. 20. add shall be made (...). l. 22. d^le, shall be made. p.
75. l. 28. (...).

Reader:
THe other Parts serving, First, for Explication: Secondly, for Confirmation:
Thirdly, for Illustration, etc. of these two last Tracts, which (with our Key
contain the Scope and Sum of all, etc.) may be had at the Crane in St. Paul's
Churchyard, or from the Author, for about 250. now only remaining perfect.


