A BRIEF TESTIMONY FOR RELIGION: SHOWING That all PENAL LAWS, Force and
Violence against any for Matters of mere Religion and Conscience, are
Inconsistent with the DOCTRINES and PRECEPTS of Jesus Christ. PRESENTED To the
Consideration of all, but more Especially those that may be chosen Members of
Parliament, that they may see cause to concur with the Kings Gracious
Declaration for Liberty of Conscience. By a Lover of the King and his Country,
and a Hater of no Man because of his Opinion.

WILLIAM SHOWN.

Printed in the Year, 1688.

A Brief Testimony for Religion, showing that all Penal Laws, Force and
Violence against any for Matters of mere Religion and Conscience, are
inconsistent with the Doctrines and Precepts of Christ Jesus, etc.
THE Principle of Religion, is Inward, Spiritual and Divine, not contained in
Books, nor taught by the Precepts of Men, being before Books, and the Precepts
of Men were inwented, and is in it self Sacred, Pure and Undefiled; Grounded,
Planted and Placed in the Heart of Mankind, by the Sacred, Pure, Undefiled God,
who has given unto all Life, Breath and Being: And in all Nations upon the
Face of the Earth, all People therein, who fear God, and works Righteousness
are accepted by him; being in the Exercise of true Religion, doing Justly,
loving Mercy, and walking uprightly with God.

Now though God has sown this Seed, laid this Foundation of Equity, Justice,
Righteousness, Mercy and Fear toward him, in the Hearts of all Men; yet they
are greatly Degenerated therefrom; those plants of his own Right Hand planting,
are greatly overgrown with that which is quite contrary, viz. with the Weeds
and Plants of Iniquity, Injustice, Unrighteousness, Cruelty, Violence,
Disobedience, Rebellion against God, and one another; so that almost the whole
World of Mankind is now become Enemies to God, Nature and their own selves, in
all Nations, Countries, and Kingdoms, according to the degree of their
Degeneration from the Law, Light, Love, Dread and Fear of the Almighty God,
which he at first Placed, Planted, and Engraved in the Heart of Mankind.

Some in most Nations (from the effect of what still remains) have been made
sensible of their Loss, Nakedness and Degeneration from the likeness and Image
of God, viz. Vprightness, Holiness, Equity, Justice, and Mercy, etc. And they
have been greatly concerned in their Thoughts, Wills, and fallen understandings,
how to gain the same again, and have therein invented and set up, among Jews,
Turks, and Indians, as in Christendom, various sorts and manners of Worships,
and Ceremonies of Religion (so called) thinking thereby to please God, profit
themselves and others, by teaching and compelling (if they have Power) the
observance thereof, tho in so doing they can go no further than Adam and Cain.
did, hide and make a Covering with fig leaves, offer a Sacrifice with one hand,
and Murder with the other, and are no more accepted therein than they were;
and the infallible reason and cause of it is, because, all the Righteousness,
and Wickedness, proceeding from Mankind in this Degenerate State, are both
evil in the sight of God.

Mankind through his Fall and Degeneration, is so Polluted, so Defiled, so
Corrupted, with the stinking Leprosy of Sin, that whatever he puts his hand to
in things relating to Religion, and the service of God, is abomintion in his
sight; yea, the very Prayers of the Wicked are sin: and out of this Estate he
cannot help himself, he cannot Purge nor Purify himself, nor redeem, nor
deliver himself, by all his working, willing, and running, the Serpent is too
Strong, too powerful, too Subtle, and cunning for all Mankind in this Estate,
without a Savior, without a Redeemer, without a Restorer, and Deliverer all
Perish, etc.

Therefore God in his infinite Love and Kindness, did promise, and has
performed, has given, and laid help upon one that is mighty to Save, to
Redeem, to Purge, Purify, and Restore lost Man, Defiled, Corrupted, Captivated
Man into the Image of God again, into Righteousness, Purity, and Holiness
again, and the first name this Redeemer and Savior has in the Holy
Scriptures, is, the Seed of the Woman, and his first work is, to bruise the
head of the Serpent.

Now this promised seed, this precious gift of God, has many other names
throughout the Holy Scriptures; and has many other works to do, in and for
Mankind, the Serpents head must not only be bruised by him, but he and all his
works destroyed and cast out of the heart of Mankind. And this was and is the
blessed end of his coming and appearing, even to destroy the Devil and all his
Works, finish sin and bring in everlasting Righteousness in the room thereof:
Even into the heart and mind of Mankind, which is Gods Throne tho the Serpent
the Devil has usurped it, my desire is, that all may come to enjoy that
blessed Estate through Jesus Christ the Savior.

Which Jesus Christ the Savior is the Author and Founder of the Christian
Religion in the Purity and Power of it; which Religion excels all other
Religions upon the Face of the Earth, who are Impure, Imperfect, and VVeak,
made up of Men's Inventions, Precepts, and Traditions, Carnal Ordinances,
VVorldly Rudiments, and Beggarly Elements; which had a beginning and must have
an end, together with all Hatred and Persecution about them, for it has been,
and i^ about these things, that those who lived in and under them, have made
Laws to force, and compel observance and Conformity thereto, for nothing of
that fort or nature ever did, or can proceed from the Christian Religion, in
the Purity and Power of it: Its Fundamental Principles, Precepts, Doctrines and
Examples are quite the contrary. Love your Enemies, Bless them that Curse you,
Do good to them that hate you, Pray for them that dispitefully use you and
persecute your: As you would that Men should do unto you, Do so likewise unto
them. Be like your Heavenly Father, who makes his Sun to shine on the Evil,
and on the good, and sends Rain on the Just, and on the Unjust: Love one
another, as I have loved you, love ye also one another: By this shall all Men
know, that you are my Disciples, if you have love to one another. Do good to
all, etc. This is the Tenure of the Gospel of Christ: Peace on Earth, and good
will to Men. And they only were and are Disciples indeed, who did and do
observe those divine Precepts and Commands of Christ. And all that profess love
to him, and a knowledge of him, and keeps not his Commandments, are Liars,
and the Truth is not in them, let them profess what they will.

There is no ground nor foundation for Sangunary Laws, nor for any sort of
Persecution, Violence or Cruelty about Religion, in the lovely, meek, quiet,
and innocent Spirit of Christianity, nor in the Precepts, Principles, and
Discipline of it, they have certainly arose in Christendom from another Spirit,
that has assumed the Name, and Usurped the Throne of God, the Heart and mind
of Man, which has come to pass, through the working of the Mystery of
Iniquity, Serpent, and Antichrist, under the Name of God Almighty and
Christianity; the Nature thereof being wanting in all that have been concerned
therein.

For according to the Testimony and Phrase of Holy Scripture, and the
experience of Thousands in this Age, Men have been, are, and may be so
intoxicated in their Minds, and understandings, so mistaken, and
Captivatedunder that Monster falt Opinion; so corrupted by Tradition, and
Superstitious Education, etc. that they have been, and are said to be made
bewitched given up to believe strong Delusions, made drunk with the Wine of
Fornication, which by the Whore (the false Church) is held forth in a golden
Cup to all Nations, according to that not able Vision of the Divine Apostle St.
John, in his Revelation: read the 17th. Chapter, in a Measure of the same
Divine Spirit of Revelation, or else you will mistake, as all Sectarians has
done, etc.

Now seeing People may be Spiritually Drunk, mad, bewitched, deceived,
mistaken, blind, and intoxicated so far, as to take Truth for Error, and Error
for Truth, good for Evil, and Evil for good, Light for Darkness, and Darkness
for Light, true Religion for false, and false for true, etc. And proceed in
their Conversation and doings accordingly, toward their Neighbors and
Countrymen, when they have power and opportunity in their Hand.

Its therefore wisdom to know these distempered People, and what means and
medicine is to be used toward such people, and how far the Christian
Magistrate and Lawmakers, are concerned about such things.

(...) There are two Infallible Signs that people are in the State above: first
when they are prone to or put forward in a Blind Zeal, to hate, or hurt their
Neighbors, or Countrymen, because they are not of the same opinion in matters
of Religion; nor do not Worship after the same manner, or in the same form and
fashion as they do.

2ly. When they make it matter of conscience and duty to deal with such as are
not of their Church and way, as with Weeds and Vermin, and think they do God
good Service therein. These are two infallible Signs, that People are
Religiously mad and mistaken.

Paul, when a Persecutor (tho by the Authority of the wisest men, greatest
Scholars, highest prosessors of Religion, chief Priest, etc.) was one of the
Religious mad men, and they were no better that employed him, and gave him
Commission for the same: Notwithstanding they thought and believed otherwise;
saying, God was their Father, and that they were Abraham's Children, tho at
that very time they were doing the Works of the Devil, and persecuting the
Seed, and true Children of God and Abraham; yet knew not themselves, what they
did, nor what they were, while they were breathing out threatenings, slaughter,
and Death punishing in every Synagogue (or Parish) and compelling to Blaspheme;
being as Paul said of himself (before King Agrippa) exceeding mad against the
poor Christians, persecuting them even unto strange Cities: all this in his mad
Zeal and Ignorance, he with those of his (Religion or rather) opinion, thought
was very well done.

So as has been said, its wisdom to know these distempered people, which if
any lack, let them ask it of God, for it is his own Gift, that makes known
persons and things as they are, in the Ground and Nature, and enables to give
them Names according thereto and to judge righteously, and not by appearance,
and without this gift of God, no man can know himself, nor judge his Brother
aright.

If Education, Tradition, Academical Learning, or a profession and imitation of
that Religion, which God himself commanded, could teach a Man the knowledge of
God, or himself, those Jews, Doctors and Rabbis would have had it: none in
those Ages exceeding them in those things; yet all they attained to thereby,
was just as if we should see a Man believe and declare himself to be the Son of
some great Prince, or that some mighty Monarch was his Father, who had given
him Power and Authority as his Vicegerent, to correct, order, amend and
govern, in his Kingdom, when he is no other than the Son of a Vile Butchery
Executioner, and is assisting his Father in his filthy Drugery; for Christ told
them they were of their Father the Devil, and his Works they did, even at that
very instance, when they believed and declared themselves to be the Children of
God and Abraham, etc.

Now those that are, and would be doing the same sort of work; let their
pretense be what it will, they are in the same condition; tho they may not be
sensible thereof, nor see themselves to be such; for why is a Man said to be
mad Spiritually, is it not because the God of this World (that lies in
wickedness) has blinded the Eye of his mind, darkened and vayled his
Understanding and Judgment, that he cannot see, understand, nor judge aright of
the things of God, and yet believes and persuades himself he can, and by his
will and power would force, and compel others to believe the same, and to
receive his understanding and judgment therein, under pains and penalties, etc.
This is the Nature and Property of a blind mad Zealot.

Most in Christendom are ready to sensure Paul and the Jews, for their rage and
madness, cruelty and violence against Christ and his harmless Disciples, and
also the Gentiles for their Brutish Inhumanity against the primitive
Christians, in the Ten Persecutions, though they have been and are doing the
same work, even against those that prosess the same Name together with them,
and yet justify themselves therein, and think they do God good Service
thereby, which is an evident Token they are of the same sort, for Persecutors
were always blind.

And Persecutions under the Name of Christ and Christianity, and under pretense
of the Propagating and preserving the Christian Religion, are far worse, and
under a greater degree of madness, blindness, and ignorance, then either Jews
or Heathen: they are not only blind and mad, but Drunk also, Infatuated,
Stupefied, Intoxicated, and less excuseable then all other Persecutors upon the
Face of the Earth, because they do profess and account themselves to be
Disciples of that Imaculate Lamb Christ Jesus, who was always loving, meek,
gentle, tender, and kind to all mankind, going up and down, doing good, never
harming any, laying down his life for his Enemies, and praying for them, and
gave forth those divine Heavenly Precepts and Commandments before mentioned,
for all his Disciples and Followers to observe, keep and obey. Now wherever
people are found making profession of Christ Jesus and his Religion, and doing
those things which are not only Repugnant to it, but inconsistent with it:
certainly such are in a farther degree of blindness and madness, and more
inexcuseable, than either Jew or Heathen, for they had no such Heavenly
example, nor no such divine Precepts and Commandments in their Religion, but
rather the contrary.

Therefore a Christian Persecutor (if such a thing could be) would be as a
Monster in Nature; that which is in its self most mild, loving, gentle,
harmless and innocent, would become the most wild, cruel, ravenous and
devouring, if this could be, not only Nature, but Religion it self would be
turned quite out of course. Lillies would tear the Thorns, and Lambs devour the
Wolves, and the Sheep prey upon the Tigers, Bears and Lions, and the innocent
Dove would devour the Birds of prey.

But these things cannot be; therefore it may certainly be concluded, and
infallibly believed, that whoever is found promoting or acting Cruelty or
Violence, against any under the name and profession of the Christian Religon,
are Wolves in Sheeps clothing, painted Sepulchers, and professing Hypocrites;
neither truly loving God nor their Neighbor, which Love is the Foundation of
true Religion, and by their works and doings (not by their words) they may be,
and are known.

Now when these poor deceived distempered people are known, evidently by the
Signs of their disease aforementioned, what course is to be taken with them,
what means and medicine does Humanity and Christianity call for? And how far is
the Christian Magistrate and Lawmakers, concerned about such things?

Ans. First, they are greatly to be pitied, because the Cause of their
distempers generally is Hereditary, they are born of Jews, Turks or Mahometans,
Infidels or Christians, and are trained up, and educated in their Various ways
and worships, beliefs and opinions about Religion, by their Parents and Tutors;
so that they are Tinctured, if not possessed with Hereditary traditional
Religion, or the Opinions of their Forefathers, before they know they are men,
and become so bound with the Chains of Tradition, Custom and Opinion, in the
things relating to Religion, that they give up their Wills, Judgment,
Understanding, Conscience, and all for the forced Maintenance and Propagation
thereof, tho it be to their own hurt, and the ruin of others, not knowing nor
rightly understanding what they do, being captivated as above, and the cause in
the beginning chiefly from others.

Therefore even as Humanity teaches to pity and take care of poor blind
people, and such who are under a great Lunary, or Distraction naturally as to
provide for, and prevent their hurting themselves and others; so it leads to
do the same for those that are blinded and distracted, through Tradition,
Custom, Superstitious Education, and opinion: and Christianity teaches a
farther Lesson, even to pray for them; and with all mildness, gentleness,
tenderness and love, to endeavor their better information, in order to their
deliverance and redemption from under those sinful customs and false opinions,
whose Tyranny and oppression makes not only Fools, but wise men mad.

And for so doing, Christ himself has left Example, not only in his divine
Precepts and Commandments before mentioned, but in his own person, when he
prayed for those great professing people the Jews, whom he also wept over, and
expressed as much tenderness toward them, as a Hen has toward her Chicken;
and when they were upon the point of Executing their utmost of envy, rage,
blindness and madness upon him, he said, Father forgive them, for they know not
what they do; and his Apostle Paul said, if they had known him, they would not
have Crucified the Lord of Glory: this he knew to be true by woeful experience
himself, being blind and ignorant, while a mad zealous Persecutor: ignorance
and envy has been, and is the cause of all violence against the Righteous, and
about Religion throughout all former Ages, and let the pretense be what it
will, it has no other foundation in this Age.

All the Inventers of Creeds, Articles of Faith, Massbooks,
Common-prayer-books, Directories, and other Prescribers of set forms of worship
in whole Christendom have been prone to Curse persecution against such as
comply not therewith: especially when any one of them becomes National, and are
possessed of great Revenues for the maintenance of the same; that is as Oil to
the Flame that has devoured many, and disturbed the whole Christian World.

Therefore it concerns the Christian Magistrates, and Lawmakers, to take care
that none of those people have power and opportunity to force and compel under
corporal pains and penalties, the observation of their inventions and
prescriptions; for such things proceeds not from true Religion, but from the
opinion and imagination about it, and as has been said, is inconsistent with
it.

Now the great men of this Island of Great Britain, who are and may be
concerned to make and execute Laws, may in the first place see it absolutely
needful to abrogate and demolish all such Laws about Religion, as have
proceeded from people in the State above: as all Laws to banish, hang, burn,
Stigmatize, whip and imprison the Bodies of people for matters of mere Religion
and Conscience are; and to make and establish such Laws in the room thereof, as
may prevent any sort, or Sect of people to hurt, rifle and spoil their
Neighbors and Countrymen, because they may disser in their understanding and
practice in matters of worship and religion, and that may command and enjoin
morality and good Neighborhood, among men of different perswations about forms
of worship, etc. herein the Nation would be made happy, even in your imitating
the great God of Love, Peace and Unity, in the midst of all variety, and the
light of his countenance would shine in you, and upon you.

And now you have a Season for so doing: The King in his late tender gracious
Declaration, has outdone all the Princes of Christendom, and set them a
glorious example, by following which they may make themselves and all their
people happy: He is a Prince of great observation and experience, and has
thereby made himself a Throne in the Hearts and affections of his people: And
if you do but cast an impartial Eye void of prejudice and opinion you will find
none throughout the Nation, but such who are captivated thereby, and have been,
and would be again persecutors about the mode and manner of Religion, and
Church Ceremonies (it being the Nature of every Sect, private Spirit and
opinion, to use force and compulsion when able) because false opinion, blind
Zeal, and traditional Faith, is some of the Wine, with which the Whores cup is
filled, whereby those that drink freely thereof, supposing it to be the Wine of
the Kingdom, are made Drunk, intoxicated and mad therewith, as has been said,
you will find none but such that are for the continuation of such Laws, as
would spoil men of their lives, liberties, and Estates in this World, about the
things of another, about matters of mere Religion and Conscience, about humane
inventions, carnal ordinances, and circumstances of Religion and Worship, to
the great shame and scandal of Christian Religion, which never came into the
World at that Door; neither did it ever use or prevail by such means, nor ever
will; being certainly true, that all that are found in that way and work, under
the profession of Christianity, they are in the Degeneration from the Nature
thereof, and they are but a Sect, though they may call themselves Universal or
National Church; have a care of Jealousies, and false Suggestions; and take
heed of making conclusions, that the design of the Kings Declaration, is only
to introduce the Roman Catholic Sect; herein you may abuse the best of Kings,
for tho he has declared himself to be of that persuasion, as to the manner of
worship, etc. yet it is most apparent, that his understanding is so far
divinely illuminated, that he owns it not in the worst parts of it, viz. force,
violence and persecution, declaration.

We cannot but heartily wish, as it will eafily be believed that all the people
of our Dominions were Members of the Catholic Church, yet we humbly thank
Almighty God it is, and has of a long time been our constant sense and opinion
(which upon diverse occasions we have declared) that Conscience ought not to be
constrained, nor People forced in matters of mere Religion. It has even been
contrary to our inclination, as we think it is to the interest of Government,
which it destroys by spoiling Trade, Depopulating Countries, and discouraging
Strangers, and finally that it never obtained the end, for which it was
employed, etc.

Here is as much said in so many words, as can well be, to signify that they
proceed from a profound Judgment, a true and constant Sense, a right opinion,
great reason, a perfect sight of the true interest of Government, and all
confirmed by observation and experience, with thanks to Almighty God for the
same.

Now for any to surmise and imagine, that there is a Snake in this fair Grass,
and that there is some grand evil design to be ushered in thereby, is great
Ingratitude, the effect of bad Jealousy, and the Fruit of some fearful Sect,
that cannot live at ease while their Neighbors are free from trouble.

Indeed if the King acted without any of those excellent qualifications before
mentioned, barely as a Roman Catholic, moving only by the Dictates of that
Church, you and the Nation might have ground to fear, that there is an Adder in
the Grass, which is much more dangerous than a Snake, and that it is with
design not only to gain equal liberty for the Roman Catholics, but also to
make them capable in time to suppress all others, as the Nature of that Sect is
with cruelty and violence, as this and many Nations can witness; but to think
that this is the design of the King, is the worst interpretation that malice
and envy can put upon the words and doings of so great and just a Prince, whom
none can justly charge with playing the Hypocrite, and dissembling with God and
Man, as such thoughts would insinuate, and he has been a Sufferer for
Conscience sake himself, while a Subject (tho of the greatest Rank) and when in
the greatest power, who can say that ever he moved or put forward the making or
executing those Penal Laws about Religion, by which many men's lives, Liberties
and Estates, have been destroyed in this Nation.

Let all such thoughts and jealousies be laid aside, and with the King give
humble thanks to Almighty God, that he has placed such a one upon the Throne,
whose Heart he has inclined to imitate his divine Majesty in being kind,
merciful and just to all, without respect to Persons, or Opinions, and be ready
to concur with him in his just design, and Christian intentions of abolishing
all Penal Laws, about that which is accounted Religion, but indeed is more
properly Opinion, for the Christian Religion, and Penal Laws to enforce it,
were always inconsistent, as has been hinted; it is Opinion and not pure
Religion that has devised, and set up Penal Laws to defend and propagate it.

The Christian Religion came into the World without the approbation, consent,
or assistance of the great Scholars, Doctors and Rabbis, and other great men
of the World, they were all disturbed at the appearance of Christ the Author of
it, and consulted how to destroy him, and the highest professors of God and
Religion in that Age, studied and sought all ways and means how to suppress and
prevent the setting up and spreading the Christian Religion, but it being
founded in the Truth in the inward parts, which God loves it grew and prevailed
in the Hearts of people, amidst all opposition working powerfully in the Minds,
Hearts, and understandings of Jews, Greeks, Barbarians, Schithyans, bond and
free, making a real chaing in the inward man, not in the opinion or notion of
things only, but they were renewed in the Spirit of their minds, their Hearts
were purified, consciences rectified, their understandings illuminated, and
their Conversations was such as became the Gospel of Christ, Brotherly love,
Kindness, patience, long Suffering with Innocence, and other Fruits of the
Spirit abounded among them; this was their State when Laws and Edicts of Men
were against them, who had neither Sword, nor Penal Laws on their side; they
were far degenerated from the Nature, tho not from the Name Christian, when
they called to the civil Magistrate for Penal Laws, they were then run into
Sects, Sides and Opinions, and into disputes and quarrellings with one another
about them, envying, hating and persecuting one another, becoming as they got
power as cruel to each other, as the Heathen had been to them, forcing and
imposing their Faiths, Forms and Opinions, by banishments, Torments and Death,
to the great shame of the Christian Religion; the foundation of which is love,
peace and good will to all men, and the means it prevails by, and the Weapons
it conquers with, are not carnal but spiritual, Domonstration, Persuasion and
Conviction, whosoever has, or desire to use any other Weapons about the
Christian Religion, are certainly deceived and mistaken so far as to take false
opinion for true Religion.

Now the chief end of Magestracy, Laws and Government among men, is to preserve
and defend their properties, liberties and lives, from such as would spoil and
rob them of either, and among all the Beasts of prey, blind Zeal, misguided
Conscience, private dark selfish opinions are most ravenous, this Wolf in
Sheeps clothing has sharp Teeth and cruel Claws, and a wild untamed devouring
Spirit. Notwithstanding his pretense of Zeal and Conscience for the Christian
Religion, it is the Spirit of Cain and Saul, that murderer and Persecutor about
Sacrifice and Worship.

But whosoever is led by his religious, or rather irreligious opinions, to
endeavor the hurt or ruin of his Brother or Neighbor, about matters of mere
Religion and Conscience, if he accomplish and effect the same, he is an evil
doer and ought to suffer as an evil doer: And he that has good will to all,
and seeks the good of all, and hurts no man (tho he be of a contrary mind and
judgment to him, and erroneous opinions) he is a well doer; and the Laws of God
and all good men, who are appointed to judge and rule for God, are a Terror to
the one, and a praise, defense and encouragement to the other.

Now as you are English men, your very Native Humanity (where it is not spoiled
with false opinion) leads you to be sociable, kind and neighbourly, but where
the principle and the precepts of the Christian Religion prevails upon you,
and possess your Judgments, As to do to others, as you would have them do to
you, do good to all, overcome evil with good, love thy Neighbor as thy self,
etc. I say, where these universal precepts of Christianity prevails in you,
(from the principle thereof) it makes you excel your Native Humanity, and will
incline your Hearts to concur with things that are suitable thereto, and to
abrogate the contrary.

Did you and the Princes, and great Monarhs of the World but know, and
experience, what ease, what peace, what pleasure, what profit, what true
honor, glory and greatness, does and would attend the true observation of
these Christian precepts, beyond all that can be otherwise invented, or
devised, you and they would be in love therewith, and seek only the advancement
thereof, because tending to the universal good of mankind, not only in this
Nation, but throughout all Nations upon the Earth. It is but a little while
ago, since most of the Courts and Magistrates of England, were troubled with
people about Nonconformity, their Houses broken up, their goods seized and
taken away; not leaving some a Bed to lie on, nor a Pot to dress their Food in,
nor a Stool to sit on, nor Tools to work with; some places, their Trades
destroyed, and their Bodies imprisoned: And if any Magistrate did but incline
to kindness and moderation, people of the baser sort called Informers, who
lived upon the Prey, would threaten them with 100 l. damage, so that many that
were not willing to make havoc of people, and their Goods, were forced to
please those Beasts of prey, which was a trouble and exercise to many, even of
those called the Church of England-men themselves, whose Humanity was not quite
destroyed with their Christianity.

All which the King in his gracious Declaration has eased you and the people
of, for which he is worthy of all gratitude and thankfulness, from his Subjects
of all degrees, but especially from his Nonconforming Subjects, who were a
people designed for ruin, so that they are engaged to pray, that he may receive
from Almighty God a hundred fold ministered into his own Bosom.

So if you join with the King in laying aside all Penal Laws in matters
Ecclesiastical, and set people free from danger of losing their liberty and
property for Nonconformity; and with him as your wisdom may devise, prevent
the like to be made again in future Ages; you will not only please the King and
the Nation, and all people therein, except those in whom corrupt Interest,
false Opinion, and fearful Jealousies prevails, but you will also go sar in
answering and fulfilling those Christian divine Precepts, which are according
to the just and righteous principle of God in all men, and where it is not
Stifled, Crucified and Buried, it will arise and Answer to your just and
righteous doings, and you will have the comfort thereof in your selves, and
will become examplary to the Nations round about, who when they shall hear, see
and behold the blessed Fruits and effects, which certainly will follow your so
doing, may be stirred up to imitate and follow so glorious Example.

If you consult with any that are filled with Fears and Jealousies, especially
such who have a corrupt Interest to secure, (which cannot stand in that pomp
and power they would have it, without force and violence,) you will be
discouraged in so good a Work, as the preventing people from hurting one
another about the opinion of Religion is.

Have a care of men of that temper, your business is to show forth a noble and
generous Spirit, Eying the good of all without respect to persons, or opinions,
and to concur with the King in providing so, that it shall not be in the power
of the present and after Ages, to spoil and persecute one another about matters
of mere Religion and Conscience.

It is an ancient Maxim, That the Truth is great and will prevail, and the
Christian Religion and Worship that stands therein, requires neither Penal
Laws, nor Arms to set it up nor defend it, if any shall call upon you or
counsel you to continue and uphold such Laws, search them to the bottom, and
you will find they have some private Belly Interest to carry on, and that there
lies a venomous biting Adder in their Grass, and that their Religion is such,
as cannot stand in the pomp of it without Penal Laws.

It Is the Whore, (the false Church) that rides upon the Scarlet colored Beast,
she cannot stand alone, nor walk upon her own Legs; and it is she that has
cried to Kings, Emperors, Parliaments and great men, to force and compel people
to bear her dead weight, under pains of Banishment, Hanging, Burning and
Imprisoning, and the loss of all the good things of this World without
conformity to her, wherever you find this cry, assure your selves that it is
not from the Spouse of Christ, it is not the true Mother that would have the
living Child divided or cut in pieces, because her own is smothered and dead.

You may infallibly conclude, that it is not the Apostolical and primitive
Spirit of Christianity, that would have men's Liberties, Lives and Estates
spoiled, and ruinated about matters of worship and conscience, tho their
worship was wrong and erroneous, and their conscience desiled and misin-formed,
and therein making conscience of things which they ought not, nor may not, when
with tenderness and meekness, they are better informed and instructed.

The true Churches power, as has been said, was and is Demonstration,
Persuasion and Conviction, and her Weapons Spiritual and not Carnal, if any
dare say and affirm, that the New Testament way and means to convert or
proselite the World to Christianity, was otherwise, or that the Christian
principle, Doctrines and Precepts of Christ, can admit of any other means in
the Christian Religion; let them come forth and show the proof in the New
Testament, or else let them not (...) regarded.

In this the Children of God are manifest, and (...) Children of the Devil,
whosoever does not Righteou^ness, are not of God, neither he that loves not
(...) Brother, 1 John 3.10.

If a Man say I love God, and hates his Brother, he (...) a Liar, for he that
loves not his Brother whom he has see^ how can he love God whom he has not
seen, 1 John 4.2^

FINIS.

