PPODPOOS: OR THE FORERUNNER OF The Peaceable Consideration of Christ's
Peaceful Kingdom upon Earth, Abridged: made useful for those that have the
former, and those that have them not. ALSO, Containing many necessary matters,
often since referred unto in the following parts of the wole work, and briefly
pointing out such things as are elsewhere more fully explained, with some
Additions, and Amendments. Unto which are Annexed diverse things most useful of
those contained in the Irenicon; and also directing where the substance of the
rest is to be found in the other parcels printed since the year 1666. when many
hundreds of all the first four parts were burnt or lost, which may supply the
want of them as are particularly set down in the end of this Prodromus.

Mal. 4.5. Behold I will send you Elijah the Prophet, before the coming of the
great and dreadful day of the Lord.

Mat. 17.11. Jesus answered and said unto them, Elias truly shall first come,
and restore all things: but I say unto you, Elias is come already, and they
knew him not, etc.

Post funestam Gogi and Magogi cladem, (i.e. Papae and Turcae)

Ez. 38.39. Describitur Nova Jerusalem cui nomen [Jehovah Shamma] Dominus.

Ibid. c. 48. ad finem. By W. Sherwin, Minister of the Gospel.

London, Reprinted in the Year, 1674.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
BE pleased to observe with me that the subject of mystical Prophesis
respecting the seven Millenniums or a thousand Generations of the World may
fitly thus be described: viz. To be Gods appointed space of time divinely
couched in his word for the accomplishing of his own great design, for his own
infinite glory, concerning his Son Jesus Christ as Mediator, and all those that
he has given him in the world, and for the carrying on of his work of
Redemption in his 3 great offices of Prophet, Priest, and King, for his
Universal true Church in the said time of his Mediatorshop, until the happy
restitution of all things shall be completed in the world by him, both for his
Saints and all inferior Creatures in their capacity as in reference to things
which will mostly be seen being temporal; until those eternal things shall be
obtained, which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor entered into the heart of
man to conceive, both for men and Angels for ever more.

In which way Gods most wonderful and most gracious design toward all those
blessed intelligible creatures for his own glory according to his word will
gradually be discovered and fully at last obtained by them for all eternity:
And this which was first declared in the word will be last accomplished in the
world, until from their temporal being they all pass to the confines of
eternity.

To which purpose take notice,

1. That what was briefly declared, Genesis 3.15. by God the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, at man's fall, is the foundation and short comprisal of all future
revealed mercy: That the Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head; and
with Psalm. 110.1. Rev. 19.11. and 20.4.8, 9, 10.

2. That in Gods Covenant with Noah for all flesh, Genesis 8, and 9. for the
earths continuance, not only as a stage to act all future mercies to men and
other creatures upon, during the said space, but by its fruitfulness to be for
an accommodation to them; but chiefly in that world which is to come, Joel 3.

3. By Noah's Prophecy God sets forth the lineal descent of such as for the
future should chiefly be given to Christ, Genesis 9.25, 26, 27. viz. Jews,
according to the Covenants and Promises after made to their Fathers, and
Gentiles by their first and second calls, etc.

4. God afterward accordingly made Covenants with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
and for their seed; and though the natural seed of Abraham forfeited their
Typical Canaan by breaking their Covenant, Mich. 2.10. yet faithful Abraham
through his one divine seed Christ has obtained for all his spiritual seed
that City spoken of Heb. 11.39.40.

5. Gods mercy was after set forth to David, as by a Kingdom first also
forfeited by his natural race, to the casting down of David's Tabernacle by the
Babylonish Captivity: thereby making way for the long interim, or interruption
of David's said Kingdom for the 2300 years of the four Gentil Monarchies: but
by his divine seed Christ, Gods Covenant is renewed with David for his
spiritual seed, 2 Samuel 7. who shall partake of the sure mercies of David's
Kingdom, Ezekiel 55.3. with and by Christ in his Mediatory or Davidical
Kingdom, Revelation 20.4. and 3.21. when will also be restored to the Saints a
Paradise in that world to come instead of that lost by the first Adam on earth,
when there will be new heavens and new earth, and the old will not be
remembered, etc. When the New Jerusalem state shall be set up for all Abraham's
faithful seed, Heb. 11.10, 16. and all Israel shall be saved upon their union
with the Gentiles, of which from the possession of Canaan the whole world mostly
consists, concerning which particulars, I shall refer you to the intent perusal
of our last Treatise on Rev. 10.5. as guiding to the scope and drift of such
first so divinely declared, and last in the world to be fulfilled grace; which
we all ought to be very diligent and active to obtain.

W. S.

THE PRODROMUS.
1. THis previous intimation (I conceive) may be of good use that these
Abridgments of the Prodromus and Irenicon may not only be an helpful
introduction to serious enquirers into the mystical part of the Gospel of
Christ, respecting that world to come, but may, together with those latter
printed principles, serve both for a commentary, as well as a confirmation, of
the sum and substance thereof, in the two folded leaves, and other parts
therein quoted; which is also illustrated by the practical parts on Rev. 20.5.
Genesis 3.15. Jer. 3.17. Rev. 22.20. but may be also as a directing table to find
such things as are after supplied in the latter parcels, and relate unto them
upon diverse accounts.

And in the Irenicon will be showed how the first intended method, chap. 1.
which was many ways first interrupted after the degrees observed, etc.

2. Instead of those Prodromal texts to page 5. formerly, being after spoken of
in our latter Parcels, we here direct to consider well the nature and use of
our several books contained in the first leaf of the General Title page, or
twelve foundations of faith, the knowledge whereof may much advantage many, and
to our account after the Key, where many other useful directions are also
included, and to the Key it self, whereby much previous matter against men's
mistakes is tendered, Assert. 1. page 2. and very useful and necessary
informations of many sorts, not observed by many others, are also observable;
as, that Daniels short hints of the subject matter of the Revel. were shut up
till the time of the end, but opened since (though mystically divinely) by
Christ himself in the book of Revel. the want of which discovery occasioned
many learned men to err, as Assert. 5. of the Key; also of several senses of
Christ's comings in the New Test. Assert. 6. and large proofs of his personal
appearance, coming, and reign, Assert. 7. also many needful distinctions, not
known to many before, as two sort, of Christ's subjects, 1. Raised Saints at his
coming. 2. Converted Jews and Gentiles, Assert. 13. and for them two Jerusalems,
Assert. 14. also the twofold consideration of Christ's execution of his three
great offices, Assert. 17. not in any former works that I have known, etc. the
difference of the two last Trumpets, namely of the last mystical and last
sounding Trumpet above 1000 years after, Assert. 18. and note the distinction
of the two Gogs and Magogs one in Ezekiel. 38.39. the other Rev. 20. Assert. 19.
also observe, that as the spiritual divine foundation of Redemption of the
souls of the Saints was surely wrought by Christ's first coming, so the visible
glorious perfecting of Christ's work of Redemption for the bodies of his Saints,
with the restitution of all things, etc. will be performed at his second
coming, with all promised Mercies and Covenants to and with the Forefathers,
Assert. 21. with the consideration of those Covenants, page 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
besides many other profitable matters in diverse other former Assertions in the
said Key.

Also take special notice of those great foundations of these truths in our
last practical piece on Rev. 20.5. page 1, 2. where many great differences of
Christ's second personal coming, and his descending at the last Trump, with
those other great foundations mentioned page 2, 3. with the hints of the
subject, nature, times, and end or scope of Revelation Prophecy, p. 3, 4, 5,
6. which last is largly proved in our System, and in that whole next ensuing
Treatise by the use of Christ's own Divine Key, Rev. 20.21, 22. as may appear by
this our last and great discovery through divine grace, pertinently applied to
other proofs of the first bodily Resurrection of the Saints 1000 years before
the rest of the dead, with many other evidences and improvements of these
Doctrines, now needful to be known in these last times, by the observant
perusal of these matters and references men may by Gods blessing apprehend much
Divine truth of this nature which God has been pleased, for a time, much to
set forth mystically by many divine Hieroglypsicks and resemblances of a weak
woman for the Church, and of strong and cruel Beasts for the successive
enemies, and the woman's Divine Seed first to be her Savior at his first coming
about the 4000th year of the world. 2. Her great Redeemer at his 2d. but her
head and Husband in their Sabatism of the world to come, and 4thly to be
actually her all in all with the Father and Holy Spirit, in full reconciliation
and perfect fruition upon Christ's sentence of approbation, and his delivering
up his Mediatory Kingdom for all eternity.

Which way of these Divine Doctrines I have often in my thoughts compared to
the Astronomers teaching that art; the terms of the circles seem strange at
first to the learner, as the Polar Circles, Collures, Tropicks, Eccliptick
Line, Zodiark, Meridian, Orizon, with the Zenith, Nadir, and the like, but
easy to be understood when their use is discovered: so in the turning of Gods
great Sphere of the worlds Millenniums, of which Moses first made an Ephemeris,
viz. of the old world, of the new world, or now world, and the world to come
(as in chapter 5. of the Iren.) about the middle whereof Daniel makes his great
Kallender in his 2, and 3, and 8th chap. of the four Gentile Kingdoms, for 2300
years, until the Messiahs second coming; and his little Calender of 70 weeks,
or 396 years, chapter 9. to his first, within the compass of the former; and John
adds the last of that world to come in the three last chap. now discovered to
be Christ's Divine Key of all times, with Gods great design in them from the
fall, respecting the Lamb and the Bride in that said designed estate by God of
the 1000 years, Rev. 20. before Christ shall give up the Kingdom to the
Father: and when such Scripture Chronology is a little well considered with
the carrying on of Gods said design therein (as in our last Systeme of the
seven millenniums may be observed) these Divine Doctrines will by degrees
appear, I doubt not, more and more easy to many. See our Table of Chronol. in
the beginning of the Iren. with chapter 5. Ibid. and the book of the Parallels of
Dan. and Rev. to that purpose if they seem at first hard, they will soon be
familiar, and after both enlightening and delightful, as Divine Discoveries have
ever been formerly, and there is an excellent Divine art to be observed in
them, which by practice and due application with observing their right seasons,
may be made familiar, and more and more perfected.

3. But 3dly, as for those seasonable Prodromal texts of Scrip. in the
Revelation respecting these latter times, p. 5, 6, 7, 8. we shall hint a few
things observable; as first of that, Rev. 16.12. to the end of the sixth Vial,
on verse. 13. by the three unclean spirits (according to Paraeus) may be meant;
1. Those Legatia Latere, or plenipotentiaries sent to Princes. 2. Popish
Bishops, and Doctors. 3. Priests, Jesuits, etc. by a joint mission, 1. from the
Devil the old Dragon by instigation, 2. from the Popes Council of Cardinals,
and their associates, by advice. 3. By the Beast himself, by his authorized
Commission, page 4.

The latter part of that prophecy seems, according to Mr. Mede, to concur
with that which follows, Rev. 14.14. to the end, which he conceives may be
fulfilled in the utter ruin both of Pope and Turk, who seems to be therefore
called Gog in the Land of Magog, Ezekiel. 38.2. as having gotten a great part of
the old Roman Impire, and is that King of the North that overflowed with his
multitudes, after the Saricens pushings in the Holy Wars were over, as Dan,
11.40. who will be both probably destroyed then, v. 45. at Christ's appearance,
Rev. 19, and 20. chapter and the description of one in a cloud, with a Crown and
sharp Sickle, Mr. Mede notes always to belong to Christ, and v. 16. by the
reaping of the harvest he understands the Turks ruin, and by the gathering the
Clusters of the Vine, v. 19. the destruction of the Pope; though probably like
to be of both suddenly, (See Joel 3.2. to 13.) being gathered then with their
Armies (as those Tares, Mat. 13. into bundles to be burnt:) and both, as is
conceived, making up together one mystical Antichrist, the one holding the
worldly Babylon, the other the spiritual, to the great prejudice both of Jews
and Gentiles then to be united in one sheepfold.

The 3d. Prophecy more fully setting forth the destruction of Antichrist is,
Rev. 19.11. to the end of the chapter after that joyful exultation (probably) at
the Jews Conversion, in the former part thereof when that nation will be born
in a day, Isa. 66.8. and the marriage of the Lamb will be, v. 7. Then in v. 11,
etc. is set forth the glorious coming of Christ to destroy the said enemies to
the end of the chapter when he will eminently make his foes his footstool, as Psalm.
110.1. at the Armageddon Battle, p. 7.

The 4th Prophecy, Rev. 11.13, 14. to the end, concerns the ruin of the Roman
Empire, the time whereof shall be no more, as says that Angel of the Covenant
(probably) chapter 10. when the 7th Angel begins to sound, and Christ's visible
Dominion is then to take place, etc.

See the Divine Thesis, chapter 2. p. 3. of the Irenicon.

November 3. 1663.

This part of a Letter to a Friend, Nov. 3. 63. now ten years past, I had given
order to leave out of the Abridgment, but upon perusal thereof the 7th of April
74. I find it so considerable many ways [being a Summary of my knowledge then of
these Doctrines,] that I now order it to be reprinted, and I would have all
sorts take notice, that all I have written since, except my last great
Discovery of the Scope of Revelation Prophecy on chapter 20.5.] and some other
late Discoveries and Distinctions in our Key, and that late Summary occasioned
by my late Noble, Learned, and Judicious good Friend Sir Robert Morai, in the 2
folded leaves, and the latter part of the Divine Theses, from the 11 and 12th
to the end, with the addition now following them; I say, all others written
since, tend chiefly to the confirmation and explication of the same truth of
the mystical part of the Gospel of Christ, both in respect of those Principles
and Practicals, as in the first leaf of the 12 Foundations of Faith: and for
both purposes also I commend to them the due consideration of our 31
Observations useful for understanding mystical Prophesies, with answers to
objections both after the Tract on Rev. 22.20. in the 4th part.

AS for the New Jerusalem, since the Bar, viz. how Christ could personally make
intercession in Heaven, and yet personally reign on earth at the same time,
which occasioned my opinion of a mystical reign, etc. was taken away, whereby I
have formerly conceived it to be an Article of Faith, which the Scripture
expressly declared, viz. [That the Heavens must contain Christ's Person till his
coming the second time to Judgment] my meaning was, to the last Judgment:
having not then understood his coming in the clouds of heaven, at his
appearance and Kingdom to judge quick and dead at the first Resurrection of
the Saints 1000 years before the rest of the dead, to be the beginning of his
great day of Judgment. I have (I say) found much since in Scripture (but
especially in the book of the Revelation) to tend to a coming of Christ, as the
great Monarch, to set up his glorious Kingdom, upon the putting down all
worldly Powers that stood in opposition to him, 1 Cor. 15. when he will begin
to judge the quick and dead, Rev. 11.17, 18. I have lately perused Mr. Archers
Book of Christ's Personal Reign, and though in all things therein I am not
satisfied, yet I cannot find solid reason in many things, to dissent; and in
other things it seems convincing; and doubtless in his time he was a very
discerning Christian, and I had of late, (before I read that, or any other of
the like nature, since my most earnest search into mystical Prophecies of the
latter times) the same apprehensions of diverse passages in Scripture, which I
find to agree with his Book: as the applying what our Savior promised to his
Disciples when he came to his Kingdom, [which I find will be in the Thousand
years, Rev. 20.4. promised to the New-Jerusalem Inhabitants, Rev. 3.21.] that
then they should sit on twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel.
And that of our Savior, Luke 21.24. that Jerusalem should be trodden under
foot till the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled, [but to be raised up again
then.] And when he wept over Jerusalem, he said, They (namely the People of the
Jews) should not see him henceforth, till they said, Blessed is he that comes
in the name of the Lord, Mat. 23. ult. denoting that then they should see him.
And that promise, Zach. 12.10. to the end, which is in a way of mercy,
foreshewing how upon their conversion, they should mourn in humble contrition,
and look to him at his appearing [when that Nation shall be born in a day, Isa.
66.8,] which judicious Expositors apply to the expressions, Rev. 1.7. Behold,
he comeh with Clouds, and every eye shall see him: and they also that pierced
him (that is, the People of the Jews, that after their imprecation on
themselves, and on their children, shall be accomplished) will (as the Apostle
Paul speaks, Romans 11. ( appear to be beleved for their Fathers sake, when those
times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord, Act. 3.19. and
then all Israel shall be saved (both of Jew and Gentile:) And though many grave
Divines for a long time interpreted all that has been spoken to this purpose,
for the most part to a spiritual sense, yet the things that some hold out to
the contrary, (...) answered: so that if this Opinion, or rather matter of
Faith, ^e but freed from those evil additions that the subtilty of Satan in the
Primitive times thrust upon it (as if it should be a Kingdom of sensual
pleasure;) for before thse misrepresentations, or false aspersions rather, as
Mr. Mede notes, it was very ancient. And freed likewise from that bold
presumption and scandalous wickedness of our latter times, for any, under
pretense of Christ's Kingdom given to the Saints, to go about by the Sword, or
any other unlawful means, to divest Magistrates and Governors of their Offices,
to take that Kingdom before Christ give it to them to whom it will belong, as
being appointed to them by his Father, in his own time, namely, at Christ's
appearing. [Here consider that Christ says, he came not to destroy the Law;
and Paul says, he established the Law; and this is necessary to vindicate this
Doctrine from scandal, and to warn well-meaning persons that they think not
upon seeming-fair pretenses of good, to attemp to do evil; God having revealed,
that he will set up that Kingdom himself, and that only in his own oppointed
time. On the other side, says our Savior, He that breaks the least
Commandment, and teaches men so, shall be the least (that is, none) in the
Kingdom of Heaven] as he answered the Mother of Zebedees Children, Mat. 20.23.
It shall be given to them for whom it is appointed by my Father: appointed as
well for the time when, as the persons to whom. These and the like errors being
removed from it, I think it may have an hnorable and comfortable place in
matter of true Christian Faith, as containing the best times of the most holy
Catholic Church upon earth, that we are to believe or hope for, and the
excellent Communion of Saints that we are in this world to expect. And
likewise, that we are now especially by our prayers to labor to promote (as
God of old directed his people, when their time of deliverance from Babylon
drew on, Jer. 39. Then (said he) they shall call on me, and I will answer, etc.
And when Daniel by Books understood the mind of God, therein he set himself by
fasting and prayer, to seek for, and help forward if it might be) the
accomplishment of such revealed Grace: So now also that new Babel is abundantly
revealed to God's People, to be shortly to be thrown down, and the
New-Jerusalem, much more abundantly revealed in Scripture, shortly thereupon to
be set up: The Faith and Prayer of God's People ought in their sphere to seek
to promote it; and I observe the Dutch Notes (though by men of different
Judgments) yet in the Preface of the nine last Chapters of Ezakiels Prophecy,
apply what is there said to some wonderful Glory of a Jerusalem to come, of
which the former restoring of the Jews from old Babylon was but a Type.
Besides, I observe many Psalms, and many passages in many other Psalms more
than I read in Mr. Archers Book to tend so this way, that otherwise (as such
prophetical-Scriptures besides) seem not to have any probable fulfilling (but
according to Revelation, Interpretation (as I may call it) which I must
acknowledge I never did, nor ever was like rightly and groundedly to have
understood, but according to the tenor of that blessed book. And as Isreal's
coming out of Egypt, tended to the actual giving of them, after forty years
space, the possession of Canaan of old: so God's Peoples coming out of the
spiritual Egyptian Antichristian bondage, now approaching, tends to bring all
God's true Israel into the New-Jerusalem, that comes down from Heaven, Rev. 20.
and is it not a main drift of the most, if not of all the petitions in the
Lord's Prayer to this purpose? for when has Gods Name been so comperably
hallowed in Earth as it is in Heaven, as then it will be, both by Men and
Angels, in all he is made known by to his People? When will his Kingdom come
with such power to any suitableness in Earth as it is, and will be in Heaven,
but when the Kingdoms of this World are the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his
Christ? Rev. 11.15. And likewise when at the same time, Rev. 19. God's People
shall so rejoice when the Lord God Omnipotent reigns; because, as it
follows in the next verse, his Bride has made her self ready: And
consequently when will the Will of God be done in Earth, as it is by the
blessed Aegels in Heaven, but when his Subjects are of most obeddient hearts
and loyal spirits, as they will be under suh a prevalent reigning of Christ.

When my daily Bread, this day [any day] be so comfortably and confidently
prayed for and expected, as when the particular promises of the greatest
confluences of Temporal and Spiritual Blessings are to be fulfilled in their
proper season to their best purposes? etc. When may we with such comfort and
confidence pray for forgivieness of our Trespasses, this day, [any day] as when
our hearts shall witness with us we least allow our sins? When shall we be so
assured of our own pardon, as when our spirits are most free and clear in
pardoning others in case they offend against us? When can we so confidently
pray to be delivered from the evil one, and evil works, with the consequents
thereof this day [any day] as when Satan shall be known to be bound, Rev. 20.3.
and many great temptations removed, and a very great measure of Grace attained,
and near Communion with Christ enjoyed in this World? Yea, and will not the
following enforcements of Prayer set down by our Savior be then most clearly
aplicable, when the Kingdom is most manifestly Gods, and the Power both, to
obtain it at his own time and pleasure? and so likewise to retain it, appears
clearly his; and consequently all Glory as his due, shall be rendered unto him
to all eternity. Amen, Amen.

And for the Martyrs and Saints to be raised at the entrance of Christ on this
his Kingdom, to have their part in the New Jerusalem: I had the like thoughts
before to what I find in other Authors, That they should be in a state, such as
Christ was in after his own Resurection, while he was not acssended to his
Father; but when I consider the many Prophesies of all those great things in
the Old Testament, so confirmed in the New, and especially applied in the
Revelation to the New Jerusalem, not only by allusion, but by application of
the Spirit of God and Christ himself in a special manner, Rev. 10.7. as he
declared to his Servants the Prophets: And at that time reward is to be given
to his Servanis the Prophets, Rev. 11.18. and to his Saints, and to them that
fear his Name, both great and small, as it follows in the same Scripture: And
it is of main weight in this point, that when the Chorus was set about the
Throne, Rev. 4.1, 2, 3. etc. when Saint John was to receive the visions of that
Book, there is a Glorious appearance of God described, and the Rainbow round
about the throne, as doing all to his Church through the Covenant of Grace,
through the Blood of Christ his only begotten Son; and the seven Lamps burning
before the Throne, deciphering the seven Spirits, or the Holy Ghost with his
Gifts and Graces, as Rev. 1.4. more clearly in Rev. 5. there is a Book in the
hand of him that sat upon the Throne, which none was found worthy to open but
the Lamb, that had been, as it were, slain; having seven Horns and seven Eyes,
verse. 6. which occasioned the four living Wights, and twenty four Elders, to
sing a new Song, and afterward fall down and worship; but the top of
rejoyceing for all that was in the Book, and after all that should be done and
suffered by, and for, and in Christ's Church, (which they represented in that
vision (it was this, which was the great enforcement of their joy while the
World was to continue; And (say they, verse. 10.) we shall reign upon Earth; And
that Subject, of such their reign there, after all their labors and sufferings
of the Saints, as their time of refreshment, Acts. 3.19. and Sabbatism or rest,
Heb. 4. is largely treated of in sundry Particulars, in the 19, 20, 21, 22. the
four last Chapters of the Book of the Revelations, and that those things
therein contained, must necessarily be understood of the state of God's Church
upon earth, according to the series and order of the Book in the last times,
and therefore were never yet accomplished; take into serious consideration the
brief abridgment of Reasons and Testimonies following to that purpose.

1. The New Jerusalem is said to come down from God, chap. 21.2. and not to
ascend up, or be taken up unto God, as the Church Tryumphant at the last day
shall be, 1 These. 4.17. Christ will take the Church up to himself, John. 14.3.
it shall not come down after the last Judgment to remain here. 2. I conceive
the New Jerusalem that comes down from God, will he a kind of Tryumphant
Church, confisting of the raised Saints, though in the thousand years, it be
not fully glorified yet perfectly sanctified and saved, Rev. 20. knowing in due
season they shall be so glorified, as 1 John. 3.2, 3.

But all others of the faithful, in the natural life, shall walk in the light
of that Jerusalem, the Mother of us all, Gal. 4. Rev. 21.24. and accordingly
the several Texts lelating to either, are to be distinguished.


The Church is said to be prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband, verse. 2.
Now the Church Tryumphant, for all the Elect gathered together, is not a Bride
prepared, but a wife in marriage fully accomplished. 3. Because it is called a
Tabernacle, a removing state, and God also said to be with men, and to dwell as
in a Tabernacle with them; but concerning the Church Tryumphant in Heaven, the
manner of speaking is to say [It is with God] 4. Because the Holy Ghost so
strongly confirms this renovation of all things, avouching it again and again,
verse. 1.5. commanding to write, and affirming the words to be faithful and
true, which needed not in so generally approved believed truth. touching the
state of the Church Tryumphant. 5. Because John is made to ascend on high, to
see this new City below him descending out of Heaven from God 6. Because it is
said to be measured, and that with the measure of a man, v. 16, 17. which
shows it to be the Church on Earth, which is only measurable, and to be
measured, c. 11.1. Zach. 1.16. but not the Tryumphant in Heaven. 7. Because
here is said, That Nations shall walk in the light of it, and Kings of the
Earth shall bring their glory and honor to it, verse. 23, 24. yea the glory and
honor of the Nations too, v. 26. But none can bring earthly glory and honor
(for of such he speaks) in Heaven above, to becautifie it withal. 8. This
seems not unreasonable (though something in the Letter carry our thoughts to a
state of full perfection, chap. 21.4. and 22.3, 4, 5. because the like speeches
have been used by the Holy Prophets aforetime, to set out the graceful and
peaceful state of the Church, Isa. 65.17, 18, 19, 25. and 60.18, 20. and 25.8.
and 60.21. and yet farther observe, after those high expressions, it is said,
chap. 22.6, These sayings are faithful and true, the Lord God of the Holy
Prophets (who had spoken of old time) sent his Angel to show unto his Servant
John the things [which must shortly be done] which words, shortly be done, seem
always in this Book to note the state of the Church on earth.

Now for testimonies in the next place: Some such thing is promised to the
Jews, in the Books of the Prophets, which seem not yet to be fulfilled, but
deferred till the seventh Trumpet be blown, when the Mystery of God shall ye
finished, as has been declared to his Servants the Prophets; by which words it
is clear, that all things in the Prophets are not accomplished, till this Book
of the Revelations be fulfilled; for the Prophets have formerly spoken of this
Mystery to be finished under the seventh Trumpet. Now that we may not wonder at
the New Jerusalem here set forth, look unto the prophesies of old, and mark
what by them the Lord did promise unto the Jews after their captivity. 1. He
tells them, They shall be brought back again to Jerusalem and to inhabet Judea,
Zach. 8.7, 8. and 10.8, 9. Isa. 60.10, 15. and 62.10. And all Nations, Isa.
61.11. 2. He will pour upon them the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, and they
shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, Zach.
12.10, 14. 3. He will make them strong to overcome all their enemies, and they
shall inhabit Jerusalem again, Zach. 12.6. and build the old wastes; they shall
raise up the former desolations: and they shall repair the waste Cities, and
the desolations of many Generations, Isa. 61.4, and 58.12. and that by the help
of strangers and their Kings, Isa. 62.10. 4. Being so built, where as it had
been forsaken and hated, so as no man went through it, he will make it an
eternal Excellency, and a Joy of many Generations, Isa. 60.15. For, 2. Violence
shall no more be heard in the Land, wasting nor destruction within the borders,
but her Walls shall be called, Salvation, and her Gates Praise, Isa. 60.18. The
Sun shall be no more her light by day, neither for brightness shall the Moon
give light unto her. Isa. 60.19, 20. 2dly. All the people shall be righteous,
Isa. 60.21, and no cananite there, Zech. 14.21, 3dly. Her Officers shall be
Officers of Peace, and her Actors, Righteousness, Isa. 60.17. 4thly. Her
Watchmen shall never be silent, Isa. 62.6. neither shall her Vision ever be
wanting, Isa. 59.21. But the false Prophet, and the unclean spirit shall be cut
off, Zech. 13.2. So as by this glorious and graceful state she shall be called
by a new name, which the mouth of the Lord shall name, Isa. 62.2. that is,
Hephziba, and the Land, Beulah; for the Lord would delight in her, and marry
her: or Jehovah there shall be the name of the City, Ezekiel, 48.35. 5thly,
Hereupon they shall be known among the Gentiles and People, and all that see
their Seed and Offspring, shall acknowledge them the Seed which the Lord has
blessed, Isa. 61.9. An holy People Redeemed of the Lord sought out, and not
forsaken, Isa. 62.12. 6thly, The Gentiles and their Kings shall see her
Righteousness and Glory, Isa. 62.12. whereupon they shall come to her, Isa.
60.3. and that with earnest desire, and high estimation of her, Zech. 8.22, 23.
and be joined to the Lord, and become his People also with her, Zech. 2.11.
These Nations and Kings shall bring to her Sons and Daughters, Isa 60.4. and
49.22. Enrich her mightily with abundance, and precious things, Isa. 60.6, 17.
She shall eat the Riches of the Gentiles, Isa. 61.6. and suck the Milk of the
Gentiles, and the breasts of Kings, Isa. 60.16. who shall be her Nursing
Fathers, and Queens her nursing Mothers, (...) ^9.23. bringing her Presents and
Gifts, Isa. 60.6. and 45.14 they shall fall down, and make supplication, Isa.
45.14. they shall worship with their Faces to the Earth, and lick the dust of
her Feet, Isa. 49.23. Zech. 14.16. Strangers shall be her Servants, Isa. 61.5.
Yea, such as will not serve her, shall be destroyed, Isa, 60.12. Zech. 14 17.
She shall be a Crown of Glory in the hand of the Lord, and a Royal Diadem in
the hand of her God, Isa. 62.3. And this her excellency shall never be changed,
her days of mourning shall be ended, Isa. 60.19.20. Her Joy everlasting, Isa,
61.7. For ever shall her Land be inhabited, Isa. 60.21, Zech. 14.11. For to the
Lord is she married, Isa. 62.4. who swears by his right Hand, and the Arm of
his Strength, to give her no more over to her Enemies, Isa. 62.8. As that day
the Lord shall be King over all the Earth; and in that day shall there be one
Lord, and his Name one, Zech. 14, 9.

Thus we see what glorious Promises are made to the New Jerusalem, when the
Promises of the New Heavens and the New Earth shall be accomplished, with many
other of the like nature: whence it may appear how strongly pre-possession of
prejudice against an Opinion, of Doctrine, may carry grave and otherwise
judicious men away from the Way of Truth; sometime upon one advantage or other,
as by Prescription, by Multitudes of wise, learned, or even good men (If they
try not all things, to hold that which is good, (which was mine own late Error
in this particular) or at least want of defecation of appendant Errors,
cunnigly by Satan affixed on this Truth, as we observed in ancient and modern
seducements, not distinguishing between the Depravation and Corruption of that
Truth, and Truth it self, which in its Original was pure and untainted (as in
other cases many times) when the corrupt super-additions of men have long
prevailed to mingle themselves with anciently untainted Truths, which when men
can learn to view with unprejudiced minds, and adhere to with uninteressed
Affections, will soon appear to them in their native excellency.

But for the said New-Jerusalem, the more I observe many places of Scripture,
not only in the New Testament, and Revelations, but in the Psalms, the
Prophets, and even the Historical Parts, the more I am minded thereof, from
time to time. And besides, Psalm. 2. and 8. and 96, 98, 99. which one mentions
especially, I have taken notice of sundry others (since God has opened my
eyes, as he did Hagers of old, to see these refreshing Waters of Comfort) as
Psalm. 89. and 50. and diverse passages in others, which seemed to tend that way,
as Psalm. 146.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. and 148.11, 12, 13, 14. and 149. throughout;
and those nine last Chapters of Ezekiel, (...) the Dutch Bible reckons like
Daniels, to be Revelations of the old Testament, which set forth things to be
accomplished in the New (though they seem not to own the Opinion) yet sometimes
again lay grounds of it. The second and seventh of Daniel speak much of Christ's
Kingdom, and many other places, too largely here to rehearse. The Spirit of God
seems to me to have spoken so largely thereof, and in many specialties likewise
to these purposes, and the things themselves seem so to approach, as evidently
may appear from the Book of the Revelation of Jesus Christ, (th best Expositor
of the meaning of his own Prophetical Spirit) that it much concerns all Gods
People diligently to search and examine all such Truths as he has set down
there for our now seasonable Instruction and Consolation, being sunk down near
to the very dregs of the Worlds evil Times. And as our Savior on Earth
directed to search the Sciptures for Salvation; so now being in Heaven he
directs his people to search them in this for consolation, And as then he said,
In Moses, the Prophets, and the Psalms, as it is written of me, for the former;
so for this he not only points out Moses, the Prophets, and the Psalms in the
old Testament, but has likewise taught the Apostles, the Evangelists, with
many other persons divinely inspired in the New Testament, to give witness to
these things; and lastly by his own wonderful, gracious, divine, Vide the
Irenicon, or Peaceable Consideration of Christ's Kingdom, etc.
though mystical Revelation to the beloved St. John, wherein very much is held
out concerning his own Kingdom, and the New Jerusalem; and as it was when by
the Ministry of Christ and his Apostles, the Doctrine of the Resurrection had
been more cleared than in former times; yet afterward the Apostle Paul shows a
farther Mystery concerning the same, 1 Cor. 15. We must (says he) all be
changed, though not all dye; so many things are still Mysterious to us,
concerning both the New Jerusalem, and the Resurrection, though concerning
both, our Savior in his Revelation has last super-added greater farther
Discoveries in both, than any were before, at least in evidence and clearness;
Yet how are the Eyes of very many withheld from discerning these things? and in
great part it is like to be so to all, save to them to whom it is given to know
the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, which he uses to do, as Christ himself
informs us, to Babes and Sucklings, when they are hid from the Wise and
Prudent, Mat. 11.25. and therefore to be humbly and faithfully sought: And
though the Apostle Paul concerning the Jews general Conversion, had discoursed
largly in the ninth, tenth, and eleventh Chapters of the Epistle to the Romans,
yet still he reckons that Doctrine mystical, v. 25, etc. Let all such therefore
as are of truly Christian Spirits, wait upon God, as by other means, so by
faithful and earnest Prayer to the true Teacher of his own Mysteries, as may
appear requisite in a matter of so great importance, concerning all Gods
faithful People, who seem to have their peculiar interest therein, Rev. 3.21.
and 20.4, 5. and 10.18. which is incomparably greater and better for that
thousand years, than all the Crowns, and Scepters, and Kingdoms of the World
(not improved in Christ's service) in the mean time.

This part of a Letter of May 20, 1664. to Mr. Call of the order of the times,
of the Seals, Trumpets, and Vials, perused with that Abridgment of the
Seal-Prophesie, with the large Note, page 26, 27, 28, 29. of the Irenicon, with
the following Paper of two defects in Mr. Durhams book of Scotland, may to
observant Readers give much light to the book of Revelation, and the Scheme of
that whole book and Summarie of Daniel before the Parallels after drawn up when
many hundred of both the other were burnt Anno 1666. serves for the like use,
but with somefarther advantages therein observable, etc.
THe first six of the seven Seals, are the first Times after the giving of the
Revelation to St. John, toward the end of the first Century, or first hundred
of years after Christ's coming in the Flesh; the which said six Seals reached to
the time wherein Constantine the Great threw down the Heathenish Idolarry (...)
Roman Empire, about the year 320. after Christ; they are set ^ow: Rev. 6. But
out of the seventh Seal proceeded the Seven Trumpets, whereof the six first
contain all the ensuing time of the Roman Empire, both Christian and
Antichristian; and the seventh Trumpet will begin at the ruin of Antichrist,
Vide, Paper of December. 7. 1664. where diverse Reasons are given for it.
and continue, as some conceive, to be the last day of Judgment, or rather to
the beginning of the thousand years. The first four Trumpets (which are
reckoned the milder miseries upon that World of the Roman Empire) contain
somewhat above two hundred years after Constantine, Rev. 8. When the Goths,
Vandals, Hunnes, Almains, etc. by degrees took away the Emperor, who was he
that let the revealing of Antichist, spoken of 2 These. 2. The other three
Trumpets, called the [Vae, vae, vae, Tubae,] or three Woe-Trumpets, Rev. 8.
last verse. are as follows; The first Woe-Trumpet, or fifth Trumpet, is coneived
to begin Anno Dommine 622. according to Helvicus, when those Locusts out of the
bottomless Pit. viz. the Saracens, subdued and overran, one half of the
Eastern Roman Empire, bringing in with them that horrible Imposture of
Mahomatism, Rev. 9. first part of the Chapter, which continued till about Anno
Domini, 1300. When the second Woe-Trvmpet or sixth Trumpet is conceived to have
begun, when the Turks, the other Mohammedan Locusts overcame the Sarecens, and
overcame likewise the other half of the Eastern Roman Empire, Rev. 9. latter
part of the Chapter, which Trumpet will end with the utter perdition of the
last Head of the Roman State, viz. the ruin of the Popedom, being the Feet and
Toes of the Image expounded by Daniel cap. 2. And for the state of the Church,
contemporary with these contained in the little Book in the Angels Hand,
Revelations 10. after a short Chronological Table (as it were) of both
Prophesies, chap, 11. to verse. 15. and thence to the end of the Chapter, a
short Relation of the sounding of the seventh Trumpet and state of the World,
then and thence forward (as after follows.) The first Contemporary State of tho
Church is set down, chap. 12. dontaining the Primitive times, till
Constantines, and the Dragons flood of Arrian Pesecution; from those times,
till the Woman's, the True Church her flight into the Wilderness, not long after
the Year of our Lord 400. when its probable the Date of the Beast began, the
false Apostatical Church, when the Western last Head of the fourth Beast, which
had received a deadly wound, was again healed, set forth by two Beasts, chap.
13. The first having seven Heads and ten Horns, deciphering the Politic State;
the other with two Horns like a Lamb, and speaking like the Dragon, the
Ecclesiastical State thereof, whose time is forty two months, the same with the
Lord Christ's two Witnesses Prophesying Sackcloth, 1260 days of years, Rev. 11.
and the Woman's, the True Church, her abode in the Wilderness, for a time,
times, and half a time, as chap. 12.14. where the Lord's said Witnesses nourish
her to the end of the said time, and last period of the sixth Trumpet, under
which most (if not all) of the seven Vials, the seven last Plagues, Rev. 15.16.
are poured out upon the beast, the Popish State and Church, to the utter
destruction thereof, whilst the 144000 followers of the Lamb stand with him
upon Mount Zion, Rev. 14. harping with their Harps, and singing, as it were, a
new Song before the Throne, and the four living Wights, and twenty four Elders,
who are excellently described, ver. 4, 5. till all the Angels had done their
Messages, and the Son of Man that sat on the White Cloud, had thrust in his
sharp Sickle several times, at the request of the last Angels, to reap the
Harvest and Grapes of the Earth fully ripe, to the end of the chap. Which
Angels seem contemporary (if not the same) with the seven Angels pouring out
the seven Vials, chap. 16. particularly set down; And it seems probable that
the sixth of those Vials is now pouring out by the Turkish Army, drying-up the
great River Euphrates of the German Emperors dominions, and forward toward
Rome, whereby the maintenance, honor and desence of the Popedom has been long
upheld and conveyed to it. As the great River Euphrates was useful unto old
Babylon, until the great Army of Cyrus, having turned the waters another way,
passed through the Channel thereof into old Babylon.

Or, if by such means, with others, as by the conversion of some, and plagues
and confusions in others, the Turks Dominions, as the great River Euphrates
shall be dried up in the issue, to make way for the Jews, the Kings of the
East, to come into Palestine; yet so it will, but the sixth Vial upon the great
River Euphrates, and it may not improbably be true of both. The seventh Vial
will end the Popes Being, and all evil Dominion, being poured upon the Air,
where the Prince of the power of the Air has so long prevalently ruled, which
is called the end of the second Woe, Rev. 11.14. at the end of which the
seventh Trumpet will sound, which is called the Wo-joy Trumpet; first, bringing
for the most part destruction to the Wicked in the World, and likewise bringing
in great happiness to Gods faithful People following in the thousand years,
Rev. 20. and other things concerning the New Jerusalem, and the contemporaries
therewith in the two last Chapters of the Book of the Revelations: Concerning
which state of things in the Church (then) I conceive the not distinguishing
between the seventh mystical Trumpet, and the last loud-sounding Trumpet, 1
These. 4.16. is the occasion of some misapprehensions of some things to be in
the said thousand years, which are also an occasion of stumbling to many, as to
the matter of Doctrine of the Kingdom of Christ upon Earth, whence the great
and sudden change of all the Faithful is apprehended to be at the beginning of
the seventh mystical Trumpet (which I conceive from the Apostle's words) will
not be until the other loud-sounding Trumpet, above a thousand years after at
the last Resurrection and great day of the last general Judgment at the end of
the World, 1 These 4. which will follow the last attempt of the Devil by Gog and
Magog, Rev. 20. at the end of the thousand years; at which great sudden
momentany change, in the twinkling of an eye, at the Voice of the Archangel,
and sounding of the said Trumpet, both all those that were raised at the
beginning of Christ's Reign, or all along the thousand years, as learned Mede
conceives; and all the Faithful that are found alive at last on Earth, must all
then pass through that momentany change, and be rapt up with the Faithful
likewise, which departed this life in the said 1000 years, then raised to meet
Christ in the Air in a glorious condition; For, though such as were raised
before the beginning of Christ's Reign, were before in an excellent state in
regard of their bodies, suitable to what Christ's was in before he ascended
unto the Father; yet then it seems probatile they will be more glorious bodies,
than formerly mortal eyes could endure to behold: therefore says the Apostle
Paul, 1 Cor. 15.51. We shall not (then) all sleep, but we shall all then be
changed, both living and dead. All be changed both living and dead, or raised
before, namely, all that are faithful; and repeats it again, the more strongly
to assertain it, ver. 52. latter part of the verse; for the Trumpet (says he)
shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be
changed. See this explained in the Treatise on Rev. 20.5. p 56, 57 etc. It
seems also necessary that there be a distinct consideration of the state of
such as are of the New Jerusalem come down from Heaven, which seems to be the
City, whose Maker and Builder is God (as it is said) Heb. 11.10. which is again
said, v. 16. to be prepared by him for the faithful Forefathers that died, not
having received the Promises, v. 39, who without us will not be made perfect,
ver. last, having all died in Faith; which is probable to to be meant by our
Savior, when he calls it, the City of the great King, Mat. 5.35. where his
Deputies, the twelve Apostles, shall sit on twelve Thrones judging the twelve
Tribes of Israel, Luke 22.30. on whose twelve foundations of the Wall thereof
shall be written the names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb, Rev. 21.14. and
seems to be the chief mansion-place of the blessed, holy, then raised Saints,
having part in that first Resurrection, wholly then freed from the second
death, Rev. 20.6. upon which the Glory of the LORD will then eminently shine
continually, to the eclipsing of the glory of the Sun and Moon, Isa. 60.19.
Rev. 21.23. and 22.5. Very glorious things (says the Psalmist in a Prophetical
Rapture) are spoken of thee, O City of God, Psalm. 87.3. (as is observable in
that whole Psalm.)

Again, the (then) happy estate of the converted and reduced twelve Tribes of
Israel and Juduh, those two sticks united into one, Ezekiel. 37. together with the
converted Gentiles in their fullness then come in, Romans 11. who together with
very large endowments of inward spiritual Grace, and therewith abundance of
temporal prosperity, which the Prophets largely spoke of, with very much
exemption from the evil of sin and suffering, when Satan is bound, the Churches
enemies destroyed, or subdued and brought under; which happy estate they and
their posterity will successively enjoy through all the Generations of the said
thousand years, according to the Prophecies or Promises, Deuteronomy. 30. ver. 1. to
11. Isa. 61.1. The Seed which the Lord has blessed Ezekiel. 37.25. They and their
Childrens Children for ever, and my Servant David, that is, Christ the Messiah
shall be their Prince for ever, Isa. 59. last. Deuteronomy. 4.30, 31. with many texts
more; and which were theirs, not in a mortal, (that is) a changeable condition
from a natural life, by some removal or Translation; as otherwise they should
have no Seed or Posterity to enjoy those many Promises all the thousand years,
so neither should they at last be liable to any evil attempt of Satan, and
wicked men, called Gog and Magog; (though by gracious Promise, such as live at
that last Period of time, are secured from the evil even of the attempt
likewise) many other things the holy Scripture seems to hold forth, in
reference to the differing state of the naturally living, and the Saints raised
at the beginning of the thousand years; and as for the restitution of all
things, in respect thereof, without Scripture-warrant, why look we for any more
than Gods removing the Curse? as the inflicting that from the Fall, has been
the efficient Cause of all that bondage that has been ever since upon the
Creatures, held on by the means of Saran, till then when he shall likewise be
bound. Thus in such a way, if the distinction between the last mystical
Trumpet, and the last said sounding Trumpet, and the state of the raised
Saints, and such as then will remain in their natural Life, be well observed,
it may greatly make way for the clearing by degrees (by the help of Gods Word
and Spirit) many excellent Truths respecting these things, wherein much caution
and moderation will still be very useful and necessary in what things are not
clear and evident, etc.

The third Paper of December 7. 1664. of Mr. Durhams Book of Scotland,
occsionally sent to be perused, etc. and is added here as a Supplement to the
two former Papers.
AS for the perused Author, he was manifestly a man of great Abilities, Worth
and Piety, as is evident from his grave, judicious, and truly pious
Determinations, Discourses, Cases and Treatises of several Subjects, and many
Expositions along that large Book of his upon the Revelations; and first, more
purticularly in the most things handled by him on the three first Chapters of
the seven Churches of Asia, and on the fourth and fifth Chapters, setting forth
the glory of God the Creator, and Christ the Redeemer; But as for the right
series of things, following in that Divine Book, he appears not to have
attained the right Key, so far as I can, by the guidance of God's Word and
Spirit (as I believe) with such other helps, which in special mercy have
hitherto been afforded me, discern; and to this purpose I shall endeavor by
his Grace to set down some brief hints of Differences between him and others,
which upon the former accounts I much rather approve of, as namely of judicious
Mede, and some others since him, yet living; though happily in some things I may
differ from all, yet I conceive Light and Darkness may so thereby the better
discover themselves and illustrate each other, that whosoever, like the noble
Bereans, shall search the Scriptures answerably, concerning what shall be set
down, may probably find whether all these things be so: for as no man's eminency
should lead us into error, so no man's meanness should make us neglect or
despsie the Truth he tenders, especially the Divine and Heavenly Truths which
God has set forth in his Word, for the true comfort and Edification of his
Church; I shall briefly, for what is past, give only some hints of both, for
the most part referring to a former Letter to such purposes, dated May 20.
1664. with the foregoing Key, to both which this Paper may be a supplement; but
happily somewhat more largly of what is to come, as God shall direct and enable
me, whose assistance, I must confess to his glory, I have formerly
experimentally found.

First then, What this Author understands in the Seals, That the Horses
signify the Church, and the Persecutions thereof along the Primitive Times,
seem to me more aptly otherwise to denote with Mr. Mede and others, the
dispensations of God in the world, (as in Zach. 1.10.) both toward the Church
and others with whom they had to do, namely the Roman Empire, called the (...)
in the New Testament: and though both the Books in the Seal-prophesie, and the
little Book, chap. 10. speak much in some sort of both, yet each chiefly
relates to one, as namely the Seal-prophecy for the most part to the Empire,
and the Book-prophecy for the most part to the Church, as after may more by
Gods assistance appear; which is to be observed until the Empire and Church
become one under Christ's Kingdom, in the time, or happily after the time of the
seventh Trumpet.

Therefore after the Lamb Christ Jesus had received the Book at the Hand of him
that sat upon the Throne, chap. 5. in the Chapter following, John heard the
thundering Voice of one of the Beasts, saying, Come and see, when the Lamb
opened the first Seal; where he beheld a white Horse, and he that sat on him
had a Bow, and a Crown was given to him, and he went conquering, and to
conquer; denoting the dispensations of God's Grace in the world through Jesus
Christ, who received of the Father this Book of Revelation of the things
concerning the Church and her Enemies, and has all power to fulfill and execute
them accordingly here; first, set forth by the white-horse, so tendering Peace
by the Preaching of the Gospel, which like a Bow, shoots out Arrows, (as Psalm.
45.) piercing the hearts of all sorts it is sent unto, and by which Christ will
be Victorious and Glorious, etc. and therefore in the sending abroad of his
Gospel, he goes conquering of all sorts thereby, and to conquer and subdue all
such as shall oppose and persecute it. This has been his design ever since
this white horse was sent abroad, guided by that Rider; and this is and will be
pursued till he fully have the Crown of Victory, when his Enemies shall become
his Footstool, Psalm 110. at the day of the glorious appearing of the great
God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, Titus 2.13. to begin, at or about, the
destruction of Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. when he will come with Clouds, Rev.
1.7. and when all Families of the Earth shall mourn, seeing the Son of man
coming in the Clouds with Power and great Glory, Mat. 24.30. and 26.64. of
which design the Spirit of God, by the holy Prophet, speaks eminently, Psalm.
45.4. saying, Ride on in thy Majesty because of the Word of Truth, of Meekness
and Righteousness, viz. to subdue unto his Obedience by conquering; and his
right Hand will teach him terrible things, by conquering and subduing his
Enemies, and such as withstand him: And this in all parts of the Revelation
will be evident; for persecution will follow the Gospel, as the Shadow the
Substance, so long as the Seed of the Serpent and the Seed of the Woman have
their abode together in the world: and therefore, in this Book, in the
following Seals, God seems thereby to manifest what dispensations he would show
toward such persecuting Enemies in all the following Seals and Trumpets, till
that time of eminent victory and conquest, begin to be manifest unto men in the
World at the foresaid Period, for the great comfort of his Church to be
believed from his Word, and which should be applied daily for the warning of
wicked men if they will be admonished. Mr. Mede does very appositely apply the
Red, Black, and Pale Horses, to such purposes in the three following Seals,
observing from the Histories of the Primitive times how they were accomplished,
and (as likewise Mr. Fox observes remarkably) that after the Roman Governors
had rejected the offer of receiving Christ, and that Satan had engaged them in
Persecutions, above thirty of their Emperors successively came to untimely
deaths; but how such Judgments, of Sword, Famine, Pestilence, followed one
another upon the Empire, and sometimes altogether besides, as may be observed
from the first, second, and third Seals, but especially from the fourth, as
more particularly is set down by the aforesaid Mr. Mede.

I would therefore have observed in the fifth Seal the remarkable different
dispensation of God, when most of the ten Persecutions had reged, and sent home
such multitudes of believing Christians to blessedness by their sufferings;
that by the opening of the fifth Seal, is signified to the Church how God was
mindful of the Blood of the Martyrs, by the crying of the Souls under the
Altar, for revenge; not that they in Happiness then did complain, or so did
really cry for Vengeance, but that God looked upon what had been done to them,
as an occasion whereupon he would revenge them, but yet not presently, but
after their Brethren, which should soon after suffer as they had done, had been
likewise killed; which seemed to have been fulfilled in the Tenth Persecution
under Dioclesian, and others, which continued ten years to gether, which
probably was the ten days Trial and Tribulation formerly spoken of, Rev. 2.10.
but the sufferers under the Beast are included also. And accordingly in the
sixth Seal came the great Earthquake, when the Sun became like Sackloth of
Hair, and the Moon like Blood, and the Stars fell, and the mighty men hid
themselves in the Caves of the Earth, when the wrath of the Lamb was two ways
manifest: first, In dethroneing the Dragon, and casting him down to the Earth,
in abandoning the Heathenish Idolatry: and secondly, By curting off his
Instruments, the then wicked Rulers of the World, by the means of that
Reforming Victorious Conqueror, the Emperor Constantine the Great, when God's
hand was so heavy upon Dioclesian, Maximinianus, Galerius, Maximinus,
Maxentius, Licinius, and many Governors under their Command, with their
Armies; and particularly on Pontitius, Culianus, Theotimus, with many others,
as Stories testify.

And afterward by taking away by degrees the Seat and Throne of the former
Beast, who received afterward the deadly wound, upon which the Dragon had so
prevailed before to persecute the Saints, as appears in the Trumpets following,
which proceeded out of that seventh Seal; all of which sounded their several
Wrath and Judgments against it, till it went into utter perdition under every
form, both East and West.

But before the execution of that Wrath, God would (Chap. 7. and 14.) have both
his 144000's of the Faithful, sealed, where those Trumpets Blasts should come,
who should be saved from the spiritual mischief of them: and after the sealing
of those 144000, Cap. 7. are an innumerable company of Palm-bearers, of all
Nations and Tongues: which the said Author rightly conceives to be the great
confluence of Christians, when the Jews, with the fullness of the Gentiles,
shall come in, which will (I doubt not) be in the time of Christ's powerful
Reign, (for this is the course observable in this Book, (as may hereafter be
more manifest) that the spirit of God first sets down what blessedness shall
ensue the sufferings of his People, before those sufferings come) Now I
conceive (with a Learned Author) that these 144000. sealed Ones, Cap. 7. are
another from those 144000, Cap. 14. for which he gives diverse Reasons, showing
those in Cap. 7. were to be preserved in the Greek Church, in the Eastern
Empire, and that from the fifth and sixth, and the part of the seventh Woe.
Trumpet, that might fall there as towhat evil might there fall at the beginning
of the sounding thereof, which said sealed Ones are specially to be preserved
and secured at the entrance of the fifth or first Woe-Trumpet, by the Saracen
Mahomatan Locusts, Cap. 9.4. and so it is to be noted (which I also add) that
the blasts of the first four Trumpets, being the milder miseries on the Empire,
were stayed, ( Rev. 8.1, 2.) until much Incense was offered by Christ, with the
prayers of the Saints, that they might be accepted, where those four Trumpets
took effect, namely upon the Western part, from the time the barbarous Nations
came in there, for the most part till he that let, as the Apostle speaks, 2
These. 2. should be taken away in the West (as he was there first) to make room
for Antichrist, to whom the Dragon by degrees gave his Seat, and Power, and
great Authority: And that the 14400 were to arise out of the Greek Church, viz.
which were sealed, Cap. 7. Some of the said Authors grounds are farther,
namely, That the Angel that would have the four Winds stayed till they were
sealed, is said to arise out of the East, and the evil of the Woe-Trumpets was
to fall upon the East chiefly; and that if those sealed ones, Cap. 7. be not of
Christians in the East Church, in the times of the Woe-Trnmpets, there is
nothing spoken of them in all the Book of Revelation remarkable, which have
been so long under such sad tribulation; and their being said to come out of
great tribulation, does more fitly seem to decypher out the Christians of the
Greek Church, than any others under those Trumpets: To which I may add, as
being of the same Judgment, That they are farther described to have specially
washed their Robes in the Blood of the Lamb, whom they would not leave, for
Mahomatan impostures at the highest Price of Fears or Favors, and seem to
differ from what is set down of those 144000, Cap. 14. with the Lamb in Mount
Sion, having their Fathers Name in the Forehead, which seems to be in the
Western Church, preserved in the darkness of Popery from spiritual ruin by
Antichrist, who are called there, The Followers of the Lamb wheresoever he
goes, keeping close to him, and not turning into the Beasts by-ways and
thickets, though he pretended never so much to be the Lambs Deputy, and
Vicar General on Earth; and they are said to be Virgins, which denotes their
avoiding of Anttichrists Idolatry; and have no guile in their mouths, to
pretend for Christ, and follow Antichrist, with other particulars observable,
Cap. 14. which seem to set them forth to be the sealed ones in Antichrists
Dominion, rather than in the East parts, where Mahonetism prevails, etc. and
therefore the four Augels stayed their four Winds while the former 144000, Cap.
7. were sealed, which seems to signify they were to be within the reach of
their four first Trumpets, that for the most part fell upon the Western Empire,
till that Seat of the former Beast was taken away, and preparation should be
made for the new Beast, the Dragons next Substitute, to whom he gave after his
Seat, and Power, and great Authority Cap. 13.

For by the first Trumpet, Rev. 8. seems to have been weakened the Dominion of
the Western Empire, by the incursion of the barbarous Nations; by the second,
the great City or Mountain sacked or burnt; by the third, the Emperor in the
person of Agustulus, the last of that Order there, utterly taken away, being
plucked out of his Throne; and in the fourth, the light and glory of all that
Kingdom formerly, by taking away their ancient Senate, by means whereof Rome
had so long shined so glorious with all her Lights in that Orb before, was
wholly extinct: but in the fifth, or first Wo-Trumpet, ( Rev. 9. to verse. 11.)
Gods Dispensation seemed very evident (not in respect of Antichrist, as the
forementioned Author conceived) for all the particulars, Chap. 9. to the 11th
verse, seem better to agree to the Sardcens, than to him. [ Vide Notes of the
Bible on that chapter, and the Sober Guess, etc. with others.] But against the
spiritual hurt, falling on the one part of the Eastern Empire by the Incursion
and Conquest made by the Saracens, some of those before sealed, chap. 7. were
preserved as by means of the two Wings of an Eagle, spoken of chap. 12. on that
part where the Saracens settled; and after on the other part, which the Turks
took away, besides what the Saracens formerly had; as likewise that Woman, the
Church, had her other Eagles Wing in the West, that Eagle denoting the Roman
Empire after Constantine had built Constantinople in the East, dividing the
Empire into two parts in East and West; and the Eagle, with her two sade-Wings,
being the Ensign thereof: upon which advantage, the Woman, the true Church,
fled into the Wilderness, chap. 12. about the end of the second Trumpet, or
beginning of the third, (when probably Antichrist had his rise, with his ten
Kings, or Crowned Horns, soon after the beginning of the fourth Century; from
which time the said Woman, the Church, has been fed by her true Pastors, the
two sackcloth-Prophets, in her Wilderness-condition, which she is shortly to
come out of, But on the other part, that said Woman, the Church, brought into
the East by the other Eagles wing of the Eastern Empire, before into her
Wilderness condition, or rather miserable bondage and great tribulation, being
cast under the stroke of Mohammedan Tyranny by the prevailing of the Saracens,
at the beginning of the fifth (or first Woe) Trumpet, about the year of our
Lord, 600, or not long after: who then (I say) began to bring her into her
great tribulation in the East on one part, wherein she so continued until the
second Wo-Trumpet under the Turk, about the year of the Lord 1300, by whow the
other part of the Eastern Empire was subdued utterly, and Mahometism likewise
prevailed wholly over the formerly famous visible Greek-Church, etc. only the
said 144000 of sealed ones have been and are still wonderfully preserved
amongst them; and even of late, an. 1629. or thereabouts, an excellent
Confession of Faith, was sent from Constantinople by Cyril late Patriarch
there, well approved by judicious men amongst us, as an evidence of the abiding
still of such poor, persecuted, oppressed souls in those parts, whose great
tribulation, spoken of chap 7. for about a thousand years now past, and still
are like to be under the Turk for his day, and weck, and month, and year, as
Mr. Mede computes them, or until his 396 years be expired.

Now when the Spirit of God (as seems probable) having set forth the Wrath and
Judgment upon the very seat of the former Beast in the season of the six first
Trumpets, both East and West, where in their order they fell; the greatest part
contemporating with Antichrists Tyranny, both which shall be finished at the
beginning of the seventh Trumpet, whereby the same spirit of God seems to lead
us by the hand (as it were) to the borders of Christ's glorious Kingdom upon
Earth, approaching upon the beginning of the seventh Angels sounding, chap. 11.
2d General Prophecy, Rev. 10.
He then, in the little book, chap. 10. begins again with the affairs of the
Church more especially, having set forth Gods dispensations in respect of the
Empire, both while it was Draconized, and after it had been Christianized.

Which little Book when John had eaten up, he is told by the mighty Angel of
the Covenant, that he must prophecy again before Peoples and Nations, and
Tongues, and Kings, so that they might have advantage to know these Prophecies,
had they enquired, as he had so prophesied: for as it was otherwise of them, so
it was before them; and as he had done it in one respect before, (namely) of
the Empire, wherein the Church had her being, so he should do it again in
another respect, namely of the Church, who had her being there: but chiefly
under Antichrist in his time, where there was another 144000 followers of the
Lamb to arise chap. 14. Therefore after the Table of the Times in part of chap.
11. to ver. 15. wherein we may see, ver. 1. a description of the state of the
Primitive Times; in ver. 2. her state in Antichrists forty two months; and ver.
3. the true Churches state, in regard of the most eminent part of it, namely of
the two Witnesses, her Pastors, their thousand two hundred and sixty days of
years, who should feed the Woman in her Wilderness condition, and stand on
Christ's part against Antichrist, powerfully and successfully, till about the
time of finishing their Testimony, to ver. 7. and then what should befall the
Beast upon his last War against the finishing Witnesses upon their Resurrection
and Ascension, after the Beast had killed them, to ver. 17. where is the ending
of the second Woe, and thereupon comes in a short Abridgment of the seventh
Trumpet, containing the great Changes of the affairs of the World and of the
Church, namely, evil to the wicked World, but happy to the true Church: and
this excellent Abridgment seemed needful in regard of the great concernment of
all sorts, to understand this, as of main use to the whole Book. Again, the
foresaid Author fails in not distinguishing between the first War the Beast
makes against the Saints and Servants of Christ, wherein he kills and prevails,
whereupon all the World wonder after the Beast; and the second War against the
Witnesses, which is dismal and fatal to himself, as Mr. Mede well observes; and
hence the said Author reckons the Witnesses slain above an hundred years ago,
and so passes without taking notice of the last finishing Witnesses, as then
counting the Beasts forty two months expired, reckoning the Vials in the
seventh Trumpet before the second Woe be past, or almost any thing of the Beasts
ruin begun; which work the Angels that have the Vials are to begin and finish,
as Mr. Mede and others judge upon considerable grounds, etc.

But in chap. 12. is begun the story of the new Prophecy of the true Church in
the Primitive times, which is there represented by a Woman clothed with the
Sun, and having the Moon under her feet, and upon her head a Crown of twelve
Stars, whereby was described her excellency of the Primitive Church of Christ,
which soon contesteed with the great red Dragon and his Angels, till she by
Faith and Prayer obtained the Man-child, Constantine the reforming Emperor, by
whose means God cast down the great red Dragon from his heaven upon earth,
together with his Angels, by which means the Woman had two wings of an Eagle
given her, to flee into the Wilderness for a time, times, and half a time; but
before her flight into that retired hidden condition, the Serpent cast out his
flood of abominable Heresies, chiefly against the Persons of the Holy Trinity,
by Arrius, Eutiches, Macedonius, and others, to have carried her away thereby,
which took up probably almost an hundred years before her time, times, and
half, with Antichrists 42 months, took place; all which time from Constantine,
the forementioned Author reckons within the date of the Beast, and consequently
he ends it as much too soon, as may farther appear; and yet for the Earths
opening her Mouth, and swallowing up of the Dragons flood of Heresies, what he
objects against the usual opinion, to wit, That it was not the incursion of the
Barbarous Nations, because some of them favored Arrianism; the same might
likewise be objected against what he says of the visible Professing Rulers to
be the Earth then opposing those Eerrors in many Councils, though they favored
Superstition, and so might be accounted the Earth; but to that might be
answered, amongst them were many in those times good and Orthodox men about the
fourth Century, and yet (perhaps) more fitly it might be applied to the Bishops
of Rome, and their party, that in those times, to get to themselves
pre-eminence, did take upon them to end differences in Religion, and became in
a sort famours thereby, getting honor and credit among men thereby, and being
to be the Beast out of the Earth, acting for earthly ends, the Earth might be
said to help the Woman, by withstanding errors against the Sacred Trinity, yet
promoting Superstition, etc. and so might swallow up the flood.

Rev. 13.] Concerning the two Beasts in the thirteenth Chapter, the said Author
is very excellent, full and clear, above any I have seen, if he had timed their
rising rightly, only he seems to confound the number of his Name, ver. 17. with
the number of the Beast, ver. 18. whereas the first denotes evidently the
remotest sort of Antichrists followers, that only may be reckoned or numbered
amongst his party, which were to be in the last days, as they are described by
the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. when others of the Beasts party come in
the latter times, which forbid Marriage, and command to abstain from Meats,
etc. 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. But the number of the Beast, ver. 18. belongs to the
Beast himself, concerning the Exposition whereof, he gives a probable
conjecture of his many errors, as the Sober Guess and others produce many more,
which learned and industrious men have observed, and particularly opposing the
Beasts number, to the 144000, or the measure of the Holy City; and I conceive
the considering, it as numerus Terminans, as Dan. 5. may be more considerable
than many think, as was (...) in another consideration, setting out what
Country man Antichrist should be, and what Language he should use in his Laws
and Worship, wherein I conceive the wonderful Divine Wisdom of God is much to
be acknowledged in setting down Mystery Babylons name, so to exercise the
several gifts he has given to several men, several ways, to have their
apprehensions agreeable to truth, and considerable in reference to this
menifold monstrous Beast, wherein they are to be found in one respect on other;
and so the largest comprehensive sense is like to prove the true sense, and
many of them, to be acknowledged real in such a strange compounded Creature of
many, as he is described Dan. 7. And in this Book chap. 14. is conceived by
judicious men upon considerable grounds, to be contemporary with the two
Beasts, setting out the opposite state of the true Church, in the same time,
not successive (as this Author takes it) though the Beasts ruin is therein
more fully described; yet he has many considerable things against and
concerning Antichrist in this Chapter; and likewise, he is very excellent upon
the seventeenth and eighteenth, being a like subject, to prove the Pope to be
Antichrist.

But for the particular Vision concerning the Vials, Rev. 15, and 16. which
appears to be a larger explication of what was spoken of Antichrists downfall
and ruin in the latter part of chap. 14. As the seventeenth was an explication
of diverse things concerning the Antichristian Church of Rome; and the
eighteenth, a special Vision of the terrible, sudden, irresistible and cursed
destruction and desolation of Rome about the sixth Vial, after which (probably)
will succeed the conversion of the Jews, and the Armageddon Battle, upon which
he has many profitable notes upon chap. 19.

But for the beginning of the seventh Trumpet, at the beginning of the pouring
out of the seven Vials, and placing so many of the Vials, after the time
wherein the thousand years ( chap. 20.) is begun, and making the casting of
Satan into the Lake, after the Battle of Gog, and Magog, chap. 20. to be the
seventh Vial, I conceive to be much differing from the sense of the Scripture;
and for that the seven Vials are called the seven last Plagues, which Phrase is
the same in sense with the end of the days, Dan. 12. both setting forth the
period of wicked Monarcy, when the Feet and Toes of the Image he saw before,
are wearing out toward the expiring of the Roman Monarchy, and are both spoken
of the Beasts ruin, and poured out to accomplish it by degrees, which the last
Vial finisheth, and reach no farther; and in this sense learned men understand
the Oath of the Angel of the Covenant, chap. 10. That Time should be no longer,
viz. to that wicked Dominion; for thenceforth was to begin a new World, as
after Noah's Flood, wherein Christ's glorious Reign on Earth should take place in
an eminent manner, for then the Scene of the World will be visibly changed, the
old being ended, and the new begun, wherein a King shall Rule in Righteousness,
whose Officers shall be Peace, and his Exactors Righteousness, as the Prophet
foretold, etc. then will come in that (...), that world to come, Heb. 2.5. but
the Vials are the last Plagues, because they at last dispatch and rid
Antichrist and all his supportors out of the Earth; neither are any such
Plagues suitable to, or seasonable in the state of things in the said thousand
years, while that happy World remains, and the Kingdoms of the World, become
the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; which this Author applies to the
time of Luther, which he judges to be the beginning of the Vials (I conceive
unwarrantably) when he thinks the Witnesses were slain, chap. 11. not
dinstinguishing of the former and last flaying, as we observed.

Grounds of the Doctrine of Christ's Kingdom on Earth, throughout the whole Book
of the Revelations.
ANd here I shall take occasion to hint what I have all along observed this
Learned and Religious Author to have been defective in; namely, as one not
owning the Doctrine of the Glorious Kingdom of Christ to come one Earth in the
thousand years, Rev. 20. That he passes over many things in the Book of
Revelation, which evidently respect that time, without observation; as first,
in the Epistles to the seven Churches of Asia, wherein those promises are set
down again, repeated, c. 21, 22. concerning the New Jerusalem, many of which
are evidently incompetible to any other state of affairs, but of that time, as
to have power over the Nations, chap. 2.26. to receive the Morning Star, and to
eat of that Tree, whose Leaves shall be for the healing of the Nations, to sit
on a Throne of Christ distinct from his Fathers Throne, chap. 3.21. and to have
a Name written of the New Jerusalem, which comes down from Heaven, which are
inconsistent with the state of the Church Triumphant in Heaven, with diverse
others, which the Primitive Christians were so well resolved of in the best
times, to belong to those that obtained a better Resurrection, as the Spirit of
God expresses it, Heb. 11.35. which Saint Paul seems to aim at the attaining
to, by the fellowship of Christ's Sufferings, Phil. 3.10, 11. whence the
Faithful are called the Children of the Resurrection, Luke 20.36. Yea observe
farther, they are called by our Savior, Such as are accounted worthy to attain
that World, and the Resurrection of the dead: And to this purpose it is storied
of the Primitive Christians, (such was their Faith in this particular) that out
of an holy ambition (as it were) to have a share amongst the raised Martyrs,
they were forward to suffer (upon that account) for the Name of Christ.

But in the next place likewise, he passes over what evidently refers to that
state, chap. 5.10. though he spoke of what the representative Church are said
there to obtain from Christ, to be Kings and Priests (spiritually) unto God:
but he altogether passes over what the Holy Ghost teaches them there to
praise God for, for the time to come, and which they greatly exult in, and
rejoice in aforehand, for the time to come, as a duty belonging to all Saints
in that happy privilege upon Earth till then, and say they (We shall reign
upon Earth) which is joined to the other, as an other part of their joy, and
matter of praise, foreseen by the eye of Faith; as if they had said, For so we
all, Ministers and People, shall their reign, not only as we did spiritually,
in our former condition in the world, but as will be suitable to that world to
come in Christ's Kingdom on Earth, We shall reign with him there a thousand
years, as chap. 20. is farther explained; and to make it clear, it must not be
taken for Celestial Eternal Glory, the place is set down where that Reignishall
be, namely, on Earth; and for the time, future, noting that it was not their
present spiritual Reign, but they shall so reign there, viz. on Earth: What can
be spoken more clearly? yet by him all together overlooked: So usual it is for
prejudice to blind the eyes, even of otherwise judicious and good men: though
some mysteries of God are discovered in their seasons, only to whom, and when,
and so far only as he is pleased to reveal them; as Mr. Mede records of a
Tradition, that the Apocalypse should be little understood in Antichrists time,
till about the twelfth Century, and suitable in some things afterward, in such
times as God sees good, etc.

Again, he takes notice of another innumerable company, clothed in white,
besides the 144000 sealed ones, chap. 7. which innumerable company of all
People, Nations, and Languages, having Palms in their hands, he seems to
understand of the flourishing state of the Church, when the Jews shall be
called; and he has many considerable Testimonies to that purpose in sundry
places of his Book, but yet he does not observe these of both companies are set
forth to be clothed in white, which is after (as likewise before) the clothing
of the inhabitants of the New Jerusalem that comes down from God, and makes
this 144000, c. 7. and the other 144000, c. 14. the same (though they arise
from several parts, as we showed, besides many disserences) But that their
clothing in white is the badge of the Jerusalem-Inhabitants, consider how the
fundamental Promise made to Christ as Mediator, first, to Adam and Eve, then to
Abraham and Sarah, after to David, tend all this way, to advance such a Kingdom
of the Mediator Christ Jesus upon Earth. First, after that Gods everlasting
Gospel, preached by himself when man had forfeited his dominion
before-promised, chap. 1.26. and after could have no right to that nor other
benefits, but through the promised-Seed; See how this is ascribed to Christ, as
his peculiar right belonging to him, in Psalm. 8. And see how the Apostle, Heb.
2. expounds it so, and that with referring it unto that world to come, ver. 5,
6, etc. in which world those white ons shall have their share, namely, in their
reigning with Christ upon Earth: Having suffered with him, must reign with him
there, as their Captain the King of the New-Jerusalem. See this farther in the
personal Promise to Abraham first, and his Seed; Not seeds, as of many, but
unto Thy Seed: As says the Apostle, of one, viz. [Christ] concerning the Land
of Canaan, who yet personally possessed not a foot, as the Scripture phrase is,
save what he purchased for a Burying place with money, to show his part of that
Inheritance; and faithful posterities part was to be had after the Resurection,
and their bones, as Joseph's, took and have kept possession thereof ever since,
and will do, till they be raised to live upon it again. And so after again, the
said Promise was renewed to Isaac, the type of Christ, the Seed of the Woman,
in a supernatural way, though Abraham's likewise; And to Jacob, that was Israel
for prevailing with God, having seen the Vision of God before. And therefore
the Apostle says of them both, They were Heirs with Abraham of the same
Promise; to whom it was said, Genesis 17.8. I will give unto thee, and thy Seed
after thee. The first right is his own, which is held only by Faith while he
lived, and therefore the actual possession yet remains to be enjoyed; Vide Genesis
26.3. to Isaac, and Genesis 35.3. the like to Jacob; and to all three Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob together, Exodus 6.4, 8. Deuteronomy. 11.21. and 30.20.
and so to Isaac and ^acob, who possessed it no more than Abraham in their
lives; therefore Gal. 3.16. with Heb. 11.9, 10. they sojourned in that Land of
Promise, as Strangers, dwelling in Tabernacles, with those Heirs with him of
the same Promise, and v. 17. shows the drift of this Promise was to be
fulfilled in Christ the promised Seed, to possess the Land, and the rest by,
and with him. Let these Scriptures, and their contexts, be well weighed, with
Heb. 11.9, 10. for what these Promises did refer to, is evident, ver. 10
namely, the Jerusalem coming down from Heaven, whose maker and builder is God:
and verse. last, he has provided for them a City: again, ver. 14. They sought a
Country [not Mesoptamia] but a better Country, ver. 16. and for which God is
not ashamed to be called their God, for he has prepared for them a City: To
this purpose he tells Moses, Exodus 3.14. that that should be his Memorial
throughout all Generations, that he is the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob:
and upon this Foundation are those many promises in Moses and in the following
Prophets, that God would reduce their posterity after all their dispersion, to
possess that Land, as in Deuteronomy. 30. to ver 11. and many other places, too many
here to rehearse; and in Vision revealed the same to Daniel, chap. 7. both how
and when all should be fulfilled, when the Kingdom should be given to the
Saints of the most High: which is yet more clear and manifest by Christ
himself, Rev. 20. which is the same which this Author misapplyed, c. 11.15.
When the Kingdoms of the World are become the Kingdoms of the Lord and of his
Christ; that is, in another manner than at the first revealing of Antichrist
(as he understands it) yet gloriously, eminently, visibly, when he has taken
unto himself his Great Power, and Reigned, having begun wonderfully to subdue
his enemies under his feet at the destruction of Antichrist: And this is the
drift of our Saviors argument against the Saduces, as Mr. Mede makes evident
on Mat. 22. Mark 12. that God was the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: thefore
they shall live again to inherit the Premise of the Covenant to possess the
Land of Canaan: I do but here briefly hint a few things out of multitudes to
the like purpose: Vide the Irenicon.

And here from the whole Book of Revelation, I may offer this one thing
observable, namely, That all sorts of faithful Christians in their several Ages
and Conditions, have their special encouragement held out in something
referring to the New Jerusalem on Earth, though many overlook them, or at least
they have not been revealed to them; for men in this case are like Hagar, till
God opened her eyes in a special manner, she saw not the Well of Water before
her; so no sort seem to discern these things, till in some remarkable way they
be made manifest to them.

First, The seven Churches of Asia in the first Vision have each their Promises
made, in reference to the State of the New Jerusalem upon Earth.

Secondly, The Representatives of the whole true Church, viz. the four Beasts,
and four and twenty Elders, Rev. 5.10. in particular praise for, and rejoice
in, their reign upon Earth, to come, which by faith they see aforehand; and
more especially that seems to be the encouragement to the Sufferers under the
five first Seals; and (as was said) seemed so to be applied by them.

Afterward, the sealed ones in the East, chap. 7. under the Woe Trumpets, as
Rev. 9.4. they have the New Jerusalem habit upon them, as they shall be there
happy, and celebrate Gods praise; and so do the innumerable company of the
Nations after them, chap. 7. as is evident in the last part of that Chapter.

Again, The four Angels are stayed from their blowing the four first Trumpets,
which fell for the most part upon the Western Empire, until the Angel, chap.
8.3, 4, 5. (probably the Angel of the Covenant) had made intercession for the
faithful Christians under those four first Trumpets, with much Incense, with
the Prayers of the Saints there abiding, that they might be accepted, who was
their spiritual Priest to intercede for them, and their King to protect them
spiritually.

Again, Chap. 11. the two Witnesses prophesying in Sackcloth 1260 days, have as
a general Consolation to the Church, all that time foreshewed to them that they
shall rise again, and ascend into Heaven at the end of the days; and soon after
have the state of the Kingdom of Christ on Earth, foreshewed unto them in the
end of the same Chapter.

So likewise the other 144000 Lamb-followers in the Western Empire, are set
forth to be with the Lamb in Mount Sion, and have this Character of the New
Jerusalem upon them, That they have his Fathers Name written upon their
Foreheads, Chap. 14.1.

Again, Those that should be Sufferers under Antichrist, toward his fall, they
sing the Song of Moses, coming out of their Wilderness-condition, and praise
God for his Judgments upon their Persecutors, and have the entrance of Christ's
Kingdom upon Earth, set before them, for their comfort, Chap. 15.4, 5. so that
unto this scope drive the Consolations of the sufferers and faithful Christians
of all times, since this most holy and comfortable Book was given to Christ's
Church; and so both those Arms of that Red Sea of Blood, running through the
Eastern and Western Empires in the Churches, meet together at the borders of
the Land of Canaan, promised to the Forefathers and their Seed, about the end
of the sixth Trumpet, and entrance of the seventh: And whether it reaches
further than unto that New World, may seem questionable: First, because it is
one of the Woe Trumpets, and no such things seem suitable to the Kingdom of
Christ upon Earth in the thousand years: Secondly, because the whole
continuance of that is set forth by another Title, for the comfort of the
Church; namely, Of the Saints reign with Christ a thousand years, as it were by
way of distinction from the former suffering times of the Church: Thirdly,
there is nothing clearly said in the Text, that it should continue longer than
to bring the Woes upon Antichrists Kingdom, and other Enemies in the World, and
seems to end with the last Plagues; so called, because they are the portion of
the Churches Persecutors before the thousand years, and utterly bring them to
perdition; and as the sixth Vial seems to end with the Armageddon-Battel, Chap.
19. so the seventh binds and shuts up Satan for that thousand years, wherein he
must no more seduce the Nations, Chap. 20.

And what this Author says of Satan's being cast into the Lake after the
thousand years, as a Vial, and the last Vial of the seven, is contrary to the
Text, Rev. 16. at the latter end of the Chapter, where it is said, that when
the seventh Vial was poured out, the great City was divided into three parts;
and then great Babylon came in remembrance before God, executed, Chap. 18.
which will be done above a thousand years before Satan's casting into the Lake
of fire, where the Beast and the false Prophet were cast so long before:
Besides, Satan's casting into the Lake, seems not to be reckoned in the nature
of such Vials as gradually brought destruction on the Beast, and other
persecuting Enemies on Earth, but as his last doom, at the comsummation of all
things, and the dissolution of the World; which is as much a mercy to such as
are saved, as a beginning of woe and wrath to Satan, and all damned Men and
Devils; but an end only to the being of inferior Creatures, which had long
before in the thousand years enjoyed the liberty of the Sons of God; as is
said, Romans 8.21. Again, the drift of the Trumpets were to blow out Wrath and
Judgment upon the Earth, and Grass, and Trees, Chap. 9.4, etc. and such things
as were upon the Earth belonging to wicked men, till they should be destroyed
from off the face of it, and there to end; and Satan was then bound in the Pit,
when there was no work for him to seduce such after their destruction, who was
their Captain and Counselor before.

It is likewise observeable what Mr. Mede says of the thousand years wherein
the Saints were to reign, that Satan aforehand, in the time of Antichrist, set
them up in a false way of reigning, to eclipse their true reigning that
afterward they should have on Earth; and therefore taught Antichrists Followers
to set them up superstitiously and idolatrously, to worship and pray to them,
and before their Shrines and Images, making them sinfully to have a reign with
Christ on Earth, in show, but really against him and his Father: And all that
said time of Antichrist, he has played the Ape, in seeking to pour out the
Vials upon Christ's Kingdom to come, as Christ had before declared, that he had
seven Angels in their times to pour out seven Vials to the destruction and
ruin of Antichrist.

The first of Satan's seeming Vials was, by imposing Chiliasm upon it, by carnal
pleasures, and typical Worship, though upon slight, unjust, and false
pretenses, as Mr. Mede manifests.

Secondly, By the advantage thereof, he obtained that some of the Ancient
Fathers were so prejudiced that they wrote against it, though the former, for
the most part, were for it.

Thirdly, By such prejudice, and the like, he obtained that good men all along
misplaced the thousand years by way of anticipation, though differing in the
time they began, and expounding them all along the Popes time, only of a
Spiritual Reign.

Fourthly, By Popish false Glosses and Expositions upon all the Revelation, and
that part in particular, etc.

Fifthly, By seducing men of latter times, since the Light of Truth began more
than of a long time before to break forth, to seek disorderly to set up
Christ's Kingdom, which will be God's own work in his own time, to anticipate
the same, and that by acting against the Divine Precepts that Christ came to
establish in casting off due obedience unto Magistrates, and endeavors to
suppress the Ministry, thereby to scandalize the Doctrine of Christ's Kingdom
on Earth.

Sixthly, More lately by such as this Author names in the end of his Book, Gr.
and Ha.
concerning whom he declares much in a few lines, who would make the Revelation
an History of things past, rather than a Prophecy of things so long to come;
so that the Pope should not be Antichrist in his forty two months, much less
Christ have a thousand years Reign on Earth afterward.

And lastly, The seventh Vial that Satan has to pour on Christ's Kingdom,
seems not unfitly to be conceived, to be by displacing the Vials, Chap. 16.
from their own time unto Christ's Reign, whereunto they are not competible,
whereof the subject matter will be then taken away, or making a groundless
great Chasm of above a thousand years difference, from the sixth to the
seventh, when Satan is to be cast into the Fiery Lake, which is a business of a
much differing nature many ways from all the Vials, as well as in time, etc.
And thus of Satan's seeming seven Vials on Christ's Kingdom; but the glorious
appearance of Christ will shortly abolish all appearance of truth in them, and
so all Satan's Vials upon Christ's Kingdom will be utterly ended, and yet will
not that Kingdom be thereby in the least degree impaired.

Lastly, Whereas the said Learned Author interprets the New Jerusalem to be
the Church Triumphant, besides the many considerable reasons to the contrary,
in the Letter of November. 3. 1664. he might have observed that the Lamb's Wife
was spoken of before, Chap. 19.7. by which he there understands the coming in
of the Jews to the Catholic Church, (I conceive rightly) and that the beloved
City, Cap. 21.2. spoken of Chap 20. as being before the Battle of Gog and
Magog, when the Devil stirred up the Hypocrites of those times, which had been
long held under by good Government, then to attempt to besiege that beloved
City, though to his and their utter ruin, that so they might receive that
portion of hypocrites, as the Antichristian Scoffers had theirs before, when
both sorts should meet with their Leaders, the Pope, and the Devil, in the Lake
of Fire; and Chap. 21. being but a further decyphering of the same City, should
therefore be expounded accordingly of that City that was in the thousand years;
it being the observeable Method of the Holy Ghost in that Book, after some more
obscure expressions of things more generally, afterward to give more full and
particular Explications of the same, as in the seventeenth Chapter, an
Explication of Babylon and the Beast, etc. and what was said of the ruin of
Babylon, Chap. 14. explained by the Vials, Chap. 15, and 16. and further, of
the last Vials, Chap. 18, 19, and part of 20. and so somethings in the 19, and
20. further explained, Chap. 21, and 22. besides many things belonging to the
New Jerusalem, are incompetible to the state of the Church Triumphant in
Heaven; see the forementioned Letter, November. 3. 1663. And for the first
Resurrection, it may appear not to be of the Spiritual Resurrection of the Soul
from sin, both from the drift of the Holy Ghost, further, to open the Mystery
of the Resurrection, which St. Paul had in some respect showed before, 1 Cor.
15. And the Doctrine thereof has been gradually set down in the Scriptures;
and this, Chap. 20. gives light thereunto above all others, both as to the
Resurrection of the Just and Wicked, which are opposed one to another, as first
and second, and their distinct times set out; for as Chap. 11.18. When the
Kingdoms of the World shall be Christ's, then he gives reward unto his Servants
the Prophets, and to his Saints, and to all that fear his Name, both small and
great; such as not only suffered for him, (who are said, Chap. 20. to be
beheaded for him, etc.) but such as have done his Will on Earth, shall have
such reward from him in Earth, as 2 Timothy 2.12. And for such Souls [that is,
Persons, in Scripture language] to live again, what sense in Reason or Religion
can fitly be applied to such sufferers, or others, but such first Resurrection?
I know many learned men have tired their parts to find shifts to avoid this,
but have been more solidly and substantially answered, (besides many others) by
Mr. Mede, and Dr Homes, in his Answer to Pareus, Dr. Predeaux, and others, in
one part of the Dawning of the Day Star: Read them seriously, etc.

Mr. Mede, conceives that Resurrectio Justorum, will be in acting all or most
of the thousand years, every one in their own order; and the Ancients conceived
there will be (mora) delay in respect of some, etc. but that the living again
of such as were so beheaded, to be meant of the Spiritual Resurrection, is far
from the scope of the Text, besides all other considerations about it: see the
Appendix in the Irenicon, and the forenamed Authors, it is, actum agere, to say
much of it, etc.

And for the number of a thousand years to be taken indefinitely, as it is
contrary to the judgment of learned men on both sides, for many considerable
Reasons; so somewhat this learned Author mentions himself, namely, That that,
that Thousand Years, so often spoken of in respect of Saints and Satan, and
with all the considerable circumstances, what was done at the beginning of
them, with all the continuance, and what should be at the end of them, etc.
might have swayed his judgment otherwise, if he had not been prejudiced against
the whole Doctrine thereof, and all that concerns it: for those Souls said to
be Beheaded, cannot fitly be said to live again, but in respect of that state,
namely, of their bodily living again, wherein they had died before; for as the
Spirits of just men, they lived ever since their departure from their Bodies;
so that living again, denotes their living bodily, and living in a different
manner than they had done before. Now the drift of all these things, being for
the comfort and edification of all God's People, in this great point of the
Resurrection of the Just, and being specially useful against the evil times,
going before the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus
Christ, when Antichristian Tyranny should most rage in the World; God, in Mercy
to his People, is pleased now again, to cause the light of these precious
Truths to break forth again, more than they have done in many Ages last past,
when that said Glorious Appearance of Christ, and beginning of the Day of
Judgment, and Joyful Resurrection following upon it, do in their order near
approach: It is much to be desired, and earnestly prayed for, that true
Christians would duly weigh and consider them, being so mainly for their
Edification and sound Consolation, if they will not overlook their own good,
or put it off from themselves, since the great goodness of Christ is therein
manifest toward them.

A Paper of September. 27.1664. concerning the Personal Appearance and Reign of
Christ, Rev. 20.4.
AS for the personal appearance of Christ at the destruction of Antichrist, and
the general calling of the Jews, when that Nation shall be born in a day, as
Isa. 66.8. many Texts of Scripture seem to me fully to evidence it; as first,
that great Promise, That they shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and
mourn; with such a penitent Contrition promised to them in mercy, Zac. 12.10.
compared with Rev. 1.7. with Even so Amen, as a great mercy in its time to be
accomplished. And from St Peter's Sermon to the Jews, when he tells them, That
the times of refreshing from the presence of the Lord, at the restitution of
all things, shall come, when God will send Jesus, whom the Heavens must contain
till then, Act. 3.19, 20, 21. which the Apostle Paul calls, Christ's appearing
at his Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.1. and in Dan. 7. after the little Horn (the Pope)
spoken of before, verse 9. the Ancient of Days did sit, and in verse 21. the
little Horn prevailed until the Ancient of Days came, verse 22. which is
farther explained, verse. 26, 27. And Mat. 24. after the coming of the Son of
man was described by the Lightning from one part of the Heaven to the other,
and after the trouble then to be upon the Earth, verse. 29. it is said,
Immediately shall appear the sign of the Son of man, which is probably
conceived to be Christ himself, as a sign then to the whole World; and the time
seems decyphered, verse. 24. that that Generation shall not pass, namely, in
that the Nation of the Jews was to remain distinguished from all other People,
[for they have been, and will be preserved mostly unmixed with others, until
the appearing of Christ] and as 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. Antichrist is to be destroyed at
the appearance of his coming: So likewise, Mat. 23.39. Ye shall not see me till
ye shall say, Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord; implying that
then they shall see him: And in that Parable upon the occasion of the time of
the appearing of the Kingdom of God, verse. 11. having before, chap. 17.
compared the days of the Son of man to the days of Noah and Lot, which latter,
of Lot, seems to resemble the next appearing of Christ, and the former, namely,
of Noah, his last coming to judgment, those two days of the Son of man: Now as
Lot and his Family were sent out of Sodom first, before Sodom and Gomorrah were
destroyed in that particular destruction, so the faithful shall first come out
of Babylon, and spiritual Sodom, before it be destroyed in that partial
destruction, though like to be very great and terrible: and as Noah and his in
the general Deluge were carried by the Ark above the destruction of the old
World by Water; so in the general conflagration of the World at Christ's last
coming, all the Faithful at their great and general change, shall be caught up
to Christ their safe Ark, in the Air, above the destruction of the Wicked by
Fire, at the Worlds last destruction; and, as the Rabbis speak from the
Prophet, Their strength shall then be renewed like the Eagles, and be there
with Christ in safety, as neither liable nor capable any more of any such
misery: (I say) then in the 11th Chapter, he speaks of such a coming, verse. 13.
when he will reckon with such as would not have him reign over them, and with
the unprofitable Servant at his coming, verse 23. and will have those his
Enemies then brought and slain before him, verse. 27. when he shall receive his
Kingdom, and return, verse. 12. and this Parable was particularly spoken by our
Savior to resolve the mistake of such as thought the Kingdom of the Messiah
should then immediately appear, verse. 11. And many of the Prophets expressions
import as much, which I shall now insist upon: But for how long, and in what
manner he may be personally present, so as Rev. 1.7. he is said to come with
Clouds (happily) to vail the brightness of his Glory, which otherwise mortal Eyes
could not endure, I dare not say: for as the Apostle Paul speaks, he dwells
in the light, which no man can approach unto; (otherwise) As no man has seen
him, so no man can see him, 1 Timothy 6.16. and whether after some time of his
appearing personally, that expression of the Tabernacle of God its being with
men, as Rev. 21.3. imports some wonderful Glory and Grace upon the New
Jerusalem, as upon the Tabernacle of his Grace of old; or the Glory of God
shining upon it, as Isa. 60.1. whose Sun and Light sets not day nor night,
verse. 19, 20. by some brightness of Glory and Grace shining upon them
continually, making glad the City of God, when the Lamb shall be her Light, as
Rev. 21.23. or their beholding of him, as Stephen did miraculously at his
death, sitting at Gods right hand; or in what manner the Ark of Gods Testament
shall then be seen, when the Temple of God is opened in Heaven, Rev. 11.19.
with many expressions to like purpose; or how long that Resurrectio Justorum
shall be in finishing, which Mr. Mede in one of his Letters seems to conceive
may be a great part of the thousand years, and according to their order (as the
Apostles phrase is) first of the Martyrs, and most eminent Saints, and so of
the rest successively; concerning which, and the like, as I am in the dark, so
I must be silent: God in his own time will reveal what he knows best for his
People; in the mean time there is matter enough of Comfort and Rejoicing in
respect of both Quick and Dead, in the good and blessed condition of his
Church, in the said thousand years upon Earth, to all such as so wait upon
Christ here, as the true Followers of the LAMB, Rev. 14. that they may be in a
capacity of the Happiness reserved for either sort in those times; for which
the Holy Scriptures give plentiful Evidence, if Men will not hide their eyes
from the Light thereof.

But besides what was said of the personal Appearance, Coming and Reign,
Assert. 7. of the Key, the strongest evidence above all others, is the
undoubted fulfilling of all revealed promised Mercies and Covenants to and with
the Fathers, carried on also in old and new Testament by the spirit of God till
Christ by his Divine Key has so graciously unlocked the Mysteries of them, as
we showed on Rev. 20.5. of the first bodily Resurrection 1000 years before the
rest of the dead, for at his Appearance and Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.1. he Personally
judges Quick and Dead: Personally comes in the Clouds, and brings his Saints
with him: Personally raises their bodies: is Personally seen of the Jews: his
Enemies are personally slain before him, Luke 19. his Saints personally behold
his glory: his bodily Tabernacle will personally be with men, Rev. 21.3. he
will personally sit upon the Throne of David to order it, etc. Isa. 7. will
personally inherit all Nations: will from te marriage of the Lamb personally be
the Husband and Head of his Bride the Church, with many other things peculiar
then to himself, etc.

FINIS.

