A Scheme of the whole Book of the Revelation of Jesus Christ, of very great
use, with the following Summarie of Daniels Visions, etc. for the right
understanding of the Parallel of that Book and the Revelation after set down.
Printed in the Year 1671.
AFter that the beloved Disciple John according to Christ's appointment, chap.
1.19. had written, First, the things which he had seen in Vision, chap. 1. and
Secondly, the things that were in his time concerning the 7 Churches of Asia,
chap. 2, and 3. under which 7 Churches is probably conceived also to be
contained an adumbration of 7 Intervals of the future state of the true Church
until the glorious appearance and Kingdom of Christ.

Then in the 3d place (after a Divine Preludium, or rather Hieroglyphical
Prologue and Drammatical Chorus (if I may so term them) by two most glorious
Visions set down chap. 4, 5. respecting the events of things to come in the
end) he is appointed in all the ensuing Book to write of all things to come
unto the end of the World.

In which 3d respect from chap. 4, and 5. until the said appearance and Kingdom
of Christ on Earth, chap: 19, and 20. and the state of things in his said
Kingdom farther decyphered, chap. 21, and 22. are two large Prophesies (in that
interim) contained, both of them respecting the Fates and State of the Roman
Empire and f^lse Church during the same time, viz. 42. Months, and also of the
true Church contemporating all along with both, for the 1260. days of years.

The first of which is the Seal Prophecy chiefly respecting the Roman civil
State, first, as Heathenish, chap. 6. 2dly, as heretical and Antichristian,
chap. 8, and 9.

The 2d, is the Book-Prophesie, Rev. 10. respecting (chiefly) the Roman
Ecclesiastic state, or false Church, first, as Pagan and Heretical, chap, 12.
2ly, as Popish, c. 13, 17. whose ruin is foretold, c. 14.8, and executed to
the end of that chapter, with c. 15, and 16. and more fully illustrated c. 18,
and 19.

Under both which states, the true Church is briefly decyphered, in c. 11. to
v. 15. (where follows her happy state succeeding to the end of that chap.) of
which likewise more largly again in the Book-prophesie, c. 12, and 14 until
her said blessed state shall come, which is again decyphered farther, c. 19,
and 20. and gloriously illustrated, c. 21, and 22.

Now for the Contemporating of the said two Prophesies observe further.

First, That the said Seal-Prophesie respect; the Roman Sease, and is contained
in c. 6, 8, 9. (with c. 11. to v. 15: which last as a table of all the said
times is applicable to both Prophesies) but in c. 6. are the six first Seals:
the first Victory: the 2d Slaghter: 3d Balance: 4th Death: 5th the Altar: 6.
the great Earthquake in Constantine the greats time, when the great Red Dragon
was cast out of his Heaven of Idolatrous worship to the earth, about 320. years
after Christ's birth under the said sixth Seal.

The 7th Seal in c. 8. out of which proceed the 7. Trumpets, or Judgments
described in the same chapter

By the first Trumpet Hail destroys the Earth; the 2d, a Mountain burning fell
into the Sea 3d, a Star fell into the Rivers: 4th, an Ecclyps of the Lights,
being all gradual Judgments upon the Roman Empire for persecuting the Saints
before, etc and chiefly brought upon it by the Incursions of the Barbarous
Nations till about the time of the Popes date began; together with the 10.
Kings that give their power to the Beast, as c. 17. v. 12. about 410.

But after these, come the three woe Trumpets much more full of horror, etc.
two of them in c. 9. wherein are contained the Locusts, the Saracens; the first
Woe to v. 11. about An. Dom. 600. and the Turks the Euphratean horsemen, to the
end of the chapter about 1300. who have successively more and more prevailed to
promote the ruin of the Roman Empire, chiefly of the East irrecoverably.

The 3d Woe Trumpet utterly puts an end to the Roman Empire at the ruin of the
Popedom, the last head thereof, as c. 10, and c. 11.14. whereunto succeeds
Christ's Kingdom in the sequel of chapter 11. from v. 15.

And under all the said 7. Trumpets the 144000. c. 7. of all the Tribes of
Israel, i.e. of all real Saints in the times of all the said Trumpets are
preserved by the Seal of the living God, whilst the rest of the men perished
under his said Sealed Judgments, but especially the Woe Trumpets.

Secondly, Also the said Book-Prophesie c. 10. with which the time of the first
6 Seals did contemporate*

First, the Court of the Temple and Altar measured, c. 11.1.

2dly, The Dragon with 7 heads making War with Michael and his Angels, c. 12.
which also were in the Primitive times of persecution almost until Antichrists
date began, by his great Apostasy.

But during the said 6 first Trumpets out of the 7th Seal were many
contemporaries, as

1. The outward Court or holy City not measured but given to the Gentiles [ viz.
the Papists] to be trodden under foot 42. Months, c. 11.2 2. The two Witnesses
at last to be killed by the Beast prophesied clothed in Sackcloth 1260. days
of years, chap. 11.3. 3. The child-beating-Woman the Dragon being cast down,
flees into the wilderness, where she is to be nourished by the witnesses, 1260.
days of years, or a time times and half a time, c. 12.3, etc. 4, The 7 headed,
and 10 horned Beast being after his deadly plague revived, under the course of
that last head, blasphemes, and overcomes the Saints 42. months, c. 13.1, 2, 3,
etc. 5. The 2 horned Beast or false Prophet, the setter up of the 10 horned
Beast administers all his power in his sight or presence, c. 13.11, 12, etc. 6.
The Virgin company of the 144000. sealed ones of the Lamb, c. 14. to whom
alone it is given to sing the new song, does admonish the worshippers of the
Beast of the Divine Judgments, c. 14.7, 8, etc. 7. That great City Babylon the
Whore, sits upon the 7 headed beast, now in the course of his last head with
ten horns, making the inhabitants of the Earth drunk with the Wine of her
Fornication, c. 17.1, 2, etc. to destroy which said whore with fire, God will
stir up the Kings of the earth, Rev. 17, 16.
And as for the 7 Vials or last plagues, chap. 15.16. the first six of them are
probably conceived, by Mr. Mede, to be powered out under the sixth Trumpet, all
which prepare for the said Beasts utter ruin, but it is the execution of the
7th when the 3d woe comes, that will as Daniel says, c. 7.26. by fire consume
and destroy the body of the said Beast unto the end, when he is also said to
go into perdition, Rev. 17.11.

But at the sounding of the 7th or 3d Woe Trumpet the mystery of God is
finished, c. 10. as he spoke by his servants the Prophets, when will stand up
the innumerable company of rejoicing Palm-bearers in their white robes, as they
are described, c. 7. who are said to be sealed as before, and preserved for the
Jerusalem state, and Christ's Kingdom on earth, c. 20.21, 22. And upon the
sounding of which said 7th Trumpet, when the last Beastly Kingdom, viz. the
Roman shall perish for ever, as Number. 24 24. The good new World to come will
then begin; for upon that ruin of Satan's Kingdom, Christ's is set up in the
world for 1000. years: for which time Satan is bound, and Christ reigns
personally with his Saints. All which time the Wife of the Lamb, the New
Jerusalem that came down from God out of Heaven. (after whose light the Nations
that are saved; shall walk) will be the Mother City of Christ's said Kingdom.

And when the said 1000. years are ended, Satan shall be loosed for his last
most provoking and desperate attempt with his last Gog and Magog, c. 10.8, etc,
which will suddenly bring on him destruction, and on the world likewise,
thereupon to be dissolved, when the sounding of the last Trumpet will be heard,
and the change, resurrection and rapture of all the Saints living, remaining,
and dead, will in a moment or twinkling of an eye be accomplished, unto which
will succeed the resurrection of the wicked, and the General Judgment of good
and bad by the irreversible Sentence of approbation and condemnation for all
Eternity.

A brief and useful Summary of the book of the Prophet Daniel, being a fit
Introduction to the Parallel of that, and the book of the Revelation.
AS Christ Jesus commanded St. John his beloved Disciple. Rev. 1.19.

First, To write the things he had seen, viz. set down in the same 2ly. The
things that then were, viz. concerning those present Churches of Asia, Chap. 2.
and 3. 3ly. The things that should be afterward to the end of the world: in
the rest of that whole book: even so the spirit of God had before guided Daniel
that greatly beloved Prophet in the same order.


First, To write the things he had seen: More generally, 1. By Revelation only,
Chap. 2. by making known to him the exposition of Nebuchadnezzars dream of an
Image, the parts of which, set forth the four Monarchies of this world. 2. By
both Vision and Revelation, chap. 7. when the same things in generals were
again set before him by four beasts that should destroy each other, further
decyphering for the use of the Church, the state of the said Mettle Kingdoms,
in other respects set forth in the Image before.


By which double confirmation, God set before his people the excellency and
usefulness of those things so made known, with the certainty of them, and of
what was to ensue to the end of the world (as our Savior in these times of the
end has by his Revelations to St. John made manifest, as he here also expressly
declares, Dan. 2.28. and afterward, Dan. 10.14.) viz. they were of things that
concerned the latter days.

And in both these Generals made known to Daniel, we may observe the special
inlargements concerning the 4th. Kingdom of the Romans, with this difference,
that in Nebuchadnezzars dream were set forth the things that concerned the
Roman Monarchy in the civil state thereof, by the mixture of Iron and Clay in
the sect and toes toward the end of it, as belonging to the beast with ten
horns, expounded by our Savior, Rev. 13.1, 2, 3, to v. 11. And thereunto was
added the setting up of the first state of Christ's Kingdom by the God of
Heaven, ver. 34. and v. 44. showing the prevalency thereof in the time, and at
the end of that Monarchy, when both that, and all the broken parts of the
former, should altogether pass aways whereupon should succeed the 2d. state of
Christ's Kingdom, which Mr. Made styles the Kingdom of the Mountain, from Dan
2.35. when the stone shall become a great Mountain filling the whole earth.

But unto Daniel, chapter 7. with the 10 horns or civil state, is also set forth
that which seemed to be a little horn (at first view) which was after to
decypher the great Antichrist with his wicked actings, ver. 8. etc. further
expounded, v. 20, 21, 22 etc. which appears from Rev. 13. v. 11. etc. to refer
to the two horned beast in the same time in respect of its Ecclesiastical
capacity, for whose wickedness was the setting up of the Throne of Judgment of
the ancient of days to destroy the said beast, etc. v. 11, with 9. and 10. Upon
which total and terrible destruction of that whole state was showed unto
Daniel, the coming of the Son of man coming with the Clouds of Heaven so often
spoken of by our Savior in the Gospel, when he shall receive and possess his
universal glorious kingdom in the world, and all Dominions shall serve and obey
him, v. 13, 14. and v. 27. and as is set down, v. 18. and v. 22. then Judgment,
or Potestas judicandi, shall be given to the Saints of the most high: who shall
from that time, as our Savior has taught, Rev. 20.4. and Rev. 5.10. Reign
with himself upon earth a thousand years.

The second head in the book of Daniel, is of such things as were in Daniels
own time, wherein,

First, Of his own, and the other three worthies coming, promotion, and
continuance at Babylon, to the first year of Cyrus, chap. 1. Secondly, Of the
special occasion of his own promotion by interpreting Nebuchadnezzars dream,
chap. 2. Thirdly, Of the trial and deliverance of the three said Worthies from
the fiery Furnace, chap. 3. Fourthly, ^f Gods humbling of King Nebuchadnezzar
for his pride, and his getting thereby glory to himself, chap. 4. Fifthly, Of
the end and ruin of his Kingdom in Belshazzars his Grand-childs destruction,
chap. 5. where ended the Babylonian Monarchy as was revealed before to Daniel,
chapter 2.4. for then was the Lion with Eagles wings made to stand on his feet as a
man: wherefore no more is spoken thereof; but only of the 3 following.
The Sixth and last thing recorded by Daniel in his own time, was the Story of
his own trial and deliverance from the Denn of Lions, chapter 6. which though
placed before his Vision of the 4 beasts, yet was given many years after it;
about the same time in which he had the Vision of the 70 weeks of years
revealed to him, chap. 9. of which, more afterward, by Gods assistance.

So 3ly, We come to the last head of Daniels book, to wit, of such things more
particularly which were to be afterward. First, respecting that continuance of
the said 70 weeks, or 490 years, in all the three succeeding Monarchies, to the
utmost extent of that time contained in that Vision, chapter 9. which was showed to
him upon his seeking God at the end of the Babylonian Captivity, in the first
year of Darius; the beginning of which 70 weeks (as learned men conceive) was
from the putting in execution of the decree for the building of the City
Jerusalem, until Christ Jesus had fulfilled the work of man's Redemption, and in
half a week after confirming his Covenant with many, and to the end of the said
490 years, and before Jerusalems last destruction, which was (as in the end of
that 9th. chap. is showed) to remain desolate, after the people of the Roman
Prince had destroyed it, all the times of the Gentiles (as our Savior has
expounded that Text, Luke 21.24) that he should make it desolate, even until
the consummation, and that determined, should be poured upon the desolate, v.
27. the same time otherwise called the indignation to be accomplished, for that
that is determined shall be done chapter 11.36.

But 2ly, Daniel had another Vision in the third year of Belshazzar before that
in the 9. c. which more especially concerned the two next succeeding
Monarchies: First, setting forth therein the great power of the Persian Ram,
and his sudden ruin by Alexander of Macedonia, the beginner of the Grecian
Monarchy, set forth by the Hee-Goat, swiftly subduing the Persian Ram, chapter 8.
according to the ensuing interpretation of the Angel, from v. 20. to 25.
together with the division of the Greek Kingdom, afterward unto his four
Commanders: from one of which, viz. S^le^chus Nicanor, proceeded that wicked
Antiochus Epiphanes, the eminent type of the great Antichrist, whose ruin also
like his, is said v. 25. to be without hand. But before the said interpretation
of the Angel, Daniel had another Vision of Palmoni, or the secret or wonderful
numberer, v. 13, 14. etc. wherein it is resolved how long the Sanctuary and
Host should be trodden under foot, namely unto 2300 evenings and mornings, or
many days, viz. of years, as seems to be f^rther explained, v. 26. which
though in the letter, it be applied by some only to the time of Antiochus
Epiphanes his outrage against the Jews and their Religion; yet seems ^o have
especial respect to the Jews general captivity, from the beginning of the 70
years, to their general deliverance by Christ at his appearance, ^s Dan. 12.1.
to which purpose observe, it is called a Vision of it self to be for many
days, v. 26. with an especial confirmation of the truth of it. 2ly. It was
from Palmoni or the secret and wonderful numberer, and therefore likely to have
reference to some greater extent of time than that short time of Antiochus
Epiphanes Tyranny and outrage. 3ly. It was the time that the Host and the
Sanctuary were to be trodden under foot; now the Host and Sanctuary had been
trodden under foot long before in the fence our Savior says the City should
be, Luke 21.24. after it should be again destroyed, which we read not that the
Temple was in Antiochus Epiphanes time.

4ly it is said it should be until 2300. days, not said expressly so long time
was to come but seems rather to imply much of it was past. 5ly, Both Host and
Sanctuary, have in our Saviors sense seemed to be trodden underfoot many ages
since (mystically, Rev. 11.2. under the Gentiles or Gentilizing Papists.) But
besides all this, there are diverse expressions from the words in the Vision
that appear to have referrence to the last times as the time of the end, v. 17.
and again very expressly, he said he would make him know what should be in the
last end of the indignation, v. 19. answerable to a like expression at the end
of the Roman Monarchy, c. 11.36. till the ind^gnation be accomplished, etc.
and again, v. 26. it shall be for many days; not mornings and evenings: and
farther, it has that mark of the last times set upon it, [that the Vision
should be shut up,] as others after were till the time of the end, or Gospel
times, as c. 11.40. and 12.4.9. Which, in this book has reference to the time
when Christ g^ve the Revelation, to open such Mysteries in Dan. as the other
phrase [^he list and of indignation] appears to relate to the Jews deliverance
at the end of the Roman Monarchy, c. 11.36. and therefore upon the
confirmation of the said Vision to be true, Daniel is enjoined to shut it up;
and that for the reason following, for it is for many days: which phrase we
find again explained by [the la^t^r days, or posternity of days (as the Heb.
phrase notes) and so it is said, c. 10.14. I am come to make thee understand
what shall be in the latter days: for yet the Vision is for many days. So that
though there might be some gradual sui^ing of the mornings and evenings to
Antiochus his time, yet upon these many considerations the Vision appears to
reach to a much larger extent of time than the outrage of Antiochus, Epiphanes,
namely, to the end of the Jews bondage. So the Prophecy Zac. 12.10. is
partially and in some respect applied to the Jews piercing of Christ at his
death, Jo. 19.37. when he was pierced with a Spear on the Cross, which will
have in other respects a much more eminent fulfilling at the national
conversion of the Jews, when they shall happily behold him, and mourn with true
penitence abundantly for that former piercing of him. so the promise of pouring
out his Spirit on all flesh, Joel 2.28. was partially fulfilled, Act. 2. but
will much more fully be accomplished, when Jews and Gentiles shall jointly make
up one Sheepfold under one Shepherd: so that promise that King, shall be
Nursing Fathers, and Queens Nursing Mothers, Es. 49.23. has sometimes been
fulfilled, remarkably since the rejection of the Jews, but shall be in a far
greater measure fulfilled (according to diverse Prophesies) when all Israel
shall be saved (as S. Paul speaks, To. 11.) so the Messenger promised Mal. 3.1.
to prepare the way before Christ; and Elias, Mal. 4.5. to be sent before the
great and terrible day of the Lord at Christ's first and second coming, were in
some sort fulfilled in John Baptist, who came in the spirit and power of Elias,
Luc. 1.17. yet shall have a further accomplishment at his next coming, as our
Savior informs us, after the death of John Baptist. Mat. 17.11. and that with
a strong asseveration; Elias (truly) shall first come and restore all things,
etc.

3dly. Thirdly that last great and large Vision concerning the 3 other
Mettle-Kingdoms after the Babilonian was past, to the uttermost period of the
Romans, and the setting up of Christ's Kingdom, was revealed to Daniel in the 3d
year of Cyrus after his three weeks seeking of God when the glorious appearance
of Christ was revealed to him, c. 10. as if his glorious appearance should be
upon the accomplishment of that Vision: the like was showed to St. John at the
beginning of the Revelation, who says, he comes quickly, etc. at the end of
it, Rev. 22 2. and in v. 14. he is instructed by him that comforted him, that
he was come to make him understand what should befall his people in the latter
days, for yet (said he) the Vision is for many days. Whereupon the Visions of
the three last Monarchies were given in order to him, c. 11. where, v. 2. only
concerns the Persian Kingom, and v. 3.4 concerned the Grecian Kingdom more
generally; and from thence the several wars between Syria and Egypt, to
Antiochus Epiphanes, v. 21. and from thence of his evil actings, and the
sufferings of Gods people, to v. 36. where (according to Mr. Mede, and others,
for weighty reasons) begins the 4th Kingdom of the Romans as there, and
formerly described by Daniel, and farther explained by Christ in the
Revelation, with the many changes which should be in its several times till the
end thereof at Christ's appearance; c. 12.1. whereto are added many things for
explication in the rest of that 12th c. but v. 36. of c. 11. is first set down
what is spoken of the qualities and actings of the Roman Empire more generally
both before Christ, in his time, and in those primitive times of the Church
described, Rev. 12.1. when she was as a woman clothed, with the Sun and the
Moon under her feet, etc. but v. 37.38, 39. seem to contain the Beasts 42.
Months, when the said Woman the Church went into her wilderness condition for a
time, times, and dividing of a time; and was fed by the Sackcloth witnesses
1260. days of years, but at v. 40. in those times of the end, or Gospel times,
appears the more remarkable ruiners of the Roman Empire, which are reckoned in
Rev. 9. to be the first and second woe Trumpets in the preva^lencie of
Mahumetan impostures: the first of the Saracens about An. 600. called the King
of the South, who in the time of the holy Wars (as they were called) seemed so
to push at the Roman Monarchy in the East, and against the Popes party from
the West. The 2d woe Trumpet the King of the N^rth, viz. the Turk, after by
power and policy he had prevailed against the Sarracens, overflowed not only
the Eastern Roman Empire, with his multitudes about An. 1300. but many other
parts; whose actings and proceedings toward Edom, Ammon, Moab, Egypt, we have
afterward described, v. 41, 42, 43, 44. till his ruin and destruction
irresistibly come upon him, v. 45. where ends the 2d woe Trumpet; and c. 12.1.
will begin the 3d woe Trumpet when the Romans Empire that remained in the feet and
toes of it, under the Popedom will finally be destroyed; and Daniels people the
Jews be delivered, v. 1, 2 3. which state of the Papacy is also darkly further
decyphered unto Dan. 12.5, 6, 7. but with a charge to shut up and seal that and
some other things then v. 4 9. ^^ll the said time of the end or Gospel times;
which since are opened, unsealed, and revealed by Christ to St. John for the
use of his Church; wherefore when the whole book of the Revelations were
imparted to him he forb^d him to seal it, Rev. 22.10. (though the things;
therein contained were sealed in Daniels time) but now the time of the end was
come, now he sets down the orders of the accomplishment of things more fully
(though in a Divine mystical way) which Daniel set down more briefly, or only
in generals, for then God would have them shut up till the said time of the
end: when also Antichrists time, times, and half a time, Dan. 12.6, 7. should
be understood by those that have warning given them, v. 10. to prepare and
provide to improve those suffering times which are not yet fully ended, though
hopefully near their period: whereunto are annexed some mystical Numbers
respecting the Jews (as Judicious men probably conceive) to begin about Julians
the Apostate Emperors time, An. 666. or as Dr. Usher computes 663, when
Sacrifice should be last and effectually taken away, and the abomination of
Desolation set up with further encouragement to the faithful Jews of those
times, v. 11, 12. And in the last verse, was given a special consolation for
Daniel at the end of the days, when all his former Visions should be
accomplished, viz. at the Resurrection of the Just; when he shall stand in his
lot with all the faithful Forefathers, and others since, etc. as Heb. 11.39,
40. See many of these things more largely spoken of in the Abridgement on
Daniel's Visions, with the Parallel of Daniel, and the Revelation.

FINIS.

