IEPO-ETPOPOLIS OR, The Holy, the Great, the Beloved NEW JERUSALEM, (a) Shortly
to come down from God out of Heaven: b BEING The work of Gods own hands: (c)
whose form will be perfectly cub^cular in length, breadth, and height; equal
12000 furlongs: (d) having the glory of God, or light as a stone most precious,
(e) prepared for the Lamb; Wife or raised Saints: (f) then to be made perfect
in one; (g) there to behold Christ's glory in his Davidical Kingdom (h) of the
thousand years reign with his Saints on Earth, (i) from Antichrists last ruin,
to Satan's last loosing; (k) shortly then producing both the worlds destruction,
and his own perpetual torment with all the damned in Hell. (l)

From Scripture evidence, abundantly made manifest, both by clear Texts and
necessary Consequence; more especially comprised in 15 well approved reasons.

By William Sherwin, Minister of the Gospel.

See (a) Rev. 21.10. and 20.9 (b) Rev. 21 2.10. (c) Heb. 11.10. (d) Rev. 21.16.
(e) Rev. 21.11. (f) Rev. 19.7, 8, 9. compared with chap. 21.9.10. Heb.
11.16.40. (g) Jo. 17.21, 22, 23. (h) Jo. 17.24. Es. 9.7. Rev. 1.32, 33. (i)
Eze. 48. last, Rev 5.10. Rev. 20.4 (k) 1 These. 2.8. 2 Timothy 4.1. Rev. 19.11. to
the end, Rev. 20.2.7. (l) Rev. 20.8, 9, 10.15. etc.

Apoc. 3.21. (...).

Esa. 54 12, 13. I will make thy Windows of Agats, thy gates of Carbuncles, and
thy borders of pleasant stones: See Rev. 21.18, 19.

Ver. 13. And all thy Children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be
the peace of thy Children, So Rev. 22.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Smith, and are to be sold at the Elephant and
Castle, without Temple Bar.

Scripture evidence for the New Jerusalem on Earth to come.
The Doctrine whereof is First, proved. Secondly, Improved.


Proved, First, From the explaining and opening of the Text. Jer. 3. from ver.
14. to v. 20. 2ly. From many Prophesies and Descriptions thereof in the Old and
New Testament; with Answers to some Objections; and 13. Reasons set down, why
it shall be on Earth, etc. 3ly. From the Series and Order of things set down in
Daniel, and explained more fully in the book of Revelation given to the beloved
Apostle John.


-- Secondly improved.

First; for Redargution of the errors of several sorts of persons against
these truths.

Secondly; For Admonition to three sorts of men.

First; To such as own these Divine Doctrines, to be mindful to improve them.
2ly. To such as really endeavor to improve them to be often mindful of, and
much to be affected with the greatness of their mercies, and the greatness of
engagement to duty thereby, if duly considered. 3ly. To such as own them not to
beware of slghting so much Divine and sacred Scripture truth of so great weight
and concernment, both as to holiness and happiness, as many such persons little
think of, or consisider; and most of all to take heed of opposing of them.
Thirdly; To exhort all men to make use of the light of their understanding
abilities, to search into those Scriptures that concern these things, that they
may not be found fighters against any such truth of God.

Christian Reader,
When the ancienter misrepresentations, about the time of the the rising of
Antichrist, and some later pervertings are remove ^ from the Doctrine of
Christ's Kingdom upon earth in the thousand years, Rev. 20. (as we showed in
our Preface to the Irenion) it will appear to be a Divine and Scriptual part of
the glorious Gospel of Christ, and to be nothing else but an explication of
some Articles of the Christian faith, according to holy Scripture; namely, how,
and when Christ will come from the right hand of the Father to judge the quick
and the dead at his next appearance, and his Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.1. and in what
order he will fulfill the blessed Resurrection of the Just, Luke 14.14 or that
first Resurrection, Rev. 20.5 in the said thousand years, with all those great
things to be accomplished according to Scripture, from his said appearance, to
the little space wherein Satan shall be loosed afterward; as namely, the final
destruction of Antichrist; the national and miraculous calling of the Jews; the
Restitution of all things; the New Heavens and the New Earth; the restoring the
Dominion over the Creatures, and their freedom from the bondage of Corruption,
into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, Romans 8.21. And in the said first
blessed Resurrection of the Just, the fulfilling of the prrmises to Abraham,
Jsaac and Jacob, of the Promised Land, to them and their Seed for ever: The
sure mercies of David, how Christ shall rule on his Throne to the end of the
world, Esa. 9.7. 2 Samuel 7.16 25, 26.29. with many other excellent things
belonging to that time, which cannot from Scripture be warrantably applied to
any other time (as we have showed in a Treatise on Genesis 3.15.) then that
wherein he will so eminently break the Serpents head; and this is that coming
the second time without sin unto Salvation, Heb. 8.28 At the first he came to
satisfy for sin; and by reason of sin, all the time from thence to his second
coming, his Servants have been liable to sufferings* as members of his mystical
body, with him, and for him, after his example (though not without Sin) but
then he will appear to Salvation to them, to free them from such sufferings, by
destroying their Enemies, and binding Satan; and powerfully enabling his
Servants to serve him, Rev. 22.3. granting great and wonderful peace in the
world to them, in those times of refreshing from his own presence, Acts 3.19.
redeeming the bodies of the faithful from the prison and corruption of the
Grave, and after the thousand years, will save the Camp of the Saints, and the
beloved City from the last attempt of Cog and Mag g, upon Satan's seducement;
and after Christ's withdrawing in the time of that attempt, he will descend as
says the Apostle, with a shout, and the voice of an Archangel, and with the
Trump of God, 1 These. 4.17. though we know not whether he will be then out of
the world in person, or at least the raised Saints on earth, shall not even at
that time have the Vision of his glorious Person; but to the Creatures
discovery he will then descend at the last general Resurrection and Judgment,
when Heaven and Earth shall flee away before his face, and no place be found
for them, as says St. John, Rev. 20.11. upon the fulfilling whereof, he will
perfect the Salvation of all his people by carrying his whole mystical body with
him into eternal blessedness in the highest Heavens; no more to withdraw from
them, but that they shall ever thenceforth be with him the Lord, 1 These. 4.17.
How then must he needs (from his said second coming, be glorified in his
Saints, and be then admired by all them that believe, 2 These. 1.10. and how
ought the faith of the said things to cheer and comfort their hearts against,
and under all their sufferings in the mean time, and make them with joyfulness
to serve him, and praise him, and willingly even to suffer for him when he
calls them to it, since he has promised graciously to be with them in the
deepest waters of their afflictions, and will not suffer them to be tempted
above their measure in the mean time, and will in the issue deliver Israel from
all their afflictions, and even recompense their measure of faithfulness and
sufferings for him, with a suitable degree of glory with him, 2 Timothy 2.12. Rev.
20.4. in that blessed New Jerusalem state upon earth, Esa. 24.23. when the Lord
of Hosts will reign in mount Sion, and before his ancients gloriously; as from
Divine Authority in the ensuing parcel, may be observed to the honor of the
great King, and the magnifying of Gods Divine wisdom and goodness, and great
consolation to faithful Souls, etc.

A word or two I shall further add of the nature and use of my four parts
lately published, which to some Christians may prove advantageous: First, the
drift of the Irenicon is chiefly to prove that the things respecting Christ's
Kingdom upon Earth, were spoken of by all Gods holy Prophets since the world
began, as the Apostle Peter teaches, Acts 3.21. with diverse other heads of
arguments to the same purpose; and an Appendex added to it concerning the
blessed first Resurrection of the Just: Yea, and all likewise that have written
in the new Testament, have added some explications thereof, as in that second
book is manifest, but chiefly the great Apostle Paul in alm st all his
Epistles; Heb. 16. and 2.5.6, 7, 8 and 4 9 and 9.28.10.13.37. and 11.8 9,
10.13.14.16.22.35.39, 40. and 12.22, 23 28.
but above all in that to the Hebrews, as might be showed particularly in many
Chapters thereof, as being the people most especially concerned in things of
that nature, etc. Unto which said Irenicon was afterward added this Parallel,
or third part before intended, as page 2d. of the former book, as a strong
foundation of that truth, both from Daniel and the Revelation of Jesus Christ,
which is only a Divine mystical Exposition (as we have showed therein) of that
part of Daniel that was sealed and shut up before, till the time of the end, or
Gospel times, as in some measure may be discerned by our short summary of
Daniel. As for the forerunner or first piece, it co sists of diverse things
which were occasional, and after placed together, as apparently very useful for
the whole work; whereunto reference is afterward fitly made in the following
parts: And for the fourth part, it contains many observations, and other
particulars, very useful for the understanding of mystical Prophesies, with the
removal of prejudices from this Doctrine: And as from my own exercise by Gods
gracious assistance in drawing up those, I am by his goodness enabled to speak
groundedly and knowingly upon other subjects, respecting these things from
Divine warrant; and especially from the help of that golden Key of Christ's
Divine Revelation, left to his Church for that purpose, to open that part of
Daniels shut up Visions; so may others also (by Gods blessing) by the help of
those parts, receive much advantage, which may be observed in the considering,
both of the forementioned treatise on Genesis 3.15. of Christ's breaking the
Serpents head; First Decreetively and Declaritively, before he began his
Mediators Office jointly with the Father, and with the Holy Ghost: And
secondly, Executively in his Mediators offices, ever since the fall of man
hitherto; and will most eminently, as the great King, and only Potentate (as
the Apostle Paul styles him) then do it in the Millennium, when (as he also
says, 1 Cor. 15.25.) he must reign till he has put all his Enemies under h^s
feet; And so concerning the ensuing subject of the New Jerusalem, which are as
examples to show the usefulness of the forenamed books, as containing
foundations thereof; wherein th re is often reference made to things contained
in them which I wish all such as l^ve the glorious appearance of the great God
and our Savior Jesas Christ, seriously to consider, and the great things
thereunto appertaining according to Scripture warrant; And chiefly to look to
that direction at the end of the Parallel, page 68. and well to peruse those
summaries of the Revelation in the forerunner page 22, 23. etc. And in the
Irenicon, page 26, 27, 28. with the Abridgment of Daniel, or the summary
thereof hereunto annexed; for such Abridgments help much in the discovery of
the order of the Parallel, to show wherein the Revelation explains the Visions
of Daniel, which is a very strong evidence of the truth, and gives great light
to the understanding of these Divine Mysteries, from the hands of both those
beloved Messengers of God, the writers of them, which should much commend these
subjects to truly faithful Souls; conveyed to them by such high Favorites of
the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, etc. I shall only here add this further
direction in the use of the said Books which I have often given already by word
of mouth to diverse knowing persons; namely, to read the two last books first,
and the References in them to the former: And so commending thee (Christian
Reader) to the guidance of the Spirit of truth, to lead thee into all such
comfortable and blessed truths of the Gospel, as may make most for the glory of
God and our Savior Jesus Ch is it, and thy own great rejoicing in the faith of
such great things pertaining to his glorious Kingdom on earth to come, for
which end I am especially

Thine in him William Sherwin.

Scripture evidenced for the New Jerusalem on Earth.
Jerem. 3.17. At that time they shall call Jerusalem the Throne of the Lord;
and all Nations shall be gathered to it, to the Name of the Lord, to Jerusalem,
etc.
THat first (on the negative part) this Text is not to to be understood of any
Jerusalem that has been destroyed, may be made evident from this portion of
Scripture, ver. 14. to 20. whereunto, and to the times whereof the things
herein mentioned, are no ways competible: First, not old Jerusalem called
Sulem, in Melchisedecks time, Genesis 14. after held by the Jebusites in Joshuaes
time, and after subdued by David, and beautified and fortified by Solomon, the
Type of the true Prince of Peace, (as that was also of the New Jerusalem that
is to come) of which this Prophet and others foretold the Desolation to come
by the King of Babylon* neither was it of that after the 70 years Captivity,
afterward repaired and adorned by Herod; and as our Savior denounced against
it, laid even with the ground by Titus and Vespatian, about 40 years after his
death; for as that was less glorious in it self, so it not only killed the
Prophets, and stoned those Servants of the Lord that were sent unto it from
God; but did not spare the Son himself when he came to gather her Children as
an Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, etc.

But that by the Jerusalem here, to be called the Throne of the Lord, is meant,
the New Jerusalem to come down from God out of Heaven, Rev. 21. may these three
ways be abundantly confirmed: First, from the due weighing of this Text and
context. Secondly; from many Prophesies and Descriptions set down both in the
Old and New Testament, which comport with this Prophecy, concerning the New
Jerusalem, of which the Old was but a type: Thirdly, from the series and order
of the times of the New Jerusalem, set forth in holy Scriptures, which this
portion of Scripture has three times reference unto, ver. 16, 17, 18. In those
days, at that time, etc. which together with the context, contain many
characters and marks to know that time from all others, and jointly witness
each to others; and because the matter of the context does so necessarily
relate to the time of fulfilling in the New Jerusalem state, we shall consider
them here together: first, he says in those days, ver. 16. after he had
before, ver. 14 set down what state they should then be in, namely, of
Children, then beloved (as the Apostle Paul speaks of those times, Romans 11.)
for their Fathers sake, and as appears in this Chapter, ver. 19. though they
had backslidden before, yet then returning at Gods call [ Turn ye back sliding
Children, etc.] Secondly; God there lays them down a reason respecting himself
and an effectual motive in regard of them (then) for I am Married unto you, and
that for ever in Truth, Righteousness and Judgment, as the Prophet Hosea
further explains it, chap. 2.19. showing how that people then should call him
Ishi my Husband, ver. 16. this Marriage-state of that people (then) with God
and Christ, should bring about the business; for this the Text is very punctual
and evident in reference to such a state of his people the Jews; and as he had
made ancient promises of such mercy then to them, Deuteronomy. 30. to 11. and Deuteronomy.
32. ver. 36. to 44. so he here declares he was, and would be mindful of them,
and promises to take them one of a City, and two of a Family, or (as a Rabbin
reads it) two of a Country or Province, and bring them to Sion: Again, he will
do it when he promises, to give them pastors after his own heart, ver. 13. to
feed them with knowledge and understanding, such as he foretold of (then) by
Daniel, chap. 12.3. that should be indeed wise to turn many to Righteousness of
Justification, which belong in special to that time, as we may see afterward,
and as Es. 62.6. her Watchmen shall never hold their peace, etc. till he make
Jerusalem a praise in the truth, where also much more of the like nature is
observable.

And though they shall be multiplied and increased then, yet he shows ver. 16.
they shall speak no more of the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, for that was
but symbolical and conditional, so that while the Ark was with them, the Lord
might be absent from them, as to his gracious presence (as sometimes he was) and
therefore says, they should not think or speak any more of such old Typical
constitutions as the Ark was; he minds them not only of his real, but personal
being with them, as their Messiah, in whom (says the Apostle) Col. 2.9 the
fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily. Showing ver. 17. that Jerusalem then
should be his Throne; saying, at that time, they shall call Jerusalem the
Throne of the Lord, and all Nations shall be gathered to it, to the name of the
Lord, (for h s name will then be great in the whole world) namely, when the
Kingdoms of the world are become the Kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ;
not only by right (as they ever were) but also his (as they will be then) by
their immediate use, and visible possession; and that the Nations might know
(then) whither to repair to the name of the Lord, where his glory will then
shine out eminently, he names the place again, saying to Jerusalem.

And this is further confirmed, ver. 18. by several other mercies belonging to
the same time; first, the house of Judah shall walk with the house of Israel;
those two sticks shall then be united together into one Kingdom, under one
King to them both, as Exe. 3.7. and they shall both come together (then) out of
the Land of the North, as this Prophet speaks again of the same time, chap.
16.15. and 23.8. and they shall have that Land (then) given, as an Inheritance
unto their Fathers, as the days of Heaven upon Earth, as is Emphatically
expressed, Deuteronomy, 11.21.

Again, he declares how all this good shall be brought about, ver. 19. namely,
Israel by virtue of their Adoption shall then have the promised possession of
the Nations, and of the pleasant land; and as Children abide for ever in their
Fathers house, for that Adoption will be unalterable, for thou (says he) shall
call me Father, and shall not turn away from me, for then their hearts shall be
Circumcised, as he also promises, Deuteronomy. 30.

So that then, as an Husband, he will be married inseperably to that people,
ver. 14. As a King he will set his Throne in the midst of them, ver. 17. as a
Father he will give them the sure Adoption, and therewith the large inheritance
of the Hosts of the Nations, and their own pleasant land, ver. 19. which is
further illustrated from their ready answer to his call [return you
backsliding Children, and I will heal your back-slidings] whereunto they make
a willing and obedient Answer: Behold we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord
thy God; and then proceeds to make a meek and gracious acknowledgment of their
own, and their Forefathers sin and unworthiness; and that Salvation is only in
and from the Lord, from v. 12 to the end of the Chapter. So that then will be
supplied to them Wisdom and Grace, Preservation and Blessing, Eminency and
Security from the Lord, and Unity amongst themselves in the enjoyment of all
good, conferred upon them, as is from this portion of Scripture very
observable; which if duly considered, may evidently appear to be a large and
strong evidence of the happiness of that ancient inheritance of God, the seed
of Jacob, which they shall have in those times upon Earth in the New
Jerusalem-state, when it shall be the Throne of the Lord, and his Dominion so
large in the world, that all Nations shall come thither to do him homage, or as
it is otherwise expressed, Es. 2.2. All Nations shall flow unto it, yet not
with deceitful Spirits, as men do some time, to great Conquerors or Monarchs
in the world; or after their own evil heart, as the Jews formerly, but as
manifesting themselves to be the Sons of God by the Spirit of Adoption: So that
by these many particulars from the context, it may appear, that the Jerusalem
spoken of in the Text, is the New Jerusalem spoken of, Rev. 21. upon the
national call and conversion of Gods ancient people the Jews, who shall then
look upon him whom they have pierced, and with true penitence turn unto him, as
Zac. 12.10. from which time they their Seed, and their Seeds Seed shall
continue the blessed of the Lord, Es. 61.9. and 66.22. when that Nation of the
Jews shall be born in a day, and the Iniquity of their Land shall be taken away
in one day, Es. 66.8. Zac. 3.9.

The second way of Confirmation, is from the many Prophesies and Descriptions,
and Testimonies contained in the Old and New Testament, respecting the New
Jerusalem, where first we may consider those eminent Texts, Es. 59.20, 21. when
the Redeemer shall come to Zion, what a Covenant he then makes with her
Children, and how she shall shine when the glory of the Lord shall be risen
upon her, chap. 60. what access there will be to her, and how strangers shall
build her Walls, and how Kings shall Minister to her, and her gates be
continually open to receive the Forces of the Gentiles, etc. ver. 9, 10.11. and
Rev. 21.24.26. and amongst many other high expressions she shall be called the
City of the Lord, the Zion of the holy one of Israel; and much of these
Prophesies and such as follow are applied by Christ himself unto the said New
Jerusalem, Rev. 21, etc. and therefore are so to be understood; but to save
transcribing more Prophesies under this head of proofs: see many more then we
have touched upon here, in our Prodromus in the letter of November, 3. 1663.
page 18, 19, 20, 21. As for Scriptural descriptions of the New Jerusalem, much
is spoken by the Prophet Jeremiah and Esaias, and others, as we have in part
already showed; but especially it is largely described by Ezekiel in his nine
last Chapters, where he at last declares the name of the City to be Jehovah
Shamma, the Lord is there; being probably in part, the same that is described
more gloriously by Christ, Rev. 21. for the use of the Gentile Church, as
Ezekiel had set it forth for the Jews before: see Observation third in our last
part, page 18, 19.

Again, in the New Testament our Savior styles it the City of the great King,
Math. 5. and where the Tabernacle of God shall be with men, Rev. 21. and Christ
reign with his raised Saints a thousand years, Rev. 20. and of which City, the
Lamb will be the visible light instead of Sun, Moon, or Candle; and where his
Saints shall behold his glory which his Father has given him, Jo. 17.24. It is
that place which our Savior told his Disciples he went to prepare for them,
Jo. 14.1. and that after his going from them, he would come again and receive
them unto himself, that where then he will be, they might be there also, ver.
3. even in his Kingdom, assigned to him by his Father, Dan. 7.13, 14. at the
time when Jerusalem as in the the Text, shall be called the Throne of the Lord,
as (by Gods assistance) we shall further manifest, at which time our Savior
also has appointed a Kingdom to his Disciples, Luc. 22.29, 30. even as his
Father had appointed unto him, that they might not only eat and drink at his
Table in his Kingdom, but sit on Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel,
which only can be in the New Jerusalem-state, according to Scripture: It is
that City whose maker and builder God is said to be, Heb. 11 10 the Jerusalem
that was free, when the other was in bondage with her Children, Gal. 4. which
is the Mother of all the faithful, and which is to be above, till the time of
its coming down from God out of Heaven, when Christ will bring all his Saints,
and such as sleep in him, with him, 1 These. 3. ult. 1 These. 4.14. and therefore
it is described by the Apostle, to be the City prepared by God for the faithful
Forefathers; yet so, as for all future believers likewise, that they without
us (says he) might not be made perfect, Heb. 11.40. or perfect in one as the
Lambs Wife (as the same Jerusalem is called, Rev. 21.9, 10.) whose privileges
are there described to be exceeding great; for there shall be no hunger, pain,
crying, and all tears shall be wiped away, there shall be no more curse, but
the Throne of God, and the Lamb shall be in it: and therefore all Joy, Glory,
and Happiness suitable to that State, as Chap. 21. and 22. to ver. 7. is
largely and divinely (though Mysteriously described) all which Prerogatives of
that ^appy condition, are largely set forth both in Old and New Testament (as
the forementioned Quotations, with many others) may abundantly Evidence, if
they were particularly insisted upon for glorious things (says the holy
Psalmist) are spoken of thee thou City of God, Psalm. 87. Which has special
reference unto those times, when the Nations shall come unto her, as Egypt,
Assirya, etc. as Esa. 19. from verse 18. to the end: When also the fresh
Springs of Divine Grace will flow from thence, etc. As is also described in
Ezekiels last Vision.

Object. But the new Jerusalem, Rev. 21. is said to come down from God out of
Heaven, and to be a City; whose Maker and Builder God is said to be, Heb.
11.10. which Abraham is said there to have looked for: And is that City
prepared for the faithful Forefathers (as was said from verse. 40.) But that in
the Old Testament foretold, is to be Built by Men, and Strangers shall build
the Walls of it, and Kings, and Nations bring their Wealth and Glory to it, etc.

Answ. In answer whereunto we are to consider, that according to Scripture, the
Jerusalem state at that time, will consist of Saints in a twofold condition:
First, of the Nation of the Jews, with other Israel^tes converted, and all
other converted Nations that shall join themselves to them, with their Kings
all abiding in their Bodies and animal L^fe as formerly.

Again, it will consist of such Saints, as Christ at his second coming brings
with him, as Zach. 14.5. 1 These. 3. last. who shall have their Bodies raised in
their order, as says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. Romans 11.18. who will be another
sort of Inhabitants in that New Jerusalem state, though in a much more blessed
and holy condition, Rev. 20.6. In which respect, the Scripture seems peculiarly
to ascribe to God, the making and building of that City, as a Mansion fitted
for the raised Saints, and a place of glory for them; then to behold Christ's
glory which then he will have in his Mediators Visible Kingdom upon Earth,
suitable to that estate, which City shall have Foundations, Heb. 11.10. But
whether it shall be by these Foundations elevated on high above the Earth, or
otherwise; and have Streets of Gold, like to transparent Glass, that the glory
of it may be discerned in some measure by other Saints then in the world, and
is set forth by Christ to be square and a perfect Cube the height, as much as
the breadth, with all the excellencies set down by him, Rev. 21. and 22. It
being mysterious, we may not be too curious to inquire, nor ^ash to determine
(though such things are there spoken of) which are not on the other hand
negligently to be overlookt, as spoken to man's capacity, yet this may be
resolved upon: That since such persons have then and there such happiness
assigned to them. God will make it every way suitable to such a condition: But
yet unto this glorious and happy Mansion which God prepared for that time for
the raised Saints (as he did wonderfully prepare a body for Christ when he
became man) even to that glorious Mansion, the Scripture shows the Kings and
Nations of the earth shall bring their glory and honor, as Rev 21.24.26.
probably not so much to add to it, as to show their affection toward it, and
the Owner of it: And such help and comfort they may then bring, as may be
useful to the Nations that are saved, walking in the Light of the new
Jerusalem, being in their bodies al ve as before; to them it is probable there
wi l be much good use made of such bounty of Kings, and munficence of Princes,
and others in those times, and Christ the great King much honored by their
Oblations, etc. Wherein it is probable the goodness of God may in such ways
appear eminently in those times, according to his many Prophesies and Promises
to such purposes; and the same God that has appointed an eternity of
Happiness, has likewise prepared a suitable happiness in that state, for all
sorts of his Saints, then, which experience will manifest, though we cannot in
all things now be resolved particularly: God has prepared that Jerusalem now
above, where are the spirits of just men made perfect, and God will, or has
prepared that City for them and others departed since, Christ's first to his
second coming, which shall then come down from him out of Heaven; when their
Bodies shall be reunited to their souls, to remain with Christ in happiness in
his Kingdom upon Earth, and after that to all Eternity in the highest Heavens.

Object. Another Objection may seem to be taken from Ezekiel. 16.55, 56. etc. When
I bring again the Captivity of Sodom, and her Daughters, and the Captivity of
Samaria, and her Daughters, then will I bring again the Captivity of thy
Captives in the midst of thee; which may seem an utter rejection of that
people, etc.

Answ. That this Text or any other of the like nature, is not to be understood
of an utter final rejection of any of them, let them be particularly
considered: First, not of Samaria, or the Israelites, whose chief City it was:
for that in the appointed time of Gods mercy promised to them, shall be again
received and owned by him, may from many Texts of Holy Scripture appear
abundantly, for those two Sticks of Israel and Judah, shall be again united
into one Kingdom, as Ez k 37. Then will be fulfilled what the Apostle Paul
foretells, Romans 11. that then all Israel shall be saved. And secondly, Sodom and
her Daughters, as well as Egypt and Assyria, Esa. 19.25. when it will be said,
Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria the works of my Hands, and Israel mine
Inheritance. Even Sodom it self may then have a part in that general Mercy, at
the great Restitution of all things (though for its foul-sins, now a stinking
Lake in the mean time) since then Mercy will be extended to all Nations, to see
the salvation of the God of Israel, Esa. 52.10. For all the ends of the earth
shall see the salvation of our God: Therefore also Sodom and her Daughters, and
appears here so to be understood, because joined with the Israelites, (as
before Egypt and Assyria were, Es. 19.25. to whom belong the Adoption, and the
Covenant, and the promises, (as the Apostle Paul teaches, Romans 9.4. to which
purpose also, read in this Chapter and consider, ver. 53, 54 compared with, and
explained by ver. 61.63. for as he spoke of their return at the same time, so
toward the end of the Chapt. upon the foundation of his own everlasting
Covenant, he would give them to her for Daughters, and at such a time as not
only she should be ashamed for her former miscarriage, but when he also would
be pacified toward her for all she had done, etc. And although no mercy was to
be expected to the Land of Judea, or Jerusalem by their own Covenant which they
had broken, as is showed ver. 59. thou have despised the Oath in breaking the
Covenant, wherefore God denies such mercies to be upon that foundation, ver.
61. Not (says he) by thy Covenant, but even upon that takes occasion to renew
and confirm his own Covenant, and that his everlasting Covenant for the comfort
of the faithful then, and of all times after, to come in a glorious way of free
grace, formerly set down in the days of her youth; and now again in this Chapt.
repeated, and confirmed, as appears manifestly, ver. 60, 61. to the end of the
Chapt. in many full and forceable expressions (if those verses be duly
considered) wherein the mercy of God reserved for them against those times, is
both largely displayed, and strongly confirmed; which Covenant is yet also more
fully explained and clearly distinguished by the Prophet, Jer. 31 31, 32, 33,
etc. which likewise the Apostle Paul applied in a more special manner to that
people in his Epistle to the Hebrews, (though not excluding others) Heb. 8.
ver. 8, 9, 10 11. according to what he had told the Gentiles as a mystery (as be
calls it, (...) 11.25.26 27.) from the words of the Prophet, Es. 59.20. The
(...) shall come to Sion, and to them that turn from transgression in Jacob; a
like confirmation hereof we have again from the Prophet Ezekiel largely set
down, chap. 20.37.40, 41, 42, 43, 44 etc. let all these Texts be ser^ously
considered to this pu^pose, wherein the riches of Gods free grace to that his
ancient people, after all their so great and so long wanderings from him are so
largely displayed.

Quest. But is not that which you call the New Jerusalem upon Earth, to be
meant of the highest Heavens?

Answ. It is true that many have so understood it; but again, many others that
have taken pains in searching the intent of that and othet mystical portions of
Scripture, have been, and are of a different judgment, and that for many good
and we ghty reasons, as these following, and the like.

1. Because the last part of St. John's Prophecy, Rev. 12.26. is said to be of
things shortly to come to pass; namely, in their due order in the world, and
nothing by him there seen in Vision, to be extended further then the worlds
end, when the measure of short or long time will utterly cease etc.

2. The last Table of the last times, contained in chap. 20. leads us to the
end of the thousand years, and the finishing of the last Judgment, of which the
2 following Chap. are an explication, as is usual in that book; first, to set
down things more generally, and then more particularly to explain them; as also
is observable from that former Table of the times, chap. 11. which also
reaches to the state of things on earth in the thousand years.

3. St. John saw that holy City, the New Jerusalem, descending out of Heaven
from God, not ascending thither, or being there.

4. When that general great rejoicing was at the destruction of the Enemies,
chap. 19. to ver. 9 for these 2 reasons; first, that the Lord God Omnipotent
(then) Reigned. 2ly. That the Marriage of the Lamb then was come, and that his
Wife had made her self ready (which is afterward manifest to be above a
thousand years before the last Resurrection) and this Wife of the Lamb, is
after explained to be the New Jerusalem that St. John saw descending out of
Heaven from God, there called the Bride, the Lambs Wife, Rev. 21.9. consisting
of the blessed Saints then to inhabit it bodily in their order at the first
Resurrection, which is also in the following part of that chapt. so gloriously
decyphered, and in Chap. 22. to v. 6. therefore it is thence evident, that the
said Jerusalem, the Lambs Wife, descended above a thousand years before the
last Resurrection and Judgment, and therefore all that time not to be in
Heaven; moreover it is said to be besieged by Gog and Magog at the end of the
thousand years, as follows in the next reason.

5. The same holy City is said to be compassed about by Gog and Magog at the
end of the thousand years, Rev. 20.9. which could not be done if it was not
then in the world; and therefore the Vision thereof, when it first descended,
which the Angel that had one of the 7 Vials then showed to St. John, calling it
the Bride, the Lambs Wife, and all the privileges and excellencies thereof
must needs belong to it whilst it is in the world, and all those many excellent
things concerning it, chap. 21, and 22. to v. 6. must needs belong to the state
of Christ's Church in those times on Earth, (as after will further appear) all
tending to set forth that one description of that holy City seen in the same
Vision, which was before said to be so encompassed with God and Magog, with its
privileges and appurtenances as follow in both Chapters.

6. It will be in that time when the Nations of them that are saved shall walk
in the light of the said New Jerusalem, which they will not do in the state of
Heavenly perfection, when no Nations will be in the world, but all Saints will
be perfect in one, Jo. 17, 23. in soul and body, and the whole mystical body of
Christ shall be completed in the members of it, and all received into perfect
glory and happiness.

7. In the same verse the Kings of the Earth are said to bring their own glory
and honor to it, and therefore it must be in the time wherein they enjoy such
honor and glory upon Earth, ver. 26.

8. Those Kings are there said also to bring the glory and honor of the
Nations unto it, in the same verse; and therefore it must be in the time
wherein such Nations have such Kings, and such glory and honor to be brought
unto it, and these also were foretold, Es. 60. in many eminent expressions in
many perticulars.

9 It will be in a time measured by months, when the Nations will also need
healing; and therefore the use of the leaves of the Tree of Life, in the street
of the City that bears fruit every month, is said to be for the healing of the
Nations, chap. 22.2, and so before the end of the world etc.

10. The Sun, Moon, and Candle, at the same time will be useful to other places
in the world, when the Lambs supereminent light will so enlighten that holy
City, that there will be no need of any other, Rev. 22 5. and Rev. 21.23. as
was also foretold of the same times by the Prophet. Esaias, chap. 24.23. Then
shall the Moon be confounded and the Sun ashamed when the Lord of Hosts shall
Reign in Mount Sion, and in Jerusalem* and before his Ancients gloriously. So
also Es. 60.19. The Sun shall be no more thy light by day, neither for
brightness shall the Moon give light unto thee, but the Lord shall be unto thee
an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory.

11. Upon the coming down of this New Jerusalem, the Tabernacle of God is said
to be with men, and he to dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and
God himself shall be with them, and be their God, Rev. 21* 3. and was said
before in c. 20.4. Christ should reign with his raised Sts. 1000. years, and
that on earth, (expressly say the representatives) exulting greatly in it, Rev.
5.10.

12. Some of the former and ensuing promises are applied by the spirit of God
in this Book to the said new Jerusalem state, as that of the new Heavens and
the new Earth, Isa. 65.16. so applied Rev. 21.5. and that the Kings and Nations
of the earth shall bring their glory to it in that time, Isa 60.11. and so
applied Rev. 21, 24 26, etc.

13. It is the place where the representatives, Rev. 5.10. shall reign with
Christ upon earth being that City that God prepared for the faithful
Forefathers, Heb. 11. the last and all believers since their times to the
resurrection of the just; wherefore it seems to be of so great largeness as
containing 12000. Furlongs, which some reckon 500. Leagues; and which is most
wonderful (as our late Annotators observe) the height and length and breadth
are equal as a perfect Cube: who also reckon the City, described by Ezekiel. to
be so great, as containing in compass about it, 18000. measures, or 4500. on
each square, Ezekiel. 48.16.

14. The City that Abraham particularly looked for, is said to have
foundations, whose maker and builder is God, Heb. 11.10. and such is that that
shall then come from God out of Heaven, Rev. 21. having 12 foundations, v. 14.
of which, the Psalmist seems prophetically to speak, Psalm. 87.1. his foundation
is in the holy Mountain; and which Psalm is in many places applicable to those
times of the new Jerusalem to come: and these foundations may seem to
difference it (then) from that which is now above, where are the spirits of
just men made perfect, Heb. 12. called also Paradise, and Abraham's bosom, etc.
that when the Sts. come with Christ at the said Jerusalems coming down from God
out of Heaven, that their bodies may be raised and united to their Souls at the
first blessed resurrection; such foundations may be suitable to their condition
(then) having their bodies reunited to them, and to that estate of the Church
in the world described in Rev. 21. Moreover, Abraham that looked for such a
City having foundations, is called by the Apostle the heir of the World, Romans
4.12. through the righteousness of Faith: by which Faith, says the Apostle, he
received Isaac from the dead in a figure, Heb. 11.19. and accordingly the
Apostle seems to apply the divine efficacy of his faith in some resemblance to
Gods raising up the dead and calling things that are not as though they were,
Romans 4.7. and proceeds to illustrate the power of his faith, that neither the
deadness of his own body, nor the deadness of Sarah's womb did hinder it, in
believing that he should have that promised Seed: and so of the promised
inheritance, often sworn by God to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; Abraham had not
of it to set his foot on, Acts 7. and that promise was looked for a far of by
him and others, Heb. 11.13. and yet believed and embraced by them; yea many
others set down afterward, which obtained a good report by faith; yet (says
the Apostle) obtained not the accomplishment of the promise, v. 39, 40. God
having provided some better thing for us, that they without us should not be
made perfect, to wit, at the said Resurrection from the dead; and in the said
City which Abraham looked for, which has foundations, v. 10. and that City
prepared by God himself for the rest of the faithful, v. 16. and v. 40, all
which seem to point out the New Jerusalem state on earth at Christ's second
coming; with many other great things to be accomplished in those times, as we
have showed more particularly in a Tract on Genesis 3.15. and in our 4th. Part,
Obser. 31. and well may that condition be called an heavenly Country, because
it will be of an heavenly nature, and in an excellent state and condition; when
there will be indeed an heaven upon earth, when Christ will bind Satan, and
seal him up in the bottomless Pit that he shall not deceive the Nations for
that space of a thousand years, Rev. 20.3, 7. and many wicked men be destroyed
from the earth, Rev. 11.18. and he will bring all his Saints asleep in him
(till then) with him, 1 These. 4.14. and an innumerable company of Angels to
attend upon him, Psalm. 97, and all creatures shall bow the knee, Phil. 2. to do
him homage, which are now in heaven, or earth, or under the earth, whose name
is above every name; which seems excellently decyphered before us, by his own
spirit, Rev. 5. after he had taken the book from the right hand of him that sat
upon the Throne to loose the seals thereof: the fulfilling of the contents of
which, will cause that wonderful praise by the 24 Elders, and 4 Beasts, or
living Wights, by Angels, and all Creatures, from v. 10. to the end; and yet of
that Country, says one, it is called (...) of (...), the Country where their
Fathers dwelt, as in many Prophesies and Promises it is styled, etc. And the
things concerning that State, seem therefore to be so strongly and often
asserted by the Spirit of God, Rev. 19.9. and 21.5. and 22.6. to show, that
though many would be backward to believe them, yet they should be not certainly
fulfilled in the world in due time.

15ly. It is said to be measured (as we have elsewhere noted) and likewise many
other Prophesies and Promises are applicable from the Old Testament to that
said New Jerusalem State, as the Spirit of Christ in respect of those
forenamed, has directed; and which may more largely be observed in our
Prodromus, Page 18, 19, 20, 21. in the letter of Nov. 3, 1663.

3ly. And so we come to the 3d. way of confirmation of the New Jerusalem to
come on earth, namely from the Series and Order of the time in Scripture
assigned for the setting up thereof in the world, to wit, upon the destruction
of the Beast at Christ's 2d. coming; whom, says the Apostle, Christ will
destroy with the appearance of his coming 2 These. 2.8. unto which he also
adjoyns his Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.1. at his appearance (says he) and his Kingdom.
And to this purpose, it is very observable, that when God was about to destroy
the O^d Jerusalem for the greatness of the wickedness prevailing in it; by the
same Prophets whereby he denounced the destruction of the Old to the terror of
the wicked; by the same also, he foretold the setting up of the New for the
comfort of the faithful; wherein they in due time should have their shares, as
Es. 29.19. Jer. 31.31, 32, etc. Ezekiel. 37. and these do not only speak of the
deliverance of the Jews from Babylon after 70. years, but of the great
restoration of all Israel and Judah, which they set forth with many peculiar
Marks and Characters belonging to it, as we observed from this Text, Jer. 3.17.
and from Es. 60. and many other places. But the Prophet Ezekiel, in c. 37. of
his Prophecy, does not only describe their deliverance to be wonderful, like a
raising of dry bones from the Grave, and making them stand up in a great Army;
but also largely there also shows the uniting both Kingdoms of Israel and
Judah, into one, under Christ the Great Messiah, called there David, of whose
Seed he was, according to the flesh, and in whose Throne he is to sit so long
as the Sun and Moon endure, from the time of the raising up the Tabernacle of
David that was fallen, Acts 15, etc. Yea, this 37 of Ezekiel, seems with the
remainder of that book to the end, to be as a comment or exposition of the main
drift of diverse of Daniels Visions respecting the latter times: for as he by
Visions (as we said) set forth how wonderfully God would raise and restore
them, c. 37. so in the two next chapters, he largely by Prophecy fore-tells
the stupendous destruction of their Potent Enemy Gog and his Multitudes, with
Magog, which he specially declares twice, shall be in the latter days, c. 38.
v. 8. and v. 16. with many expressions agreeing to their great Enemy the Turk;
and thereby God undertakes for the comfort of the faithful, to remove him which
is to be the great hinderer of their freedom. And from thence in 9 chapters to
the end, he sets down his large Vision of the New Jerusalem, and in the end
declares the name thereof shall be Jehovah Shamma, the Lord is there; which is
also by Scripture order to be set up when the Enemies are destroyed, as Dan.
11.45. and Dan. 12.2, 3, etc. But Daniel in a more special way of Mercy from
God to his faithful people from his time, had for their more abundant
consolation, in diverse Visions set down in order, the times to pass over the
Jews in their said Dispersions, and the several Oppressors of them in order to
be destroyed, until their full deliverance come; and this both more generally
in 4 wicked Monarchies before the fifth came that should destroy them, c. 2. by
his interpretation of Nebuchadnezzars Dream which were again set before him in
a Vision of ^ beasts to subdue each other till the Son of man's coming in the
clouds of heaven to receive his Kingdom over the whole world, upon the last
beasts destruction, Dan 7. and afterward in c. 8. and in the end of the 9. and
in his last Vision, c. 10, 11, 12. he has things more particularly set down,
respecting the 3 last Monarchies and Beast-like states to the time of the
standing up of Michael the great Prince at the destruction of the Turk and the
deliverance of Daniels people, c. 12. 1, etc. as may more largely be observed
from our Abridgement of Daniels Prophetical Visions, and the Parallel of
Daniels Visions, with the Book of the Revelation, so far as respects the time
of the end, or Gospel times, from Christ's first to his 2d coming; when the 4
Mettle-Kingdoms will be utterly and finally broken as the dust in the Summer
threshing, and the wind drive them away: as Dan. 2.35. and the Date of the 4th
beast be ended, Dan. 7. when the Kings shall be Christ's, and theirs to whom he
has appointed them, as Luke 22.30. concerning the particularities to be
accomplished in above 2000. years space Daniel has set down many things in
such order as seemed good to the spirit of God, to guide him and reveal any of
them to him. But under the last Kingdom or Beast, Daniel has many things shut
up and sealed until the time of the end (or Gospel times) which Christ Jesus
the Lamb has since in the book of the Revel. opened and explained in a
wonderful divine manner; yea, and in great part fulfilled and accomplished
likewise, which leads us to the end of Daniels Visions when Christ should
appear and Daniel stand up in his lot at the end of the days. Which is the time
the new Jerusalem is to have its being in the world, and all the Promises and
Prophesies concerning it, and Gods ancient (people performed: and when it shall
be called the Throne of the Lord, as from Christ's own Revelation is
sufficiently manifest: and thus of the 3 ways of confirmation forenamed at the
beginning.

Use 1. Let us now proceed to some inprovement of this Truth by way of
Application: And first, by way of Redargution or Reproof, it may hence appear
how much they are to be blamed that think and speak slightly of the great and
national conversion of the Jews; and the happy estate of the Jews and
Israelites united in one Kingdom, to be in the world in its season, since Gods
word does so abundantly declare what wonderful mercy he has still in store
for them: But much more of such as esteem them finally little better than
cast-aways from Gospel Grace, there is a veil indeed upon the heart of that
people, yet nevertheless that Vail (as says the Apostle Paul 2 Cor. 3.16) when
they shall turn to the Lord, shall be taken away; so that the hope of Israel
shall not utterly fail or perish: But least of all will many believe that they
shall have such a glorious Church state, as the word of God (as we have here,
and else where showed) as they with the Gentiles (when their fullness shall come
in) shall enjoy together in the 1000. years reign of Christ upon earth: Let
such seriously consider of it, how unchristian it is to recompense evil for
evil unto them: The Jews ('it is true) in the Apostles time did indeed both
despise and malign the Gentiles, and would not endure to hear of their
receiving to mercy, but they were for the most part the obstinate and
unbelieving Jews, or at least before God had wonderfully by word and vision, by
Miracles, and the Testimony of the spirit, put his owning of the Gentiles, out
of question in the Church (then) before which time the evidence of the Gentiles
hopes was both obscure and small in comparison of what the Jews have for the
time to come, and that of strong Scripture ground in Gods appointed time, when
both Jews and Gentiles shall be joint heirs of Gods enlarged grace to them
both: And it seems very remarkable, that when the Apostle Paul speaks of the
first receiving of the Gentiles to mercy he quotes little Scripture for that
purpose, and those also which before were very obscure, Romans 9.25, etc: from,
Hos. 2.23. I will call them my people which were not my people, and her beloved
which was not beloved: and from Hos. 1.10. in the place where it was said, ye
are not my people, there they shall be called the children of the living God:
which had been difficult to have applied to those times, those places, and
persons, had not God so powerfully and wonderfully confirmed and evidenced his
good pleasure there in those respects. But when he comes in the same Epistle to
speak of Christ as the Minister of the Circumcision, Romans 15.8, 9. and to
confirm the promises made unto the Fathers, whose posterity the Jews were, and
to whom the promises did belong, as he shows with many other privileges,
together with all the Israelites, Romans 9.4, etc. he then heaps up many
testimonies of the Prophets, and from Moses, and the Psalms, that should all
witness to the joint happiness of both Jews and Gentiles when all Israel shall
be saved: in respect of the former when our Savior came the first time, be
himself said, Mat. 15.24. That he was not sent in his own person, during the
time of the Ministry, but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel: that was,
only to the nation of the Jews, being the Minister of the Circumcision as the
Apostles phrase is: But for the said joint grace to be abundantly, gloriously,
and wonderfully powered out on Jews and Gentiles at the time of his 2d coming
without sin to Salvation, he applies many pertinent places belonging to that
time, seeming therein in a special manner to be directed by the spirit of God
to teach the Gentiles, (as Romans 11. Apostle does largely discover) that their
greatest mercy is then to be looked for, when the Jews shall obtain theirs, as
by a resurrection from the dead, when all Israel shall be saved, etc. with much
more to such purposes. And all those texts which he names to that purpose, Romans
15.8, 9, etc. have special respect to the time of their uniting in one sheep
fold one shepherd, as our Savior himself has likewise foretold, John 10.16.
that there should be one sheepfold and one shepherd: the 40th Psalm is very
prophetical of Christ's wonderful prevalencie over his enemies then, above what
was competible then to David, and Deuteronomy. 32.43. is the last part of Moses
prophetical song for posterity that ends with the union of Israelites and
Gentiles: the 117th Psalm. is a short and pithy prophecy and form of praise for
that very cause: and Es. 11.10. with much of that c. (as both Mr. Mede and many
others well observe) to be a glorious prediction of Christ's said Kingdom on
earth, in that time of the uniting of Israelites and Gentiles in the grace of
the gospel to come as, Romans 11. before named; and the state of the said new
Jerusalem when his rest shall be glorious, (as Esa. 60.1. which by the context
in Esa 11. both before and after the 10. v. may abundantly appear. But that
which many such men seek chiefly to avoid, is the yiedling of Christ's Daviaical
Kingdom here upon earth, the doctrine whereof (though in some parts of holy
writ it be set down in a divinely mystical manner) yet the holy Scripture is
plentiful for it, and very punctual for the time when it shall appear, and for
many excellent and glorious things belonging to it, (if truly pious and dilgent
search thereof be made) as if that great Redeemer of his ancient people beloved
(as the Apostle Paul says) for their Fathers sake would not come in his time
appointed, would not come to mount Sion to deliver them and others, even to all
such as shall turn away from transgression in Jacob as is promised, Esa 59.20.
when they shall look upon him (when he appears) whom they have pierced, Zac.
12.10. and turn by true repentance to him from the iniquities of their fore
fathers. And in both these respects great scandal is given to the Jews, for
they know there is a strong entail of many great both spiritual and temporal
mercies to their faithful forefathers, and their posterity in those times to
come (though for a time their sins withhold those mercies from them) and that
as they expect, though, happily, not in that manner, the son of David their
Messiah will come to deliver them the sacred Scriptures give strong assurance,
and which time of their redemption seems to draw nigh as our Savior teaches,
Lu. 21.28. and that the Kingdom of God is nigh at hand, v. 31. the signs
whereof when they shall see, he bids them there lift up their heads: for then
according to the prediction of the Angel to the blessed Virgin, Luke 1.23. the
Lord shall give to Christ the Throne of his Father David, which is the same
which our Savior told his Disciples his Father had, then, as Dan. 7.13, 14.
appointed unto him, even as he appointed unto them at the same time a Kingdom,
even that Kingdom that they may eat and drink at his table in his said Kingdom,
and sit upon Thrones judging the 12 Tribes of Israel, Luke 22.29, 30. which
will be the only time for them to do, for afterward in heaven there will
neither be such eating or drinking, or judgeing or ruling over others or their
cities, as Luke 19.17, 18. and it is to be observed those texts of Scripture
speak of such Kingdom as was to come, and therefore not to be understood of
Christ's spiritual Kingdom which he had both then, and in all the times of the
old Testament, and as when Solomon, the type of Christ in that particular, sat
upon the Throne of David, 1 King. 2.12.24. it could not be said he sat upon his
Throne spiritually, but personally in Jerusalem: so neither in this respect can
it be said, that Christ of the seed of David according to the flesh shall then
only spiritually, but personally sit upon the Throne of David in the new
Jerusalem, which then [as in the text] shall be called the Throne of the Lord.
Though he has always as God had a spiritual Kingdom in the world; but the
sitting upon the Throne of David for the future belongs to him as man, as the
fruit of David's Loins according to the flesh, Acts 2.30. which the Apostle
Peter v. 35. shows should be, when God makes his Foes his footstool; for as
when Christ is frequently in the gospel called the Son of David, we cannot in
that sense say he is the Son of God: so when he is said to sit on the Throne of
David, as Esa. 9.6. we cannot in that sense say he shall sit upon the spiritual
Throne of God; for the spiritual Throne of God is in reference to spirituals:
But to fit upon the Throne of David as man, will be to order it with judgment
and justice, as is foretold of him, Esa 9.7. yea this said Throne of David
which shall be given unto Christ as Mediator by his Father is so distinguished
by himself as another from his Fathers Throne, Rev. 3.21. To him that overcomes
will I grant to sit with me on my Throne: even as I also overcame, and am set
down with my Father on his Throne. Moreover the spiritual reign of Christ in
the hearts of men is common to all the three Persons in the sacred Trinity, but
to sit upon the Throne of David as man, is peculiar to Christ as Mediator, as
(...) God-man in one person; so the spiritual reign of Christ is one thing, but
his sitting upon the Throne of David is another; and from what has been said,
they may fitly be distinguished in these respects following. First, God the
Fathers Throne and Kingdom is eternal, but Christ's visible glorious Kingdom as
Mediator is temporal, only for a set time, which will begin at Antichrists
destruction, Dan. 7.9, 10, 11. and at his own appearance, 2 Timothy 4.1. and will
end when he shall resign it back again to his Father, as St. Paul expressly
declares, 1 Cor. 15.24. 2dly, God the Fathets is originally in or from himself;
but Christ's Mediators visible glorious Kingdom in the world is given to him of
the Father, Dan. 7.14. And there was given to him Dominion, Glory, and a
Kingdom, that all People Nations and Languages should serve him. Thirdly, the
Throne of God the Fathers Kingdom is in Heaven, as our Savior teaches, Rev.
3.21. but the Throne of his own Kingdom as Mediator God-man shall in that time
be on the earth, as in the text, and People Nations and Languages shall then
serve him, as was last showed, and to make it evident it must be done on earth:
in the 27. v. of Dan. 7. it is said the Kingdom and Dominion and Greatness of
the Kingdom under the whole Heaven shall serve and obey him. Fourthly, This
Temporal Kingdom for the thousand years Christ will resign back again to the
Father, but his spiritual Kingdom as God he never received, nor will ever part
from of which there will be no end. So that hence it may appear for Christ to
reign spiritually in the hearts of his people as God is a thing many ways
distinct from his sitting upon the Throne of David as man in the time of his
visible glorious Kingdom on earth to come. Let these things therefore by all
such persons be seriously considered, that they be not sinfully found to be
pleaders against Christ's Interest in this respect, for which the Scripture is
both clear and plentiful, as Rev. 20.4. and 5.10. Dan. 7. Ier. 3.17. with many
others, etc. See the Forerunner, page 47, 48. and let them remember the
legitimate confession of Christ is to confess all things that belong to Christ,
amongst which, the sitting on the Throne of David as man, will be one. 1 John
4.2, 3.

And as for the raising of the dead Saints at the Resurrection of the Just as
it is called, Luke 14.14. or the blessed first Resurrection above a thousand
years before the rest of the dead shall be raised, Rev. 20.5. they being such
as will be counted worthy of that world (called the world to come, Heb. 2.5.)
where those Children of the Resurrection (as our Savior speaks, Luke 20.35,
36.) shall be as the Angels in Heaven, since at his appearance and coming into
the world Christ will bring his Saints with him, and such as sleep in Jesus
with him, 1 These. 3. ult and 4.14. Zac. 14.5. to the end that being raised from
the dead he may reward them, Rev. 11.11. and 22.12. or recompense them at the
said Resurrection of the Just, Luke 14. when they shall behold the glory of
Christ which the Father has given him as Mediator, John 17.24. when his
Disciples shall sit upon twelve Thrones judgeing the twelve Tribes of Israel,
Luke 22.30. and his faithful servants according to the improvement of their
Talents shall rule over so many Cities, Luke 19.17.19. Psalm. 49.14. and shall
have power over the Nations, Rev. 2.26. Psalm. 45.6* their bodies being then
redeemed from the prison and Corruption of the grave, Romans 8.23. and their
former mortal bodies shall then be powerfully raised by the same spirit of him
that raised up Christ from the dead, Romans 8.11. that so (then) such as suffer
for Christ in the body, may reign with Christ in his Mediators Kingdom in their
bodies, 2 Timothy 2.12. and those raised bodies when he shall appear being like
him, shall see him as he is, 1 John 3.2. when the Tabernacle of God shall be
with men, and he be with them in the new Jerusalem come down from God out of
Heaven, Rev. 21.3.10. in that City whose name shall be Jehovah Shamma the Lord
is there, Ezekiel. 40. ult. and which shall then be called the Throne of of the
Lord, as in the text; that City prepared for the faithful forefathers, yet so
as without the faithful that died since Christ's first to his second coming they
shall not be made perfect, Heb. 11.40. or perfect in one (as our Savior
prayed, John 17.23.) and declares his will in the presence of his Father, and
before his Disciples, that such as were given him should then be with him to
behold his glory which his Father had given him, v. 24. who will then be that
spiritual and mystical Bride, the Lambs Wife, Rev. 21.9. in the time of his
thousand years reign, Rev. 20.4. when (as says the Apostle Paul) Christ must
reign till he has put all his enemies under his feet, 1 Cor. 15.25. even till
he deliver up the Kingdom to God the Father; having put down all rule and all
authority and power, that stood in his way, as in the verse before, the last
enemy Death being destroyed, v. 26. Many of these texts of holy Scripture our
blessed Savior by his book of Revelation has given much evident light unto,
(as whosoever carefully compares them, and duly weighes them, with humble and
faithful seeking the guidance of his spirit may hopefully find) till which time
many of these and diverse others were darkly delivered, and have not otherwise
so clear and fit exposition given of them, as that they will be fulfilled at
that time of the restitution of all things, when the times of refreshing shall
come, for his people from the presence of the Lord, when God will send Jesus,
whom the Heavens must contain till then, Acts 3.19, 20, 21. in which times the
many great things are to be accomplished which we formerly set down on Genesis
3.15. and Christ's explication of them will at last be most certainly found the
best; and the mean time let it be observed that the Doctrine of the
Resurrection was a long time but darkly set down in Scripture, and but by
degrees were the mysteries thereof revealed, 1 Cor. 15.51, 52. Romans 8.11. [as
we have else where observed] and as Mr. Mede says that the Prophets in the old
Testament except Daniel, spoke darkly or promiscuously of the first and second
coming of Christ, so we may say of the whole Scriptures speaking of the first
and second bodily Resurrections, till Christ explained them, and chiefly in
Romans 20. yet by the guidance of that, many others fall in with it. See more in
the Appendix, after the Irenicon page 97. to 109. for I have in a manner but
touched upon these texts of Scripture, because I study brevity and have spoken
there more largely of the first bodily Resurrection; and because the Scriptures
carry with them so great evidence in their consent one with another, and
bearing witness in their order to the same truth, which serious Christians may
in their Meditations more enlarge and improve, that being rightly from the word
informed of these things, and the like, they may both frame their prayers, and
make other improvements thereof accordingly, to help forwards Gods work in the
fulfilling of some of them, having such sure and comfortable foundations from
the Word, to raise up their affection to such purpose; and especially in those
latter days when their fulfilling approaches near, as may be observed from
the fulfilling of so many Prophesies already; and for the accomplishing of
those that remain, tends in a special manner that prayer at the end of these
Visions, with an (even so) as if it had been said, that these great things in
the said thousand years of Christ's reign may be fulfilled, Rev. 22.20. Even so.
Come Lord Jesus. And that happy estate of Christ's Church in that time of his
said reign upon earth, seems to be the main drift and scope of the three first
petitions of the Lords Prayer: which will then have their greatest fulfilling
on earth (as they are now fulfilled in Heaven) when Satan shall be bound and
sealed up in the bottomless pit, from deceiving the Nations for that thousand
years, Rev. 20. and wicked men destroyed, that destroyed the earth, Rev. 11.18.
the blessed and holy Saints raised from the dead at the first resurrection,
Rev. 20. and the holy Angels be Christ's attendants in Christ's Kingdom, as the
Courtiers of their most glorious King, Heb. 1.6. Psalm. 97. where also his
terrible coming into the world (then) is decyphered eminently; with the joy of
his people thereupon; and that which will make it an Heaven indeed, will be the
Tabernacle of God will then be with men, etc. and the Lamb will be the visible
light of that City, and the living waters of divine grace will flow so
abundantly from the Throne of God and the Lamb, etc. with many other heavenly
excellencies of that state, Rev. 21. and 22. but that this may yet further
appear to be then on earth; all other inferior Creatures must then also do
their homage to their heavenly King, by bowing the knee, or yiedling their
subjection to him, whose name is above every name; for as those in heaven do
it, so shall those in earth and under the earth in their due time do it, Phil.
2.9, 10. and so in such a glorious condition will those new Heavens and new
Earth then be, that his Name will be sanctified, his Kingdom will be come, and
his Will (then) be done on earth, as it was (before) in heaven: [For Christ
when he was upon earth taught not his Servants to pray all along to his coming,
for those things which shall never be; and God has not made so many promises,
and given forth so many prophesies of such things as never will be performed
and fulfilled] But then will be that great Sabbatisme of such holy refreshment
from the presence of the Lord, and rest which remains (says the Apostle) for
the people of God, Heb. 4 9. when those promised mercies to the Fathers shall
be fulfilled on earth, that his people may serve him without fear of their
enemies in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of their Life,
Luke 1.73, 74. and as Rev. 22.3. now these promised mercies were to Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, not yet fulfilled, but seen a far off, Heb. 11.13, etc. There
are also sure mercies of David not yet fully accomplished* 1 Samuel 7.15, 16,
etc. that his House and his Kingdom should be estab^ished for ever before him,
and his Throne shall be established for ever: which he there largely by Faith
applied, and by grateful acknowledgement praised God for, as if it had been
performed; and then Job and Esaias will find the effect and fruit of their own
Faith, Job 14. Esa. 46. and Daniel shall then obtain his promised Lot, with all
the holy Prophets, and faithful servants of God in those times. Oh how should
our Faith be exercised in these things! that with faithful Abraham we may
rejoice aforehand, at the day of Christ's visible Dominion, as he did both at
that, and his Incarnation, Heb. 11.13, etc.

And so we should proceed to a second Use of thankfulness for such great
mercies now manifest to the Church of Christ from his Word, and chiefly from
him the faithful and true witness; but because we have been somewhat large to
that purpose upon a like occasion toward the end of a former Treatise on Genesis
3.15. we here wave that, and only touch upon some hints of further improvement
by way of admonition, and exhortation, and so leave them to be enlarged by
Christians in their private meditations, etc.

Use 2. For admonition to two sorts of persons. First, to such as own these
Doctrines of Christ's Kingdom of visible power to come, etc. so much the more to
be careful to make sure their interest first in Christ's spiritual Kingdom of
grace here in this present life, and state of things, before they look or hope
for any part in his Kingd. of visible power on earth at his coming, or in Gods
eternal Kingdom of glory ensuing upon it, for grace and Gods spirit here is the
earnest and evidence of all blessedness hereafter; only Wise Virgins will be
admitted into the Bride-chamber, when the Bridegroom comes, and such only will
he receive to himself to make them inheritors of everlasting blessedness in the
Kingdom of his Father: for though all divine Scripture truth is written for our
learning (as the Apostle Paul teaches) yet all divine knowledge not being duly
improved will aggravate the sin and misery of all formal professors thereof,
both in the whole of Christian religion, or in any remarkable branch thereof,
much more if such knowledge be perverted contrary to the holy just and good
laws of Christ's Kingdom of grace, that teaches his people to deny ungodly and
worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and Godly in this present
world, Tit. 2.11, 12. But for such as own these Doctrines, and are indeed
faithful servants, and subjects of their great Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
to look upon all Doctrine respecting Christ's Kingdom on earth, as a great
engagement unto duty and thankfulness, not only in word and outward profession,
but most especially to endeavor to manifest it in heart and conversation, buth
before himself, and in the sight of men, and that they may so labor the more
to act thankfulness by walking so much the more Christianly and obediently to
his Laws, seeing by such Doctrine a greater engagement is laid upon them
thereunto: for as their expectations are greater than otherwise they could be,
from the evidence they have of their interest in Christ's glorious Kingdom of
power on earth to come, by the redemption of their bodies, and the union of
them to their souls, in that blessed condition appointed to the faithful in
their order: besides what others shall enjoy, who then remain in their natural
life, that upon that account they study and labor to be more ready and forward
to do such acceptable service for Christ as he assigns them unto, though
unpleasing to flesh and blood, because it will be acceptable unto him, and he
requires it of them; and it will be found no loss [as some misapprehend] but
occasion of great rejoicing, for those spirits of just men made perfect to be
brought with Christ at his appearance and his Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.1. to attain to
that desired Union with their bodies, there to behold Christ's glory, etc. in
that blessed condition, above a thousand years sooner, than the last
resurrection, as was manifest by that great exultation of the Representatives,
Rev. 5.10. as an addition to their spiritual joy, and praise to the Lamb: And
(say they) we shall reign upon earth, where they knew aforehand, that they
should personally enjoy in body and soul the blessed vision of Christ, and all
such happiness as is appointed for them in his visible Mediators Kingdom of
power upon earth; who will then be so admired of all his Saints, as the Apostle
Paul teaches, and glorified in them that believe, 2 These. 1.10.

Use 3. For Admonition to all real and faithful Christians that as yet own not
these Doctrines of the Millennium [which I confess, till of late years I my
self have often opposed, as I showed in the Irenicon] to take heed and beware
of slighting and over-looking so much divine truth as the forenamed, and many
other texts and portions of holy Scripture hold forth evidently concerning
those things; and to that end consider, first, some truths of that nature have
been anciently received; though the great Deceiver then stirred up some to cast
unjust reproaches, and false imputations upon the owners of them; yea they have
been owned both by ancient Fathers, and modern writers, and the light and
evidence of them is like to break forth more and more amongst faithful
Christians, as prejudices are removed, and more Mysteries are accomplished, and
(by Gods mercy) greater discoveries made of what concerns his true Church: and
if diligent and impartial search were made of those Scriptures which concern
these things, but especially what Daniel speaks concerning the 4th or Roman
Monarchy, according to the judgment of diverse learned men, and that first
more generally, Dan. 2. and Dan. 7. Mr. Med^ Dr. Usher, Mr. S. cala. men's. c.
16. p. 183.
or more particularly of the rise of the Roman Monarchy, c. 11. 18. 30. 36*
and then of the nature and state of it till Christ's appearance, c. 12. 1. it
seems very probable, that many persons of the best state and worth, may see
cause to acknowledge much thereof, and especially when they shall find Christ's
Revelation given to his Church in these times of the end, is nothing but a
divine mystical Comment upon the 4th Monarchy in Dan. and his own Kingdom to
succeed it, as we have showed in our Abridgement on Dan. and the parallel
ensuing it, (as we have set down in a direction in the Epistle before this
parallel; and yet more in this respect, when they shall find that there is
nothing of weight that has not been answered sufficiently, and sollidly, as we
showed in our tract on Genesis 5.15.

Use ult. To exhort all such faithful Christians that own all other parts of
divine Doctrine, but not these as yet, to take that Candle of the Lord, that he
has put into them, Prove. 20.21* even their own understanding Soul as it is
given to them from him, without prepossession, prejudice, partiality, self ends
or interests, and so let them search into all divine Truths respecting these
things, as God may give them helps and advantages to make use of, yet only as
grounded upon, and warranted by the written word of God: Searching therein
(with the noble Bereans) whether these things be so; for it is a heinous thing
to be found fighters against any Truth of God. But we ought to improve all we
have, or are to promote divine Truth when called to it, to stand up for it, and
witness to it. For as it is great folly, vanity, and sin, to please our selves,
with expectations from Christ's Religion that he has given us no ground or
warrant for: So it would be as much for any Christian, that would be owned of
Christ Jesus, willingly to neglect, or regardlesly to pass by such things as
Christ in much graciousness tenders to his Church for her encouragement and
cosolation; which must needs prove in such matters very unacceptable to him,
and is like to procure to them more blame from him (when he shall appear) then
(happily) they are aware of: Let men therefore in due season seriously consider
these things, etc.

Further directions for the use of all these Books then were set down in 3 late
Epistles to Genesis 3.15. Jer. 3.12. and the 8 convincing Arguments.
1. FIrst, read the 4th part with the Scheme in one sheet, on Genesis 3.15. [to be
placed next before Rev. 22.20. Behold, I come quickly!] wherein with Jer. 3.17.
concerning the new Jerusalem on earth to come, are contained the substance of
all those Gospel Truths respecting Christ's Kingdom to come.

2. And to manifest how fitly those Doctrines agree with all other divine
truths, therewith consider well all those divine Theses in p 9, 10, etc. of the
Prodromus or forerunner, but esprcially observe the 11, 12, 13. with that
refeence of December. 7.46. for which see p. 44, 45 46. of the same, also p. 3,
4. etc. of the Irenic. with Arg. there, and p. 33. Unto which may be added the
letter of Nov. 3.36. p. 15, 16. wherein much of those Truths is touched also.

3. And for an help unto the 3d part, viz. the Abridgement and Parallels
Daniel, with the Revelation which is of great use for the foundations of sure
discovery of all such Doctrines, diligently peruse the Letter to Mr. Call. May
20. 64. p. 22, 23. of the Prodr. and the Scheme of the book of Revelation
concerning the times and order of the Seals, Trumpets and Vials, in which
Letter observe well these 2 distinctions there set down toward the end
thereof, which will be found to be of very great concernment in these
Doctrines. First, the distinction of the last mystical Trumpet, or 3d woe
Trumpet, when (Antichrist being utterly destroyed) the Kingdoms of the world
become the Kingdoms of Christ, Rev. 11.15. And of the last sounding Trumpet,
above 1000 years after, These. 4 16. (for they differ in nature as well as
times) when the general Rapture and glorious Change of all Sts. shall be, as 1
Cor. 15 51, 52. The other Distinction also in this same Letter greatly to be
noted, is the different state of Persons in Christ's Kingdom. First, some will
be raised Sts in the first blessed Resurrection, Rev. 20.6, etc. in the new
Jerusalem, described Rev. 21. 2dly, Another sort of persons will be in the
natural life which are said (then) to walk in the light of the new Jerusalem,
called Rev. 21.24 the nations of them that shall be saved: the not observing of
these two directions evidently grounded on holy Scripture have been the ground
of many men's errors, etc.

4. Then compare that said Letter of May 20.64. with another Abridgement of the
Seal-Prophesie, and book-Prophesie in the Revelation as p. 26, 27, 28, 29. of
the Irenicon or 2d part. Both which Prophesies contain the orders of times from
Christ's ascending to heaven, Acts 1. to his coming again, Rev. 19.1. with 20.1,
2, 3, 4. till the good new world shall begin. But first the Seal Prophecy is
of Civil matters in the Roman state chiefly; and 2dly the Book-Prophesie is of
the Ecclesiastic affairs in the true and false Church, and both of them until
the new and good world to come shall begin, as Heb. 2.5. Ephesians. 5.21. Rev. 19.20,
etc.

5. Furthermore for the attaining of better light in the whole Revelation,
after the former Letter, read observantly the large paper of December 7.26* p.
26, etc. of the Prodro. concerning two defects of Mr. Durhams Book of Scotland
on the whole book of the Revelation with the Scheme thereof; one was his
mistaking of the times (in great part) for near 100 years: the other defect was
his passing over the new Jerusal. state; and Christ's said Kingdom of power, or
(as Mede on Dan. 7.35. styles it) the Kingdom of the Mountain, throughout all
the book of Rev. as if nothing there had been said of it in this world, though
the Elders, etc. say expressly, Rev. 5.10. we shall reign upon earth: that paper
will be of very good use, and being well observed with the others, gives much
light to that Book of the Revelation: and all the said helps to the use of the
Parallels in the third book or part on Dan.

6. As for our second part, viz. the Irenicon, it is to prove such a Kingdom
with the late 8 Arguments in the [Word written, etc.] referring to it.

The Penmans further humble acknowledgement.
MOst Blessed Lord God, I thy poor weak and unworthy Servant, do in all
humility of Soul by the help of thy holy Spirit through Jesus Christ my
Savior, three in Persons as formerly confessed by me, etc. Ser Prodr. p. 9,
10, 11, 12. and Dir. 2d.
and now to thy praise, before thy Omni-present Divine Majesty, and before
Angels and Men, I do here also again confess and declare thy great, manifold,
and free mercy (together with innumerable experiences thereof otherwise from my
youth) that in particular thou have so manifested unto me through the riches of
thy grace in Christ that glorious part of his Mediators Offices still to be
fulfilled, which (as I have professed) so still I esteem to be, the greatest
mercy (since thy gifts of faith, grace, and thy holy spirit conferred upon me)
that I have been capable of receiving in this life. And with humble
thankfulness, I especially acknowledge thy good hand toward me, and upon me,
in the beginning, carrying on, and at last (after some interruption yet again
turned by thy hand to good advantage) thou were pleased to enable me to finish
the four parts of the foundations of these truths diverse years past, and by
degrees to proceed in those practicals after published.

And first, that (a little before the Cities sad conflagration) thou wast
pleased upon the said advantage (as in other respects) so especially to enable
me (then) to compose that Piece on Rev. 22.20. from the ground of those Iren.
p. 41, 42, etc.
distinctions of the Spiritual, Visional, Executive, Representative Comings
(together with three Personal Comings) of my Savior, all (as I believe) taught
me remarkably (with the due use of other means) by thy Word and Spirit: which
last (if it will be only in the as Word written p. ult.
apprehension of Creatures) yet, I believe, it is by thy Word said to be his
descending with a shout, and the Voice of an Archangel, and with the Trump of
God, above 1000 years after his second Personal coming, as by that Scripture
Evidence thou did enable me (then) to set down.

And also, that in that order of my Saviors execution of his three great
Offices set down in some of my Theses written on a Lord's Day morning, (not
without the special motion and assistance of his Spirit as I conceive) I was
first enabled to set down that little observed, yet very real and useful
distinction of These. 11, 12, 13. of p. 10. of Prodro.
his general and particular execution of them, as a foundation of drawing up
that Treatise afterward on Genesis 3.15. to set forth by Scripture and
experience, how he has, does, and will accomplish them all, etc.

And Lastly, by convincing Arguments, and other helps, (which thy Divine
goodness has ordered to be subservient,) that thou have now been graciously
pleased, after many divertings for diverse years past (and to much advantage
likewise of my work) of what I my self formerly intended concerning the Tract
on the New Jerusalem from Jer. 3.17. yet that after the ceasing almost in me
any such intentions or hopes thereof, thou have remarkably again led me in
ways to fin sh thy own Work, so much the more to thy own praise, by how much
my own weakness and unworthiness have rendered me unsuitable for such an
undertaking, had I not been both first prepared, then set apart, quickened,
assisted, encouraged, and carried on remarkably by thy Grace and good Spirit
according to thy Word (as I also really believe) and which assured persuasion,
has made me greatly unmovable (so far as I found thy Gracious hand leading me
on therein) that at last the Top-stone of that main Building (is by this Tract
on Jer. 3.17.) now at last laid thereon, etc. So (Father) it seemed good to
thee, when thou had before hid many of these things from many Wise and
Prudent; and even in such things, caused the foolish in the world to confound
the wise: for thou art all and alone so, and all Creatures are nothing but by
thee: to thee therefore be all the praise from all thine for evermore, for of
thee, and by thee, and for thee, are all things; and (Gracious Father) let many
of thine from this thy Work (by my weak hand) be daily the more enabled to
render the same unto thee, in regard of thy special goodness in these Divine
Truths here set before them: which is the main and just intendment thereof.

Amen, and Amen, by me and them for Evermore.
ERRATA.
In Prodr. p. 9. These. 4. add in the execution of the eternal Decrees. In the
Advertisement before the Irenic. r. supernal for supernatural, and p. 100. r.
Ideom for Idem. In the Word written p. ult. r. late 5t Monarchy men, and after
grave for great. In the New Jerus. p. 12. l. 35. r. most for not.

FINIS.

