A plain and evident Discovery of the two Personal Comings of CHRIST, one at
the beginning of his Thousand years Reign, Rev. 20.4. with his holy and blessed
raised Saints in the Now Jerusalem, come down from God out of Heaven, Rev. 21.
the other after the little space when the Thousand years are ended, etc.
Whereunto are added, many profitable Applications of the same Doctrine for all
sorts of persons.
Rev. 22.20. Surely I come quickly: Amen. Even so, come Lord Jesus.


THese words contain Christ's most certain Asseveration of his second Personal
Coming, whereunto is annexed the Spirits and Brides assent and consent
thereunto, and their assured expectation thereof in its time and due order:
They are the last words of holy Scripture (saving a usual Salutation) and
therefore like to be words of great consequence, and that if we consider how
and by whom spoken, and how and by whom entertained and improved, as in the
latter part; but we shall not here insist on them, as to handle them as a Text,
save only as they hold out to us the great Personal Appearance of the Coming of
Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 2.8.
now shortly approaching, which the world in great part (as it is likely) will
not believe, till they in great part feel the terror of it: when at the said
Appearance and his Kingdom he will begin to judge both quick and dead, 1 Timothy
4.1. as in the sequel we doubt not will, by the assistance and guidance of
God's Spirit and Truth, be made to right enquirers evidently to appear.

In chap. 1.7. it was proclaimed with an Ecce, a note of observation (Behold)
aforehand for the Churches great consolation before her troubles began, that
even then her Deliverer had begun his journey (as it were) for her help and
deliverance: Behold, he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him, and
they also that pierced him: but also for the woe and misery of the wicked world
likewise, for all Nations shall wail because of him; and both these
ascertained, with Even so, Amen: to show that his coming in the clouds of
Heaven, in such a glorious manner as the holy Scriptures abundantly show, or
with clouds, (as here) shall be most certain and infallible, and of great
concernment for his faithful People to observe all along, to remember,
consider, and improve through all the orders of times in this most sacred
Prophetical Book: But now at the latter end when he comes to set home this
lesson in its due order of accomplishment, as foreseeing what hindrances in
that respect his People would find in the latter days, he then strikes hard
and often upon this string, to rouse them, and awaken that Faith that then
would be hard to be found: Luke 18.8. says he in his own person three times in
this 22th chapter: first, v. 7. Behold, I come quickly: again, v. 12. And
behold, I come quickly: and lastly in this 20th verse. Surely I come quickly:
still in each verse encouraging his People to wait for his coming that would
make amends for all, and that in the worst times before his coming, which would
then shortly be, when the last head of the Roman Monster was to fall in its
order into utter perdition in the Armageddon battle, Rev. 16.14, 16, 17. and
fully executed, chap. 19.11, etc. and that he should most certainly then so
come to set up his glorious Kingdom on Earth, and then to have his reward with
him for all sorts, v. 12. Rev. 11.18. that so, as the Apostle Paul speaks, all
that suffer with him in his Kingdom of Patience, may reign with him in his
Kingdom of Power, as their Messiah and Deliverer on Earth, 2 Timothy 2.12. That
they may serve him without fear (there) in holiness and righteousness all the
days of their lives, Luke 1.74. So by these and the like means the Bride, the
Lamb's Wife, the Mystical Body of Christ, then shortly to be made perfect in
one, (as, John 17. our Savior prayed on Earth at his first-coming, for his
Saints happiness on Earth at his second coming) should, according to the due
order of things set down in this most divine Book, expect it in the end of the
Roman Kingdom, and when his own glorious Kingdom, as Mediator, should succeed
on Earth, and become that Mountain filling the whole Earth, Dan. 2.35. of which
he sets down in the four last chapters: First, the removal of the hinderers,
the Pope and his adherents, chap. 19. and then of the Devil and his angels,
chap. 20.1, 2, 3. Secondly, the erecting of his excellent Dominion; first, by
the Brides making ready, when she should so sing her Alleluja's upon her
Enemies ruin, in the old mother tongue, etc. Rev. 19.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and also
the Saints be raised in order; first, such as were beheaded, and then, etc.
chap. 20.4. and more fully, chap. 11.18. who must then have Judgment given to
them, that is, power of judging on Thrones, ver. 4. and Dan. 7. and this for a
thousand years; and having showed what Satan with the last Gog and Magog, chap.
20.7, 8, 9, 10. should attempt for a little space, till both be sent to Hell;
and in what way and manner he will thereupon begin the last Session of
Judgment, from ver. 10. to the end: he then in the two last chapters decyphers
the excellent blessed and holy state of his own and his Saints Kingdom upon
Earth, with their privileges and advantages therein, as may abundantly appear
from chap. 21 and 22: wherein from the consideration of this his own next
Personal Coming he stirs up all his People to come to him, to be fit to welcome
his Coming, v. 17. The Spirit and the Bride say, Come: and let him that hears
(spiritually) come; and let him that is athirst, come, etc. that when they hear
him say, ver. 20. Surely I come quickly, they may by faith, and with fervent
desires (as his Bride) say, Amen. Even so, come Lord Jesus.

And all these warnings, with frequent assertings of these things, which he
sets down in these four last chapters of this Book: as chap. 19.7, 8. These are
the true sayings of God. and chapter 21.5. These words are true and faithful: chap.
22.6. These sayings are faithful and true; and v. 10. forbids this Book to be
sealed, because the time is at hand, viz. in the order of the accomplishment of
all contained in this Book: and in this 20th verse. concludes with his own most
sure testimony: He which testifies these things, says, Surely I come quickly,
etc. All which he seems to do as knowing how the faith of these things would be
resisted in the world about the time he should so come in the clouds, or with
clouds, as chap. 1.7. even this coming of which he says, Surely I come
quickly. And as we now find by experience at this very time, as respecting his
special spiritual powerful coming, so much slighted and opposed by most of men;
and his next personal coming is not like to be less slighted and mocked at, 1
Pet. 3.3. but by the Scoffers of those times very possible much more.

Now whereas besides Christ's coming in humility to take our nature, and to
suffer for his Church, there remains according to holy Scripture (as we hope
(by the Grace of God) to make manifest to all impartial searchers into these
Mysteries) there still remains a twofold personal coming of Christ: One when
God will subdue and destroy the great Enemies of Christ and his People, both
Jews and Gentiles, namely the Turk and Pope, set forth by Ezekiel under the
titles of Gog and Magog, chap. 38 and 39. before he set up his New Jerusalem,
chap. 40 to the end of the Book, Whose name shall be JEHOVAH SHAMMA, the Lord
is there: just as the Beast and his Armies shall be destroyed, Rev. 19.11, etc.
before the Jerusalem, Rev. 19, and 20, and 21. called the Holy, Beloved, the
great and holy Jerusalem, which is also there the Bride, the Lambs Wife, be
built by God's own hand; as Heb. 11. which will be accomplished at the sounding
of the seventh Angel, Rev. 11.16. upon which comes in the thousand years when
Christ will take to himself his great Power, and reign, as chap. 19. v. 1 to v.
10. And afterward when our blessed Savior had given a clear and perfect
computation of all succeeding times to the end of the world, with all the
suiting circumstances before, in, at the end, and after his said thousand years
Reign on Earth: in that last Table of the last and best times in the new World
in chap. 20. (as he gave a Table of all the last and worst times, chap. 11. to
ver. 16. in the old bad World) he shows manifestly from the completing of that
Judgment upon those great Enemies from his second Personal Apearance or Coming
at that time, when the Judgment was set to destroy the Beast, Dan. 7.9, 10.
there are to pass above a thousand years before the third, when is to be the
last Session of the day of Judgment at the general Resurrection of all that
lived not again before, both good and bad, as our Savior distinctly teaches,
chap. 20. called there the rest of the dead that lived not again before, ver.
5. setting forth to the end, the manner of God's carryingon many wonderful
works from thence unto the end. And then Christ further proceeds in the two
last chapters, to set forth in a very divine and wonderful manner the
succeeding glorious estate of his Church upon Earth, with her excellent
prerogatives and privileges all that time of his thousand years Reign, from
his second coming to his third, saving the little space Satan is after loosed
and seduceth the last Gog and Magog, chap. 20.7, 8, 9, 10. to their
destruction; to which ensues the last Judgment, ver. 11. to the end: when he
will again descend from Heaven, not with clouds, as at his second coming, but
with a shout and the voice of an Archangel, and the Trump of God, as the
Apostle shows, 2 Thessalonians. 4.16, etc. and as here, chap. 20.11. sitting upon a
great white Throne, before whose face Heaven and Earth fled away.

Now to that end we may the better and more clearly carry on this great work to
satisfaction of some, hitherto unresolved conscientious Christians, we shall
endeavor to this purpose to set down many evident Texts of holy Scriptures,
upon the advantage of what has been already said, which may appear manifestly
to relate to those two Personal Comings: and then come more fully to consider
them from the order of their distinct times wherein they are to be, both from
Daniels Visions and the Book of Revelations, in both which we have the series
and order of the accomplishment of the Generalities of the greatest marters,
wherein God's glory and the Churches concernment should lie, from the beginning
of Daniels Visions for the space of above three thousand three hundred years.
2dly, To observe, for Christians information, the different names and titles
sometimes given to them, and answerably thereunto their natures as suitable to
those names. 3dly, The different things to be done by Christ at both those said
Comings, with many distinct particularities under both those heads, besides
what is orderly to be accomplished both according to Daniel and the Book of the
Revelation of Jesus Christ, the faithful and true Witness, from his second to
his third personal coming at the last resurrection of good and bad, which our
Savior after his ascension into Heaven has at last declared and opened, and
left unsealed (as was noted) for his Churches instruction and comfort, as by
special order is manifest, Rev. 22.10. by which means his People are enabled
rightly to understand many otherwise dark passages of Old and New Testament,
and besides has given great encouragement of blessing to the faithful and
diligent searching into them, to the spiritual hearing or believing of them,
and to the keeping of the sayings of that Book, chap. 1.3.

Now therefore in reference to the first part of our business let it be
observed, That many judicious men, well versed in the mysteries respecting the
latter times, unanimously agree that Christ will remain, from his appearance or
coming at the destruction of Aptichrist, thenceforward all the thousand years
of his reigning with his raised Saints in the ^orld, Rev. 20.4. and will (as
Mr. Mede conceives probably) through that time be raising up all the dead
bodies of all the formerly deceased Saints, to the end of that thousand years,
in their own order, having departed out of this life during the Kingdom of the
Stone, or the Kingdom of Patience, for almost seventeen hundred years, having
believed through their word (as is said John 17.) namely by the Apostles
Doctrine, with all the Faithful under the Old Testament, even till that time
when they shall all be made perfect in one with Christ their visible Head, then
in that his glorious Kingdom on Earth for the said thousand years space, unto
which that Scripture must necessarily be referred, Joh. 17. from ver. 19 to 25.
But it seems from the time that Satan, at the end of the thousand years, shall
be loosed for a little season, that Christ will withdraw from the world for
that little season, to give (as it were) opportunity to the Devil to play his
last most abominable wicked prank in the world with his seduced Hypocrites, the
last Gog and Magog, as follows, Rev. 20.7, 8, 9. to bring on that last
destruction of all them, and the whole World, v. 10. which thereupon will
suddenly be dissolved, as follows, ver. 11 to the end; when the Apostle Paul
plainly says, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. Christ will again descend from Heaven with a
shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God; and shows
that immediately the dead in Christ shall rise first, (namely such as had died
in the thousand years since his second coming) that they with such as are alive
and remain all the time since they were raised to live again upon Earth, (which
he speaks of twice, v. 15, 17.) as being in a very different condition from
those that are dead then, and in the thousand years, and to be first raised
when all wicked men are to be raised. Where note, he says not, We shall rise
first then, as he did of the other state, we that are alive and remain; but,
the dead in Christ; and that they, with all such as were in the natural life on
Earth, who should have a momentany change then instead of a death; and also
that all those that were before raised in the thousand years, should all at
once be rapt up to meet Christ in the air, and altogether be thenceforth ever
with the Lord; who had for a little time before absented himself from them. And
that the Apostle in this Epistle speaks both of his second and third coming,
may thus further be made to appear, chap. 3.13. he speaks of the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ with All his Saints; and again, chap. 4.14. he says also,
them also that sleep in Jesus shall God bring with him: he brings them with him
at his next appearance to take their bodies in the first Resurrection, Rev.
20.6. but at his third coming they are not said to be brought with him, but
rapt up to meet him in the air, when he is descended from Heaven: Before he had
left them a little season, but afterward they shall be ever with the Lord. To
which purpose Enoch prophesied of old of his first coming, Jude 14.8. Behold,
the Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints: that is, when the New
Jerusalem which is above, and called by the Apostle, The Mother of us all, Gal.
4.26. shall come down from God out of Heaven at his second coming at the time
of the restitution of all things, Acts 3.20, 21. and Rev. 21. being prepared as
a Bride adorned for her Husband: when he will make all things new, and the
Tabernacle of God shall be with men, v. 2, 3, 5. when the souls beheaded for
the testimony of Jesus shall live and reign with Christ the thousand years,
Rev. 20.4. and when he will begin that judgment, Rev. 11.18. to reward his
servants the Prophets, and his Saints, and all that fear his Name both small
and great: and when the four Beasts (or rather living wights) and the twenty
four Elders, Rev. 5.10. shall actually enjoy that which they foresaw in Vision
above one thousand five hundred years before that they should reign upon earth;
for he is not said to bring them with him at his third coming, but to take them
up to him to meet him in the air, by a sudden resurrection, and momentany
change and rapture, who before in great part lived again, and remained upon
Earth, or in the World, until that time; and yet he says that they should not
prevent those that were then asleep: and also shows, that though Christ had
left them for a season before, yet from thence-forward they should all ever be
with the Lord. And for his second coming the Scripture is very full and clear,
at the destruction of Antichrist, from Dan. 7.14. when he shall come in the
cl^^^^ of Heaven; and Rev. 1.7. Behold, he comes with clouds, and every eye
shall see him: and 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. he will then destroy the Man of Sin with the
appearance of his Coming, when he shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty
Angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance on those wicked men who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his Power; and then also be glorified in his Saints, and admired
in all them that believe, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8, 9, 10. And this is his appearance at
his Kingdom, when he will judge both quick and dead, as 1 Timothy 4.1. by
destroying wicked men, and rewarding the Righteous, as Rev. 11.18. and 20.4.
for then God begins to make his foes his footstool, when having taken to
himself his great Power, he destroys them that destroyed the Earth, as follows
in Rev. 11.18. and all this will be at or about the same time, when Michael the
great Prince (that is, the Messiah) shall stand up to deliver his People, Dan.
12.1. when such a time of trouble will be as never was since there was a
Nation: and such a great Earthquake also will be then at the pouring-out of the
last Viol to finish the destruction of the Beast, as never was since men were
upon the Earth even till that time, so mighty an Earthquake and so great, Rev.
16. latter end, and likewise Dan. 7.9, 10, 11. and ver. 26. for the Judgment is
set to that end, and the Books then opened, as in ver. 10. See many Texts that
speak of this his second coming in the Irenicon, page 42, 43, 44. and for his
personal appearance, which is the same second coming in the Forerunner, p. 47,
48. And for his third descending with a shout from heaven, and the voice of the
Archangel, and the Trump of God, when the rest of the Saints that dyed in the
thousand years shall be again raised, as the other were in the thousand years
that had reigned with Christ before upon earth, before Satan seduced the last
Gog and Magog, See the Abridgm^ on Daniels Visions.
there is above a thousand years space (as was said) from his second coming to
that third, when (namely at his third coming) he will sit upon that great white
throne, as Judge, from whose face the Earth and Heavens will then slay away,
Rev. 20. after the last Gog and Magog shall be destroyed. ver. 11, 12 to the
end: Also concerning this third coming seems St. Peter also to speak, 2 Pet.
3.10. which words are spoken to the terror of ungodly men, termed there,
Scoffers at the promise of his coming, whom that last coming does specially
concern, and yet with the exceptive particle, Nevertheless, brings in the
consolation for the Godly from the promise of the new Heavens and the new
Earth, which before in the thousand years they should enjoy with him, v. (...).
Mr. Archer observes, first his second coming, from Mat. 25.30. (...) his third
from ver. 31. suitable to what St. Paul expresses 1 Cor. 15. where he speaks of
his first coming, v. 23. saying, Christ the first fruits, afterward [(...)]
they that are Christ's at his coming. Then ((...)) says he, comes the end:
where the words (...) and (...) are used at a great distance; for Christ, the
first fruits, arose before the Saints at his next coming, above 1600 years; and
then ((...)) afterward the end comes, above a thousand years after his said
second coming; and at his third, when the last Session of the day of Judgment
will be held and finished. Where he further also ( v. 24.) sets down what must
be done at that third coming, with what was done before that, all along the
thousand years from the second, while he is putting down all Rule and Authority
and Power ( viz. that opposed his own, and stood in his way to rule, etc.) that
is, when the Devil shall be bound, Rev. 20.1, 2. wicked men destroyed, or made
slaves, and so made his footstool, at the end of his sitting at the right hand
of his Father, Psalm. 110. when Antichrist is destroyed (as before) Dan. 7. Rev.
11. and 19. before his third coming, as might be cleared from many other Texts
likewise; and also the Turk come to his end when none shall help him, Dan. 11.
ver. ult. and Dan. 12.1. and thereupon asserts Christ's Reign necessarily, v.
25. for (says he) Christ must reign till he has put all his enemies under his
feet: and he names the last enemy to be destroyed by him, namely, Death, v. 26.
which will be done at his third coming, Rev. 20. latter end, when Death and
Hell shall be cast into the lake of fire, etc. shows also (ver. 24.) when the
end shall come, and not before, namely, when he shall deliver up the Kingdom to
God, even the Father, which he received of him, Dan. 7.14. which he told his
Disciples, he gave to them as his Father had given to him, Luke 22.29, 30. and
1.33. and the glory in that Kingdom which his Father had given to him, he gave
to them, John 17.22. Also of his last, or third coming, St. Paul speaks again
evidently, ver. 52. of that 1 Cor. 15. when also the last Trump shall sound
(says he) and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed
in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye; (and he repeats it again, that it
might be observed well) for (says he again) the Trumpet shall sound, and the
Dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed. Likewise in Mat.
24.3. the Disciples propound three Questions to our Savior, first, of the
destruction of Jerusalem, the second of his coming, namely, his nex^ coming,
and the third, of the end of the World, which will be at his third (as was
showed) he answers to them all (though there seems to be some intermixing) but
of his second he speaks ver. 30. when all the Tribes of the Earth shall mourn,
when they see him, the Son of man, coming in the Clouds of Heaven with Power
and great Glory, as Dan. 7.13. But of his third he speaks, v. 21. when he shall
send his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet, and they shall gather the
Elect from the four winds, from one end of Heaven to the other, as 1 Thessalonians.
4.16. So that if we duly weigh and consider these many Texts of holy Scripture,
and of others like them, we need not so much startle at the mention of Christ's
third coming, as many upon mistake, or prejudice and un-grounded conceits, are
often apt to do. And as for that Text of Acts 3. at the restitution of all
things, God will send Jesus, whom the Heavens must contain till then, v. 20,
21. it is clearly meant of his second coming, with Dan. 7.13. when he will come
in the Clouds of Heaven; of which three of the Evangelists speak in several
places, Mat. 24.30. and 26.44. Mark 13.26. and 14.62. Luke 21.27. and in Luke
21. and Matthew. 24. our Savior sets forth diverse signs of that his second
coming, and limits those signs to the times of the Jews dispersion; saying,
This Generation shall not pass away till all these things be fulfilled; which
is to be understood of that Nation kept distinct from all others till his
coming again: Where note, (that his second coming is never called his last
coming, as many conceit it to be;) which the hand of God's providence,
respecting the Jews, has ordered accordingly ever since the Jews rejection,
though they have been scattered through the World. And agreeable to this the
word ((...)) generation, signifying a race, stock, or offspring of any sort of
men; not an age or present time (as some unwarrantably would understand it) is
to be interpreted: and almost to this day (accordingly) where the Jews have
come, they have been for the most part known to be Jews distinct from all other
people, and like to be so till Christ's personal appearance to convert them,
and deliver them suddenly both temporally and spiritually, as Isa. 66.8. Zech.
3.9. and 12.10. Rev. 1.7. Dan. 12.1.


But because the clearing up the distinction of the second and third coming of
Christ, both of which will be personal, are of great concernment in matters
respecting the last times, and by the overruling hand of God, Satan and the
Antichristian faction have all along prevailed to cloud this strongly asserted
Truth in holy Scriptures, and prejudices hitherto amongst men have much
prevailed against it, by the confused notion of the general day of Judgment,
taken up only upon trust: we shall proceed to consider the other particular
heads following concerning this great subject in order, upon which many other
mysteries of these latter times much depend, according to the warrant we find
in sacred writ, and as the Spirit of God shall therein afford assistance;
Namely, in considering, first, the distinct times and orders of Christ's said
second and third personal comings, according to the series of Daniels Visions
and the Book of Revelation. Secondly, of the different titles and names of them
according to their natures, implying the reasons of such titles or names.
Thirdly, Of the different things or matters to be done, at both those personal
comings, in many particulars considerable.

First, Then we may take notice of the distinct times of the two Sessions of
the great day of Judgment, when he is said to come at both, according to the
series or order both of Daniel and the Revelation; wherein we have summarily
set down the general heads of Prophecy in their order, as the Spirit of God
has been pleased to record them, for the benefit of his Church, for See
Parallel on Christ's Monarchy.
for From the beginning of Daniel's Visions at Nebuchadnezzar the head of Gold,
Dan. 2. to Christ's third coming are contained above 3300 years, as follow;
first, The time of the Babylonian Captivity, seventy years. 2dly, From Cyrus,
in whom the Persian Monarchy began, to the twentieth year of Artaxerxes
Longimanus, eighty years. 3dly, Daniel's seventy weeks, or four hundred ninety
years, to the end of the half week after Christ's death; whose death was about
1666 years more before Christ's second personal coming (according to all the
four computations of Scripture, observed) to end about the seventeen hundredth
year of our Lord [so that accordingly from his Ascension to his descending
again, is so reckoned 1666 years] when the Beast will wholly be destroyed,
(which is to be observed.) From thence are to be reckoned Christ's reign with
his blessed and holy raised Saints on Earth a thousand years: whereunto will
succeed the little season, wherein Satan will be again loosed, to the
destruction of the last Gog and Magog by fire from heaven, which since Christ
says it will be but a little season, we have reason to believe it will be so:
whereunto will ensue the last Resurrection and general Judgment: this last
state of things our Savior has clearly and distinctly opened, Rev. 20. which
Daniel had but darkly set down in such manner as God's Spirit then taught and
guided him, for such time as God was pleased to have many things which he
delivered then to be shut up til the time of the end, when Christ should unseal
and open them, as both Daniel and the Revelation, do witness.
the space (as was said) of above 3300 years of Daniel's Prophecies, beginning
with the Captivity of Babylon, who (darkly) hold out the generals of things to
be fulfilled in their order to the end of the World, saving we find nothing
there of the little space after Christ's Reign the thousand years is ended:
which both for the continuance of it for a thousand years, and what was to be
done in the little space after, our Savior, the great Prophet and faithful
Witness, has made known to his Church, Rev. 20. and which could not by any
wisdom of creatures otherwise be found out; and the Book of Revelation of Jesus
Christ explains so much of Daniel's Prophecy, (though mystically) as was to be
fulfilled to the end, from the time of the opening of the first Seal under the
Roman Empire, when our Savior at his Resurrection, having received all Power
in Heaven and Earth, gave Commission for the preaching of the Gospel, Mat.
28.18, 19, 20. Now for the time of Christ's second coming, both Dan. 7. and
Rev. 19. jointly agree, (as all serious men acquainted with the order of
mystical Prophecies universally agree) and is evidently discernable to any
unprejudiced searchers into them. St. Paul gives this Epitome of that Coming to
destroy Antichrist, which both Daniel and Christ are large in, saying, Christ
will destroy him with the appearance of his Coming: and so in other Scriptures
before: Daniel has much in generals that shall be in the world at the second
personal coming of Christ, but the third I find not that he has any touch of,
whence the Jews did so much expect and speak of such a coming, as his second
will be, to restore the Kingdom to Israel, etc. which, says Mr. Mede, the
Jewish Doctors call the day of the great Judgment, (...) dies judicii, and
(...) magnus dies judicii, in the 4th Letter to Mr. Hain: from Dan. 7.10.22.26.
But our Savior most clearly, and St. Paul (and Peter likewise seems) but
especially Christ in the Book of Revelation, chap. 20. has set forth his third
coming, as a point of Doctrine most needful to be known and considered in the
last times when his second coming approaches near unto us: As the order of
Daniel's Prophecy in our Abridgment, and the order of the Revelation in the
Letter of May 20. in the Forerunner, page 22. and the sum of the Revelation in
the Irenicon, p. 26, 27, etc. will evidently make to appear; so that both
Daniel and the Revelation do orderly hold out his second personal coming, with
other Scriptures: And the Revelation of Jesus Christ most clearly decyphers the
third, showing what shall be done at the beginning of, and all along the
thousand years, and what at the end of them, and how the day of the last
general Judgment will be brought on and executed to the end of that 20th
chapter, with the state of things in the interim in the two last chapters, and
Rev. 11.15. to the end: which respects the same time, or at least the entrance
upon that period.

And secondly, As these two personal comings are distinguished by Christ the
great Interpreter of both these Prophetical Books, so their names and
decypherings in Scripture are much distinguished suitable to the nature of both
the said comings: The first is called, the appearance of Christ, or the
appearance of his Coming, the other his descending from Heaven with a shout,
etc. The first is his coming with clouds, etc. at the other no mention of
clouds, but contrarily Heaven and Earth will then flee away before him: the
former styled the Revelation of Christ when the mystery of Godliness is
finished, 1 Timothy 3.16. but the last will be after a long manifestation of his
Glory all the thousand years in the world, with other names more fully to be
seen in the (...), page 43.44, 45. and the reason the former is so often called
his appearance, seems to be, because Christ at his coming in the clouds of
Heaven, then will only appear in clouds to the world (no mortal eye being able
to behold his Glory in the brightness of it) and (probably) because this
appearance will be in the clouds but a short time, chiefly to be so manifest
unto the Jews, to take off the hard vail of unbelief from their hearts; and
(as Mr. Mede probably conceives) he will speak to the Jews (then) at their
conversion, as he did to St. Paul for a pattern thereof. And after that done, I
find not that he will any more be seen of mortal men (at least not ordinarily)
in the world; though his Glory will shine fully, and inlighten the raised
Saints in the New Jerusalem, as in many texts we have showed, as Isa. 66.1.
Rev. 21. Joh. 17.24, etc. But his third coming is styled, his descending from
Heaven with the voice of an Archangel, and with the Trump of God, but not so at
the former, 1 These. 4.16. Mat. 24.31. his coming in his Glory with all his holy
Angels, and sitting upon his Throne, where all shall be gathered before him,
Mat. 25.31. and the like in several texts forecited.

Thirdly, As they differ in a long distance of time, and the titles given to
each according to their natures, so they differ in the things that will be done
at both those personal comings. At the first God begineth to make Christ's foes
his footstool, both by binding of Satan, Rev. 20. and by destroying many
wicked men from off the earth that would not have him rule over them, and
miraculously calling the Nation of the Jews, and delivering that Nation fully
from their temporal, and greatly (at least) from their spiritual bondage, Dan.
12.1, 3, etc. and making the wicked to be slaves, and likewise then brings such
as sleep in Jesus with him, and all his Saints with him, when the New Jerusalem
comes down from God out of Heaven, which is that Jerusalem whose maker and
builder God is said to be, Heb. 11. and that City prepared for the
forefathers, who without us that believe, will not be made perfect etc. where
the blessed and holy raised Saints shall behold Christ's glory, which he has
given them their part in, John 17.22, 24. and shall reign with him there the
thousand years.

But the third coming of Christ, will be his descending from Heaven with a
shout and the voice of the Archangel, as was said, and with the Trump of God,
above 1000 years after the former, to raise first those dead in Christ, that
had died from the time of his appearance at the beginning of his thousand years
reign, till his last coming; and to change such as were in the natural life, in
a moment, instead of a death, who altogether, with such as were made alive,
and to remain by a powerful resurrection in the thousand years, should then
also be altogather rapt up into the air to meet Christ; and thenceforth ever
to be with the Lord; which the Saints raised before were not, in the little
space when Satan was loosed after the end of the thousand years; and then
suddenly (after such a rapture of all the Saints to meet Christ in the air) all
the wicked will be raised to the last Judgment, Rev. 20.11, etc. 1 These. 4. at
Christ second coming he brought all the deceased Saints with him; but at his
third, all the other, after deceased and liveing on Earth, shall be raised and
changed, and with all the former be kapt up altogether to meet him in the air
(for none must in that (as the Appostle says) prevent the other) before only
the Just that had died, were raised up in their order, in the thousand years,
to have their time and measure of glory then with Christ in the New Jerusalem,
that came down from God, (for every faithful sufferer for Christ in the Kingdom
of patience shall then reign with Christ in the Kingdom of power on Earth:)
but all the other, both good and bad, that lived not again (as they are
decyphered) Rev. 20.5. till the thousand years were ended, shall then be raised
or changed, as was said at Christ's last coming, 1 Cor. 15.25. Rev. 20.11, etc.

Before Christ came with clouds, to vail his wonderful Glory, that he might be
seen by mortal eyes, and especially of the Jews, to convert them (therefore
called his appearance, as we noted) that that Nation might be born in a day, as
the Scriptures declare, Isa. 66.8. and the iniquity of that Land might be taken
away in one day, as is said, Zac. 3.9. But at his last coming he will shine out
in the fullness of his glory, and his Saints shall be like him (then) in their
degree: at his former coming will be but a partial destruction upon the wicked
world, compared to Sodom and Gomorrha, etc. Luke 17. upon the Armies of Gog and
Magog, and such as he sends not his Angels, then to save them, as he did Lot
and his Family, the Lord being merciful unto them: when two will be in one bed,
two in the field, two women in the Mill, the one taken, the other left: But at
his last coming Heaven and Earth will both at once flee away before his face,
Rev. 20.11. etc. and no place be found for them: the Sun Moon and Stars all
(then) losing their light and motions, when nothing but the light of the glory
of Lord, and of his glorious Angels and Saints will shine out (then) in the
world, to the wonderful rejoicing of the blessed, and the terror and amazement
of wicked men and Devils.

Many such like different considerations, I dout not, but God will show to
humble and faithful searchers into these great things of the last times, which
the Scripture gives Testimony unto, which the hazard and charge of printing,
with other reasons, bar me at present to enlarge upon, or so by application
to improve them, as otherwise was meet, and as the matter requires. Yet I hope
by what has been already laid down, a plain way may be laid open for others,
whom God may guide into the like paths, to proceed profitably therein, to some
greater measure of discoverry, and (happily) upon more outwardly helpful
advantages then (peradventure) I have found from men; Yet nevertheless that a
special divine assistance of Gods Spirit has been with me graciously herein, I
must ever thankfully acknowledge to the praise of the riches of his grace
toward such a poor, weak, and unworthy instrument: who am therefore so much
the more obliged to render all the glory thereof, unto his Divine Majesty.
Amen, Amen.

Yet notwithstanding I shall a little endeavor, according to what I find
sacred Scriptures point out to me, on this or the like account, by way of
improvement of this great and weighty subject, to give some brief hints, at
least, to those purposes, and leave the enlargement thereof to all truly
Christian Spirits for their own use and others, only thereunto adjoining my
earnest and hearty prayers for a blessing upon all sorts in the right use
thereof.

First then, let all faithful Ministers and Superiors consider, for their own
benefit, this terror of the Lord, that thereby they may be the more
effectually moved, to persuade men, 2 Cor. 5.11. and chiefly such as are under
their charge, and all within their reach, upon all advantages which God puts
into their hands etc.

Secondly, Let all such arm themselves with the whole armor of God, Ephesians. 6.11,
13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. and help to arm others against any of Satan's most
violent assaults, which God puts into their hand; for Satan, knowing his time
is short, has the more rage against all the faithful, Rev. 12.12.

Thirdly, Let all hence learn to exercise this threefold watch, upon this
account, Mat. 24.41. Mar. 13.33, 34, 35, 36, 37. 1st. Watch and be sober; in
affections of temporal things, in passions, in opinion, in practices, avoiding
whatever Gods word condemns, as drunkenness, or is contrary to true Christian
moderation, Phil. 4.5. Luke 21.34. 1 These. 5.6. 1 Pet. 4.7. 2ly. Watch and pray
(as our Savior frequently charge upon this account) Luke 21.36. Math. 24.42.
Mar. 14.38. and 13.33. 1 Pet. 4.7. 3ly. Watch and keep their garments, Rev.
16.15. of Justification, Sanctification, and an holy Conversation, etc.

Fourthly, Let all that seek their own or others chief and true good, take more
care and pains by reason of such disovery of Christ's coming approaching, to
preserve and secure the safety of their own and others souls, upon that
account; and less care then ever for the procuring or securing of temporal
things to themselves, or others: this being Gods undertaking to cast in unto
the other, Matthew. 6.33. though now the contrary is sadly observable, in this
decrepit age of the world, which is now about to leave men, and yet men pursue
and cling to it more then ever in former ages, when they were more like to be
taken out of it, then that (as now) the world was about to leave them; God in
our due use of means has undertaken for our temporals, but it was ever without
limitation our duty to take care for Spirituals; which in the due use of all
God's means, and in God's way, we can never be too careful for in respect of
our own or others souls.

Fifthly, Let us approve our selves wise Virgins, Mat. 25. by getting Oil into
our Lamps, and to have our Lights burning; that true Grace in our hearts may
shine forth in our lives; the best adornings for the coming of our Lord; that
so we may be counted worthy to escape all those things, and be able to stand
before him, the Son of man, Luke 21.36. being so adorned to meet our spiritual
Bridegroom, Mat. 25.13. so waiting for and expecting the Adoption, even the
redemption of our bodies, Romans 8.23. in that day of Redemption when he comes,
as Luke 21.28. Mat. 24.33. being then counted worthy of that world, even the
world to come, Heb. 2.5. and of the resurrection of the dead, being the
children of the resurrection, Luke 20.35. Yea, let us (as the Apostle
exhorts) hasten unto the coming of the Lord, 2 Pet. 3.12. casting off every
weight that presses down, Heb. 12.1. and so all such as are risen with Christ
from the dead, though they sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him, 1 Thessalonians.
3.13. and 4.14.

Sixthly, Let the due consideration of this second coming of Christ make us long
for it, and love it, which will be an Argument of our blessedness by it, 2 Timothy
4.8. for there is laid up a Crown of Righteousness for all such as love his
appearing; It is the time of the redemption of all God's Israel from their
Enemies, and from the hands of all that hate them, that they may serve him
without fear, in righteousness and holiness all the days of their lives, Luke
1.74. Rev. 22.3
It is the end and attainment of the faith and prayers of God's People,
according to the mercy promised frequently to the forefathers, and recorded in
the Word, that as our Savior taught us to pray that Gods Name should be
hallowed, his Kingdom come, his Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven: so it
will from his said appearance be accordingly fulfilled, by Angels and Men on
Earth (then) as before in Heaven; so it will be such a state as will be much
admired, and so to be longed after and loved: where, above all, his Servants
shall behold Christ's glory which his Father has given him on Earth, John 17.24.

Seventhly, Let all faithful Christians hence be cheerful and free-hearted in
giving to Christ's Disciples, so making them friends of the Mammon of iniquity,
that they may receive them into everlasting habitations, Luke 16.9. that which
is so disposed of, is laid up in the best and safest treasury in the whole
world: yea more, it is put into the best hand, and for the best improvement
that it is possible to make of earthly treasure; Christ takes it as done to
himself, and undertakes the repayment both more incomparably, than worldly
treasure is worth, and for unspeakably longer continuance than any worldly
treasure could be kept. 2dly. Be sitted for acts of self-denial when Christ
calls to it, for he will be above all our interests or relations (as there is
the greatest reason, Mat. 10.37.) it is the condition of Christ's Disciples,
Mat. 16.24. Luke 9.23. Mar. 8.34. and such as in so doing forsake any thing,
make Christ their debtor who is their best paymaster, and in the best season:
probably in his Kingdom in this time ((...), as the word may seem to note) an
hundred fold in both these Texts, Mark 10.30. and Luke 18.30. though otherwise,
many times in this life, likewise: but it is most sure, if they suffer with him
in his Kingdom of Patience on Earth, they man reign with him in his glorious
Kingdom of Power on Earth in the New Jerusalem [Jehovah Shamma] the Lord is
there, Ezekiel. 40. ult. and when the Tabernacle of God is with men, Rev. 21.3.
and he will dwell with them, and wipe away all tears from their eyes. And 3dly.
to be courageous and resolute in suffering for him when called to this: And
what are any or all the sufferings of men, to the sufferings of God becoming
man? that he might suffer to satisfy Divine Justice, to procure infinite Mercy
for such as should otherwise have endured infinite and eternal Misery: this our
Savior requires in the forenamed places, Mat. 16.24. Luke 9.23. Mark 8.34.

Eighthly, Let the terrible things of both those comings engage Godly men to
labor to be counted worthy to escape such things, and to be able to stand
before the Son of man; by improving all such Christ's and his Spirits counsels,
Luke 21.36. as ye have heard in sundry particulars. And let the consideration
of them fray wicked men from their sins, even the greatest as well as the
meanest: and to learn to kiss the Son, Psa. 2 ult. lest he be angry, and they
perish in the way: And if they will not believe these things, let them hence
know assuredly they will feel the misery of them, as the Jews of old did after
Christ's first coming, upon their neglecting or despising his warnings.

Again. As for ungo^ly men of any of the former sorts, that refuse to make any
such good use of these terrors of the Lord, let them hence also take notice and
know, that when they shall think themselves most secure in their sins, a sudden
destruction will then come upon them, as pains on a woman in travel, and they
shall not escape. It is true (I know) and I find by daily experience, that
these terrors of the Lord, and Doctrines of mortification are unpleasing and
unacceptable to most sorts of men, but they must ^e pressed upon them; as
wholesome and necessary Physic is by parents upon their children to save their
lives, so on these to save such men's souls (if God may give them repentance:)
but if not, they will be the more inexcusable, in that they have not perished
without warning, and such seasonable warnings may help to free Gods Ministers
from the heavy guilt of the blood of souls. Now therefore let all carnal,
worldly, ignorant, profane, wicked, and u^ believing persons: And all sinfully
engaged enemies to the Truth, Cause, Glory, Worship and Servants of God, or
against any or all sorts of persons engaged to stand up for Gods and Christ's
sake, that so they might promote irreligion and false religion with
profaneness; or to endeavor to suppress true Religion and the power of
Religion by opposition and hatred of true Piety and Holiness: Oh, let such
seriously and thoroughly consider, in the most retired closets of heir hearts
and consciences, what a dreadful appearance (without repentance and
reformation) will the coming of the Lord be unto all such! O let them consider
what fools they will then be (with millions of witnesses) that for trifles,
sading Vanities, for nothing, for worse than nothing, for the matter and cause
of horror and anguish, with everlasting woe and misery, in that they have
despised and rejected their own mercy, that happiness that Christ has
purchased, by an infinite price, and was provided for his servants, by the most
wife, holy, glorious, and infinitely gracious God, for all truly penitent and
believing souls, and tendered and bestowed on them by the sanctifying Spirit of
Wisdom, Grace and Truth; but such in the mean time while it is offered will
have none of it, but utterly reject it, and all God's and Christ's terms
whereupon it is offered to them: How then can they think to stand, when Gods
wrath and fury shall break out against them, and they be irrecoverably carried
away with the streams of his eternal indignation: Let this (I say) be duly
considered by all sorts of such persons while time and opportunity lasts; and
who knows how suddenly any man's opportunity may be lost irrecoverably? etc.

FINIS.
Certain Observations, useful for the understanding of diverse Mystical
Prophecres of holy Scriptures, See the Irenicon, page 53, 54, 55.
respecting the latter days, for the increase of Joy and Consolation to
faithful Christians.
FIrst, Where things that concern the Mysteries of the last times are expressed
more fully in the Old Testament, they are usually touched more briefly in the
New: as for example, What is said of that Mother-Text, Dan. 7.9, 10, 11. (as
Mr. Mede calls it) of the first Session of the Great Day of Judgment, or the
Judgment of the Great Day, (as St. Jude speaks) setting forth God's manner of
destroying Antichrist, as is said, remarkably; because of the great words the
Horn spoke, etc. Dan. 7.9, 10, 11. That is, for the Popes abominable
Blasphemies, Tyranny, Pride and insolent Impieties, etc. which in the
New Testament is but briefly, many times, set down, as 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. whom he
shall destroy with the appearance of his coming; the like, chap. 1.7, 8, 9. of
which and the like Scriptures in the New Testament, the said text, Dan. 7. was
the ground and warrant; save only in the order of the accomplishment St. John
had a particular Vision to the like purpose, Rev. 19, 11. to the end.

Secondly, The first said Session of the Great Day of Judgment will be for the
destruction of the first Gog and Magog, to wit, of the Turk and Pope, who were
so under those terms represented to the Jews, Ezekiel. 38.39. before the setting
up of the New-Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 40. to the end of that Book; and the second
Session will be upon the destruction of the second Gog and Magog, above a
thousand years after, Rev. 20.9. at the end of the world. Where again observe,
that Gog and Magog are taken for the great, obstinate, resolved Enemies of
God's People, whom he will powerfully destroy. Now at both the said Sessions of
the great Day, and at the ruin of both sorts of those wicked men, it is said,
that the Judgment was set, and the Books were opened, which seem proper to the
Judgment of the great Day, Dan. 7.10. Rev. 20.4, 14. And again, observe, See
Parallel of Roman Mon. the 6th head.
that at both the said Sessions, quick and dead are said to be judged: First,
the wicked quick, namely, Antichrist and his followers, etc. then to be sent to
the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, from the Armageddon-battel, described Rev. 19.
from ver. 11. to the 20th. Concerning the same it is again said of the same
time when the third Woe came, Rev. 11.18. Thou have destroyed them that
destroyed the Earth, See Irenicon, p. 99.
when the Nations were angry, and God's Wrath was then come, as the twenty four
Elders that praise God for the ruin of Antichrist at that time, and likewise
for judging the dead (then) by giving reward unto his Servants the Prophets,
and to his Saints, etc. which Mr. Mede conceives he will be doing all the
thousand years, Raising the Saints in their own order (as St. Paul speaks)
which is called by Christ the first Resurrection, Rev. 20.5. and of which St.
Paul likewise speaks remarkably, when he had spoken of Christ's Resurrection
as the first fruits thereof, which was to be above 1600 years before, then
says he, (...), afterward they that are Christ's at his coming, namely, (...),
at his coming or presence, at Antichrist's destruction; and then ((...)) he
speaks of the coming, of the end, 1 Cor. 15.23, 24. which Christ shows should
be above a thousand years after the former, Rev. 20. namely, (as St. Paul
further adds) when Christ had put down all Rule, all Authority and Power, and
when he had destroyed the last enemy, Death, ver. 26. Which Christ again shows
shall be done at his last Session of Judgment, Rev. 20.14. before he gives up
again the Kingdom to his Father, and until that time St. Paul positively
asserts the Reign of Christ in the world, namely, from his second Coming or
Appearance to the end of the second Session of the Judgment of the Great Day,
See Discov. next after the Parall.
as ver. 25. for (says he) he must reign till he has put all his Enemies
under his feet; which Reign Christ teaches must be a thousand years, with his
eminent Saints first raised, Rev. 20.4. and at the end likewise quick and dead
will be again both judged: first, the wicked quick (then) at the destruction of
the last Gog and Magog, and then the dead both good and bad when the rest of
the dead shall be raised, as they are called, Rev. 20.5. and 12.13.

Thirdly, The description of the New-Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 40. to the end of the
Book, whose name is there said to be Jehovah Shamma, or the Lord is there;
because there his Saints shall behold his glory given to him in his Kingdom on
Earth, as Mediator, for a reward in time of that his great work in time, as
Dan. 7.14, 15. which by his last Will and Testament in the presence of his
Father and his Disciples he declared at the end of that Prayer, See Obs. 20.
John 17.24. after he had ended his Farewel-Sermon, Joh. 16. and then the Lamb
will be the visible light of that heavenly City, come down from God out of
Heaven, whose maker and builder is God, Heb. 11. to remain in the world above a
thousand years. But (I say) that description of the said City in the Old
Testament seems there to be set forth sutably to the state of the Jews under
the Old Testament, when Ezekiel was their Prophet. But the description of the
New Jerusalem under the New Testament (which upon many considerations from the
context, and the series of the times, which both descriptions relate unto,
appear plainly to be one and the same thing) I say, that Description of Christ,
Rev. 21. is set forth more sutably to the state of the Christian Church in a
more glorious manner, unto which a more eminent degree of Christ's Glory was
manifest, before that triumphant State of it came, which should so descend from
God out of Heaven, to be for such time in the world; which consisting of the
raised Saints, is not only called The Beloved City, which those blessed and
holy ones at their resurrection (as they are called, Rev. 20.6.) shall then
inhabit, and have mansions therein, (and the holy Jerusalem, Rev. 21.10.) for
the time of their reign with Christ there; But they being in it then made one,
and perfect in one, as Christ prayed, John 17.11. as Christ and the Father are
one, etc. (consider well the Prayer of Christ, being all along prophetical of
the ensuing times) that Jerusalem will be then the Bride, Rev. 19. and the
Lambs Wife, Rev. 21. and was of old fore-spoken of, as his Spouse, in the Song
of Solomon, his type therein: So the Wisdom of God seems to fit the
descriptions thereof suitably to their several states to whom it was so
represented.

Fourthly, The most of those Prophecies which concern the Jews are more fully
set forth in the Old Testament. Hence the Turk's ruin, who is the sixth
Trumpet, Rev. 9.11. is more fully described, Ezekiel. 38, 39 chapters, under the
name of Gog, and the Pope's there both briefly under the name of Magog, in
chap. 39. referring us Christians intime to come, to look into the New
Testament, for what God would after, for our use then make known of Antichrist
more largely.

Fifthly, The fifth and sixth Trumpets, which are the first and second
Wo-Trumpets, Rev. 9. See Abridgm. Dan. 11.40.
which were to ruin the Eastern Roman Empire, are the Sarazens and Turks, set
forth by the titles of the King of the South, and the King of the North, Dan.
11.40, etc. being likewise the oppressors of the poor Jews.

Sixthly, The Armageddon-battel being for the destruction of the first Gog and
Magog, is set forth in both Testaments, as referring to the Enemies of both
Christian Jews, and Gentiles, first set down in the Old Testament, Ezekiel. 38, 39
chapters, Joel 3.7, 11, 12. Dan. 11.45. and Zech. 14. as in reference to the
Jews. Secondly, in the New Testament, Rev. 14 and 15 chapters, and 16th under
or after the sixth Viol, and Rev. 19.11, etc. as in reference to the Gentiles.

Seventhly, The greatly-beloved Prophet Daniel chiefly sets down what might be
ground of comfort to the faithful Jews: See Irenicon, page 63.
But the beloved Disciple and Apostle St. John, mainly speaks of what might be
useful for the Faithful in the times of the Gentiles, Luke 21.24. whilst the
body of the Jewish Nation remained cast out.

Eighthly, The 12th chapter of Daniel's Prophecy is useful to open the way for
understanding the Mysteries of that Book, as the 17th chapter of the
Revelations is for the understanding much in that Book. See Abridgm. on Dan.
chap. 12.
For from Daniels 12th may be understood the time and order of Christ's
appearing, with the terribleness thereof, ver. 1. and of the Jews deliverance
therewith, v. 1. and how long before both will come, v. 11, 12. and what state
that Church and the Saints in it should be in then, v. 1, 13. in what state the
Church of the Jews was in before Christ's appearing, very troublesome, v. 2, 3.
how long these Mysteries should continue shut up, v. 4, 9. and what was meant
by the time of the end when they should be opened, compare ver. 9. with verse
40 of chap. 11. and then what state was to be of the Church of the Gentiles,
ver. 4. latter part of the verse, and v. 5, 6, 7. which Daniel (then)
understood not, v. 8. because then sealed up, v. 9. and likewise concerned
things long after to come in the Gentile-Church, and yet he had it expounded to
him before by one that stood by, chap. 7.16, 21 to v. 27. So also Rev. 17. is a
chapter remarkably set down by the Spirit of God, very useful for the opening
of diverse Mysteries contained in the Book of Revelations, See Irenicon, p. 26,
27, 28, etc.
concerning Antichrist's rise, reign and ruin, with many other things
thereunto partaining, mentioned chapters 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, etc. as may be
observed in the Letter of May 20. in the Forerunner, and in the Irenicon, page
26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. etc.

Ninthly, Then observe, Daniels Visions were sealed to the time of the end,
chap. 12.9. which was to the times of the Sarazens and Turks, or (which is
contemporary) in Antichrist's time, times, and the dividing of a time, as Dan.
11.40, etc. and Dan. 12.5, 6, 7. and chap. 7.24, 25. compated with Rev. 9.11.
and chap. 11. and chap. 13. at which time they were to be unsealed in respect
of both those enemies both of Jews and Gentiles, as Daniel and the Book of
Revelation set them forth in their due order, as was said.

Tenthly, What Daniel briefly showed the Jews should be done for them at
Christ's Appearing, See Abridgm. on Dan. 12.
namely, (that then his People should be delivered) Dan. 12.1, etc. the Prophet
Ezekiel in that respect more fully explained, from the Visions of God, chap.
37. first, by the rising of the dry bones; and after by the uniting of two
sticks into one under one King, to them both for ever: and chap. 38, 39. by
removing Gog the hinderer of their rising. And lastly, chap. 40, 41, 42, to the
end of the Book, by showing to him the New Jerusalem then to ensue after Gog's
ruin: and both Daniel and Ezekiel, being God's Prophets, sent to the Jews in
the time of their Captivity, and both foretelling their great restoration, and
the time thereof (though mystically) as two witnesses of God's Truth to comfort
the Faithful Jews in the low ebb of their dejected condition till then.

Eleventhly, The first three worldly Monarchies being past, which had oppressed
the Jews before Christ came in the flesh, the Book of Revelation speaks nothing
of them; See Abridgm. on Dan.
nor of the Roman Monarchy till Christ's Resurrection, at the opening of the
first Seal, Rev. 6. and Psalm. 45. when Christ having all power in Heaven and in
Earth given to him, he gave Commission to his Disciples for the preaching of
the Gospel, Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. See Irenicon, p. 26, 27, etc. and page 61, 62,
63.
But afterward the orders of the times and things in Daniel, as respecting the
proceedings of things in the Roman Monarchy, to the time of its ruin, and
Christ's Kingdom following upon it, both the Prophecy of Daniel and the Book of
Revelation exactly agree, as being revealed by the same eternal Spirit of
Truth, namely, from the finishing of Christ's work of Redemption to his coming
again: But after that for the state of things, in Dan. 7.13, 14, 15. to the end
of that chapter, that it shall be for a thousand years, Christ only in Rev. 20,
21, and 22. further informs us, saving it is darkly employed, Dan. 12.13. where
it is promised to Daniel that he shall stand up in his lot at the end of the
days, that is, at the resurrection of the Just, or first resurrection, Rev.
20.5.

Twelfthly, Hence it may appear that though Christ, as man, upon Earth, knew
not the time of the last day, yet having since ascended, and sitting on his
Fathers right hand in Heaven, revealed now for our use (in a latitude) both
concerning the last day, and also many other great mysteries contained in that
Divine Book of the Revelation; and by means of that (together with the
assistance of God's holy Spirit) what was shut up before in Daniel likewise,
till the time of the end, but ever since to be sought after to be known for the
benefit of his Church, as they are recorded by his Apostle St. John, with
promise of blessing to the due performance thereof.

13ly. Such Scriptures as have special stamps upon them of the last times, as
Jacob's and Moses his Prophecies of the twelve Tribes, Genesis See Iren. p. 59,
60, 61.
49. and Deuteronomy. 33. and that Song of Moses penned for posterity, Deuteronomy. 32. and
Balaams Prophecy, Number. 24. etc. usually contain something in them respecting
the same times.

14ly. That usual phrase in Scripture in the Original, (...), the postremity of
days: in the Septuagint (...), in the last of days: by ours read, in the
latter days, has reference usually to these Times wherein these great
Mysteries were to be opened by degrees, and the things contained in them
accordingly fulfilled in their orders, as is observable in these Scriptures
following, Genesis 49.1. Numb. 24.24. Deuteronomy. 4.30. Prove. 31.25. Isa. 2.2. Mic. 4.3.
Jer. 23.20. Ezekiel. 38.16. Hos. 3.5. But especially take notice of these two
following places, Dan. 2.28. and 10.14. to which may be added Dan. 8.17. the
time of the end, and ver. 19. the last end of the indignation; and the like,
chap. 11.36. till the indignation be accomplished: where the former or such
other like expressions of the latter days are used, which all usually refer to
the Mysteries of these latter times. But Daniel in the first text tells
Nebuchadnezzer expressly, [ that God had made known unto him what should be in
the postremity of days, etc.] viz. in the fourth and fifth Monarchies as he
proceeds to explain to him: And chap. 10 14. after Daniel had seen a glorious
Vision of Christ, an Angel was sent to comfort him, and told him expressly that
he was sent to make him understand what should befall his People in the latter,
or postremity of days: See Abridgm. on Dan. 11.36, 40
and so the other like phrases at the time of the end, Dan. 11.40. that is, in
the last times: So chap. 12.4, 9, 13. in the end of the days; at the
resurrection of the Just, that is, when Daniel was to be raised again to stand
in his lot: and the other phrase, the last end of the indignation, Dan. 8.19.
and chap. 11.36. is to be understood of the Jews full and great Restoration at
Christ's Appearance, as Dan. 12.1. which are the particular drifts of those
several phrases by the orders of his Visions and the intents of them (as may
appear by their accomplishments in part) and by what is further still to be
done, as we have set down in their due place in our Abridgment of Daniels
Visions, on diverse of those places and phrases. Therefore, besides many other
considerations from the Prophecies of Daniel, which might be convincingly
added, take notice of this one; How unwarrantably some men, contrary to the
scope of the Spirit of God, and the natural sign^fications of these many
phrases and expressions set down by the holy Ghost along that Book, besides the
experimental fulfilling of diverse things therein accordingly, as chap. 11.40.
and 12.4, 9. and 2.28. in part fulfilled: yet notwithstanding all these, they
have (I say) very mistakenly gone about to limit and confine all Daniel's
Prophecy to the Greek Empire, which our Savior has manifested in the Book of
Revelation, will not be fulfilled wholly in about two thousand years after, or
(happily) near upon it. See our Abridgment on Daniel, and the fum of the
Revelation in the Irenicon, page 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31.

15ly. God's Covenant with Abraham, to be the Lord his God, and thereupon to
give to him and his seed the Land of Canaan, renewed afterward to Isaac, Genesis
26.3. and also to Jacob, Genesis 35.12. See Fore runner, p. 38, 39.
and confirmed by Moses for all three together, Exodus 6.3, 4. yea, and as he
speaks, sworn by God to them, Deuteronomy. 30.20. Yea and again, with a very
remarkable and strong expression, reaching to and comprehending the Kingdom of
Christ in the thousand years, as appears Deuteronomy. 11.21. he swear it (says Moses)
as the days of Heaven upon Earth, (...): Upon the account of all which God
seems to tell Moses, Exodus 3. that that should be his Memorial through all
Generations, that he was the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; which Memorial
he there three times repeated, v. 6, 15, 16. to assure all Generations of the
first Resurrection of the Just, Rev. 20.5, 6. having not only personally
promised it to them all, but sworn it in such manners as Moses records. And
yet again, his own Spirit and Word in his Servants mouths again declares, that
in their natural lives they lived on Earth, this Promise made personally to
them was not fulfilled (as St. Stephen expressly speaks, Acts 7.5.) they had not
so much as to set a foot upon by that Covenant, (though they purchased
Burying-places that their dead bones might keep possession thereof by that
means till the Resurrection of the Just, or first said Resurrection, Rev. 20.5,
6.) when Christ that one promised Seed, Gal. 3.16. in special and chiefly to be
understood as their Seed, not Seeds, as the Apostle remarkably distinguishes,
and expounds too in that Text: I say, Christ that promised Seed should put
them into possession then of that Land of Canaan, wherein they had been only
strangers and pilgrims before, as Heb. 11.9. and dwelling in Tabernacles, as
was the condition also of Isaac and Jacob, as the Apostle shows, though they
were Heirs of the same Promise, ver. 9. and yet he had said of Abraham
particularly, ver. 8. That Abraham when he was called to go out into a place
which he was afterward to receive for an Inheritance, obeyed, not knowing
whither he went: So that not having yet received it, he must (according to
Scripture) receive it at the said first Resurrection; See Forerunner, p. 38,
39.
for God's Promises and Oaths will not fail (though many men's faith may much
fail in these things, as is by our Savior foretold, Luke 18.8.) when he
(Abraham) shall appear to be the Heir not only of Canaan (but of the World)
through faith, as the Apostle Paul further teaches, Romans 4.13. and this Mr.
Mede shows to be the drift of our Savior's Argument, Mat. 22.27. and Mark 12.
that therefore God is the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, according to the
tenor of that Covenant, in that they must live again upon Earth to inherit
(then) that promised Land of Canaan, to wit, at that time of the restitution of
all things, Act. 3.19, 20. (...), in the New Creation of all things; as our
Savior shows, Rev. 21.5. Behold, I make all things new; and in this sense Beza
understands that place, (...), according to five or six copies, distinguished
by a comma, to be understood in that sense, of new creation of things, not
spiritual regeneration, as men use to take it: when all such faithful Spirits
shall be counted (as our Savior speaks) worthy to obtain that World, and the
Resurrection of the Dead, that which is called the World to come, Heb. 2.5.
(...). And when Abraham's, Isaac's, and Jacob's posterity shall enjoy that Land
with them, Deuteronomy. 30. to ver. 11. and Deuteronomy. 32.43. as David's Kingdom shall then
be stablished before himself for ever to the end, 2 Samuel 7.16. And so likewise
the Promise and Covenant made to David, of the Kingdom for himself and his Seed
for ever, will (then) in Christ the Seed of David on Earth be fulfilled, when
also the first Adam's lost dominion, as was fore-prophesied, Psalm. 8. and
explained and applied by the Apostle, Heb. 2. will be regained to the raised
Saints from the dead at the first said Resurrection, by Christ the second Adam;
Consider seriously these Scripture-evidences, and the things held out by them.

16ly. Such Prophecies as speak of good things to come to Israel, Ephraim, or
Joseph, together with Judah joined with them, usually contain something
belonging to the great Restoration at Christ's appearing and his Kingdom, 1 Timothy 4.1. when he first begins to judge quick and dead at the first session of
the day of Judgment: when God's ancient People of Israel, or Ephraim and Judah
shall be joined together into one stick, under one King, to them both for ever,
even Christ being his Promised Seed, which will be accomplished in those last
days (as was said) from Ezekiel. 37.

17ly. When David by his prophetical Spirit foretells of things incompetible
to his own Kingdom, or to his natural seed, such things must necessarily be
referred to Christ's glorious Kingdom on Earth, See Iren. p. 77, 78, 79, 80.
in the thousand years.

18ly. Again, it is observable in Mystical Prophecies, that the Spirit of God
seems many times to lay down great things in generals, and after by degrees to
give expositions of them, See Abridgm. on Dan.
as in Nebuchadnezzar's dream, Dan. 2. and Daniels Visions of the same matters,
Dan. 7. both which are by Daniel and the Angel in the same chapters in some
brief way first expounded: and both again more particularly afterward in the
following Visions in their order, chap. 8. and somewhat in chap. 9. but
afterward more fully in many things, in their order, in his last large Vision,
chap. 10, 11, 12. and so in the Revelation in chap. 4, 5, and 7. some general
heads are touched at, which are more particularly explained in a great part of
the Book following: So in the latter part of chap. 14. the decay of the Papacy
is spoken of, which afterward is again explained, chapters 15 and 16, more
briefly, and some of the Vials again more largely, chapters 18, 19, and 20.

19ly. In the Book of the Revelation when things are not said to succeed one
the other, as 1st, 2d, 3d, etc. as the Seals, Trumpets and Vials, but one
measure of time is assigned and suited to them all, or one table of Chronology
is fitted to them all, such distirct Visions are contemporaries, as all that
concerned the true and false Church in Antichrist's time have the same measure
(though diversely computed) by months, days, and a time times and an half; all
agreeing in 1260 years, the date of the Beast, the mourning-time of the
Witnesses, the Woman's Wilderness-condition: by which also the Whore of
Babylon, the ten crowned Horns, with the two-horned Beast, etc. are limited to
their seasons: So all those Visions under or after the 7th Trumpet, See the
Irenicon, page 30.
have one Chronological Table to compute their time [as chap 11. to v. 15.
contained the forty two months for the night-workers in darkness: and a
thousand two hundred and sixty days of such as are of the Light, and walk
therein:] So all the Visions (I say) in the three last chapters, have one
Chronological Table to compute the time of them all, to wit, [a thousand years]
wherein Christ will reign with his Saints, the Devil shall be bound and shut
up, etc. the New Jerusalem come down from God, and God's Tabernacle be with
men; and the New Heavens and New Earth, and the Paradise of God, and the Tree
of Life, and the pure River, etc. all for the said time of the thousand years,
and so are contemporaries, and all strongly there asserted and confirmed. See
Irenicon in several places.

Observe. After Christ Jesus our Savior had finished his Farewell Sermon, Joh.
16. he then in the presence of his Disciples made that most excellent
declarative Prayer, Joh. 17. wherein a large Prophecy of many things to come is
very divinely (though mystically) couched: wherein we may observe many things
in order, according to the Will of his heavenly Father, set forth by Christ,
which should afterward according both to his prayer, prediction or disposal, be
done, and has herein caused to be recorded, which shall have their due
accomplishment in their times, beginning from his making that excellent
prophetical Prayer; who always prayed according to his heavenly Father's Will,
and (as he said) was always heard of him: and so it is to be known by us, that
all here he prayed for, in respect of himself, his Disciples, and the faithful
Pastors and Christians succeeding, even all such as his Father had given him
till his coming again, and all that believed through their word, namely the
Apostles Doctrine, through the time of the wicked world, which he prayed not
for till the time of the good world came, that should both believe and know him
whom the Father had sent; when that Glory should be given to his own, that the
Father had given him: concerning which he then made his Will, v. 24. that they
should behold his Glory in his Kingdom, Dan. 7.13, 14. at the Resurrection, in
that World to come of which he speaks, Luke 20.35, 36. which, as was said Heb.
2.5. is styled (...), the world (habitable) to come, of which the Apostle there
said he spoke, namely chap. 1.6. where he had said (...), when he shall bring
his Son again into the World, that is, the second time, he says, and let all
the Angels of God worship him: for he shall then (as both Daniel, and from
Daniel three of the Evangelists witness Christ's words of his coming) come in
the clouds of Heaven, as was foretold of him, and all his holy ones with him,
both Saints and Angels. And in reference to this order of this prophetical
declarative Prayer of our blessed Savior, observe the ensuing steps of his
proceeding therein to the said purposes, which we have already hinted, to be
now further observed and duly considered accordingly. Ver. 1. he says, Father,
glorify thy Son, that thy Son may also glorify thee: which was evidently soon
after answered in his Resurrection from the dead; of which God said, Thou art
my Son, this day have I begotten thee, Psalm. 2.7. applied largely by St. Paul
to Christ's Resurrection, Acts 13.33, 34, 35, 36, 37. with other Scriptures; of
which, says he again Romans 1.4. he was declared to be the Son of God with power
by the resurrection from the dead: And being so glorified by his Father, he
also glorified him by setting up the preaching of the Gospel, and give
Salvation thereby, v. 2, 3, 4. when all power being given to him in Heaven and
in Earth, as he said Mat. 28.18. he then mainly improves the same in
commissionating and fitting, and sending his Disciples to be his Apostles to
preach the Gospel (as in the Prayer is to be observed afterward) and Mat.
28.19, 20. Go, preach the Gospel to all Nations; and Mark 15. Go, preach the
Gospel to every creature; and also glorified his Father many ways in the forty
days after his Resurrection; but especially he is said then to speak to his
Disciples of the things that concerned the Kingdom of God, Acts 3.3, 4, 5.
whereupon seemed that question of the same Kingdom then to be moved by them,
etc.

The next step was his Prayer for his Ascension into Heaven, v. 5. to be
glorified with that Glory which he had before in the Bosom of his Father before
the world was, when he was (...), but thenceforward should as (...), God-man in
one person, sit at the right hand of the Father in his Caelestial Glory, which
he had with the Father before the world was: and then v. 6, 7, 8. having
declared diverse things respecting his Disciples, what he had done toward them,
and what effect was found in them, etc. he proceeds in v. 9, 11. to make his
Prayer for his Disciples, after to be his Apostles, being in the world when he
was ascended, that his Father would keep them from that evil world, as he had
done for them to that time, v. 12. having showed their joint interest, ver. 10.
and shows the end why he spoke these things suitable to their present state, v.
13, 14. and showing what Persecution they were to look for, but how they should
be preserved, etc. he proceeds to limit his Prayer for his Disciples, v. 15.
not that they should be taken out of the world, but that they should be kept
from the evil: And since they were not of that world, v. 16. he prays further
in v. 17. to have them sanctified by the Word of God's Truth: and giving them
their Mission, v. 18. he shows, the end of his sanctifying himself was for
their sanctification by that means, v. 19.

So having done with what concerned his Disciples to be sent as Apostles into
the world, and in them for all faithful Messengers of the Gospel that were to
succeed: he then proceeds, v. 20. to pray for all truly faithful and believing
souls [through their Word] (as he speaks) even from that time of their Mission
to his Coming again (as may many ways appear by what follows from ver. 20. to
25.) wherein all such faithful persons should be equally concerned; showing
that the end and drift of all their believing [through their Word] or of any of
his Messengers, was, that they might all be one, as the Father was in him, and
he in the Father; that they might be one, as the Father and the Son were one,
v. 21, 22. that is, that they should be, as the Bride, the Lamb's Wife, is one
with her Head in the New Jerusalem, come down from God out of Heaven, Rev. 21.
and so made perfect in one, v. 23. at Christ's second coming; or his coming
again into the world, as Heb. 1.6. when that good world to come shall believe
that the Father has sent him, yea, and know it too in an especial manner, as
he adds and repeats in part the same thing, v. 21, 23. having showed in v. 22.
that he had given them the same Glory that the Father had given him in his
Kingdom, Dan. 7.14, 15. and for that end that they might be one (as was said
before) as he and the Father are one, who loved them as he had loved him. And
v. 24. he further declares his own last Will and Testament in that particular,
respecting the enjoyment of that happiness with himself in the said Kingdom
which his Father had given him, as Mediator, as a reward in time for that work,
finished in the time of that his Office, which the Faithful should enjoy with
him in the time of that said good World to come, when they should be where he
should be, and behold to their happiness the Glory then given him by his
Father, from his love to him, as his obedient Son and faithful Servant, before
the foundation of the world: and in the two last verses concludes with some
special consolations respecting his Disciples, as follows, ver. 25, 26. to the
end of the chapter.

Thus divinely has our blessed Savior, according to his infinite Wisdom,
couched the order of these glorious Mysteries, in his making and leaving this
most excellent Prophetical and declarative Prayer of his before his departure
out of the World, recorded by his beloved Apostle St. John, for the information
and consolation of his poor and little little Flock, to whom, with himself, it
was his Father's pleasure to give that Kingdom with himself on Earth, Rev.
20.4. and Rev. 5.10. And the advancement of that state is the great drift of
our Lord's Prayer, recorded also by two Evangelists, namely that God's Name may
be hallowed, See Irenicon, p. 30.
and his Kingdom come, and consequently his Will be done in Earth (then) as in
Heaven (before;) for which purpose, as God's People should always endeavor
faithfully, so they have abundant ground to believe from the Word it will be so
done in the time when the Devil will be shut up in the bottomless-pit from
seducing the Nations for a thousand years space, Rev. 20. The blessed and holy
Saints shall come with Christ to take their bodies in their own order: The
glorious Angels shall come and worship him, and do their service to him in the
world, Heb. 1.6. And all the creatures in Heaven and Earth, and under the
Earth, shall bow the knee, and be subject unto him, Phil. 2. and all things be
made new by him, Rev. 21.5. all which since his Word declares most surely,
shall be performed.

Observe. That the perfect Dominion over the Creatures (which was part of the
Image of God upon Man in his innocence) will be restored again unto him, the
holy Scriptures make evident; which the Apostle Paul says, The whole Creation
groans for to be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious
Liberty of the Sons of God, Romans 8. and this David prophetically foreshews will
be done in Christ, Ps. 8. where he says, God had visited him, the Son of man,
and made him for a little time [as both the word in the Original (...). and
also the Septuagint [(...)] signify) lower than the Angels, and crowned him
with Glory and Worship, making him to have dominion over the works of his
hands, and putting all things under his feet, etc. Which the Apostle applies to
Christ, Heb. 2. and also says, he has made him, ((...)) a little while (as
our Translation has it in the margent likewise) inferior to the Angels; and
then speaks of the same subjection of the creatures under him, then
afterward to come; and therefore ver. 8. he says, we do not yet see all
things put under him: only we see Christ in his own person, that for a little
while was made lower than the Angels, for the suffering of death, crowned with
glory and honor. But he again further teaches, Phil. 2.9, etc. that God had
given him a Name above every name, that at the Name of JESUS every knee should
bow (or be subject) of things in Heaven, and things on Earth, and things under
the Earth; and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to
the glory of God the Father. Which will not be done till he has received his
Kingdom, and shall return (as he himself speaks, Luke 19.12, 15) and all
these things can at no other time upon Scripture-ground be expected but at his
said 2d coming, when God shall bring again his Son into the world, and say, Let
all the Angels of God worship him, Heb. 1.6. and that was also foretold, Psalm.
97.7. which whole Psalm (beginning, The Lord reigns, let the Earth rejoice,
etc.) sets forth prophetically in what a glorious manner Christ will come
then to set up his glorious Kingdom, both by destroying his Idolatrous Enemies,
and wonderfully delivering and exalting his People (as is observable throughout
the whole Psalm,) and this as to the time and order Christ succinctly explains,
Rev. 20.4. saying, the Saints reigned with Christ a thousand years. And
accordingly thereunto are all the Promises of raising again the Tabernacle of
David which was fallen, Amos 9.11. and Acts 15.16. and those for the perpetuity
of David's Kingdom to his seed so long as the Sun and Moon do endure, See
Irenicon, p. 77, 78, 79.
and the like, are all to be interpreted; which will be manifest when the
Kingdom of the Stone, Dan. 2.33, 34. shall become a great Mountain, filling the
whole Earth: And this is that Coming of the Son of man in his Kingdom, spoken
of by Christ Matthew. 16.28. of which he soon after showed a glymps unto his
three Disciples, Peter, James, and John, at his Transfiguration, Mark 9.1. Luke
9.27. Neither can these Texts be justly denied to be meant of such a Kingdom of
Christ to come upon his coming again, nor warrantably be interpreted in any
other sense, if the said Texts be seriously and duly considered.

Obser. I have observed only three great Earthquakes, spoken of in all the
series or order of the Book of Revelation: And where the Spirit of God calls
them great, we may expect they will be great indeed, (For Earthquakes are often
spoken of besides these great ones). The first is upon the opening of the sixth
Seal, Rev. 6.12. when God by Constantine the Great overturned Satan's Paganish
Kingdom, when five or six several Caesar's were so potent to oppose him, See
Fore. runner, p. 29.
and cast down Satan from his Heaven of Heathenish Worship into the Earth, Rev.
12.9. which was spoken of the same time which is described, as a day of
Judgment, Rev. 6. to the Paganish Powers (as indeed it was) and there the
Spirit of God sets down an Ecce before it; and Lo (says he) there was a great
Earthquake. The second is, Rev. 11.13. at the ascension of the two Witnesses
after their resurrection, and then the holy Spirit tells us at the same hour
there was a great Earthquake, when the tenth part of the Dition of the City of
Rome probably will quite fall from it, See Fore runner, p. 8.
where the Witnesses are to rise again, etc. and this Earthquake we may daily
expect: But thirdly, there is another great Earthquake, afterward spoken of to
come, which he further illustrates much above both the former, and that will be
at or about Antichrist's final destruction, at the end of the sixth Viol, and
pouring-out of the seventh for the completing of his ruin, Rev. 16.17, 18.
and then the Spirit of God speaks with a great deal of emphasis of it, saying,
v. 18. And there was a great Earthquake, such as was not since Man was upon
Earth, so mighty an Earthquake and so great: Which seems to be further
described in the three following verses, and seems to be at or about the same
time of Michael's standing up to deliver Daniels People, when such a time of
trouble will be as never was since there was a Nation, Dan. 12.1. and when St.
Paul says of Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. Christ will destroy him with the
appearance of his coming; and happily of both, Rev. 14. latter part of the
chapter: And then will not only the Earth be shaken, but also the Heavens, as
says the Prophet, Hag. 2.6, 7, 21. and Heb. 12.26. and as upon good reason
from several Scriptures seems to be the main drift of them then to be
fulfilled, as Mal. 3.2. Rev. 11.16. Which shaking of the Earth (probably) may
seem was first at that great Earthquake, Rev. 6.12. when God by Constantine the
Great overthrew Paganish Idolatry: and may be again by the next great
Earthquake now approaching, Rev. 11.13. which will also begin to shake
Antichristian Idolaters, who are called in this Book, the men of the Earth: and
the perfecting of that shaking is to be at that third and greatest Earthquake,
Rev. 16.18. when not only the Earth and evil men will be shaken, but also the
Heavens, namely, such Churches as will be then in a degree reformed Churches;
and thereupon will the new Heavens and new Earth ensue of both reformed Church
and State in the whole World, I conceive at the setting up of Christ's Kingdom
on Earth, Rev. 20.4. and 5.10.

Moses denounces threatenings against the twelve Tribes, the Spirit of God
seems to guide him (diverse times) to set them down prophetically, as including
Prophecies, in their order afterward to be fulfilled: as is observable, Lev.
26. Deuteronomy. 28. and 4.30. which he said expressly should be in the latter days;
and Deuteronomy. 32. from ver. 1. to 44. See these Texts more fully in the Irenicon,
page 60, 61.

Obser. The heavy weight of God's wrath upon mankind next after the fall of the
first Adam seems very observable through the first great Period of the World
until the Flood: for, first, good Abel (the remotest type of Christ after Adam)
being slain by his brother; Yet cursed Cain was then suffered to live to people
the World: which further appears, that in those first ages of the World to the
Flood, few are recorded or hinted in Scripture, to be faithful or saved; and
that in a few successions amongst such long-lived persons, at the end of 1656
years (as the old World's time is computed) it was then for man's wickedness and
impenitency drowned by an universal deluge; saving those few in the Ark with
Noah, and they not all good neither: But afterward the more remote men lived
from the first Adam's fall, and the nearer they drew on to the 2d Adam's first
coming, the more clearer manifestations of God's Grace have appeared in the
World: But when Christ at his said first coming both purchased and tendered
greater Grace toward both Jews and Gentiles, and that more clearly and largely
than ever before: Yet how few (as our Savior warned) of either sorts (in
comparison) even in the best times, have under that Kingdom of Patience been
saved! Mat. 7.14. Luke 12.32. but especially all that time the Wrath has lain
heavy upon the Jews (according to their own Curse upon themselves and their
Posterity) in a remarkable visible manner, for above sixteen hundred years: And
so strait and narrow has the way been found to Heaven, in all the times of
this Kingdom of Patience even to the Gentile Christians, through all the
Heathenish, Heretical and Antichristian Persecutions, even to this day; that
few (as our Savior said, Mat. 7.) have since found it: But when the times of
the Jews free-promised mercy (who are also yet beloved for their Father's sake,
Romans 11.) shall once appear; the Grace of God by Christ will not only be rich
and wonderful to them, and to them more especially, But also (together with
them) to those Gentiles, then to come in at their rising, Isa. 60.3 to 17. with
other like places; for then he, the great Messiah, will appear wonderfully
glorious, in respect of both, (then) made one in him ( Joh. 10.16.) the second
Adam: and that not only in the tenders of his Grace (as formerly to the Jews
before Christ's birth) and afterward toward all in the first preaching of the
Gospel; but also (then) his glorious Grace will appear in the power and
efficacy thereof abundantly, in his pouring-forth his Grace and Spirit upon
them both, and causing them to walk in his ways according to his promises,
Ezekiel, 36. Jer. 23. Deuteronomy. 30. 1 to 11. And likewise then he will show himself in
his Person, more powerful to save his Saints, and subdue his Enemies, than the
first Adam was weak and sinful in ruining his natural race, and giving all
Enemies advantage against all God's Chosen People till that time: that as Luke
1.74. they shall (then) be delivered from those Enemies, and the hands of all
that hate them, to serve him, etc. for from that time of his Kingdom of Power
neither Enemies temporal or spiritual shall have thenceforward any advantage or
power to hurt the Saints (though once they will attempt it, Rev. 20.8, 9.) So
that what the first Adam lost for himself and his posterity so foolishly,
sinfully and shamefully; the second Adam will (then) happily manifest he has
again regained, even to his spiritual seed on Earth most holily, powerfully and
gloriously.

Obser. Our Savior ascended from Mount Olivet, Acts 1.12. and was then taken
out of his Disciples sight by a cloud, ver. 12. and he shall so come again in
the clouds, (said the Angels) v. 11. as is showed, Mark 13.26. Rev. 1.7. and it
seems probable, that Propbecy of his feet standing upon Mount Olivet at that
time, when he will at his coming again manifest himself to the Jews for their
National Conversion, and (as Mr. Mede is of opinion, will then speak to them)
will then have its fulfilling, Zech. 14.4. which chapter sets forth many things
then to be accomplished, etc.

Malachi speaks of two harbingers or forerunners of Christ at his first and
second coming. The first was John Baptist, Mal. 3.1. Behold, I send my
Messenger before thy face, etc. which was applied by the Angel, Luke 1.76.
Matthew. 11.9, 10. showing in what sense he was called Elias by the Angel here,
and by our Savior afterward, as Luke 1.17. namely in the Spirit and Power of
Elias; and our Savior speaks of both Eliases together, Mat. 7.11, 12. and
what the turning of fathers to the children may be, see Ephesians. 2.14. The other
harbinger or forerunner which Malachi speaks of, chap. 4.5, 6. to be before the
great and dreadful Day of the Lord come, which whether it shall be Elias the
Tishbite, or John Baptist raised again from the dead (as several of the
Ancients have severally conceived) or whether it shall be one at that time to
be sent (as John Baptist was) in the Spirit and Power of Elias at his coming
again, as the Angel before expounded concerning John Baptist, Luke 1.17. I will
not contend: But this I assuredly believe, that that Messenger to be sent
before Christ at his second coming, spoken of Mal. 4.5, 6. shall then also be
spirited and fitly qualified for so great a work, etc.

Observe. When the stamp of the Primitive times, Dan. 4. latter part of the
verse, [Many shall run to and fro, See Irenicon, p. 63, 64.
and knowledge shall be increased:] and then Antichrist's time, times, and the
dividing of a time, v. 5, 6, 7. set forth mystically and very darkly to Daniel,
being things that concerned not the Jews (directly) but the Gentile Christians
in both those times, being to come a long time after; He thereupon said; v. 8.
Though I heard, yet I understood not, though in part expounded to him before by
the Angel, Dan. 7.24, 25. But of what concerned his People the Jews both before
and after, he had further such marks set down in the following part of the
chapter, that were like in time to come to be more discernable by them, ver.
10, 11, 12, etc. as mainly concerned themselves in the time of the end, chap.
40, etc. but were to be shut up till then, v. 4, 9. See Abridgment on Dan.
12.4, 5, 6, 7, etc.

Obser. Christ's eminent execution of his three great Offices in respect of his
Universal Church in the three great Periods of the World, is very observable in
Scripture and Providence: First, of such his Prophetical Office under the Old
Testament, by his Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation. Secondly, of such his
Priestly Office under the New Testament, both by his Sacrifice and
Intercession, unto his coming again by his Spirit of Grace and Truth. Thirdly,
in his eminent Kingly Office in his Thousand years Reign, beginning when he
shall begin to judge quick and dead, at his Appearance, and his Kingdom, 1 Timothy
4.1. and continuing to the loosing of Satan after he has been bound and sealed
up in the bottomless-pit the said thousand years, Rev. 20. to be manifest
(then) by his Spirit of Power and Dominion. See these largely considered in
seventeen Theses, with Texts of Scripture, in the Forerunner, page 12, 13. and
confirmed by Arguments in the Irenicon, page 33, 34.

Observe. The Spirit of God seems frequently to join matters of the latter times
together, which will be fulfilled at a great distance, and particularly
concerning the two Resurrections, Rev. 20. and even the whole Doctrine of the
Resurrection (almost) (as we noted in the Irenicon, page 102. and elsewhere)
was made known by degrees, and so the two Sessions of the great day of
Judgment, vide Obser. 2. But as we here observe, St. Paul sets three great
things down together, namely, Christ's Resurrection as the first fruits of the
Resurrection of the Just, at the said first Resurrection, or at his second
coming, which is like to be about 1700 years after, and then comes the end,
which according as Christ has revealed, will be above a thousand years after
his second coming, and at his third. So that mark of the Primitive times, Dan.
12.4. to wit [Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be encreased]
diverse hundreds of years before Antichrist's time, times, and the dividing of a
time: which are set forth in a wonderful Vision of Christ (as Rev. 10.
likewise) in the three next verses, 5, 6, 7. which contain 1260 years more. So
three Questions are propounded by Christ's Disciples, Mat. 24. of the signs of
Jerusalems destruction, and of his coming again or returning (as he called it
before, Luke 19.12.) and of the end of the World. To all our Savior answers,
but much of the nearest, and gives diverse signs of his second coming in the
clouds of Heaven, which he speaks of, ver. 30. but closely thereunto adjoyns
what should be done at his third coming, v. 31. which was not to be so much
revealed (saving mystically afterward in the Book of the Revelation) which was
in respect thereof to be the true Key to open in aftertimes the spiritual
Cabinet of diverse (otherwise) mystical Texts, darkly set down by Christ and his
holy Spirit, in other places of Scripture to the like purpose: (and so to be
such a Key for other things) See the like, Mat. 25.31. speaks in part of his
second coming; and in the other part of that verse, and ver. 32. he speaks of
what shall be done at his third coming, largely expounded so by himself, Rev.
20.11, to the end of the chapter. So again St. Paul in 1 These. 3. ult. and
chap. 4.14. he speaks of Christ's second coming, when Christ will bring all his
Saints, and all that (then) shall sleep in Jesus, with him: but in ver. 16. he
speaks of his last coming, as also expounded by Christ in the said place. Also
again, 1 Cor. 15.23. the Apostle plainly speaks of his second coming, and ver.
52. sets down diverse things to be done at Christ's coming at the last Session of
Judgment and last Resurrection: And because it appears God would have these
things concerning the last times of the World to be so darkly delivered for the
most part, and in mysteries in the Revelation. Hence it has come to pass, that
such imperfect and mistaken apprehensions have for the most part been
entertained by all sorts of men; and without some special guidance of God's
Spirit could not (probably) be otherwise found out, who himself is said to have
opened the Disciples understanding after his Resurrection, Luke 24.45. that
they might understand the Scriptures: but as many then which heard them neither
believed nor regarded what they taught; and those matters of Salvation by Jesus
Christ crucified, risen and ascended, were hidden from most men's eyes; so it is
to be expected it will be (as we are forewarned) with most men in respect of
Christ's descending or coming again the second time, by stumbling at such
Scriptures that concern it on one prejudice or mistake or other. It concerns
those therefore that will approve themselves wise, to be wary in such matters,
of putting them by slightly, which such as rightly shall receive and own, are
like to find much sweetness and benefit by them, being such as duly search into
them: For Christ's blessing, Chap. 1.3. will not be void or vain, say vain men
what they can, or wicked men and devils act what they can to the contrary. See
Discovery of his Second and Third coming, next after the Parallels.

Observe. That of Daniel, 12.2, 3. is specially meant of the civil Resurrection
of the Jews, from their bondage and dispersion, the time of which is afterward
set down, verse. 12. which (in a vision of the dry bones, Ezekiel. 37. is showed to
Ezekiel) is many ways evident; (as afterward follows) and so that
Resurrection was to be carried on to the end of the forty five years, verse.
12. afterward; when Christ will fully deliver them both temporally and
spiritually, as verse. 1. Many arguments might be raised from the words to this
purpose, and from the time wherein the things are to be fulfilled, according
both to Ezekiel and Daniel: When it is said, Many shall arise, not all. And
again it is said, They shall be turned unto righteousness, that is, the
righteousness of Justification by Faith in Christ; which was contrary to the
Legal righteousness, that the Jews before sought after. Again some arise to
shame and contempt at that time, that is, by revolting from the faithful Jews
(then) by fears, or hopes, or threatenings, or the like, from the enemy; and so
fall into shame and perpetual contempt both temporally, spiritually, and
(consequently) eternally. It is observable that the Spirit of God sometimes
sets down Mysteries of Judgments in the order they are to be fulfilled, in
the resemblance of a day of Judgment, as here; and sometimes though such things
be done long before the end of the world; as in Rev. 6. When the sixth seal was
opened, in Constantines time, which is above one thousand two hundred years
ago, and yet there described as a day of Judgment, but yet it was but a
particular one for that time; but no Judgment said then to be set, nor Books
opened, and quick and dead both Judged, as will be at Christ's second and third
Comings; as was said in our second large Observation.

Observe. The harmoniousness and uniform agreement of these divine Truths,
respecting the Reign of Christ the thousand years (touched (at least briefly)
in diverse of the preceding Observations) shows them to come from God, and
their agreeing with the divine Oracles of the holy Spirit, scattered in all
parts of the sacred Scriptures (as in many particulars have been here already
set down, and as we may afterward point out, or at least briefly hint at) As
in the two Sessions of the great Day of Judgment: with the four particulars
proper to the day of Judgment. First, In both, the Judgment is said to be
set. Secondly, In both, The Books are said to be opened. Thirdly, In both,
first the quick: And Fourthly, In both, last the dead are judged. See the large
second Observation to these purposes. Again, these particulars are suitable to
the second personal coming of Christ, to be hereafter at the beginning, and
after the little space, when the thousand years shall be ended. See them at
large in the Plain Discovery after the Parallels. At the first Christ removes
the hinderers and opposers of his reigning in the World, toward whom God had
showed long Patience all the time of Christ's sitting at his right hand; and his
faithful Servants patience had been all along exercised by them: Yet
notwithstanding by their Faith and Patience all along, that Kingdom of Patience
(now almost at an end) have inherited the Promises hitherto, and still shall do
through the thousand years: But Psalm. 110. at the end of Christ's sitting at
Gods right hand in Heaven, he will begin to make his foes his footstool; by
destroying the first Gog and Magog, the Turk and Pope, by a complication of
Judgments; Ezekiel. 38, and 39. Rev. 19.11. and 16.18. Dan. 12.1. with Dan. 11.45.
And binding Satan. Rev. 20.1, 2, 3. See Observe. 3. Then God will set his King
upon his holy hill of Sion, Psalm. 2. and so perform the sure mercies to David
for ever, and that before himself: for all which it is plainly recorded (as is
to be well observed, 2 Samuel 7. in a great part of that Chapter) See Observe. 21.
And then he will make every knee to bow to him in Heaven, and Earth, and under
the Earth, Phil. 2. Having given him a Name above every Name, etc. For then
those in Heaven, Angels and Saints, come with him into the World, when God
shall bring his Son the second time into it; as Heb. 1.6. which was prophesied
of by David, Psalm. 97. throughout, and many other Scriptures. Vide Irenicon,
from page 42, to page 88. And then, all such as sleep in Jesus will God bring
with him, 1 Thessalonians. 4.14. See Obser. 21. And he will (then bodily) begin to
reward his Servants the Prophets, and his Saints, etc. Rev. 11.18. by that
blessed first Resurrection, Rev. 20.6. and (probably) as they were eminent in
grace, or sufferings, or both, so much the sooner. And in Earth, the Jews will
then become, upon a miraculous Call and Conversion, a very zealous and blessed
People, being beloved for their Fathers sake, Romans 11. See Observe. 15. The
heathen Gentiles will earnestly (then) seek Christ's face and favor; and even
make use (then) of the Jews interterest to procure Christ's favor, Isa. 6. Isa.
19. etc. The very inferior creatures then will be freed from their bondage of
co^uption, Romans 8. For there shall be no wicked men, that shall then dare to
abuse them, or tyrannize over them as formerly. See Observe. 21. yea even such
wicked men as will then be spared, proving hypocrites (as is probable) will
themselves be made slaves then, as diverse Scriptures seem to speak. For as sin
brought always with it a Spiritual slavery before; so it is like always
remarkably to add an outward visible slavery, to all evil men in the world
then: But those Creatures will be matter of Gods praise to the Saints, etc.
Christ will then delegate the power and management of that his Kingdom to the
Saints, for him, Dan. 7.18, 22, 27. even that Kingdom he received of the
Father, and which he gave to them (as he speaks) and that they may rule for
him, v. 27. First, to the first raised Saints, and then to other eminent Saints
in the natural life; as his enemies which he came to destroy, had ruled against
him before, which will be the just reason and cause of their ruin then, Luke
19.27.

The Covenant and Mercies to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, promised and sworn to
them personally, and yet never personally performed, in respect of their
enjoying the Land of Canaan: neither had their natural Seed that Land, as it
was made sure to that one seed, Christ, Gal. 3. for ever, Deuteronomy. 30. and Deuteronomy.
11.21. and that as the days of heaven upon the earth, etc. See Observe. 15. But
it shall be then accordingly performed as it was promised and sworn. As
likewise the Oath to David in David's Seed, and Savior, and Antitype, to reign
so long as the Sun and Moon shall endure. See Irenicon, page 77, to page 80.
And Observe. 21. So of the New Jerusalem, called, Jehova Shamma, Ezekiel. 48. ult.
which is said, to come down from God out of Heaven, Rev. 21. where the
Tabernacle of God, is said to be with men. See Observe. 3. And, the new Heavens
and new Earth. See Observe. 22. later end; with diverse other Contemporaries for
that thousand years, as the Tree of Life and pure River. See Iren. page 30.
whereby the blessed, gracious and glorious state of all things then are
decyphred, etc.

If these and the like points of Doctrine were enlarged upon, and sitly placed
in their due order of accomplishment, as the holy Scriptures set them forth,
with such Rational and Scriptural Illustrations, as are best suitable to their
natures amongst themselves, and in their sweet harmony, with all other divine
Truths, there set down; I doubt not but when once God shall give any sorts of
men such Faith, as to receive these things upon the divine authority of his
Word, they will appear both comfortable and excellent, and prove forcible to
such true Believers for increase of sanctification, above what they received
before, and make to them (as I have found by experience) many parts of holy
Scripture more clear and sweet, and many ways more useful, than otherwise they
can be to them; whereas, without these Doctrines, I find I did not, nor could
ever have rightly understood or known them; namely, what such Texts of
Scriptures, respecting these and the like Doctrines, do chiefly mean or drive
at; and I believe many others by degrees may find the like experience thereof
in time.

But I am now many ways restrained from enlarging therein, and therefore only
at present, hint these things to believing Christians in such respects, etc.

(...).
To Glory's God all Glory's due for aye:
To Him alone, this Due, let all his pay.

FINIS.
A brief representation of the Doctrine of Christ's Kingdom of Power to come
upon Earth, together with an endeavor to remove unjust prejudices from it: To
prevent the great sin and danger of being ashamed of Christ and his Truth, even
that great Truth of his Kingdom, Joh. 18.37. Before a sinful and an adulterous
generation: of both which we are warned. Mat. 8.38.
True Christian Friend, etc.
THE great and precious Truths respecting Christ Jesus our Saviors glorious
appearance to destroy Antichrist, to convert the Body of the Jewish Nation, to
begin his glorious Reign with his raised Saints on Earth for a thousand years,
etc. And all this probably shortly to be manifest in the World, which God has
been graciously pleased to discover unto me a poor weak and an unworthy
instrument, in such remarkable ways as he has led me, according to his Word,
and by the guidance and operation of his holy Spirit, and has so strongly
evidenced to my own soul (and which has been by sundry learned men and
judicious Christians acknowledged) and I doubt not will be owned more and more,
I am well assured are of so high concernment, both for the glory of God and our
Lord Jesus Christ, and for the edification and comfort of his People in the
last times, that I shall be ready by his Grace upon all fitting occasions, to
warn all such as truly fear God, to take heed either of slighting or rejecting
of them; for though they are of that nature that God has in his most wise
counsel reserved to be more especially known for his true Churches benefit in
these last days, when his ancient People the Jews are shortly to be converted
unto Christ their Savior (as the Apostle Paul says, Romans 11.) and all Israel
shall be saved; that even as the Mystery of the Gentiles Conversion was hidden
to the Jews, and even, for a time, to the Apostles themselves, when it was to
take place, until by Miracles, Word, Spirit, and Visions, they were powerfully
taught to acknowledge it: So theirs is like in great part to be hid to the
Gentiles. And as Antichrist was to come to be revealed to reign, to be consumed
with the breath of Christ's mouth, uttered by his Witnesses, but all to be
fulfilled in a great Mystery all along to the most in the World, saving unto
some few persons and places, unto whom by degrees God in special ways of mercy
has been pleased from time to time to manifest these things; and yet (I say)
but by degrees (for the accomplishment of God's Mysteries) have in all times
been very wonderful, and above men's reach ordinarily to discover. And as the
Apostle Paul was greatly honored and employed by the Jewish Rulers and learned
Rabbis of his time, whilst he persecuted the Christian Faith, yet when
afterward he preached that Gospel of Christ crucified, and that unto the
Gentiles, was as much by those Jews persecuted and opposed himself, and by all
of their way: so in a degree may it be expected of such as God manifests such
things unto, as he will accomplish in the end of the days (as Daniel's phrase
is) which shall appear to be against the interest of men in the world, or above
the ordinary strain of the times, that many (though not all) will slight and
oppose them, even until God fulfils them; and such their slighting and opposing
is like to be (as to the Jews of old) the occasion of such his fulfilling of
them, Dan. 12.10. But then many such, will they, nill they, must give glory to
God, as Rev. 11.13. for so it pleases God usually to hide great things from
the wise and prudent, and to reveal them unto babes, Luke 20.21.

But to prevent and remove prejudices:

First then, Let all serious Christian Spirits take notice that in those two
first Books I have endeavored to vindicate the true Doctrine of Christ's
Kingdom on Earth to come, from those unjust aspersions of Disloyalty to Kings
and Magistrates, as most opposite thereunto; which though happily it has been
unpleasing to some, yet otherwise I had not therein so approved my self unto
God, satisfied mine own conscience, done right to many sorts of men, nor to the
Doctrine which I have been taught (as I said before;) and this may three times
be seen in the said Books; in the first, page 15. somewhat largely; and page 41
and 42. reckoning such delusions among Satan's Vials on Christ's Kingdom: and in
the second Book, in the Preface of it, toward the end of the second leaf, etc.

Secondly, Let all such observe, that those things which (as I believe) I have
by God's special guidance published, are (for the substance) nothing but the
true Scriptural explications of the old Articles of the Faith (as Learned-men
had before manifested from the best Antiquity) and owned in great part in the
most pure Primitivetimes; But yet, upon a better ground for us, are now to be
owned from the most pure and infallible Word of Truth, that more sure Word of
Prophecy (as 2 Pet. 1.19.) whereunto all Christians are bound to take heed. For
as we profess to believe that Jesus Christ will come from the right hand of the
Father to judge the quick and the dead, and likewise to believe the
Resurrection of the Just, and the Life of the World to come, (as the Nicene
Creed, according to Heb. 2.5.) And how these things shall be fulfilled, our
Savior (who best knew) has himself instructed his Church (together with the
time when, in some good measure, as Rev. 11.18.) at his glorious appearing,
both beginning to judge the quick, then by destroying of them that destroyed
the Earth, ( i.e. Antichrist and his Accomplices) with the appearance of his
coming, as 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. and 2dly, by giving reward unto his Servants the
Prophets, and unto his Saints, and to all that fear his Name both small and
great; which is then to be done in the Resurrection of the Just, as is further
explained, Rev. 20.4, 5, 6. when also begins the Reign of the Saints with
Christ on Earth the said thousand years, while Satan also shall be bound, as
ver. 1, 2, 3. during which time our Savior shows that the Apostles shall sit
upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel, Mat. 19.28.
concerning which Period he more fully explains himself, Luke 22.29. I appoint
unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me; where his Throne must
be distinct from his Fathers, where he sat on his right hand in Heaven, as
Rev. 3.21. is clearly explained: which Kingdom, appointed to him by his Father,
the Apostle shows, 1 Cor. 15.24. at the end the same shall be delivered again
to his Father, when ends the said Kingdom that the Father had appointed to him
with his Saints on Earth, which began at his beginning to judge the quick and
the dead, at his first appearing (as was showed) which continued all the said
thousand years, and the finishing of the Judgment of the Just and Wicked,
concerning which there are so abundant and evident proofs in Scripture that
(when Antichristian prejudices shall once be removed, even that spirit that
confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, as 1 John 4.3. which
such do not in the Apostles sense, that acknowledge not the fulfilling of all
Christ's Offices in their seasons, as the Scripture holds them out, till his
Mediatorship be consummate, which the spirit of Antichrist has all along
opposed, etc. Then (I say) I confidently believe those glorious Truths will
evidently be manifest and received in the true Church of Christ.

Thirdly, Now for the Subjects of that Kingdom of Christ on Earth (that we may
give a little further taste of the Doctrine thereof, before we proceed to the
removal of the prejudices against it) They will be first the Body of the Nation
of the Jews, etc. for the most part miraculously converted upon Christ's
glorious appearance, and probably his speaking to them (as in that pattern of
St. Paul's Conversion, and of many Jews, about three hundred years after
Christ, as in Mr. Mede's Answer to Dr. Twisse's second Letter) See Zech. 12.10,
11. with Rev. 1.7. Isa. 66.8. and Isa. 60. with many other Texts of Scripture.
2dly. Another sort of subjects then, will be, Converted Heathen Gentiles then
to come in, Isa. 60.5, 6, etc. Isa. 19. who shall be then Christ's Inheritance,
and the utmost parts of the Earth his Possession, as Psalm. 2.8. which the
Apostle reckons the greatest riches of the Gentiles. Romans 11.12. If the casting
off the Jews was the riches of the Gentiles, how much more their fullness! And
afterward, v. 25. he reveals it as a Mystery (to humble us Gentiles in the
mean time) that blindness was in part happened to the Jews, until a first
fullness of the Gentiles was come in: which our Savior expresses, by the
fulfilling of the times of the Gentiles, Luke 21.24. for so long was the Jews
calamity and miserable Captivity to endure from Jerusalems destruction, as is
evident from the context. 3dly. Christ's chief and best Subjects, or Assessors
and Deputies then in that his Kingdom, will be the blessed raised Saints in the
New Jerusalem come down from God, Rev. 21.2. who is said to be the Maker and
Builder of that City, Heb. 11.10, 16. which are they, our Savior says, that
are counted worthy of that World, and the Resurrection of the Just, called
there also the Children of the Resurrection, Luke 20.35, 36. even in that
habitable World, as the Apostle calls it, Heb. 2.5. And at that time when God
brings his Son again into the World, Heb. 1.6. Where those which God gave him
before, shall see his own Glory given him, as Mediator, by the Father, as a
manifestation of his eternal love to him, who he knew would perfectly fulfill
that Office; and (therefore in his last Testament-Will) he bequeatheth it to
them in the presence of his Father and his Disciples, saying, John 17.24.
Father, I will that they, etc. Observe well both the words and the context,
they are very weighty, all full to this purpose, that those raised Saints shall
there be where Christ is in his own Kingdom, as Dan. 7. there beholding his
Glory, and many other Texts to the like purpose. Consider in the Books, wherein
many other excellent and sweet points of Christian Doctrine to serious spirits
may be observable bordering upon these, which to such may (by God's Grace) be
exceeding available to promote Grace and Piety, and that from a great advantage
above what usually has been taught, or is yet expected by most Christians,
namely, from the weighty consideration of the happiness of the whole man both
in soul and body together, and that upon Earth, where those Saints were
formerly despised and suffered, when their enemies shall not live in body, Isa.
26.14. but they shall live with Christ in a triumphant state of Glory, Rev.
20.4, 5. and that above a thousand years sooner than is ordinarily expected;
and this happy estate will be a sure entrance into the possession of eternal
blessedness in the highest Heavens. Men use too greatly to prize, and very
dearly purchase (many times with the loss of their precious souls) their
earthly falsely supposed perpetuities; and when they have done all, know not
that they or their heirs shall possess (I will not say enjoy them) for a
thousand days on Earth; but suppose a lawful acquired purchase, and left
ordinarily with the greatest hope of blessing by a Godly Parent to a gracious
Christian Posterity, yet how soon do successions many times here degenerate,
and in some few hundreds of years how are Estates and Nations turned up-side
down, as sacred and other Histories abundantly evidence! and the best men's best
estate is here full of evil as well as good, bitter sweets at the best; yea,
they and every man in his best estate is altogether vanity, Psalm. 39. And does
Christ by his own peculiar teaching (and his evidence must needs be best)
assure his faithful Servants he has procured and appointed unto them not a
small pittance, but a Kingdom, and one that cannot be shaken; not for a life
here, or a few successions, but for a thousand years on Earth; free not only
from outward enemies, but in the judgment of the best Christians from far
worse, scil. from Sin and Satan, with all their retinue, Shame, Sorrow, Death,
Hell, with all that black Regiment that guards them, etc. On the other hand;
What brutish madness do wise men reckon such to be possessed with that cast
away a great Estate with the casting of a Dye, or by any other sinful earthly
frenzy? but what is it for any worldly vanity, with a curse hereunto entailed,
and sometimes, pursuing it close at the heels, to cast away a sure Christian
Interest in such a Kingdom, as Christ's is sure to be on earth; so glorious, so
satisfying (as every condition of the faithful after death is satisfying fully)
so secure, every way blessed in what they enjoy at that period, and in what
they know they shall enjoy to all eternity! For as evil men are made to know
all the degrees of their cursed estate, both of soul and body; likewise to come
to their exceeding horror, from the very moment of their death, when their
Conscience being let loose, is their accuser, witness, judge, executioner and
continual tormentor; so godly men appear to know from the very moment of their
departure hence, every happy condition they are to pass through to eternity:
therefore of this state, said the representatives, Rev. 5.10. almost one
thousand six hundred years ago, we shall reign upon earth; so that on the one
hand, upon this said great advantage, Christians may be urged by the Apostles
argument (a fortiori) more strongly, as the good is so great and near
approaching: wherefore, Beloved brethren, since these things are so, what
manner of men ought we to be, in all holy manner of conversation? etc.

And on the other hand, in respect of evil men (a fortiori) they will not only
lose such happiness, which they will not now believe, but they will presently
know they have lost it, and that it will from thenceforth be irrecoverable; and
which ever will make them miserable, they will find they were taken hence in
wrath, from the tenders of mercy which they had, and shall never have tenders
thereof again made before Christ's second coming, or at his coming, nor after
the last resurrection: so that whether thus taken away in
particular-displeasure, or in the common destruction of the wicked, they will
thoroughly know each miserable estate which shall abode them, privatively,
positively, as well their poenam damni, as poenam sensus; as well what they
have irreparably lost, as what in every estate to eternity will be inflicted
upon them.

Qu. But here by the way is one great Question; How will this Doctrine be
proved; for many great and learned men do not assent to it?

Answ. Whether any Doctrine that is founded evidently and strongly on Gods
Word, is owned by learned men, or eminent men in the world, will not be the
question at last, in foro Conscientiae, at least if thou had pausedly read
with due attention, or heard the sound of such Doctrine of Christ, thou
ought to search, whether those things are so. Men on both parts are to be
heard more in regard of their Scripture evidence, for what they affirm, than in
any other regard, in the things of God and the salvation and happiness of
souls. But for this Doctrine, it has been, and is abundantly proved, if men
would seriously seek information, and so as never will be refelled; and I doubt
not but will more and more with many of Gods People be owned and improved; but
it will in this be found (as in all other branches of Christian Faith) it must
be Gods Spirit must persuade men to believe it, though they know it, for none
can believe what they know not; therefore it will necessarily follow, when they
have the knowledge of it, they must earnestly pray, and meditate, and consider,
and importune the Father of Mercies, to know in this respect his will; yea, and
though they be reckoned wise and prudent, and learned too in such matters, they
must go to Christ as babes, to be taught by his Spirit: Parts, Learning,
Authority of men, may work conviction, but cannot persuade men to own and apply
unto themselves any divine and precious truths of God in Scripture, for the
benefit of his Church. And therefore (Christian) if this Doctrine held out to
thee be of God, thou art bound carefully and diligently to enquire after it,
for if thou be faithful, it is part of thine inheritance, and exceeding
useful and needful for thee too in the last days, that the evil consequences
of rejecting of it, may not inevitably fall upon thee. On the other hand, there
are degrees of glory to be obtained of the Saints, For one star differs from
another star in glory. For any through the rejecting of such Doctrine of the
Gospel, but to lose the happiness, in the more speedy resurrection of the Just
some few hundreds of years, may well be deemed a great loss. And as the
Ancients judged there will be (mora) a deferring of some (probably) upon such
an account, how should men therefore seek to be strengthened in all kind of
Gospelconsolation, etc.

Object. But those Scriptures have been otherwise interpreted by many able and
good men in an other sense, only for spiritual consolation, etc.

Answ. That many able and good men have so understood them, has been because
of the unjust scandals, etc. that a long time have been cast upon this Doctrine
of Truth by the subtilty of Satan and vanity of men, or at least for want of
discovery; but how weakly and insufficiently some who might of later times have
had more light set before them, have gone about to evade the Truth, may to a
discerning impartial eye, easily appear; that while they have gainsaid the
Truth, have many times laid down evident proofs and confirmations thereof, so
that their own Writings might sufficiently manifest their mistakes; besides,
God has raised many able and judicious persons of later times, that have both
vindicated these Truths, and sufficiently answered what by others (though
otherwise men of good account) have unwarrantably been set down to the
contrary, as has been showed, etc.

Object. But some may happily say, they are satisfied with the knowledge of
what is and has been accounted necessary to salvation, and think it not
needful to trouble themselves with things dark and mysterious, though they be
truths, etc.

Answ. As God has works to fulfill in all Ages of his Church, so has he
needful Truths to be owned and believed in several conditions and estates his
People are to pass through in this world; but these great Truths concerning the
right understanding of what God does and is about to accomplish in these last
times, are now more in their proper season (as was said) are his more distinct
and clear explications of some Articles of Christian Faith; and though the
Scriptures, however they have been plentiful, yet have formerly of old been
more dark in setting them down (according to the divine wisdom and pleasure of
the incomprehensible God) and yet in much grace to his true Church, in these
last times, has made them very evident, that we may by no means conceive those
plentiful portions of sacred Scripture, respecting these things, are now in
their season to be overlooked; since God has such excellent ends in revealing
them to his People, both for his and our Saviors glory, and his Peoples
seasonable and needful consolation; for there is no word of Grace written for
believing souls, but they know it in its due season and use, to be more of
worth than all the world: and therefore this general charge Wisdom gives her
Children, Prove. 2.4. To seek her as silver, and search for her as hid
treasures; verse. 5. whereby they may understand the fear of the Lord, and find
the knowledge of God; with many like encouragements. And our Savior, the
wisdom of the Father, enjoyneth men for seasonable Truths, in his Lifetime, to
search the Scriptures (then) the same charge lies upon all his People now,
which whosoever endeavors faithfully, shall find his blessing accordingly in so
doing; and then mysteries before, are no longer mysteries to them to whom God
reveals them for the good of others.

Obj. But such as seek into such Mysteries do often mistake and differ one from
the other, etc.

Answ. The great things of God are sometimes so high that he is pleased but to
reveal them by degrees, and in their proper seasons; yet every degree (of such
he imployes to seek into them) really promotes his end, and when his time is
come, either by searching, or revelation, or both (or as he pleases) he makes
them known; and when they are so they are highly to be prized, and duly to be
improved; and though in some things less essential some mistakes may be amongst
some good men, and differences of apprehensions, yet still by such searching,
the Word will resolve them. I must acknowledge to God's glory, before men and
Angels, I have to my own great satisfaction found the experience thereof, which
I have therefore in order set down sincerely and faithfully, with the sense of
mine own weakness, for other men's profit and advantage, (though the intent of
that Treatise (called The Irenicon) was to prove such a Kingdom of Christ was
to come:) yet, as I found a remarkable hand of God upon me, many ways leading
me to discern and acknowledge a personal appearance of Christ, after I had laid
down some reasons of my former apprehensions of a mystical, which I likewise
sufficiently answered, so, as may make much for the advantage of such as will
duly weigh that work of God upon me, by whom with my seeking (with small help
of men) I desired to be guided so, as ever to have an eye and an ear open to
the directions of his Word and Spirit, of the proceedings, wherein I have
endeavored in sundry places, on several occasions, to give an account
advantageous to serious Christian souls, and greater than if it had been
otherwise, as upon sundry considerations might be made to appear; and though in
such subjects (for diverse reasons) men that write of them cannot well be much
in explications and applications, lest they be too voluminous, in laying down
the principles and confirmation, as the foundation of them, in the first place
necessary, yet afterward it will be easy (by God's assistance) for all sorts
of understanding Christians to do it for their own benefit, and the edification
of others. And to which purpose I shall likewise, by God's Grace, be ready upon
any call of his to approve my self to all men's consciences in the clearing and
improving of such needful Truths, according to my measure, and as he may give
me opportunity, (which happily I conceive may be the chief work remaining to me
in this world) though happily they may find resistance from Satan, the end of
whose Kingdom they hold out; or from several sorts of men, either upon
prejudice or want of searching and trying them by the Scriptures, or from some
evil disposition of spirit or other, or worldly engagements to the contrary,
etc. as it has usually been with the Witnessings of other Truths of God in
their seasons: but this is the comfort in such case, Truth shall prevail, and
Gods Word shall stand when all is done; for he that is with such as witness for
it, is Almighty, and will suffer no Truth of his utterly to fall to the ground
(though for a time it may suffer an eclypse) but in the mean time the work of
his Witnesses is with him their Lord, and their labor with their God. And as
no Truth of God is in its season to be rejected, so concerning these there
seems to be less reason in this regard; because the Spirit of God seems in all
times of his Messengers to be so abundant in giving testimony thereunto, that
men may not only find much in Moses, and the Prophets, and the Psalms (as our
Savior (then) directed to search for his first coming in his Kingdom of
Patience, Vide Irenicon, p. 81, 82, 83 etc.
but concerning his second coming and Kingdom of Power then to be set up in the
World) they may have abundant evidence besides, from his Apostles, Evangelists,
and many sorts of persons, there recorded, to have been divinely inspired; and,
after all, our Savior's most sure Explications and Applications of all the
former strongly asserted, and sent by his beloved Disciple St. John, unto the
Churches for their Edification and Comfort, unto his said Coming again, as all
along by the quotations in the said two Books (by his remarkable hand sent
abroad of late) may more fully appear to such as duly weigh the Scriptures.

Obj. But it may be alleged against these things, as it was at our Saviors
first coming, Have any of the Rulers believed on him? So, Do the Great, and
Learned, or Eminent Men in the World, of many Ages past, acknowledge these
things?

Answ. It was a great stumbling block to many sorts of the People of the Jews,
that their Rulers did not; But were they not both by our Savior (therefore)
characterized by Blind leaders of the blind, etc. and the same obstacle has
many times since, and still is, like to fall in the way of many. But the
Scripture informs men on the other hand, Not many Wise, not many Learned, not
many Noble, etc. though some of all those, etc. So neither are these Truths
without some Witnesses of all such ranks; and many in the purest primitive
times, besides more late ones (as has been abundantly not long since
published) but while men (as we hinted before) have more respect to Men, than
God's Word, it is no wonder they are in some great matters misled: Therefore
(in a word) they are to be warned that they pin not their faith on other men's
sleeves, but with the Noble Bereans search by the holy Scriptures, whether
these things be so, if they would stand upon a sure foundation, etc. It matters
not to thee (saithful Christian) who are the persons that plead for or against
any divine Truth, whilst thou may find the Word of God evidently to give
witness to it; and if in this thou follow any sort of men rather than Christ's
truth, thou will certainly be misled above what thou might in other things;
for our Savior has in these things forewarned thee, Luke 18.8. Their Faith
will be wanting when he comes, as in the latter part of the foregoing Chapter
is particularly described; wherefore they should pray and not faint, etc.

Object. But there is one dangerous shifting here comes on to be avoided. i.e.
Many good men, able, faithful and well approved, do not at all own such
Doctrines, and some reckon them to be little better than fancies, etc.

Answ. No good men, however qualified or approved in this world, are perfect.
Who better, or equal to the Apostles of Christ? yet the chiefest of them showed
their infirmities. Peter and Paul were so at difference, that they parted from
each other; and Barnabas was far carried away with the dissimulation of a
mistaken party; and there was much ado among some of them, before the
believing Gentiles could be received, though the Word and Will of God was for
it, till God made the business out of question (but the evidence of the Jews
conversion, and things contemporary with them, have much more clearness that
they shall be accomplished: and though good men in many things have been upheld
in upright ways, pleasing unto God, yet they may fail in others; and what
sorts of good men have not had their failings? and is not that vanity in many
able, approved and learned men, that they are apt so to conceive of their
light, or parts, or learning, or experience, that nothing is to be owned and
received, that is not suited to their own standard? and all is but fancy that
is not comprised within the summary of their Faith, although they have not
searched and tried them by the true touchstone of the Word? But let all such,
be they who they will, either in their own esteem, or in the esteem of others,
take heed of being in such regard resisters of any divine Truth. God has more
Truths yet to reveal, than any times past have been hitherto capable of
receiving, or that these times we are in can attain to; but will be revealed
and received too, at the time when his Temple shall be opened in Heaven; and
when men shall see in his Temple the Ark of his Testament, Rev. 11.19. But he
has now in our times revealed some things which he would have owned by us,
which have not of many years past been so manifest and clear, but are now very
seasonable to be many ways improved in these last days.

Object. But the Teachers of such or such Doctrines have many of them had such
faylings, or given such offense, as occasion others to stumble, or they are so
mean in esteem as not much to be regarded, etc.

Answ. Though perhaps some have been such, yet not all: there are very ancient
as well as modern Witnesses thereof, and in most times some, and good and
eminent men too, as well as meaner persons, if men would impartially enquire;
and much I doubt not might be fairly answered to particular exceptions (if
things were duly weighed, but it has been usual to take up any vain pretenses
against what is really good; but the rule of old was non quis, sed quid. Our
Savior has two cautions in hearing; take heed what, and take heed how; but he
reserveth to himself liberty to send his messages by any sort of men: As we
must not have his Faith with respect of persons; so not receive or own it in
respect of persons, but as founded upon the Scriptures of Truth. How often has
the looking asquint upon Gods Messengers, upon some appearing or pretended
occasion of disrespect or other, proved a sad judgment unto many to whom they
have come, and who have been sent by him in great turnings of times, that have
not been assaulted in some kind, respecting their persons? Those rebels of old
excited one another to smite the Prophet with the tongue, that they might not
give heed to any of his words, Jer. 18.18. However, notwithstanding the worst
that can be pretended against men's persons, men may consider, that Gold that is
found but in dunghills ordraughts, if by the touchstone it be approved to be
Gold, deserves to be laid up (when washed from the soil upon it) as well as
that which had been kept closely before, in the Treasury or Cabinet. Wisdom
will be justified of her Children, in all her Oracles, for this reason, because
they are her Oracles. Gods Servants here are to have their grain of allowance;
but the vain World uses to preoccupate the judgment of the Saints unjustly by
harsh censures and hard speeches, as Antichrist has done their reign to come
by wicked Idolatry.

Object. But these Doctrines, etc. shake the foundation of worldly interest and
enjoyments: for if Christ's glorious appearance will be so terrible, and work
such desolations and changes, and that its approach is nigh, what will become
of Possessors treasures and their owners?

Answ. Good to the good, and evil to the evil, Rev. 11.18. and therefore God
seems to cause such seasonable Truths to be known and published in these last
days, to loosen men's hearts from the world, and especially from their
wickedness, and as Daniel counseled Nebuchadnezzar, when he was to be driven
from his most stately Palace to feed among the Beasts, Dan. 4.27. Let men break
off their sins by righteousness, and their iniquities by showing mercy to the
poor ( viz. Gods poor) etc. and like to our Saviors wise Steward, let them
make themselves friends with the Mammon of iniquity, whilst time serves, that
they may receive them into their houses, when they are out of their
stewardships; even those houses and mansions which our Savior went to prepare
for his little little flock in his Kingdom; and at his return will give them
possession of them with himself.

But here to be short: Let sober and serious Christians further consider, that
God has not said so very much of these things in his Word to no purpose, but
every truth contained in his Word is useful in its season to his Church,
working (as all holy Scriptures do) Sanctification in his People: besides take
notice, that mystical Truths may now from the Word be expected to be revealed
in great measure, when that point of time is hastening to us, wherein the
Mystery of God will be finished, Rev. 10.7. And according to Mark 13.32. which
Text many stumble at. Christ says, (that as man) he knew not the day and hour
of the last times (at least not strictly taken) yet even then, he being such a
person in whom the Godhead dwelled bodily, as Col. 2.9. did then to his
Disciples make known much of these things, Matthew. 24. Luke 20, and 21. Mark.
13. and in other places (at least in some latitude) although in a strict sense
the day and hour of Christ's coming may not be known to us, by means of
incomplete or broken years, or some imperfection of Chronology, or the like, as
God is pleased to overruled, etc. So likewise when Christ tells his Disciples,
Acts 1.5, 6. It is not for you to know the times and seasons (then in the state
they were in at present) which the Father has put in his own power. Yet even
then he tells them in the next verse. of being endued with power from on high,
on Pentecost, then near at hand; when they were not only fitted for the work of
the Ministry, and to work Miracles, but to know the great Mysteries of holy
Scriptures, and of Daniel in particular; as was seen in Peter, Acts 3.19, 20,
21. in James, Acts 15.15, 16, 17. In St. Paul abundantly, in his Epistles, and
even in Jude's short Epistle, verse. 14. But above all, the beloved Disciple,
St. John, is taught to unlock all the formerly shut up Mysteries of the greatly
beloved Prophet Daniel, even to those times, and that by Christ himself, in the
whole Book of the Revelations, thenceforward to be useful for his Churches
successively, for the time of the end, for which they were reserved (as is
observable, Dan. 8.17, 19. Chap. 11.40. and 12.4, 9. So that from that time
they were unsealed by our Savior and his holy Spirit, who through all times of
the Seals, has hitherto opened his Mysteries in their orders, Rev. 6. and Rev.
8. etc. much of this nature might be added, not only to remove the frivolous,
and erroneous conceits of many respecting these things, whilst they little
consider in what Glory and Majesty Christ will then come in the Clouds of
Heaven, or with Clouds, as Rev. 1.7. accompanied with all his holy Angels. And
as Enoch long since prophesied, Jude 14. with ten thousands of his Saints, who
shall then come with him, 1 Thessalonians. 1. ult. and 4.14. that he then uniting their
Spirits to their Bodies, may make them alive and remain against his last coming
(as verses 15, 17.) and may so make them capable to behold his glory in the New
Jerusalem the thousand years, John 17.4. with Rev. 20.

In sum then (Christian) take notice of these representations of the points of
Doctrine, respecting Christ's comings and Kingdom on earth.

First, These Points, as all other divine Truths, are Uniform, See this
considered in many particulars in Obser. 31.
and bear an excellent harmony with themselves, and all other true Doctrines,
and no ways twharting or disagreeing in themselves, or with any others, which
sound Christians own or profess, as by comparing particulars will appear.

Secondly, There is nothing new in them in substance, being only fuller
explications of divine Mysteries, before more darkly couched, yet contained in
the Word of God.

Thirdly, They will more and more be manifest to have no greater enemies than
ignorance of Gods Divine Counsels revealed, and sinful unbelief or
profaneness, being of themselves sacred and sanctifying Truths; which likewise
is another evidence of their divine excellency.

Lastly, That now they are in their due season especially made known by the
especial grace of God, to be published to and improved by his faithful People
upon whom the ends of the World are coming.

And as for some misapprehensions of some good men to whom Mysteries of this
nature are not yet discovered; whence not only a strange slighting of these
great things of God sometimes proceeds; but likewise hard speeches both
concerning the things, and Christ's own witnesses of them according to his Word,
who are therein to be pitied and prayed for with endeavors of information, if
God afford opportunity, and shall be pleased to vouchsafe his blessing: However
all men herein are to be admonished, that they offend not any such ways
against Christ more than they are aware of, by contemning or speaking evil of
those divine matters they understand not, and therefore do not believe, yet
will be fulfilled in their season. Amen.

FINIS.
Errata's formerly omitted, though smaller faults be passed by.
IN the Forrunner. page 10. before line 26. add [of the eternal decrees] p. 34.
r. Rev. 13. in the marg. In Irenicon, p. ult. Chron. Table, l. 18. r. 410. In
the Preface, p. 3. l. 1. r. witnessings. In the Advertisement, l. 19. 1.
supernal. p. 84. l. 27. r. Pharisees, not Disciples. p. 100. l. 26. 1. Ideom.
p. 101. l. 39. r. special, not spiritual. p. 109. l. 6. r. thy. In Parallel. p.
36. l. 9. r. incheate. Plain Discovery, p. 1. l. 4. r. new.


