IMPRIMATUR,
Liber cui Titulus, [ A Vindication of Some Protestant Principles, of
Church-Unity, etc.]

Nov. 16. 1687. Guil* Needham Rmo. in Christo P. D. Wilhelmo Archiep, Cant. a
Sacris.

A VINDICATION OF SOME Protestant Principles OF Church-Unity and
Catholick-Communion, From the Charge of Agreement with the CHURCH of ROME. IN
ANSWER To a late PAMPHLET, Entitled, An Agreement between the Church of
ENGLAND and the Church of ROME, evinced from the Concertation of some of her
Sons with their Brethren the Dissenters. By WILLIAM SHERLOCK, D. D. Master of
the TEMPLE.

LONDON: Printed for William Rogers, at the Sun over against St.
Dunstan's-Church, in Fleet Street, 1688.

TO THE READER.
I HERE Present thee with a Book which the Importunity of our Roman Adversaries
has extorted from me; I had rather have employed my Pen upon some more useful
Argument; but in such a state as this, we cannot always be our own Chusers. The
Design of the Book I Answer seems to be, To revive some Old Disputes between us
and the Dissenters, and to raise New Jealousies in them, if not of our
Inclination to Popery, yet of a great deal of Popish Leaven yet remaining among
us, which ought to be purged out; for there is nothing such men dread more,
than that the Dissenters should at this time entertain any kind Thoughts of the
Church of England. The Plot, I confess, is well enough laid, were not all Wise
Men of both Parties aware of it, and that makes it ridiculous enough; and
indeed the Book it self is an odd kind of mixture; he gives very good words to
the Dissenters, and at the same time uses no other but their own Arguments
against the Church of England, to establish some main Points of Popery, which
whether it be a piece of Courtship to them, or a sly Affront, ought to be
considered: As for our Agreement with the Church of Rome, if I have not
sufficiently baffled that Pretense, I will never write more; but this of it
self was too mean a Design to confute that which no body, not the Objector
himself, believed; and therefore I will be bold to say, that I have abundantly
confuted the Popish Supremacy from those very Principles on which this Author
would found our Agreement; I intended a Preface to have explained some Notions
about the Church, which might have been of use to ordinary Readers for the
better understanding this Answer, but it swelled so much upon my hands, that by
the advice of some Friends I have reserved it for a distinct Treatise, which
shall quickly follow.

W. S.

AN ANSWER TO THE PREFACE.
SINCE this Author has thought fit to single me out, as an example of this
pretended Agreement between the Church of England and the Church of Rome, I
shall undertake my own defense, which will give me no other trouble, but a
short diversion from some better designs; which I suppose is all that was hoped
for from this Pamphlet.

For whoever this Author be (which I am not curious to know) I cannot think him
so weak, as to hope at this time of Day, that he could persuade our Dissenters,
That the Clergy of the Church of England, are not the Chief, if not the only
Opposers of Popery, and Defenders of the Protestant Religion; or that,
notwithstanding all their appearing Zeal against Popery, they are still Papists
in their hearts, and are ready to embrace a Cassandrian accommodation whenever
the Government pleases; and therefore I could be very well contented such
suggestions as these should pass without an Answer, as far as I am concerned in
them; for let any man that knows me, think me a Papist if he can; I am pretty
confident, this Author believes me far enough from it, or else I might have
expected better words from him; but it is fit, that such little arts as these
should be exposed to the scorn and contempt of Mankind, and that our Dissenters
should be made sensible what a mean Opinion such Writers have of them, who hope
to impose upon them by such mean arts. For to begin with that great Cry of
late, that the Clergy of the Church of England are now the Chief, if not the
only opposers of Popery, and Defenders of the Protestant Religion; Is there not
good reason for it? Have they not defended the Church of England against all
the little arts and shifts of the Church of Rome? What is that then which he
calls the unlucky mistake, and which the unwary Readers of Books are to be
warned against? That those unanswerable Books, which have of late been written
against Popery, were not written by the Clergy of the Church of England? That he
dares not say. What is the mistake then? That these men, who confute Popery,
are not Protestants, but Papists? Methinks their confuting Popery is no great
sign of their being Papists; especially when Papists are not able to defend
their Religion against them. I am sure, if their Arguments will keep men from
turning Papists, they are notable opposers of Popery, and defenders of the
Protestant Religion, whatever they are themselves; and what hurt it would do
any man to be confirmed in the Protestant Religion, though it were by the
Writings of concealed Papists, I cannot guess. Should the Pope himself write a
Book against Popery, if the Arguments were good, I should like the Book never
the worse for the sake of the Author. I deny not, but such things may be done;
Papists may write against Popery, and Protestants for it, with an intention to
betray the Cause which they undertake to defend; but if this were his rule of
guessing, there would be much more just cause to suspect, that our late Popish
Writers were Protestants, than that our Protestant Writers were Papists. When
they are able to Answer their Books against Popery, we will give them leave to
call them Papists still; but could they have done that, they would have allowed
them to have been Protestants still.

But what course does our Author take to undeceive unwary Readers at this time,
and to prove these Confuters of Popery to be Papists? Why, by acquainting them
with the avowed Principles of some of our Clergy about those Points wherein the
very life of Popery consists, and on which the whole System of that Religion is
founded: In doing which, he has with some clearness demonstrated the agreement
of Opinion between the Church of England men, and the Church of Rome, to be so
exact and full, that if the Government should so design, it were but dictum
factum, according to their Doctrine; and a Cassandrian Peace might be patched
up presently with Rome. This is a notable discovery indeed! Do any of these men
then embrace any Doctrines of the Church of Rome? No; but it seems, they agree
with the Church of Rome in some Fundamental Principles, whereon the whole
System of Popery is founded; That shall be examined anon: But suppose it at
present; Do they draw the same Conclusions from these Principles, which the
Church of Rome does? No; but they ought to do so: so this Author thinks; But
suppose they do not think so; Are they ever the nearer Popery, though their
Principles be the same, if their Conclusions are as distant as Protestancy is
from Popery? If they be so well disposed to a Cassandrian Peace, I pray, What
hinders it? Will Not, they receive us upon these terms? What? Not after all their
softning representations to invite men into the bosom of the Church? When they
are so fond of all new Converts, will they reject the Cassandrian Divines of
the Church of England? When he adds, That his Majesty will admit of no such
accomodations, any one would suspect that these poor Cassandrians had been
suing for reconciliations, and had been rejected; that the mollifying
character, of a Papist truly represented, and the Bishop of Condom's Exposition
of the Catholic Faith, which is as soft, though not so honest, as Cassanders
consultation, would not now be allowed of at Court, and all for the sake of
that more glorious design of Liberty of Conscience. But why might not
Cassandrians be reconciled to the Church, and Dissenters have their Liberty
too? This Prefacer does not tell his Story well; he has Forehead enough, but
wants somewhat within.

Well, but it was necessary in this present juncture to put some check to the
insulting Talk of the Clergy, who would be thought to be the only Champions
against Popery: That the Clergy of the Church of England, have industriously
and successfully opposed the Corruptions of the Church of Rome, will be
acknowledged by all but Papists, and they feel it to their cost; but that they
are the only Champions against Popery, I assure you, is not pleasing to them,
for they would be very glad to see their dissenting Brethren put to their
helping Hand, and be as industrious to preserve those from Popery, who have a
Veneration for their Authority, as we are; and upon these terms we could
heartily forgive them all their former unjust imputations of Popery to us; but
that our Popish Adversaries find it necessary in this juncture to give some
check to this Popery-opposing Clergy, I do not wonder, and I believe no body
will, tho methinks the best way of giving a check to their Brags, had been to
confute their Books, and they had work enough before them, had they liked this
way; for I can tell them a great many Books which they have never answered yet,
and I believe never will, I am sure never can to any purpose: But they come too
late to persuade people now that we are Papists, especially when they are so
open-hearted as to tell all the World what their design is; for if we were
Papists, no man will believe that they would be the first men who would
discover us; it may be they may know some few Cassandrian Churchmen, but those
they keep to themselves yet, and leave others to guess at them.

But what Check does he intend to give to this Insulting Talk of the Clergy? A
very terrible one truly; for from this Essay, it is pretty evident, That the
Church of England must either freely declare, that as to the particulars
instanced in, she is agreed with the Romanist, and that the Controversy lies
only between the Church of Rome and the Protestant Dissenter; or she must
honestly renounce the Principles she has cleav'd unto, when any of her Sons
wrote against the Nonconformists, and confess that she has been persecuting
them for their firm adherence to Protestant Doctrines. This is to triumph
before the Victory, as our Author will quickly find; but however, for my part,
I am glad it is no worse; for I do not see how this will much humble us with
relation to our Disputes against Popery: Should I find any Principles that ever
I have maintained against Dissenters, give any advantage to Popery, I would
certainly conclude them to be false, and make no scruple at all to renounce
them; for that which is false cannot follow from that which is true; and how
great a humiliation soever this were, a man might dispute heartily against
Popery still; and let them but lay the charge of Persecution upon this issue,
which I grant is the true and fair state of the Case, (for Persecution is only
for Righteousness sake) and if our Dissenters were in the right, I will readily
grant that those who made or executed those Laws against Dissenters, who had
any hand or heart in it, were guilty of Persecution. There may be unreasonable
severities used upon other accounts, but every man who suffers for following
his Conscience, is not therefore persecuted; but he who suffers for being in
the right, for believing and doing what God commands.

The next discovery this Essay makes is this, That ever since the breach
between the Church of England, and the Protestant Dissenter has had its being,
we have left us uothing but the Name, the Shadow of a Protestant Church of
England, and that so far as she differs from the Dissenter, she agrees with the
Roman Catholic. How glad would these Gentlemen be, to have none thought
Protestants but Dissenters, who in this present juncture are a more gentile and
better natured sort of Protestants, than this Shadow of the Church of England,
which haunts them like a Ghost or Spectre: But when did the Church of England
commence such a mere Name and Shadow? Ever since the breach with the Protestant
Dissenter. But is not the Church of England the same now that it was before
that breach? And if it were a good substantial Protestant Church then, How
comes it to be a Shadow now? Suppose what he says were true, That as far as we
differ from the Protestant Dissenter, we agree with the Roman Catholic. The
Church of England may be never the worse Protestant Church for that, which is
placed in the middle, between two Extremes, the Dissenter and the Papist. The
Church of England Reformers never made a mere Opposition to the Church of Rome,
the Rule of their Reformation, but Reformed only those abuses of the Church of
Rome which needed a Reformation; and when this Prefacer can prove that we have
not Reformed enough, we will Reform again; for we are not obstinate against
convictions, and never think it too late to Reform; however, if as far as we
differ from the Dissenter, we are Roman Catholics, yet certainly, as far as we
agree with the Dissenter, we are not; and that is enough to make us somewhat
more than the Shadow of a Protestant Church. For we agree with them in our
opposition to the Popes Supremacy, (as will presently appear) to Infallibity,
to Transubstantiation, to the Sacrifice of the Mass, to the Adoration of the
Host, to the Worship of Saints and Angels, and the Virgin Mary, to the Worship
of Images, to Prayers in an unknown Tongue, to the denying People the use of
the Bible, to the Five new Popish Sacraments, to Indulgencies, Purgatory,
Prayers for the Dead, the Merit of Works, and such like Popish Innovations and
Corruptions; and to oppose these I take to be good substantial Protestancy. And
as for those things wherein we differ from the Dissenters, we are so far from
being Roman Catholics, that as for my own part, tho I like neither, yet I
think the Dissenter the better of the two: setting aside the Apostolical
Institution of Episcopacy, I should prefer any form of Government, Presbytery,
or Independancy, rather than a Papal Monarchy; it were better to have no
Ceremonies at all, than to see Religion transformed into little else but
outside and Ceremony; for some external Indecencies of Worship, which may be
supplied by inward Devotions, are more eligible than gross and palpable
Superstitions. Though I think sitting at the Lords Supper favors of too much
irreverence, yet I had rather see men Receive sitting, than see them Worship
the Host.

So that our Church of England Nobility and Gentry, as he adds, have no reason
either to embrace the name of Roman Catholic, or to close with the Protestant
Dissenter; a Church of England Protestant is somewhat more than a name still,
and I hope will be so, when some other names will be forgot.

AN ANSWER TO THE PRETENDED AGREEMENT Between the CHURCH of ENGLAND, AND THE
CHURCH of ROME.
And First to the INTRODUCTION.
HE begins with an Account of that late Dispute about Representing and
Misrepresenting, which if he had been wise he would have forgot; The Papists
(he says) complain of Misrepresentation, and until this be yielded, they will not
Dispute. And I commend them for their Resolution, which is the wisest thing
they can now do, tho it had been wiser not to have complained; for they
complained as long as they could; and now they have no more to say, They will
Dispute no longer; as he observes, That for some months there has been nothing
but Answering, Replying, Rejoyning, and Sur-rejoyning, and we are still where
we began: That is, they are Papists still, and we Protestants, which I suppose
is all that he can mean; for if they have any modesty, their complaining, and
our trouble of answering is at an end, which I think is not where we began.

Well, so much then for Misrepresenting, and now a new Scene opens, In the
first place a just State of the Controversy must be settled, wherein the
Contending Parties agree, and how far they differ. What they please, we are
contented to follow them in their own way; tho it is strange this should be to
settle now. Our Author undertakes the first of these, but does not design to
encumber this Discourse with a Catalogue of Agreements in the great Doctrines
of Christian Religion, and matters of Opinion. Tho he was more afraid than hurt
here, for this would not much have encumbred his Discourse; for I know little
we agree in, but the Three Creeds; but his Reason why he will not encumber his
Discourse with our Agreement in Doctrines and Opinions, is very surprising,
viz. because there is no need of Agreement in such matters; For both the
Council of Trent, and our English Convocation, have taken especial care by a
latitude of expression to obtain the assent of men, who vastly differ in their
opinions: Which is a false account of the English Convocation, but a very true,
tho strange account of that Infallible Council of Trent, of which more
presently. But is not this a clever way of flinging off all disputes about
Doctrines and Opinions? His business is to prove the Agreement of my Principles
about Church*Communion, with the Church of Rome. For after all his talk of the
Church of England, he has not one word about her, unless he takes me for the
Church of England, which I assure him I never took my self to be; but it seems
one poor single Divine may pass for the Church of England, since it is dwindled
into a name and shadow, tho it would be Misrepresentation in a Protestant to
impute the Opinions and Doctrines of Popes, Cardinals, Doctors, Schoolmen,
Canonists, Casuists, nay of General Councils themselves, if they happen to
forget their Anathema's, to the Church of Rome: I say, his design being to show
the Agreement of my Principles with the Church of Rome, he knew this was
impossible to be done, unless he laid aside the Consideration of all Doctrines
and Opinions. But are these of no account then in the Church of Rome? Is it no
matter what our Opinions are, so we do but maintain the Popes Supremacy? I
think the Supremacy an intolerable usurpation on the Rights and Liberties of
the Christian Church; but I think the Popish Innovations in Faith and Worship
more intolerable Corruptions of the Christian Religion, and more fatal to men's
souls; and therefore tho men groaned under the oppressions of the Sea of Rome,
they were other Corruptions which gave birth to the Reformation, witness
Luthers Reformation; and tho I should suppose it possible to be persuaded for
peace sake to submit to the Usurpations of the Bishop of Rome, if all other
Abuses and Corruptions were taken away, yet while the Corruptions of Faith and
Worship remain, while I believe them to be such dangerous Corruptions, it makes
Reconciliation impossible; for tho I may be contented to be oppressed in my
Christian Liberties, I can never be contented to be damned; which is the
difference between submitting to an usurped Authority, and complying with a
corrupt Faith and Worship; for tho I hope a great many who do so will find
Mercy, yet those can expect none who are convinced of these Corruptions, and
yet comply, which would be my case. So that he begins at the wrong end to prove
my Agreement with the Church of Rome; for tho my Pinciples did prove, and tho I
were my self persuaded that the Bishop of Rome had a regular and Canonical
Authority over all other Churches, while he is a truly Catholic and Orthodox
Bishop, yet I should think such Corruptions in Faith and Worship sufficient to
absolve all Christians from their subjection to him; and therefore whatever my
Principles of Church Communion are, there is little hope of my Agreement with
the Church of Rome, while these Doctrinal Corruptions last; and it is a vain
thing to prove an Agreement in Principles of Government, unless they can prove
an Agreement in Faith and Worship too. There was no dispute, that I know of,
between the Catholics and the Arians about Principles of Government; but he
would have been laughed at, who should hence have inferred an Agreement between
them.

However setting aside this, let us consider how he proves that Doctrines and
Opinions are so little, or not at all, concerned in the Agreement of the two
Churches, viz. because both the Council of Trent, and the English Convocation,
have taken especial care by a Latitude of expression to obtain the assent of
men, who vastly differ in their Opinions. Has the Church of Rome then, and the
Church of England, no positive Opinions to which they expect the Assent of
their Members, especially of their Clergy? He instances in the Doctrine of
Predetermination, or which among us are better known by the name of Arminian
Controversies; now suppose they thought fit to give a latitude of Sense in
their defining these Controversies, have they positively defined nothing? Has
not the Church of Rome in express terms decreed the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, of worship of Saints, and images, of the Adoration of the
Host, of Seven Sacraments, of Purgatory? etc. And has not the Church of England
as positively determined against them? And where is the agreement then between
the Two Churches? The truth is, there cannot be a worse thing said of any
Church, than what this Author charges both upon the Church of England, and the
Church of Rome, that they purposely penned their Decrees in such loose terms,
that men of different Opinions might expound them to their own sense: Which is
to make a show of deciding a Controveesy, with an intention all the while to
leave it undecided; which is such a juggle as unbecomes the Sincerity of a
Christian Church. There may be a great many nice Philosophical disputes, which
a wise Church may think necessary to leave undecided; but there never can be
any good reason, instead of determining Controversies, to lay the foundation of
endless disputes between the Members of the same Communion, by doubtful and
ambiguous expressions.

And therefore I absolutely deny, that the Church of England has done this, or
ever intended to do it. She has indeed used that temper and moderation in those
Articles, which relate to the Five points, as only to determine what is
substantial in them, and necessary to be believed by all Christians, without
deciding those Niceties, whereon the Controversy between the Calvinist and the
Arminian turns, and therefore both of them may subscribe these Articles,
because the Controversies between them are determined on neither side; and the
appeasing such heats, as may be occasioned by those Disputes, is left to the
prudence of Governors, which was thought a better way than a positive decision
of them: This I think, I could make appear, were it a proper place for it; and
therefore have always thought, that the Church of England was wronged on both
sides, while both the Calvinist and Arminian have forced her to speak their own
sense, when she intended to speak neither. And no man can blame this conduct,
who remembers, that this is only a reviving that old Philosophical dispute
about Necessity and Fate, which always has been a dispute, and is likely to
continue so; and though these different Opinions have very different effects on
our minds, and form very different apprehensions in us of Almighty God, which
may be a just reason to prefer one before the other; yet they are both
consistent with the belief Vindication of the Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet. p.
281, etc.
of all the fundamental Doctrines of Christianity, as I have showed at large in
that Book to which this Author so often refers.

But now the Church of Rome has truly used this art, which this Author charges
her with, such a latitude of expression and ambiguous terms, as might satisfy
their differing Divines, that the cause was determined on their side, when
there was no other way to end their disputes, and allay their heats; and that
in many concerning points too, as any one may see, who reads Father Paul's
History of the Council of Trent; and if this be intolerable in a fallible
Church, it is much more intolerable in a Council, which pretends to
Infallibility. Certainly they distrusted their own Authority; either did not
believe themselves to be Infallible, or knew, that their Divines did not think
them so; for otherwise the Authority of the Council might have overruled their
Disputes, and there had been no need of cheating them into an assent: But what
expectation is there, that the decrees of those men should be Infallible, who
so often intended to decree nothing? This is a Mystery, which I suppose our
Author would not so freely have confessed at another time; but it was necessary
to allow this latitude of sense in the Decrees of the Trent Council now, to
bring off Mr. De Meaux, and the Representer, who do indeed expound the Decrees
of the Council to a great latitude of sense: But it is not a little matter will
help them out; the latitude of one side of the Line will not do, but it must
reach from Pole to Pole. There is another ingenious confession of this Author,
which is worth the noting; That among the Romanists, about the great Doctrine
of Predetermination, there are the Durandists, Dominicans, Jansenists,
Molinists, and Scotists, that very much differ in Opinion, and yet are still of
the same Church: and yet these are the men, that quarrel at the reformation,
because there are differing Opinions among them, when there are the same
Disputes among themselves, managed with as great heat and contention. These are
the men, who tell us, that we must have an infallible Judge to end our disputes,
when an infallible Pope, and infallible Councils, dare not undertake to end
theirs: but as for what he adds, that there are in the Church of England,
Calvinists, Arminians, Socinians, and Antinomians, who subscribe the same
Articles of Religion, as terms of Unity and Peace: As for Calvinists and
Arminians, I will grant, they may both subscribe our Articles; whether any
Socinians do, I know not, no more than they know when a secret Jew, or one who
does not believe Transubstantiation, is received into holy Orders by them; but
I am sure an honest Socinian cannot subscribe our Articles, unless he can
subscribe the Nicene and Athanasian Creeds; but this was only designed to
propagate that groundless calumny, That the Divines of the Church of England
are infected with Socinianism.

Having thus as well as he could, delivered himself from engaging in that
Dispute, about our agreement in doctrinal Points, which he knew he could make
nothing of; he says, He will confine himself to the agreement there is between
both Churches about Government and Worship; and threatens to show, how we have
disputed against Dissenters upon Roman Catholic Principles, both in proving
their Obligation to Communion with us, and in vindicating the terms of our
Communion from being sinful. This is what he undertakes to prove, and we are
bound to hear him.

Answer to SECT. 1.
Concerning the Church of Englands Closure with a Roman Catholic Principle
about the Government of the Church, in proving the Dissenter to lie under an
Obligation of holding Communion with her.

AND now we are come to the main seat of the Controversy about
Catholick*communion, which our Author has very dexterously improved into
Catholic Power and Empire. I need give him no hard words; to expose his
manifest and wilful prevarications in this matter, will be thought hard enough,
if he be capable of blushing. Now to make this as visible as the light; I
shall, 1. Show, wherein he pretends the Agreement between the Two Churches
consists; that is, between my principles of Communion, and the Church of Rome;
for I am the only person here concerned; and if I cannot vindicate my self, I
will own my own shame, without casting the blame on my dear Mother the Church
of England; and I suppose, it will be sufficient to vindicate my self, if I
first show him, that I have in express words rejected all those Propositions
wherein he pretends this Agreement consists. Secondly, Particularly vindicate
those passages he transcribes out of my books, and show his sincerity in
quoting, and his skill in applying, and then his French Popery may shift for it
self, excepting a word or two of that learned Archbishop Petrus de Marca.

As for the first, He himself has collected the Particulars wherein we agree,
which I shall distinctly examine; the Reader may find them p. 15, 16. which are
these,

1. They both make the Catholic Church, one visible governed Society, Household
or Kingdom. This is the (...), the first and fundamental mistake, and a wilful
one too; for I affirm the contrary in express words, in the defense of Dr.
Stilling fleet's unreasonableness of Separation, p. 565, 566, upon occasion of
that Dispute about the constitutive Regent Head of a National Church; I
expressly assert, That the Unity, both of the National and Universal Church,
consists in one Communion; That Consent is all that is necessary to unite a
Body or Socity in one Communion; -- That their Unity consists only in consent,
not in any superior Governing* Ecclesiastical Power on Earth, which binds them
together: So that I absolutely deny, That the Catholic Church is one governed
Society, with one supreme Government over the whole. P. 567. I assert, That
Christ has instituted no such constitutive Regent Power of one Bishop over
another in his Church; and therefore, the Union of particular Churches into
one, must be made by consent, not by Superiority of Power. P. 564. I affirm,
That tho a National Church (and the Reason is stronger for the Universal
Church) be one Body, yet it is not such a political Body as they describe, and
cannot be according to its original Constitution, which differs from Secular
forms of Government (which have a supreme governing Power) by that Ancient
Church-Canon of our Saviors own decreeing, It shall not be so among you. And
thus, a National Church as governed by consent, may be one Body in an
Ecclesiastical, tho not in a Civil Political Sense; that is, by one Communion,
not by one Supreme governing Power: The Dean in Answer to Mr. Baxter, who
asserts a constitutive Regent Head of the National Church, necessary to make it
a Church, and yet allows, That there is one Catholic Visible Church, and that
all particular Churches, as headed by their particular Bishops or Pastors, are
parts of the Universal Church; argues thus, If this Doctrine be true, and
withal it be necessary, that every Church must have a constitutive Regent Part
as essential to Defense, p. 572.
it; then it unavoidably follows, That there must be a Catholic Visible Head
to the Catholic Visible Church; and so Mr. B's Constitutive Regent Part of the
Church, has done the Pope a wonderful kindness, and made a very plausible Plea
for his Universal Pastorship. Where the Dean proves, That a Constitutive Regent
Head is not essential to the Notion of a National Church, for then it must be
essential to the Catholic Church too; and then there must be a supreme Pastor,
or some supreme governing Power over the whole Church, which I suppose, is to
deny that the Catholic Church is one visible governed Society. This Argument I
defended at large, and added (p. 576.) That to deny a Church can be one without
a constitutive Regent Head, infers one of these two things. 1. Either that many
particular Churches cannot associate into one, for the joint Exercise of
Discipline and Government, which overthrows the very Notion of Catholic Unity
and Communion. Or 2. That there is and must be a power in the Church, superior
to the Episcopal Power, which naturally sets up a Pope above Bishops. Thus much
for my agreement with them, that the Catholic Church is one visible governed
Society, that is, which has a supreme Power over the whole; and if our Author
by this time does not begin to Color, I will even Blush for him. But by this
the Reader will perceive, what a hopeful Cause this Author has undertaken, to
prove my Agreement with the Church of Rome about the Supremacy, either of the
Pope or General Council, when I absolutely deny, that there is, or ought to be
any such Superior Authority and Jurisdiction over the whole Church. But to
proceed.

2. He says, They both pitch upon the Episcopal Government as distributed into
the several Subordinations of combined Churches, as what is by Divine
Institution made the Government of the Church: A combination of Diocesan
Churches to make up one Provincial, whose Bishops are in Subordination to their
Metropolitan; a combination of Provincial Churches to make up a National, and
the Metropolitans in Subordination to the Primate; a combination of National
Churches to make up a Patriarchal, and the Primates in Subordination to the
Patriarch; and a confederacy of Patriarchal to make up one Ecumenical, and
every Patriarch in Subordination to the Ecumenical Bishop, or chief Patriarch.
This is an Agreement with a Witness; and if he can prove this, as he says he
has done, of which more presently, we will never dispute more with them about
Church Government; let us then consider the several steps and Gradations of
Church Authority, which at last centers in an Universal Bishop.

1. The Subordination of Parochial Presbyters, who are combined and united
under the Government of a Diocesan Bishop. Thus far we agree with him, and
acknowledge a direct Superiority of Bishops over their respective Presbyters;
but we go not one step farther with him.

2. A combination of Diocesan Churches to make up one Provincial, whose Bishops
are in Subordination to their Metropolitan. Such a Combination I allow of, but
the Subordination I deny to be the original Form of Church Associations; and
this one word Subordination, which he has here thrust in, discovers the whole
Trick, and spoils our Agreement quite. I assert, these Combinations are for
Communion, not for Government, and therefore there is no Subordination required
to such an Union; he will have these Combinations to be, not merely for
Communion, but for Government, and that indeed requires a Subordination; but
these two Notions do as vastly differ, as a friendly Association for mutual
Advice and Counsel, and a Subjection to a Superior Authority. And that I have
not altered my Opinion, but that this was always my judgment in the case, I
shall now show, and I need to that purpose only transcribe a Page or Two out of
the Defense, p 577, etc.

It is evident from the Testimony of the earliest Ages of the Church, that
first the Apostles, and then the Bishops as their Successors, were the Supreme
Governors of the Church, who had no higher Order or Power over them: And
therefore Tertullian calls the Bishop, Summus Tert. de Bapt. c. 17.
Sacerdos, or the chief and highest Priest; and Optatus Barrow. Supremacy. p.
189, etc. Quarto.
Apices and Principes, the Tops and Princes of all; which was the general
Language of those days; as any one who pleases, may learn from Dr. Barrow's
learned Treatise of the Popes Supremacy.

And as Bishops were the highest Governors of the Church, so every Bishop was
greatest in his own Diocese; no other Bishop, nor Synod of Bishops, could
impose any thing on him, without his own Consent; they met for Advice and
Counsel, not for Rule and Empire; which, Mr. B. tells us so often, was
Archbishop Usher's Judgment, and which plainly was the Judgment and Practice
of Antiquity, as appears from what I have already discoursed about Catholic
Communi on: It were easy to transcribe several Passages out of St. Cyprian to
this purpose, especially from his Preface to the Council of Carthage, where he
tells them, That they were met freely to declare their Opinions about this
matter (the Rebaptization of those who had been Baptized by Heretics) judging
no man, nor denying Communion to him if he dissent: For neither does any of us
constitute himself Bishop of Bishops, or by tyrannical terror compel his
Colleagues to a necessity of obeying; since every Bishop being free and in his
own power, has his own free choice, and can neither be judged by another, nor
judge another; but let us all expect the judgment of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
alone has power both to advance us to the Government of his Church, and judge of
our Government;

and in p. 579. I add,

Nor does this overthrow that very Ancient Constitution of Patriarchal or
Metropolitan Churches; for a Patriarch or Metropolitan was not a Superior Order
to Bishops, nor included any Authority over them, as is evident from what St.
Cyprian discoursed, who was himself a Primate, but only some precedence in the
same Order, and such advantages of Power in the Government of the Church, as
was given them by the common consent of Bishops for a greater public good; as
the power of calling Provincial Synods, and presiding in them, and a principal
Interest in the Ordination of Bishops in his Province, and the like, which were
determined and limited by Ecclesiastical Canons.

It is true this Patriarchal Power did in time degenerate into Domination and
Empire, when it fell into the hands of ambitious men; but was originally (and
is so still, when wise and good men have the management of it) a very prudent
constitution to preserve Peace and Order, and good Discipline in the Church.

But that Archbishops and Metropolitans had no proper Superiority and
Jurisdiction over Bishops, is evident from what St. Hierom objects against the
Discipline Hieron. ad Marcel. Ep. 54.
of the Montenists, Amongsts us ( i. e. the Catholics) the Bishops enjoy the
place of the Apostles; among them the Bishop is but the third; for they have
the Patriarch of Pepusa in Phrygia for the first, those whom they call Cenones
for the second; thus Bishops are thrust down into the third, that is, almost
the last place.

And yet in St. Hieroms time the Catholic Church had Archbishops and
Metropolitans, but yet it seems not such as degraded Bishops, or advanced any
above them.

Whether this be true Reasoning or no, shall be examined when there is occasion
for it; all that I am concerned in at present, is only to show, that I never
asserted such an Original Combination of Metropolitical Churches, as placed
Bishops in subordination to the Metropolitan, or gave him a direct Authority or
Jurisdiction over them; and here our Agreement must for ever break off; for if
it will not reach to the Jurisdiction of Metropolitans and Primates, much less
will it extend to Patriarchs, and least of all to an Ecumenical Pastor, whom I
have in express terms rejected, and for what reason will appear anon.

3. The next instance of Agreement is, That we both agree in giving to a
General Council direct Authority over their Colleagues in matters that concern
the Purity of Faith and Manners, and the Unity of the Church. But here are two
considerable Mistakes in this Matter: 1. That I give this Authority to a
General Council. 2. That I give a General Council, or any other Combination of
Bishops a direct Authority over their Colleagues.

1. That I give this Authority to General Councils. My Dissenting Adversaries
began this Charge, that I set up a General Council, as a Superior Governing
Power over the whole Church, and consequently over all Bishops, and therefore
was no better than a Cassandrian or a French Papist; and our Author revives
this charge without taking any notice, that it was ever Objected and Answered
before: indeed he has Objected nothing in this whole matter, but what was
before Objected by Dissenters with as much Art and appearance of Truth, as he
has now given it: And I could more easily forgive it in them, because it might
be an innocent mistake in them, till these notions were thoroughly sifted, and
set in a better light; but for our Author to read that very Book, The
Vindication of the Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet, wherein all these Objections
were made and Answered, and to renew the Charge, and repeat the Objections
again, without taking notice of any Answer that was given to them, is such a
piece of Ingenuity, as an honest Dissenter would be ashamed of. In my Defense
of the Dean, there was not one word which looked toward a General Council,
excepting the Collegium Episcopale, or the Episcopal College, which some
mistook for a General Council; but this mistake I rectified in the Vindication,
p. 146. I observed, that Optatus called the whole body of Bishops Collegium
Episcopale, and upon the same account St. Cyprian and St. Austin call all
Catholic Bishops Colleagues; and they may as well say, That when the Fathers
speak of the Unity of the Episcopacy, they mean their Union in a General
Council, as that they mean a General Council by the College of Bishops. In St.
Cyprians time there never had been a General Council, excepting the Council of
the Apostles at Jerusalem; and yet when he wrote to foreign Bishops, with whom
he never was joined in Council, nor ever like to be, he calls them his
Colleagues, or those of the same College with him; which signifies no more than
that they were of the same Power and Authority with him, and united in one
Communion. And what my thoughts are of a General Council, whoever pleases, may
see some Pages after: p. 162, 163, etc.

2. Nor do I give a direct Authority to any Bishops or Council of Bishops over
their Colleagues: This I expressly deny in Forty places, as to be sure every man
must do, who acknowldges, that all Bishops have originally an equal power, and
the Supreme Authority in their respective Diocesses. That no Bishops either
Vindicat. p. 15.
single or united have any direct Authority or Superiority over each other.
That the combinations of Churches, and the Synods and Councils of Bishops, are
not for direct acts of Government, and Superiority over each other; with
several 217.
other like expressions before quoted.

But do I not say, That General Councils can have no direct Authority over any
Bishops, who refuse to consent, unless it be in such matters as concern the
purity of Faith, and manners, and Catholic Unity? and does not this infer,
that they have a direct Authority over them in such matters?

This possibly might lie a little out of our Author's reach, I not having
occasion then given me to difcourse it more at large; but if he had not
understood this, it had been more modest and ingenuous to have thought it an
unwary saying, or to have made a Query upon it, and desired me to have
reconciled this seeming contradiction, rather than to charge me with such
Principles, as I so often expressly and positively reject. But ingenuity and
modesty are Virtues not to be expected from such Adversaries, and therefore I
shall briefly state this matter also, by 1. Showing what I meant, by matters
which concern the purity of Faith and Manners, and Catholic Unity. 2. What
Authority I give to bishops, or a Council of Bishops over their Colleagues in
such cases, and how this is to be reconciled with my affirming, that the
combinations of Churches, and the Synods and Councils of Bishops, are not for
direct acts of Government and Superiority over each other, but only for mutual
advice and counsel.

1. As for the first, when I say, That Neighbor Bishops, or a Council of
Bishops, has Authority over their Colleagues in matters which concern the purity
of Faith and Manners, and Catholic Unity, it is plain that my meaning was not,
and could not be, That such a Council of Bishops had Authority to make what
Decrees they pleased in matters of Faith or Manners, or Catholic Unity, and
impose them upon their Colleagues by a direct and superior Authority, without
their own consent; for this is the very thing I disputed against; and yet this
is the sense he would put upon my words, and indeed no other sense of them can
do the Church of Rome any service; but let any indifferent Reader consider the
whole Paragraph, and freely judge whether this Author be not a very Candid
Interpreter. I was discoursing about General Vindic. p. 162.
Councils, That it is not likely there should ever be a Convention of Bishops
from all parts of the Christian World; nor if it were possible, that there
should be some few Bishops dispatched from all Christian Churches, all the
world over, can I see any reason why this should be called a General Council,
when it may be there are Ten times as many Bishops who did not come to the
Council, as those who did; and why should the less number of Bishops assembled
in Council, judge for all the rest, who so far exceed them in numbers, and it
may be are not inferior to them in Piety and Wisdom; especially considering,
that every Bishop has the Supreme Government of his own Church, and his liberty
and power to choose for himself, as St. Cyprian tells us; and must not be
compelled to obedience by any of his Colleagues; which overthrows the proper
Jurisdiction of General Councils, which can have no direct Authority over any
Bishops, who refuse to consent, unless it be in such matters, as concern the
Purity of Faith and Manners, and Catholic Unity. Now if Faith and Manners, and
Catholic Unity, were considered as the Subject of Conciliary Decrees, what
greater Authority could the Council of Trent it self desire than this, to have
Authority to make Decrees about Faith and Manners, and Catholic Unity, which
shall oblige all the Bishops in the World? For I know not any thing else for a
Council of Christian Bishops to make Decrees about: And therefore these matters
which concern Faith and Manners, only relate to the Faith and Manners of the
Bishop; as I elsewhere expressly teach, That a Bishop cannot be imposed on
against his own consent, Ibid. p. 157.
by any Bishop or Council of Bishops, nor can justly be deposed upon such
accounts, while he neither corrupts the Faith, nor schismatically divides the
Church. So that this Authority refers not to the Decrees of Councils about
Faith or Manners, but is only an Authority of censuring Heretical and
Schismatical Bishops.

2. But that we may better understand the true state of this matter, let us
consider what kind of Authority this is: And

1. I observe this is no act of Authority over Bishops considered a Bishops,
but over Heretics and Schismatics; and no man that I know of, ever denied the
Churches Power to censure Heresy or Schism, or to correct the Lives and
Manners of Men; and if Heretics and Schismatics, wicked and profligate
Persons, may be flung out of the Church; if any Bishops be such, there is no
reason their Character should excuse them, for that does not lessen but
aggravate their Crime.

2. And therefore this is no usurpation upon the Episcopal Power and
Government; it is not imposing Laws or Rules on a Bishop for the Government of
his Church without his consent, which is an Usurpation upon the Episcopal
Authority; but it is only judging him unworthy to be a Bishop, and committing
the care of his Flock to some more fit person.

3. This Authority does not result from that superior Jurisdiction, which one
Bishop, or all the Bishops in the World have over any one single Bishop, but
from that obligation which every Bishop has as far as he can, to take care of
the whole flock of Christ, as I explain it in the Vindication, p. 156. That the
Unity of the Episcopacy is the foundation of that Authority which neighbor
Bishops have over their Colleagues in case of Heresy or Schism, or any
notorious wickedness; for they being Bishops of the Universal Church, have an
original Right and Power (not to govern their Colleagues, but) to take care that
no part of the Church which is within their reach and inspection, suffer by the
heresy or evil practices of their Colleagues, which as I observed in the
Defense, p. 215 is the reason St. Cyprian gives why there are so many Bishops
in the Christian Church whom he calls a copious body of Bishops, coupled by the
cement of concord, and bond of Unity. That if any of our college (i. e. any
Bishop^) should endeavor to broach any new Heresy, or tear and spoil the
Flock of Christ, the rest may come in to their help, and like good and merciful
Pastors, gather again the Sheep of Christ into the fold. So that this is not
properly an Authority over Bishops, who have originally no superior
Jurisdiction over each other, but an obligation on all Bishops, as far as they
can, to see that no part of the Christian Church be corrupted with Heresy, or
divided by Schisms; the discharge of which may empower them to remove Heretical
Bishops, without any direct Authority to govern Bishops. So that this power of
deposing Heretical and Wicked Bishops does not contradict what I before
asserted, That by original right, all Bishops are equal, and every Bishop
supreme in his own Diocese, who cannot be compelled by other Bishops to govern
his Church by such Rules and Laws as he himself does not assent to; and
therefore that such Combinations and Councils of Bishops are not originally for
direct acts of Government and superiority over each other, but only for mutual
Counsel and Advice: For these are two very different things, To have Authority
to compel a Bishop to govern his Church by such Laws as he himself in his own
conscience does not approve; and to have Authority to fling a notorious
Heretical or Schismatical Bishop out of their Communion, and to command and
exhort his Presbyters and People not to own him; St. Cyprian I am sure thought
these two cases very different; for the first he utterly rejects as an
usurpation on the Episcopal Authority, that it was to make themselves Bishops
of Bishops, which he thought a great impiety; the other he practiced himself in
the case of Basilides and Martialis. For the first is a direct Authority over
Bishops in the exercise of their Episcopal Function; the second is only an
Authority to censure Heresy and Schism, and to preserve the Communion of the
Church pure, and to defend the Flock from such Wolves in Sheeps Clothing,

But it may be it will be Objected, That this comes much to one; for the
Authority of deposing Heretical and Schismatical Bishops, infers an Authority
of declaring Heresy and Schism; and that of making or declaring Articles of
Faith, and Laws of Catholic Communion; for how can they depose Heretics or
Schismatics without an Authority of declaring what Heresy and Schism is? And
this is as much Authority as the Council of Trent it self would have desired;
and therefore it seems very absurd and contradictious to deny a Council
Authority to oblige their Colleagues by their Decrees of Faith, or Manners, or
Catholic Unity, and to give Authority to neighbor Bishops to depose or
censure any Heretical or Schismatical Bishop. To this purpose our Author
argues, p. 32. 33. According to their Doctrine the Bishops of Spain, France,
Italy, and Germany, being Bishops of the Catholic Church, though ordinarily
their Power is confined to their particular Churches, yet having an Original
right with relation to the whole Catholic Church, are bound by the Laws of
Communion to reassume their Original right, and assemble and summon before
them the Bishops of the Church of England; who, in their opinion, are fallen
into a great Schism and Heresy; in which matters these Bishops have a direct
Authority over the Bishops of the Church of England, and may proceed against
them, and depose them, and ordain others in their room, and oblige the People
to withdraw from the communion of the deposed Bishops, in which case the
foreign Bishops being the governing part, have as much authority over the
English Bishops, as the English Bishops have over the Dissenters in England. He
should have said as the English Bishops have over the Popish bishops of France,
Spain, or Italy, and then he had come pretty near the matter. He adds. The
larger combination of Bishops, the greater is their Power and Authority: And
therefore if the English Bishops have a direct Authority over the Dissenters in
England, so has this greater combination of Bishops over the dissenting English
Bishops; (that is, if Bishops have Authority over their own Flocks, then the
Bishops of France and Spain have Authority over English Bishops; if Bishops
must govern their own Churches, other Bishops may govern them; an inference
which I believe, our Author is the first man, that ever made.)

And as the English Bishops insist on their Authority in decision of
Controversies, and the Dissenter must submit; so may this greater College of
Bishops urge their Authority, and the Dissenting English Bishops must submit,
and may not be admitted to exercise their own judgment, or pretend Conscience
there, no more than the English Protestant Dissenter may do it here.

It must be carefully observed, that by these Gentlemen the Power is lodged
with the College of Catholic Bishops; and so long as the Church of England
acknowledges the Bishops of these Countries to be Catholic Bishops, as now
they do (just as we acknowledge the Church of Rome to be part of the Catholic
Church, but a very corrupt and schismatical part of it) they cannot question
their power, that they must acknowledge: And by the Laws of Catholic Communion
must obey a College of them, and appear before them, when Summoned: The
greatest thing, that they can with any pretense insist on, is the justness of
their cause, of which they are no more competent judges before this College,
than the Dissenters are, when before these Bishops here.

What happy days would the Church of Rome see, were things brought to this
pass! but how impertinent all his talk of the College of Bishops is, has been
already shown, and will be more in what follows: All that I observe at present
is, how he turns the power of deposing, and censuring heretical and
schismatical Bishops into a power of declaring Heresy, and judging whether they
be Heretics or not, by such a final and uncontrollable power, as Heretics
themselves are bound to submit to: And which is more ridiculous than that, if
one Church agrees to accuse another Church of Heresy, the accusers alone must
be judges, and the accused are very incompetent Judges of it, because forsooth
they are accused: But this matter may be stated without setting up such a
Sovereign Tribunal for judging of Heresies. For

1. That Heretical Bishops may be deposed, I think all agree in.

2. And there is as little question, but that Orthodox and Catholic Bishops,
who have the care of the Church committed to them, have this power of deposing:
That is, of casting such a Bishop out of their Communion, and exhorting his
People to withdraw Communion from him, and to accept of a Catholic Bishop in
his stead; which is all that the Ecclesiastical power of deposing signifies.

3. There is no question neither, but that all Bishops will call that Heresy,
which they themselves think to be so, and will judge those to be Heretics, who
profess such Doctrines, as they call Heresy.

4. But it does not hence follow, that any Bishops, or any number of Bishops,
however assembled, have such an Authority to define Articles of Faith, or to
declare Heresy, as shall oblige all men to believe that to be Heresy, which
they decree to be so.

5. And therefore the effects of these Censures must of necessity depend upon
that Opinion, which People have of them: Those who believe the Censure just,
will withdraw themselves from the Communion of such a Bishop; those who do not
believe it just, will still communicate with him. For who ever pronounces the
Sentence, (excepting the interposing of Secular power) the People must execute
it, and if they will still adhere to their Bishop, he may defic his Deposers,
and all their power: As the English Bishops and People do all the Anathemaes of
the Church of Rome.

6. And whether they do right or wrong in this, their own Consciences must judge
in this world, and God will judge in the next: This is all that can be said or
done in such a broken and divided state of the Church, as we now see. While
nothing was called Heresy but the denial of some plain and acknowledged
Article of the Christian Faith, while there was no dispute, who were Heretics,
the power of deposing Heretics was sacred and venerable, and had its just
authority and effect; but since what is Heresy is the Controversy, and the
world is divided about it, tho the power remains still, the exercise of it
grows very contemptible, when a Church first coyns new Articles of Faith, and
then Excommunicates, Censures, Deposes those for Heretics, who will not
believe them.

4ly. We are come now to the last Point, wherein he says we agree, viz. To give
to one Bishop a Primacy, for the better preserving Catholic Union, and also a
Superior power of Appeals, and exercising some peculiar acts of Discipline
under the regulation of Ecclesiastical Canons. Now all this indeed I do assert,
and yet we are very far from agreeing in this matter. For though they made no
more of the Pope than a mere Primate, which I doubt is not good doctrine in
Rome, yet there is as much difference between our Primates, as there is between
a National and Ecumenical Primate, and consequently as much difference between
our Appeals, as between Appeals to Rome, and to the Archbishop of Canterbury,
as between Appeals to the Primate of a National Church, and Appeals to foreign
Bishops. I know he disputes very learnedly, that such an Ecumenical
combination of Churches, and an Ecumenical Primate is more for the
preservation of Cathol Unity, than a National Church or Primate; but this he
knew I denied, and therefore should not have said, that I agree with them in
it, and who has the best reason on their side shall be examined presently.

By this time, I suppose, the Reader is satisfied how far we agree in these
things, I having in express words denied every thing which he has affirmed, in
these very Books, to which he has appealed; which I think is no great sign of
agreement.

2. It is time now to vindicate those passages which he quotes out of my Book,
and on which he founds this pretense of agreement between us; and to do this
effectually and plainly, I must as I go along briefly explain some of my
Principles, which our Author either did not understand, or did wilfully
misrepresent.

All the sayings he has picked up, and brought together from one end of the
Book to the other, relate to one of these two Principles, The Unity of the
Church, which is one Communion, or the Unity of the Episcopacy.

1. As for the first of these, The Unity of the Church, the whole mystery of it
is no more but this, That the whole Christian Church, by the Institution of our
Savior, is but one Church, and this one Church is one Communion, that is, one
Body and Society, whereof all Christians are members, and wherein they have a
right to communicate in all Christian Privileges, and have both a right and
obligation to Communicate in all Christian Duties: This our Author Agreement,
Page 7.
puts in the second place, tho it ought to be the first, as being the
Foundation of all: That all Christians and Christian Churches in the world are
one Body, Society, or Church, and this is called Catholic Communion; for they
being all one Body, they Communicate with each other in this one Body, in all
the Duties and Privileges of it; and what advantage he can make make of this,
I cannot yet guess, unless he thinks that the very name Catholic being one of
Bellarmin's Notes of the Church, Catholic Communion, must signify the
Communion of the Catholic Church of Rome.

My Adversaries hearing this word Communion, presently concluded, that I placed
the Unity of the Church in some mere transient acts of Communion, and disputed
very earnestly against it, as well they might. But this mistake I rectified in
my Vindication, and showed them that one Communion signifies one Body and
Society, in which all the Members Vind. P. 36.
communicate with each other; which I explained by this familiar comparison:
Suppose the whole World were one Family, or one Kingdom, in which every
particular man, according to his rank and station, enjoys equal privileges; in
this case the necessity of Affairs would require, that men should live in
distinct houses and distinct Countries, as now they do all the World over: But
yet if every man enjoyed the same Liberty and Privileges, wherever he went, as
he does now in his own House and Country, the whole World would be but one
House and Family, or Universal Kingdom; and whosoever should resolve to live by
himself, and not receive any others into his Family, nor allow them the liberty
of his House, would be guilty of making a Schism in this great Family of the
World: And what Nations soever should deny the Rights and Privileges of
natural Subjects to the Inhabitants of other Countries, would make a Schism,
and rent it self from this Universal Kingdom. I added,

Thus it is here; The Church of Christ is but one Body, one Church, one
Household and Family, one Kingdom. These words our Author sets in the Front, and
thinks to make something of them: for seeing all know, that to make the whole
World one Universal Kingdom, it is necessary that it be subjected under one
governing Head; it unavoidably follows, that unless in the Catholic Church
there be one Supreme Governing Head, it cannot be like to an Universal Kingdom,
an organized politic Body. Very right! Had I compared the Catholic Church to
an Universal Kingdom, with respect to Government, the consequence had been
good; but comparing it only with respect to Communion, the consequence is
ridiculous; and yet this was all I intended in the Comparison, as appears from
the Application of it. And therefore though the necessity of Affairs requires,
that Neighbor Christians combine themselves into particular Churches and
particular Congregations, as the world is divided into particular Families and
Kingdoms, (which shows, that I no more subject the Church to one
Governing-head, than I do the World to one Universal Monarch, now it is divided
into particular Kingdoms) yet every Christian, by virtue of his Christianity
has the same Right and Privilege, and the same Obligation to Communion, as
occasion serves, with all the Churches in the World, that he has with that
particular Church, wherein he lives; wherever he removes his dwelling, whatever
Church he goes to, he is still in the same Family, the same Kingdom, and the
same Church. Now whether this be a good Consequence, that because I make the
whole Christian Church one Family and Kingdom, with respect to Christian
Communion; that is that all true Christians have a right to Communion in all
true Christian Churches in the World, therefore I subject the whole Christian
Church to one Supreme Governing Head on Earth (for with respect to Christ, who
is the true and only Head of his Church, we will allow it to be one Kingdom and
Family in this sense) I say, let any man judge of this, who understands
Consequences. If our Author did not see this, the Reader may judge of his
understanding; if he did, he may judge of his honesty. And thus his foundation
is gone, and then all the superstructure is but a Castle in the Air: For if the
Universal Church be not one Organized politic body, as according to my
Principles it is not, then it cannot be subjected to one governing Head,
neither to the Pope nor a General Council.

His third charge is, that I make somewhat more necessary to Catholic
Communion than an Agreement in the same Faith, the same Rules of Worship, and
right Administration of the Sacraments; that is, Catholic Communion is our
union in one body, and communicating in this one body is the exercise of
Catholic Communion, which those who do not, if there be not a just and
necessary cause for it, are Schismatics for all that, whatever their Faith and
Worship be; and Schism is a damning sin. But how does this make any thing more
necessary to Catholic Communion, than the same Faith, the same Worship, the
same Sacraments? These are all the Catholic terms of Catholic Communion; but
if these do not unite us into one body, we are not united for all that: Not
that any thing else is wanting to make this union; but because through the
lusts, and vices, and passions of men, an union does not follow upon it: but he
was sensible, that Catholic Communion alone, would not do his business, would
not prove the necessity of one Supreme governing-head (whether the Pope, or a
General Council) over the whole Church; and therefore he insinuates, that I
make something else the necessary terms of Catholic Communion, besides the
true Christian Faith, Worship, and Sacraments; and what should that be, do you
think, but subjection to one Supreme Head, which you shall see, how learnedly
he proves; For he adds,

4. That what is further necessary to Catholic Communion, is a Catholic
Government, namely the Episcopal. Now all these words I have used upon one
occasion or other, but there is no such proposition as this in all my Book. I
do allow Episcopacy to be an Apostolical Institution, and the truly Ancient and
Catholic Government of the Church, of which more hereafter; but yet in this
very book, I prove industriously, and at large, that in case of necessity, when
Bishops cannot be had, a Church may be a truly Catholic Church, and such as we
may, and ought to communicate with, without Bishops, See Vindication of the
Defense, p. 329, etc.
in vindication of some foreign reformed Churches, who have none; and therefore
I do not make Episcopacy so absolutely necessary to Catholic Communion, as to
unchurch all Churches which have it not.

But the Remainder of his quotations referring to the Unity of the Episcopacy,
I must briefly explain what my Notion is about it; and truly I have proceeded
all along upon St. Cyprian's Principles, and he must answer for it, if he have
misled me. S. Cyprian taught me, that there is one Episcopacy, part of
Episcopatus unus est, cujus a singulis in solidum pars tenetur Cypr. de
unitate. See the Defense. p. 208. etc.
which every Bishop holds with full authority and power; where by one
Episcopacy St. Cyprian understands one Bishopric, that is, the Universal
Church, which as it is but one Church, is but one Bishopric also; it being all
under the Government of the Episcopal power. But then this Bishopric is
divided into parts, into particular Diocesses, and every Bishop has a part of
this Universal Bishopric, which he has in solidum; that is, he has his part to
govern with the fullness and plenitude of the Episcopal power, without any
Superior authority, or jurisdiction over him. This I take to be the plainest
and easiest interpretation of St. Cyprian's words; for though all learned men
have agreed in the same sense, yet the Phrase has a little puzzled them; for if
by one Episcopacy, we understand one Episcopal office and power, though the sense
will be the same, yet the expression is very obscure; for how can every Bishop
have but part of the Episcopal office in Solidum; that is, part of the office,
and the whole power? But if by one Episcopacy, we understand one Bishopric,
and the universal Church may as properly be called one Bishopric, as one
Church, and one Sheepfold, then it is all plain, that there is but one
Bishopric, of which every Bishop has part, in which he exercises the whole
Episcopal authority and power. Another Principle of St. Cyprian's is, that this
one Episcopacy, or one Bishopric, is preserved one Unus Episcopatus,
Episcoporum multorum concordi numerositate diffusus, Cypr. ad Antonian. Ep. 52.
Pam.
by the concord and agreement of Bishops; for if the Bishops disagree, who have
the Supreme government of their own Churches, this must of necessity divide the
Bishopric and the Church; but this one Bishopric is spread over the World, by
the consenting multitude of many Bishops; which, as I observed, he calls the
Unity and Peace of the Episcopacy: And for the same reason Optatus calls it the
Episcopal College; and Bishops are called Colleagues. And St. Cyprian tells us,
The-Catholick Church is not rent, nor divided, but united and coupled Quando
Ecclesia, quae Catholica una est, scissa non sit, neque divisa, sed fit utique
connexa, and cohaerentium sibi invicem Sacerdotum glutino copu. lata. Cytr. Ep.
69. ad Florentium Pupianum.
by the cement of Bishops, who stick close together.

Another Principle is, That no Bishop, nor College of Bishops have a direct
authority or jurisdiction over their Colleagues, to compel them to submit to
their decrees and definitions, against their own Judgment and Conscience: That
none of them pretended to be Bishops of Bishops, which he abhors as a
Tyrannical Usurpation, as we see in his Preface to the Council of Carthage.
Another Principle is, That since there is but one Episcopacy or Bishopric,
every Bishop, besides the Supreme Government of his own particular Diocese, has
such a relation to the whole Church, that he is to take care, as much as in him
lies, to see, that no part of the Church suffer by the Heresies or Schisms of
their Bishops; which is the reason, as I observed before, St. Cyprian gives,
Why there are so many Bishops in the Christian Church, That if any of our
College ( i. e. any Bishop) should endeavor to broach any new Heresy, or to
tear and spoil the Cypr. ad Ste phan. Ep. 67.
Flock of Christ, the rest may come in to their help, and like good and
merciful Pastors, gather again the Sheep of Christ into their Fold.

These are the Principles I learnt from St. Cyprian; and if our Author can find
a supreme Head of the Universal Church, whether Pope or General Council, in
this Scheme, I am sure St. Cyprian could not, who disowns any such superior
Authority to Bishops.

Let us then now return to our Author, who observes, that I assert, That all
the Bishops of the Church are but one also, (which a little differs from one
Bishops being all) invested with the same Power and Authority to govern the
Church; (for which I quoted St. Cyprian, tho he thinks fit to leave him out);
That as St. Cyprian tells us there is but one Episcopacy, Vindic. p. 124, etc.
part of which every Bishop holds with full Authority and Power; that all these
Bishops are but one body, who are bound to live in Communion with each other,
and to govern their respective Churches where need requires, and where it can
be had, by mutual Advice and Consent, and therefore that no Bishops are
absolutely Independent, but are obliged to preserve the Unity of the
Episcopacy, or Episcopal College, as Optatus calls it, (which words our Author
leaves out, as being afraid of naming the Authority of any Father in the case)
whereon the Unity and Communion of the Catholic Church depends. Thus far our
Author recites my words, and here breaks off; but I shall beg leave to go on.
For it is impossible the Catholic Church should be one Body or Society, or one
Communion, if it be divided into as many Independent Churches, as there are
absolute and independent Bishops: For those Churches must be independent which
have an independent Power and Government, as all those must have, which have
independent Governors and Bishops; and independent Churches can never make one
Body and one Catholic Communion; because they are not Members of each other;
and thus the Unity of the Catholic Church must be destroyed, unless we assert
One Episcopocy as well as One Church, One Evangelical Priesthood as well as One
Altar, all the world over.

Here I must stop a little, for here he seems to lay his Foundation, whereon to
erect his Papal Monarchy, or his Sovereign Power of General Councils; that I
assert, That Bishops are not absolutely independent; and therefore he supposes,
That they must be subordinate too to some higher Power and Jurisdiction. How
far I am from asserting any such Supreme Power over the whole Church, I have
already shown; and now I must vindicate this Principle, That Bishops are not
absolutely Independent, from any such consequence, which is no very difficult
task, if men will consider what I mean by the independency of Bishops, and for
what reason I asserted, That Bishops are not absolutely independent. For the
independency I deny, is such an independency as is opposed to the unity of the
Episcopacy, and to their obligation to live in Communion with each other; for
because there is but one Episcopacy, because all Bishops are but one body,
therefore I assert, they are not absolutely independent, but are obliged to
preserve the unity of the Episcopacy, or Episcopal College: for absolute
Independency excludes all necessary obligations to Unity and Communion, as well
as to Subjection. An absolute independent Sovereign Prince is no more bound by
the Laws of Sovereignty to live in Unity, than to own subjection to neighbor
Princes; now Bishops indeed as to subjection are independent, for there is no
superior Authority in the Church over them, as I have always asserted; but they
are not independent as to Unity and Communion; for the fundamental Laws of one
Episcopacy oblige them to Unity and Communion, and that obliges them to govern
their Churches by mutual advice, without which this Unity cannot be preserved.
I am sure St. Cyprian lays so much stress on this, that he expressly asserts,
Episcopi nec potestatem habere potest nec honorem, qui Episcopatus nec unitatem
tenere voluit, nec pacem, Cypr. ad Anton. Ep. 52.
That He cannot have the Power nor the Honor of a Bishop, who will not
maintain the Unity and the Peace of the Episcopacy. Now I cannot think such
Bishops absolutely independent, tho they are subject to no superior Authority,
who depend upon preserving the Unity and Peace of the Episcopacy, for the very
Power and Dignity of Bishops.

I deny such an independency of Bishops, as makes their Churches independent,
which destroys Catholic Communion, as I showed in those words which our Author
suppressed, That Unity of the Catholic Church depends upon the Unity of the
Episcopacy. For it is impossible, the Catholic Church should be one Body or
Society, or one Communion, if it be divided into as many independent Churches,
as there are absolute and independent Bishops; for those Churches must be
Independent, which have an Independent power and government, as all those must
have, who have Independent Governors, or Bishops; and Independent Churches can
never make one Body, and one Catholic Communion, because they are not Members
of each other. Now this Independency of Churches, which I condemn, is not
opposed to a superior Jurisdiction; for so Churches, as well as Bishops, are
originally Independent: but it is opposed to their being such distinct and
separate Bodies as are not Members of each other, which destroys Catholic
Communion, or makes it Arbitrary. And this is the Independency of Bishops which
I deny; such an Independency as overthrows the unity of the Episcopacy, and
consequently the unity of the Church.

Nay, I further deny the Independency of Bishops, as that signifies an
exemption from all censures in case of Heresy, and Schism, and Idolatry, and
such like evil practices; which does not infer a superior authority of one
Bishop over another, but only an authority in the Church to censure such
crimes, whoever be guilty of them; as I have already explained it at large: So
that my Notion of the Independency of Bishops, will do no service at all to the
Pope or General Council.

5. He proceeds in his charge; The power of every Bishop in his own Diocese, is
not so absolute and independent, but that he is bound to preserve the unity of
the Episcopacy, and to live in Communion with his Colleagues and fellow Bishops;
for this is the foundation of Catholic Communion, without which there can be
no Catholic Church. This has been accounted for already, and whoever observes,
that the reason of all is laid upon the preservation of Catholic Communion,
will easily guess, how little this makes for an Universal Power and Empire over
the Church. He proceeds, The whole authority of a Bishop, or Council, over
other Bishops, is founded on the Laws of Catholic Communion, which is the
great end it serves (and therefore it does not prove a Supreme governing Head
over the Church, and therefore they have no proper authority, but only in such
matters as concern the Unity of the Episcopacy, or the peace and Communion of
the Catholic Church; This also has been sufficiently explained before. Again,
this unity of the Episcopacy, is the foundation of these larger combinations
and confederacies of Neighbor Churches; which make Archiepiscopal or National
Churches: For since there is but one Episcopacy, it is highly reasonable, and
necessary, so far as it is practicable, they should all act and govern their
respective Churches, as one Bishop, with one consent, which is the most
effectual way to secure the peace and unity of the Episcopal College, and to
promote the edification and good government of the Church. Nay, this unity of
the Episcopacy is the foundation of that authority which Neighbor Bishops have
over their Colleagues in case of Heresy and Schism, or any other notorious
wickedness; for they being Bishops of the Universal Church, have an Original
right and power to take care, that no part of the Church, which is within their
reach and inspection, suffer by the Heresy, or evil practices of their
Colleagues.

Here is a good long Quotation, if any body knew to what purpose it served. I
own the Words, and know not how I could say the same thing better, if I were to
say it again. I am still of the same mind, that such Combinations of Bishops
for mutua^l Advice and Counsel, is of great benefit and use for the good
Government of the Church; but if he would insinuate, (as that, if any thing,
must be his design) that these Combinations of Bishops are for the exercise of
Authority over their Colleagues: this I absolutely deny. They are to advise and
consult with each other, not as with superior Governors, who are to determine
them, and give Laws to them, but as with Friends and Colleagues, of the same
Body and Communion; as I expressly affirm, Vindicat. p. 127. May not Bishops
meet together for common Advice, without erecting a Sovereign Tribunal, to
determine all Controversies, and make Ecclesiastical Laws, and impose them upon
their Colleagues, without their own consent? When though the least, yet it may
be the best and wisest part of the Council are of another Mind: Is there no
difference between advising with our Equals, and making them our Superiors? May
it not be a very great fault, and very near the guilt of Schism, for a Bishop
without any cause, but mere humor and wilfulness, to reject such Rules and
Orders of Discipline and Government, which are agreed by the unanimous consent
of neighbor Bishops, unless we give a Superior Authority to such Synods over
their Colleagues?

6. His next charge is, that the Colleague of Bishops may grant unto some one
Bishop a Primacy, for the preservation of Catholic Unity and Communion, who by
a general consent may be entrusted with a Superior Power of calling Synods,
receiving Appeals, and exercising some peculiar Acts of Discipline under the
Regulation of Ecclesiastical Canons. This Sentence he has made up of two places
in my Book, above fifty Pages distant, p. 127 and 184, for he durst not quote
either of them entire, and therefore I shall be at the pains to transcribe them
both, that the indifferent Reader may judge of them. Vind. p. 127. There are
these words,

This makes it highly reasonable for Neighbor Bishops, at as great a distance,
as the thing is practicable with ease and convenience, as the Bishops of the
same Province, or of the same Nation, to live together in a strict Association
and Confederacy; to meet in Synods, and Provincial or National Councils, to
order all the Affairs of their several Churches by mutual Advice, and to oblige
themselves to the same Rules of Discipline and Worship. This has been the
practice of the Church from the very beginning, and seems to be the true
Original of Archi-episcopal, and Metropolitical Churches, which were so early,
that it is most probable, they had their beginning in the Apostles Days: For
though all Bishops have originally equal Right and Power in Church affairs, yet
there may be a Primacy of Order granted to some Bishops, and their Chairs by a
general consent, and under the Regulation of Ecclesiastical Canons, for the
preservation of Catholic Unity and Communion, without any Antichristian
encroachments or usurpation on the Episcopal Authority.

For (as I proceed) This Combination of Churches and Bishops does not, and
ought not to introduce a direct Superiority of one Bishop, or Church, over
another; or of such Synods and Councils over particular Bishops: Every Bishop
is the proper Governor of his own Diocese still, and cannot be regularly
imposed on against his consent. -- If a Bishop differ from his Colleagues,
assembled in Synods, or Provincial Councils, or one National, or Provincial
Council differ from another, in Matters of Prudence, and Rules of Discipline,
without either corrupting the Faith, or dividing the Church, if we believe St.
Cyprian in his Preface to the Council of Carthage, they ought not to deny him
Communion upon such accounts, nor to offer any force to him in such matters.

In p. 184, I discoursed much to the same purpose.

That for the preservation of Peace and Order in this united Body, or
Confederation of Neighbor Churches, one or more Bishops may by a general
consent be entrusted with a Superior Power of calling Synods, receiving
Appeals, and exercising some peculiar Acts of Discipline, under the Regulation
of Ecclesiastical Canons, which is the Power now ascribed to Archbishops and
Metropolitans.

But yet, there cannot be one constitutive Ecclesiastical Regent Head in a
National, much less in the Universal Church: not Monarchical, because no one
Bishop has an original Right to Govern the rest in any Nation, and therefore
whatever Power may be granted him by consent, yet it is not essential to the
Being or Unity of the Church, which is one, not by being united under one
superior governing Power, but by living in one Communion: Not Aristocratical,
because every Bishop being Supreme in his own Diocese, and accountable to
Christ for his Government, cannot, and ought not, so wholly to divest himself
of this Power, as to be in all Cases necessarily determined, and overruled by
the Major Vote, contrary to his own Judgment and Conscience -- All the Bishops
in a Nation, much less all the Bishops in the World, cannot unite into such a
Colleague, as shall by a Supreme Authority, govern all Bishops and Churches, by
a Major Vote, which is the form of Aristocratical Government, and for the same
Reason, a National Church considered as a Church, cannot be under the
Government of a Democratical Head, for if the College of Bishops have not this
Power, much less has a mixed College of Bishops and People.

Thus careful was I to secure the Episcopal Authority from such Encroachments
and Usurpations, as it now groans under in the Church of Rome; from placing the
Unity of the Church in such a superior governing Head, whether Primate or
Synod; and now let him make the best he can of this Primacy, which he should
have called a Primacy of Order, as I did, and not absolutely a Primacy, which
may signify a Primacy of Power and Authority, which I positively deny he has
over any of his Colleagues: In a body of Equals, though there is no Superiority,
there must be Order; and therefore some One must have Authority to Convene the
Assembly, and to preside in it, and if the Synod see fit, may in some Cases be
entrusted with a Superior Power of executing their Decrees, which involves no
direct Superiority over any of his Colleagues. All that I intended in these
Discourses, was to show, what Power a National or Provincial Synod, Archbishops
and Metropolitans might have, upon St. Cyprian's Principles, without
encroaching upon the Original and Essential Rights of the Episcopacy; and those
who will allow St. Cyprian's Principles, I believe will confess, that I have
truly and fairly stated the Bounds of pure Ecclesiastical Authority: If
Archbishops and Metropolitans have a greater Power than this, by the
Constitutions and Laws of Princes, since the Church is incorporated into the
State, that I meddle not with, for it is not a pure Ecclesiastical Authority,
but must be accounted for upon other Principles.

Well! but I assert, that Catholic Communion is a Divine Agreement. p. 13.
Institution, and then the Combination of Churches for Catholic Communion is
Divine also; and thus National Churches, Archbishops, Metropolitans, Primates,
are of Divine Institution; but had our Author transcribed the whole Sentence,
every Reader would easily have seen, how little it is to his purpose: The words
are these: The Vindic. p. 195. 196.
Patriarchal or Metropolitical Church-Form is an Ecclesiastical Constitution,
(and therefore certainly not an immediate Divine Institution) though not
therefore accidental (according to the Phrase of my Dissenting Adversary,) but
Catholic Communion is a Divine Institution, and therefore the Combinations of
Churches for Catholic Communion is Divine also, though the particular Forms of
such Combinations may be regulated and determined by Ecclesiastical Prudence,
which differs somewhat from what we call mere Humane Prudence; because it is
not the result of mere Natural Reason, but founded on, and accommodated to a
Divine Institution. So that here is no Archbishop, no Primate, no particular
Forms of Combinations of Churches, of Divine Institution; they are
Ecclesiastical Constitutions, which may be regulated and altered by
Ecclesiastical Prudence; but Catholic Communion is a Divine Institution, and
therefore that Bishops and Churches should unite, for the preservation of
Catholic Communion is Divine, though the particular Forms of such Combinations
may be determined by Ecclesiastical Prudence, which is somewhat more Sacred
than Humane Prudence, because it is founded on, and accommodated to a Divine
Institution. I suppose the Reader is by this time very well satisfied about our
Author's Justice in his Quotations, as the Prefacer speaks.

7. He observes, that I teach, that a compliance with the Order, Government,
Discipline, and Worship, as well as the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, is
necessary to Catholic Communion. For all Christians and Christian Churches are
but One body, and are thereby obliged to all Duties, Offices, and Acts of
Christian Communion, which are consequent upon such a Relation. The Catholic
Church is one Body and Society, wherein all the Members there of have equal
Right and Obligation to Christian Communion. This he puts all together as One
entire Reasoning, though the parts of it are above three hundred Pages distant,
as he owns in the Margin, and belong to very different things, which is a very
honest way of Quoting, by which means we may make any Author speak what we
please, as the History of the Gospel has been described in Virgil's Verse: The
latter part of these words concern the Obligation of all Christians to
Catholic Communion* which, what it is, I have already explained: In the former
part he would insinuate, that I make it necessary to Catholic Communion, that
all Churches should observe the same particular Orders, Forms of Government,
Rites and Modes of Discipline and Worship; and makes me give a very senseless
Reason for it, because all Christians and Christian Churches are but one Body,
and are thereby obliged to all Duties, Offices, and Acts of Christian
Communion, which are consequent upon such a Relation. As if Christian Churches
could maintain no Communion with each other, unless they used the same Liturgy,
the same Rites and Ceremonies, and were all governed by the same Ecclesiastical
Canons; whereas we know, that all Churches in all Ages, have had peculiar
Liturgies, peculiar Rites and Ceremonies, peculiar Fasts and Feasts, peculiar
Canons, and Rules of Discipline of their own: as there are in many Cases to
this day in the Church of Rome, especially among their Religious Orders.

In the place from which he quotes these words, I was Vindic. p. 396.
Vindicating the Terms of Communion in the Church of England to be truly
Catholic: P. 392. There are these words. For the Terms of our Communion are as
Catholic as our Church is; Diocesan Episcopacy, Liturgies, and Ceremonies,
have been received in all Churches for many hundred Years, and are the settled
Constitution of most Churches to this Day; and this is the Constitution of the
Church of England, and the Terms of our Communion; and must be acknowledged to
be Catholic Terms, if by Catholic Terms he means, what has actually been
received by the Catholic Church. After much more of this Argument, I add the
words he quotes, That though it be hard to determine, what is in its own Nature
absolutely necessary to Catholic Communion; yet, I can tell him de facto, what
is, viz, a Compliance with the Order, Government, Discipline, and Worship, as
well as the Doctrine of the Catholic Church: He who will not do this, must
separate from the Catholic Church, and try it at the last day, who was in the
right. I am content our Dissenters should talk on of unscriptural Terms of
Communion, so they will but grant, that the Church of England is no more guilty
of imposing unscriptural Terms, than the Catholic Church it self has always
been, and when they have confidence enough to deny this, I will prove it, and
shall desire no better Vindication of the Church of England, than the practice
of the Catholic Church. This is so plain, that I need say nothing more to
explain it, that if we will live in Catholic Communion, we must own
Episcopacy, Liturgies, Ceremonies, which has been the ancient Government,
Worship, Discipline, of the Church, and those who upon pretense of
unscriptutural Terms, separate from the Church of England, for the sake of such
Catholic Practices, by the same reason must have renounced the Communion of
the best and purest, and most Catholic Churches since the Apostles Days. But
how far I ever was from thinking, that the particular Rites and Modes of
Worship must be the same in all Churches, and that there can be no Communion
without this, any man may satisfy himself, who will be pleased to read some
few Pages in the Vindication, beginning at p. 372; where I show how impossible
it is to maintain Catholic Communion, between distinct Churches, without
allowing of such diversity of Rites, which are, and always were practiced in
different Churches.

Thus I have done with our Author's Quotations, and what Agreement there is
between us, the Reader must judge. And now he pretends to draw up my Argument
against the Dissenters, which he says proceeds upon Roman Catholic Principles:
But I shall not trouble my self to examine whether my Arguments against the
Dissenters were good or no, for I have no Dispute with them now, and will have
none; but if they ever were good, they are not Roman Catholic Principles,
which make them so; for I have no Roman Catholic Principle in all my Book. As
for what he so often triumphs in, the late King's Paper, I tell him once for
all, I will have no Dispute with Kings; but if he have any thing to say, let
him fetch his Arguments, whence he will, without alleging the King's Authority
to make them good, and he shall have an Answer.

And now from quoting, our Author falls to disputing me into an Agreement,
which methinks argues, that we are not agreed, or at least, that I do not know
we are; for what need of disputing, if as the Title of his Book says, we are
agreed already, but however, the Dispute is like to be but short, and therefore
we will patiently bear it.

Now to trace us to St. Peter's Chair, he thus begins. For by their making the
Catholic Church one Body, one Household, one Kingdom, or governed Society, that
has a governing and governed Part, they must necessarily be for a Catholic
Hierarchy, as what alone is a fit Government for so great a Body Politic; that
is, if the whole Church be one Body Politic, over which there must be one
Supreme governing Head, then we must acknowledge the Authority of the Pope, or
general Council, over the whole Church, which is a demonstration. But if we do
not make the whole Church one such Organized, Politic Body, but only one
Communion (as it has appeared, we do not) then there is no necessity of one
Supreme Government over the whole Church, but it is sufficient, if the Church
be governed by Parts, by Bishops, who have all equal Authority, but agree in
the same Communion, and govern their particular Churches by common Advice; and
in this case, there is a governing, and a governed Part, but no one Supreme
Head. And thus all his reasoning is at an end, for destroy this one Principle,
that the whole Catholic Church is one Politic, Organized Body, with one
Supreme Power over the whole, and there is an end of the Authority, both of
Popes, and general Councils.

But he will not give up the Cause thus, for says he, Let us therefore a little
more clearly observe, what these Church of England Clergymen affirm, and we
shall find their Notion about Church Government, exactly formed according to
the Roman Model. Well Sir! watch us as narrowly as you can, and see the end of
it. For (says he) they say, there can be no one Catholic Communion, without
one Catholic Government: But what does he mean by one Catholic Government?
One superior Power over the whole Catholic Church? And who ever said this, and
where? We say, that the Unity of the Episcopacy, or the Communion and good
correspondency of Bishops, is necessary to preserve Catholic Communion among
their several Churches, but we never said, that one Catholic Government, or
superior Power over the whole Church is necessary to this end. He proceeds: And
that Catholic Unity and Communion may be the more securely preserved, the
Combination of Churches, considered as pure Ecclesiastical Societies, into
Archiepiscopal and National Churches is necessary: Not absolutely necessary,
but highly expedient; but then our Author must remember withal, that these
Combinations of Churches, are not for a superior Authority and Government over
Bishops, but only for mutual counsel and advice, and then let him, make his
best of it. And so he will make what he can of it, for he adds. So that the
great end of the Combination of Diocesan into Provincial and National Churches,
is the preserving Catholic Communion. Right! remember that, that it is for
Communion, not for Government, and all is well: Which cannot be, but by raising
the Combination higher, and extending it much farther, even unto Patriarchial,
and at last into one occumenical combined Church, for this alone is
commensurate to Catholic Communion. Well! suppose then, that all the Bishops
in the World could meet together for counsel and advice, as the Bishops of a
Province or Nation can, and had just such an Ecumenical, as there are national
Primates, what service would this do the Church of Rome? For here is no Supreme
Power all this while over the Universal Church, neither Pope nor general
Council: Here is no Ecumenical Pastor, no Supreme Tribunal, which all the
World is bound to obey. For as I have already shown, we do not make a Primate
or National Synod, the constitutive Regent Head of a National Church, but only
a great Council for mutual Advice; and therefore were there such an Ecumenical
Primate, and Ecumenical Council, yet it would as vastly differ from the Roman
Model, as a Council for Advice, and a Council for Government; as an Ecumenical
Head and Pastor, and the President of an Ecumenical Council; and the Church of
Rome is at a very low ebb, if it can be contented with such a Primate, and such
a Council as this, which essentially differ from what the Councils of Constance
and Basil themselves attribute to Popes and Councils: But besides this, if such
an Ecumenical combination of Bishops and Churches cannot be, and there be no
need of it to Catholic Communion, then I suppose, our Author will grant, that
the Argument from a National combination of Churches, and a National Primate,
to an Ecumenical Combination of Churches, and an Ecumenical Primate, is not
good.

1. Then this cannot be, and that for this plain Reason, because all the
Bishops of the Christian Church, cannot meet together from all parts of the
World, and if they could, they ought not to forsake their Churches for so long
a time as such a Journey, and such a Consultation requires: But you will say,
every Nation may spare some Bishops, to send with full Authority to the
Council, as the Representatives of all the rest. This I take to be next to a
Moral Impossibility; I am sure it was never yet done; there never was such a
Council, as had some Bishops in it from all parts of the Christian World. But
suppose this could be done, these Bishops, who meet in Council, could represent
Nobody but themselves, and therefore can make no such Decrees, as by their own
Authority shall oblige all the other Bishops, who were not present. For a
Bishop is not a representable Person; He is the Supreme Governor in his own
Diocese, and cannot, and ought not, to be imposed on without his own consent;
his Trust and Office and Power is Personal, and so is his account; and
therefore he can no more be represented in a Council, than he can at the Day of
Judgment: every Man's Conscience and Soul must be in his own keeping; and
therefore can be represented by no Man. Had the Representatives of the
Catholic Church, a Divine Authority, superior to all particular Churches and
Bishops, to oblige them to stand to their Decrees, as the Church of Rome
asserts a general Council has, then indeed some few Bishops chose by their
National and Provincial Bishops, to go to the Council, and to Act as the
Representatives of such Churches, might have a plenary Authority to debate and
determine all Matters in Dispute, whether relating to Faith, or Worship, or
Discipline: But such an Authority as this, he knows we absolutely deny, and
assert that Councils are only for mutual Advice, and can oblige no Bishops
without their personal assent, and this makes it ridiculous to talk of
Representatives, in giving and taking Advice, which is a personal Act, and
requires every Man's own Judgment, and his personal Assent.

I deny not but it may be of great Use for Christian Princes and Emperors, to
summon such Councils as these, as Constantine and other succeeding Emperors
did; for there was no such thing, as what we call a General Council, till
Constantine summoned the first Council at Nice. For Christian Princes and
Emperors are concerned to encourage and support the true Christian Faith and
Worship; and they are as much concerned not to be misguided in these Matters,
which instead of Nursing Fathers, may make them Persecutors of the true Church:
And to prevent this, they cannot take a better way, when the Church is divided
by Schisms and Heresies, then to summon such a great Council, where the Matters
in Dispute may be freey debated; but I look upon these rather to be Councils of
the Empire, than of the Church which have no other Authority, but what either
the Imperial Sanctions give them, or what every Church gives them, by receiving
their Decrees: And it is evident from Ecclesiastical Story, that the bear
Authority of these Councils never put an end to any one Dispute, any farther
than they were backed by the Imperial Power; which is an Argument, that they
did not believe in those days, such Councils to be Infallible, or to be the
Supreme Tribunal of the Christian Church. They were indeed Supreme Tribunals,
when Princes made them so, but not by any mere Ecclesiastical Authority and
Jurisdiction; If then a Council of Bishops be only for mutual Advice, and a
Council for Advice requires the personal Presence of all Bishops, and though
all the Bishops of one Province, or one Nation, may conveniently enough meet
together for Advice, yet, all the Bishops of the World cannot; then I think it
is plain, that the Consequence from a National to an Ecumenical Council, is
not good. especially,

2dly, Since there is no need of it to Catholic Communion. The Christian
Churches maintained a very strict Alliance and Communion with each other, for
above Three Hundred Years without it: Catholic Communion was better preserved
then, than ever it has been since, which is a demonstration, that such a
Supreme governing Power over the whole Church is not necessary to Catholic
Communnion, for then Catholic Communion could never have been maintained
without it; and yet, thus it was in St. Cyprian's days, who was as Zealous an
Asserter of Catholic Communion, as any before or since.

In those days, the Bishops of Neighbor Churches frequently met together, to
Advise about the general Concernments of the Church, and if any thing happened,
which concerned the Discipline of the whole Church, as it did in St. Cyprian's
days, about the case of the lapsed, and rebaptizing those who had been baptized
by Heretics; they sent their Letters to Foreign Churches, and took their
Advice about it, and by this means did more perfectly understand one another
Judgments and Reasons, and came to a better accord and agreement, than they
could have done, had they met in a General Council, consisting only of some
few Representative Bishops. I am sure by this means St. Cyprian Maxim cum
jampridem nobiscum and cum omnibus omnino Episcopis in toto mundo constitutis
etiam Cornelius Collega noster -- decreverit -- Cypr. cp. 68. Pam.
says their Decrees were confirmed by all the Bishops in the World; and Optatus
says, that this Catholic Cum quo nobis totus orbis commercio formatarum in una
communionis societate concordat. Opt. l. 2.
Communion was maintained all the World over, by formed and communicatory
Letters: It seems, they did not think then, that one governing Head was
necessary to Catholic Communion; and therefore, though Catholic Communion
does require the Union of Neighbor Churches into one Combined Church, it does
not require such an Union and Combination of all the Churches in the World.

Thus I have particularly answered this Author's charge, excepting his vain
Repetitions of the same Cavils, without giving any new force or strength to
them, and I think any ordinary Reader may see, how far I am from setting up the
supreme Authority, either of Pope or General Council over the Universal Church,
and how impossible it is to graft such consequences upon my Principles, with
any show or pretense of Reason.

And now as for his French Popery, let it be what it will, I am unconcerned in
it, since I give no Supreme Authority neither to Pope nor General Council, and
therefore neither agree with the Italian, nor Spanish, nor French, nor any
Popery, of what denomination soever. But I must add a word or two about Petrus
de Marca, because it seems my Honesty and Credit is very much concerned in this
matter, so deeply, that no man ought ever to believe me more; and though I
suppose the Reader sees, what credit he is to give to this Author, yet I must
speak at least a good word for my own honesty: and to do that, I must give a
brief account of the occasion of my alleging the Authority of Petrus de Marca

I was charged by my dissenting Adversaries, with a Cassandrian design, for
setting up, as they apprehended, the Authority of a General Council. For there
is not one word, which this Author has objected against me, but what was before
objected by the Dissenters, and answered in the Vindication. Now having shown
them their mistake in this Charge, that I had asserted nothing which did infer
the Authority of a General Council, as the Supreme Regent Head of the Catholic
Church, I over and above showed them how vain this Charge of Cassandrian or
French Popery was, though I had given such an Authority to a General Council.
For merely to assert the Authority of a General Council, does not make any man
a Papist of no sort whatsoever, unless he assert the Authority of the Pope: for
though there be some dispute, whose Authority is greatest, the Popes, or the
Councils, yet no man is a Papist, who does not own the Pope to be the Supreme
and Ecumenical Pastor; and therefore I having expressly disowned all Authority
of the Pope or Bishop of Rome, though I had owned the Authority of a General
Council, I could be no Papist, not so much as a Cassandrian or French Papist.
So that this is the thing I was to prove, that there is no Papist, but owns the
Pope to be the Supreme Head of the Church, the Universal and Ecumenical
Pastor. This I proved Cassander did; who asserts, That to the Unity of the
Catholic See Vindicat. p. 131. etc.
Church, is required Obedience to One Supreme Governor, who succeeds Peter in
the government of Christ's Church, and in the Office of feeding his Sheep --
-and that it is evident Cassand. Consult. de pontifice Romans
from all the Records of the Church, that the chief Authority of the Universal
Church has always been yielded to the Bishop of Rome, as Peter's Successor, who
sits in his Chair. This I proved also of the Councils of Constance and Basil,
That though they decreed the Council to be above the Pope, yet they asserted
the Popes Supreme Pastorship. That all particular men and particular Churches,
are bound to obey the Pope, unless in such matters as are prejudicial to this
holy Synod, or any other which is lawfully assembled; as the Council of Basil
expressly teaches. And this was all I undertook to prove of the French Church,
That whatever Liberties they pretended, still they owned the Pope to be the
Supreme Pastor and Head of the Universal Church; for which I appealed to Petrus
de Marca. Let us then consider what is my Fault.

Our Author gives us an account, that the French Agreem. p. 18. etc.
Church teaches, as the Council of Basil did, That though the Pope be greater
than particular Churches and Bishops, yet he is not greater than the whole
Universal Church; and that the Authority that is granted him in the Interval of
Councils -- does not in the least suppose him to have any Superiority or
Pre-eminence above the Universal Church: whence it is, that whenever from the
Ecclesiastical Courts in France, any References, Suggestions, or Consultations,
were made to the Pope, if the Popes Rescripts were contrary to the old Canons,
the French always looked on it as abusive, and made an Appeal from the Pope
called Appellatio ab Abusu, provoking him to the old Canons. Now he says, Dr.
Sherlock is bold enough to deny all, and to bring no less person than the
learned Petrus de Marca for his Voucher. But where do I deny one word of this,
or allege Petrus de Marca's authority to prove it. I had no occasion to deny
this; for all that I was to prove was, that the French Church did own the Pope
to be the Supreme Head and Governor of the Church, and that they did so, I
proved from Petrus de Marca: Does not then Petrus de Marca say, what I charge
him with? Yes, that he owns: What is my fault then? Why truly, only that I say,
that Petrus de Marca wrote in defense of the Liberties of the Gallican Church:
and is not this the Title of his Book? De Concordia Sacerdotii and Imperii, seu
de Libertatibus Ecclesioe Gallicanae: Of the Agreement of the Priesthood and
the Empire, or of the Liberties of the Gallican Church. Yes, this he grants;
but the Archbishop was persuaded to add this Title by the Bookseller, to make
it sell the better: and I ought to have known for all this, if I had looked any
farther than Titles and Margins, that he wrote against the Liberties of the
Gallican Church; and will he say, that I ought to have said so too? That had
been a great piece of modesty indeed, as great as it is in this Author, whoever
he be, I am sure very inconsiderable, in comparison of this great man, to
charge him with downright Knavery.

For my part, I am of that mind still, that the Archbishop, who was as great a
man as that Age bred, did firmly believe, that he had truly stated the
Liberties of the Gallican Church, though he differed from some, who had
stretched those Liberties very much, to the prejudice Marcae per Archiepiscopum
Burdegalensem Regis nomine imperatur, ut adversus ^^nc libellum (Optati Galli)
scribut, sed ea m^thodo, ne libertates. Ecclesiae ^^llicanae, quas per latus
non occulte petebat Optatus, aliquam paterentur injuriam; quinimo id sedulo
ageret, ut omnes intelligerent, libertates illas nihil ^etrahere de reverentia,
quae debetur Romanae sedi, quam pr^ cunctis semper nationibus (...)
constantissime retinuerunt. Baluz. vita Petr. de Mar.
of the Roman See; which the King himself expressed his sense of, when he
imposed that task on him of writing this Book, for he charged him to take care,
that the Gallican Liberties might suffer no Injury, and that he should let all
men see, that these Liberties did not diminish that Reverence, which the French
have most constantly maintained for the Roman See above all other Nations; from
whence also we may observe, that the Subject he was to write on by the Kings
Command, were the Gallican. Liberties, which was therefore a proper Title for
his Book, though he was unwilling to have given it that Title for fear of
offending the Court of Rome, as it accordingly happened; and he was to take care
so to assert the Gallican Liberties, as not to detract from that Reverence,
which the French Church, as the King affirms, has always paid to the Roman See.
This Province he undertook, and discharged to the abundant satisfaction of that
King, who employed him, who was jealous enough of the Gallican Liberties, as
far as they were consistent with the Reverence of the Apostolic See: but this
work was not so well relished at Rome; for as the King rewarded him with a
Bishopric for it, so the Court of Rome kept him out of it for several Years;
and one would guess by this Usage he met with at Rome, that they had a very
jealous eye on these Gallican Liberties, even as De Marca had stated them.

But our Author observes that Baluzius who wrote De Agreement, p. 33.
Marca's Life, positively affirms, that none amongst the French, no, nor
amongst the Spanish and Italian did more eloquently, and with greater Authority
of the Ancients, exalt the Roman Chair to a greater height than De Marca did.
This Baluzius does not say so absolutely as our Author reports, but adds a
Qualification, which he out of his great Exactness in quoting, thought fit to
leave out, viz. qui modo intra limits oequi constiterit, that no man who kept
within the bounds of Equity and Moderation, ever exalted the Authority of the
Roman Bishop more: which argues, that De Marca did not fly so high, as some
Flatterers of the Roman Greatness have done, but yet gave him as great Power as
any man could honestly give him; Offendit tamen (quis crederet) hic liber
Romana ingenia, nullam aliam ob causam ut Marca existimabat, quam quod in
front operis admoneret, hic agi de libertatibus ecclesiae Gallicanae. Unde
Romany (quorum aures teneritudine qu^dam plus trahuntur --) promptum suit sibi
persuadere, illum libertati ecclesiasticae adversari, qui de libertatibus
ecclesiae Gallicanae (proh nefas!) agebat ex professo. Baluz. in vita Petri de
Marca. p 9.
and this I hope he might do without betraying the Gallican Liberties. Tho'as
Baluzius observes, the Romans, whose Ears are very tender in such matters,
could not bear the Title of his Book of the Liberties of the Gallican Church,
for they suspected, that he must be an Enemy to the Ecclesiastical Liberties,
who wrote professedly for the Liberties of the Gallican Church, which he brands
with a proh nefas! as a thing ridiculous and absurd.

In the same place, Baluzius falls severely upon Faget, who also wrote the Life
of De Marca, for making him a Deserter and betrayer of the Gallican Liberties:
He gives an Account of the Roman Arts, to persuade him to condemn some parts of
his Book, and to insinuate that the mistakes of that Book of Concord were not
owing to his own Will and Choice, but to the importunate Commands and Ambition
of others; this Condition he absolutely refused, though it was proposed by
Cardinal Barberini as the easiest Expedient to obtain a dispatch of his Affairs
at Rome. This he was frequently solicited to, and as constantly refused, firmly
resolving while he was in health rather to renounce all Right and Claim to his
Bishopric, than remit any of the Privileges of the Gallican Church, till at
last they taking advantage of a great fit of Sickness, when his mind might be
supposed as weak as his Body; he subscribed a Paper, wherein he recanted every
thing in his Book, which was contrary to the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and
Immunity, as it was taught by the Church of Rome: an account of which Baluz.
gives us in his Life, p. 16. 17. From whence it appears, that though De Marca
did not so much depress the Pope, nor extend the Gallican Liberties, as some
French Lawyers had done, yet he honestly and sincerely maintained with
constancy and resolution (excepting this subscription in his sickness,) against
all the Arts and Solicitations of the Church of Rome, what he thought to be the
true Liberties of the Gallican Church; and this surely was reason enough for me
to say, (as he himself says in the Title of his Book, and as the French King,
and the Court of Rome thought he did) that he wrote for the Liberties of the
Gallican Church, how our Author will defend himself for saying that he wrote
against them, with any modesty and reverence for the Honesty, Learning and
Judgment of that great man, he had best consider: I cannot pretend to
understand the Gallican Liberties so well, as to say, who is in the Right; but
I would still prefer the Judgment of De Marca, who was both a great Lawyer and
a great Divine, before any of his Adversaries.

And yet I was not concerned to judge of this matter, whether De Marca or the
Pragmaticks were in the right, where they differ from each other; all that I
alleged his Authority for, as I observed before, was to prove, that the
Gallican Liberties did not exclude the Authority of the Pope, as Christ's
Vicar, and St. Peter's Successor in the Government of the Church. This is what
the Council of Basil it self owns; and to deny it, would be an Ecclesiastical
Liberty with a witness, but not a Popish, but a Protestant Liberty. This is my
Crime, which he says, Ought to be a caution to all Readers, how they take up
any thing upon trust from me; and though I have done nothing to forfeit my
Credit yet, I do not desire any Readers should trust me, but see with their own
Eyes; and if they would serve us all so, I know what would become of such
Writers as this Author. And he wishes it may be a means to engage me to more
modesty, and an abatement of my contemptuous way of writing (if I write any
more) for the time to come. I perceive he thought, this discovery would have
broke my heart for ever; but I have ventured to write once more, and may do so
again, and very modestly too, when I meet with modest Adversaries. I thank God
I contemn no man living, but it is a little in my nature to contemn Knavery and
Nonsense; and therefore if our Author tastes a little of it still, I must beg
his pardon, for I cannot help it. As for what follows, I have nothing to say to
it, it is all a Dispute against the Popes Supremacy, which I like very well;
only I wonder, if he be in good earnest, why the Oath of Supremacy should stick
in his teeth. I have only one Request to him, to tell me, which was the
Infallible Council, that of Basil, or Trent: for the first subjects the Pope to
a Council, the last makes him superior to it; and it were very strange, if
Contradictions should be Infallible.

AN ANSWER TO THE Necessity of AGREEMENT Between the Church of England AND THE
CHURCH of ROME, etc.
BEfore I proceed to Answer his second Section of the Agreement between the two
Churches about some of their imposed Terms of Communion, I shall in a few words
rid my hands of that terrible Appendix which the Prefacer ascribes to another
Author, to prove the Necessity of an Agreement between the Church of England
and the Church of Rome, evidenced from the Nature and Constitution of a
National Church, Episcopally Established. Thus first they prove, that we are
agreed, and then they prove, that there is a necessity we should agree: But
what need to prove that we must agree, did they believe, that we were already
agreed? So that this Appendix is indeed a confutation of the Book which he
Entitles, An Agreement between the Church of England and Church of Rome:
Whereas this proves, that of necessity we ought to agree, if we will be true to
our Principles; which supposes, that whatever our Principles are, we are not
yet agreed. How well he has proved our Agreement, I have already shown, and now
shall briefly examine how he proves our Necessity of Agreement.

But I must observe by the way, that though the Prefacer does ascribe this
learned Piece to another Author, yet he has concealed the true Father: His
other Author is a good Roman Catholic, who disputes in good earnest from the
Subordination of Pastors in the Church, to prove the Supremacy of an Oecumenic
or Universal Pastor; but the true Author was an Independent Protestant, from
whom this honest Romanist borrows every Argument, and almost every word,
excepting such little variations as a Papist must of necessity make in an
Independent's Writing, without ever confessing his Benefactor, or owning from
whence he had it. The Title of the Book is, The Catholic Hierarchy, or the
Divine Right of a Sacred Dominion in Church and Conscience, truly Stated,
Asserted, and Pleaded. Printed for Sam. Crouch at the Princes Arms in Pope's
Head-Alley in Cornhil, and Tho. Fox at the Angel in Westminster Hall, 1681. In
the 14 Chap. of which Book, p. 76. being a Digression concerning the
Subordination of Pastors; whoever has the curiosity may find this entire
Treatise of the Necessity of Agreement between the Church of England and the
Church of Rome, only with this difference, that the Independent disputes
against the Subordination of Pastors by this very Argument, That the Asserting
the Subordination of Pastors in the Church, does by all good consequence infer
the Supremacy of an Ecumenical or Universal Pastor.

This Popish Plagiary takes his Book, and makes a quite contrary use of it, to
prove from the subordination of Pastors, which is and ought to be in the
Church, as the Church of England owns, the necessity of owning an Ecumenical
Pastor, they both indeed dispute against the Church of England, but the first
Author disputes for Independency, the Plagiary for Popery. Now why might not
the Independent, had he not had more Wit than his Transcriber, have entitled
his Chapter, The Necessity of Agreement between the Church of England and
Independents, because they both agree in rejecting an Ecumenical Pastor, and
therefore ought to agree in rejecting the subordination of Pastors, which
infers an Ecumenical Pastor; as well as this Author calls it, A Necessity of
Agreement between the Church of England and Church of Rome, because they both
agree in the subordination of Pastors, and therefore, as he thinks, ought to
agree in an Ecumenical Pastor: Nay, he had but served his Independent Author
right, had he styled it, The Necessity of Agreement between the Independents,
and the Church of Rome, because they both agree in this Principle, that if
there be a subordination of Pastors, there ought to be an Ecumenical Pastor,
which is the nearest Popery of any Principle I know; for there is nothing to be
done in order to this Agreement, but to prove a subordination of Pastors, which
is a thousand times easier, than to make good that Consequence from a
subordination of Pastors, to an Ecumenical Pastor.

But let this Author make the best he can of his Independent Arguments, and
call his Book what he pleases, my business is only to show, that there is no
necessity for those, who acknowledge a subordination of Pastors, to acknowledge
an Ecumenical Pastor: And before I consider his reasons in particular, I shall
make short work with them, and confute them altogether. The querie he proposes
to discuss, which he has transcribed verbatim from his Independent Author, is
this:

Whether the asserting of the Subordination of Pastors in Agreement, p. 61.
the Church, does not by all good consequence, necessarily infer The Catholic
Hierarchy, p. 77.
the Supremacy of an Oecumenic or Universal Pastor. Now my exception against
this, and consequently against all his Arguments, whereby he proves this, is,
that I will allow of no consequences to prove an Institution. No man can have
the Authority of an Universal Pastor, unless Christ has given it him; and
therefore unless Christ have appointed such an Universal Pastor, there can be
none: and to prove by consequence, that Christ has appointed one, when no such
Institution appears, is ridiculous. Suppose then, there were as much reason for
the Supremacy of an Ecumenical Bishop over all the Bishops in the World, as
there is for the Superiority of Bishops over Presbyters, which is all the
Subordination of Pastors, that we allow, of which more presently; yet at most
this can only prove, that there ought to be an Ecumenical Bishop, and that
Christ ought to have appointed one; but it don't prove that there is one: And
therefore he, who believes that the Superiority of Bishops over Presbyters is
an Apostolical Institution, but can find no such Institution of an Universal
Bishop, can never be forced by any reason or consequence, to own such an
Universal Bishop. We own the Subordination of Presbyters to Bishops, not from
Reason, but Institution; and does it then hence follow, that we must own the
Supremacy of an Universal Bishop, for some pretended Reasons without an
Institution? What is matter of Institution depends wholly upon the Divine Will
and Pleasure; and though all men will grant, that God and Christ have always
great reason for their Institutions, yet it is not the Reason, but the
Authority which makes the Institution: Though we do not understand the reasons
of the Institution, if we see the Command, we must obey; and though we could
fancy a great many reasons why there should be such an Institution, if no such
Institution appears, we are free, and ought not to believe there is such an
Institution, because we think there are reasons to be assigned why it should
be: And thus in our case, though we should not show why Christ should institute
the Apostolical Office and Power (to which ordinary power Bishops succeed)
superior to Presbyters, and not institute an Ecumenical Pastor superior to
all Bishops; though we should fancy that there is as much reason for the one as
there is for the other, yet if there appear to be an Institution of the
Superiority of Bishops over Presbyters, and no Institution of an Ecumenical
Pastor, we may safely own what is instituted, and deny what is not instituted,
what ever parity of reason there is between them. And this, I think, plainly
shows that the Church of England may own the Superiority of Bishops over
Presbyters, and yet deny any such Officer as an Ecumenical Pastor, because
there is an Institution of one, and not of the other.

But that our Author (if we may call a notorious Plagiary so) may not complain,
that we will not hear him, I shall briefly examine, what he says.

He begins with explaining what is meant by Church, by Subordination of
Pastors, and by an Ecumenical Pastor.

1. As for the first, he distinguishes between a Church and the Church; A
Church is any particular Church; The Church belongs to the Catholic Church
only. Why so? is not a Church, though it be a particular Church, the Church of
England, the Church of France, the Church Agree. p. 62.
of Spain? The Church of England is not the Universal Hierar. p. 77.
Church, no more than the Church of Rome, but it is the Church of England: But
what he would make of this, I cannot well guess. He says, Men are frighted into
Conformity to the impositions of any particular Church, upon supposition that
they are the Laws of the Church, i. e. the Catholic Church, as the People do
for the most part believe: But I perceive he thinks, that our People in England
are as silly as they are in some other places; but we tell them, and every body
of common sense understands without telling, that when we in England exhort
them to obey the Laws of the Church, we mean only the Laws of the Church of
England; and he ought first to have proved, that every National Church has not
power to give Laws to her own Members, before he had represented this, as such
a mere Scarecrow; for his distinction between A and The Church, does not prove
that a Church, or every particular National or Diooesan Church, if he pleases,
has not Authority over her own Members. This he himself dares not deny, and
therefore distinguishes between obeying a Church, as the Church, and as a
Church; but though we do grant a difference between the Universal and a
Particular Church, yet before he had run down the Authority of particular
Churches, he ought to have proved such a Superior Authority in the Universal
Church, to which all particular Churches must be Subordinate: But here his
Author failed him, and therefore he must of necessity fail his Readers.

2. By Subordination of Pastors he understands the standing of several men in
distinct Orders, or Degrees of Office, one above another, or under another in
Subordinate Ranks. This he applies to Patriarchates, National, Provincial,
Diocesan, Churches; the Romanists he says never stop till they arrive at the
most Catholic Visible Church and Pastor in the World, i. e. an Ecumenical
Pastor: The Protestant Prelates and Doctors (who go not Dr Sherlock's way) do
say, that there are no degrees of Subordination in the ascending part, above a
National Church and Pastor. I have already defended my way, which this Author,
I find, knows nothing of, no more than he does what is the sense of Protestant
Prelates in this matter: and therefore I must tell him, that though we do own a
Subordination of Presbyters to Bishops, yet we own no Subordination of one
Bishop to another, but do assert with St Cyprian, That all Bishops have
originally the same Authority and Power: what the meaning is of Metropolitical
and National Combinations of Churches, and how far we are from setting up a
National Supreme Pastor with a kind of a National Infallibility, as he
insinuates, I have already shown at large: Though I think there never was a
more senseless Suggestion, that no Church can exercise any Authority and
Jurisdiction, nor punish the Disobedient, without pretending to Infallibility,
which would overthrow all Government in the World, unless Princes, and Parents,
and Masters be Infallible too: And the reason he gives of it is as absurd to
the full; that its the most unjust and unreasonable thing in the World for me
to pretend to force another to believe and practice that which I am not assured
to be truth: As if no man could be certain of any thing without Infallibility.
Now all his Arguments proceeding upon this Mistake, that we own a Superiority
of one Bishop over another, that Bishops own Obedience and Subjection to
Archbishops and Primates, and they to Patriarchs; whereas we own no such thing,
but teach, that all Bishops are equal, as I have already explained it; and that
these combinations of Bishops into Archiepiscopal and National Churches, are
not for direct acts of Government and Superiority over each other, but for
mutual Advice and Counsel: All his Arguments from the Superior Power of
Archbishops, Metropolitans, and Patriarchs, to prove that there must be an
Universal Pastor, fall with it.

3. By an Oecumenic Pastor, he means the Universal Visible Ruling Head of the
Catholic Organized Church Militant. This is easily understood; the only
difficulty is to prove, that the Catholic Church is such an organized body, as
must have an universal visible ruling Head.

And thus I come to his Reasons, whereby he proves, that the Subordination of
Pastors in the Church, does necessarily infer the Supremacy of an Oecumenick or
Universal Pastor:

1. His first Argument is, that there is the same Politic Agree. p. 65.
Hierar. p. 77.
Reason for an Universal Pastor, that there is for any subordinate Pastor, that
has Pastors subjected unto him. Now suppose this were true, we do not sound
the original right of Government, of superiority and subjection between the
Pastors of the Church, upon any politic Reasons, but only upon Institution;
and therefore though the Politic Reasons were the same, if the Institution be
not the same, that makes an essential difference, and spoils all the Arguments
from a parity of Reason.

The only Subordination we allow of, is the Subordination of Presbyters to
their Bishops, and that we found on an Apostolic Institution, and if we will
speak in the Ancient Language, this is not the Subordination of one Pastor to
another: for none were called the Pastors of the Church in St. Cyprian's days
but Bishops, who are the Apostles Successors, to whom Christ entrusted the care
of feeding his Sheep. For though Presbyters are entrusted with the care of the
Flock, yet they are not complete Pastors, because they are under the direction
and government of their Bishop in the Exercise of their Ministry, and according
to Ignatius his Rule must do nothing without him: but Bishops are the Supreme
Governors and Pastors of their particular Churches, and we allow of no
Subordination of Bishops, that is, of Pastors, to each other. This our
Transcriber was sensible of, and therefore here he leaves his Copy: The
Independent Author gives his first instance in a Diocesan Bishop ruling his
Parish Priests or parochial Pastors, the chief end of the said Bishop being
Jurisdiction, determination of Ecclesiastical Causes, regulation and ordination
of his Clergy, unity, order, uniformity. Now our Popish Transcriber was
sensible, that there was not such a Subordination between Bishops, as there is
of Presbyters to Bishops, and therefore he changes a Diocesan Bishop into a
Provincial Pastor ruling his Diocesan Bishops, and regulation and ordination of
his Clergy into regulating Abuses, and Consecration of Bishops. So that he was
conscious to himself, that there is not the same politic reason for the
Subordination of Bishops to each other, that there is for the Subordination of
Presbyters to their Bishops, which is the only Subordination we own, and thus I
might dismiss his first Argument.

But is there not a Subordination of Bishops to Archbishops allowed and
practiced in the Church of England, and interwoven with the Constitution of it;
and it this be thought necessary to the unity and good government of a National
Church, is there not greater need for a principium unitatis and regiminis, a
principle of unity and government in conjoyning many National Churches in one
Patriarchal, or all in one Oecumenic, as for uniting Provincials in one
Primateship, or for subjecting Diocesans to their respective Provincials? This
is the whole force of the Argument, which I have sufficiently answered already,
but shall briefly consider it again.

1. Then I observe, that whatever superiority or jurisdiction Archbishops
challenge over Bishops, it is but a Humane Institution; for all Bishops, with
respect to the original Institution of Episcopacy, are equal: and therefore the
superiority of Archbishops oven Bishops cannot prove, that Christ has appointed
a Supreme Pastor over the whole Church, and all the Bishops of it; for Christ
has not made an Archbishop superior to a Bishop, much less a Pope superior to
them all. So that at most, if they proceed upon this Argument, they must quit
all pretense to a Divine Right, and confess the Pope to be as very a Humane
Creature as an Archbishop is, and then we know what to say to them.

2. For the being and authority of Archbishops, and consequently of such an
Ecumenical Bishop, is not necessary and essential to the unity of the Church,
as no Humane Institution can be: Christ Instituted his Church, which is but one
Church, without Archbishops and Metropolitans, and consequently without an
Ecumenical Bishop, and therefore they cannot be necessary to the unity of the
Church. For if Christ instituted this one Church in a parity of Bishops, it
must be one without such a superiority, as is only of Humane institution. The
Church cannot be one without the essential principle of unity, and if an
Ecumenical Pastor be this essential principle of unity, then either he must be
appointed by Christ, and so his institution does not result from a parity of
reason with the Archiepiscopal and Patriarchal Authority, which were not
Instituted by Christ, and then this Argument is lost; or else Christ instituted
one Church without the essential principle of unity, which is as great an
absurdity as to say, that there can be one Church without a principle of unity.

3. As the Archiepiscopal and Patriarchal Authority is originally of Humane
Institution, so it is plain, that before the Church was incorporated into the
State, and it may be some time after, it did not give a direct Authority and
jurisdiction to one Bishop over another: For St. Cyprian, who was a Primate
himself, disowns such an authority, as makes them Bishops of Bishops; and in
St. Ieromes time the Bishop was the highest order in the Church; and of what
place soever they were Bishops, they were all Equal, which is a contradiction,
if one had a direct superiority over another; and therefore such combinations
of Bishops (as I have often observed) were not essential to the unity of the
Church, but were a good prudential means to maintain a strict alliance between
Neighbor Bishops, was very useful for mutual advice and council; gave great
authority to Church Discipline, when every particular Bishop, though he had the
supreme Authority in his own Church, yet did not act merely upon his own Head,
but with the consent and advise of the whole Province, or Patriarchate, which
confirmed the Authority of every Bishop, when those, who were duly censured by
their Bishop, saw it in vain to complain to other Bishops, who all observed the
same rules of Discipline: and an Archbishop or Primate was very necessary in
such combinations, not for unity and government, but for order, as it is in all
other Bodies and Societies of men: at least not for any acts of Government over
their fellow Bishops, but such as did belong in common to them all, as
ordaining Bishops for vacant Sees, or composing such differences as the single
Authority of the Bishop could not compose in his own Diocese.

4. I readily grant, that since the Church is Incorporated into the State,
Archbishops and Metropolitans have a greater and more direct Authority over
their Colleagues, as far as the Canons of the Church confirmed by the Supreme
National Authority extend: but whatever is more than I have now explained, is
not a pure Ecclesiastical Authority, but a mixed Authority derived from the
Civil Powers, and this may be greater or less, as the Civil Powers please. All
compulsory jurisdiction must be derived from the Civil Powers, because the
Church has none of her own, and when the Church is incorporated into the State,
as it is very fitting, that the Ecclesiastical Authority should be enforced by
the Civil Authority, so those, who have the exercise of this Ecclesiastical
Authority, seem the fittest persons to be entrusted with such a Civil
Jurisdiction, as is thought convenient to give force to it: which is the true
original of that mixed Authority, which the Bishops and Archbishops now exercise
by the Canons of the Church, and the Laws of the Land.

But though this justifies the Archiepiscopal or Metropolitical Authority over
a National Church, yet it is a demonstration, that there can be no such
Ecumenical Pastor, as there is a National Archbishop, unless we could find an
Universal Monarch too, as well as a King of England, of France or Spain; for
otherwise, whence should this Universal Pastor derive his Oecumenic Authority,
unless there be an Universal Prince? Merely considered as a Bishop, he has no
Superiority or Jurisdiction over any of his Colleagues or fellow Bishops; and he
can never have such a Jurisdiction over the Universal Church, as a Metropolitan
has over a National Church, unless there be an Universal King to give this
Universal Authority to him, as there is the King of England, of France, or
Spain, to give such a National Authority to their Patriarchs and Primates:
Whereas the Pope of Rome is so far from deriving his Authority from Secular
Princes, that he challenges a Superior Authority over them and their Subjects
in their own Dominions: Which shows how senseless it is to infer the Authority
of an Universal Bishop or Pastor from the Authority of a National Primate,
because they cannot derive their Authority the same way, there being no
Universal Monarch to give him such Authority; and the Bishop of Rome, who alone
challenges this Universal Pastorship, is so far from owning such a Title to it,
that he assumes an Authority over Sovereign Princes. And therefore though it
may be pardonable in an Independent to use such an Argument for the Pope's
Authority, I know not how our Popish Plagiary will come off with it; for it
effectually overthrows all pretenses to a Papal Supremacy, to derive it from no
higher Principle than what gives being to a National Primacy, which is not the
Institution of Christ, but the Authority of Sovereign Princes, and Civil
Powers; which the Pope cannot have, and if he could, would think scorn to
receive his Power from them: For that would spoil his claim as Christ's Vicar,
and St. Peter's Successor; and they who give can take away too.

5. But setting aside all this, there is not a parity of reason for an
Oecumenic Pastor, and a National Primate, neither of them are necessary to the
Unity of the Church, which is preserved by the concord and agreement of
Bishops, not by such a governing Authority and superior Power of one Bishop
over another: As for Advice and Counsel, such a National combination of Bishops
under a Metropolitan, may be of great use, because all the Bishops in a Nation
may without any inconvenience meet together; but there is not the same reason
for an Universal Bishop, because all the Bishops in the World cannot meet
together in Council with him, as I have already discoursed. And as for some
peculiar acts of Authority and Jurisdiction, especially where there is a
mixture of the Ecclesiastical and Civil Authority; this may very prudently be
entrusted with a National Primate: But it is both an intolerable grievance,
which has been complained of by Roman Catholic Princes and People, that
Appeals should lie to Rome, and the Bishops and People of all Nations in the
World, be forced to have their Causes heard there; and it is a derogation from
the Authority of Sovereign Princes, to have a Foreign Bishop exercise a
superior Jurisdiction in their own Kingdoms. This I think is sufficient, if
men be reasonable, to answer his first Politic Reason for an Universal Pastor.

2. His next Argument is very Comical; the whole Agreem. p. 67.
Cath. Hierar. p. 79.
of which he has borrowed also from his Independent Author, though sometimes he
ventures upon new Phrases, and new Illustrations, which make it more comical
still: He proves, that they that maintain the Government of the Church by
Bishops, Archbishops, Primates, etc. must also own and acknowledge an Universal
Visible Pastor, from the nature of an Universal Visible Church. This may be
true for ought I know; for who can tell but his etc. which is all he has added
to the Original, may include an Universal Pastor? But his Argument is
fallaciously put, (which I confess is none of his fault, but his Author's, whom
he has honestly Copied) it should have been this, those who assert the
Government of the Church by Bishops, Archbishops, Primates, (though he should
have left out Bishops, as he did in his former Argument, because their
Authority is of a distinct consideration from Archbishops and Primates) from
the nature of an Universal Visible Church, must also own an Universal Visible
Pastor from the nature of an Universal Visible Church: For if we do not derive
the Authority of Archbishops and Primates, from the nature and essential
Constitution of the Catholic Church, as it is evident we do not; how can the
nature of the Universal Visible Church, force us to own an Universal Pastor,
when it does not force us to own a National Primate? If there be such a
connection between them that the consequence holds from one to the other, we
must own them both for the same reason; for there is no proportion nor no
consequence between things, which have different natures and causes.

But let us hear how he proves this: This Church, he says, must be an
organized, or unorganized Body, made up of parts Similares only. Right* the
Universal Church is unorganized as to the whole, though made up of organized
parts. But this we must not say, for then we spoil his Argument; and yet he
knows that every one, who denies an Universal Pastor set over the whole Church,
must, and does, say it. So that the sum of his Argument is this: If you will
allow the whole Church to be an organized Body, that is, to be under the
Government of an Universal Pastor, then you must own an Universal Pastor; but
if you will not own this, he has nothing to say to you, but that you ought in
civility to own it, to make good his Argument. If men will be so perverse as to
own particular National Churches to be Organized Bodies, and to deny the
Universal Church to be thus Organized, (as we all do) then they may own a
National Primate, and deny an Ecumenical Pastor; and if men own the Universal
Church to be such an Organized Body, they must own an Universal Pastor, whether
they own Archbishops and Primates or not; and therefore Archbishops and
Primates might have been left out of this Argument, because they signify
nothing in it; and consequently the whole Argument is nothing to his design, to
prove that those who own Archbishops and Primates must own an Universal Pastor.

Well, but he undertakes for us, that we will not grant, that the Universal
Church is an unorganized Body; because it lays a necessary Foundation, for
particular Coordinate Churches, Congregational, or Presbyterian: If he had
said Episcopal, he had said right, and we know no inconvenience in this to say,
that all Episcopal Churches are Coordinate, since all Bishops by an original
Right are equal. But besides, if the Catholic Church be considered in its
largest acceptance and extent, comprehending the Militant and Triumphant
Parts, the Scripture tells us, it is an Organized Body, being called a Body of
which the Lord Jesus Christ is the living Head. This is purely his own, for his
Author had more Wit than to say it: The whole Church Militant and Triumphant,
or the Church in Earth and Heaven, is but one Church, and this one Church is
united to Christ, the Head of the Church, and this proves, that the Church on
Earth cannot have any other Head, as the Principle of Unity, but only Christ:
For the Head of the Church must be the Head of the whole Church, as the Head is
the Head of the whole Body: And therefore the Church on Earth, being part of
the Church, not the whole (for the Church in Heaven is the largest, and best
part of the Body) it cannot have a visible Head on Earth, because such a Head
cannot be the Head of the whole Body; for those who say the Bishop of Rome is
the Head of the visible Militant Church on Earth, yet never pretended, that he
is the Head of the invisible Triumphant Church in Heaven; now the Church on
Earth can never have a Head, which is not the Head of the Church in Heaven,
unless we will say, that part of a Body, as the Church on Earth is, may have a
Head by it self, which is not Head to the other part of the Body, which is a
thing, that never was heard of in the World before, that a Head should be Head
only to part of the Body, and not to the whole, when the Body is but one.

But what does he mean, when he says, that the Church Militant and Triumphant,
is an Organized Body? What Organization is there in the Church Triumphant? They
are all indeed united to Christ, and so are his Body, but there are no
different organical Parts in this Body, no differing Ranks and Offices, that we
know of, in the Church in Heaven, no distinction between Clergy and Laity,
Prophets and Apostles, Pastors and Teachers there, for these Offices cease with
the use of them, and therefore they are not united to Christ in one organical
Body, which has different Members, and Offices, in Heaven; and therefore tho
the Church on Earth consists* of such organized Bodies, yet it is not their
Organization, which unites them to Christ, for then this would be necessary in
Heaven, as well as in Eartth, for the same one Body, and every part of it, must
be united to Christ in the same manner, and by the same kind of Union; and if
the Union of the Church on Earth does not consist in its Organization, to be
sure, there is no necessity, that the whole Church on Earth should be one
organized Body, to make it the Body of Christ. The Organization of particular
Churches is for the Edification and good Government of all the Members of it,
not immediately for their Union to Christ, and therefore if the whole Church
may be edified, and well governed, by the Organization of particular Churches,
the Church being called the Body of Christ, cannot prove, that the whole Church
on Earth is, one organical Body.

But if particular Churches be organized, it is most natural and fit, that the
Mother Teeming Church, should have the most proportionate Adaptation of Parts.
A Mother that brings forth organized Children, is supposed to be organized her
self. Nihil dat quod non habet: Wherefore all other less comprehensive
Churches, coming out of the Womb of Mother Church, and proved to be organized
Bodies, it is naturally necessary, that she her self should be homogeneous, or
of same kind, otherwise the Mother must be more monstrous than the Daughters.
Here he forsakes his Guide again, and falls into Nonsense. Could he find out a
Mother Church, which is none of the Daughters, a Catholic Church, which is
distinct from all Particulars, this would be a notable Argument indeed, to
prove the Catholic Church to be organized, because particular Churches are;
but if there be no Teeming Mother Church, but what is a particular Church it
self, if no Church brings forth Churches, as a Woman brings forth her
Daughters, nay if Churches are not brought forth, but Christians, who are
afterward formed into Church-Societies, if all this at best be nothing but
Metaphor and Allusion, and that without any real likeness and similitude too,
we may safely allow him such kind of Arguments as these, for his organized
Catholic Church.

Well but now these particular Churches are transformed from Daughters into
integral Parts of the Mother Catholic Church, nay, are Daughters and integral
Parts too, which constitute the Mother; and then a Body which is made up of
Organized Parts, is always it self Organized, e. g. in all Animals, in a Man
the head, hand, legs, etc. are each organized for the completing the totality
of that part; and therefore are becoming Organs to the whole man, and hence the
man is an Organized Body. Now indeed if the whole Church were such a Body as
the natural Body of a Man is, and did consist of particular Churches, which did
as much differ in their nature, and use, and organization* as the head, and
hand, and legs, do in the natural Body; this were a very notable Argument to
prove the whole Church to be an organized Body, consisting of particular
Churches, as of integral Parts: But now the Apostle makes every particular
Church to be such an organized Body, consisting of all the integral Parts of a
Church, a Bishop, Presbyters, Deacons, and faithful People; and therefore
particular Churches are not properly organized Parts of the Catholic Church,
as the hands or legs are of a humane Body, which is made up of several other
members of a different nature, but as organized wholes, every particular Church
being a complete and entire Church, not a part of a Church; and the Catholic
Church is considered as one, not so much by uniting all particular Churches,
considered as particular Churches, which is to unite a great many wholes
together, to make one whole, which is perfectly unintelligible; but by uniting
the several parts, of which each particular Church consists, into one, they
being the same in all; and this makes one organized Catholic Church, of the
same nature and constitution, the same Officers and Members, with every
particular organized Church. As for instance: A particular organized Church, as
I have now observed, consists of a Bishop, Presbyters, Deacons, and faithful
People, and the whole Catholic Church consists of the same Parts, and can have
no other; and yet there are no Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, Christian People
to make up this Catholic Church, but what belong to some particular Churches,
and yet particular Churches are not Parts of a Church, but complete entire
Churches, as having all the integral Parts, of a perfect Church, and therefore
particular organized Churches cannot make up a whole Church, as the several
Parts make a whole Body, because they are each of them a whole; where then
shall we find Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, People, to make up one Catholic
Church? Now in this case there can be no other Notion of the Catholic Church,
but the Union of the same Parts of all particular Churches into One, and then
the Union of all these united Parts into one Body, makes the one Catholic
Church. As to explain this briefly.

St. Cyprian tells us, that there is but one Episcopacy, or one Bishopric, as
I have already shown; and therefore all the Bishops, who are now dispersed over
all the World, and have the Supreme Government of their particular Churches,
must be reckoned but one Bishop; for tho their natural Persons are distinct,
they are but one Ecclesiastical Person, their Office, Power, and Dignity, being
one and the same, not divided into Parts, but exercised by all of them in their
several Churches, with the same fullness and plenitude of Power; and thus we
have found out one Bishop for the one Catholic Church, all the Bishops in the
World being but one, for tho they are many distinct Persons, they are but one
Power, and exercise the same Office, without Division or Multiplication. And
thus all the Presbyters in the World, who are under the Direction and
Government of their several Bishops, are but one Presbytery of the Catholic
Church, for if the Episcopacy be but one, the Presbytery must be but one also,
in subordination to this one Episcopacy, the like may be said of Deacons, and
of Christian People, that they are but one Body and Communion under one Bishop.
Where there is but one Bishop, there can be but one Church, and therefore one
Episcopacy unites all Christians into one Body and Communion: How this is
consistant with the many Schisms and Divisions of the Christian Church, shall
be accounted for elsewhere. This is a plain intelligible account, how all the
particular Churches in the World are but one Church, because all the Parts and
Members, which answer to each other in these particular Churches are but one by
the Institution of Christ: All their Bishops but one Bishop, all their
Presbyters but one Presbytery, all the Christians of particular Churches, but
one Body and Communion, and thus the Catholic Church is an organized Body,
consisting of the same parts, that all particular Churches consist of: Just as
if Five Thousand Men, whose Bodies have all the same Members, should by a
coalition of corresponding Parts, grow up into one Body; that all their Heads,
their Arms, their Legs, etc. should grow into one, which would make a kind of
Universal organized Body, of the same nature with what every single individual
Man has.

And that there can be no other Notion of the Catholic Church, as considered
in this World, Ethink, is very plain from this, that there is but one Notion of
a Church; and therefore the Catholic Church and particular Churches, must have
the very same Nature and integral Parts. If a Bishop, Presbyters, and Christian
People, make a particular Church, there must be the very same parts in the
Catholic Church, or you must show us two distinct Notions of a Church, and
that the Catholic and particular Churches differ in their essential
Constitution: If the Notion be the same, and all particular Churches constitute
the Catholic Church, then these particular Churches must constitute the
Catholic Church, just as they are constituted themselves, that is, of Bishops,
Presbyters, and People; and therefore all the Bishops of particular Churches,
must make but one Catholic Episcopacy, all the Presbyters, but one Presbytery,
all the Christian People, but one Body and Communion; and then the Catholic
Church, and particular Churches are exactly the same, one Body of Bishops,
Presbyters, and People.

And this utterly destroys all subordination between Bishops, for if to the
Notion of the Catholic Church, all Bishops must be considered as one, than
every Bishop must be equal, for an inferior and superior Bishop cannot be one:
And if the Notion of the Catholic Church did require one Supreme Ecumenical
Pastor, to whom all particular Bishops are subordinate, then the Catholic and
particular Churches are not of the same Species, for the one has a sovereign,
the other a subordinate Head, and therefore is not a complete and perfect
Church, nor of the same kind with the Church, which has the sovereign Head.

And thus I think, I might safely dismiss all our Author's Criticisms, about
the several kinds of Totums, which he has transcribed from the Independent
Copy, excepting some peculiar Absurdities of his own: For the Catholic Church
properly speaking is no Totum at all, with respect to particular Churches,
which are not properly Parts of the Catholic Church, considered as particular
organized Churches, but the Catholic Church is one Church, by the Union of all
the corresponding Parts of particular Churches, which we have no example of,
that I know in Nature, nor is it to be expected to find the exemplars of such
Mystical Unions in Nature, which depend not upon Nature, but upon Institution,
but it may not be amiss briefly to show our Author's great skill in such
matters.

He takes it for granted, that the Church Catholic must be some kind of Totum
or whole, and therefore undertakes to prove that in all Totums there must be a
Subordination of parts, and therefore there must be a Supreme Ecumenical
Pastor in the Catholic Church. Now he says, Totum is most legally (I suppose
it should be Logically) divided into quatenus integrum, and quatenus genus;
such a whole as a Body is, which has all its parts, or such a whole as a Genus
is to a Species; and one of these he thinks the Catholic Church must be: But
then his Author minded him, that there was an aggregate whole, such a whole as
a heap of Corn is, but he told him also, that this was but a kind of Integrum;
though if this Integrum signifies such a whole as has integrating Parts, the
union of which makes the whole, such an Aggregate as has neither any parts nor
any union, is a pretty kind of Integrum, but reduction may do great things, and
therefore I will not dispute that: but since he has named this Aggregate whole, if
any man should be so perverse as to say that the Catholic Church is such an
aggregate Body, consisting of all particular coordinate Churches; what would
become of his Subordination of Pastors; for what Subordination is there in
aggregate Bodies, in those Grains suppose, which make up a heap of Corn, which
are all alike? The Independent Author foresaw this Objection, but medles not
with it, like a wise man who would not conjure up a Devil which he could not
lay; but this Transcriber is bold and brave, and sometimes ventures out of his
depth without his Bladders, and then he is usually ducked for it. He tells us,
p. 70. That an aggregate whole has integral parts; which I believe is a new
Notion; for I thought it had been a collection of incoherent things, which had
no union nor relation to each other, as parts have to the whole: But how much
he understands of this matter, appears from the example he gives, for he takes
an Army to be such an aggregated whole; if he had said a Rout or a Rabble had
been such an Aggregate, he had come near the business; but I fear the King's
Guards will not take it well to be thought a mere aggregate Body: But he could
find no other Aggregate, wherein there is a Subordination of parts, and
therefore an Army must pass for such an Aggregate.

But let us consider his Totum integrum, which is a Natural or Political whole,
such as the Body of Man, or a Community is, which is made up of several parts,
which are integral and essential to its composition. Now according to the right
Notion of Subordination, the whole is divided into the next, but greater parts,
and they into the next lesser, and they into lesser, or least of all. Well
then, let us apply this to the Body of Man, which are the greater and lesser
parts, and least of all into which it must be divided: Which are the Superior,
and which the Subordinate Parts in a Humane Body? There are some indeed which
are higher, and others lower in the situation of the Body; some more noble and
more useful than others; but there is no Subordination between them, that I
know of, but the Soul governs them all, and they have the same care one of
another. Indeed Subordination relates only to governed Societies, which may be
divided as he speaks into greater or less, superior or subordinate Parts; which
is another kind of Integrum, such as we call a Community. But suppose this be
what he means by his Integrum, not a Natural, but a Political whole; how does
he prove that in every such Integrum, there must be such a Subordination of
parts, as at last centers in one Supreme Governor? For what does he think of
Democracies, or Aristocracies? Who is the Supreme where all are equal? And
should any man say, that all the Bishops of the Catholic Church are equal,
without any supreme Head over them, as Democratical or Aristocratical Princes
are, how would he be able to confute him from his notion of Integrum? And
therefore the mere notion of an Integrum will not prove such a Subordination of
parts, as center in one* supreme Head; but he must prove that the constitution
of the Christian Church is such, as is under the Government of one supreme
visible Head.

His next Totum is Genericum: His Author had confessed that this does not
belong to the Church; and he confesses it after him in the very same words:
This Notion I Will not further prosecute, because according to the best Logical
and Theological Rules, the application of a Genius, does not so well suit the
nature of the Catholic Church, it being more properly an Integrum than a
Genus. And yet he would not lose this opportunity neither, to let us see his
great skill in Logic: but since they both confess, it is nothing to the
purpose, I shall not trouble my Readers with it.

3. He argues from the nature of Subordination it self, Agreement, p. 61.
of any kind, which always supposes a Supremum and infimum --. And if there be
in the Church a Subordination Cath. Hierar. p. 80, 81.
of Pastors, as our Protestant Prelates assert, then there must be a supreme as
well as the lowest Term, viz. A Catholic Pastor for the highest range or round
of the Ladder, and a Parish Priest, or (as our Bishops would have it of late) a
Diocesan, for the lowest, the continuation being always to a neplus ultra at
both ends of the Line. Which, for ought I see, does as well prove an Universal
Monarch, as an Universal Pastor. For he tells us, this holds in any kind of
Subordination. We do grant indeed, that there is a Subordination of Pastors in
the Church, i. e. that Presbyters are Subordinate to Bishops; but we say with
all Antiquity, that a Bishop, even a Diocesan Bishop, is not the lowest, but
the highest term; for a Bishop is the highest Order in the Church, and all
Bishops are of equal Power, and this without any danger of Independency, as I
have already shown.

4. His next Argument is from the derivation and original of Pastoral Office
and Power. The Sum of which in short is this* that every Pastor must receive
his Pastoral Power, from some Superior Pastor, that as Presbyters are ordained
by Bishops, so Bishops by their Metropolitans, they by their Primate, and they
by the Ecumenical Bishop, from whom they receive the Pastoral Staff. But he
forgot all this while, from whom this Ecumenical Bishop must receive his
Orders; and whether those who ordain the Pope, are his Superiors. Such Talk as
this might become the Independent well enough, from whom he transcribes it, but
is pretty Cant for a Romanist, for whoever has Authority to confer Orders, may
certainly confer them, whether he be a Superior or Equal, and therefore he
ought to have proved, that none but a Superior can have Authority to confer
Orders; and then he must find a Superior to the Pope, to give him his
Ecumenical Power. The Catholic Church has always owned the Power of Order to
be in Bishops, who are the highest Order of the Church, and have a plenitude of
Ecclesiastical Power, which is the reason why Presbyters cannot ordain without
their Bishop, because they are not complete Pastors, but act in subordination
to, and dependence on their Bishops, and therefore have not such a fullness of
Power in themselves, as to communicate it to others.

5. In the next place he argues from the chief ends of Subordination Agree. p.
74.
of Pastors in the Church, viz. That there may be Hierar. p. 83.
place for Appeals in matters of Controversy, in Cases of Maladministration
by the subordinate Clergy, final Determinations of difficult Ecclesiastical
Causes, Correction of Heresy and Schism, as also establishment of Ceremonies.
Schism and Ceremonies belong to the next head of Arguments, where his Author
placed them, but this Transcriber has not Judgment enough to write after his
Copy, but will sometimes venture to alter, tho without sense. But there are as
many choice passages in his pursuit of this Argument, as one could wish, which
would make one suspect, that the Independent Author himself was a wellwisher to
Popery, he disputes so heartily for a last Supreme Judge to receive Appeals,
and for the Infallibility of such a Judge: But there is nothing more required
to answer this Argument, but to give a plain state of this case of Appeals. We
must distinguish then between Ecclesiastical Causes, and consider the original
Right of Appeals.

As for Ecclesiastical Causes, nothing is a pure Ecclesiastical Cause, but what
concerns the Communion of the Church, who shall be received into Communion, or
cast out of it, or put under some less Censures, which confines this either to
Faith or Manners: But as for other causes, which are called Ecclesiastical
because they concern Ecclesiastical Things or Persons, such as the repairs of
Churches, advowsance of Livings, Tithes, Glebe, Oblations, etc. they are rather
of a Civil than Ecclesiastical Cognizance, tho Bishops and Ecclesiastical
Persons are entrusted by the Civil Powers with the determination of them; and
in such Matters as these, it is fit, there should lie Appeals, as there do in
all other Civil Matters; but then it is sit also, that these Appeals should be
bounded as all other Civil Appeals are, within the Kingdom or Territory, where
the cause arises; for to carry such Appeals out of the Kingdom, is as great an
injury to the Authority of the Prince, as to the Liberties of the Subject. A
Sovereign Prince has all civil Power and Jurisdiction, and to suffer Appeals to
Foreign Bishops or Princes, is to own a Superior in his own Dominions; and
therefore in such matters as these, no Appeal can lie to an Oecumenick Bishop.

As for causes purely Ecclesiastical, the Bishop being Supreme in his own
Diocese, there can be no original Right of Appeal from him, for there is no
Appeal from the Supreme: he has a free power in the Government of his own
Diocese, and must render an account of his actions to Christ, who is the
supreme Lord of the Church, as St. Cyprian tells us. But, as notwithstanding
this, it is very expedient, and in some degree necessary, that neighbor
Bishops should unite into an Ecclesiastical Body for the maintenance of
Catholic Communion, and the exercise of Discipline, as I have already shown;
so the very nature of such combinations admits and requires Appeals, that if
any Presbyter or private Christian be too severely censured by his Bishop, or
without just cause, he may find relief from the Synod or Primate, or in
whomsoever the power of receiving Appeals is placed: for Bishops are men, and
liable to humane Passions and frailties, and it would be impossible to maintain
the Authority of Church censures, without such Appeals. For though there be no
original right of Appeals from the Sentence of one Bishop to another; yet every
Bishop has authority to receive whom he judges fit, into the Communion of his
own Church; and should one Bishop depose a Presbyter, or Excommunicate a lay
Christian unjustly, should they go into another Diocese, if the Bishop of it
judged them worthy of Communion, he might receive them into Communion
notwithstanding these censures; for he is Judge in his own Church, as the other
was in his. But how contemptible would Ecclesiastical Censures be, if they
reached no farther than single Diocesses; and what dissensions would this
create among Bishops, should one receive those into Communion, whom the other
had cast out? Which makes it highly expedient, that neighbor Bishops should be
made, not the Judges of their fellow Bishops, or their actions, as it is in
superior Courts, which have a direct Authority over the inferior, but Umpires
and Arbitrators of such differences as may happen between the Bishop and his
Clergy, or People; which will preserve the peace and concerd of Bishops, and
give a more sacred Authority to Ecclesiastical Censures: But then these Appeals
must be confined to this Ecclesiastical Body, and not carried to foreign
Churches* for by the same reason that these Ecclesiastical Bodies and
Communions must be confined within such limits as admit of such combinations,
of which I have given an account above; these Appeals also must be confined to
the Ecclesiastical Bodies, as St: Cyprian expressly affirms, that the Cause
should be heard there where the Crime was committed. Cypr. Ep. 55. ad Cornelium.


Thus we see there is no need of an Ecumenical Pastor to receive Appeals, much
less of an Infallible Judge for this purpose; and thus I might dismiss this
Argument, were it possible to pass it over without observing some peculiar
strains of Reason and Rhetoric in it. As for Example: That Appeals are to no
end, if there be not some Supreme Catholic Pastor to arrive at, in whose
determination we are bound to set down and rest satisfied. As if there could be
no last Appeal but to a Catholic Pastor, or no man were bound to rest
satisfied in any other last Appeal. But I perceive the satisfaction he means,
is the satisfaction of having our Cause determined by an Infallible Judge, who
cannot Err: Which it may be is the first time a Roman Catholic, for I must
except his Independent Original, ever made the Pope an Infallible Judge not
only in matters of Faith, but of all Causes, which are brought before him by
Appeals.

But why may not the last Appeal be made to any one else, as well as to the
Catholic Pastor? No: the mind of the whole Catholic Church may be had in the
Principium unitatis; but no other National, Provincial, or Diocesan Pastor have
the mind of the whole Catholic Church: Which I can make nothing more of, but
that the mind of the Catholic Paston is the mind of the Catholic Church; and
therefore the Catholic Pastor, if he speaks his own mind, speaks the mind of
the Catholic Church too* He is the Head, and if we will know a man's mind we
must resort to the Head, not to the Arms or Legs, where you can only expect a
dumb: kick or box under the Ear, as we have had enough of from our Protestant
Prelates: -- A Diocesan; Provincial, or Primate, are but the Churches more
surly and less intelligible Organs: (but Arms or Legs, which give dumb kicks,
or boxes on the Ear) but if you will understand the sense of the Church* you
must resort to the Body speaking in the Head, not to the kicking Heels. This is
all demonstration, besides the advantages of apt figures, and the elegancies of
expression to set it of.

Well, the last Appeals then must lie to the Catholic Pastor, because he knows
the mind of the whole Church, and is its speaking Head; whereas Metropolitans
and Primates are but dumb, surly, less intelligible Organs, whose mind you can
only understand by kicks, or boxes under the Ear; which yet I think, is a very
intelligible way, though I believe few People love to understand that way: For
this reason then, we must go to the Head, that we may understand the mind of
the whole Church, for then we cannot Err. But is this Head then Infallible?
Yes, most certainly! for the pretensions made by the Catholic Pastor to
Infallibility, are founded on the Principles of the Episcopal Constitution. For
an Episcopal Church (settled by Subordination of Pastors within it self) without
a Catholic Head, is an Animal without a Head: Which is a pretty strange sort
of Creature. In all our Appeals from Pastor to Pastor, from Church to Church,
in any Causes or Controversies, if we do not still come to a less Fallible
Church, and at last arrive at the most Infallible, comprehensive of our selves
as Members, Cui bono hic labor, and hoc opus? That is, to what purpose do we
Appeal from one Fallible Church to another, unless we can at last lodge our
final Appeal in an Infallible Church? So that the reason why we must Appeal to
the Catholic Pastor, is that our Cause may be determined by an Infallible
Judge, who has the mind of the whole Church: and the proof of the Infallibility
of this Catholic Pastor is, that to him must be made the last Appeals, which
were to no purpose, if he were not the most Infallible. Thus Infallibility
proves the necessity of Appeals, and Appeals prove the necessity of
Infallibility; for one good turn requires another.

But still methinks there is a little difficulty, why there should be any
Appeals at all to a Fallible Judge? Why should not all Causes in the first
instance be brought before the Infallible Judge? Why must we take such a round
by Bishops, Provincials, Metropolitans, Primates, before we come to the
Catholic Pastor; when there can be no satisfaction till we come to the
Infallible Judge, and have the mind of the whole Church from him? And as our
Author observes, Cui bono, do men Appeal from one Fallible Creature to another?
If the right of Appeals be grounded on Infallibility, why must we Appeal to
those who are Fallible?

To salve this, which is a real difficulty; our Author would insinuate (for he
is afraid down right to own such an Absurdity) that there are Degrees of
Infallibility, which if admitted we must arise to the highest, but why not go
to the highest at first, but rise by Degrees? If it be granted that a Bishop is
less fallible than a Parish Priest, and an Archbishop less fallible than a
Bishop, and a Primate than he, upon the same ground we may expect the Catholic
Pastor to be less fallible than all the rest. But what a lamentable ground is
this for Infallibility! and what a lamentable. Infallibility is that, which is
only being less fallible, than some other fallible Creatures?

But the pleasantest conceit is, that men's Infallibility increases with their
several Orders, and Degrees in the Church, that a Bishop is less fallible, and
therefore more infallible than a Priest, and an Archbishop than a Bishop, etc.
Now I suppose he will grant, that Infallibility does not result from men's
personal Abilities, but is a supernatural Gift, and that Christ never gives any
thing less, in such a supernatural way, than absolute Infallibility: And
therefore, whatever Infallibility men can challenge, by virtue of a Promise,
must be absolute, and absolute Infallibility has no degrees: If then the
Infallibility of the Catholic Pastor be founded on a divine Promise, it has no
relation at all to the several degrees of Fallibility in other Church Officers;
unless he can show, where Christ has promised several degrees of Infallibility,
to the several Orders and Degrees of Ecclesiastical Ministers, and then indeed
we may conclude, that he has bestowed the most perfect Infallibility upon the
Catholic Pastor, if it be first proved, that he has instituted such a
Catholic Pastor. But it is evident, that to be more or less fallible, depends
upon men's personal Abilities, Learning, Wisdom, Honesty, and therefore it is a
ridiculous thing to say, that every Bishop must be less fallible than a
Presbyter, and an Archbishop less fallible than a Bishop, and a Primate than
he, unless you can prove, that all Bishops must be wiser, honester, and more
learned men, then Presbyters, and Archbishops than Bishops, and Popes than
Archbishops and Primates: Which I believe is a pretty hard Task, and yet our
wise Author at last resolves the Popes Infallibility into this belief, for it
is not to be supposed, that the Catholic Church would commit the greatest
Charge to a Person of the least Judgment and Understanding. So that it seems
Infallibility at last is dwindled away into Men's personal Judgment and
Understanding; and tho it may be the Catholic Church might be careful in such
a choice, yet we can easily suppose, that Cardinals, who may not be Men of the
best Judgments themselves, and may be divided by Interests and Factions, or
bribed with Money, or overawed by Power, or influenced by Friendships, may not
always choose the wisest Man in the World, and if they did, yet he could be no
more infallible this way, than the wisest Man in the World is, who after all is
a fallible Creature, as all Men are: and I dare appeal to all sober and
considering Roman Catholics, whether our Author has not utterly overthrown the
Infallibity of the Pope, and all Appeals to him, by what he adds. To what
purpose is it for us to betake our selves for further light to those, whom the
Church has entrusted with higher Power and larger trust, if we have no reason
to judge them, not only to be holyer, wiser, and juster men, than those we
appeal from, but less fallible in judgment, and errable in practice? For I am
confident few Roman Catholics think their Popes to be the wisest and best Men
in the World, and therefore if their inerrability depends upon their Wisdom and
Honesty, they cannot think them Infallible neither, and I suspect our Author
has no great claim to Infallibility himself, who at this time of day, when the
Stories of Popes are so well known, should found Infallibility upon the Wisdom,
Holiness, and Justice, of Popes.

By this one would guess, that he makes no great matter of the Popes
Infallibility* that he has found out such a fallible Foundation for it. He
says, that the Oecumenic Pastor in his human Capacity may mistake and Err, and
so did St: Peter, but not fundamentally, yet as Supreme Head in his Catholic
Capacity (quatenus in Cathedra Catholica, and comparative) to all inferior
subordinate Pastors, he has a kind of Infallibility, which is a Power
entrusted in him by the Catholic Church, to pass a final Judgment of
Determination in all Causes and Controversies, to be a Ne plus ultra to all
Appeals and Litigations in the Church. So that in the first place he is not
infallible in his human Capacity, and yet he founds his Infallibility on his
Wisdom, Holiness, and Justice, which are human and personal Perfections. In his
public Capacity he would have him Infallible in the Chair, but yet it is but a
comparative Infallibility, which is none at all: Then his Infallibility is not
an Infallibility in judging, but a Power to make a final* Determination,
whether it be right or wrong, and any Man might have this Power, as well as the
Pope; especially since he is not entrusted with this Power by Christ, but by
the Catholic Church, that is too, only by the Church of Rome, for no other
Church entrusts him with it, and thus he quits all Divine Claims to
Infallibility, and the Pope is no more Infallible, than the Church can make
him, by entrusting him with a final decision of Controversies, at all
Adventures. And therefore he adds, We are not bound to believe his Judgment is
infallibly true, but are to subscribe to it, as the last, because we can have
no further, and higher Appeal on Earth. That is, we must subscribe to it,
whether we believe it true or not, which is an admirable sort of Infallibility.
Thus he says, the English Clergy Subscribe the 39 Articles, not that they
believe them (as they commonly say) to be true and Orthodox, but because they
be the last Resolutions of the Church of England, in those Points, they sit
down satisfied to subscribe them* as Instrumenta pacis and unitatis, but indeed
Maxim emcolumenti, by which what he means, cannot guess, but am very much of
his Mind, that upon the same ground (were there no other reason of
Subscriptions) they may subscribe to the Council of Trent. But this is a
Scandal on the Clergy of the Church of England; we subscribe to the Truth of
the Doctrines, and for my part I would not subscribe, did I not think them
true; and this is false with reference to the Church of Rome, which
Anathematizes all Persons who do not own, and acknowledge, and believe, all the
Articles of the Council of Trent: However Infallibility is at a low ebb in the
Church of Rome, when they can exact Submissions and Subscriptions only upon
Protestant Principles, who pretend to no Infallibility at all: I have examined
this Argument a little more at large, to make him sensible how dangerous a
thing it is to write after an Independent Copy: for had any man intended to
have burlesqued Infallibility, (as possibly his Author, from whom he
Transcribes, did) he could not have done it more effectually, than by such
Principles as these.

6. His sixth Argument (in Catholic Hierarchy the seventh, Agreem. p. 77. etc.
Cath. Hier. p. 85. etc.
for he has dropped one from the Nature of the Church, which he made an
Introduction of, and there it has been considered) is, that this Catholic
Headship is inseparable from an Ecclesiastical Body, made up of subordinate
Pastors and Churches, may be abundantly evidenced from these following
enumerated Church necessities.

The necessity, 1. Of a Catholic judgment of Schism. 2. Of a Catholic
interpretation of Scriptures. 3. Of a Catholic determination of Ceremonies,
for order and decency. 4. For a Catholic composure of Forms of Prayer. 5. For
a Catholic Canonization of Saints. 6. A Catholic Call and Convention of
Councils Oecumenic. Which are Word for Word the Argument of the Independent
Author. I shall briefly consider them all.

1. The necessity of a Catholic judgment of Schism. i. e. that there should be
some Judges who are Schismatics, for otherwise, 1. Patriarchal or National
Churches may be Schismatical and no competent remedy found for the said Schism.
2. There can be no determination of a Schism from the Catholic Church, nor any
proportionate punishment of it: For a Patriarch or National Primate cannot be
judicially proceeded against, but by an Oecumenic Pastor; which I think is the
same with the first: for a National Schism must be a Schism from the Catholic
Church, or none; since National Churches among us, depend on no foreign
Patriarchs. 3. Because superior Churches are to judge the inferior; no
particular Church has an absolute definitive Power in it self, but there lies
an Appeal against it to the Catholic Church and Pastor. Which instead of
proving, that there is such a Catholic Pastor, supposes that there is one; for
else there can lie no Appeal to him. 4. That particular Churches will never
agree about Schism, but the very disputes about Schism, will make Schisms
without end. Now, suppose a man should turn the Tables, and prove by this
Argument, that there is no Catholic Pastor, nor Catholic Judge of Schism;
because there are, and always have been Schisms in the Christian Church, which
it is impossible there should be, did the Church know of such a Catholic Judge:
For how could there be any such dispute about Schism, if there were such a
Judge? If you say, that it is the not owning such a Judge, which makes the
Schisms: That may be true, but it is true also, that it is a sign the Christian
World does not know of any such Judge; for if they did, they would own him, and
put an end to their Schisms: If it be necessary, there should be such a
Catholic Judge of Schism, I am sure it is necessary he should be known, or
else, as Experience testifies, the disputes about such a Judge, will make more
Schisms than such an unknown and disputable Judge can ever end.

Now since there either is no such Catholic Judge of Schism, or he is not
sufficiently know to all Christians* methinks it proves, that there is no need
of such a Catholic Judge of Schism; for there is as much need ^e should be
known, in order to put an end to Schisms, as that there should be such a Judge;
and if the necessity of ending Schisms proves, that there should be such a
Judge, I am sure the continuance of Schisms proves as plainly, that he is not
known, because he cannot end them. It is ridiculous to imagine, that there
should be any such thing as Schism, were there a known Ecumenical Pastor and
Judge; and it is as ridiculous to prove that there is such a Judge, from the
necessity of such a Judge to end Schisms, when it is demonstrable from the
continuance of these Schisms, that the Christian World knows of no such Judge:
And it is very strange, that Christ should appoint such a Judge, and not take
care that he should be known. Good Arguments must convince Schismatics in this
World; and Christ will judge them in the next, and I know of no other Catholic
Judgment of Schism.

2. From the necessity of a Catholic Resolution of difficult Agreem. p. 80.
Cath. Hier. p. ^7.
and dubious places of Scripture. For the Scripture is not of private
Interpretation, and there are great inconveniences in leaving Scripture to the
Interpretation of private men, or particular, though National, Churches. But
let the inconveniences be what they will, the same Argument returns again, that
if there be such an Infallible Interpreter of Scripture, he ought to be known;
and that there are such disputes about the Interpretation of Scripture, proves,
that the Christian World do not own such a Catholic Interpreter, and therefore
that they know nothing of him. And there is another Argument, that there is no
such Catholic Interpreter of Scripture, because we have no such Catholic
Interpretation: And what is the Christian World the better for a Catholic
Interpreter, if he does not Interpret? And yet in the Church of Rome it self,
we have no Expositions of Scripture, but from private and fallible men: The
truth is, the Pope and his Councils have Expounded plain Scriptures to a
dubious, difficult, unintelligible sense, but never, that I know of, made any
Text easy and intelligible, which was difficult before. To expound Scripture,
is to make us understand it, not to impose upon our Faith without
understanding; and therefore this is not so much an act of Authority, as of
skill and judgment; any man, who can so explain Scripture to me, as to make me
understand it, shall gain my assent, but no Authority is sufficient to make me
assent without understanding. And yet such a Catholic Expositor our Author
would set up, whose Authority shall make me grant that to be the sense of
Scripture, which his Reasons and Arguments cannot persuade me of. But all
reasonable Creatures must understand for themselves; and Christ no where
commands us to believe that to be the sense of Scripture, which we cannot
understand to be so. I know no necessity that all Christians should agree in
the Interpretation of all difficult Texts of Scripture: there is enough in
Scripture plain, to carry men to Heaven, and as for more difficult and obscure
Texts, they are for the improvement of those who can understand them, and need
no such Catholic Expositor, because it is not necessary that all men should
understand them. Most of the Controversies of Religion, especially between us
and the Church of Rome, are about Texts of Scripture, easy enough to be
understood, and an honest teachable mind* would sooner end our Controversies,
than his Catholic Expositor.

3. Another necessity for an Oecumenic Pastor, is, A Agreem. p. 81.
Cath. Hier. p. 87.
necessity of a Catholic Determination of Decency and Order: i. e. That the
same Rites and Ceremonies, for decency and order, should be observed in all
Christian Churches all the World over. Now I know no necessity of this; and
that which is not necessary it self, cannot make an Oecumenic Pastor necessary.
De facto, there have been diversity of Rites in the Christian Church in all
Ages; thus it was in St. Augustine's time, as appears from his Epistle to
Ianuarius 118; and then either there was no Catholic Pastor, or he did not
think such a Catholic Uniformity of Rites necessary. None of the Fathers ever
condemn such a diversity as this, but exhort all Christians to conform to the
innocent Customs and Ceremonies of the Church, where they came, though
different from the Customs of their own Church; which St. Austine tells us in
that Epistle, was the Advice of St. Ambrose. And when Pope Victor
Excommunicated the Asian Churches for their different Custom in observing
Easter, Irenoeus, and other Bishops, did vehemently oppose him in it; and
therefore, either did not believe him to be the Catholic Pastor, or did not
think, that the Catholic Pastor ought to impose an Uniformity of Rites upon
all Churches. The Decency of Worship is nothing else, but to perform the
external acts of Worship in such a manner, as may express our Reverence and
Devotion for God: And therefore, since there are no Catholic signs of Decency,
there can be no Catholic Uniformity in these matters. The decency of Garments,
Postures, Gestures, differ in several Countries; and so do the Expressions of
Honor and Reverence: And therefore such external Rites being only for
external Decency, and having no Sacredness by Institution, may vary with the
different Customs and Usages of Countries: We must Worship God in a decent
manner; this all Christian Churches are bound to, and this they do, when they
Worship God in such a manner as among them signifies Reverence and Honor. But
says our Author, then one Church will esteem this or that thing decent in the
Worship of God, which another reckons absurd. Then say I, they are as absurd as
Country People are, who gaze at Foreigners, and laugh at their exotic Habits,
and think every thing ridiculous, which differs from their own Customs. But
this Uniformity is lost in the Catholic Church, where it is most necessary to
be had. An Uniformity in external Rites is not necessary in the Catholic
Church, and it may be cannot be had.

But why is it necessary there should be uniformity then in particular National
or Diocesan Churches? Ans. Because it is fit and decent, that those who Worship
God in the same Assemblies, should Worship him in the same manner, and to do
otherwise would contradict the public decency of the Worship. Every Bishop (as
being the Supreme Governor of his own Church and Diocese) has Authority to
appoint the decent Rites of Worship in it; and when all the Bishops of a Nation
are united into one National Body, they may consent in some common Rites of
Worship for the National Church, since the Usages and Customs of the same
Nation, the Rules of Decency, and the expressions of Honor and Reverence, are
the same, which gives an account, what Churches have this Power to determine
the Decencies and Order in Ceremonies; every Bishop has an original Right to do
this for his own Church, but as a National Combination of Bishops, to govern
their several Churches by a mutual Consent, is of great use, so when they are
united into a National Body, it is much more decent, that they should agree
upon an Uniformity of Rites for the National Church; but there is not the same
reason, that this should extend to Foreign Churches, much less to the whole
World, both because these Combinations of Bishops are limited to National
Churches, and the Customs of different Countries change and vary.

4ly. The necessity of a Catholic Canonization of Saints, Agreem. p. 84.
Cath. Hier. p. 89.
for supposing a necessity of a due Observation of Saints Days, which the
Church of England has always insisted on and pleaded for, it is to be
enquired, who or what Church Canonized the Saints, etc. The Church of England
indeed does observe some Festivals, in commemoration of the Saints, but she
needs no Oecumenick Pastor to Canonize them: She observes the Festivals of no
Saints, but such as the Christian World acknowledge to be so, without the Popes
Canonization: and the use she makes of Saints, needs no Canonization, which is
only to bless God for them, and to excite our selves to an imitation of their
Virtues; not to build Temples and Altars to them, or to Worship them with
religious Honors as our Mediators and Advocates. This Canonization of Saints
was a strange kind of Argument, from a pretended Independent, and it is such an
Argument, as I thought at this time of day, a Romanist himself would have been
ashamed of: For pray, what Authority has the Church to Canonize Saints, and who
gave her this Authority? Such Consecrations and Canonizations, indeed were in
practice in Pagan Rome, and Tertullian sufficiently scorns them for it. He
tells us, that Vetus trat decr^tum, Ne (...) Deus ab Imperatore consecraretur,
nisi a Senat^ probatus -- Apud vos de humano arbitratu Divinitas pe^sitatur,
nisi homini Deus (...), Deus nonerit, homo jam Deo propitius esse debebit Tert.
Apol. p. 6. Paris, 1664.
there was an ancient Decree, that the Emperor should not Consecrate any God,
without the approbation of the Senate, for the Emperor in those days was the
Pontifex Maximus, or the Oecumenick Priest. This the Father says was to make
Divinity depend upon human Votes; and unless the God pleases Men, he shall not
be a God: how applicable this is to the Canonization of Saints, let our Author
judge, and tell me, whether there were any such practice known in the Christian
Church, in Tertullian's days. To Canonize a Saint, to be sure, is to Vote him
into Heaven; and if the Oecumenick Pastor has this Authority, he is somewhat
more than the Head of the visible Church on Earth, for his Power extends to the
invisible Church too.

5ly. The necessity of a Catholic composure of Church Agreem. p. 85.
Cath. Hier. p. 8^.
Prayers, i. e. That the same Liturgy should be used in all Christian
Churches; which never was practiced in former Ages, and no need it should be:
We prefer a Liturgy before private and extempore Prayers; we think it most
Uniform, that a National Church should use the same Liturgy; but if every
Bishop, who is the Supreme Governor of his own Church, should have a Liturgy
of his own, I see no hurt in it, if it be a true Christian Liturgy, and
neither corrupt the Christian Faith, nor Worship. When he can give me one wise
reason, why the whole Christian World must use the same Liturgy, and that
there must of necessity be an Oecumenick Pastor to compose this Liturgy, I
will consider it farther. His harangue about our charging Dissenters with
Schism, does not relate to this matter: For setting aside the Civil Authority,
whereby our Liturgy is confirmed, their Schism does not consist in using
another Liturgy, for they use none; but in separating from the Communion of
their Bishop, who has Authority to appoint what Liturgy shall be used in his
Church: For the Liturgy being agreed on in Convocation, makes it an Act of the
Church, confirmed by the Authority and Consent of all the Bishops, besides the
concurrent Votes and Suffrages of the inferior Clergy: And if every particular
Bishop have Authority to appoint, what Form of Prayer shall be used in his
Church, all the Bishops of England may agree in the same Liturgy, and those
who deny obedience to their Bishops, and separate from them upon such accounts,
are guilty of Schism: But where there is no such subjection and obedience
owing, as there is none between particular Bishops, and distinct National
Churches, they may make Liturgies and Forms of Prayer for themselves, and are
accountable to no Body else for it.

6thly, His last necessity for an Oecumenick Pastor, Agreem. p. 87.
is, for calling, convening, and dissolving Ecumenical Councils. Cath. Hier.
p. 92.
Now, if there be no such absolute necessity of Ecumenical Councils; if they
may, and have been called by Emperors; if they may meet together of themselves,
by Mutual Agreement, then there is no necessity of an Ecumenical Pastor for
this purpose. But such an Assembly, he says, must be a Church Assembly, or else
it can claim no Power in the Church, and all Church Assemblies are of right
convened by the Pastor of the said Church, in which it is, as in a Diocese, the
Clergy is convened by the Authoritative Call of the Bishop. This is the force
of his whole Argument, wherein there are two things supposed, which we desire
him to prove, 1. That an Ecumenical Council is not for Mutual Advice, but for
direct Acts of Authority and Government. 2. That a Council receives its
Authority from an Authoritative Call; when he has proved these two
Propositions, his Argument may deserve a new Consideration.

AN ANSWER To SECTION II.
CONCERNING The Agreement between the Two Churches, about some of their Imposed
Terms of Communion, their Ministry, Ceremonies, and Image Worship.

1. The MINISTRY.
HAving answered all their Pretenses of Agreement, between the Church of
England, and the Church of Rome, concerning one Supreme Ecumenical Pastor;
what remains will give me no great trouble, and I shall give my self, and my
Readers no more than needs must.

1. The first Agreement is about the Ministry, unto Agreem. p. 36.
which all are required to submit, which is the same with that of
Roman Catholics, and maintained by the same Arguments; that is, concerning the
Divine Institution of Bishops and subject Presbyters. Now this charge we own,
that we do acknowledge the Divine Right of Episcopacy, and that Presbyters by
the Institution of their Office are subject to Bishops; and if the
Roman Catholics own this, we agree with them in it; and so we will in any
thing else, that is true, and think it no injury to our cause; for we do not
think our selves bound to renounce what is true, only that we may differ from
Roman Catholics: and yet the mischief is, that in despite of his Title and
design, he will not suffer us to agree with them here, but endeavor to prove,
that we do not agree with them. Thus he tells us,

1. Touching the difference there is between a Bishop and a Presbyter, as
amongst the Papists some held, that they were of the same order, differing only
in degree, and others that they were of distinct Orders; so among our Clergy (I
perceive our Author has a mind to be a Protestant at last, by his crying our
Clergy) there were some, who in King James the First days, asserted that
Bishops and Presbyters were of the same Order, but now it is carried for their
being of two distinct Orders; but what is this to the Agreement of the two
Churches, that there are Divines in each Church, which differ about this Point?
If neither Church have determined this, then they agree only in not
determining it; but if it were the Current Doctrine in the Council of Basil,
that Bishops and Priests are of the same Order, and it be the avowed Doctrine
of the Church of England, that Bishops are a distinct and superior Order; then
I think the two Churches do not agree about this Point.

And our Author himself takes care to prove, that we are not agreed: For the
Romanists, he says, do not so much stick to the Divine Right of the Episcopal
Order, as to hold, that without a Violation of the Divine Law; a Presbyter
cannot be entrusted with the Episcopal Insignia, and ordinary Jurisdiction;
yet, its the avowed Doctrine of the Church of England, that the giving the
Power of Conferring Orders to a Presbyter, is so contrary to the Divine Law,
that its ipso facto, null and void; and in pursuance of this Doctrine, she
Re-ordains all those, who have had only a Presbyter's Ordination, even whilst
she is against a Reordination. And thus he has himself confuted his first
Point, The Agreement of the two Churches about the Ministry, for a disagreement
about the Power of Orders, is so concerning a Point in the Ministry, that there
can be little agreement after it. This determines the Dispute that Bishops do
not differ in Order, but only in Degree from Presbyters; for if Bishops by a
Divine or Apostolical Institution were a distinct and superior Order,
Presbyters could never be entrusted with the ordinary Power and Jurisdiction of
a Bishop, such as the Power of conferring Orders is; much less that a Presbyter
should have Power to Consecrate Bishops, and Bishops should be subject to
Presbyters, as he affirms of the Abbot of Hy: This overthrows the Essential
Constitution of the Ministry, if Bishops are by Institution a Superior Order to
Presbyters, that Presbyters should have Authority to Consecrate and Govern
Bishops; and overthrows one of the principal Arguments for an Oecumenic Pastor,
as it is urged by our other Author, from the power of conferring Orders which
he says cannot be done, but by a superior Pastor; and surely Presbyters,
though sovereign Abbots, are not superior Pastors to Bishops, nor to
Presbyters neither.

And yet the Church of England does not deny, but that in case of necessity,
the Ordinations of Presbyters may be valid; and upon this Principle justifies
the Presbyterian Orders of Foreign Churches, while such unavoidable necessity
lasts, as I have also done at large in the Vindication, to which this Author so
often refers. But the case of Schism is a different thing, and I believe our
Author himself, though he grants a Power to the Pope to entrust Presbyters with
the power of conferring Orders, will not say, that Schismatical Presbyters may
take this Power, or that their Ordinations are valid, if they do. And this is
the case between us and our Dissenters, they ordain in a Schism; and though
necessity may make an irregular Act valid, yet Schism will not: And I would
desire to know what reason it is for which they Null the Protestant Reformed
Ministry; which, he says, is so much less severe than the Principles of the
Church of England. The artifice of all this is visible enough, to heighten and
inflame the difference at this time between the Church of England and
Dissenters, but in vain is the Snare laid in the sight of any Bird.

But that the Reader may better understand the Mystery; of all this, I shall
briefly show, why the Church of Rome is so favorable to that Opinion, that
Bishops and Presbyters are of the same Order, and differ only in degree: why
they allow the Ordinations of Abbots Sovereign, who are but Presbyters, to be
both valid and regugular; that they are exempted from the Jurisdiction of the
Diocesan, and have in themselves Episcopal Authority, whereby they can Ordain,
Correct, Suspend, Excommunicate, and Absolve; nay, exercise this Jurisdiction
over Bishops themselves, as this Author tells us of the Abbot o Hy: Which will
show, how far we are from agreeing with the Church of Rome about Episcopal
Power.

The plain Account of which in short is this: That they distinguish their
Orders in the Church of Rome, with relation to the Sacrament of the Eucharist:
and since the Doctrine of Transubstantiation prevailed, which is such a
wonderful Mystery, for a Priest to Transubstantiate the Elements into the
Natural Flesh and Blood of Christ; this is looked upon as the highest act of
Power in the Christian Church, and therefore that must be the highest Order,
which has the highest Power: and since a mere Priest has this power of
Consecration, which is as high an Act, as any Bishop can do: therefore they
conclude, that Episcopacy is not an higher Order than the Priesthood, but
differs only in Degrees with respect to the power of Jurisdiction.

And the competition between Popes and Bishops, to serve their several
Interests, did mightily incline them to favor this Opinion. The Papal Monarchy
could never arrive at its utmost greatness, without depressing and lessening
the Authority of Bishops; and therefore aspiring Popes granted Exemptions,
Dispensations and Delegations to Presbyters; that there was no part of the
Episcopal Office, but what a Presbyter might do by Papal Delegations, which
made Presbyters equal to Bishops, but advanced the Pope vastly above them.

When by these Arts, which were often complained of, the Pope's Power grew
boundless, and infinite, and it was thought necessary to bring it lower; it
could not be done without calling in the assistance of Presbyters, and allowing
them to Vote in the Council: For the majority of Bishops were engaged by
Interest and Dependence, to maintain the Papal Greatness; and therefore if
these matters must have been determined by the major Votes of Bishops, there
could be no remedy against the Papal Usurpations. For which reason, in the
Council of Basil, those Bishops, who were devoted to the Interest of the Pope,
and knew they were able to secure the Cause, if none but Bishops might Vote,
insisted on this, That according to the Presidents of former Councils, all
matters might be determined only by the Votes of Bishops; and now the equality
of Order between Bishops and Presbyters, was trumpt up to serve another turn,
to prove their right to Vote in Councils, to assist those Bishops, who groaned
under Papal Usurpations, in some measure to cast off that Yoke, and vindicate
their own Liberties.

To this original the equality of Order between a Bishop and Presbyter, is
chiefly owing in the Church of Rome; from this Authority the Abbots Sovereign
derive their Power, which is a subversion of the Supreme Authority of Bishops,
has no president, and would never have been allowed, in the Primitive Church;
and therefore as for the Dispute about the Abbot of Hy, what the matter of fact
is (which those learned men, whom he assaults, I doubt not, are able to defend,
were there a just occasion for it) is nothing to our purpose: If it were as he
says, it is an intolerable encroachment upon the Episcopal Authority, and void
in it self.

We who deny Transubstantiation, and disown any such Authority in the Pope, to
delegate the Episcopal Power to mere Presbyters, do not, I suppose, very
exactly agree with the Church of Rome in this matter.

2. Much at the same rate we agree in asserting the difference between a Bishop
and Presbyter, to be of an immediate divine Right: This indeed we do constantly
affirm, that the Institution of Episcopacy is by immediate divine Right, but is
this the current Doctrine in the Church of Rome? That he knew was false, and
therefore had no sooner said it, but he unsays it again: For says he, It Is
true, that those, who are for the divine Right of the Supreme Jurisdiction of
the Pope, over the whole Catholic Church visible, do hold the divine Right to
be but mediate ( mediante Papa) but the Followers of the Councils of Constance
and Basil, are against the Supreme uncontrollable Power of the Pope, and for
the immediate divine Right of Episcopacy. And it is notorious from the Debates
in the Council of Trent, that the French, Spanish, and many other
Roman Catholics stuck to their immediate Divine Right too, and the great
reason, why opposition was made in the Court of Rome, against the immediate
divine Right of Bishops, was an Opinion that the Supremacy of the Pope could
not be secured on the granting it. But Dr. Sherlock has found out a Notion,
which will be of great use to them; for the divine Right of a Primacy is a
great step to the Supremacy; and this the Doctor does establish consistently
enough with the divine Right of Bishops.

As for my own Notion, I have sufficiently vindicated that already, from doing
any Service to the Pope's Supremacy, and see no occasion to add any thing more
here: But I wonder he should pitch upon this instance of the divine right of
Episcopacy, to show the Agreement between the two Churches, when he himself is
forced to acknowledge, what fierce Debates there were in the Council of Trent
about this matter: He says indeed, and that very truly, that the French and
Spanish Bishops in the Council, did dispute very vehemently for the divine
Institution of Episcopacy, and he knows what a prevailing opposition was made
against it: The Pope sent express Orders to the Legates, that whatever they
did, they should not suffer that to pass; Laynez the Jesuit was appointed by
the Legates, and Papalins, to make an elaborate Lecture against it. Wherein he
asserts, that Christ Father Paul's History of the Council of Trent, B. 7. P.
570, etc.
built his Church upon Peter, whose Name signifies a Stone in the Hebrew and
Syriack, and therefore according to the most Catholic exposition, Peter
himself is that Rock, whereon Christ built his Church, that the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, were given to Peter only, and by consequence, Power to bring
in, and to shut out, which is Jurisdiction: So that the whole Jurisdiction of
the Church, is committed to Peter only and his Successors. And if the Bishops
had received any Jurisdiction from Christ, it would be equal in all, and no
difference between Patriarchs, Archbishops and Bishops; neither could the Pope
meddle with that Authority, to diminish, or take it all away, as he cannot do
in the Power of Order, which is from God. That to make the Institution of
Bishops, de jure divino, takes away the Hierarchy, and introduces an Oligarchy,
or rather an Anarchy. That according to the Order Instituted by Christ, the
Apostles were ordained Bishops, not by Christ, but by St Peter, receiving
Jurisdiction from him only, or if they were ordained by Christ, Christ only
prevented St. Peter's Office for that one time. That the Bishops are
Ordinaries, because by the Pope's Law, they are made a Dignity of perpetual
Succession in the Church. That Councils themselves had no Authority but from
the Pope; for if every particular Bishop in Council may Err, it cannot be
denied, that they may all Err together, and if the Authority of the Council,
proceeded from the Authority of Bishops, it could never be called General;
because the number of the Assistants is always incomparably less than that of
the Absent. With much more to this purpose, which is all full and home to the
point, which as the Bishop of Paris observed in his Censure of it, makes but
one Bishop Instituted by Christ, and the others not to have any Authority but
dependant from him, which is as much as to say, that there is but one Bishop,
and the others are his Vicars, to be removed at his pleasure.

Whatever Opposition was made against this in the Council of Trent, it could
never prevail: The Popes Supremacy was advanced in that Council to its greatest
height and glory, but the Divine Institution of Episcopacy was dropped, though
the whole Council was satisfied, that the Divine Right of Supremacy, and the
Divine Institution of Episcopacy were inconsistent: For this Reason, the Pope
and Legates, and Italian Bishops opposed the Divine Institution of the
Episcopacy, and for the same Reason the other Party so vehemently contended for
it; and then I will leave any man to judge, which of these two Opinions must
pass for the Sense of the Council and Church of Rome: We wish with all our
Hearts, the Church of Rome did agree with us in the Divine Institution of
Episcopacy, which was the Sense of the Primitive Church; but unless all Parties
in the Council of Trent were very much mistaken, the Supremacy of the Pope, as
it is Taught by that Council, does utterly overthrow the Divine Institution of
Bishops, and make them only the Pope's Creatures and Dependants.

3. As for his third Head of Agreement about the Hierarchy, which is made up of
Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Prebends, Canons, Archdeacons, Chancellors,
Officials, Priests, Deacons, etc. This is only an Ecclesiastical Body of human
Institution, for the good Government and Discipline of such Combined Churches;
and alterable again, as the necessities of the Church requires: and yet, there
is an Essential Difference between such Protestant National Combinations of
Churches, and the Popish Hierarchy; The first is Independent on any Foreign
Powers, is perfect and entire in it self; The second has an Oecumenick Pastor
for it is Head, and derives its Power and Authority from him; and this is enough
to be said about our Agreement in the Ministry.

II. The CEREMONIES, OR EXTERNAL WORSHIP.
THIS is the next instance of Agreement between Agreem. p. 47.
the Church of England and the Church of Rome, and any man, who considers the
matter, must needs be very much surprised at it. For if the two Churches were
so very well agreed about Ceremonies, it is very strange that the Church of
England, from the beginning of the Reformation, to this day, has rejected such
a vast number of Ceremonies, as were then, and still are, in use in the Church
of Rome. And for my part, it is my desire and prayer, that they may always
agree so, while the Church of Rome maintains and practices such a corrupt
Worship.

To make this out, he says, Our first Reformers opposed the Ceremonies of the
Church of Rome, upon the same Principles that our Dissenters now oppose the
Ceremonies of the Church of England, viz. by this Argument,

All Uninstituted Worship is False, Superstitious, and Idolatrous Worship.

But the Romish Ceremonious Worship, is Uninstituted. Ergo.

And if our Author can show me any such Argument urged by our first Reformers
against Ceremonies, that are merely for Decency, and Order, and external
Solemnity of Worship, I will grant, they argued very ill, and did much worse to
retain any such Ceremonies. But if he cannot show this, as I am sure he cannot,
then the Reader knows what to judge of him and his Argument too.

As for the Controversy between the Church of England and Dissenters about the
use of Ceremonies in Religion, it is nothing to our present Dispute; and though
our Author has a mind to revive these Disputes among us, he shall not draw me
into it: It is sufficient we dispute against them, and against the Church of
Rome, upon very different Principles. Against them we defend the lawful use of
indifferent Rites and Ceremonies in Religious Worship, though there be no
express command for it in the Word of God, if they serve the ends of Order and
Decency, which are expressly commanded. Against the Romanists we never object,
that their Ceremonies have no Divine Institution, that they are not commanded,
but either, that they are forbid, or that they are so numerous, that they are
very burdensome, or that they are abused to superstitious purposes, or that the
signification of them is so dark and obscure, that they are of no use in
Religion. Which is best expressed in the words of our Church, Concerning
Ceremonies, why some be abolished, and some retained.

Of such Ceremonies as be used in the Church, and have had their beginning by
the Institution of man: (and therefore our Church, from the beginning, never
quarreled with Ceremonies, because they had not a Divine Institution) Some at
first were of godly intent and purpose devised, and yet at length turned to
vanity and superstition: some entered into the Church by undiscreet devotion,
and such a zeal as was without knowledge; and for because they were winked at
in the beginning, they grew daily to more and more abuses, which, not only for
their unprofitableness, but because they have much blinded the People, and
obscured the glory of God, are worthy to be cut away, and clean rejected: other
there be, which although they have been devised by man, yet it is thought good
to reserve them still, as well for a decent Order in the Church, (for the which
they were first devised) as because they pertain to Edification; whereunto all
things done in the Church, (as the Apostle teaches) ought to be referred. With
a great deal more to the same purpose, which every body may see, who will turn
to the beginning of his Common Prayer Book.

And yet I deny not, but our first Reformers might, as we do at this day,
condemn all Uninstituted Worship, and condemn several practices of the Church
of Rome under that Notion: such as Invocation of Saints, and Worship of Images,
etc. but she never took her Ceremonies to be any acts or parts of Worship, but
only some Adjuncts and external Circumstances, for the decent and orderly
performanee of Religious Worship. And to say, as this Author does, that the
Dissenters did at last prove, to the Agreem. p. 50.
conviction of the Church of England Clergy, that the controverted Ceremonies
were parts of external Worship; and that we were forced to fall in with the
Roman Catholic in denying that Uninstituted Worship is False, Superstitious,
and Idolatrous: to speak softly is not true. The Dissenters themselves never
thought that external Circumstances were parts of Worship, but endeavored to
prove, that our Ceremonies were not meet Circumstances of Worship, but
Sacraments; but I never heard of any Divine of the Church of England, that
allowed them to be so, or that thought they had proved it.

What the sense of the present Clergy is, may be learned, as from a great many
other excellent Books, so especially from The Case of indifferent Things, and
The Church of England's Symbolizing with the Church of Rome. Which are in the
Collection of Cases, lately Written for the satisfaction of Dissenters, when
the Government thought fit for other reasons, to require a vigorous execution
of those Laws against them, which had lain Dormant for some time: To show the
World at that time, what persecuting Spirits they were of, they used their
utmost diligence, both by private Conferences, and public Writings, managed
with all the softness and tenderness, that any Dispute is capable of, to
satisfy their Scruples, and thereby to prevent their Sufferings, which could
be prevented no other way; and let our Author try his skill, if he pleases, to
find out in those Cases, such an Agreement, as he pretends, between the Church
of England, and the Church of Rome, which I believe he may as soon do, as find
out that persecuting Spirit in them, he so much talks of, unless good Arguments
and soft Words, may pass for a Persecution.

But Dr. Covel he says, calls Ceremonies the external Act of Religion: I grant
he does so, and I think it a very loose definition of a Ceremony: But then we
must consider, that he plainly enough tells us, what kind of Acts of Religion
our Ceremonies are, that they are only to make the Act of Devotion to be more
Solemn, and that Solemnity Covel's modest Examination, c. 6. p. 55.
is in some measure a necessary adjunct to all public Service. And if
Solemnity be but an Adjunct, and Ceremonies but for Solemnity, they cannot be
in a strict Notion Acts of Religion, but Adjuncts of public Worship. And as he
calls them, The Hedges of Devotion, and tho not the principal Points, yet as
some of the Fathers call them, the Second intention of the Law, intermediate
means not to be despised, of a better and more religious Service. Which plainly
enough shows, what distinction he made between Ceremonies strictly so called,
and Acts of Worship.

And therefore he tells us, that there are Three Acts of Religion, 1. The
Internal, which is the willing desire, to give unto God his due Worship and
Honor. 2. The External Answering to this, which is no otherwise good or
commendable, Ibid. p. 56.
than that it virtuously serves to this end 3. The commanded Act, that is the
Act of every Virtue ordained by Religion to God's Honor. The Second, which is
the external Act, and includes the whole external Worship, he calls Ceremonies,
not as Ceremony now signifies, among us, the external Decencies and Solemnities
of Worship, but as it was anciently used to signify all external Worship. And
therefore he afterward distinguishes between these Ceremonies. That, 1. Some
were for Justification, such as the Law commanded -- -- -in place whereof
afterward sacceeded those that were for Ornament, and to signify such Virtues
as were requisite in those Parties, that rightly used them. These are those
Ceremonies, P. 58.
which before he told us, were only external Solemnities, and in some measure
necessary Adjuncts of Worship, which are the only Ceremonies in dispute among
us, and the Dissenters, which he calls Adjuncts and Solemnities as we do He
adds. 3. Some are parts of the immediate Worship, as Sacrifice, Prayer,
Adoration, and such like; some only dispose, as Fasting, austere Living; some
are only Instruments, as Churches, Altars, Chalices, and all those, which
religiously being separated, serve only to make the Worship more Solemn, and
that Solemnity more Holy. So that tho he calls the whole external Worship, and
every thing, that belongs to it, Ceremonies, and Acts of Religion, as having
some relation to religious Actions, yet he expressly distinguishes between the
Parts of Worship; and the external Adjuncts and Instruments of it, and
therefore does not call our Ceremonies Acts of Worship, as that signifies a
part of God's immediate Worship, but in a more lax sense, to include all
external Adjuncts and Solemnities of Worship.

And therefore the Church of England never had any occasion to justify her
Worship by such distinctions as the Church of Rome has invented of Primary and
Secondary, Agreem. p. 48.
Essential and Accidental, Proper and Improper, Worship, whereby they endeavor
to justify that Worship, they pay to Saints and Angels, and Images; which we
have no use of, because we Worship none but God. And our Author is a very
pleasant Man, who would justify the Worship of Images, under the Notion of
Ceremonies: surely the Church of England is not agreed with them here too; for
we know no such Ceremonies as are the Objects of Worship, and that an Image is
in the Church of Rome; we use some indifferent and significant Ceremonies in
the Worship of God, but we do not worship our Ceremonies.

III. The AGREEMENT ABOUT IMAGE WORSHIP.
THIS will be Answered in a few Words. He Answer to Papists Prot. p 81.
forms his Argument from a Passage in the Answer to Papists, protesting against
Protestant Popery; and from another in the Discourse against
Transubstantiation, p. 21. and from the Ceremony of Kneeling at the receiving
the Lords Supper. The Answerer says, that to pay the External Acts of
Adoration, to, or before, or in Presence of a Representative Object of Worship,
as Representing is the very same thing In the Discourse against
Transubstantiation, it is observed, That the Doctrine of the Corporal Presence
of Christ, was started upon occasion of the Dispute about the Worship of
Images; in opposition whereto the Synod of Constantinople, about the Year of
Christ, 750. did argue thus: That our Lord having left us no other Image of
Himself, but the Sacrament in which the Substance of the Bread is the Image of
his Body; we ought to make (...) other Image of our Lord. In Answer to this
Argument, the second Council of Nice in the Year 787. did Declare, That the
Sacrament after Consecration is not the Image and Antitype of Christ's Body and
Blood, but is properly his Body and Blood. And then the Church of England has
enjoined Bowing or Kneeling at the Reception of the Lords Supper, for a
Signification of our humble and grateful Acknowledgments of the Benefits of
Christ therein given to all worthy Receivers; and for avoiding such
Profanation and Disorder in the Holy Communion, as might otherwise ensue.

From these Premises our Author thus Argues. So that Kneeling is Expressive of
the inward Reverence of the Heart to Christ, and so is an Act of Religious
Adoration; the Kneeling then before the Sacramental Signs, is the same with
Kneeling to them; Bowing before them, is the same with Bowing to them; a
Worshipping before them, the same with giving a Religious Worship to them.
Which sufficiently shows, that in one great Instance the Church of England
retains the same kind of Image Worship with the Roman Catholics; and so far
are we agreed with them.

In very good time! But there is one thing yet, remains to be proved, which he
has conveniently dropped: And that is, That the Church of England owns the
Sacramental Bread to be the Image of Christ, and the Representative Object of
Worship: This he knew, he could not prove, and therefore says nothing of it,
for it does not follow, that, because the Council of Constantinople affirmed,
that the Sacramental Bread is the Image of Christ's Body; therefore the Church
of England teaches so: I am sure, that Author say no such thing, and if we
should allow it in some Sense to be the Image, as that signifies the
Sacramental Figure of Christ's Body; Does it hence follow, that it is the
Representative Object of Worship? And thus his To, and before, and in Presence,
is all lost; because the Bread according to the Doctrine of the Church of
England is no Representative Object of Worship, and therefore we neither Bow
To, nor before, nor in Presence of the Bread, as a Representative Object; and
therefore the Answer that Author gave, that we do not Kneel to the Sacrament,
but receive it Kneeling, is a very good Answer still.

Thus I have considered all his Pretenses of Agreement, between the Church of
England, and the Church of Rome, which they are as unfortunate at, as they are
at Representing: And methinks it Argues some distrust of their Cause, that they
dare not downright defend it, but are forced either to represent it away
almost into Protestant Heresy, or to shelter themselves in their Agreement with
a Protestant Church; but the better way is to turn Protestants themselves, and
then we will own our Agreement with them.

THE END.
Books lately Printed for Will. Rogers.
THE Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome, truly Represented; in
Answer to a Book entitled, A Papist Misrepresented, and Represented, etc.
Quarto.

An Answer to a Discourse entitled, Papists protesting against Protestant
Popery; being a Vindication of Papists not Misrepresented by Protestants: And
containing a particular Examination of Monsieur de Meaux, late Bishop of
Condem, his Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, in the Articles
of Invocation of Saints, Worship of Images, occasioned by that Discourse.
Quarto.

An Answer to the Amicable Accommedation of the Difference, between the
Representer and the Answerer. Quarto.

A View of the whole Controversy, between the Representer and the Answerer;
with an Answer to the Representer's last Reply; in which are laid open some of
the Methods, by which Protestants are Misrepresented by Papists. Quarto.

The Doctrine of the Trinity, and Transubstantiation, compared as to Scripture,
Reason, and Tradition; in a new Dialogue between a Protestane and a Papist, the
first Part: Wherein an Answer is given to the late Proofs of the Antiquity of
Transubstantiation, in the Books called, Consensut Veterum, and Nubes Testium,
etc. Quarto.

The Doctrine of the Trinity, and Transubstantiation, compared as to Scripture,
Reason, and Tradition in a new Dialogue between a Protestant and a Papist, the
Second Part: Wherein the Doctrine of the Trinity is showed to be agreeable, to
Scripture and Reason, and Transubstantiation repugnant to both, Quarto*

An Answer to the Eighth Chapter of the Representer's Second Part, in the first
Dialogue, between him and his Lay-Friend.

Of the Authority of Councils, and the Rule of Faith. By a Person of Quality:
With an Answer to the Eight Theses, laid down for the Trial of the English
Reformation; in a Book that came lately from Oxford. Ser-

(...)
