A VINDICATION OF The Rights OF Ecclesiastical Authority: BEING AN ANSWER To
the First Part OF THE Protestant Reconciler.

By WILL. SHERLOCK, D. D. Master of the TEMPLE.

LONDON: Printed for Abel Swalle, at the Unicorn at the West End of St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1685.

(...) who exclude so many Laborers for things indifferent. p. 212 His fourth
Argument, from our Savior's command not to scandalize little ones. p. 213 What
is meant by little ones. p. 214 What it is to scandalize them. p. 215 His fifth
Argument, from the Woe denounced against those who shut up the Kingdom of
Heaven. p. 216 How the Pharisees shut the Kingdom of Heaven. ibid. What is
meant by heavy burdens. p. 218 And what it is our Savior condemns under that
notion. p. 219 His sixth Argument, that Christ would not suffer his Disciples
to forbid that man who wrought miracles in his Name, but did not follow him;
and therefore dissenting Preachers, who renounce the Communion of the Church,
must not be forbid to preach. p. 220 His seventh Argument, from Christ's laying
down his life for his Sheep, to prove that the Church must part with her
Ceremonies for them. p. 223 His last Argument from Christ's Prayer for the
Unity of the Church. ibid.
CHAP. V.
The Answer to our Reconciler's Argument, drawn from the 14 of Romans p. 225
There may be some cases wherein forbearance is reasonable, others wherein it is
neither prudent nor reasonable ibid. And therefore we cannot argue from the
case of the Jews to the case of the Dissenters, unless they appear to be the
same ibid. St. Paul in the 14 Romans only exhorts the Jewish and Gentile
Converts to mutual forbearance in such cases which had already been determined
by the highest authority in the Church 226 And therefore it is impertinently
alleged to prove that the Governors of the Church must not impose any
indifferent Ceremonies which are scrupled by Dissenters 227 The Decree of the
Council at Jerusalem the foundation of this Apostolical forbearance ibid.
Private charity may be exercised in such cases where public authority can make
no determination in favor of the scrupulous 231 The Dispute between the Church
and Dissenters of a different nature from that between the Jews and Gentiles;
the one concerns indifferent things, the other the observation of the Law of
Moses 235 No Dispute about the use of indifferent things in Scripture, nor any
exhortation to forbearance in such matters 236 An Answer to the Reconciler's
Argument which he alleadges to make it probable that St. Paul in this Chapter
does not refer to the observation of the Law of Moses ibid. So that this
Chapter does not concern the Dispute about indifferent things 243 The Apostle
did not plead for indulgence to the Jews in the observation of the Law of Moses
under the notion of an indifferent thing ibid. The reason of his different
treatment of the Churches of Rome and Galatia 244 Whether though the case of
the Jews and Dissenters be different, yet by a parity of Reason the same
indulgence ought to be granted to both 247 The nature of such Arguments from a
parity of Reason ibid. That there is no parity of Reason between these two
cases 249 The Arguments the Apostle uses in this 14 Chap. very proper to the
case of the Jews, but not applicable to the case of our Dissenters proved at
large ibid. etc. What the Apostle means by receiving one another, and Dr.
Falkner vindicated from the Reconciler's Objections The Apostles first Arg.
That God has received them, the meaning of it, that it is peculiar to that case
of Jews and Gentiles, and not applicable to Dissenters 257, etc. 2 Arg. that
they must not judge another man's servant 262 That this Arg. relates only to
such matters as God has determined by his own immediate authority 264 3 Arg.
that they acted out of conscience toward God 265 Whether every man must be
permitted to act according to his own Conscience 266 God will judge the
Consciences of men, and therefore grants no such liberty as this 267 Civil
Magistrates ought not to regard men's Consciences in making or executing Laws
for the public good 268 Nor is there any obligation on the Governors of the
Church to do this 269 What St. Paul means by regarding a day to the Lord 270 To
do any thing to the Lord, does not merely signify a private persuasion that
God has commanded or forbid it 272 The Apostles Exhortation not to offend a
weak Brother 274 What the scandal was of which the Apostle speaks 275 Who this
weak Brother is, and whether this be applicable to Dissenters 276 The offense
which was given was a supposed violation of an express Law of God 277 The
nature of a criminal scandal 279 The danger of offending these weak Jewish
Brethren (which the Apostle warns them against) was, lest they should renounce
the Christian Faith, and fall back into Judaism 282 The weak in Faith, who are
to be indulged, signifies those who are not well confirmed in the truth of
Christianity 284 The same indulgence not to be granted to Schismatics, though
ignorant and weak in understanding ibid. The Reasons whereby the Apostle
disswades them from giving scandal 287 A Paraphrase on the 14, 15, etc. verses
of the 14 Romans ibid. These Arguments to avoid scandal concern only the
exercise of every man's private liberty 292 That this compliance must be in such
matters wherein Religion and religious Worship is not concerned 293 Meat and
Drink does not signify the Externals of Religious Worship 294 Nor does
Righteousness and Peace, etc. signify all the Essentials of Religion 296 The
mistake of Reconcilers, that the Externals of Religion are nothing worth, and
of small account with God 297 This Apostolical Exhortation to avoid scandal
concerns only such cases wherein we are not bound to make a public profession
of our Faith 298 The meaning of Have thou Faith? have it to thy self 299 What
is meant by Him that doubts 302 How far the Apostle allows that every man
must be left to the conduct of his own Conscience This extends only to such
cases where every man's Conscience is his only Rule, not where Conscience it
self has a Rule 303 Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind, is a safe
and a sure Rule, when there is no other Law to govern us 306 This proved to be
the meaning of the Apostle ibid.
The Case of liberty of Conscience briefly stated 304 A short Recapitulation of
this Discourse, by comparing the case of the Jews with the case of Dissenters
311 The forbearance St. Paul pleads for, had no influence upon Christian
Worship, it neither destroyed the Uniformity of Worship, nor divided the
Communion of the Church; what the Reconciler pleads for, must do one or both
321 Dr. Stillingfleet vindicated 322 The forbearance St. Paul pleads for, was
in order to prevent Schisms; which our Reconciler's forbearance cannot do 333
This indulgence to the Jews was very consistent with the Apostolical Authority
in governing the Church, but an indulgence of Dissenters is not 335 St. Paul
always asserted and exercised the Apostolical Authority as much as any Apostle,
and therefore would not suffer any diminution of it 337 The forbearance St.
Paul pleads for, was only temporary 339
CHAP. VI. Containing an Answer to the 5th Chapter of the Protestant Reconciler
His 1 Arg. from St. Paul's reproving the Christians for going to Law before
the unbelievers 341 His 2 Arg. that St. Paul would not impose Virginity upon
the Christians, though he owned some advantages in that state above marriage;
therefore the Church must not impose her Ceremonies, though they had the
advantages of greater Decency 345 The difference between these two cases plain;
the Apostle had not authority to impose the one, the Church has to impose the
other 346 His 3 Arg. is from the Dispute about meats offered to Idols ibid.
Those knowing persons who eat in the Idols Temple, were the Gnostick Heretics
347 The weak persons who were offended at this, were some Paganizing
Christians, who still thought it lawful to worship their Country-Gods, and were
confirmed in this belief by seeing the Gnostics eat in the Idols Temple 349 In
the 1 Cor. 8. the Apostle Disputes against this practice of the Gnostics, upon
a supposition of the lawfulness of it, because it encouraged these imperfect
Christians in Idolatry 350 The Reconciler mistakes the whole case. The Apostle
does not grant it lawful to eat in an Idols Temple, but proves the contrary in
chap. 10. 352 The weak Conscience is not a Conscience which did abstain from
eating, but which did eat 354 Not a scrupulous Conscience which doubted of the
lawfulness of eating, but a Conscience erroneously persuaded that it might
lawfully eat 355 And therefore the Apostle does not plead for indulgence to
this weak Conscicnce, but warns them against confirming such persons in their
mistakes 356 The Apostle's decision of this Controversy, that it is not lawful
to eat in an Idols Temple, but that it is lawful to eat meats offered to Idols,
when sold in the Shambles, or eat at private houses 357 But yet they were to
abstain in these cases also, when it gave offense 358 For whose sake the
Apostle abridges them of this liberty of eating such meats at private houses
ibid. Nothing of all this to our Reconciler's purpose 359 This forbearance
only in the exercise of their private liberty 360 His Argument from St. Paul's
own example of charity and condescension ibid. St. Paul was an example of no
other condescension than what he taught; and if that do not plead for
Dissenters, as I have already proved it does not, neither can his example do it
361 His Argument from St. Paul's preaching the Gospel freely at Corinth,
answered at large 362, etc.
CHAP. VII.
An Answer to his Motives for mutual condescension 372 His first Motive from
the smalness and littleness of these things, which ought not to come in
competition with Love and Peace ibid. This enforced from Gods own example, who
suffered the violation of his Ceremonial Laws upon less accounts than these 377
And gave his own Son to die for us 380 His second Motive, that God does not
exclude weak and erring persons from his favor for such errors of judgment as
^re consistent with true love to him 382 His third Argument, that Christ broke
down the middle wall of partition between Jew and Gentile 387 His fourth
Motive, from the example of Christ and his Apostles in preaching the Gospel,
who concealed at first many things from their Hearers, which they were not then
able to bear 390 Mot. 5. from that Rule of Equity, to do to others as we would
be dealt with 392 6. From the obligations of Charity 397 7. That the same
Arguments which are urged to persuade Dissenters to Conformity, have equal
force against the impositeon of Ceremonies as the terms of Communion. The
particular Argument considered and answered ibid. His Arguments from many
general Topics, which he says are received and owned by all Casuits 404 An
Answer to the Dissenters Questions produced by our Reconciler 405
CHAP. VIII.
Some short Animadversions on the Authorities produced by our Reconciler in his
Preface 431 His Testimonies relating to the judgment of King James, King
Charles the first, and our present Sovereign, answered 433 Whether those
Doctors of the Church of England whose Authority he alleadges, were of his mind
438 Concerning the testimonies of foreign Divines 442 And the judgment of our
own and foreign Divines about the terms of Concord between different Churches,
which does not prove that the same liberty is to be granted to the Members of
the same Church A conclusion, containing an Address to the Dissenters, to let
them see how the Reconciler has abused them; that they cannot plead for
indulgence upon his Principles, without confessing themselves to be
Schismatics, and weak, ignorant, humorsome People 443
Errata.
P. 35. l. 32. for and r. as, p. 47. l. 28. f. bind r. bend, p. 96. l. 10. f.
charity r. clarity.

A VINDICATION OF The Rights OF Ecclesiastical Authority: BEING An ANSWER TO
THE Protestant Reconciler.
The INTRODVCTION.
THE name of a Reconciler, especially of a Protestant Reconciler, is very
popular at such a time as this; and it is a very invidious thing for any man to
own himself an Enemy to so Christian a Design; and therefore I do not pretend
to answer the Title, which is a very good one, but to examine how well the Book
agrees with the Title, and whether our Author has chosen the proper method for
such a Reconciliation. For this Reconciliation will prove very chargeable to
the Church, if she must renounce her own Authority to reconcile Dissenters.

The usual methods taken by Reconcilers, have been either to convince men, that
they do not differ so much as they think they do, but that the Controversy is
only about the manner of expressing the same thing; or that they are both gone
too far into opposite Extremes, and have left Truth and Peace in the middle; or
that the matter in dispute is not of such moment, as to contend about it; or
that the truth of either side of the Question is not certain; or that one of
the contending Parties is in the wrong, and therefore ought to yield to him who
is in the right.

But our Reconciler has taken a new way by himself, to prove that both the
contending Parties are in the wrong, and that both of them are in the right;
for thus he adjusts the Controversy: He who says, that it is sinful and
mischievous to impose those unnecessary Ceremonies, and to retain those
disputable expressions of our Liturgy, which may be altered and removed
without transgressing of the Law of God, says true. (And thus the present
Constitution of the Church of England, in these present circumstances, is with
great modesty and submission, without any dispute, pronounced sinful, by a
professed Member, and as we may suppose from his own Character of himself, by a
dignified Clergyman of our Church). And that he also who pleads for separation
from Communion with us, on account of those few scrupled Ceremonies, and
disputable Expressions of our Liturgy, is sinful and unreasonable, as well as
mischievous, does also speak the words of truth and soberness; or that one
should not impose these things as the conditions of Communion, and the other
should not, when they are once imposed, refuse Communion upon that account: i.
e. the Church sins in imposing, and the Dissenter sins in disobeying such
Impositions. The Church is in the right, as to the lawfulness of what she
imposes, but sins in the exercise of her Authority in commanding lawful things.
The Dissenter is in the right, in affirming these Impositions to be the sin of
the Imposers, and yet sins in not obeying them; that is, the Dissenter judges
aright of the duty of his Superiors, but is mistaken in his own. And if he can
reconcile these things, it will be one good step toward a Reconciliation.

Governors indeed may be over-rigorous and severe in the exercise of a just
Authority; but I dare not say that they always sin when they are so, but that
they do not act so wisely or so charitably as they might do. For the Wisdom and
Charity of Government is so nice a thing, and subject to so many difficulties,
that the case of Governors would be very hard, should every mistake in such
matters be a sin; and Government it self must necessarily lose its Sacredness
and Authority, if every Subject may censure the Wisdom and Charity of lawful
Commands and Impositions, and vote them to be mischievous and sinful, if they
do not agree with his Notions of Prudence and Charity.

All that Subjects are concerned to enquire about the Commands of their
Superiors, is concerning the lawfulness or unlawfulness of them; if they go
any farther, they make themselves Governors, not Subjects: and therefore it is
not very modest to condemn the Commands (otherwise civilly called Impositions)
of Superiors, as sinful and mischievous, when it is lawful to obey them. And
he who thinks Dissenters do ill in refusing Obedience, does not well himself in
charging the Church with doing what is sinful and mischievous in imposing.

But then on the other hand, if the Church do sin in imposing, she either
exceeds her Authority and Commission, and so imposes without Authority, or else
she imposes something unlawful; and in either of these cases no man can blame
Dissenters for refusing Communion with the Church in such matters. For no man
is bound to communicate in unlawful things, nor to obey where there is no
Authority to command. And therefore our Reconciler can never reconcile these
two Propositions, That the Church sins in imposing, the Dissenter sins in
rejecting such Impositions, and in refusing Communion, where it cannot be had
without submitting to them. For though we are bound to submit to the Supreme
Powers, when they act illegally, because we are bound never to resist; yet we
are not bound to yield an Active Obedience to any illegal Commands: but the
Church, considered as a Church, or Ecclesiastical Body, having no external and
compulsory Authority, if she commands what she has no Authority to command, no
man is bound to obey her; and if this occasion a Schism, she her self is the
Schismatic.

But to show how ominously our Reconciler stumbles at the threshold, let us
state the case a little otherwise. The great reason he assigns throughout his
Book to prove that the Church sins in these Impositions is, that there is a
great number of men among us, who either scruple the lawfulness, or positively
afsert the unlawfulness of them; and this occasions a Schism in the Church. To
prevent which, the Church is bound in charity to the Souls of men, not to
command such scrupled and unnecessary Ceremonies, and sins if she does. Now in
this case also, the sin and guilt can lie but on one side. For if the
Dissenters, notwithstanding this, may and ought to conform to such Impositions,
then there is no necessity, upon that account, for the Church to alter her
Constitutions, nor does she sin in imposing: if they may not, then the
Dissenters do not sin in rejecting such Impositions. If some particular
Governors are acted by ill principles, this contracts a personal guilt on
themselves; but it neither excuses Dissenters, nor affects the Government,
while they command nothing but what the Church has Authority to command, and
what may be lawfully obeyed: but if the mere scruples of Dissenters will make
the Commands of the Church sinful, when there is no other fault to be found in
her Constitutions, but that Disfenters will not obey them, this overthrows all
government in the Church. So that our Reconciler, who is resolved to prove both
these Propositions, that the Church sins in imposing, and the Dissenter in
breaking Communion for such Impositions, will have much ado to reconcile his
two Books together. One part of his Task is certainly needless; for if he can
but convince the World of the truth of either part, he effectually does the
busin^ss. If he can convince the Dis^enter that he ought to conform to these
Impositions, the Church may impose without sin* or if he can persuade our
Governors that it is sinful to impose, there is no need to deal with
Dissenters: and therefore methinks it had savoured of more modesty, and greater
deference to Authority, to have tried his skill upon Dissenters first. But our
Author, by over-doing, is like to spoil all. For it is very probable he will
convince Dissenters of what they believed before, that the Church cannot impose
such things: from whence, in spite of all his Logic, they will conclude that
they are not bound to obey; and he will convince the Government, that the
Dissenter ought to conform, and sins in not doing it; which justifies their
Impositions. And thus he ends just where he began.

Nay, could he convince the Church that she ought not to impose upon Dissenters
while their scruples last, and the Dissenters that they ought not to scruple
these things, nor disobey them, when they are commanded; we may expect it will
take up some time to adjust the dispute, after all this, between the Church and
the Dissenters, which of them shall yield: for both sides cannot yield, unless
we will say that the Church must leave off imposing, and then the Dissenters
must begin to obey; that the Church must no longer command, and then the
Dissenter is bound to obey, when no body commands.

So that could he effectually prove that the Church and the Dissenter are both
guilty of sin, the one in imposing, the other in refusing Obedience; yet I do
not see what Reconciliation this is like to make. For it is not enough to
reconcile two contending Parties, to prove that they are both in the fault,
unless you can propose some middle terms of accommodation, or prove that though
they are both equally in the right, and equally in the wrong, yet one of them
is bound to yield.

Our Reconciler has not attempted any such thing as this; nor indeed can he:
for there is no medium between the Authority of commanding, and the duty and
necessity of Obedience, wherein Governors and Subjects may unite without
either commanding or obeying; which destroys the very Relation between
Governors and Subjects. Nor has he told us which of them must give way first,
unless we may conclude this from the order of publishing his Books, that the
Church ought to give place to the Dissenters; and then his second Book is
useless, for there will be no need for Dissenters to obey the Church. But our
admirable Reconciler has first pelted the Church with the Dissenters Arguments,
and now serves the Dissenters in the same nature; which is an excellent way to
revive a Quarrel, if it had been ended: but bare disputing on both, sides, was
never thought a likely way to reconcile a Quarrel.

I have premised this, to take off the odium of answering the Protestant
Reconciler; which a man may very honestly do, and yet be a great and passionate
Friend to the Reconciliation of Protestants: for there is not the least offer
made toward a Reconciliation in all this Book. He only teaches the Dissenters
to cast the sin and mischief of all our Divisions upon the Church, and the
Church to cast it back upon the Dissenters, and so leaves them just at the same
distance that he found them; unless possibly he have added to the confidence
and obstinacy of Dissenters, by joining with them in their lewd and
unreasonable Clamours against the Church.

But let us consider what betrayed him into this mistake; which he very
honestly and plainly tells us, in these words: That which chiefly did confirm
me in this apprehension, was this observation, Reconcil. p. 3.
That I found each of the Parties strong and copious upon these two points, but
elsewhere silent. The Pleaders for Conformity still pressing the necessity that
men should yield obedience to the things commanded, but seldom saying any thing
to justify the exercise of that Authority which laid upon the Subject the
burden of obedience to things unnecessary: and whosoever shall peruse the
Writings of the learned Dr. St. and his Defenders, will find that they have
been very silent upon this head, and have upon the matter left our Rulers in
the lurch. And on the other hand, I find that our Dissenters are very prone on
all occasions to cry out against imposing these things as the conditions of
Communion, and the excluding all that are not able to submit unto them from the
privilege of Church Communion; but they say little of any weight and moment,
to show it is utterly unlawful, under the present circumstances, to yield
submission and obedience to the things imposed.

Now as for matter of fact, this is utterly false. For the Dissenters
themselves (to give every one their due) have used great variety of Arguments,
not only to prove the unlawfulness of imposing these things, but the
unlawfulness of the things themselves; otherwise what is it that the great
Champions of the Church of England, ever since the first rise of this
Controversy, and the Dean and his Defenders of late, have answered? Did they
make Objections for the Dissenters, and then answer them; or did they answer
such Objections as they found made to their hands? Whether what they object
have any weight or moment, is another Question: but it seems very unreasonable
to charge men with saying nothing, because they say nothing to the purpose,
when they say as much as they can, and as much as the cause will bear; by the
same Figure we may assert, that the Protestant Reconciler has said nothing. But
yet if no Answer had been returned to prove that all he has said is nothing, I
strongly fancy that he and several others of his Size, would have thought that
he had said something; and so would the Dissenters too, had not their something
been so often proved to be nothing.

And he has treated the Advocates of the Church, and the Dean and his
Defenders, with the same civility and honesty: for have they indeed said
nothing for the lawfulness of imposing these things? and is not that a
sufficient justification of theAuthority which imposes? Did he never read any
thing in vindication of Ecclesiastical Authority, in commanding indifferent
things? Could he find nothing in the Dean and his Defenders tending this way? I
assure him I have found a great deal which he may hear of in a convenient
place, which may teach him to make more careful observations for the future.

But if this had been so, methinks it had more become a Minister and Son of the
Church of England to have tried his skill to have supplied these defects of his
Brethren, than to have exposed the nakedness of his Mother, by tearing off her
Vail with his own hands.

Every honest and prudent man thinks himself bound to obey and to justify the
Rites and U^ages of the Church, as far as they are lawful and innocent, and to
persuade others to do so; and though he should observe some things which in his
private opinion he judges might be altered for the better, yet he does not
think it his duty to raise a great Noise and Outcry about this, and to call
furiously for a Change and Reformation, to set the people into a ferment, and
to alarm the Government with new Models and Platforms of Discipline and
Worship. A wise man considers what different apprehensions men have of
expediency, fitness, and decency of things, and that it properly belongs to
Governors to determine these matters; but it does not become private
Christians, when Authority does not ask their opinions and advice, to sit in
judgment upon the Wisdom of Government: for there would be no end of this in
^uch matters, wherein men's minds differ as much as their faces do.

Had our Reconciler been a Member of the Convocation when such matters had been
under debate, it had become him to have declared his mind freely, where his
Arguments might either have obtained such a Reformation as he desired, or have
received a fair Answer, without appearing abroad to disturb weak and unstable
minds, or to confirm and harden men who are already engaged in an actual
Schism: at least, if he be so thoroughly convinced of the truth of what he
says, if he be (as he says) so sensible of his own weakness and praneness to
mistake in judging, Preface, p. 2, 3
and most unwilling to do the least disser^ice to the Church -- or to those
Reverend Superiors whom from his heart he honors, what necessity was he under
of publishing such a Discourse as this? Why did he not first ask the opinion of
his Brethren and Superiors about it? What service did he expect to do to the
Church, by appealing to the People (who certainly are not the best Judges in
such matters, and have no power to reform but by Mutinies and Seditions)
against her uncharitable Impositions? And when he has published a Book against
the Constitutions of our Church, agreed on by the wisdom of the Convocation,
and established by Act of Parliament, when he has already the most mature and
deliberate judgment of Church and State, it looks like a very hypocritical
piece of modesty, a downright Challenge to the whole Clergy to cry out, as he
does, Teach me, my Reverend Brethren, and I will hold my peace; cause me to
understand wherein I have erred, and I will thankfully, yea I will publicly
retract it. Any body, I think, but a Protestant Reconciler, would call this
libelling the Church, and hectoring and out-braving all his Mothers Children.

How the rest of my Brethren will digest this outrageous Contempt of
Church Authority, I cannot tell: for my part, I cannot bear it, but am resolved
to do my weak endeavors to vindicate my dear Mother from the rudeness and
insolence of her undutiful Son. And in order to this, I shall consider what it
is he contends for, wherein we agree, and where we part, and fairly debate on
which side the truth lies.

The Proposition which he undertakes to prove, is contained in these words:
That things indifferent, Reconcil. p. 4.
which may be changed and altered without sin or violation of Gods Laws, ought
not, especially under our present circumstances, to be imposed by Superiors as
the Conditions of Communion, or as Conditions without which none shall minister
in sacred things, though called to that work, and none shall be partakers of
the public Ordinances which Christ has left to be the ordinary means of Grace
and of Salvation to mankind, b^t shall upon refusal to submit unto them, for
ever be excluded from the Church, and from the Privileges belonging to the
Members of it.

Where, by indifferent things, which may be changed and altered without sin or
violation of Gods Laws, it is plain he means, whatever is not expressly
commanded by God; and so must include all the Externals of Worship, Government,
and Discipline, which are not enjoined by a divine Law. That these ought not to
be imposed, signifies that it is sinful and mischievous to impose them, as he
expressly asserted before, P. 2.
and which all his Arguments are designed to prove; viz. that Governors sin in
it. To impose, signifies only to command; and to impose as Conditions of
Communion, signifies no more than to impose, though it sounds bigger. For the
Church makes such indifferent things the Conditions of Communion in no other
sense than as she commands those of her Communion to worship God in such a
manner; and rejects those which will not: which is nothing more than to
command, as to command is opposed to leaving every one at liberty to worship
God as he pleases. So that if the Church have not Authority to make these
indifferent things the terms of Communion in this sense, so as to reject those
who will not worship God according to such Prescriptions, i. e. who will not
obey the Governors of the Church wherein they live; then she has no power at
all to command. And when he adds, especially in our present circumstances, he
refers to those Divisions and Schisms which he says are occasioned by such
Impositions. Whenever such Ceremonies are doubted and scrupled, and made an
occasion of Schism, then especially it is a sin to impose them; but when he
says especially, he plainly insinuates, that it is at all times sinful and
unlawful to impose such uncommanded Rites and Modes of Worship, though it is a
greater sin to do it, when there are any who scruple the lawfulness of such
Impositions.

This is the Doctrine of our Protestant Reconciler; which I should rather have
expected from a professed Enemy, than from a pretended Advocate of the Church
of England. He has at once very modestly rejected all Ecclesiastical Authority
in indifferent things. He has condemned all the Canons and Constitutions of the
Church for the orderly performance of Religious Worship, from the Apostle days
until this time, which concern the external Circumstances and Ceremonies of
Worship. He has plainly renounced one of those Articles of Religion, to which
he has subscribed and declared his Assent, if he be a Member of our Church. For
Art. 20. asserts, That the Church has power to decree Rites or Ceremonies: And
if the Church has power to do this, I suppose she may do it without sin, and
without asking leave of her Inferiors.

But though our Reconciler has stated this matter so generally, as to condemn
all Ecclesiastical Authority in indifferent things, and has said many things
which look that way in several parts of his Book; yet his open and avowed
design is only to prove the sinfulness of such Impositions, when they are
scrupled, and made the occasion of Schisms and Divisions in the Church, as he
says it is at this day among us. And here I shall join issue with him, and give
a particular Answer to every thing which has the least appearance of an
Argument; which though it will make this Answer larger than I could wish, yet
is necessary to stop the mouths of such pragmatical Reconcilers, who are as
troublesome and dangerous to the Government as Dissenters themselves.

CHAP. 1. Concerning the external Order and Decency of Worship, and the
Authority of the Church in such matters.
THat I may give a fair Answer to our Protestant Reconciler, I shall first
examine some of his Mistakes, which run through his whole Book, and whereon the
whole Argument of his Book is founded; the removing of which, to men of any
competent understanding, would supersede the necessity of any farther Answer.
And they either concern, 1. The usefulness of some Rites and Ceremonies of
Religious Worship, and the Authority of the Church in such matters: Or, 2. The
obligations of charity to the Souls of men, with the due measures and extent of
it: Or, 3. That regard which ought to be had to an erroneous or scrupulous
Conscience. From these Topics he all-along argues to prove that
Church Governors ought to alter the external Ceremonies of Worship, because
they are of no value in themselves; and therefore charity to the Souls of men
requires them in such things to condescend to the errors, or scruples, or
weakness of their Brethren.

I shall begin with the first, which is the fundamental Mistake on which all
the rest depend, and therefore must stand or fall with it; and that concerns
the external Order and Decency of Worship, or the Authority of the Church, in
prescribing Rites and Ceremonies for the more decent and orderly performance of
Religious Worship.

Now concerning this matter, our Reconciler thinks that the external Ceremonies
of Religion are of no account at all; for public Worship may be performed as
decently and reverently without the use of those Ceremonies which are in
dispute, as with them. For thus he expressly and dogmatically asserts, That the
Ceremonies which are imposed by our Church, Prot. Recon. p. 39.
as they have nothing sinful in their nature for which Inferiors should refuse
submission to them, so have they nothing of real goodness, nothing of positive
Order, Decency, or Reverence, for which they ought to be commanded. Now if he
can make this good, I am resolved to meddle no farther in this Controversi^^
for it is not worth the while to spend Ink and Paper in defense of such
Ceremonies as have no positive Order, Decency, or Reverence, for which they
ought to be commanded. For I am sure no Ceremonies in Religion, which do not
serve the ends of Orders, Decency, and Reverence, ought to be commanded: for
that is to trifle in sacred things.

But let us hear how he explains himself; for this is a Proposition which seems
to need some explication. I call (says he) that positive Order, Decency, or
Reverence, which being done, renders the Service more decent, reverent, and
orderly; and being undone, the Service becomes irreverent, indecent, and
disorderly performed. So that my meaning is, that if our public Service were
by the Minister performed without the Surplice, if Baptism were administered by
him without the Cross, if the Sacrament of the Lords Supper were administered to
such as did not kneel, but stand at the receiving of it; these actions would
not be performed sinfully, or with defect of any real goodness which belongs to
them, nor indecently, disorderly, or irreverently. So that his description of
positive Order, Reverence, and Decency, resolves it self into two Propositions:
That no Ceremonies have any positive Order, Decency, or Reverence, the use of
which does not (1) make the Worship more decent, reverent, and orderly, than
otherwise it would be, i. e. than it would be in the use of any other
Ceremonies, but those particular Ceremonies about which the Controversy is;
(...) there the fallacy seems to lie: And the neglect of which does not (2)
make the Worship irreverent, indecent, and disorderly. Now though it is in my
nature to be very civil to Reconcilers, yet I cannot grant him either of these
Propositions.

As for the first, I suppose our Reconciler will grant that it is possible
there may be different degrees of Order, Decency, and Reverence; and that
religious actions may be performed orderly, decently, and reverently, with some
Ceremonies, though there may be other Ceremonies more orderly, decent, and
reverent; and therefore there may be positive Order, Decency, and Reverence in
those Cemonies, the use of which makes the Worship orderly, decent, and
reverent, though it does not make it more orderly, decent, and reverent, than
otherwise it would be.

As for the second, there may be a less orderly, decent, and reverent way of
performing religious actions, which yet cannot strictly be called irreverent,
indecent, or disorderly; or there may be several sorts of Ceremonies which may
equally contribute to the reverent, decent, or orderly performance of religious
actions; and then the neglect of any one sort of Ceremonies may not make the
action indecent, irreverent, or disorderly, while we use other Ceremonies
equally reverent or decent: and therefore it cannot be true, as he affirms,
that no Ceremonies have any positive Order, Decency, or Reverence, which being
undone, the Service is not irreverently, indecently, and disorderly performed.

As to explain this by his own instances. The Surplice may be a very decent
Garment for Religious Offices, and it may be the most decent of any other; and
yet the Worship may not be performed indecently without the Surplice, if the
Minister officiate in some other decent Garment: but should he leave off the
Surplice, and put on a Colliers Frock, or a Buff-coat, I should think It very
indecent and irreverent; what the Reconciler would think, I cannot tell. Thus
the Cross in Baptism does very much contribute to the gravity and solemnity of
the action; and yet Baptism is complete and perfect without it, and may be
administered very reverently and decently, if all other due circumstances be
observed. Kneeling is a posture very expressive of our Reverence and Devotion,
and therefore very proper for so sacred an action as receiving the Lords
Supper; but standing and prostration are expressive of Reverence and Devotion
also, and therefore those who do not kneel, but stand, when they receive,
cannot be charged with irreverence. But now will any man in his wits say that
there is no positive Order, Decency, or Reverence in a Surplice, or the Cross
in Baptism, or kneeling at the Lords Supper, because it is possible that these
religious actions may be performed decently with other decent Ceremonies or
Circumstances, without them?

But our Reconciler, though he may be a very charitable man, yet is not very
honest, but manifestly puts tricks upon his Readers: otherwise, why does he
oppose standing at the Lords Supper to kneeling, and not rather sitting, which
is the only posture used by our Dissenters? The French Protestants indeed
receive standing; but what is that to our Dissenters, who would no more receive
standing than kneeling? for the same Objections which they urge against
kneeling, are as good against standing: That it was not the posture used by
Christ at the institution of this Sacrament: That it is not a Table-posture,
and therefore not proper at a Feast: That it is used as a posture of Worship,
and therefore they may worship the Host as well standing as kneeling; for if it
be not used as a posture of Worship, it is no more expressive of Reverence than
sitting. Now why does not our Reconciler say that the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper may be received as reverently sitting as kneeling, but inst^ad of
sitting, which is the case of our Dissenters, whose Cause he undertakes, puts
in standing? I can imagine no other reason but only this, That he was very
sensible that sitting was no reverend posture, (nor used by them as a posture
of Worship; for then it is liable to the same Objections as kneeling is, for
they might worship the Host as well sitting as kneeling; and yet if they do not
worship sitting, they confess that they do not worship Christ no more than the
Host, when they approach the Lords Table): and therefore he puts in standing
which is not kneeling indeed, and yet is expressive of Reverence. And is not
this a plain confession, that the only case wherein decent and reverent
Ceremonies may be neglected, and yet the Worship not be indecent and
irreverent, is when other decent and reverent Ceremonies are used in their
room; but if they lay aside reverent Ceremonies, and use irreverent ones, the
Worship becomes irreverent also? The external Decency and Reverence of
religious actions, consists in the Reverence and Decency of those Circumstances
and Ceremonies wherewith they are performed. Where there is choice of such
decent Modes and Ceremonies of Worship, the neglect of any one decent and
reverent Mode or Ceremony cannot make the action irreverent or undecent, but
the neglect of all does. Had our Reconciler said that all those Ceremonies had
a positive Order, Decency, and Reverence, without some or other of which, the
Worship would be indecently, irreverently, or disorderly performed, he had said
very true; and this would have justified the Ceremonies of the Church of
England, and all the decent Ceremonies of any foreign Churches in all Ages. But
it is a manifest Fallacy, to say that the particular Ceremonies which are used
in the Church of England, have no positive Order, Decency, or Reverence,
because the acts of Worship may be performed orderly, decently, and reverently
without them; which our Church always owned: for she never condemned the
Worship of other Churches which do not use her Ceremonies, while by other means
they secure the external Decency and Reverence of Worship. But the Question is,
Whether the Ceremonies enjoined by the Church of England, or some other decent
Ceremonies in the room of them, be not necessary to the external Decency and
Reverence of Worship? Whether we can worship decently and reverently, without
some decent habits, postures, places, etc? Whether the Ceremonies used by the
Church of England, be not as decent and reverent as any other? We do not
pretend that our Ceremonies are the only decent and reverent Ceremonies that
can be used in religious Worship; then indeed his Argument had been strong,
That those who do not use them, must worship God irreverently and indecently:
but we say they have a positive Decency and Reverence, and that those who
worship God according to the Prescriptions of our Church, observe an external
Decency and Reverence of Worship. But this he says not one word to, and
therefore I presume cannot; for he has given evidence enough, that he never
wants will, but when he wants power, to be civil to the Church of England.

And therefore he might have spared his pains in proving that God may be
decently and reverently worshipped, without the use of the English Ceremonies;
for no body ever said otherwise that I know of: and the very Argument whereby
he proves it, plainly shows that the Church of England is of that mind; for she
asserts these Ceremonies to be indifferent and alterable: whereas, as he well
urges, they could be neither, if they were absolutely necessary to the Decency
and Reverence of Worship.

But before I proceed, it will be necessary, for the clearer stating of this
matter, to consider the several kinds of Decency, and upon what account we
assert, That our Ceremonies have a positive Decency in them. Now we may
distinguish between the decency of circumstances, and the decency of things or
actions. No action can be performed without some circumstances, and no action
can be decently per^^rmed without decent circumstances, such as ^ime, and
place, and posture, and habit; and this is as absolutely necessary as the
Decency of public Worship is. And to this Head of decent circumstances we
reduce the Surplice, which is a decent habit for the Minister when he performs
the public Offices of Religion; and kneeling at the Lords Supper, which are
two of the three Ceremonies of the Church of England. The Cross in Baptism,
which is the third Ceremony, is not a circumstance of action, and therefore has
not the same kind of Decency, nor the same necessity that the other Ceremonies
have; but it is to be considered as a decent thing or action. Now these two
being of so distinct a nature, must be considered distinctly also; and
therefore I must advertise my Reader, that what I shall now discourse about the
Decency of Worship, and the necessity of i^, concerns only the decent
circumstances of religious actions; such as the Surplice and knee^ing at the
Lords Supper are. As for decent things or actions, such as the sign of the
Cross is at Baptism, I shall discourse of that distinctly by its self. Having
premised this, let us now return to our Reconciler.

This modest man, who is so sensible of his own weakness and proneness to
mistake in judging, Pref. p. 2.
who is so unwilling to do the least disservice to the Church of England, who
has such a hearty honor for his Reverend Superiors; yet with great humility
ventures to confute and expose all the Savoy-Commissioners, Reconcil. p. 39.
who were very grave and reverend Persons.

The Commissioners observed, That the Apostle has commanded that all things be
done decently, and that there may be uniformity; let there be (...) a Rule and
Canon for that purpose: And hence, he says, they infer, that though charity
will move to pity and relieve those that are perplexed and scrupulous, that we
must not break Gods commandment in charity to them; and therefore we must not
perform public Services indecently and disorderly for the sake of tender
Consciences. Which, he adds, is expressly said, to justify their refusal to
abate the imposition of the Ceremonies, especially these three, the Surplice,
the sign of the Cross, and Kneeling.

This seems to me to be very wisely and judiciously urged by our Commissioners;
but our Reconciler thinks they have greatly overshot themselves, when they
assert, That by abating the use and imposition of these Ceremonies, they should
break Gods Commandment, and perform public Service indecently and disorderly.
Truly I think this is a little too much; and our Author has loaded it with a
great many hard consequences, which I see not how they can answer: but the best
of it is, that the Commissioners never said any such thing: I am sure there is
no such thing contained in the words cited by him, which he reduces to this
absurd Proposition.

But do not they say, that they must not break Gods Command in Charity, and
therefore must not perform public Services indecently and disorderly for the
sake of tender Consciences? Yes, they do say so. And was not that said to
justify their refusal to abate the imposition of the Ceremonies? Suppose that
too. Does not this then signify, that by abating the use or imposition of
these Ceremonies, they shall break Gods Commandment, and perform public
Service indecently and disorderly? By no means. This is only one instance of
our Author's proneness to mistake in judging; which I wish he were more
thoroughly sensible of, and that would make him more modest without a
complement.

The Commissioners assert very truly, That the Apostle commands that all things
be done decently and in order. This they take to be Gods Command, as well they
might* and therefore it is a breach of Gods Command to perform public Services
indecently and disorderly; and charity does not oblige them to break any
Command of God, and therefore they must not do this for the sake of tender
Consciences. All this I presume our Reconciler himself will acknowledge. What
then is the fault? Why the Commissioners urge this upon occasion of the Dispute
about abating the Ceremonies of the Church of England; and therefore it proves,
that they thought the Worship of God could not be decently and reverently
performed, without those particular Ceremonies: for otherwise their Argument is
not good. Yes, say I, the Argument is very good without this Supposition; and
therefore the Reconciler's consequence is not good. For I would ask him one
plain Question: Can any particular Church urge this Rule of the Apostle, that
all things be done decently and in order, in justification of their imposition
of some indifferent but decent Rites and Ceremonies in religious Worship, which
are not commanded by God? If any Church may, why not the Church of England?
unless he can prove that our Ceremonies are indecent, irreverent, and
disorderly. If they may not, then the Apostles Rule signifies nothing; for it
will not justify the Governors of the Church in taking care of the Decency
and Reverence of Worship. And if this Rule will justify any one Church in
appointing decent Rites and Ceremonies of Worship, it will equally justify all
the Churches in the World in their Rites and Ceremonies, how different soever
they be from each other, so they be all decent and reverent. And yet I suppose,
should the Advocates of any particular Church, as for instance, the
Commissioners of the Savoy, urge this Apostolical Rule in vindication of the
Ceremonies of their own Church, no man in his wits would hence conclude, that
they did believe the particular Ceremonies of their Church to be the Command of
God, and that religious Worship could not be decently or reverently performed
without them, which would be to condemn all other Churches which did not
observe the same Rites and Ceremonies with themselves. And thus all the several
Church^s in the World, which enjoin nothing but what contributes to the
external Decency and Solemnity of Worship, may by the Apostles Rule justify
themselves; and yet, according to this way of arguing, cannot justify
themselves, without condemning all other Churches: which I confess is very hard
to my understanding.

Does not such a general Rule for the Decency of Worship, require that there
should be some particular Rules of Decency and Order prescribed? Does not such
a general Rule suppose that there may be several Rules given, several Rites and
Ceremonies of Worship prescribed, differing indeed from each other, but all
complying with the general Rule of Decency and Order? for that is a strange
general Rule, which contains but one particular under it. Does not such a
general Rule suppose that the choice of particulars is left to the prudence of
Ecclesiastical Governors, while they keep themselves within the general Rule?
And is not the true reason of this general Rule, and consequently of those
particular Rules and Orders for Worship which are prescribed by virtue of this
general Rule, to prevent a disorderly, irreverent, indecent performance of
religious Worship? And may not Church Governors then assign this as a reason
why they prescribe these Rules, and why they will not alter them, because they
must not perform the public Service indecently and irreverently? If they may,
then their saying so does indeed suppose that those Ceremonies which they
prescribe, are decent and reverent; but it does not suppose that there are no
other decent or reverent ways of performing religious offices, and that whoever
does not use those Ceremonies which they institute and command, must be guilty
of an indecent and irreverent performance of public Worship. For that would be
to overthrow the main Principle by which they act, which is the authority of a
general Rule, which does not prescribe the particular Rules of Decency and
Order; and therefore supposes that there may be several, and that every Church
has liberty to choose for her self.

In short, I would desire our Reconciler to consider, that if Church Governors
must not prescribe any particular Rites and Ceremonies to prevent the disorders
and indecencies of Worship, while there are any other Rites and Ceremonies as
decent and orderly as those which they prescribe, then this Apostolical Rule
signifies nothing; for it can never be reduced into practice. As for instance,
suppose the French Protestants enjoin standing at receiving the Lords Supper,
or at public Prayers, as the Primitive Church did on the Lords days, and
should assign this reason for it, that they must not suffer the Worship of God
to be indecently or irreverently performed, and so break that Commandment, Let
all things be done decently and in order; presently our Reconciler has seven
Arguments to oppose against them, though they may all be reduced to one: That
this makes standing at the Lords Supper not to be an indifferent Ceremony of
humane institution, Reconc. p 39, 40.
but necessary in its own nature, and by a divine command antecedent to all
humane Authority, and that which no humane Authority can alter; and therefore a
necessary part of Worship. For how can they say that they require their
Communicants to receive standing, in obedience to a divine command, and because
they must not worship God irreverently and indecently, unless they believe that
standing at the Lords Supper is not an indifferent Ceremony, but such a
necessary posture, that he who does not stand at receiving, breaks the Command
of God, and receives irreverently and Indecently? And thus the French Church is
utterly ruined, and must no longer enjoin standing at the holy Communion. Well,
the Church of England requires kneeling for the same reason that the French
Church requires standing, and therefore the same Arguments are good against
her; and should any man have the confidence to use the same reason for sitting,
that they must not worship God irreverently and indecently, the same Arguments
would hold good against them also. So that here is a general Rule given to
Church Governors, to take care to preserve Decency and Order in the Worship of
God, and all the parts of it, and yet no Church Governors can reduce this to
practice; for a general Rule cannot be reduced to practice but by particular
Rules and Orders; and yet whoever prescribes any particular Rules of Decency
and Order, and insists on them to prevent irreverence and indecency in Worship,
falls under our Reconcilers censure, and is with all humility entreated to
answer seven terrible Arguments in his own vindication.

The plain Answer to our Reconciler then is this: That the Governors of every
Church are, by virtue of this Apostolical Command, required to prevent the
indecency and irreverence of public Worship; and they have no other way of
doing this, but by prescribing some particular Rules of Decency and Order: And
though the constitutions and usages of several Churches may be very various and
different from each other, yet every constitution which is decent and orderly,
prevents the indecent and irreverent performance of public Worship; and
therefore all Church Governors may justify such Impositions as the
Commissioners at the Savoy did, by saying, that they must not break Gods
Commandment, and therefore must not suffer the public Service to be indecently
and irreverently performed; and therefore must prescribe some particular Rules
of Order and Decency, without either making their own Rites and Ceremonies
essential to the Decency of Worship, or censuring and condemning the decent
usages and customs of other Churches.

But since great part of this Controversy turns upon this hinge, that it is a
very trifling and inconsiderable thing to prescribe Rules for Habits, Postures,
or Gestures in the Worship of God, much more to institute any significant and
symbolical Rites and Ceremonies; that such things have no real and positive
goodness in them, and therefore are not worth contending for: I shall discourse
this matter more particularly, and shall, 1. show how necessary some decent
Rites and Ceremonies are to the external Decency of Worship; which will
justify the Governors of the Church in such Impositions. 2. Wherein the
Decency of religious Worship consists; which will justify the Ceremonies in
use among us, as having a positive Order, Decency, and Reverence. 3. I shall
consider how our Reconciler states this matter.

First. How necessary some decent Rites and Ceremonies are to the external
Decency of Worship.

For though any one particular Habit, or Posture, or Gesture in religious
Worship, is so far indifferent as it is nowhere expressly commanded; yet a
decent Habit and Posture, etc. is not indifferent, but as necessary as external
Worship is, and expressly commanded by this Apostolical Rule, That all things be
done decently and in order. If men will acknowledge that God requires public,
external, and visible Worship, as well as the Worship of the Mind and Spirit,
See Pract. disc. of religious Assembl. 6.2.
which I have largely discoursed elsewhere; it is certain there can be no
visible Worship, but by external and visible signs of honor: for the internal
Devotion of the mind cannot be seen by men, though it be seen by God; and
therefore is not external and visible Worship. See Defen. of Dr. Still. Unr. of
Separ. p. 30.
Can that man be said to pay any visible Honor or Worship to God, whose words
and actions, postures and behavior, signify nothing of Honor or Reverence?

We know of what mighty consequence the Ceremonies of State are, and how
punctual Princes are in exacting them; and when we remember that no Prince can
be so jealous of his Honor as God is of his Worship, we cannot think that the
public Solemnities and external Decen^y of Worship are such inconsiderable
things, when the glory of God is so nearly concerned in them. For the external
and visible glory of God consists in external and visible Worship; and external
Worship is nothing else but external significations of Reverence and Devotion.

And therefore though the particular modes and circumstances of Worship are not
particularly prescribed by God, yet some particular Rites of Worship for
external Decency and Order, are necessary, and ought to be prescribed by those
who have the care of public Worship. For if the external Decency of Worship be
necessary by an Apostolical Precept, and yet this external Decency cannot be
secured without some particular Rules of Decency and Order; then some such
particular Rules are as necessary as Decency and Order is; and whatever
external Rites do contribute to the Decency and Order of Worship, have all that
real goodness in them which ther^ is in Decency and Order: and no man can truly
say, that any such Rites and Ceremonies have no real goodness in them,
wherefore they ought to be commanded, without asserting at the same time, that
there is no real goodness in Decency and Order: for if they are decent and
orderly, they must have all that real goodness which is in Decency and Order.
For it is a manifest Fallacy, to argue that such or such Rites or Ceremonies
are in their own nature indifferent, and not commanded by any positive Law of
God, and therefore have no real or necessary goodness in them, when the end for
which they serve is not indifferent, but necessary, and expressly commanded by
God. For I cannot see but that these men* if they pleased, might as well prove
that those Rites and Ceremonies which serve the ends of Decency and Order, are
not indifferent, but necessary, by virtue of that Law which enjoins the
external Decency of Worship, as that they are not necessary, but indifferent,
because they are not in particular commanded by God. For the same Law which
makes the external Decency of Worship necessary, makes the use of decent Rites
necessary, because the end cannot be attained without the means; but the
natural indifferency of things does not make them indifferent in their use,
when they are to serve a necessary end.

But the fallacy of this consists in the equivocal use of these terms, real
goodness, necessity, indifferency; which therefore I shall briefly explain, and
apply to the present Controversy.

Real goodness may respect the intrinsic nature, or the use of things: In the
first sense we call all moral Virtues good, which have an intrinsic and
eternal reason, such as Prudence, T^mperance, Fortitude, Justice, and all those
natural acts of Homage and Worship which we owe to God: and in this sense, no
Habits, Postures, or Gestures, have any real goodness in them; for they are no
acts nor parts of Worship. This turns all these external observances into
superstition (which our Savior charged the Pharisees with of old, and which we
very justly charge the Church of Rome with at this day) when we place such
Virtue and Sanctity in these things, as to advance them into proper Acts and
Ministries of Religion; the very doing of which, is as acceptable, or more
acceptable to God, than the most real and natural acts of Homage and Worship.

But then there are other things which have no natural nor intrinsic goodness
in them, which yet may be properly enough called, and are really good, with
respect to their use, and the end they serve, if the end be good; and such are
those external Rites and Ceremonies which conduce to the decent and orderly
performance of religious Worship: For if the external Decency of Worship be
good, then those Ceremonies wherein the external Decency of Worship consists,
must be so far good also, and fit to be commanded.

The like may be said about the different kinds of necessity, as far as it
concerns this matter. For some things are necessary in their own nature; as all
those things are which have an internal and immutable goodness, and being
founded on eternal reasons: other things which are not necessary in their own
nature, yet may be necessary by a divine and positive Institution; as the
Levitical Sacrifices and Ceremonies were under the Mosaical Law, and as the
Christian Sacraments are under the Gospel: other things are neither necessary
in their own nature, nor by a positive Law, which yet may be necessary as means
in order to a necessary end. And here are two degrees of necessity: 1. When the
means is so absolutely necessary to the end, that the end cannot be obtained
without it; as it is in all those cases where there is but one way of doing a
thing, which makes that one way as absolutely necessary as the thing it self
is; as, if there were but one Road from London to York, it would be as
necessary to travel that Road, as it is to go to York: but there are very few
such cases as these in matters of Morality. But, 2. There is another kind of
necessity, when there are various means equally fitted and suited to attain the
same end; as in the case before us: the external Decency of Worship is
necessary, but yet there may be different Rites and Modes of Worship, which may
be all very decent. Now in this case all these Rites and Ceremonies are on
different accounts both necessary and indifferent. They are necessary,
considered as to their general nature and use, as they are decent Rites and
Ceremonies of Worship, because the Decency of Worship is necessary; they are
indifferent, considered as such particular Rites and Modes of Worship, because
there are other decent ways of Worship besides them. As to show this in a
parallel case: All wholesome Food is necessary to preserve life and health, and
yet no one particular kind of Food, considered as such a particular kind, is
necessary to our life and health, because men may live very healthfully who use
very different Diets; but yet considered as to its general nature, as wholesome
Food: and so we may say of any particular Diet, that it is necessary to our
life and health. Every particular sort of wholesome Diet has the necessity of a
means and cause, which can produce the effect, though not the necessity of an
only cause, without which the effect cannot be produced. And this is a true
degree of necessity, though not an absolute necessity. It is sufficient to
justify any man in using any wholesome Diet, and to justify any Church in
choosing and determining any decent Rites and Ceremonies of Worship. Food is
necessary to preserve our lives, and external Decency is necessary in religious
Worship; but no particular sort of Food is so necessary that we cannot live
without it, nor any particular Ceremonies so necessary that we cannot worship
God without them; but yet they have the necessity of a cause to produce the
effect, which is all the necessity things of this nature are capable of, the
necessity of a means to an end, though not of an only means: and therefore
they cannot be called indifferent, with respect to producing the effect, for
they have a proper and necessary influence on the effect; but they are
indifferent only with respect to other causes, which can equally produce the
effect.

But this will be better understood by considering the several kinds of things
indifferent. Some things are indifferent in their own nature, as being neither
morally good nor evil; or with respect to a divine Law, as being neither
particularly commanded nor forbid: and upon both these accounts the particular
Ceremonies of Religion may be called indifferent things. But then these
indifferent things, which considered absolutely in their own nature, are
neither morally good nor evil, nor particularly forbid nor commanded by God;
yet with respect to some end they are fitted to serve, or as they are reducible
to some general Law, may lose this absolute indifferency of their nature, and
be capable of being advanced to be the Rites and Ceremonies of religious
Worship. Thus for instance: a white, or black, or red Garment, are all
indifferent Habits; standing, sitting, or kneeling, are all indifferent
Postures; the like may be said of times and places: but when they come to be
applied to Religion, they may not all be equally fitted to the Gravity,
Decency, and Solemnity of religious Worship. And therefore by virtue of that
general Law, That all things be done decently and in order, some of these
Habits or Postures, times and places, are more proper to be made the
Circumstances of Religion; and therefore are not wholly indifferent with
respect to the Decency of Worship, because their natural or instituted
signification makes them fitter for the Service and Ministries of Religion,
than other things are; and therefore antecedently to all Laws, have so much
goodness and necessity in them, that they have an aptitude and fitness to serve
the external Decency of Worship; and by virtue of that Apostolical Precept of
Decency and Order, some or other of them must be used in public Worship. But
then since there may be different Rites and Usages which may equally secure the
Decency of Worship, all these decent Rites and Modes of Worship may still be
called indifferent, as considered in particular, and as compared with each
other: for till the particular Circumstances of Religion are determined by a
just Authority, either of them may be decently used; but none of them are
indifferent, considered in their general nature as decent Rites and Ceremonies,
and as compared with other Rites and Modes of Worship, which are indecent. The
indifferency is not in the nature of the things, considered as decent, and as
opposed to that which is indecent; but the indifferency is only in our choice,
occasioned by the variety of decent Rites. It is not indifferent whether we
will use any decent Ceremonies, or none; it is not indifferent whether we use
decent or indecent Ceremonies; but the only indifferency is in a variety of
decent Ceremonies which we will choose.

From hence I hope by this time it appears, that all decent Rites and
Ceremonies have such a goodness in them, as makes them fit to be commanded: for
though they have no in^ernal nor necessary goodness, considered absolutely in
their own natures* yet with respect to the acts of Worship, they have the
goodness of Decency, which is commanded by an express law, and is essential to
public Worship: and therefore they are not absolutely indifferent, as things
which can neither do good nor hurt, which we may use or may let alone; but are
necessary to the Decency of Worship, as means to an end, or as a cause is to
produce its effect. We may safely say in general, that decent Rites and
Ceremonies are necessary to public Worship, because public Worship cannot be
performed decently without them: and the reason why we cannot say this of any
particular Ceremonies, is not because they are absolutely indifferent in their
own nature considered as decent, but they are indifferent as to our choice and
election, when there is a variety of such decent Ceremonies: for in this case
the Governors of the Church are not confined to any one decent Garb or
Posture, but may command the use of any one that is decent. But yet this is no
Argument against any particular Ceremonies, that they have not so much goodness
or necessity, that they ought to be commanded, because there are other Rites
and Modes of Worship as decent as they: for this Argument will hold against all
particular Ceremonies considered in particular, and so no particular Ceremonies
of Decency must be commanded; and yet this general notion of the Decency of
Worship can never be put in practice, but by the use of some particular decent
Rites.

And I cannot but observe by the way, that the very name of indifferent things
is very unduly and improperly given to those Rites and Ceremonies of Religion,
which serve the ends of Decency and Order; and I doubt not but this has in part
occasioned those fierce Disputes and Contentions about them. For indeed,
indifferent things, which are upon all accounts indifferent, and have neither
any good nor hurt in them, are by no means fit to be commanded in religious
Worship; for this is to trifle in sacred things, which is contrary to the
Decency and Gravity of Worship: but those Ceremonies which serve the ends of
Order and Decency, are not indifferent things, but necessary, considered as
decent. There must, upon some account or other, be an antecedent Decency in
things, before they are fit to be commanded: Church Governors must take care
to maintain the Decency of Worship, but they must find things decent; for by
their mere command they cannot make them so. All decent Rites and Ceremonies
are, by the Apostolical Rule to do all things decently and in order, fitted and
qualified to be made the Ceremonies of Religion, which nothing purely
indifferent is; and all the Authority of Church Governors in this matter, is
only to determine what particular decent Rites of Worship shall be used in
their Church; that is, to apply the Apostles general Rule to particular
instances.

I know very well how jealous and fearful most men are of owning any other
necessity or obligation to observe the external Rites and Ceremonies of
Religion, but what is derived from the Authority of Ecclesiastical or Civil
Governors; and therefore no wonder if in an Age wherein the Authority of the
Church is so much despised, and the Authority of the Prince in matters of
Religion is absolutely denied, they fall under such a general Contempt. But I
confess, I see no reason why any man should be afraid to own some kind of
necessity antecedent to all humane Authority. For, as I have already proved, 1.
The external Decency of Worship is absolutely necessary by an Apostolical
Precept antecedent to all humane Authority. 2. This makes it necessary that
some decent Rites and Ceremonies should be used in religious Worship. 3. This
makes it necessary, that nothing but what is decent should be used. And
therefore, 4. All particular decent Ceremonies have this necessity antecedent
to all humane Authority, that some of them must be used in religious Worship,
and no other must. And therefore, 5. When the Governors of the Church have
determined which particular decent Ceremonies shall be used in religious
Worship, these particular Ceremonies become necessary, not merely by
Ecclesiastical Authority, but by virtue of the Apostolical Command, and their
own natural Decency, which brings them within the compass of that general Rule.
Church Governors have Authority to apply that general Rule to particular
Ceremonies, which have such Order and Decency as comprehends them within that
general Rule: But these Rites and Ceremonies, when they are fixed and
determined, do not derive their obligation merely from the Authority of the
Church, but from the Apostolical Canon; we must observe them not merely because
the Church has commanded them, but because they are in themselves decent, and
so comprehended within the Apostolical Canon, and therefore the proper Object
of Church Authority. The Authority of the Church consists only in applying the
Apostolical Authority to such particular Rites and Ceremonies, as by their own
Decency are fit and qualified to be used in religious Worship* but it is the
Apostolical Authority, as applied by the Church to such particular Ceremonies,
which gives them their necessity and obligation.

Hence Mr. Calvin observes, that those Ecclesiastical Laws which relate to
Discipline and Order, Calvin in 1 Cor. 14.40.
must not be accounted humane Traditions, because they are founded in this
general Precept of doing all things decently and in order, and so receive their
approbation as it were from the mouth of Christ himself.

This, I think, is sufficient to show that the decent Rites and Ceremonies of
Religion have such goodness and necessity, that they ought to be commanded: for
they have the goodness and necessity of Decency, which is enjoined by an
Apostolical Canon. But still the Controversy remains, what this external
Decency of Worship is, and by what Rules we must judge of it: for one man may
account that decent, which another may think has no positive Decency at all; as
it is in our present case. The Church of England retains the use of some
Ceremonies for the sake of Decency; our modest Reconciler, who is very sensible
of his own proneness to mistake, yet ventures to contradict the judgment of the
Church, and affirms that there is no positive Order or Decency in the
Ceremonies of the Church of England, wherefore they ought to be commanded. And
therefore it will be necessary,

Secondly, To consider what the general notion of Decency in religious Worship
is, and by what Rules we must judge of it.

Now in general, the external Decency of religious Worship consists in
performing the Duties of Religion in such a manner as is expressive of Honor,
Reverence, and Devotion. This, I suppose, will not be denied by any man who
acknowledges any such thing as external Worship; but the difficulty is, by what
Rules we must judge of external Honor and Reverence: and yet most men
understand this very well also, when they speak of civil Honor. They know what
Postures, what Actions, what Habit, what Behavior, what Language, what
Address, becomes them, when they approach their Prince, and their Parents, or
any other Persons, whom they ought to honor or respect. And this suggests to
us two general Rules to direct us in religious Worship.

1. That whatever would be deservedly thought a breach of good manners in
common Conversation, or a violation of that civil Respect and Honor which is
due to Princes and all Superiors, can never become the Worship of God. What
God tells the Israelites, who offered the blind, and the lame, and the sick in
Sacrifice, holds good in all other cases: Offer it now to thy Governor; will
he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person, says the Lord of Hosts, 1 Mal.
8. Such words, and actions, and behavior, as would be an affront to the
Majesty of a Prince, do much more unbecome religious Worship, because God is
much greater than the greatest Prince.

2. That whatever is a necessary expression of our Honor and Reverence to men,
as far as it is agreeable with the nature of religious Worship, is in a
peculiar and eminent degre^ due to Almighty God. Many of the external
expressions and signs of Honor both to God and man, must of necessity be
alike, and if not the very same, yet of the same kind and nature. For whether
we intend to honor God or men, it must be done by some visible signs of Honor
which are not necessarily determined either to religious or civil Worship, but
applicable to both. If it be a sign of Honor to our Prince, to be uncovered
in his presence, to deliver our Petitions upon the knee, to come in a decent
apparel, to put on a grave and modest countenance, to keep our distance, etc.
that is, if we must express our Reverence for our Prince in our words and
gestures, in our looks, and habit, and deportment of our selves while we are in
his presence, we must honor God too in the same manner; that is, by the
gravity and reverence of our words and actions, postures, habits, behavior,
etc. when we approach his presence. There may be indeed, and is, a great
difference between the particular expressions of civil and religious Honor:
that which may become a Prince, is not always fit for religious Worship; and
that which is proper for the Worship of God, must not always be given to
Princes. But the Comparison consists only in this, That since the external
signs of Honor consist in our words, postures, looks, habit, behavior, and
suchlike external circumstances of action, as he who does not observe such a
good decorum in all these, as is required in civil Honor, affronts the Majesty
of his Prince; so does he who neglects such a Decency in these things, as is
proper to religious Honor, profane the Worship, and pollute the Name and
Majesty of God. But still we want some Rule whereby to determine what that
Decency is in these external Circumstances, which is proper for religious
Worship: and to explain this, I shall lay down these three Rules.

I. That the external Decency of Worship consists in a peculiar regard to the
Majesty of that God who is the sole Object of our Worship. II. In a regard to
the particular nature of those acts of Worship in which we are employed. III.
In a regard to the quality, conditions, and relations of those Persons who
worship God.
I. The external Decency of Worship consists in a peculiar regard to the
Majesty of that God who is the sole Object of our Worship. This Rule God
himself gives us by the Prophet Malachi: A son honors his father, 1 Mal. 6.
and a servant his master. If then I be a father, where is my honor? if I be a
master, where is my fear? Which plainly signifies, that we must worship God in
such a manner as is expressive of a just Honor and Reverence for his excellent
Majesty: As he adds, v. 14.
For I am a great King, says the Lord of hosts, and my Name is dreadful among
the heathen. Now we express a just regard to the Majesty of God, these two ways.

1. When we worship him with all the external significations of Awe and
Reverence. When our words and actions, postures and behavior, declare to all
the world what a great sense we have of the Majesty of God, and that infinite
distance which is between him and us; that is, when our words are few and wise,
as Solomon directs; when we worship, and fall down, and kneel before the Lord
our Maker, and not only bind our hearts but our bodies to him, and are very
cautious of being guilty of the least indecency in his presence.

2. Then we honor the divine Majesty, when we worship him in a peculiar and
appropriate manner, and do make a visible distinction between the Worship of
God, and all the other actions of our lives. The sanctification of Gods Name
consists in the peculiarity of his Worship, when we separate him from all other
beings, and ascribe incommunicable and eminent Perfections to him; and
therefore that Worship is most suitable to the divine Majesty, to his peculiar
and incommunicable Perfections, which is performed in the most peculiar and
distinguishing manner.

We know the Worship of God under the Law was by his own command performed in
the most peculiar and appropriate manner; by peculiar persons, by Aaron and his
Sons, and the whole Tribe of Levi, who were separated to the service of the
Altar and Tabernacle; in a peculiar place, at the Tabernacle or Temple; and at
peculiar and appropriate times, the Seventh-day Sabbath, and those other annual
Festivals; and by peculiar Rites and Ceremonies. The Priests had their peculiar
Garments to minister in before the Lord, and all the Vessels and Utensils of
the Tabernacle were appropriated to those uses: not to mention now their
Sacrifices, and Oblations, and Incense, etc. Now though these Persons, Times,
Places, Rites, and Ceremonies, which by the Law of Moses were appropriated to
the Worship of God, had something mystical and typical in their signification,
yet the appropriation of peculiar Persons, Times, Places, and Habits, to the
Worship of God, is not mystical and typical; but besides other uses it may
serve, is the natural Decency of Worship, and that which the peculiar
Excellencies of God, and the peculiarity of the divine Worship requires.

The Light of Nature instructed all mankind in this, as much as in the
necessity of religious Worship; insomuch that there never was any Nation which
paid public and solemn Adorations to any Deity, but had their Priests, their
Temples, their holy Garments, and other Ceremonies appropriated to religious
uses. And if it be thought enough to say, that these men were Idolaters, and
their Worship idolatrous, and therefore we cannot learn from them, what is
proper and decent in the Worship of God; we ought to consider, that when the
Devil set up for a God, he challenged divine Honors to himself, and therefore
retained all the external form of religious Worship, though he corrupted it
with impure, and obscene, and inhumane Rites. He would not have valued either
Priests, or their Vestments, or Temples, or Altars, had not these been very
necessary and essential to religious Worship, and always judged so by mankind.
When a Rebel usurps the Throne, he usurps the Honor too of a natural Prince;
and when the Devil would be thought a God, he challenges such a Worship, as
according to the general sense of mankind, is due to God, though he adapts the
particular Rites and Ceremonies of it to his own impure nature, and barbarous
and cruel inclinations.

As for appropriate Persons, Times, and Places, I suppose our Reconciler will
not dispute the fitness and decency of it under the Gospel: And there is as
little reason why he should dispute the Decency of an appropriate and peculiar
habit for religious Worship; which God himself commanded under the Law, and
which has been used in all Religions, and in the early Ages of the Christian
Church. Appropriate Times and Places, are as Jewish as appropriate Habits; and
whoever considers the peculiarity of the divine Worship, cannot think it
indecent, that it should be distinguished from other common actions by peculiar
Times, and Places, and Habits, as well as Persons.

II. The Decency of Worship consists in adapting the Rites and Ceremonies of it
to the nature of those particular acts of Worship in which we are employed.
Thus, when we beg of God the pardon of our sins, or that he would bestow on us
those Blessings which we want, it becomes us to do this with the greatest
humility; and therefore kneeling, and prostration are very decent postures of
Prayer, as being natural expressions of great modesty, and a just sense of our
own unworthiness. When we profess our Faith in God, or offer up Hymns of Praise
and Thanksgiving, standing may be a very decent posture, as expressive both of
our Reverence of God, and of the Vigor and Cheerfulness of our Minds. But I
shall only instance here in kneeling at the Sacrament, which, with our
Reconciler's leave, I must needs think a very decent Ceremony, both as it
distinguishes it from a common Feast, and is very agreeable to the nature of
that holy Mystery.

In this holy Supper we feast indeed at the Table of our Lord; but this is not
a common and ordinary Feast, and therefore an ordinary Table-posture does not
become us, for this is not to discern the Lords body, that is, not to
distinguish it from a common Feast. If the Decency of religious Worship
consists in peculiar and appropriate Ceremonies, certainly there ought to be
some distinguishing marks on this mysterious Feast: And what more proper, than
to receive our Pardon upon our knees, which is here sealed and conveyed to us?
What more proper, than in the highest act of Worship to our Savior, to express
the greatest humility of Soul and Body; and when we receive the greatest and
most ample favors from him, to acknowledge our own unworthiness, and pay the
lowest Adorations to him? I could be tempted to say, that if any particular
Ceremony in Religion be necessarily determined by an innate Decency and
Fitness, kneeling at the Lords Table is.

III. The Decency of Worship consists in a respect to the quality, conditions,
and relations of those who worship God. This Rule I learn from that reason the
Apostle gives, why a man should pray uncovered, 1 Cor. 11.4, 5, 6, 7.
and a woman covered, to signify the natural Authority of the man, and
Subjection of the woman. For the same reason he would not suffer a woman to
speak in the Church, chapter 14.34, 35.
because they must be under obedience; for to teach, is an act of Authority,
and therefore does not become her state of Subjection. 1 Timothy 2.11, 12.
And there are other cases to which this may be applied; but all that I shall
at present observe, is the use of distinct Habits for separate and consecrated
Persons in the Worship of God. The Apostle, it seems, thought it a piece of
Decency, that their external Garb and Habit, when they worshipped God, should
be proper and suitable to their state and condition; should represent and
signify the Authority and Government of the man, and the Subjection of the
woman. And then I would fain know a reason why this is not decent for the
Ministers of Religion too, that they should perform the public Offices of
Religion in such a distinct Habit, as may both signify the peculiarity of
their Function, and that holiness and purity of mind, which becomes those who
minister in holy things. A white Linen Garment has always been thought very
proper for this purpose: the twenty four Elders, who sat about the Throne, 4
Rev. 4.
are represented as clothed in white Linen Garments: nay, that great multitude
which stood before the Throne, 7 Rev. 9.
and before the Lamb, were clothed with white Robes. Nay, this is one
privilege which was granted to the Wife of the Lamb, 19 Rev. 8.
that she should be clothed with fine Linen clean and white. Which I allege
only for this purpose, to show that a white Linen Garment is very proper for
the Ministries of Religion, and very expressive both of the Honor and Purity
of the Ministerial Function: for otherwise it would not be represented as the
habit of those Elders who sat round the Throne, nor as the habit of the Lambs
Wife: for all these prophetical descriptions must borrow their figures and
resemblances from earthly things. And if a white Linen Garment were not proper
to signify the Dignity, and Honor, and Holiness of such Persons, it could not
properly be used to represent and signify that in Heaven, which it does not
signify on Earth. And if a white Linen Garment do very aptly ^ignifie both
the Honor and Purity of such a Function, and it be a piece of Decency to use
such Habits in religious Worship as are proper to the state, condition, or
relation of the Worshippers, we may certainly conclude, that a Surplice or a
white Linen Garment, is a very decent Habit for the Ministers of Religion,
when they perform the public Offices of Religion.

I confess I cannot see what can reasonably be objected against this. For why
should not the Ministers of Religion worship God in a Habit expressive of the
Dignity and Holiness of their Office, as well as men and women in such Habits
as signify the natural Honor and Dignity or Subjection of these different
Sexes? Is not Religion as much concerned in the Honor and Purity of the
Ministerial Office, as in such oeconomical relations? And is it not as fitting
then to signify one, as the other, by distinct and appropriate Habits?

If it be said, that these external signs are nothing worth, and that the
Honor of the Ministry is more concerned in the Purity of their Lives, than in
the whiteness of their Garments; this answer might have been given to St. Paul
when he commanded the men to pray uncovered, and the women covered, That the
Obedience and Subjection of Wives to their own Husbands is much more valuable
than their praying covered, in token of such Subjection. But it seems S. Paul
thought that the Decency and Solemnity of Worship did require the external
signs and significations of this, though every body knows that a sign is not
so valuable as the thing signified.

This, I hope, is a sufficient Vindication of those Rites and Ceremonies of
Religion, which are also the necessary circumstances of action; and it is a
wonderful thing that this should ever be a Controversy, whether the Governors
of the Church have any Authority in these matters. The Dissenters themselves,
at other times, will acknowledge that the Church has Authority to prescribe the
necessary circumstances of action; and I take that to be necessary, without
which an action cannot be performed, as, I think, it cannot be, without time,
place, habit, and posture. And since different times, places, habits, postures,
may be lawful, and some are necessary, it must be left to the prudence of
Governors to determine which shall be observed according to the Rules of
Decency and Order.

And when the determination of these things is necessary, it seems a more
ridiculous thing to me, to quarrel with Habits and Postures for their
signification, if they signify well: for there is no other Rule, that I know
of, See Defen. of Dr. Still. Unr. of Separ. p. 41, 42.
to determine the Decency of religious Circumstances, but by their
signification; as I think sufficiently appears from what I have already
discoursed. That which signifies nothing, is neither decent nor indecent; that
which signifies ill, any thing unworthy of God, or unsuitable to the nature of
religious Worship, is indecent; that which signifies well, the Devotion and
Reverence of our Minds, our religious Awe for God, or that peculiar Honor we
have for him, is a very decent Circumstance: and yet this is all which men
raise so much Clamor about, under the formidable name of Symbolical Ceremonies.

But as I observed before, there are another sort of Ceremonies which are not
the necessary circumstances of action, but yet may be very decently used, and
do contribute to the Gravity and Solemnity of religious actions. Of this nature
is the sign of the Cross in Baptism, which is no necessary circumstance, for
Baptism may be very decently and reverently administered without it; but it is a
thing very fitting and decent to be done at the time of Baptism, and which adds
to the external Solemnity of it. Our Church has enjoined no other Ceremony of
this nature, but only the sign of the Cross; but yet it will be necessary to
discourse something briefly about the nature, the decency, and lawfulness of
such Ceremonies as these, and in particular about the Cross in Baptism.

First, As to the nature of these Ceremonies, I shall observe three things;
which I presume will contain all that is necessary to be known about them.

1. That though they are symbolical and significant Ceremonies, they are not
merely for signification; that is, they are not mere Images and Pictures of
things, which would transform Religion into an external piece of Pageantry. A
great many such things indeed have been used, and are still in use in the
Church of Rome; as, dressing up a Baby, and rocking it in a Cradle, as a Figure
and Emblem of Christ's birth, about the time of his Nativity, and suchlike
childish and ludicrous shows, which unbecome the Gravity and Simplicity of the
Christian Religion. Such mean Representations as these, are only for the
entertainment of Children, but do mightily debase the Spirits of men, and
detain them by earthly Figures and Similitudes from contemplating those sublime
Mysteries. God never instituted such a Religion as this, nor did Christ and his
Apostles give any countenance or authority to it. The Law of Moses indeed
consisted of a great many significant Rites and Ceremonies, such as
Circumcision, Washings, Purifications, Sacrifices, etc. many of which were
instituted purely for their signification; but then the design of it was to
teach them by such external Rites those things, which at that time he did not
think fit to give any express Laws about, nor to make a plain and clear
revelation of. The Rites and Ceremonies of their Law were either typical of
Christ and the state of the Gospel, or had a moral signification to instruct
them in those Evangelical Graces and Virtues, which God did not think fit then
expressly to command. Now in such a dispensation as this, it did highly become
the divine Wisdom by such external Signs and Figures to give some hints and
intimations of diviner Mysteries, and a more excellent Philosophy, to devout
and inquisitive minds: The design of these legal Ceremonies was to teach them
that by Hieroglyphics, which it was not yet time to teach them by plain
Precepts and express Revelations. But to transform the plain Precepts and
Revelations of the Gospel into earthly Figures, is to teach men backward, to
draw them off from the immediate contemplation of pure and naked Truth to court
a Picture and a Shadow, and to dote upon earthly Figures and Images of it. And
therefore it is a reproach to the wisdom of the Mosaical Dispensation, to call
such fooleries as these, Jewish Rites and Superstitions. There was a great deal
of hidden and secret Wisdom contained in and taught by those Rites, which at
that time they had no other way to learn; but such significant Ceremonies as
are merely for signification, in the Christian Religion do only obscure and
debase divine Mysteries, are wholly useless, when we are instructed in those
things by plain and express Revelations, which these Ceremonies teach, or
rather darken by earthly Figures; and they corrupt a Spiritual Worship, which
hereby degenerates into external pomp and show.

2. These Ceremonies therefore, though they are significant, must not be mere
teaching Signs, which are out of date under the Gospel, and a reproach to the
clear Revelations and perfect light of it; but are visible signs and
expressions of some Grace, or Virtue, or Duty, which we at that time exercise,
or profess the exercise of. As to give you some instances of such Ceremonies as
were both allowed and practiced by Christ and his Apostles.

13 Joh. 4, 5.
Christ washed his Disciples feet, as an Example of Humility as well as
Kindness; which he recommended to their imitation; and this seems to be
literally practiced by them after his death, 1 Timothy 5.10.
and was continued in some Churches to after-Ages. But now we must not look
upon this Ceremony only as a sign of Humility, but as a real exercise of it.
In those Countries, to wash the feet of any man, was a servile work, and as
mean an Office as they could do for one another; and therefore it was a visible
exercise of Humility in our Savior to do it, and so it was in them too, who
imitated him in it; but did withal signify all other acts of Kindness,
Humility, and Condescension, which by that act of washing the feet they did
profess to each other. And should men wash each others feet still, without the
exercise of that Humility with which our Savior did it, it would not be a
religious Ceremony, but a ludicrous piece of Superstition.

Thus the Kiss of Charity, or the holy Kiss, which was used in the Apostles
days, was not a mere significant Sign, but a real exercise and expression of
that Brotherly love which they had, and which they expressed to each other; and
those who kissed without this divine Charity, profaned the Ceremony. Thus the
Love-Feast, which was in use also in the Apostles days, where all Christians,
the rich and the poor, eat together at a common Table, was not only a
significant Sign of mutual Love, but an Exercise and a visible Profession of
it; and therefore the Apostle severely reproves them for such disorders at that
holy Feast, as were inconsistent with that Brotherly Love and Charity which
they professed in it.

Thus the sign of the Cross, as it is used in our Church at Baptism, is not
merely for signification, but is a visible Profession of our Faith in a
crucified Savior, and a Promise and Engagement of our selves to take up his
Cross, and to suffer as he did, rather than to deny him. In token that we shall
not hereafter be ashamed to confess the Faith of Christ crucified, and manfully
to fight under his Banner against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, and to
continue Christ's faithful Servants and Soldiers unto our lives end.

But yet we must observe farther, that though these Ceremonies may be called
religious Actions or Ceremonies, yet they are not properly acts of Religion in
a strict sense, as that signifies acts of Worship. They are religious actions,
as being done upon a religious account, as being the Exercise or Profession of
some Virtue; but we do not properly worship God in them, no more than we do by
being meek, and humble, and charitable, and professing the Faith of Christ
before men. To kiss each other, and to eat together at a common Table, is a
civil action, and a testimony of civil kindnesses and respects; but when this
is done upon a religious account, as a testimony and expression of Christian
Charity, it becomes a holy Kiss, and a religious Feast. These Ceremonies are as
acceptable to God, as those Duties and Graces are which we exercise and profess
in them, if we be sincere; but they are no parts nor acts of Worship, though
performed in the time of Worship.

This short account of the nature of these Ceremonies, shows us what a
ridiculous pretense it is to charge them with being Sacraments of humane
Institution. Some tell us, that the definition our Church gives of a Sacrament,
belongs to such Ceremonies as these; that it is an outward visible sign of an
inward spiritual Grace; and here they stop, as if this were the full definition
of a Sacrament: but our Church adds, given unto us, and ordained by Christ
himself, as a means whereby we receive the same, and as a pledge to assure us
thereof. So that there can be no such thing as a humane Sacrament, because
there can be no Sacrament but what is ordained by Christ. True, say they, but
that is the fault of it, that when upon other accounts it has the nature of a
Sacrament, it has not that authority which should make it a divine, and
therefore it is only a humane Sacrament. These Ceremonies then it seems would
be Sacraments, if they had the authority of Christ: then there is one Sacrament
more than they think of, viz. washing the Disciples feet; which was instituted
by Christ himself, and is as much an outward visible sign of an inward
spiritual Grace, as the Cross in Baptism, or any other significant Ceremony can
be; but it wants what our Church adds to make up the nature of a Sacrament,
that it is ordained as a means whereby we receive this spiritual Grace, and as
a pledge to assure us thereof: Which shows, that no Ceremony, how symbolical
soever it be, can be a Sacrament, which is not the Seal of a Covenant and
Promise, and an instituted means for the conveyance of Grace.

But to let that pass: the nature of these Ceremonies does not consist in this,
That they are outward visible signs of an inward spiritual Grace; but that they
are the visible Exercise or Profession of some Grace or Duty. Their nature does
not consist in being signifying signs to teach a Duty, but in signifying the
actual Exercise or Profession of some Duty: and this, I suppose, does not make
them Sacraments.

Secondly, Let us now consider the Decency of such Ceremonies, and I cannot
imagine what dispute there can be about it. For if the Exercise or Profession
of such Virtues be decent, then the external Rite and Ceremony whereby such a
Profession is made, if it be used in a grave manner, and upon a solemn
occasion, and be a proper and natural sign of such a Profession, must be
decent too. If it be a decent thing for Christians to express their mutual love
and charity to each other, when they come together to worship God, and to offer
up their united Prayers to their common Father, or to feast at the Table of
their common Lord and Savior; then, to kiss one another, and to feast at a
common Table, which are proper and significant expressions of mutual Charity,
must be decent also at such times. And thus they were used by the Primitive
Christians; they used to kiss each other after Prayers, upon which account it
is called Signaculum orationis, or the Seal of Prayer. Thus they kissed each
other before their receiving the Lords Supper, and began this mysterious Supper
with a Love-Feast, which was a common Table for the poor and the rich. And if
it were decent at such times to express their servent charity to each other,
the external Rite and Ceremony of this must be decent also: for inward Charity
cannot be expressed but either by words or signs; and visible signs, which are
also the external acts and exercise of Charity, are to be preferred before
words.

Thus if it be decent upon some solemn occasions to make a public profession
of our Faith in a crucified Christ, and our resolution to follow him even to
the Cross, and rather to die with him than deny him; there cannot be a more
solemn occasion for this, than at our Baptism, when we are received into the
Communion of his Church, this being an express Condition of our Discipleship,
to take up our Cross and follow him: and therefore also there cannot be a more
proper sign and emblem of this Profession, than to receive the sign of the
Cross in our foreheads: for, to receive the sign of the Cross, is a natural
profession of our crucified Lord, and a suffering Religion; and to receive this
sign in our foreheads, which are the seat of Modesty and Bashfulness, is a
visible Profession that we are not and will not be ashamed of the Cross.

And as this is decent in it self, so it contributes to the Gravity and
Solemnity of that religious Administration, as all awful, grave, and solemn
Ceremonies do. If we consider this as the profession of the Person baptized,
nothing can be more decent at such a time, than to confess a crucified Christ,
(under whose command we then lift our selves) and our resolution to fight under
the Banner of the Cross. If we consider it as the Profession of the Church, who
by her public Ministers solemnly owns the Doctrine of the Cross, and declares
it as the Condition of our Discipleship, when she receives any persons into the
Communion of the Church; is there any thing unbecoming in this? Nay, can any
thing be more comely and decent, than upon such solemn occasions to make such a
solemn Profession of the Religion of the Cross?

Thirdly, As for the lawfulness of these Ceremonies, I think there is no need
to prove that, after what I have now discoursed; for they being nothing else
but the visible Exercise or Profession of some Grace or Duty upon fit and
solemn occasions, they cannot be unlawful, unless the external Acts and visible
Profession of a known Duty can be unlawful. If it is our duty to make a public
Profession of our Faith in a crucified Savior, no time can be more proper for
such a Profession than the time of our Baptism, no sign can more naturally
signify this Profession than the sign of the Cross. Now I would gladly hear a
wise reason, why it should be unlawful to make such a Profession as this at our
Baptism, or unlawful to do it by signs as well as words. I would desire to know
why we may not profess our Faith in a crucified Savior by the sign of the
Cross, as innocently and decently, as make our Appeals to God in an Oath, by
laying our hand upon the Bible and kissing it. Nay, I would desire to know why
the Church may not as well receive men into her Communion with the sign of the
Cross, as a solemn Profession of a crucified Savior, and a suffering Religion,
as Constantine make the Cross his Banner and Royal Standard; and yet would any
Christian refuse to fight under a General who bore the Cross in his Banner?

If you say, that this is only a civil Sign and Ceremony, I deny it, and
affirm, that it was as much a religious Ceremony as the sign of the Cross in
Baptism; unless any man think that there can be no Religion in the Field, but
only in the Church. That which makes it a religious Ceremony either upon a
man's forehead, or in the Emperors Standard, is, that it is done upon a
religious account, as a public and visible profession of our Faith in a
crucified Savior: and I think the Cross in the Emperors Standard displayed in
the open Field in the sight of Pagans, is a more public and visible Profession
of the Cross, than what is privately transacted in the Church, and leaves no
visible sign behind it. And I cannot imagine why any man should not as much
scruple to fight under such a visible Banner of the Cross, as to receive an
invisible sign of it upon his forehead, since the Profession, the Ceremony,
and the Religion of it is the same.

It is true, such Ceremonies as these ought not to be numerous, nor too
familiarly used, nor upon slight occasions; for this burdens Religion, and
makes them degenerate into Superstition or Formality: But our Church has
retained but one such Ceremony, and that used but once in a man's life, upon the
most solemn occasion in the world, at our admission to Baptism: and it argues
very little understanding in our Reconciler, to reproach the Church for this,
and scornfully to ask, Why she rejects crossing of the breast, and retains
crossing in the forehead; P. 297.
why she rejects crossing at the consecration of the Eucharist, and the
Baptismal Water, and retains it at the baptizing of the Infant; why she rejects
Exorcism, Chrysom, Unction, Dipping, trine Immersion, and retains the Cross in
Baptism. It does not become me to censure the Practice of the ancient Church in
any of these Ceremonies; but I think, if the ancient Church cannot be condemned
for these things, our Church cannot. One Ceremony is more easily justified than
twenty, and the using of it once upon a very solemn occasion, than a too
familiar use; especially where it cannot so properly be called a professing
Sign: which is all I undertake for.

The only Objection I can think of against the sign of the Cross in Baptism,
as a professing Sign, is this: That there is no need of such a Profession as
this, because we make the very same Profession at our Baptism, which represents
and signifies our conformity to the Death and Resurrection of Christ; and
therefore this is a vain and superfluous addition to the Sacrament of Baptism,
and does tacitly charge that divine Institution with defect. I answer, The same
Objection, for the very same reason, might have been made against the
Love-Feast, which was celebrated at the very same time with the Lords Supper,
to signify that Brotherly love and charity which was and ought to be among the
Disciples of Christ: and yet that heavenly Feast of the Lords Supper does not
only signify our Union to Christ our Head, but our Union to each other, as
Members of the same Body; and therefore required the actual exercise of
Brotherly love in receiving. And yet this is acknowledged on all hands to be an
Apostolical Institution, observed by the Apostles themselves, and all the
Apostolical Churches of those days.

The same Answer then will serve for both: That Christian Love and Unity is
included in the Supper of our Lord, and a patient suffering for the Name of
Christ, in the Sacrament of Baptism; but neither of these Sacraments were
instituted to signify these Duties, nor do they signify them otherwise than
collaterally and consequentially. The proper use of these Sacraments is not to
signify and represent a Duty, but to convey divine Blessings and Virtues to
us: The Pardon of our sins, and the Gift of the holy Spirit in Baptism, which
incorporates us into the Body of Christ, and the continual supplies of Grace,
and renewals of Pardon in the Lords Supper, where we feast on the Sacrifice of
Christ, and partake in the Merits of it. But then as we all feast on the same
Sacrifice of Christ, eat of the same Bread, and drink of the same Cup, this
consequentially signifies, that we are Members of the same Body, and that we
ought to love one another with the most tender and natural affections. But the
mutual love and charity of Christians being so great a Duty of the Christian
Religion, and so proper to be exercised at this time (for which reason they
used also to kiss each other before receiving), and yet not directly and
primarily represented in this holy Feast, the Apostles did not think it any
derogation from the Lords Supper, to appoint a common Table for all Christians
to eat at, as a Testimony and Exercise of mutual love and charity with each
other. When we feast with any person, it is a direct signification that we are
in a state of Friendship and Reconciliation with him at whose Table we eat; but
it does not so immediately signify, that all the Guests who eat at the same
Table are Friends to each other. It is reasonable indeed that it should be so,
and God expects and requires that it should be so; and none are welcome at Gods
Table, who do not come in perfect love and charity. But I say, the Lords
Supper, considered as a symbolical Rite, does not primarily and directly
signify it: and therefore the Apostles thought fit to signify and profess
this by a common Table, where Christians first eat and drank together as
Friends; and having thus testified their mutual kindness to each other, they
were the better prepared to eat together at the Table of their common Lord and
Savior, and receive the Tokens and Pledges of his love to them all. So that
this Love-Feast did not at all entrench upon the Lords Supper, it being
instituted for a different end, though in subserviency to it.

And thus it is in Baptism. It is the Sacrament of our Initiation, whereby we
are made Members of the Body of Christ, and entitled to all the Blessings of
the New Covenant; but the external Ceremony of Baptism, whereby we are said to
be implanted into the likeness of Christ's death, does not primarily signify
our laying down our lives for Christ, (though that be a necessary Condition of
our Discipleship) but it signifies our new Birth, our spiritual conformity to
the death of Christ, by dying to sin, and walking in newness of life; as St.
Paul discourses in the 6 Romans And therefore taking up the Cross being by Christ
himself made such an express Condition of our Discipleship, the Primitive
Christians thought it very fitting to make a visible Profession of this, by
receiving the sign of the Cross on their foreheads, at the same time that they
were received into the Church by Baptism: which does no more derogate from the
perfection of Baptism, than their forms of renouncing the Devil with their
faces toward the West, and spitting at him. Those constant Persecutions which
in those days attended Christianity, made this a very useful and necessary
Ceremony: And it may be observed, that no Christians in any Age of the Church,
ever scrupled to receive the sign of the Cross on their foreheads, but those
who think the Doctrine of the Cross now out of date, and can as profanely scoff
at a suffering Religion, as the Heathens did at a crucified Christ: None but
those, who profess Treasons and Rebellions for Christ, and never think it their
duty to suffer, but when they want ^trength and power to fight for him; which
^ives little encouragement to Christian Prin^es to part with this symbolical
Sign and Ce^^mony of a suffering Religion.

But there is one Objection which our Reconciler makes against the positive
Order and Dcency of these Ceremonies which a^e used in the Church of England,
Prot. Rec. p 38
which is fit to be considered in this place; and that is, That Christ and his
Apostles did not use them, and therefore they either worshipped God indecently,
or the use of them is not necessary to the Decency of Worship. Now this is
sufficiently answered by what I have already discoursed, That though the
Decency of public Worship be a necessary Duty, and some decent Rites and
Ceremonies be necessary to the external Decency of Worship, yet where there is
choice of such Ceremonies, which are very decent, we cannot say, that such or
such particular Ceremonies are absolutely necessary, because the Decency of
Worship may be preserved by the use of other decent Rites: and therefore Christ
and his Apostles might worship very decently without the use of these
Ceremonies, and the Church of England may worship very decently with them. But
yet, to show the folly of this Argument, we may consider,

1. That all the time Christ was upon Earth, he never set up any public
Worship distinct from the Jewish Worship. He lived in Communion with the Jewish
Church, an^ worshipped God with them at the Temple, o^ in their Synagogues. And
it is as pleasant (...) Argument to prove that there is no reason (...) using
such Ceremonies now, because (...) did not use them, as it would be to proves
tht we must not use such Ceremonies as are pro^er to the Christian Worship,
because they wre not used in the Temple or Jewish Synagog^es in our Saviors
days: for he never performed any act of public Worship any-where else.

But you will say, Christ instituted the Sacrament of his own Body and Blood,
but he neither received kneeling himself, nor commanded his Apostles to do so.
Now in answer to this, it is not evident to me, that Christ received at all
himself, much less does it appear in what posture he received. It is said in
St. Matthew and St. Mark, that after the institution of this holy Supper, when
he had blessed the Bread and brake it, and divided it among his Disciples, and
commanded them all to eat of it, and had likewise took the Cup, and having
given thanks, commanded them all to drink of it, that he added, But I say unto
you, I will not henceforth drink of this fruit of the vine, 26 Mat. 29 14 Mark
25.
until that day that I drink it new with you ^n my Fathers kingdom. From whence
some ^ay conclude, that he did at that time drink (...) the Cup, though he
tells them it was the (...) time he would drink of it. But St. Luke (...) us,
22 Luke 15, 16, 17.
that these words were spoke at eating (...) Passover, before the institution
of his last Super, and then they are a plain demonstrati^^, that he did not
drink of the Sacramental W^e: and it is not likely that he should fea^ on the
symbols of his own Body and Blo^. But suppose he had, it had been as imprper
for him to have received kneeling, as it ^s decent in us to do so; for this had
been ^n act of Worship to himself. And though we do not read in what posture
the Apostle received, yet I am pretty confident they did receive in their
ordinary eating posture. For it is very improbable, that our Savior would
require them to kneel; for he exacted no act of Worship from them while he was
on Earth; they never prayed to him as their great High Priest: and we may as
well argue, that we must not pray to him now he is in Heaven, because he did
not command his Apostles to pray to him while he was on Earth, as that we must
not worship him when we approach his Table, nor receive that mysterious Bread
and Wine with all humility of Soul and Body now he is in Heaven; because at the
first institution of this holy Supper, while he was still visibly present wit^
them, he did not command his Apostles t^ receive kneeling.

Nor is it likely the Apostles would do (...) of themselves, any more than that
they (...) any other act of religious Worship to Chst on Earth: for though they
heard the wrds of institution, yet at that time they understod nothing of the
mystery of it; as it is impo^ble they should, who understood so little o^ his
Death and Passion, much less of the merorious Virtue and Expiation of his Blood.

2. As for the Apostles, who founed a Christian Church, and set up Christian
Worship after the Death and Resurrection of our Savior, what particular Rites
and Ceremonies of Worship they used, we are no certain; though that they were
careful of the Decency of Worship, is evident from this Apostolical Precept,
That all things be done decotly and in ord^r. And their Love Feasts an^ the
holy Kiss, are a plain proof that they were not without their religious Rites
also. And if we may judge of the Apostolical Churches by the succeeding Ages of
the Church, even while they were under Sufferings and Persecutions, there was
no Age of the Church: till the Reformation, so free from Rituals and
Ceremonies, as the Church of England is at this day.

Thirdly, Let us now consider, how our Reconciler states this matter; and here
I shall once for all examine whatever I can find in his Book pertinent to this
Argument.

I. Now in the first place I observe, that our Reconciler agrees with Bishop
Tailor, That it is for ever necessary that things should be done in the Church
decently and in order; Prot. Rec. c. 8. p. 313.
and that the Rulers of the Church, who have the same power as the Apostles had
in this, must be the perpetual Judges of it. And he adds, It cannot therefore
rationally be denied, that the Rulers of the Church have power to command
things which belong unto the positive Order and Decency of the Service of God.
This is so fair a Concession, that methinks we might agree upon it: but he
immediately undoes all again, and says, That this Command affords no ground for
the imposing the Ceremonies now used in the Church of England, because it has
been proved already, that they have nothing of this nature in them; that is,
nothing of positive Order or Decency. But what he says has been proved already,
I have made appear is not proved by him yet; and I hope I have proved the
contrary. But if the Ceremonies of our Church, which are nothing else but the
decent circumstances of action, or contribute to the Gravity and Solemnity of
religious actions, have no positive Decency, and therefore cannot be prescribed
by the Church; I desire to know what that positive Decency is, which the Church
has authority to command: for if it does not extend to the determination of the
necessary circumstances of action, I cannot see that the Church has any
authority in matters of Decency. And if, as the Bishop says, the Rulers of the
Church are the perpetual Judges and Dictators in such matters, which he seems
to assent to, how does it become the great modesty of our Reconciler to assert,
That there is no positive Decency and Order in those Ceremonies which the
Church has appointed for the sake of Decency and Order? If the Rulers of the
Church be the proper Judges of this, how does our Reconciler come by this
authority to judge his Judges?

II. Our Reconciler adds a limitation of this Rule, That all things be done
decently and in order, in the words of the same Reverend Bishop, Ibid.
That it is not to be extended to such Decencies as are only ornament, but is
to be limited to such as only rescue from confusion. The reason is, because
the Prelates and spiritual Guides cannot do their duty, unless things be so
orderly that there is no confusion. But if it can go beyond this limit, then it
can have no natural limit, but may extend to Sumptuousness, to Ornaments of
Churches, to rich Vtensits, to Splendor and Majesty: for all that is decent
enough, and in some circumstances very fit. But because this is too subject to
abuse, and gives a secular power into the hands of Bishops, and an authority
over men's estates and fortunes, and is not necessary for Souls, nor any part of
spiritual Government, it is more than Christ gave to his Ministers.

How much our Reconciler has injured this learned Prelate by his numerous
citations of his words, to a quite different sense from what he intended, shall
be made appear before I leave this Argument; though he has dealt no worse by
him, than he has by Christ and his Apostles, whose words ^e has as grossly
abused.

That this excellent Bishop had no design in this or any thing else which our
Reconciler transcribes from him, to reflect on the Rites and Ceremonies of the
Church of England, I have more than one reason to believe, as will appear
presently: and therefore though I could not give an account of every particular
expression, yet none but such a Protestant Reconciler would expound any of his
words in contradiction to his declared sense of things. I am sure what he here
says, if it be applied to the Ceremonies of the Church of England, has no
reason in it; and that is a sufficient Argument to me, that he never meant it
so. For,

1. Supposing this to be true, That this Rule is not to be extended to such
Decencies as are only ornament, this does not concern the Church of England,
which has no such Ceremonies as are merely for ornament. And therefore the
Church has authority enough to prescribe the decent Rites and Modes of Worship,
though she have not authority to make her Worship gay and theatrical; which
indeed is not decent, and therefore not contained within this Rule. The Bishop
never thought of the Church of England, when he gave this Rule, but had his eye
upon the fantastic Ceremonies and Amusements of the Romish Worship.

2. But yet when he says, That this Rule is not to be extended to such
Decencies as are only ornament, it is evident that he does not exclude all
Ornaments neither, if they serve any ends of Religion beside. For if they be
really such Decencies and Ornaments as become Religion and Christian Worship, I
cannot imagine any reason why they should not be included in the Rule of
Decency and Order. Such Decency and Order as is opposed to confusion and
disorder, is always necessary, and may always be had, what state soever the
Church is in, while there is any public face of a Church. Ornamental*
Decencies cannot always be had, and therefore do not always oblige, as in the
case of Persecutions. But why any man should say that the Authority of the
Church does not extend to Ornaments, when it is in her power to adorn the
Worship of God, I cannot guess. Must there be no difference between the
afflicted, and prosperous state of the Church? When God has made in all other
things a distinction between Necessaries, Conveniences, and Ornaments, does he
allow nothing but what is barely ne^essary to his own Worship? It is possible
indeed, that men may mistake in what they call the Ornaments of Religion, as
the Church of Rome evidently does; but if they do not mistake, and have it in
their power to give an external beauty and luster to Religion, do they exceed
their Commission in this too? The Bishop acknowledges, that Sumptuousness,
Ornaments of Churches, rich Vtensils, Splendor, and Majesty, is decent enough,
and in some circumstances very fit; and I should much have wondered, had he
denied it. Now when these things are decent and fit, does it exceed the
Authority of the Church to appoint them? Can any thing be decent and fit to be
done in any circumstances, which the Church has no Authority to do?

And therefore when he says, that mere Ornaments are not comprehended within
the Rule of Decency and Order, he means no more by it, than that the Governors
of the Church are not so strictly obliged to take care of the external
Ornaments of Religion, which cannot be had at all times, as they are of the
Decency and Order of Worship. Ornaments are very fitting, when they can be had;
but the Bishop has not authority to oblige the People to the charges and
expenses of such Ornaments, unless they freely and willingly consent. And that
this is his meaning, appears from the Reasons he gives of it: That this is too
subject to abuse, and that it gives a secular power into the hands of Bishops,
and an authority over men's Estates and Fortunes: Which are good Arguments only
upon this supposition, that the Bishop had such authority as to oblige his
People to such expenses as he should think fit for the Ornaments of Religion;
but suppose devout people liberally contribute to such pious uses, if his
Authority and Commission does not extend to Ornaments, he must not receive
their money, nor adorn the Church with it; if he may, then his Authority
extends to Ornaments, though he has no Authority over men's Estates: for he must
not do any thing in the Church, which he has no authority to do. But this is
not necessary for men's Souls. Right; and therefore not an absolute and
necessary Duty: otherwise, how does it appear that the Bishops Authority
extends only to Necessaries? Why may not the Honor of God, and the external
Beauty of his Worship, be considered in Religion, as well as the salvation of
men's Souls? Why may not spiritual advantages find place in our Worship, as well
as what is barely necessary? But it is no part of spiritual Government. Right;
not to seize men's Estates to adorn the Worship of God. By these Reasons he
proves, that this is more Authority than Christ has given to his Ministers:
From whence we may easily learn what kind of Authority he means, such an
absolute Authority to adorn Religion, as gives the Bishop authority over men's
Estates for such prous uses. But Christ has given Authority to his Ministers to
take care of the Decency of Worship; and therefore their Authority is of equal
extent with the Decencies of Religion.

3. When that Reverend Bishop says, That Rule, Let all things be done decently
and in order, must be limited to such as only rescue from confusion, he must
have some larger notion of confusion than the usual signification of that word
will justify: for men may avoid all confusion, and yet neglect all the natural
Decencies of religious Worship. The Meetings of Quakers may be very orderly,
without any confusion, and yet without any Decency. And the reason the Bishop
assigns for this, Because the Prelates and spiritual Guides cannot do their
Duty, unless things be so orderly that there be no confusion, is a very good
reason against confusion; but is no reason at all to prove that the Rule of
Decency and Order extends no farther than to rescue from confusion, in the
common acceptance of the word: for there is something more required in
religious Assemblies, than merely that the Bishop or Pastor may do his Duty
without disturbance and confusion; viz. that the People worship God in such a
decent manner as becomes the divine Majesty. The external Decencies and
Solemnities of Worship, are an essential part of Religion, and therefore
naturally belong to the care of Church Governors, whether there had been any
Law for it or no, much more when they are commanded to do all things decently
and in order, we may reasonably conclude, that their Authority extends to
whatever is truly decent in Religion.

But our Reconciler thinks that this limitation of the words to matters done in
confusion P. 3, 4.
and disorder, may be plainly gathered from all the instances preceding, which
gave occasion to the Rule, they being instances of great indecencies and
disorders committed in the Church of Corinth: And from thence he tells us, This
only can be certainly collected, that when any thing is performed indecently
and disorderly in the Service of the Church, the Rulers of it should correct
them. And to the same purpose, he urges an Argument of Mr. Ieanes: The words of
the Apostle, Let all things be done decently and in order, are not disobeyed,
unless there be some indecency committed in the Worship and Service of God, or
some disorder in it: for Decency and Indecency, Order and Disorder or Ataxy,
are privatively opposite; and between privative opposites in a capable subject,
there is no medium; and therefore there is Decency sufficient in those actions
where is no indecency. But now by the omission of symbolical Ceremonies of
humane institution, such as the Cross in Baptism, Surplice in Prayer, Kneeling
when we receive the Sacrament, there is committed no indecency in those parts
of the Worship of God; and therefore the Apostles Precept is not disobeyed by
the omission of such Ceremonies, and consequently this Precept cannot warrant
the imposing of them.

I wonder how learned men can impose upon themselves and others with such silly
Sophisms as these: for let us consider,

1. Suppose this Precept, to do all things decently and in order, were given
upon occasion of those disorders and indecencies which were committed in the
Church of Corinth, how does it hence follow, that the Apostle requires no other
Decency than just what will remove the indecencies of Worship? Is Decency a
thing valuable for it self, or only as it is opposed to indecency? If the
Decency of Worship be a good thing, (and if it be not, Indecency cannot be a
fault) then it is a ridiculous thing to say, that the end of Decency is only
to prevent Indecency: as if the end of seeing, were only to prevent blindness;
or the end of Virtue, only to prevent Vice. They tell us that Decency and
Indecency are privatively opposite; that is, I suppose, that Indecency is the
privation of Decency, not that Decency is the privation of Indecency: and
therefore though the nature of Indecency consists in its opposition to Decency,
yet the nature of Decency does not consist in its opposition to Indecency.
Though we should allow that to be decent which is not indecent, yet it is not
decent merely because it is not indecent, but because it is agreeable to the
Laws and Rules of Decency: And therefore though the Apostle gave this Precept
upon occasion of these Indecencies committed in the Church of Corinth, yet the
Command extends to any instances and degrees of Decency: for he does not
command Decency merely out of opposition to Indecency, (which is to invert the
natural order of things) but for its own sake, as necessary and essential to
public Worship; as he who reproves the Vices of the Age, and exhorts men to
the contrary Virtues, does not mean that they should only practice so much
Virtue as not to be guilty of these popular Vices, but that they should aim at
the highest degrees and instances of Virtue.

2. And therefore those Rites and Ceremonies of Religion may be included in
this Apostolical Precept, to do all things decently and in order; the omission
of which, is not disorderly and indecent, if they be agreeable to the Laws and
Rules of Decency; because the Decency of our Actions does not consist in its
opposition to Indecency, but in conformity to the Rules of Decency. This is the
principal Argument on which our Reconciler and Mr. Ieanes rely, to prove that
the Ceremonies of the Church of England cannot be included in that Apostolical
Precept of doing things decently and in order, because the omission of these
Ceremonies is not indecent. If then (says the Reconciler) it can appear that
praying without a Surplice, or receiving the Sacrament without kneeling, or
baptizing without the Cross, is doing these things indecently and disorderly,
then must it be confessed that this is a good warrant for the imposition of
these things; but till this can be made appear, it must be vainly pleaded to
that end. But now (says Mr. Ieanes) by the omission of symbolical Ceremonies of
humane institution, such as the Cross in Baptism, Surplice in Prayer, Kneeling
when we receive the Sacrament, there is committed no Indecency in those parts
of the Service of God; and therefore the Apostles Precept is not disobeyed by
the omission of such Ceremonies, and consequently this Precept cannot warrant
the imposing of them. That the Apostolical Precept is not disobeyed by the
omission of these Ceremonies, I readily grant; but not for his reason, that the
omission of them is not indecent; for this Precept commands the positive
Decency of Worship, as well as forbids the Indecency of it; but because the
Decency of Worship may be secured by other decent Rites and Ceremonies, though
these were omitted: but his consequently is a farfetch'd one. The imposing any
decent Rites may be warranted by this Precept, though the neglect of them be
not indecent: for every decent Rite excludes Indecency, and makes the Worship
decent; which is the sum of this Apostolical Precept. Decent Rites and
Ceremonies are not opposed to the Indecency of omitting such Rites, but to
other indecent Modes of Worship. Kneeling at the Sacrament ought not to be
opposed to not kneeling, nor wearing a Surplice to not wearing a Surplice: for
they cannot be opposed as doing a thing decently or indecently, but as doing or
not doing a thing which may be decent or indecent according to the nature of
things; but they must be opposed to other Postures or Habits in Worship: And
such Rites as exclude Indecency, and have a natural Decency in them, are
comprehended in this Rule.

3. As for his Logic, he tells us, That Decency and Indecency are privatively
opposite; and between privative opposites in a capable subject there is no
medium, and therefore there is Decency sufficient in those actions where is no
Indecency. This our Reconciler calls a plain Argument, which is nothing else
but a plain Fallacy. For suppose we grant him that Decency and Indecency,
Reverence and Irreverence, are privative Opposites, that is, opposed to each
other as a habit, and its privation as sight and blindness; how does it hence
follow, that there is Decency enough where there is no Indecency? Sight and
blindness are privatively opposite; but will you say, that man sees well
enough, who is not blind? Though there be no medium between a habit and a total
privation, yet there are great degrees in habits; and no man thinks he sees
well enough, though he be not stark blind, if his eye be weak and tender, or
short-sighted, or wants the assistance of Spectacles, or other helps of Art.
Thus though Indecency were nothing else but the privation of Decency, yet there
are great degrees of Decency. And when the Apostle commands, that all things be
done decently and in order, our Reconciler must prove that he meant only the
lowest degree of Decency, which is but one bare remove from Indecency;
otherwise he must give us leave to conclude, that whatever is truly decent, is
comprehended in this Precept; and the more decent any thing is, the more
agreeable is it to the Apostles design.

But besides this, Mr. Ieanes, and our Reconciler after him, are grievously out
in their Logic. For Decency and Indecency, Reverence and Irreverence, are not
privative opposites: for Indecency is not the mere privation of Decency, but
they are opposed as Virtue and Vice; that is, as two extremes are opposed to
each other, which are properly called adversa, which are affirmative, not
negative opposites, though the Grammatical Notation of the words Indecency and
Irreverence, seems to have betrayed him into that mistake. And I suppose they
will allow that there is a medium between two extremes: and let our Reconciler
consider how it would sound to say, That man is virtuous enough, who is not
vicious. Indecent and not decent, do not signify the same thing, no more than
unlearned and not learned. I have been taught in Logic, that homo est
indoctus, and homo est non doctus, are not equipollent Propositions: To say, A
man is learned, a man is not learned, a man is unlearned, signify very
differently; and so do these Propositions, An action is decent, an action is
not decent, an action is indecent: the first signifies a positive Decency; the
second, that there is no positive Decency; the third, that there is a plain
opposition and contrariety to the Laws of Decency. Civility and ^udeness in
common conversation, are opposed as Decency and Indecency are; but there is an
untutored and undisciplined humor, which is neither civil nor rude. This, I
think, is sufficient to prove, that there may be no Decency nor Reverence in
such actions which cannot be strictly charged with Indecency and Irreverence:
and therefore when the Apostle commands, that all things be done decently, he
require^ something more than not to be guilty of a^^ Indecency or Irreverence
in Worship.

III. To proceed: He observes, that the same Reverend Bishop proves, That
beyond commanding that which has a necessary relation to the express command
of God, or is so requisite for the doing of it, that it cannot be well done
without it by any other instrument, or by it self alone, the Bishops can give
no Laws which properly and immediately bind the transgressors under sin. I
confess I do not certainly understand what this learned man refers to, he
having given us no particular instances; which has given advantage to our
Reconciler to apply it as he pleases. But let us consider his Reasons; and by
that we may guess how far we are concerned.

1. Because we never find the Apostles using their Coertion upon any man, but
the express breakers of a divine Commandment, or the public disturbers of the
peace of the Church, and the established necessary Order. Thus far the Bishop.
To which the Reconciler adds, Men must not therefore first make unnecessary
Orders, and when men cannot conscientiously submit unto them, and therefore do
not so, cry out that they disturb the Churches peace. These words he represents
as the Bishops also, though they are his own; which is one of his pious frauds.
But as for the Argument, I think it is evident, it does not relate to our
Dispute, who pretend no other authority but to censure those who disturb the
peace of the Church, and the established necessary Order: for such the Rules of
Order and Decency are. But how the Apostles censured such persons, we cannot
tell neither: for we never read that any Christians in those days disputed the
Apostolical authority in such matters, or refused to obey their Canons and
Injunctions; and therefore there was no occasion to exercise such censures.

2. Because even in those things which were so convenient, that they had power
to use Injunctions, yet the Apostles were very backward to use their authority
of commanding, much less would they use severity, but entreaty. It was St. Paul
's case to Philemon beforementioned, Though I might be much bold in Christ to
enjoin that which is convenient, yet for loves sake I rather entreat thee. But
this does not concern us neither: for what is this to the Rules and Orders of
Worship, that he would not take Philemon's servant Onesimus from him, without
his consent? for I doubt Church Authority does not extend to such matters,
which are purely civil and secular: and though when such things are highly
expedient for the Worship of God, the Bishop has authority to exhort and
persuade, and that man sins who disobeys, yet this is not properly the object
of Church Censures, and Ecclesiastical authority, no more than when men refuse
to do some pious or charitable act at the Bishops request. Philemon's
obligations to St. Paul, who was his spiritual Father, who had converted him to
the Christian Faith, gave him a peculiar authority over him; but the bare
Apostolical authority did not extend to the disposal of men's Fortunes and
Servants, which in those days were part of their Estates.

3. In those things where God had interposed no command, though the Rule they
gave contained in it that which was fit and decent, yet if men would resist,
they gently did admonish and reprove them, and let them alone. So S. Paul, in
case of the Corinthian men wearing long hair, If any man list to be
contentious, we have no such custom, nor the Churches of God; that is, let him
choose, it is not well done, we leave him to his own liberty, but let him look
to it. But this does not reach the case neither: for wearing long hair did not
concern the Rites, and Ceremonies, and Uniformity of religious Worship, (which
is our only Dispute) but was an Indecency in common conversation; and a great
many such things the Apostles indulged both to Jews and Heathens, till they
could be reformed by Reason and better Instructions; though at the same time
they did more severely correct the Disorders and Indecencies of Worship. And
yet I confess, it seems a very odd Comment upon the Apostles words, We have no
such custom, nor the Churches of God; viz. let him choose, it is not well done,
we leave him to himself. Whereas in these words the Apostle is so far from
leaving them to do as they please, that he determines the Controversy against
them by the highest Authority, to a Christian, next to an express Law of God,
viz. the Customs and Usages of the Christian Church. The Apostle indeed does
not here threaten Church Censures against them, but first tries what Reason and
Argument will do; which is a very proper method for Bishops to use, but a very
ill Argument to prove that the Church must not censure those who refuse
Obedience to her Laws and Constitutions.

4. If the Bishops power were extended farther, it might extend to Tyranny, and
there could be no limits beyond this to keep him within the measures and
sweetness of the Government Evangelical; but if he pretend to go farther, he
may be absolute and supreme in the things of this life, which do not concern
the Spirit; and so fall into Dynasty, as one anciently complained of the Bishop
of Rome, and change the Father into a Prince, and the Church into an Empire.
This is a plain Argument, that the Bishop does not speak here of the decent
Rites and Circumstances of Worship: for how the Authority of the Church to
prescribe the decent Rites and Ceremonies of Religion should degenerate into
Tyranny and secular Power, is unintelligible to me. The Usurpations of the
Church of Rome, we know, came in at another door; and the Presbyter, who has
little regard to the external Order and Decency of Worship, can find other
pretenses to get some secular power into his hands.

But what limit can be set to Ecclesiastical Authority, if the Church exceed
what is barely necessary to prevent confusion in religious Worship? I answer,
Decency is the bound of it, and there needs no other. What is decent and
orderly in religious Worship, belongs to Church Authority; what is more, is an
irregular abuse: and there is no great danger that such a Power as this should
make Bishops secular Princes.

This makes it evident to me, that this learned Prelate intended not one word
of all this against the Ceremonies of the Church of England, or the imposition
of them: and it is certain he could not, unless we will say, that he
contradicts himself; and then his authority is good on neither side. And I
shall make this appear once for all, and thereby answer the Citations out of
the Writings of this excellent Bishop, to countenance this Reconciling Design,
all together.

I observe then, that the Bishop himself does expressly justify the Ceremonies
of the Church of England, as not offending against any of those Rules he had
prescribed for Ecclesiastical Laws. Duct. dubit. l. 3. c. 4. R. 20. S. 8.
When he speaks of Rituals, and significant Ceremonies, and censures such
Ceremonies which are merely for signification, which seems to come nearest to
our Case, there he designedly not only vindicates the Practice, but applauds
the Wisdom of the Church of England in reference to her Ceremonies. There is
reason to celebrate and honor the Wisdom of the Church of England, which has
in all her Offices retained but one Ritual or Ceremony that is not of divine
Ordinance, or Apostolical Practice, and that is, the Cross in Baptism; which
though it be a significant Ceremony, and of no other use, (though in this I
cannot agree with the Bishop, and have given my reasons for it above) so it is
very innocent in it self; and being one and alone, is in no regard troublesome
or afflective to those who understand her power, her liberty, and reason. I
say, she has one only Ceremony of her own appointment: for the Ring in
Marriage is the Symbol of a ^ivil and religious Contract; it is a Pledge and
Custom of the Nation, not of the Religion. And those other Circumstances of her
Worship, are but determinations of time and place, and manner of a Duty; they
serve to other purposes besides signification; they were not made for that, but
for Order and Decency; for which there is an Apostolical Precept, and a natural
reason, and an evident necessity, or a great convenience. Now if, besides these
uses, they can be construed to any good signification or instruction, that is
so far from being a prejudice to them, that it is their advantage; their
principal end being different, and warranted, and not destroyed by their
superinduced and accidental use. In other things we are to remember that
Figures and Shadows were for the Old Testament, but Light and Manifestation is
in the New.

This is the judgment of this excellent Bishop about the Ceremonies of the
Church of England; which I think makes little for our Reconcilers purpose; and
therefore when he had transcribed that large Discourse about Rituals and
Ceremonies merely for signification, out of the Bishops Writings, Prot. Recone.
p. 220, etc.
he stops when he comes to this, as being convinced in his Conscience, that the
Bishop did not intend one word of this against the Ceremonies of the Church of
England, which he expressly excepted and justified. Well, but though the Bishop,
out of civility to the Church, made such an exception, yet there was no reason
for it; his Arguments were as strong against the significant Ceremonies of the
Church of England, as of any other Church. But it seems the Bishop did not
think so; and when the Reconciler alleges the Bishops Authority, as well as
Arguments against us, he ought to have urged his Arguments no farther than he
himself did, or to have told his Readers what exceptions the Bishop made, and
left it to him to judge whether the exception was good and reasonable, or not.
And I am apt to think, that every ordinary Reader would have made some little
difference, as the Bishop did, between such significant Ceremonies as are
withal the necessary circumstances of religious actions, and receive their
Decency from their signification; and such Ceremonies as contribute nothing to
the decent performance of religious actions, but only entertain a childish
fancy with some Theatrical Shows, and arbitrary Images and Figures of things,
of which the Bishop there speaks.

And indeed, all his other Citations out of the Writings of this excellent
Bishop are as little to his purpose, because none of them concern the decent
circumstances of religious Worship, which is our present Dispute; and therefore
we cannot from thence learn what the Bishop's judgment was in these matters: as
to take a brief survey of these Arguments, as he calls them, taken out of
Bishop Taylor's Ductor Dubitantium.

His first Argument is patcht up of two Sayings, Re^. c. 7. p. 212.
at the distance of fifteen pages from each other; and yet they are much nearer
to each other in the book, than they are in their design and signification: He
says, The Bishop truly says, That it is not reasonable to think that God would
give the Church-Rulers his Authority for trifling and needless purposes. This
is said in one place; and to make up his Argument, he tacks another Saying to
it: Now Rituals, says he, and Externals are nothing of the substance of
Religion, but only appendages, and manner, and circumstances; a wise man will
observe them, not that they are pleasing to God, but because they are commanded
by Laws.

The first of these Sayings is under the third Rule, That the Church has power
to make Laws in all things of necessary Duty, by a direct Power and divine
Authority. So that this does not relate to the circumstances of religious
actions, but to some necessary Duties. The instance the Bishop gives in that
place, is this: That the Bishop has power to command his Subject or
Parishioner to put away his Concubine; and if he does not, he not only sins by
uncleanness, but by disobedience too. This sure is remote enough from the
Dispute of Ceremonies. But then he proves, that such men sin by disobeying the
Bishop in such cases, by this Argument among others, That it is not reasonable
to think that God would give the Church-Rulers his Authority for trifling and
needless purposes. For it is a trifling thing to have Authority to command, if
that Authority have no effect; if men may disobey such commands, without sin.
So that these words, whereby the Bishop proves the Authority of the Church to
command, and that those sin who disobey, our Reconciler produces to prove that
the Church has no Authority to command the decent Ceremonies of Religion,
because in his opinion they are trifling and needless things.

The latter part of his Argument is taken from the Bishops sixth Rule, which is
this: Kings and Princes are by the ties of Religion, not of Power, obliged to
keep the Laws of the Church. His resolution of which, in short, is this: That
such Ecclesiastical Laws which are the Exercises of internal Religion, cannot
be neglected by Princes, without some straining of their duty to God, which is
by the wisdom and choice of men determined in such an instance to such a
specification; but in Externals and Rituals they have a greater liberty; so
that every omission is not a sin in them, though it may be in Subjects: and his
reason is, That they are nothing of the substance of Religion, but only
appendages, and manner, and circumstances; and therefore a wise man will
observe Rituals, because they are commanded by Laws, not that they are pleasing
to God. Since therefore these are wholly matter of obedience, Kings are free,
save only when they become bound collaterally and accidentally. So that the
Bishop does not here speak one word of Externals and Rituals, as such trifling
and needless things, that the Church has no Authority to command them (to which
purpose our Reconciler applies it) but as such things, which being bound on us
only by humane Authority, a Sovereign Prince who owns no higher humane
Authority than his own, is not so strictly obliged by them, as his Subjects
are, but may dispense with himself when he sees fit. These are excellent
premises for such a conclusion as our Reconciler draws from them.

But yet it is worth the while to consider what the Bishop means by the
Externals or Rituals of Religion. Whatever our Reconciler finds said about
Ecclesiastical Laws, or the Externals and Rituals of Religion, he presently
applies to the Ceremonies of the Church of England, which (excepting the Cross)
are only decent circumstances, without which, or suchlike, the Worship of God
cannot be decently or reverently performed; that is, without which there can be
no external Worship, which consists in the external expressions of Honor and
Devotion. It is sufficiently evident what a vast difference the Bishop makes
between these two. Thus he expressly does in these words: To the ceremonial Law
of the Jews nothing was to be added, Duct. Dubit. 3 b. 4 c. R. 20. S. 6.
and from it nothing was to be subtracted* and in Christianity we have less
reason to add any thing of Ceremony, excepting (N. B.) the circumstances and
advantages of the very Ministry, as time, and place, and vessels, and
ornaments, and necessary appendages. But when we speak of Rituals and
Ceremonies, that is, exterior actions or things besides the institution and
command of Christ, etc. Where he expressly distinguishes between the
circumstances and advantages of the very Ministry (what is necessary or
convenient for the decent and orderly performance of the public acts of
Worship) from Rituals or Ceremonies, whereby he understands exterior actions or
things; that is, such Ceremonies as are not the circumstances of religious
actions, but are distinct acts themselves, either instituted as parts of
Worship, and then, he says, they are intolerable; or merely for signification,
and that is a very little thing, and of very inconsiderable use in the fullness
and charity of the Revelations Evangelical. Such he reckons, giving Milk and
Honey, or a little Wine, to persons to be baptized; and to present Milk,
together with Bread and Wine, at the Lords Table, to signify nutrition by the
Body and Blood of Christ; to let a Pidgeon fly, to signify the coming of the
Holy Spirit; to light up Candles, to represent the Epiphany; to dress a Bed, to
express the secret and ineffable Generation of the Savior of the World; to
prepare the figure of the Cross, and to bury an Image, to describe the great
Sacrifice of the Cross. A great many such things our Reconciler himself has
collected in his eighth Chapter, which may properly be called the Rituals or
Ceremonies or Religion; most of which are now out of use in most Churches which
formerly used them, and none of them are in u^e among us. But what we call the
Ceremonies of the Church of England, are not in this sense Rituals or
Ceremonies, but the decent circumstances of Worship, as the Bishop
acknowledges, excepting the Cross in Baptism; which yet is not a mere
significant, but a professing Sign, as I have already discoursed: and for such
Ceremonies as these, which serve for Order and Decency, the Bishop tells us,
There is an Apostolical Precept, and a natural Reason, and an evident
Necessity, or a great Convenience.

In a word, when the Bishop speaks of Rituals and Ceremonies, he understands by
them exterior actions or things, something which is like the ceremonial
observances of the Jewish Law, which were not mere circumstances of action, but
religious Rites. Such were their Sacrifices, Washings, and Purifications, their
Phylacteries, their Fasts, and Festivals, new Moons and Sabbaths; not
considered merely as circumstances of time, but as having such a Sacredness and
Religion stamped on them, that the very observing them was an act of Religion;
that the religious Duties observed on them, were appointed for the sake of the
day, not the day merely for the sake of the Religion. Such were the numerous
Traditions of the Scribes and Pharisees about making broad their Phylacteries,
washing their Cups and Platters, and their hands before dinner; and an infinite
number of other superstitious observances. Now though some external actions and
things, wisely chosen, and prudently used, may be for the service of Religion,
at least are not unlawful to be used, unless we will condemn the whole
Christian Church for several Ages, which used a great many external Rites; yet
every one sees what a vast difference there is between such Rites as these, and
the decent Circumstances of religious Worship. And therefore those men mistake
the case of the Church of England, who lay the Controversy upon Rituals and
Ceremonies: for there is no such thing in the Church of England, according to
the true and proper signification of these words. Our Fasts and Festivals look
most like such Rituals and Ceremonies, but are not so: for with us they are not
religious days, but days appointed for the solemn Exercises of Religion; which
differ as much as a circumstance of time, does from an act of Religion; as
making a day religious, which none but God can do, differs from appointing a
day for the public Solemnities of Religion, which the Governors of the Church
and State may do; as the Religion of observing a day, differs from those acts
of Religion which are performed on such a day.

Now this very observation of the difference between Rituals and Ceremonies,
and the decent circumstances of Worship, will answer most of his Citations
which he has impertinently alleged out of the Bishops Writings, and a
multitude of Objections, which for want of observing this, have been very
injudiciously made against those which we call the Ceremonies of the Church of
England.

Recon. p. 214.
Thus he observes from the Bishop, That Ecclesiastical Laws, which are merely
such, cannot be universal and perpetual. But then he should have told us what
the Bishop meant by Ecclesiastical Laws merely such; That is, says he, those
which do not involve a divine Law within their matter. And therefore this
cannot relate to the decent circumstances of Worship: for they all involve a
divine Law in the matter of them; they are only the specification of the Law
of Decency, and include those very acts of Worship to which they belong. To
kneel at the Lords Supper, is a command to receive the Lords Supper kneeling;
and when the Minister is enjoined to wear theSurplice, it signifies that he
must perform divine Offices in a Surplice. These are but the decent
circumstances of necessary Duties, and they founded on the Apostolical Rule of
Decency.

Well, but the Bishop adds, When Christ had made us free from the Law of
Ceremonies, which God appointed to the Jewish Nation, and to which all other
Nations were bound, if they came into that Communion; it would be intolerable
that the Churches who rejoiced in their freedom from that Yoke which God had
imposed, should submit themselves to a Yoke of Ordinances which men should
make. For though before they could not, yet now they may exercise Communion,
and use the same Religion without communicating in Rites and Ordinances. Now
does not this make it plain, that the Bishop does not speak of the decent
circumstances of Worship, such as our English Ceremonies are, but of such
Rituals and Ceremonies as answer to the Jewish Rites and Ordinances, which he
calls exterior things and actions, which are of a different consideration, and
must be governed by different Rules and Measures? And yet our Reconciler is so
unfortunate, that if the Bishop had meant this of the Ceremonies of our Church,
it had been nothing to his purpose: for he adds in the very next words, This
does no way concern the Subjects of any Government, (what Liberty they are to
retain and use, I shall discourse in the following numbers) but it concerns
distinct Churches under distinct Governments; and it means, as it appears
plainly by the Context, and the whole Analogy of the thing, that the Christian
Churches must suffer no man to put a Law upon them, who is not their Governor.
For when he says, that Ecclesiastical Laws that are merely such, must not be
universal, he means, that they must not be intended to oblige all Christendom,
except they will be obliged, that is, do consent: That no Church or company of
Christians have such authority as to oblige the whole Christian World, and all
the Churches in it, to conform to their Rituals and Ceremonies, which he says
is contrary to Christian liberty, and such an Usurpation as must not be
endured; which is directly levelled against the Usurpations of the Church of
Rome. But though one Church cannot impose upon another, yet every Church has
power over her own Members; and they are bound to obey that Authority which is
over them.

And by the way, this answers all his Testimonies from Bishop Davenant, P. 227,
etc.
and Bishop Hall, in their Letters to Duraeus about his Pacificatory design of
uniting all the Reformed Churches into one Communion; and several others cited
in his Preface to the same purpose. They discourse upon what terms distinct
Churches, which have no authority over each other, ought to maintain Christian
Communion; and this he applies to particular Churches, with reference to their
own Members: as if because particular Churches must not usurp authority and
dominion over each other, nor deny Communion upon every difference of Opinion,
or different Customs and Usages of Modes of Worship; therefore no Church must
govern her own Communion, nor give Laws to her own Members: as if because the
King of England must not impose the Laws of England on Italy or Spain,
therefore he must not make Laws for England neither.

This our Reconciler was aware of; and therefore in his Preface, Preface, p. 53.
to strengthen these Authorities, he asks this Question: Why that agreement in
Fundamentals which is sufficient to preserve Communion betwixt Churches
disagreeing in Rites and Ceremonies, and Doctrines of inferior moment, may not
be sufficient also to preserve Communion among those Members of the same
Church, though disagreeing in like matters? For if the reason why Christian
Churches which do thus differ, should be received and owned as Christians, and
Brethren of the same Communion with us, is because these differences do not
hinder their being real Members of Christ's Body, and therefore Fellow Members
of the same Church and Body with us, since the same reason proves the Members
of any Church whatsoever, who differ only in non-fundamentals, capable of
being real Christians, and so of the same Church and Body with us; why should
it not oblige us to receive them as Christian Brethren, i. e. persons of the
same Communion with us, if we can do it without sin? Now the Answer to this is
so obvious, that I wonder our Reconciler should miss it. For,

1. The reason of Communion between distinct Churches can be nothing else but
the common Principles of Christianity, one Lord, one Faith, one Hope, one
Baptism, etc. that is, whatever is essential to Christian Faith and Worship:
for what is more than this, as the particular Rules and Orders of Discipline
and Government, and Modes of Worship, are the Object of Ecclesiastical
Authority; and since no Church has authority over another, they ought not to
impose their own Rules of Discipline or Worship upon each other. But now no
private Christian can live in the Communion of any particular Church, without
submitting to its Government and Discipline, and conforming to its Rules of
Worship. Though one Church must not usurp Authority over another, yet every
Church must govern her own Members, and direct her own Worship; and there can
be no Order nor Decency of Worship, where there are no Rules of Worship, no
Uniformity, but every man is left to do as he pleases. And yet,

2. Though the Communion of distinct Churches with each other, does not require
that they should all observe the same Usages and Rites of Worship in their own
Churches, yet it requires that the Members of these distinct Churches should
communicate with each other, and conform to each others Customs, where they
happen to be present. It is a ridiculous thing to talk of two Churches being in
Communion with each other, who will not, as occasion serves, communicate
together upon the terms of each others Communion. For Calvinists to call the
Lutherans, or Lutherans the Calvinists, Brethren; but to refuse to join in
Communion, when they happen to be in each others Churches, this is not to live
in Communion with each other: or for a Calvinist to communicate in the Lutheran
Church, or a Lutheran in the Calvinists, but according to the Rites of their
own Churches, not of the Church in which they communicate; this is not to
communicate with, but publicly to affront each other. The only Principle of
Catholic Communion between distinct Churches in such matters as these, is so
far to allow of each others Rules and Modes of Worship, as to conform, when
occasion serves, to such indifferent Customs and Usages, though very different
from their own, rather than divide the Communion of the Church: and if this be
necessary to the Communion of distinct Churches with each other, then certainly
it is necessary for the Members of every particular Church to submit to its
Authority, and conform to its Rules and Orders of Worship. For,

3. It is ridiculous to imagine that nothing more is necessary to a Christian
in Church Communion, than what is absolutely necessary to the State of a
Christian out of the visible Communion of any Church; as if nothing more were
necessary to make a man a Member of the Commonwealth, than what is necessary to
make him a man. The belief of the fundamental Doctrines of Christianity, and
Obedience to those Laws of Righteousness, which have an eternal and immutable
goodness in them, will make a man a good Christian in a private and single
capacity; but obedience to Government, and conformity to the Rules of
Discipline and Worship, are as necessary to make a man a good Christian in
Church-society, as they are essential to the being and constitution of a
Church; and it is impossible to form a Church-Society only of the Essentials
of Christianity, considered as a Systeme of Doctrines and Laws, which every
private Christian ought to observe: for there are the Essentials of
Christian-Communion, as well as of Christian Religion. Christ did not only
publish the Gospel, but instituted a Church; and the Government and Discipline
of the Church is of a distinct consideration from the belief of the Gospel. No
man can be a Member of the Church, without believing the Gospel; but
Church-Society lays some new obligations upon us, beyond what is necessary in a
single state out of Church-Society.

But to return. Though this learned Bishop did not urge the abrogation of the
Mosaical Law against the imposition of the Ceremonies of the Church of England,
nor against any other Rituals or Ceremonies neither, but only against such
usurpt Authority as challenge a power to make Laws for the whole Christian
World; yet this Argument is frequently alleged by others, and more than once
repeated by our Reconciler to this purpose: but how trifling it is, appears
from this distinction between Rituals and Ceremonies, and the decent
Circumstances of Worship.

They tell us, that Christ removed those burdens which were on the Church, and
therefore would not impose new ones. But does the Church of England lay any new
burdens upon men? Does she require any thing more than what is necessary?
Christ requires that we should celebrate his last Supper in remembrance of him,
that the Minister should perform all the public Offices of Religion, and that
this should be done in a decent and reverent manner; and does the Church of
England require any more? Does she institute any Ceremonies (excepting the
Cross in Baptism, which is a professing Sign, and relates to no act of
Worship, though it be thought decent to be done at the time of Baptism) but
what are decent circumstances of action? And is Decency then a new burden,
which Christ has not imposed on his Disciples? Is Decency an unnecessary or
unreasonable thing? Did Christ leave it at liberty then, whether his Disciples
should worship God decently or not?

Christ has taken away the Yoke of Jewish Ceremonies, and has the Church of
England put another Jewish Yoke on the Disciples necks? Are there any such
Rituals and Ceremonies in the Church of England, as have the least affinity
with the Jewish Yoke? Did Christ, when he abrogated the Jewish Law, abrogate
all Decency of Worship too? or is the bare Decency of Worship a Jewish Yoke?
What correspondence is there between the Ceremonies of the Jewish Law, and the
decent circumstances of Worship? between new and distinct acts, and the decent
Modes of actions?

But our Reconciler proceeds. Ecclesiastical Laws must not be perpetual; P. 215.
that is, when they are made, they are relative to time and place, to persons
and occasions, subject to all changes, etc. Now besides that the Bishop stills
speaks of such Laws as concern Rituals and external Observances, not the decent
circumstances of Worship; and therefore it is impertinently alleged in our
present Controversy: yet suppose it did relate to our Ceremonies, what
advantage could he make of it? They must not be perpetual, that is, they are
alterable, when the wisdom of Governors sees fit; and who denies it? But must
every one who believes these Ceremonies alterable, presently grant that they
must be altered right or wrong?

This is much like another mangled Testimony, which he cites from Rule 12. n.
9. I shall transcribe the whole, because our Reconciler has concealed the
sense, by transcribing only part of it. Excepting those things which the
Apostles received from Christ, in which they were Ministers to all Ages, once
for all conveying the mind of Christ to Generations to come, in all other
things they were but ordinary Ministers to govern the Churches in their own
times, and left all that ordinary power to their Successors, with a power to
rule their Churches, such as they had; and therefore whatever they conveyed as
from Christ, a part of his Doctrine, or any thing of his appointment, this was
to bind for ever. All this our Reconciler leaves out; which is a Key to what
follows. For Christ is our only Lawgiver, and what he said was to bind for
ever: In all things which he said not, the Apostles could not be Lawgivers,
they had no such authority; and therefore whatsoever they ordered by their own
wisdom, was to abide as long as the reason did abide; but still with the same
liberty with which they appointed it: for of all men in the world, they would
least put a Snare upon the Disciples, or tie Fetters upon Christian liberty.

To what purpose he cites this, he does not say; but I suppose it was to
insinuate that there is no Authority in the Church to make any Laws which
Christ has not made, because he is our only Lawgiver; and that to make such
Laws, is to put a Snare upon the Disciples, and to tie Fetters upon Christian
Liberty, which the Apostles of all men would not do: but this is directly
contrary to the design of the Bishop. All that he says, is no more than this:
That the Apostles had not authority to make such Laws as should perpetually
oblige the Church in all Ages: for Christ only is so our Lawgiver, that his
Laws are perpetual and unalterable; and therefore what they taught as from
Christ, that was to bind for ever; but what Laws they made as ordinary
Ministers to govern the Churches in their own times, they might be altered,
when the reason of them ceased, by the Bishops and Ministers of following Ages,
who have as much ordinary authority for the government of the Church, as the
Apostles themselves had. So that the Governors of the Church have authority to
make Laws, though not unalterable ones; and therefore it is not making Laws,
but making perpetual Laws, which he calls putting a Snare upon the Disciples,
and tying Fetters on Christian Liberty: for the more unalterable Laws there
are, the less Liberty the Church enjoys; and those Laws which were of excellent
use when they were first made yet when their reason and use ceases, might prove
Snares to Christians, if there were no power in the Church to repeal them.

All his Citations from this excellent Bishop about Ecclesiastical Laws, are of
the same nature; they do not concern the decent circumstances of Worship, but
Rituals and external Ministeries of Religion: and I suppose I need not tell any
man how impertinent his Testimonies about Fasts, and Evangelical Councils, and
Subscriptions to Articles, etc. are to this Controversy. This is sufficient to
prove, that this excellent Bishop is ours; and to satisfy all men, that this
Protestant Reconciler is either a very ignorant and careless Reader of Books,
or a shameless Impostor, in suborning men's words to give testimony against
their own protest and avowed Principles and Doctrines.

There are several other little Arguments which are frequently repeated by our
Reconciler, and confirmed with great Names and great Authorities, though it is
probable enough that he has as much abused other great men, as he has done the
Bishop; and I have not leisure nor opportunity to examine all; and it is no
great matter, when the Argument is weak and trifling, whose Argument it is.

They tell us, that to impose such Ceremonies and Rites of Worship, is to come
after Christ, and to mend and correct his Laws, and to require new terms of
Communion which Christ has not required. This is a great fault, if the charge
be good and just: but is the Church of England guilty of any such thing? Does
she require any new acts of Worship, which Christ has not required? Has not
Christ required that we should worship God decently? Has he not made Obedience
to our Rulers and Governors a necessary condition of Communion? And does the
Church of England require any more? Has the Church of England imposed any thing
upon her People, but the Rules of Order and Decency? and has not Christ
enjoined this? Are the Ceremonies of our Church decent circumstances of
Worship, or are they not? If they be, then here are no new terms of Communion,
here is no mending nor correcting the Laws of Christ, but only a determination
of some necessary circumstances which Christ left undetermined, and gave
authority to his Church to determine.

But why should Church Communion be suspended upon such terms as are not
necessary to Salvation? Why is not that sufficient to make a man a Member of a
Church, which is sufficient to carry him to Heaven? No doubt but it is; and the
Church of England requires no more. The Decency of Worship is as necessary to
eternal Salvation, as public Worship is; which is not Worship, if it be not
decent. Decency is necessary; and though such or such particular Modes of
Decency be not necessary, yet some decent Mode of Worship is: and therefore
that Church which requires no more than the Decency of Worship, requires
nothing but what is necessary to Salvation.

That which confounds and blunders these men, and makes them dream of new terms
of Communion, is this: That they distinguish the act of Worship from the manner
of performing it; and because Christ has only instituted and commanded the
act, but the Church directs and prescribes the manner, therefore they say the
Church mends Christ's Laws; and makes new terms of Communion, by requiring
something more than Christ has instituted and commanded. As for instance,
Christ has instituted his Mystical Supper, and commanded us to eat Bread and
drink Wine in remembrance of his Body, which was broken, and of his Blood,
which was shed for us; but has not commanded us to do this either sitting,
standing, or kneeling; though it is absolutely necessary that we should do it
in one posture or other. Now the Church of England commands us to receive
kneeling, and will admit none to the Lords Table, who will not receive
kneeling. This, say they, is to mend the Laws of Christ, and to make new terms
of Communion. Why so? Does the Church require any more than Christ has
required? Yes, say they, she requires kneeling, which Christ does not require.
But how does that appear, that Christ does not require it? Because, say they,
he has not commanded us to receive kneeling. No, say I, that is no Argument at
all that Christ does not require it: for he who commands us to receive,
commands us to receive in some posture or other: for though we may logically
distinguish between the act of receiving and the posture wherein we receive,
yet these cannot be actually separate; for no man can receive, but he must
receive in some posture; and therefore he who commands doing such an act,
includes whatever is necessary to the doing of it right. You will say, But yet
Christ has not determined what posture we shall receive in, but left them all
indifferent. Suppose this to be true, yet the posture must of necessity be
determined before we can receive: for no man can receive but in some particular
posture; and therefore either every man must determine himself, or the
Authority of the Church must determine us: which seems to be much more
reasonable, both because it is most decent and orderly that there should be
some uniform posture of receiving, and because the Governors of the Church,
not private Christians, have the sole authority in such cases, committed to
them by Christ himself. But now the question is, whether to determine what
Christ, has not determined, and yet what must be determined before we can
perform that Duty which Christ commands, be to come after Christ to correct his
Laws, and to make new terms of Communion? If it be, then whoever receives the
Lords Supper, whatever posture he receives in, must of necessity correct the
Laws of Christ, and make new terms of Communion, at least for himself, because
he must receive in some particular and determined posture; whereas Christ has
left all postures indifferent and undetermined: which shows what a senceless
and ridiculous imputation this is.

No, you will say, to receive in some particular posture, though it be not
determined by Christ, is no correcting his Laws, nor making new terms of
Communion, because Christ has left all postures indifferent and undetermined;
and therefore has left it to our liberty to use which we please; and when we do
so, we only use that liberty which Christ has given us. But so to determine
any one posture of receiving, as not to allow of any other, nor to admit any to
our Communion who will not use that posture, this is to make new terms of
Communion which Christ has not made: for if he have left all postures
undetermined, then to be sure he has not said, that no man shall be admitted to
the Sacrament, who will not kneel. And though every man may determine for
himself, or the Church may determine for us all, yet it must not be determined
so, as to destroy the indifferency of the posture; which is directly contrary
to Christ's Institution, who has left all postures indifferent.

This Objection, at a distance, I confess, seems very plausible, and to bear
hard upon the Church: but when we look more narrowly into it, it vanishes into
nothing. For,

1. I readily grant, should the Church of England determine against the
lawfulness of any other posture but kneeling in receiving the Lords Supper, she
might be charged with correcting the Laws of Christ, and altering the nature of
things: for this would be to make some things necessary, and other things
unlawful, which Christ had left indifferent.

2. Should she refuse to communicate with any other Church which does not kneel
at the Sacrament, merely because she does not kneel, she might be charged with
making new terms of Communion which Christ has not made: for she has no
authority to prescribe to other Churches in matters of an indifferent and
undetermined nature, and therefore cannot pretend her authority for such an
Imposition, but must pretend the nature of the thing, that kneeling at the
Sacrament is a necessary term of Communion; which being no term of Christ's
making, must be a term of her own making; and then she would be guilty of
making new terms of Communion; and if a Schism followed upon it, she would be
the Schismatic.

3. But yet for the Church to determine, for the regulating her own Communion,
See the Vind. of the Defen. of Dr. Stilling. p. 427, etc.
what Christ has not determined, but yet what must be determined, before that
Duty can be performed which Christ has commanded, is not to make new terms of
Communion, though she refuse to admit any to her Communion, who will not use
the prescribed posture of receiving; and my reason for it is this: because she
neither prescribes kneeling as necessary in it self, but only as a decent
posture of receiving; nor prescribes it to any but those of her own Communion,
whom she has authority to govern. In such cases the Church does not make new
terms of Communion, but exercises a just authority in determining what was left
undetermined, and in prescribing Rules for the Decency of her own Worship.

But you will say, Does not the Church of England make that a term and
condition of her Communion, without which she will not admit any man to
communicate with her? I answer, No, this does not always follow; every such
thing is a Rule of her Government, but not a term of her Communion; which are
of a very distinct consideration in the constitution of every Church. The Laws
of Catholic Communion require, that she make nothing a term of her Communion,
but what is necessary for the whole Catholic Church and she can never be
charged with making kneeling a term of her Communion, while she holds Communion
with such Churches who do not kneel at receiving, or at least refuses the
Communion of no Church upon that account; but now the Rules of Government in
every Church are very distinct from the terms of her Communion, Every Church
has authority to make Laws for her self, to prescribe the Forms and Rules of
Worship and Discipline and though she have not authority to deny Communion to
other Churches who will not submit to her private Laws and Rules, yet she has
authority to deny Communion to her own Members who refuse to obey her Laws, or
else she has no authority to make Laws, if she have no authority to punish the
breach of them. So that here are two distinct reasons for which a Church may
deny her Communion to any persons* either because they renounce the terms of
her Communion, or because they refuse to submit to her Laws and Rules of
Worship: and therefore it is a ridiculous thing to say that a Church makes
every thing a term of her Communion, for the refusal of which she denies her
Communion to her own Members. We may call these, if we please, the terms of her
particular Communion; but this is no greater fault for any Church to make such
terms of Communion, than to make Laws for Government and Discipline: for such
terms are nothing else.

To return then to our Argument. Since the act of Worship, and the necessary
circumstan^s of Action, though they may be distinctly considered, yet cannot be
separated; that Church which commands nothing but a decent performance of those
acts of Worship which Christ himself has commanded us to perform, cannot be
charged with making any additions to the Laws of Christ, or with commanding any
new thing. For the decent manner of doing a thing, is included in the command
of doing it, unless we think our Savior was indifferent whether we worship God
decently or indecently: and therefore if the Church only enjoin such habits
and postures, times and places, as are necessary to the doing of the action,
and are decent circumstances of doing it, she commands nothing but what Christ
has virtually commanded.

And this is a plain Answer to that other Objection, that the Apostles had
authority to teach only such things as Christ had commanded them; which if it
be opposed to their Authority of Governing the Church, which required the
exercise of their own Wisdom and Prudence, and making occasional Laws in
emergent cases, is a very trifling Objection: but however, the Church of
England teaches nothing but what Christ taught. She teaches all the acts of
Worship which Christ commanded, and no other; and she ^eaches the decent manner
of doing this, which is involved in the very command of doing it: for though
the particular decent Rites of Worship are not expressed, yet all decent Rites
are included in the command of doing it; and therefore the Church may take her
choice.

Well, but the Apostles gave Laws only about necessary things, as we see in
the Council of Jerusalem, they would lay no other burden upon the Disciples,
but what they thought necessary, at least for that time, 15 Acts 29. Now though
there might several Answers be given to this, I shall say no more at present,
but that I take the Decency of Worship to be necessary; I am sure St. Paul
gives an express Law about it. But as for the necessary things which were
determined at the Council in Jerusalem, they did not concern the circumstances
of Worship, but some external Rituals and Ceremonies, which were matters of
burden. We have nothing like it in our Church; and if ever the Church should
undertake to determine such matters, it will be seasonable to urge the practice
of the Council at Jerusalem, to determine only necessary things.

These are the most material things our Reconciler has urged against the
imposition of the Ceremonies of the Church of England. Whether upon the whole
it appears that they are so useless and unnecessary, that the Church ought not
to interpose her Authority in such matters, or be justly blameable for doing
it, I must leave every man to judge.

CHAP. II. Concerning charity to the Souls of men; and how far, and in what
cases it obliges Church Governors; and what regard Church Governors ought to
have to the Errors, and Mistakes, and Scruples of PRIVATE CHRISTIANS under
their care.
HAving discoursed thus largely of the usefulness and necessity of the decent
Ceremonies and Circumstances of religious Worship, in opposition to our
Reconciler, who affirms them to be useless and unnecessary, and to have no
positive Order or Decency, for which they should be commanded; it is time now
to consider the other part of his Argument, viz. that charity to the Souls of
men obliges Church Governors not to impose any such unnecessary things, or to
alter and remove them, if already imposed, when through the mistake and
scruples of some Christians about such matters, they occasion their sin and
fall, and hazard their eternal Salvation: that is, when such Impositions as
these, which some men believe unlawful, and others doubt whether they be lawful
or not, tempt men to forsake the Communion of the Church, and lift themselves
in a Schism, which is a damning sin. I need not point out to any particular
place wherein this is said; for it is to be found almost in every page of his
Book, and comes in at the tail of every Argument: and therefore I shall once
for all consider these Principles also, and begin here with charity to the
Souls of men, which in the method of my Discourse is the second general
Principle I promised to examine. The Question then is this:

Secondly, What obligation charity to the Souls of men lays upon the Governors
of the Church. That the Governors of the Church ought to exercise great
tenderness and charity to the Souls of men, I readily grant; for the care of
Souls is their proper work and business: and our Reconciler could not have
pitched upon a more popular Argument to declaim upon, as he does at large, p.
187, etc. And indeed, I find his Talent lies more in some insinuating
Harangues, than in c'ose reasoning: but though he has made a fine S^ory of
this, and said things artificially enough to move the Passions of his Readers,
he has never offered fairly to state the extent and measures of Charity with
relation to acts of Government, but only asserted charity to the Souls of men
to be the Duty of Governors, as well as of private Christians (which no body
denies that I know of); and from thence infers the alteration of our
Ceremonies, and that Church Governors act uncharitably, if they do not consent
to such an alteration. Now the alteration of public Laws and R^tes of Worship,
which some men take an unjust and unreasonable offense at, whatever mischief
they do to their own Souls by such an unjust offense, does not seem to me to be
an immediate consequence from the obligations of charity to men's Souls: and
therefore there should have been something at least offered for the proof of
it; and, I confess, I cannot see any thing that looks like an Argument to this
purpose. Since therefore I have little or nothing to answer upon this Argument,
which our Reconciler thought better to take for granted, than to prove it, I
shall endeavor to state this matter so plainly, as to vindicate our Governors
from this spightful and uncharitable Accusation, of want of charity to men's
Souls. And to this end, I shall briefly inquire wherein the Charity of
Governors must consist, and how it must express it self; which I shall explain
by these two Principles.

I. That the Charity of Governors is consistent with the Duty and Authority of
Government. II. That the Charity of Governors must express it self in the Acts
of Government.
1. That the Charity of Governors must be such as is consistent with the Duty
and Authority of Government. For charity to others cannot dispense with our own
duty; and therefore if Christ have given authority to his Ministers to govern
his Church, whatever pretenses of charity there be to the contrary, they must
govern it, or they are very uncharitable to themselves, in neglecting their own
Duty, out of pretense of charity to others. Nay, all private acts of charity
must give place to public charity. Now Government is a public good, that is,
is a public charity; and therefore must not be neglected out of pretense of
charity to private Christians.

Now to apply this to our present purpose: If the Governors of the Church
could do what our Reconciler desires, without neglecting their own Duty, or
injuring their Authority and Government, I think this Plea of Charity would be
more specious and plausible; but that they cannot do it, is as plain to me as a
first Principle. For,

1. It is their duty to direct and govern religious Assemblies, and to secure
the Order and Decency of public Worship; which they cannot do, without
prescribing the Rules, and determining the decent circumstances of action. But
you will say, Cannot the Bishops govern the Church, nor take care of the
Decency of Worship, unless they command the Minister to officiate in a
Surplice, and the People to receive kneeling? Yes, no doubt they may. Then
these Laws are alterable. They are so. Then in charity they are bound to alter
them, according to your own Rules: for they may do this, without neglecting
their duty of governing religious Assemblies. I deny the consequence, and that
for this reason; because Charity does not require any man, much less
Governors, to do a foolish thing which serves no good end at all. For if they
should alter our present Rules and decent Circumstances of Worship, they must
prescribe some others, or else they neglect their Duty: for the Decency of
public Worship cannot be preserved, without the decent Circumstances of
Worship; and they cannot be secured (especially in such an Age as this, wherein
so many men think a rude and slovenly Worship to be most pure and spiritual)
without some fixed and standing Rules of Decency. Now whatever change they make,
they cannot change for the better, nor remove any scruple by such a change. For
most of the Principles upon which our Dissenters dispute against our present
Ceremonies, will serve as well against any other established Order of Worship:
and certainly it is not worth the while for Governors to alter Laws merely to
try the humors of People, to see whether those who without reason scruple
Impositions in one case, will without reason submit to other Impositions, when
the same reasons hold in both. It is neither consistent with the prudence nor
charity of Government, upon such slight pretenses as these, to make alterations
so much for the worse, as they must be, if ever they alter our present Rules of
Worship. If this should gratify some humoursome People, it might justly offend
and scandalize much better men, to see a decent way of Worship changed for that
which is less decent. No, says our Reconciler, Recon. p. 332, 333.
this cannot with any truth be pretended. -- Are not things indifferent, such
as may be imposed or not imposed at pleasure? And does not our Church declare
her Ceremonies to be things indifferent? Can therefore any regular Son of the
Church of England be offended that she does use her liberty in matters wholly
left unto her liberty, and by her first Reformers declared to be so? Yes, why
not, for all this? Must every thing which is alterable, be altered for no
reason at all? May it not justly offend a regular Son of the Church of England,
to see a more decent way of Worship laid aside, and that which is less decent
come in the room of it? The Church of England, I am sure, is not of this mind;
she allows that her Ceremonies may be changed and altered, Of Ceremonies: why
some abolished and some retained. Pref. to the Com. Pray.
but they ought to be altered only upon just causes, as she expressly
determines: and though in such cases she allows of some alteration in her
Ceremonies, yet she judges it necessary, that some Ceremonies should be
retained, since without some Ceremonies it is not possible to keep any Order or
quite Discipline in the Church. But, says our Reconciler, they do not desire
that the Ceremonies by Law established should be abolished, or that Conformists
should be forbid to use them; but only that others whose Consciences will not
permit them so to do, should be dispensed with in their omission of them. This
would be a greater and more just offense, than the other: for this must be
either in the same, or in distinct Assemblies. If in the same, this introduces
nothing but Disorder, Confusion, and Schism^ into the Bowels of the Church; if
in distinct Assemblies, this is to establish Schism by a Law, and to make them
only legal Conventicles. But he says, As some sit, some stand, some kneel at
Common Prayer, P. 338.
and Prayer before Sermon, and this without confusion; so may some sit, some
kneel, some stand at the receiving the Sacrament. But does our Reconciler think
this variety of posture at Prayer, an orderly and decent thing? especially for
men to sit at Prayers? Standing may be sometimes necessary, because especially
in full Auditories all persons may not have the convenience of kneeling: But is
one Irregularity sufficient to justify another? Does not the Church require an
uniform posture at Prayer too? And is it not more decent and orderly, that it
should be so? And yet there is a great difference between such various postures
at Prayers, and at receiving the Lords Supper. For excepting the rudeness of
sitting, when men have strength of body to kneel or stand, which is an offense
to pious and devout minds; these variety of postures do not proceed from men's
differing judgments and opinions about them, and therefore do not occasion
mutual scandal and offense, censuring and judging one another in the very act
of Worship. But differing postures in receiving the Lords Supper, is matter of
Dispute and scruple; one thinks kneeling idolatrous and superstitious, the
other deservedly thinks it rude and unmannerly to sit; and this must of
necessity occasion mutual Emulations in the very act of receiving; than which,
nothing can be more inconsistent with the nature of that holy Communion. And if
you say, that men must lay aside this judging and censorious humor, you must
either mean, that while men retain these differing apprehensions of things,
they must not judge one another; which is to say, that they must not judge of
men and things as they think; which is ridiculously impossible, unless you can
teach men not to think as they think: or that they must alter their
apprehensions of things, and look upon all these as indifferent postures; and
then there will be no reason to alter the Laws, or to allow of such different
postures, when men's scruples are removed.

2. As the Governors of the Church would neglect their Duty, so they would
manifestly injure their Authority by such a compliance with the ignorance,
humor, and scruples of men: and therefore how charitable soever our Reconciler
may think this, it is not such a Charity as becomes Governors. For private
Christians to abridge themselves in the use of their Christian liberty for the
sake of others, is in many cases highly commendable, and a generous act of
charity; but for Governors to renounce their Authority to gratify Dissenters,
is so far from being an act of charity, that it is betraying their Trust.
Either Christ has committed this power to them to govern religious Assemblies,
and to prescribe the decent Rules of Worship, or he has not: if he have (as our
Reconciler has more than once owned in this very Book) then this power is a
Trust committed to them, and such a Trust as they must give an account of: and
therefore no pretense of charity can justify them in renouncing the exercise
of it. The Reconciler indeed tells us, P. 159.
That which is here pleaded for, is neither a denial, nor a dissembling of
their imposing power in Superiors, but only an abatement of the exercise
thereof toward some weak Dissenters. Which may be done with the asserting of
the power, and a profession that they do suspend the exercise thereof, not
through conviction that it may not be lawfully used, but out of pure
commiseration and howels of compassion toward their weak Brethren. But all the
Protestations in the World will not salve this matter: for the great Dispute
about Ceremonies turns upon this hinge, whether the Church have authority to
command any thing relating to the Worship of God, which is not expressly
instituted and enjoined by Christ. Hence all such Rules of Order and Decency
are, by our modest and peaceable Dissenters, opprobriously called Will Worship
and Humane Inventions, and teaching for Doctrines the commandments of men: and
though they had nothing to say against the lawfulness of the things themselves,
(and indeed, all that they have to say, is next to nothing) yet their not being
commanded by God, and their being commanded by men, though by such men as are
invested with Christ's authority to govern his Church, is thought a sufficient
reason not to submit to them. Now when the Authority of the Church is the
principal matter in dispute, and Ceremonies only a collateral dispute, as
depending upon an usurped and illegal Authority, I would fain know of our
Reconciler, how upon these terms they can give up these Ceremonies to the
clamours of the Dissenters, without giving up their own Authority with them;
which is the principal thing in question, and for the sake of which the
Ceremonies are disputed.

Now let any man judge whether this be an act of charity, to part with that
Authority which Christ has placed in his Church. Is this Authority for the good
of the Church, or is it not? If it be not, then it seems Christ has placed such
an Authority in his Church, as is not for the public good; and this charges
our Savior himself with want of prudence or charity to his own Church, in
setting such an uncharitable power over it: If Church Authority be for the
public good, then it is no act of charity to part with it.

As to give but one instance of this, which our Reconciler is often at. He
tells us, P. 323.
That the Scripture-Exhortations (to Peace and Unity) are so far from requiring
such an Unity and Uniformity, (as we plead for) that they perfectly confute all
those who think it fit to lay the Union of the Church upon an uniformity in
lesser matters, and do impose them as the Conditions of Communion: for either
we must all submit to some infallible Guide and Judge of Controversies, in
order to our Union, as R. H. thinks it necessary in order to our compliance
with these Precepts, or else confess it is morally impossible to comply with
them, it being visibly impossible to bring all men unto an unity of judgment
and of practice in these things; and so we must reflect upon the wisdom of our
Lord, and of his Precepts. And grant that Protestants have no sufficient means
of Unity, which is the very thing that Papists do so continually upbraid us
with, or must acknowledge that the way to this desired Unity is not that of
imposing and requiring uniformity in little matters, concerning which the minds
of men are full of doubts and scruples; but that of mutual condescension, and
forbearance, and charity in lesser differences. God help that Church, which
meets with such Reconcilers as these! But that which I shall observe here, is
his own concession, and his Dilemma upon it. He argues strongly, That while men
are left to judge for themselves in the Externals of Worship, it is impossible
to bring them unto an unity of judgment and practice in these things: for this,
he says, must be granted, unless we own the necessity of an infallible Judge.
Here indeed the Reconciler and I differ a little about the infallibility of
this Judge; but we agree upon the main point, that without a Judge to determine
these matters, there can be no Unity and Agreement among Christians; which
certainly is a demonstration in the Age in which we live, how strange soever it
might have been thought in the Primitive times of Unity. And his Dilemma is a
very sore one: For either this reflects upon the Wisdom of Christ himself, and
grants that Protestants have no sufficient means of Unity; or that the way to
this desired Unity is not requiring uniformity in little matters. Now to begin
with the last first; it is demonstrably true, that there is no Church-Unity
without Unity in Worship; wherein the principal exercise of Christian Communion
consists; and that there can be no Decency and Order in this (which is an
Apostolical Precept) without Uniformity; and no Uniformity without such
Impositions. What follows then, but that we must reflect on the wisdom of
Christ in not leaving Authority in his Church sufficient to determine such
matters, and grant that Protestants have no means of Union? These are hard
terms; but I cannot see how they can be avoided, without granting that Christ
has given, though not an infallible Judge of all Controversies of Faith, yet a
supreme Authority to his Church to determine all matters of Decency and Order;
which all Christians are bound to obey in all cases, where their Rules and
Orders do not contradict some plain and express Law of Christ. And this
Principle will quickly make us all of a mind in such matters.

Now then from hence I thus argue: If the wisdom of Christ himself in
instituting a Church-Society, and commanding all Christians to live in Peace,
and Unity, and Love; if the Unity of Christians among themselves, and the
Decency and Uniformity of Worship, are so nearly concerned in the sacredness of
Church Authority, that without it the wisdom of Christ is obscured and exposed
to censure, the Peace and Unity of Christians rendered impracticable,
Protestants left destitute of any means of Union, and occasion given to Papists
to cry up the necessity of an infallible Judge, that which draws so many fatal
consequents after it; does not seem to me to be any great act of charity: and
yet thus it would be, should the Governors of the Church, in compliance with
the frowardness and scruples of Schismatics, give up their authority in the
Externals of Worship, and leave every man to do as he pleased. While the Church
maintains her Authority, a little Discipline and Government, and a few good
Arguments, may in time cure the Schism; and if it will not, let Schismatics
answer for it at the last day: but if Schismatics once gain this point, and
wheedle the Church for peace sake out of her Authority, then we must bid an
eternal farewell to Peace, and Order, and Uniformity in Religion: for men will
never agree in these matters, without the determination of Authority. There is
no other means left in the Church to decide these differences, when the Church
has parted with her Authority; and thus the Wisdom of Christ will be reproached
and censured, and the Protestant Name and Religion exposed to contempt: and
this is our Reconciler's Protestant Charity.

Well, but suppose this compliance with Dissenters did not infer a renuntiation
of their Power and Authority, but only a suspension of the exercise of it, the
case is much the same: for this forbearance must be for ever, unless we could
suppose that these men will return to the obedience of the Church, when the
Church leaves off to command. Now it is the same thing for the Church to
renounce her Power, and to renounce the exercise of it. I suppose Christ gave
this Power to the Church, that she should exercise it; and if the Power be
necessary to the welfare and unity, and edification of the Church, to be sure
the exercise of it is: For Authority is a mere empty name, and good for
nothing, when it does nothing. This, I think, is sufficient to prove that the
charity of Governors does not require them to renounce their Government,
neither in the authority nor exercise of it: And therefore,

II. The Charity of Governors must consist in the acts and exercise of
Government; that is, as far as it concerns our present Dispute, in making and
repealing Laws. And I dare join issue here with our Reconciler, and challenge
him and all his dissenting Clients, to fix the least imputation of
uncharitableness upon the Church of England on this account: as to discourse
this matter a little more particularly, to confound all such unjust Defamers of
Authority and Government.

1. I shall begin with repealing Laws, and altering such Rituals and Ceremonies
as were either sinful, superstitious, or inconvenient; because here our
Reformation began. And what Rules our Church 'observed in this, we learn from
the Preface to the Common Prayer; where the reasons are assigned why some
Ceremonies were abolished: As, 1. Because some of them which were at first well
intended, did in time degenerate into vanity and superstition. 2. Others were
from the beginning the effects of an indiscreet Devotion, and such a Zeal as
was without knowledge, and daily grew to more and more abuses; and they were
rejected, because they were unprofitable, blinded the people, hindered them from
a right understanding of the true nature of Christian Religion, and obscured
the glory of God. 3. Some were put away, because their very numbers were an
intolerable burden, and made the estate of Christian people in worse case
concerning this matter, than were the Jews, as St. Austin complained in his
days, when the number of Ceremonies was much less than it was in this Church at
the time of Reformation; which was a great injury to the Gospel of Christ,
which is not a Ceremonial Law (as much of Moses Law was) but a Religion to
serve God, not in the bondage of the figure or shadow, but in the freedom of
the Spirit. And lastly, the most weighty cause of the abolishment of certain
Ceremonies was, that they were so far abused, partly by the superstitious
blindness of the ignorant and unlearned, and partly by the unsatiable avarice
of such as sought more their own lucre than the glory of God, that the abuses
could not well be taken away, the thing remaining still.

With what grave and mature consideration our Church proceeded in this affair,
is evident from this account, which contains all the wise reasons that can be
thought of for the alteration of any public Constitutions. Here is charity to
the Souls of men, in delivering them from ignorance and superstition, to which
they were betrayed by the Rituals and Ceremonies of Religion; a tender regard
to the case and liberty of Christians, which was oppressed by such a multitude
as were hard to know and to remember, and very troublesome to observe, and
almost impossible to understand; which made them wholly useless and
unprofitable. Here is a great regard to the glory of God, which was obscured by
these Ceremonies; to the purity of the Christian Religion, which was
transformed, by a multitude of Ceremonies, into a mere external and figurative
Worship. And here are the true reasons why any Ceremonies which have been long
used in a Church, and confirmed by Ecclesiastical Canons, or Civil Laws, ought,
notwithstanding that, to be removed, when either their numbers are excessive,
or the abuses of them such as cannot be taken away, without abolishing the
Ceremony it self. Several instances of this may be given, as to name only
Images in Churches, which could not be safely retained at that time, without
the danger of idolatrous Worship. For the generality of people in those days
were so superstitiously addicted to the worship of Images, that had they been
left in Churches, though the worship of them had been expressly forbid, yet
infinite numbers of people would have worshipped them notwithstanding. This
very reason our Church gives in her Homily against the peril of Idolatry, part
3. of the necessity of removing Images out of Churches, That as well by the
origin and nature of Idols and Images themselves, as by the proneness and
inclination of man's corrupt nature to Idolatry, it is evident, that neither
Images, if they be publicly set up, can be separated, nor men, if they see
Images in Temples and Churches, can be stayed and kept from Idolatry. --
Wherefore they which thus reason, though it be not expedient, yet it is lawful
to have Images publicly, and do prove that lawfulness by a few picked and
chosen men: if they object that indifferently to all men, which a very few can
have without hurt and offense, they seem to take the multitude for vile Souls,
of whose loss and safeguard no reputation is to be had; for whom Christ yet
paid as dearly as for the mightiest Prince, or the wisest and best learned of
the Earth. And they that would have it generally to be taken for indifferent,
that a very few take no hurt of it, though infinite multitudes besides perish
thereby, show that they put little difference between the multitudes of
Christians and bruit Beasts, whose danger they do so little esteem. Thus in
another place of the same Homily; What shall I say of them who lay
stumbling blocks where before there were none, and set snares for the feet, nay
for the souls of weak and simple ones, and work the danger of everlasting
destruction, for whom our Savior shed his most precious Blood? where better it
were that the Arts of painting, plaistering, carving, or graving, never had
been found out or used, than one of them whose Souls in the sight of God are so
precious, should by occasion of Images or Pictures, perish and be lost.

This makes it very evident, that our Church in her Reformation had a peculiar
regard to the care of men's Souls, and therefore removed whatever might prove a
snare and temptation to them, and so hazard their eternal salvation. Our
Reconciler transcribes these Passages out of that Homily, and endeavors from
thence to prove, that the Church by a parity of Reason, Rec. p. 31, 32.
and out of care of men's Souls, ought to part with all other Ceremonies, since
the imposition of them tempts men to Schism, which is a damning sin. But is
there no difference between these two cases? The Church must not retain that,
which though it may possibly be innocently used by some men, yet is apt in its
own nature to tempt the generality of men to sin; as Images in Churches are to
tempt men to Idolatry: and the Church must not retain such Ceremonies which
serve to very good purposes in Religion, and are not apt in their own natures
to serve any bad one, because there are some men who will not submit to such
Impositions, but will separate from the Church, and involve themselves in the
guilt of a damning Schism, if such Ceremonies be imposed. Let us put a like
case, and see how this Argument will look then. A Father, out of charity to the
Soul of his Son, must not carry him to, nor indulge him in going familiarly to
the Tavern or the Stews, because though it is possible to go to those places
without being drunk or unchaste, yet very few young men can resist such
temptations; and therefore he apparently hazards his Son by it. Now suppose
from hence our Reconciler should argue, that by a parity of Reason he ought not
to command his Son to go to School, nor to do any thing which he strongly
suspects he will not obey him in, though it be otherwise very innocent and
useful, and fit to be commanded, because this involves his Son in the guilt of
disobedience to his Father, which is a damning sin, and will destroy his Soul,
as well as Adultery or Drunkenness; What would all Parents think of such a
Casuist as this? At this rate a disobedient Son must give Laws to his Father,
as well as a Schismatic give Laws to the Church. Superiors must not in
charity command any thing, but what Inferiors please to obey: for if they
disobey, and be damned for their disobedience, those Superiors who commanded
what their Inferiors would not obey, are guilty of their damnation.

But the plain Answer to it, is this: The obligations of Charity extend no
farther than our own part and duty does: for we cannot show our charity in that
which is not our duty, nor in our power to help or hinder. Whatever evil
happens to others upon the neglect of our duty, or the uncharitable performance
of it, is imputable to us; but if other men by the neglect of their own duty,
accidentally suffer by what we have wisely and charitably done, the sin and
guilt, as well as misery, is their own. Otherwise it were a dangerous thing for
us to do our duty, unless we were sure that other men would do theirs. For the
wise and charitable discharge of our duty, may in most cases aggravate the sin
and condemnation of those who will not do theirs. It may at this rate prove the
most uncharitable thing in the world, to reprove an obstinate and incorrigible
sinner, or to attempt to convince an obdurate and inflexible Schismatic;
because such reproofs, and such means of conviction, if they do not reclaim
them, make their sin more inexcusable.

Thus it is between Governors and Subjects. It is the duty of Governors to
govern, and they must do it wisely and charitably; and it is the duty of
Subjects to obey. If the Subjects suffer by the ill government of their
Superiors, it is their fault; if they suffer by their own disobedience, the
fault also is their own. If the Governors of the Church set up Images in
Churches, which is a great temptation to people to worship them, especially if
they have been educated in such an idolatrous Worship; this is very
uncharitably done, and argues little care of men's Souls: but if they give wise
and charitable Rules of Worship, and people will not obey them, but divide
themselves from the Church, and unite in a Schism; if they be damned for their
Disobedience and their Schism, the fault is their own.

2. Let us now consider what Rules our Church observed in retaining Ceremonies;
and if she have acted as charitably there too, I know not where our Reconciler
will fix the charge of uncharitableness upon the Church. Now she has retained
but very few; and therefore they are not burdensome by their numbers, nor do
they obscure or adulterate the simplicity of the Christian Worship. She has
retained only those which are for decent Order and Edification, since without
some Ceremonies it is not possible to keep any Order or quiet Discipline in the
Church. She has retained such as are venerable for their antiquity and age, and
have a plain and easy signification; are neither dark nor dumb Ceremonies, but
so set forth, that every man may understand what they do mean, and to what use
they do serve. For though mere signification, without any other use, is a very
little thing in Christian Religion, yet when the decent circumstances of
Worship, which are necessary to the orderly performance of it, have an
additional signification also, suitable to the nature of the Worship we are
engaged in, it is an additional ornament and advantage to the Ministry, as I
have already discoursed. Nay, the Church has taken care, as she says, to
appoint such Ceremonies as are least capable of being abused to superstition.
That it is not like that they in time should be abused as others have been. In
which case she has left a liberty to alter them, if they should be so abused;
which is the only reasonable occasion there can be for such an alteration. Now
how any Church can be more easy and charitable in her Impositions, I confess,
I cannot tell; and if that be a charitable Church, whose Impositions are easy
and charitable, which are innocent and useful themselves, and not apt to tempt
men to any sin, then the Church of England is very charitable, though
Dissenters should be damned for their wilful and causeless Schism.

But besides this, as far as it is possible to prevent the Cavils of
evil-minded men, our Church has taken care to explain the meaning of the sign
of the Cross in Baptism, and kneeling at receiving the Lords Supper, to remove
all suspicions of any superstitious opinions about them; which is an Argument
of great charity, and great care of the Souls of men. But you will say, Had it
not been greater charity to the Souls of men, not to have retained such
Ceremonies as needed explication, than to explain the meaning of them, which
may not give satisfaction to all men of the lawfulness of their use? This were
something to the purpose indeed, were there any thing doubtful in their
signification: but it is not the obscureness of these Ceremonies, but the
perverseness of men who endeavor to find out some superstition in them; which
makes such Declarations of the Church more charitable still, as being a
condescension not to the ignorance, but to the frowardness of her Children.
Though to worship the Cross be Idolatry, to use it as a Charm and Spell savor
of Superstition, yet to use it as a venerable Badge of our Christian
Profession, is neither; and no man can reasonably suspect that it is used
otherwise in Baptism. To kneel at the Sacrament is a decent posture of
receiving, and can never be suspected as an act of Worship to the Bread, in
those who believe that after consecration it is Bread still, and not the
natural Body of Christ: for to worship Bread, which we believe to be nothing
but Bread, would be a more absurd Idolatry than the Papists are guilty of, who
believe it not to be Bread, but the Body of Christ. This reason the Church
assigns for it, in the second Common Prayer Book of Edward the Sixth: Although
no Order can be so perfectly devised, but it may by some, either for their
ignorance and infirmity, or else for malice and obstinacy, be misconstrued,
depraved, and interpreted in a wrong part; yet because brotherly charity
wills, that so much as conveniently may be, offenses should be taken away,
therefore we, willing to do the same, declare that in kneeling at the Sacrament
no adoration of the Elements is intended. Recon. p. 208.
Thus our Reconciler cites this passages; and I must trust him at present,
because I have not the Book by me: but this sufficiently proves what I allege
it for, that our Church did not add this explication, as apprehending any
necessity of it, but to prevent the absurd interpretations of ignorant or
malicious Cavillers. But what our Reconciler adds, Who can tell why this whole
Preface in our present Common Prayer Book is left out, is only a spightful
insinuation of I know not what; since the same Declaration is as large and full
in our Common Prayer Book, as words can make it. But he proceeds: and Why that
Charity which wills, that as much as conveniently may be, offenses should be
taken away, should not will also the taking away or the abatement of
unnecessary Ceremonies, or alteration of scrupled expressions in our Liturgy?
I am not bound to answer these trifling Cavils as often as he repeats them; but
I think every man of sense will see some little difference between making the
Rules and Orders of the Church as inoffensive as may be, and destroying all
decent and orderly Constitutions: the first is such a Charity as becomes
Governors, the second is nothing better than the dissolution of Government.
But of Scruples, more presently.

Thus our Reconciler observes, that the Convocation held An. 1640. speaking of
the laudable custom of bowing with the body, in token of our reverence of God,
when we come into the place of public Worship, says thus: In the practice or
admission of this Rite, we desire the Rule of Charity, prescribed by the
Apostle, may be observed; which is, That they who use this Rite, despise not
them who use it not; and they who use it not, condemn not them who use it. Now,
says the Author of the mischief of Impositions, I would gladly hear a fair
reason given why the Apostle should prescribe the Rule of Charity to be
observed in this one Rite or Ceremony, more than another. And our Reconciler
very modestly adds, The Apostle prescribes a Rule, and they will make use of it
when and where, and in what cases they please; and in others, where it is as
useful, lay it by like one of their vacated Canons. This is wonderful deference
to Authority! But however, this is another instance of the Churches Charity and
moderation, at least in this one Rite; and methinks it deserved a little more
civility, than to be turned into an Argument of Reproach. But cannot our
Reconciler guess at any reason for this difference, why she should grant that
liberty in this one Rite, which she denies in other cases? Why then I Will tell
him one; Because it is more capable of such an indulgence than other Ceremonies
are: for it is an act of private Worship, though performed in the public
Church; and therefore different usages in such matters do not disturb the Order
and Decency of public Worship. When we offer up our common Worship to God,
which is the act of the whole Congregation, it is fitting that there should be
one Rule and Order observed: for Uniformity is necessary to the Decency of
Worship, and to the Unity of it; but there is no necessity that all men's
private Devotions should be alike. And it is possible to think of another
reason too; That this bowing the body in reverence to God, when we enter into
his house, is properly a Ritual or Ceremony, that is, an exterior action or
thing, not merely a circumstance of Worship: it is it self an external Rite of
Worship, not the circumstance of any other act. It may be very decent to bow
our body in reverence to God, when we enter his house, but it is not a decent
circumstance of religious Worship; and therefore there is not the same
necessity that the Church should determine it, as there is that she should
determine the necessary circumstances of action, without which the Worship of
God cannot be decently performed: and it seems to me to be an Argument of great
wisdom in the Church, that she has not made an uniformity in this Rite, as
necessary as in the other Ceremonies of Religion, since there is not an equal
necessity for it. And I further add, that the Apostles Rule of Charity, not to
judge and censure one another upon such different usages, does not relate to
those Ceremonies which are also the decent circumstances of religious actions,
and so are necessary to the uniformity of public Worship, which must not be
neglected out of a pretense of Charity; but it may extend to such Rites as
these: which shows the great judgment of our Church in applying this Rule to
one case, and not to the other; and argues great ignorance, as well as
impudence, in our Reconciler to censure it: which I shall largely prove, when I
come to answer his fourth Chapter.

And because our Reconciler so often mentions not only the abatement of the
Ceremonies, but the alteration of some scrupled expressions in the Liturgy,
without mentioning what those are; I can give no other answer to it, but to
represent that account which is given us of those late alterations which were
made in our Liturgy, as we find it in the Preface to the Common Prayer Book.
Our general aim therefore in this undertaking, was not to gratisie this or that
Party in any of their unreasonable demands, but to do that which to our best
understanding we conceived might most tend to the preservation of peace and
unity in the Church, the procuring of Reverence, and exciting of Piety and
Devotion in the public Worship of God, and the cutting off occasion from them
that seek occasion of cavil or quarrel against the Liturgy of our Church. --
Most of the alterations were made -- for the more proper expressing of some
words or phrases of ancient usage, in terms more suitable to the Language of
the present times, and the clearer explanation of some other words or phrases
which were either of doubtful signification, or otherwise liable to
misconstruction. And what other Rule our Reconciler would have the Church
observe in altering scrupled phrases, I cannot tell: for if she mu^t alter,
while some people cease to scruple, she must alter it all, or rather take it
quite away.

3. But you will say, It is at least a breach of Charity to impose such Rites
and Ceremonies as are scrupled by great numbers of Christians, and the
imposition of which occasions a formidable Schism in the Church. As for the
Schisms and Divisions which are said to be occasioned by the imposition of
these Ceremonies, I shall consider that in the next Chapter: My design at
present leads me to consider the Mistakes and Scruples of Christians, and how
far Governors ought to have any regard to them; and for the explication of
this, there are several things to be observed.

1. I readily grant, that the Church ought not to command any thing which is of
a doubtful or suspicious nature: for where the thing is doubtful, her Authority
to command is doubtful too. Or rather, it is certain that the Church has no
Authority in doubtful matters: for her Authority can be no larger than her
Commission; and it is no part of her Commission to teach or command things
which are doubtful. Thus it may well be doubted whether it be lawful to set up
Images in Churches, to pray before a Crucifix to excite and quicken our
Devotions, though we have no intention to pay any religious homage to them. For
the same reason, the Church cannot by her Authority adopt doubtful Propositions
into Articles of Faith, and require all Christians to believe them as the
necessary terms of Communion. To this purpose our Reconciler, at his usual
impertinent rate of Citations, P. 247, etc.
alleadges several passages out of Mr. Chillingworth, to prove that no doubtful
Propositions ought to be made Articles of Faith, or necessary terms of
Communion: in which I perfectly agree with Mr. Chillingworth, but can by no
means see how it follows from hence, that because the Church must not make new
Articles of Faith, therefore she must not prescribe the necessary Rules of
Worship; that because she must not impose things which are of a doubtful
nature, therefore she must not command any thing, which some people raise
doubts and scruples about.

But our Reconciler thinks that it is a sufficient evidence that a thing is
doubtful, and that the peace and unity of the Church ought not to be suspended
upon the determination of it, when there are a great number of men doubt of it,
and the thing is disputed and controverted, and Arguments produced on both
sides: and if this be so, there is not any Article of our Faith but what is
doubtful; it is very doubtful whether there be a God, and whether Christ were
the true Messiah or an Importer; for we know there are a great many Atheists,
Jews, Turks, and Infidels in the world. And if it be an Argument against the
Ceremonies of the Church of England, that Dissenters dispute against them; if
this prove, That the peace and unity of the Church ought not to be suspended
upon submission to them, and that the decision of the Controversy concerning
them, P. 239, 240.
was not intended as a necessary means for the peace and unity of the Church of
God in these Kingdoms; farewell to all certainty in Religion.

But he proves this by an Argument transcribed from Dr. Stillingfleet's
Irenicum, a book which certainly did such great service at the time when it was
written, to draw men on to a calm consideration of things, and whose Reverend
Author has done such excellent service since to the Church of England by his
incomparable Writings both against Papists and Fanatics, that whatever fault
there may be in it, both the Book and the Author have merited something more
than a pardon; especially since that Book stands now upon its own legs, and can
derive no authority from that great Name, he having sufficiently declared his
dislike, and, I think, sufficiently answered some principal parts of it
himself. And though I cannot assent to every Proposition in the Irenicum, as I
am pretty sure the Author himself does not, yet I can by no means think that it
deserves all that clamor which some men have raised against it. I am sure it
never can make any man a Dissenter; and I think it much more desirable, and
more for the interest of the Church, that men should conform upon the
Principles of the Irenicum, than that they should continue Dissenters. I could
not forbear saying this once for all, out of that sincere honor I have for
that excellent person, who has met with very ill usage from some men, who
either envy his deserved praises, or hope to make themselves considerable by
being his Rivals. But let us hear what the Argument is.

Where probable Arguments are brought for the maintaining one part of an
Opinion as well as another, though the Arguments brought be not convincing for
the necessary entertaining either part to an unbyassed understanding, yet the
difference of their Opinions is Argument sufficient that the thing contended
for is not so clear as both Parties would make it to be on their own sides; and
if it be not a thing of necessity to salvation, it gives men ground to think
that the final decision of the matter in controversy was never intended as a
necessary means for the peace and unity of the Church of God.

Now I confess, I see no reason why I may not assent to all this: for if the
Arguments be only probable on both sides, and such as are not convincing
either way to an unbyassed judgment, it is a sign the thing is doubtful,
though some men may be very confident both ways; and nothing that is doubtful
can be necessary to salvation, nor can the final decision of it be necessary to
the peace of the Church. But if the Arguments on one hand to an unbyassed and
disinteressed judgment, be plain and certain, and the Objections on the other
hand nothing but empty and trifling Cavils, which is the true case between the
Church of England and Dissenters in the dispute of Ceremonies; if the dissent
of these men shall be thought sufficient to render this matter uncertain, we
shall be condemned to eternal and unavoidable Skepticism.

But our Reconciler says, Let any man peruse the Arguments of the Dissenters
against Conformity to symbolical Ceremonies, and he will find them strengthened
by the suffrages of many grave and learned Divines both of our own and other
Churches. As for the grave Divines of other Churches, let them mind their own
business, for their Authority is nothing to us; and as for the Divines of our
own Church, who strengthen the Dissenters Arguments against Ceremonies, who
they are, or how many, or how grave and learned they are, I cannot tell. He has
indeed transcribed several Sayings out of some of our Divines, to plead for the
relaxation of such Impositions; but none that I know of, to strengthen the
Dissenters Arguments; which no Divine in our Church can do, who honestly
conforms himself.

Well, but how does this Passage in the Irenicum countenance this reconciling
design? Suppose there be probable reasons on both sides, where yet it is
necessary to act one way, what must be done in this case? must every man be
left to do as he pleases? So says the Reconciler, that this is the only way to
peace; but the Irenicum says the quite contrary; That the way to peace cannot
be by leaving an absolutely to follow their own ways: Irenicum, p. 3.
for that were to build a Babel instead of Salem, Confusion instead of Peace.
It must be then by convincing men, that neither of those ways to peace and
order, which they contend about, is necessary by way of divine command (though
some be as a means to an end) but which particular way or form it must be, is
wholly left to the prudence of those in whose power and trust it is to see the
peace of the Church be secured on lasting foundations. Which is a peremptory
determination against our Reconciler, who very rarely quotes any. Author,
without wresting his words to another sense, than what was intended.

If every thing were doubtful, of which some men doubt, and nothing must be
determined which is thus doubtful, it were impossible that there should be any
external form and constitution of a Church, or any external Worship. If it be a
good Argument that a thing is doubtful, because some men doubt of it, methinks
it is as good an Argument that that is not doubtful, which no body doubts of;
and thus symbolical Ceremonies, as our Reconciler calls them, are past all
doubt: for no Christian ever had any doubt about them for above fifteen hundred
years; which is time enough in this way to prove the certainty of any thing:
And though some Christians begin to doubt, and to invent Arguments to
countenance their doubts, after fifteen hundred years; yet this is no reason
for the Church to doubt also.

Well, but if men's doubting be not an Argument that the thing whereof they
doubt is doubtful, how shall we know what is doubtful, and what not? I answer:
Where there is no positive evidence, and the probabilities or difficulties are
great on both sides, there is sufficient reason for doubting; and in such cases
I think the Church has not authority to determine either way, when the doubt is
about the lawfulness or unlawfulness, the truth or falsehood of things: for the
authority of the Church cannot alter the nature nor the evidence of things; and
therefore ought not to determine that to be lawful, which it is equally
probable may be unlawful; nor that to be true, which has equal proofs of its
being false. But this cannot concern the controversy about the lawful use of
some Ceremonies in religious Worship, for which we have as plain and positive
evidence, as we can desire for a thing of this nature, as I have already shown:
and therefore any men's doubting of this, makes it no more doubtful, than their
doubts about any plain and necessary Article of Faith, renders that also
doubtful and suspicious.

2. Though the Church must not command any thing which is of a doubtful nature,
yet the doubts and scruples or mistakes of Christians ought to have no
influence upon acts of Government. There cannot be a more unreasonable and
senseless Imposition upon Governors than this, which makes all Government the
most arbitrary, and precarious, and useless thing in the world. If this Rule
were allowed, what work would it make in Kingdoms and Families, when Princes,
Parents, and Masters, must command nothing which their Subjects, Children, or
Servants scruple to do! That which makes Government necessary is, that the
generality of mankind do not know how to govern themselves; but this Principle
makes all men their own Governors, and makes it unlawful for any Authority to
impose any thing upon their Subjects which they have not a mind to: for it is
an easy matter to scruple, or to pretend to scruple, whatever we have no mind
to do: and yet if we will believe our Reconciler, here is no distinction to be
made between men who are really weak and scrupulous, and those who pretend to
it: Recon. p. 109, etc.
for it is an uncharitable thing, it seems, whatever evidence we have for it,
to charge those men with obstinacy, malice, or perverseness, who pretend to
Scruples and tender Consciences. But to what purpose has God committed any
Authority to some certain persons in Church or State, if they must not govern
according to the best judgment they have of things, but must be governed by the
mistakes or scruples of those whom they ought to govern? If they must not
command what is innocent, useful, and convenient, when those whom they ought to
command, do not think it so? This all men will acknowledge to be intolerable in
the State; and I challenge our Reconciler to show me any wise reason w^^ the
Secular Powers must have no regard to men's scruples in making useful Laws, and
the Governors of the Church must. Whoever considers how wild, unreasonable,
and fantastical some men's mistakes and scruples are, must needs think it a very
ridiculous Constitution of Government, which has any regard to them. It is in
the Government of the Church, as it is in the State, and as it must of
necessity be in all Governments. Those who have authority to govern, must take
care to do it wisely and charitably; and those who are subject, must obey in
all things lawful, without cavilling at their Superiors commands, where they
are not manifestly contrary to some divine Law: and if there happens any hard
case, as such cases will happen under all Governments, God, who is our supreme
Governor, will take care to rectify it, when the Governors of Church or
State cannot do it, without loosening the Sinews of Government. As for
instance: The Governors of the Church must take care to prescribe Rules for
the decent performance of religious Worship; and in such an Age of mistakes and
scruples as this, it is possible some very honest but weak Christians may take
offense at the best and most prudent Constitutions, and separate from the
Church, and involve themselves in the guilt of Schism; what must the Church do
in this case? Must she alter her Laws as often as any Christians pretend to
scruple them? or must she make no Laws about such matters, but suffer every
Christian to worship God as he pleases? This is to renounce their Government,
because some Christians will not obey; or to make Government contemptible and
ridiculous, when it must yield to men's private fancies and scruples. And yet it
is very hard, that the Government of the Church, which is instituted for the
care of men's Souls, should prove a snare and temptation to them, and occasion
their eternal ruin and misery. But I hope that there is no necessity for
either of these. Governors must do their duty, must take care to make such
Laws as are for the advantage of Religion, and the edification of the Church,
and are least liable to any just offense: and if after all their care, some
very honest men may take offense, and fall into Schism, we must leave them to
the mercy of God, who will make allowances for all favorable cases. The Church
can give no relief in such cases, without destroying her Authority and
Government, and giving advantage to Knaves and designing Hypocrites to disturb
the best constitutions of things; but God can distinguish between honest men
and Hypocrites: and if men be sincerely honest, and do fall into Schism through
an innocent mistake, God will be merciful to them; which secures the final
happiness of good men, and yet maintains the sacredness and reverence of
Authority. For when men know that nothing can justify a Schism, and nothing
can plead their pardon with God, but great honesty, and some invincible
mistake, it will make all honest men careful how they separate from the Church,
and diligent in the use of all means for their satisfaction; without which no
man can pass with Almighty God for an honest Separatist: and I doubt not, but
were men convinced of this, it would sooner cure our Schisms, than the removal
of all scrupled Ceremonies. But in is so far from being the duty of
Church Governors to take any notice of men's scruples, when there is no just
occasion for them, that they ought not to allow any man to scruple their
authority in such matters; which weakens Government, and opens a gap for
eternal Schisms to enter.

Chap. 8. p. 259.
It is very true, as our Reconciler has proved at large in a whole Chapter to
that purpose, that the Church in several Ages has made great alterations in the
Externals and Rituals of Religion; but how this serves his Cause, I cannot
tell. No body questions but the Church has done this, and that she had
authority to do it, and that she has so still, when she sees just occasion to
do it: but the Question is, Whether she must do this as often as every little
Reconciler, or every scrupulous Christian demands such an alteration. The
Question is, Whether unreasonable scruples and prejudices be a necessary reason
for the Church to make such alterations. And if he can give any one example in
all Antiquity, that the Church altered her Constitutions for no other reason
but to comply with the scruples of private Christians, he will say something to
the purpose. No, in those days private Christians did not use to scruple any
Ceremonies, which the Governors of the Church thought fit to appoint; but
Bishops made or repealed Laws about such matters, as they thought most
expedient for the good government of the Church. The Question is, Whether they
repealed all Laws for the Order and Decency of Worship, or renounced their
Authority to make such Laws, in compliance with those who denied any such
Authority to the Church. Again, the Question is; Whether in the same Church
they allowed all private Christians to worship God after what manner they
pleased, according to their own private persuasions and apprehensions of these
things; that those who are for a May Pole, may have a May Pole, as our
Reconciler very reverently expresses it. If he can say any thing to these
points, I confess, it will be to his purpose; and therefore I would desire him
to consider of it, now he knows what he is to prove.

But though his History of those alterations which the Church in several Ages
has made in the Rituals and Ceremonies of Religion, would not serve his main
design, yet it highly gratified his pride and insolence to trample upon a
great man, whom he thought he had taken at some advantage.

The Reverend Dean of St. Paul's assigns some reasons why the Church of England
still retains the use of some Ceremonies. Hist. of Separation, p. 16.
His first reason is out of a due reverence to Antiquity. They would hereby
convince the Papists they did put a difference between the gross and
intolerable Superstitions of Popery, and the innocent Rites and Practices which
were observed in the Church before. Recon. p. 297.
This, says our Reconciler, is very like Hypocrisy, to pretend to retain three
Ceremonies of humane institution, out of respect to their supposed antiquity,
whilst we reject as many, which were unquestionably of a divine original, and
therefore sure of an antiquity which more deserves to be reverenced. Truly if
our Church has parted with any thing of a divine original, I think she has
reformed too far: but will our Reconciler say, that every thing that was an
Apostolical Practice, is of divine original? Bishop Tailor, to whom he so often
appeals, would have taught him otherwise, as I have already observed; who says,
that the Apostles in ordering religious Assemblies, and in prescribing such
Rules of Worship as they did not immediately receive from Christ, acted but as
ordinary Ministers of the Church; and what they prescribed, obliged no longer
than the reason and expediency of the things; and the Governors of the Church
in after-Ages had as full and ample Authority as the Apostles themselves in
such matters.

But does the Dean say, that these Ceremonies were retained only for their
antiquity? then indeed the Reconciler's Objection had been strong, that other
Ceremonies which are as ancient as they, should have been retained also. But is
it not a just reverence to Antiquity, that when our Church had for other
reasons determined what number of Ceremonies to retain, and for what ends and
purposes, she chooses to use such Ceremonies as were anciently used in the
Christian Church, rather than to invent any new ones? for it had been an
affront to the ancient Church, to have rejected those Ceremonies which had been
made venerable by ancient use, when they would equally or better serve those
ends we design, than any new ones. This is the very account our Church gives
of it. Having given the reason why she retained some Ceremonies still (as I
have already observed) she answers that Objection why she has retained some old
Ceremonies. If they think much that any of the old remain, Pref. to the Com.
Prayerbook about Ceremonies.
and would rather have all devised new; then such men granting some Ceremonies
convenient to be had, surely where the old may be well used, there they cannot
reasonably reprove the old only for their age, without bewraying of their own
folly. For in such a case they ought rather to have reverence to them for their
antiquity, if they will declare themselves to be more studious of Unity and
Concord than of Innovations and new Fangleness, which (as much as may be with
true setting forth of Christ's Religion) is always to be eschewed. Let our
Reconciler consider whether this be Hypocrisy, or true and sober reasoning.

2. The Dean's second reason is, To manifest the justice and equity of the
Reformation, by letting their Enemies see that they did not break Communion
with them for mere indifferent things. Or as our Reconciler adds, That they
left the Church of Rome no farther than she left the ancient Church. Which the
Dean does not say under that Head, nor any thing like it. But yet here he takes
advantage, and says, It is manifest, that we have left off praying for departed
Saints, the Unction of the sick, the mixing water with the Sacramental Wine,
etc. with many other things which were retained in the ancient Church, and in
the Liturgy of Edward the Sixth (he should have said the first Liturgy.) and
which are things indifferent retained in the Roman Church. But is our
Reconciler in good earnest? I fear, the next Book we shall have from him, will
be the Roman Catholic Reconciler. Are all these things, as used in the Roman
Church, indifferent? Is praying for the dead, as it is joined with the Doctrine
of Purgatory and Merit, in the Church of Rome, a thing indifferent? Is the
Sacrament of Extreme Unction an indifferent thing? Are their Grossings and
Exorcisms, and suchlike Ceremonies, abused by the Church of Rome to the
absurdest Superstitions, indifferent things? Our Reformers at first, in
veneration to the Primitive Church, in which some of these Ceremonies were
used, did retain the use of them in the first Liturgy of Edward the Sixth; but
upon more mature deliberation, finding how impossible it was to restore them to
their primitive use, and to purge them from the superstitious abuses of the
Church of Rome, to which their people were still addicted, laid them all aside:
and for this they are reproached by our Reconciler. Some men would have been
called Papists in Masquerade for half so much as this.

But what is this to the Dean's reason, That we do not break Communion with
them for mere indifferent things? For certainly to retain three indifferent
Ceremonies, though we should reject five hundred more equally indifferent, is a
sufficient proof that we do not quarrel nor break Communion for indifferent
things, considered as indifferent; which is all that the Dean meant by it.

But he has a fling at some others besides the Dean, though whom he means, I
cannot well tell: but he says, Some of our Church senselesly pretend we cannot
change these Ceremonies, because they have been once received and owned by the
Church. I suppose he means the Catholic Church; and though I think it is too
much to say, we cannot change what has been once received, (for the Church of
this Age has as much Authority as the Church of former Ages had) yet, I think,
what has been received by the Catholic Church, ought not, but upon very great
reasons, to be rejected by any particular Church.

But now had our Reconciler been honest, he might have made a great many useful
Remarks upon this History of ancient Ceremonies, for the conviction of
Dissenters. He might have observed, that even in the Apostles days there were
several Ceremonies used of Apostolical institution, which yet had not a divine
but humane Authority; and therefore were afterward disused or altered by the
Church: That in all Ages of the Christian Church, there have been greater
numbers of Ceremonies used, and those much more liable to exception than are
now retained in the Church of England: That the Church has always challenged
and exercised this Authority in the Externals of Religion; and therefore there
has not been any Age of the Church since the Apostles, with which our
Dissenters could have communicated upon their Principles. This had been done
like an honest man, and a true Reconciler; but it is wonderful to me, that he
who can find so many good words for the Church of Rome, can find none for the
Church of England.

3. It may so happen, that some things must be determined by public Authority,
which are matter of doubt and scruple to some professed Christians. When I say,
Authority must determine such things, I mean, if they will do their duty, and
take care of the public Decency and Uniformity of Worship, without which there
can be no Decency. This is evident in such an Age as this, wherein some men
scruple every thing which relates to public Worship, but what they like and
fancy themselves. To be uncovered at Prayers, is as considerable a scruple to
some Quakers, as to kneel at the Sacrament is to other Dissenters. This, it
seems, was a Dispute in the Church of Corinth in St. Paul's days, but the
Apostle made no scruple of determining that question, notwithstanding that; 1
Cor. 11.3, 4, etc.
and yet praying covered or uncovered, are but circumstances of Worship, as
kneeling or sitting at the ^acrament are; and if I had a mind to argue this
point with our Reconciler, I think I could prove them as indifferent
circumstances as the other. For the reason the Apostle assigns for the men's
praying uncovered, and the women covered, that one was an Emblem of Authority,
the other of Subjection, (which makes it a symbolical Ceremony, as our
Dissenters speak) is quite contrary among us, though it were so in the Apostles
days, and is so still in some Eastern Countries. To be uncovered among us, is a
sign of Subjection; and to be covered, a sign of Authority: and therefore
Princes, Parents, and Masters, are covered, or have their Hats on, while
Subjects, Children, and Servants, are uncovered in their presence: And
therefore, in compliance with the Apostles reason, men should now pray covered,
because that is a sign of civil Dignity and Superiority, whereas we now pray
uncovered, in token of a religious Reverence and Subjection to God. Now I would
ask our Reconciler, whether our Church may determine that all men shall pray
with their Hats off, notwithstanding the scruples of some Quakers? for if the
Church must have respect to men's scruples, why not to the scruples of Quakers,
as well as of other Dissenters, when one are as reasonable as the other, and
this may as well be left undetermined as the other? for we have the practice of
the Apostle for one side of the Question, and his reason for the other. If our
Reconciler can think of an Answer to this, so can I too; and so I can also for
the Objections against kneeling at the Sacrament: but still here are scruples
on both sides, and scruples, for ought I see, equally reasonable; and therefore
Governors ought to have an equal regard to them, that is, none at all, if they
will discharge their duty in taking care of the Decency of public Worship.

Dr. Falkner gave another instance of this in the Dispute about leavened or
unleavened Bread in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; where he says, The one
sort is necessary to be determined before the administration, or otherwise the
Ordinance it self must be omitted. Here our Reconciler is resolved to try his
strength, because the Argument, as managed by that otherwise-ingenious man,
Rec. p. 339.
contains great mistakes; which being rectified, will set men right in the
decision of the Controversy. Here then, if ever, we may expect that our
Reconciler will say something to the purpose, because the decision of the
Controversy depends on it.

1. Then, he allows there may be such cases where in genere something is
necessary to be determined. I see we shall have fine work of it, when he begins
with tricks and fallacies. The Doctor speaks of the determination of a
particular circumstance, whether the Sacramental Bread shall be leavened or
unleavened; and he talks of determining some cases in genere, that is, that it
shall be Bread: for I know not else what he means by his in genere. The
Question is, Whether any particular thing which is scrupled by some persons,
may or ought to be determined; if it may, let him say so plainly, and make the
best he can of it.

Well, he grants, that what is necessary to be determined, must be determined;
but adds, that the Dissenters do universally deny that it is necessary to
determine any of these scrupled Ceremonies; and they have perfect demonstration
for the truth of that denial: for, necessatium est, quod non potest aliter se
habere; that only is necessary to be done, which cannot be left undone. I have
seldom met with more trifling and sophistry in so few words: For, 1. Dr.
Falkner speaks of a necessity of determining some things, which have no
antecedent necessity in their own natures, such as the use of leavened or
unleavened Bread in the Sacrament; and our Reconciler grants the Magistrate a
power to determine those things which are necessary in their own natures,
though that be nonsense: for what is necessary in its own nature, so necessary,
that it cannot be left undone, determines it self, without the authority of the
Magistrate; the Magistrate may command such things, but they are determined to
his hand. Nothing can be determined either way by any Authority, but that which
is indifferent and undetermined in its own nature: and I think it a
contradiction, that any thing should be indifferent in its own nature, and so
determinable by humane Authority, which has either such a moral or physical
necessity, that it cannot be otherwise.

2. Dr. Falkner proves, that there may be a necessity of determining some
particular manner of doing a thing, before the action can be done; because
though no particular mode of doing it may be necessary, yet it cannot be done
without some particular mode of doing it. He that will administer the
Sacrament, must administer it either in leavened or unleaved Bread: this is
physically necessary, that it should be done in one or the other; and this
physical necessity infers a moral necessity of determining which way we will do
it, before we can do it: for we cannot at the same time, and in the same
individual act, do it both ways; and therefore we must resolve upon one way of
doing it, or we cannot do it at all. To disprove this, which is as certain as
any demonstration in Euclide, our Reconciler says, that nothing must be
determined but what is necessary in its own nature to the doing or well doing
of any action: As if so be I could travel into the Country, without determining
whether I will walk, or ride, or what way I will go, because no one of these is
in its own nature so necessary, that I cannot travel without it: for I may
choose which I will, but yet I must choose some way or other, or I must stay at
home. Now should you ask a man who is taking a journey, which way he will go,
by land or by water, on foot or horseback, or by Coach; and he should tell you,
it is not necessary to his journey to determine either, for they are all
equally indifferent; would you not think the man mad? for though all are
indifferent, yet some one is necessary to his journey; and if he will not
determine which way he will go, he can never go. This is the case here. Dr.
Falkner says, Before we can receive the Lords Supper, it must be determined
whether we will receive it in leavened or unleavened Bread. No, says the
Reconciler, any determination by the Magistrate is here unnecessary, because
either leavened or unleavened Bread may be received. Right! and therefore there
is no necessity of an universal Law and uniform practice all the world over
about this matter; but still whoever administers, or whoever receives the
Sacrament, must do it in leavened or unleavened Bread. Suppose then in the same
Church and Congregation there should be a dispute about this, as there was
between the Greek and Latin Church; and some should scruple to administer or
receive in leavened, others in unleavened Bread, what must be done in this
case? must the Church determine this matter, or not? or must there in every
Congregation be two Ministers, and two Sacraments, one of the leavened, the
other of the unleavened Communion? I know not what our Reconciler will say to
this; but I am sure either this matter must be determined, notwithstanding the
scruples and differing Opinions about it, or there must be a Schismatical
disorder and confusion in the same Church, in the very act of Christian
Communion.

But how little regard the Apostles themselves (whom I suppose our Reconciler
will grant to be a good President for Church Governors) had to the mistakes
and scruples of Christians, when there was a just reason for making any Decrees
and Canons, is evident from the practice of that first celebrated Council of
Jerusalem. The Jews did mightily urge the necessity of circumcising the
converted Gentiles, and made it a great scruple of Conscience so much as to eat
or drink with them, much less to own them of the same Church and Communion,
without Circumcision. 15. Acts.
Paul and Barnabas were sent to Jerusalem to consult the other Apostles about
this Question. The Apostles accordingly met together; and after a long debate,
determined against the Circumcision of the Gentiles, notwithstanding the Jewish
scruples about it. On the other hand, they lay a Burden (for so the Council
calls it) upon the Gentile Christians, without any regard to any scruples they
might have about it; though, as Dr. Falkner shows, there was a fair color and
pretense for many. P. 309.
The Reconciler indeed answers those pretenses of scruple, which the Doctor
says the Gentile Christians might have, though he sufficiently blunders in it.
But what is that to the purpose? the Doctor did not pretend that they were
unanswerable, but expressly says, Libertas Eccl. p. 429.
That though these are far from solid Arguments, yet to an indifferent person
(for he did not dream of the Protestant Reconciler) may possibly seem as
plausible as many exceptions used by some men in other cases: that is, by the
Dissenters, in the Dispute of Ceremonies. But the force of the Argument (which
our Reconciler conceals, because he could not answer it) is this: That
notwithstanding such plausible exceptions and scruples, That Apostolical
Sanction was both lawful and honorable, yea though it concerned things
indifferent, and was established (as many think) by that Ecclesiastical
Authority which they committed to their Successors in the Church.

As for what the Reconciler urges, that this Decree was only about necessary
things, it has been sufficiently answered already: for the Decency of public
Worship is a necessary thing, and I think a little more necessary than
abstaining from Blood, which is part of that Decree. And whereas he pretends
that the abating our Ceremonies, is necessary upon the same reason which made
that Apostolical Decree necessary, viz. in order to avoid scandal and offense,
I shall largely show how different these cases are, in answer to his fourth
Chapter.

I observe farther, that our Savior himself, who certainly knew as well as our
Reconciler, what indulgence was fit to be used to men's scruples and mistakes,
and in what cases Charity did oblige to such an indulgence, yet was so far from
complying with the errors and mistakes of the Pharisees, that he seems to have
done many things on purpose to oppose their superstitious conceits.

This Argument was urged by Dr. Falkner, and proposed as an Objection by the
Reconciler, Recon. p. 317.
though not in the Doctor's words, as he would have his Readers believe, by
putting them into a different Character. The Doctor's Argument in his own
words, are these: It is truly observed by Ursin, Libertas Eccl. p. 415.
to add confirmation to erroneous Opinions in the minds of the weak about
indifferent things, is a giving offense, or being guilty of an active scandal.
Upon this account, though our Savior knew that his healing, and commanding the
man who was healed, to take up his bed on the Sabbath Day, his eating with
Publicans and Sinners, and his Disciples eating with unwashen hands, were
things in the highest manner offensive to some of the Jews; he practiced and
allowed these things, in opposition to the Scribes and Pharisees, who in their
censures of him, proceeded upon erroneous and corrupt Doctrines vented by them
for divine Dictates. Our Reconciler seems conscious to himself, that this was
an untoward Argument, as it was stated by the Doctor; and therefore in his
Margin he refexs his Reader to the place where these words are found, which I
have now cited; but yet he durst not trust his Readers with them, but puts the
Objection into his own words, which he thought he could better deal with. And
that every one may see how unlike they are to Dr. Falkner's Argument, I shall
transcribe them also, which are these: Our Savior knew that his healing on the
Sabbath Day gave great offense unto the Pharisees, and also ministered unto them
an occasion to traduce his mission, and to persuade the people that he was not
of God, because he did not keep the Sabbath, although he could as well have
done it on the following day: and therefore his Ambassadors may still persist
in the imposing of our Ceremonies, though others are offended at them. Where we
see he durst instance only in his healing on the Sabbath Day, which he thought
he could say something to, but slips over those other instances which the
Doctor gave* and conceals the force of the Doctor's Argument, which consists in
this, That our Savior did not think fit by his compliance with men in their
errors and mistakes, to confirm them in such superstitious conceits. But let
us hear what our Reconciler answers to it.

I. He says, touching the act it self, P. 318.
our Savior declares affirmatively, that there was a moral goodness in it;
that it was to do well, to do good, to save life. But what is this to the
purpose? Was there any moral goodness too in commanding the man whom he had
cured, to take up his Bed and walk on the Sabbath Day? which we know gave equal
offense to the Jews, who told the man that was cured, It is the Sabbath Day, 5
Joh. 10.
it is not lawful for thee to carry thy bed. Was there any moral goodness in
his Disciples eating with unwashen hands? which gave as great offense as any
thing else, and yet was publicly justified by our Savior. Was there any moral
goodness in Christ's eating with Publicans and Sinners? Could not he have
instructed them in the Will of God, without such a familiar conversation with
them, as he knew gave great offense to the Pharisees? Was there any moral
goodness in healing on the Sabbath Day, when there was no necessity for doing
it just on that day? for our Savior might have healed them at any other time
as well. Yes, says our Reconciler, our Savior adds, That the neglect of doing
this on the Sabbath, was to do evil, and destroy life. But where does our
Savior say this? He proposes this Question indeed to them, 6 Luke 9.
Is it lawful on the Sabbath Day to do good, or to do evil? to save life, or to
destroy it? And from hence our Reconciler infers, that not to heal on the
Sabbath Day, had been to destroy life; an inference worthy of his great and
profound judgment! for I would ask him, Whether our Savior could be charged
with destroying those men's lives whom he did not heal, whether on the
Sabbath Day or on any other day? Whether he were under a necessity of healing
all that were sick? If he were not, then he might have chosen his times of
healing, as well as the persons whom he would heal, without being guilty of
destroying any man's life, and so might have forborne healing on the Sabbath Day.
Nay, Whether our Savior could be charged with destroying life, by neglecting
to heal a withered hand on the Sabbath Day, which did not endanger life, and
the cure of which might have been deferred till the next day, without any
hazard? And therefore St. Matthew represents the force of our Savior's
Argument only to prove, that it is lawful to do well on the Sabbath Day. 12
Mat. 12.
And if we compare what St. Matthew and St. Luke say, we shall find this to be
the whole meaning of it: St. Matthew tells us, that when the Jews asked our
Savior, Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath Day, that he said unto them, What
man shall there be among you, that shall have one sheep, and if it fall into a
pit on the Sabbath Day, will be not lay hold on it and lift it out? How much
then is a man better than a sheep? wherefore it is lawful to do well on the
Sabbath Day. For if men may save the life of a sheep on the Sabbath Day, there
is such a vast disproportion between a man and a sheep, that we may lawfully do
any kind office for a man, though it do not extend to rescue him from sudden
death. To deliver a man from any bodily infirmity, though it be not mortal, nor
absolutely necessary to be done at that time, is more pleasing to God, than to
save the life of a sheep; and therefore if one be lawful on the Sabbath Day, we
need not doubt but the other is. The answer St. Luke makes our Savior to
return, is exactly to the same sense, though in other words: Is it lawful on
the Sabbath Day to do good, or to do evil? A strange kind of Question,
according to the English sound of the words: for certainly it is never lawful
to do evil, on no day of the week; but this is a Hebraism, and signifies this
in proper English: Is it better on the Sabbath Day to do good, or to neglect
doing good? Which is comparatively evil, because though it may have no positive
wickedness in it, yet is a less good. Now ^ertainly, the better the day is, the
more does it become us to do the best things on it. And when he adds, to save
life or to destroy it, it plainly refers to that instance St. Matthew gives of
saving the life of a sheep which falls into a pit on the Sabbath Day; which
proves the least real kindness done to men on the Sabbath Day to be lawful,
because any kindness to a man, is more than to save the life of a Beast. So
that all that our Savior pleads in this case, is only the lawfulness of doing
it on the Sabbath Day; and though he knew that the Jews were offended at it,
yet he matters not that offense, which was owing to their own superstitious
mistakes: and therefore the Church may justify her self in imposing lawful
things, though some men by their superstitious mistakes are offended at it.

And yet we may join issue with our Reconciler upon this very point of moral
goodness: for the Decency of Worship is morally good, and therefore not to be
neglected, whoever scruple a conformity to the Rules of Decency and Order.

II. He answers, The end or excellent designs our Savior had, made it not
only lawful, but expedient and necessary. So that in some cases, it seems,
there may be wise reasons for doing that, which we know some men will take
offense at. Now if it appears that the principal reason our Savior had, was to
rebuke and affront the superstition of these men, then it is a just reason for
Church Governors to continue such Impositions as some men ignorant^y and
superstitiously scruple, though they might be changed and altered without any
injury to Religion, because they ought not to countenance men in any false or
superstitious opinions about Religion. Let us then consider the Reasons our
Reconciler assigns for this.

1. His first reason, he says, is Bishop Taylor's: That Jesus might draw off
and separate Christianity from the Yoke of Ceremonies, by abolishing and taking
off the strictest Mosaical Rites, he chose to do many of his Miracles upon the
Sabbath, that he might do the work of Abrogation and Institution both at once,
and teach the people that the Son of man is Lord of the Sabbath. Whether this
be the Bishops reason, I cannot tell; for he has not directed us where to find
it, and I dare not take his word for it. But whose Argument soever it is, there
is certainly a great mistake in it: for our Savior did not intend in this, to
take off the strictest Mosaical Rites; for this Sabbatick rest, which would not
allow the doing the most charitable actions, was no Mosaical Rite, but
Pharisaical Superstition. Our Savior justifies himself, that he did nothing
but what by the Law of Moses was lawful to be done on the Sabbath Day; and
therefore he did nothing in all this toward abrogating the Law of the Sabbath,
but only to correct the superstitious observation of it; that is, publicly to
shame the Superstition of the Pharisees, though he knew they would be greatly
offended at it.

2. And this is the second reason he himself assigns, That Christ is supposed
to have taken this occasion to deliver the poor people from those superstitious
and heavy burdens which the Pharisees had laid upon them in reference to that
day. And this is certainly the true reason; and why should not the Governors
of the Church then impose the use of indifferent things for the Decency of
Worship, to deliver poor people from those Superstitions and heavy Burdens
which our modern Pharisees have laid on them in reference to religious Worship?
For to say that we must use no Ceremonies of humane appointment in religious
Worship, is as gross Superstition, and as unsupportable a Burden, as to forbid
the doing of the best actions on the Sabbath; and is as contrary to the
direction of the Gospel, as that was to the Law: and the offense men
superstitiously take at such things, ought to be despised and scorned, as we
learn from the Example of Christ himself.

This Miracle was still performed in the Synagogue, and so before a multitude
of people, who by it were confirmed in the truth of our Lords Mission, and it
was done when he had taught the people, and so was done in the confirmation of
his Doctrine. Now as to matter of fact, this is false: for our Savior on the
Sabbath Day cured the diseased man who lay at the Pool of Bethesda, which was
neither in the Synagogue, nor before a multitude of people, nor when he had
taught the people, 5 Ioh. 8. for no body knew of this cure, till they saw the
man who was cured carrying his Bed; and he himself did not know who it was that
had cured him. Here Christ had done a cure privately, and without offense: for
it had not been known, had not Christ commanded him to take up his Bed and
carry it away with him; which he did in open defiance to the Superstition of
the Pharisees, and could have no other reason of doing it.

Had these Miracles been wrought only in confirmation of his Mission, would
not another day have served as well for that purpose? He taught the people on
other days also, and wrought many Miracles; and never wanted a multitude of
people to follow him, when they knew where he was. Well, but it showed them the
blindness of their Guides. This is a very good reason* and for the same reason
the Governors of the Church ought in charity to the people, to show them the
blindness of their Guides* and therefore not to comply with them in their
superstitious scruples.

III. But the men who were offended at it, were only Hypocrites, whose hearts
were hardened against the truth. What, were they all Hypocrites? was there not
one honest man among them? Some Hypocrites there were then, and so there are
still; Hypocrites in another sense than these men were Hypocrites. For the Jews
did generally believe the unlawfulness of any kind of work on the Sabbath Day,
and therefore were really scandalized and offended; but we have a company of
Hypocrites among us, who do not really scruple what they pretend to do, but
only make a pretense of scruples an occasion to abuse the People, to stir up
Schisms in the Church, and Factions in the State; men who can conform when they
please, and be offended and scandalized when they please. But our Lord did all
that could be reasonable to prevent their scandal. No, he did not abstain from
working Miracles on the Sabbath Day, which he might have done if he had
pleased; but he was so far from avoiding giving offense to them, that he did it
on purpose because they were offended at it, and to deliver men from such
Superstitions as made them take offense. But he first satisfies them from their
own practice on a less occasion, and from the nature of the action; and that
with so much evidence and conviction, that they were ashamed, and could not
answer him one word. And has our Church been wanting in this, to give
satisfaction to Dissenters? How many unanswerable Books have been written in
justification of the Constitutions and Worship of our Church? And that our
Dissenters are not ashamed, but will talk on, when they have not one wise word
to say, is only an Argument that they have less wit, and more impudence, than
the Pharisees had. Our Church indeed cannot work Miracles, as Christ did, to
convince them; though where plain and convincing Reasons will not do, I doubt
Miracles will not do neither: for though the Pharisees were silenced by Christ,
yet they were neither convinced by his Reasons nor his Miracles.

Thus I have considered what obligation Charity to the Souls of men lays upon
the Governors of the Church to abate those Ceremonies, which some men scruple
and take offense at. But I must here briefly consider one Principle more of our
Reconcilers, which he nowhere pretends to prove, but takes for granted; That
the Charity of Governors requires the abatement of every thing which is not
absolutely necessary in Religion, if it prove an occasion of scruple and
offense. For why must the Church be tied up to what is necessary? Her Power and
Authority extends to things which are useful and expedient, though not
absolutely necessary; and therefore she may exercise this Power according to
the measures of Prudence and Charity, notwithstanding the unreasonable and
superstitious scruples of men, which ought to lay no restraint upon the prudent
Exercise of Government, as, I think, I have already sufficiently proved; and
yet our Reconciler thinks it a sufficient reason why the Church should alter
any scrupled Ceremonies, how decent or expedient soever they are, if we cannot
prove them to be absolutely necessary.

Thus I have considered the main Principles of his Book, and shall not think my
self any further concerned to take notice of them, as often as I meet with
them. If these Principles which I have now laid down, hold good, his Book is
answered, and the Governors of the Church may exercise their just Authority;
and he that is offended, let him be offended. And yet for the more ample
satisfaction of all men, what a trifler our Reconciler is, I shall particularly
examine his Arguments from Scripture, and show how impertinent they are to our
present Dispute.

CHAP. III. Concerning a more particular Answer to our Reconciler's Objections
against the imposition of indifferent things, when they are an occasion of
Discords, Divisians, and Schisms.
THough what I have already discoursed b^ sufficient to satisfy every
impartial Reader, that all our Reconciler's Arguments are mere Fallacies, as
proceeding upon false and mistaken Principles; yet for the more abundant
satisfaction of all who are willing to be informed, I shall proceed to a more
particular examination of his Reasons, why Church Governors ought to alter or
abate such scrupled Ceremonies.

Prot. Rec. c. 1.
I. And first, he declaims very copiously about the great evil and mischief of
Divisions; and truly I believe Discord and Division, especially among Christian
Brethren, to be as bad a thing as he can possibly describe it to be: But what
then? what then? the consequence is very plain: For if Conformists do not
conceive it better at least that we should run the hazard of all these dreadful
evils, than that we should consent to lay aside the imposition of a few
indifferent Ceremonies, or to the altering of a few scrupled expressions in our
Liturgy; P. 22.
then must they yield up these few Ceremonies, and alter these expressions, to
prevent all the aforesaid evils.

1. I answer: Does our Reconciler then think that every thing that is the
occasion of Discords and Divisions, must be removed? Is the cause of Divisions
in the nature of things, or in the minds of men? And is it not most proper to
apply the remedy to the disease? to instruct people that they ought not to
quarrel about such matters? that they ought to pay such deference to their
Superiors, as cheerfully to obey them in all things which God has not expressly
forbid? Till this be done, the Church may after her Constitutions every year,
and be as far off from Peace as now: for while men are ignorant, scrupulous,
and quarrelsome, it is impossible for the Governors of Church and State, by
the most wise and prudent Constitutions, to prevent Divisions.

2. Is not the contempt of Ecclesiastical Authority, and the rude and
unmannerly performance of religious Worship, as great a mischief as Divisions?
and yet it is impossible to indulge every scrupulous person, without destroying
the Authority of the Church, and the Decency of Worship, as I have already
proved. Now I must confess bona fide to our Reconciler, that I think all our
Divisions about Ceremonies, a less scandal to the Christian Religion, than this
would be: for it is better to have a well constituted Church with Division*
than to have none without it.

3. Will our parting with some few Ceremonies, cure these Divisions which he so
much complains of? This our Reconciler cannot undertake for; and it is
demonstrable it will not. Is this the only Controversy, that Presbyterians,
Independents, Quakers, and other Sectaries, have with the Church of England?
Has our Reconciler never read Mr. Baxter's Pleas for Peace, and those other
venomous Pamphlets of late date? When the Church of England was pulled down,
and these Ceremonies and Episcopacy it self removed out of the way, did it cure
Divisions, or increase them? When the Reverend Dean of St. Paul's made some
Proposals for the ease of scrupulous persons, with reference to these
Ceremonies, what thanks had he for it? How many bitter Invectives were written
against him? And can we flatter our selves then, that the removal of these
Ceremonies would cure our Divisions? And if it will not, why does he urge the
evil and mischief of Divisions, to persuade the Church to part with these
Ceremonies? Whatever other reasons there may be to part with these Ceremonies,
the cure of Divisions can be no reason, when we certainly know beforehand that
this will not cure them; unless he thinks the Church bound to act upon such
reasons as he himself and every body else knows to be no reason: for nothing
can be a reason for doing a thing, which cannot be obtained by doing it.

But because our Reconciler attempts to say something to this in his tenth
Chapter, I shall follow him thither. Recon. chapter 10. p. 326.
His first Objection is, That the Church will gain little by such an
Indulgence; and this I verily believe to be true. Let us hear then what he has
to say to it.

And, 1. he takes it for granted, that he has already proved it the duty of
Superiors to condescend in matters of this nature, rather than to debar men
from Communion with the Church of Christ for things unnecessary, and which they
nowhere are commanded to impose; and if so, let us do our duty, and commit the
event to God. Now I answer, 1. I can by no means grant that he has proved this;
and have in part already, and doubt not to make it appear before I have done,
that he has not proved it. But 2. Suppose he had proved that it is the duty of
Superiors to condescend in such matters, when they can do any good by their
condescension; has he proved also that it is their duty to condescend, when
they know they can do no good by it? When these Divisions will not be cured by
such condescension? which is the present case. The gaining of some very few
Proselytes would not countervail the mischief of altering public
Constitutions, though we should suppose it reasonable to condescend to such
alterations, when we can propose any great and public good by doing it.

II. Our Reconciler answers: P. 327.
Suppose that we by yielding in these matters should not reduce one of the
Tribe of our dissenting Brethren, yet should we take off their most plausible
pretenses, and leave them nothing which could be rationally offered as a ground
of Separation, or accusation of our proceedings against them. I doubt not but
our Dissenters despise this Reconciler in their hearts, for thinking that they
have no plausible pretenses, nor rational grounds of Separation, but the
Dispute about Ceremonies: What pretenses then have the Dissenters in Scotland,
where none of these things are imposed? And are they more quiet and peaceable,
or less clamorous in their Complaints, than our Dissenters in England? For
whose sake shall the Church make this Experiment, with the loss of their own
Orders and Constitutions? for the sake of Dissenters? And what charity is it to
them, to discover their obstinacy and hypocrisy, and render them more
inexcusable to God and men? Is it to satisfy our selves that the Dissenters
are a sort of peevish and obstinate Schismatics, who will make Divisions
without any just pretense or reason for it? We know this already; we know they
have no rational grounds for their Separation, though these Ceremonies be not
removed. Or do we think to stop their mouths, and escape their reproaches and
censures? As if any man could stop the mouth of a Schismatic, or make him
blush! Those who are resolved to continue Schismatics, will always find
something to say for it; and let them talk on, the true Sons of the Church will
defend her Constitutions with more reason, than Dissenters reproach them.

III. However, he says, This will entirely stop the mouths of the Layety; P.
330.
and if they be gained, their Preachers must follow. But who told him this? I
am sure Mr. Baxter often complains that their Layety is so headstrong and
stubborn, that they cannot govern them: and in all my observation, I find that
they are as fond of Schism, as zealous against Liturgies and Bishops: as
obstinately addicted to the peculiar Opinions and Practices of their Party, as
their Preachers are; though I am of our Reconciler's mind, that their Preachers
will sooner follow their People to Church, than the People their Preachers. But
with what face can our Reconciler say, That these Ceremonies chiefly debar the
Layety from full Communion with us, when every one knows the contrary? They can
communicate with us, notwithstanding these Ceremonies, when they please, and
when they can serve any interest by it; and their Preachers can give them leave
to do so: and is it not an admirable reason for altering the established
Constitutions of a Church, to gratify such humoursome Schismatics who can
conform when they please?

IV. He adds, They who at first dissented from the Constitution of our Church,
declared they did it purely upon the account of these things, i. e. the
Ceremonies still used among us. This now is a mistake in History: for the first
dislike that was taken against our Church, was for the square Cap and Tippet,
and some Episcopal habit^, which are not talked of in our days, and some of
which were used in the Universities, without scruple, in the late blessed times
of Reformation. But the use of these Ceremonies was never scrupled till Queen
Elizabeth's days, which was the fruit of the former Heats at Francford during
the Marian Persecution: See Dr. Still. Hist. of Separation, p. 4.
and these men indeed did dissent (as our Reconciler expresses it) that is,
they expressed their dislike of these things, but they did not separate upon
it. The first that made any steps to Separation, set up other pretenses;
complained for want of a right Ministry, P. 25.
a right Government in the Church according to the Scriptures, without which,
there can be no right Religion; which are the pretenses of our Separatists at
this day.

Well, but suppose what he says to be true, what reason is this for altering
our Ceremonies at this day? Will our Separatists conform now, if these
Ceremonies are taken away? That he dares not say: but we shall gain this by it,
That it will appear that they are not the genuine Offspring of the old
dissenting Protestants. As if any man, but a Reconciler, were to learn that
now, when it has been so often proved upon them, and they themselves scorn and
huff at the Argument, and will not have the old Puritans made a President for
them.

V. In the Treaty at the Savoy, the abatement of the Ceremonies, and the
alteration of some disputable passages in the Liturgy, was all that was
contended for: That is, he means, the Dispute went no farther; but if they had
gained these points, we should then have heard more of them. I am sure whoever
reads their Petition for Peace, will find all the Principles of Mr. Baxter's
late Pleas for Peace; that so I confess I cannot think him so very inconsistent
with himself, as some men do.

But did they plead only for the alteration of some disputable passages in the
Liturgy, when Mr. Baxter himself drew up a new Liturgy? It seems they would
first have reformed a Liturgy for us, and then have had liberty to have used a
better themselves, and to have been at their liberty too, whether they would
have used it or not.

What if Mr. Baxter and his Brethren imposed upon their Prince with a pretended
zeal for Peace and Unity, (which they pretend still as much as any men, as the
greatest Incendiaries in Church and State commonly do) and with an equivocal
use of the name Episcopacy? when we all know what Bishops they mean, not
Diocesan, but a new Baxterian invention of Parochial Bishops. Though these
pretenses at first were plausible, yet the King and the Parliament soon
discovered what they would be at; and it is modestly done of our Reconciler to
allege the Kings Declaration, when the King has since that, more authentickly
declared his will and his judgment of these matters by Act of Parliament.

But he further adds: Moreover, we are informed by Dr. Burnet and Mr. Baxter,
in the Life of the Lord Chief Justice Hales, That Dr. Bates, Dr. Manton, and
Mr. Baxter, conferring with the Bishop of Chester and Dr. Burton, at the
invitation of the Lord Keeper Bridgman, came to an agreement, drawn up in the
form of an Act by my Lord Chief Justice, to every word of which they consented;
whereupon Mr. Baxter queries, Whether after such agreement, it be ingenuity to
say, We know not what they would have? I would give all the Money in my Pocket
to see this Act, to every word of which all these persons could consent: But
till we know what it is, we may with ingenuity enough say, That we know not
what they would have; and I am still apt to believe, that they themselves don't
know neither. But what if these three men did consent to such an Act, were they
constituted the Representatives of the whole Body of Nonconformists? Could they
undertake that the rest of their Brethren should consent too? Or must the
Church be bound to alter her Constitutions at the instigation of some few busy
undertaking Dissenters?

But since this story is so often alleged, I will freely tell what I know of
it from Dr. Burton's own mouth, a little before his death.

Having met with this story in some of Mr. Baxter's Writings, (for he has told
it more than once) and going to visit Dr. Burton at his house at Bar^es, and
finding him alone, among other discourse, I told him how often Mr. Baxter used
his name in such a story; and I thought it concerned him to give some account
of it, that it might not be represented to his disadvantage. I asked him
whether he could remember what the terms of accommodation were, or whether he
had any Papers about it. He told me, he did not remember particularly what the
terms were, but he believed he had his Papers still, though he could not at
present tell where to find them; but would look for them, and show 'em me, if
he could find them. I desired him in the mean time to tell me what he remembered
about the management of that Affair; and he gave me this relation of it:

That when he was Chaplain to my Lord Keeper Bridgman, my Lord was very zealous
to bring the Presbyterian Dissenters into the Church, and thought it a thing
very seasible; and in order to that, did procure a meeting between the Bishop
of Chester and Mr. Baxter, and some others, and commanded him to attend them;
which, as being his Chaplain, he could not refuse. But besides this, my Lord
drew up some Proposals of a limited Indulgence for the Independants, who, as he
easily foresaw, could not be comprehended in any National Establishment* and
sent for Dr. Owen and some others of that Party, to discourse them about it.
They thanked his Lordship for his kindness to them, and desired some time to
confer with the rest of their Brethren, and to consider of the Proposals: And
after some few days, they returned to my Lord again, and renewed their thanks
to his Lordship, and gladly accepted of the terms, and did solemnly declare,
That if these terms might be granted them, they would acquiesce in it, and
never give the least disturbance to the Government.

All this while the Conference with Mr. Baxter and his Brethren went on, and in
short they could come to no agreement; insomuch that, he said, my Lord told him
in the greatest passion that ever he saw him in, These men (meaning the
Independants) from whom I expected the least compliance, thank-fully accept the
terms proposed; but the others (Presbyterians, Mr. Baxter and his Brethren)
whom I believed most ready to promote such a peaceable design, will never
agree in any thing; and I will never have more to do with them. And thus that
Conference wherein Dr. Burton was concerned, ended without any effect. Whether
any thing was done toward an Accommodation at other times, or by other hands,
he knew not; but at that time when he was concerned, which Mr. Baxter makes the
time of forming this Act, there was nothing agreed on. I pressed him earnestly
to search for his Papers, and to make this Story public, for the vindication
of the Memory of the deceased Bishop, and his own Reputation; but I never saw
him again, till I found him upon his Deathbed, which was about a fortnight
after I had this discourse with him. And now let our Reconciler make the best
he can of this story.

2. Another thing whereby it appears how ineffectual this Condescension he
pleads for would be to cure our Divisions, is this: That should we grant these
things for the promotion of our Peace and Unity, P. 331.
Dissenters would only be encouraged by these Concessions to ask more; and we
should never know where their demands would end, till they had robbed us of the
whole Church Government. And does not the experience of the late Times
manifestly confirm this beyond all dispute? And is it reasonable to yield any
thing, which is fit to be retained in the Worship of God, to those men who we
know beforehand will be satisfied with nothing but the utter ruin of the
Church of England? But yet our Reconciler thinks he can persuade men out of
their senses. For,

1. Says he, Is not the power in your own hands to grant or refuse, as you
shall see expedient to the great ends of your whole Ministry, the glory of God,
the peace of the Church, and the salvation of Souls? Yes, thanks be to God, yet
it is; and the Church has granted what she thinks expedient: which should
satisfy our Reconciler, did he not think himself wiser than the Church. For if
he will own the power to be in the Church, and that she must stop somewhere,
whatever Divisions it occasions, she must judge when it is fit to stop; and
every wise man will think it fit to stop, when she has cast every thing out of
her Worship which is a just cause of scandal and offense; and if she goes
further to satisfy unreasonable and clamorous demands, she can never have a
reason to stop, till she has satisfied all Clamours.

2. Yes, says our Reconciler, she may remove things indifferent and
unnecessary; which is all at present desired. No, say I, she cannot part with
all things which are in their own nature indifferent: for some such things are
necessary to the Order and Decency of Worship, which must not be parted with;
and the Church never owned the contrary. She says indeed, that her particular
Ceremonies are indifferent and alterable, that we may exchange one decent
Ceremony for another when there is reason for it; but the Church ought to alter
no Ceremony without reason, nor part with all indifferent Ceremonies for the
external Decency of Worship for any reason. And now we are beholden to him,
that, 3. He grants, with some reconciling salvo's, that we must not part with
our Church Government, under the pretense of parting with indifferent things.
But if we must not part with that, we may as well keep all the rest; for our
Divisions will be the same. No party ever separated from the Church for the
sake of Ceremonies, who did not quarrel with the Order and Authority of Bishops.

The rest of his Arguments in that Chapter do not concern this business; but
whatever he would prove by them, there are two general Answers will serve for
them all. 1. That indifferent things, which serve the ends of Order and
Decency, are not such unnecessary trifles as to be parted with for no reason;
which I think I have sufficiently proved above. And 2. That parting with them
will not heal our Divisions; and therefore, at least upon that account, there
is no reason to part with them.

What I have now discoursed about Divisions and Discords, Recon. chapter 2. p. 23.
is a sufficient Answer to his next long Harangue about the evil of Schism; in
which I heartily concur with him, as believing that Schism it self will shut
men out of the Kingdom of Heaven; which is as bad a thing as can be said of it;
and therefore out of love to my Brother's Soul, I would not upon any account be
guilty of his Schism. But how does this prove that Church Governors must part
with the Rites and Ceremonies of Religion? Oh! because Dissenters take offense
at these things, and run into Schism, and consequently must be damned for it;
and therefore Charity obliges to part with such indifferent things, to prevent
the eternal damnation of so many Souls. But now,

1. Suppose the imposition of these Ceremonies be neither the cause of the
Schism, nor the removal of them the cure of it, what then? Why must the Church
part with these Ceremonies, which are of good use in Religion, to no purpose?
And yet this is the truth of the case, as appears from what I have already
discoursed. The several Sects of Religion, were Schismatics to each other,
when there were no Ceremonies to trouble them; and would be so again, if the
Church of England were once more laid in the dust. No man separates from the
Church of England, who has not espoused some Principles of Faith or Government
(besides the Controversy about Ceremonies) contrary to the Faith and
Government of the Church: and will the removal of Ceremonies make them Orthodox
in all other points? or are they of such squeamish Consciences, that they can
submit to an Antichristian Hierarchy, and an Antichristian Liturgy, but not to
Ceremonies?

2. The Argument of Schism is the very worst Argument our Reconciler could have
used, as being directly contrary to the end and design of it. All the
Authority the Church has, depends on the danger of Schism, and the necessity of
Christian Communion. The only punishment she can inflict on refractory and
disobedient Members, is to cast them out of the Church; and that is a very
terrible punishment too, if there be no ordinary means of salvation out of the
Communion of the Church: and therefore the danger of Schism is a very good
Argument to persuade Dissenters to consider well what they do, and not to
engage themselves in a wilful and unnecessary Schism. But it is a pretty odd
way, to persuade the Governors of the Church out of the exercise of their just
Authority, for fear some men should turn Schismatics, and be damned for it.
The reason why the Gospel has threatened such severe punishments against Schism,
is to make the Authority of the Church sacred and venerable, that no man should
dare to divide the Communion of the Church, or to separate from their Bishops
and Pastors, without great and necessary reason; and our Reconciler would
fright the Church out of the exercise of her just Authority, for fear men
should prove Schismatics, and be damned for it. Christ has made Schism a
damning sin, to give Authority to the Church; and our Reconciler would persuade
the Church not to exercise her Authority, for fear men should be damned for
their Schism. Now whether our Savior, who thought it better that Schismatics
should be damned, than that there should be no Authority in the Church; or our
Reconciler, who thinks it better that there should be no Authority in the
Church, than that Schismatics should be damned, are persons of the greatest
Charity, I leave others to judge. Indeed the odium of this whole business,
which is so tragically exaggerated by the Reconciler, must at last fall upon
our Savior himself, either for instituting such an Authority in his Church, or
for confirming this Authority by such a severe Sanction as eternal damnation.
If Christ will at the last day condemn those who separate from the Church for
some external Rites and Ceremonies (as our Reconciler's Argument supposes he
will) then it is a sign that Christ approves of what the Church does, in
taking care of the Decency of Worship; and that he thinks it very just that
such Schismatics should be damned: and then let our Reconciler, if he think
fit, charge the Savior of the World with want of Charity to the Souls of men.
The Church damns no man, but does what she believes to be her duty; and leaves
Schismatics to the judgment of Christ: if he damns them at the last day, let
our Reconciler plead their Cause then before the proper Tribunal; and if Christ
can justify himself in pronouncing the Sentence, I suppose he will justify
his Church too in the exercise of her Authority.

This is certain, that if the imposition of these Ceremonies be a just cause of
Separation, our Dissenters are not Schismatics, and therefore in no danger of
damnation upon that score: and if it be not a just cause of Separation; then
the Church does not exceed her Authority in it; and therefore is not to be
blamed, notwithstanding that danger of Schism which men wilfully run themselves
into, no more than a Prince is to be blamed for making good Laws, because some
men will break them, and be hanged for it.

3. He persuades the Governors of the Church, out of Charity to the Souls of
men, not to tempt them to Schism by their Impositions: whereas there is no way
to prevent Schism, but by maintaining and asserting their own Authority. When
there is no Authority in the Church, there will be as many Schisms in it, as
there will be Factions in the State, without some ^upreme Power to whom all
must obey: And therefore out of Charity to the Souls of men, and to prevent
their Schism, Church Governors are bound to exercise their Authority, and not
to give way to ignorant and groundless scruples. There is nothing occasions
more Schisms, than the different Rites and Modes of Worship, and therefore if
they would prevent Schism, they ought to exercise their utmost Authority in
maintaining the Decency and Uniformity of Worship; which will prevent more
Schisms than it can make. It will preserve unity among those who have any
reverence for the Authority of the Church, or any sense of the danger of
Schism; and those who have not, will be Schismatics notwithstanding. The only
way I know of to prevent Schism, is by wise Instructions, and by a strict
Discipline; the one to cure their ignorance and their scruples, the other to
curb their wantonness and petulancy: but for Governors to suffer their
Authority to be disputed, and to give way to the frowardness, fullenness, or
ignorance of men, to alter the Laws and Constitutions as often as any man can
find any thing to say against them, would breed eternal confusion both in
Church and State. Government is the only Cement and Bond of Unity; and when
Governors give the Reins out of their hands, every young Phaeton will think
himself fit to drive the Chariot of the Sun; and no man will be governed, when
there is none to govern: and what Order and Unity there can be in the Church
without Government, or what Government where those who are to be governed must
give Laws to their Governors, I would desire our Reconciler at his leisure to
tell me.

What follows in this Chapter, has already been considered in my first Chapter;
and thither I refer my Reader.

CHAP. IV. An Answer to the Reconciler's Arguments from the Words, the
Doctrine, the Deportment of Christ, whilst he was here on Earth, contained in
his third Chapter.
THere are two main Principles on which all our Reconciler's Arguments are
founded: 1. That these disputed Ceremonies are wholly useless and unnecessary
things. 2. That the imposition of them is the cause of our Divisions and
Schisms, which would be cured by the removal of them; which therefore is so
great a charity to the Souls of men, that Church Governors ought to consent
to, and promote such an alteration. Now all this being false, as I have already
proved, his other Arguments must fall with it: but yet to avoid all Cavils, I
shall particularly consider the force of what he urges. And,

First, He begins with the Doctrine and Deportment of our Savior; Recon. p. 45.
which, I confess, is a very good Topic, if he could prove any thing from it:
and he has no less than eight Arguments to confound all the stiff Imposers of
unnecessary things.

I. That our Lord does frequently produce that saying of the Prophet Hosea, I
will have mercy and not sacrifice, to justify himself and his Disciples, when
for the good of their own bodies, or the souls of others, they did what was
forbidden by the Law of Moses, or by the Canons and Traditions of the Scribes
and Pharisees, who sat in Moses Chair. This is what every body will grant; and
therefore he needed not have troubled himself to prove it. And his inference
from hence, is this: P. 46.
That Precepts which contain only Rituals, are to give place to those which do
concern the welfare of men's bodies, and much more to those which do respect the
welfare of our Brother's soul; so that when both cannot together be observed,
we must neglect or violate the former, to observe the latter. From whence he
concludes, that therefore we must part with those Ceremonies, which being made
Conditions of Communion, do accidentally afford occasion to such great and
fatal evils to the Souls of men. Now does not every body see that there is more
in the conclusion, than there is in the premises? For,

1. Does our Savior here speak of abrogating the Laws of Sacrifice for the
sake of Mercy? How does he then hence conclude any thing about repealing the
Laws of Ceremonies and Rituals? which neither the Prophet nor our Savior ever
thought on, when they said these words. Though God prefers Mercy before
Sacrifice, yet he gave Laws about Sacrifices and Ceremonies, and continued
those Laws after these words were spoken; and so may the Church do also, for
any thing that is here said to the contrary. For,

2. Our Savior neither speaks here of making nor replealing Laws about
Sacrifices or Rituals, but only prefers Mercy before Sacrifice, when there
happens a competition between them: he supposes that both may be done, and that
both ought to be done, but if both cannot be done at the same time, Mercy must
take place of Sacrifice: And this Mercy our Church allows, as much as any man
can desire. She is not so severe to exact kneeling at the Sacrament, or at
Prayers, or standing at the Creed, if men have any such infirmity on them that
they cannot do it without great inconvenience; she does not exact Godfathers or
Godmothers, or the sign of the Cross, nor bringing the Child to Church when it
is sick and in danger of death; she does not impose fasting on weak and crasie
persons, nor think her Laws so sacred that no punctillo must be neglected, when
it is done without offense and scandal; she will not blame any for staying from
Church, or going out in the midst of Prayers, to quench a fire, or to help a
sick person. And this answers to our Savior's cases, wherein he prefers Mercy
before Sacrifice: But how does this prove that the Governors of the Church
must not exact obedience to wholesome Constitutions, because some men scruple
them? Our Savior never applies this saying to any such case; and I am sure our
Reconciler has neither reason nor authority to do it.

When our Reconciler proves from these words, I will have mercy and not
sacrifice, that the Church must part with her Ceremonies for the sake of those
who will separate from her if she do not, he must either argue from the Saying
it self, or from those cases to which it is applied by our Savior. Now this
Saying, as it was meant by the Prophet Hosea, 6 Hos. 6.
signifies no more than this; That God preferred all acts of real and
substantial goodness, before an external Religion, even before Sacrifice it
self; as the Prophet Micah expresses it more at large, but to the very same
sense: Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, 6 Mic. 6, 7, 8.
and bow my self before the high God? shall I come before him with
burnt-offerings, with calves of a year old? Will the Lord be pleased with
thousands of rams, or with ten thousand rivers of oil? shall I give my
firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?
He has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord require of
thee, but to do justice, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?
Now because God prefers true and real goodness before the externals of
Religion, does it hence follow that there must be no external Worship? or that
the Church must make no Laws for the decent or orderly performance of it? or
must repeal these Laws when any ignorant people refuse to submit to them? Just
as much as that God did not require them to offer Sacrifice, because he
preferred Mercy before it.

Our Reconciler obs^rves two Cases to which our Savior applies this saying: 1.
To justify his Disciples, who pulled the ears of Corn as they walked through
the fields, 12 Mat. 7.
and rubbed them in their hands and eat them, on the Sabbath Day; which the
Pharisees expounded to be a breach of the Sabbatick rest, as being a servile
work; and our Savior does not dispute with them upon that point, but justifies
what they did by their present necessity, and by this Rule, I will have mercy
and not sacrifice. That God, who prefers acts of Kindness and Mercy before
Sacrifice, when they come in competition with each other, is not such a
rigorous exacter of obedience to any positive Institutions, as to allow no
Indulgence to necessity it self: and it becomes Church Governors to imitate
the goodness of God in this; and our Church does so, as I have already
observed: but how this proves that the Church must make no Laws about
Ceremonies, or repeal them, if men will not obey them, I do not understand.

The next instance is our Savior's justifying himself against the accusations
of the Pharisees for his eating and drinking with Publicans and Sinners; 9 Mat.
13.
which, he tells them, was only in order to reform them, as a Physician
converses with the sick: and certainly it was lawful to converse with them upon
so charitable a design, since God preferred Mercy before Sacrifice; and
therefore certainly God will be better pleased with our conversing with
Sinners, in order to make them good men, than with our abstaining from their
company, though a familiar conversation with them upon other accounts be
scandalous. And how this proves what our Reconciler would conclude from it, I
cannot see.

Well, but this is a general Rule, which may be applied to more cases than one
or two. Right! But if we will argue from our Savior's authority and
application, we must apply it only to such cases as are parallel to those
cases to which our Savior applies it; otherwise we must not pretend the
authority of our Savior, but the reason of the thing: and let him set aside
our Savior's authority, and we shall deal well enough with his Reason. All
that can be made of this Rule, is this: That where there happens any such case,
that there is a temporary competition between two Duties, which are both
acknowledged to be our duty, there the greatest and most necessary duty must
take place; and particularly, that all Rituals must give place to Mercy. So
that to make this a parallel case, our Reconciler must grant that it is the
duty of Church Governors to prescribe Rules for the external Decency and
solemnity of Worship. what is the other Duty then to which this must give way?
To the care of men's Souls, says our Reconciler. No, say I, there is no
inconsistency between the care of men's Souls, and the care of public Worship,
which is the best way of taking care of men's Souls; and therefore there can
never be a competition between these two. O but some men are ignorant, and
scrupulous, and wilful; and if you prescribe any Rules of Worship, they will
dissent from them, and turn Schismatics, and be damned: and thus accidentally
it affords occasion to these great and fatal evils. Let him prove then, if he
can, from these words of our Savior, that the Governors of the Church must
never do their duty, for fear those men should be damned who will not do
theirs. Such cases as these, if they be truly pitiable, must be left to the
mercy of God; but the Church can take no cognizance of them, especially when
this cannot be done without destroying the public Decency and Solemnities of
Worship, and renouncing her own just Authority, the maintaining of which is
more for the general good of Souls, than her compliance with some scrupulous
persons would be.

I shall only farther observe his great civility to theChurch and Kingdom of
which he is a Member. For his third Observation from these words is, That they
were used by the Prophet upon the occasion of the strictness of the Israelites
in the observance and the requiring these Rituals, whilst charity and mercy to
their Brother was vanished from their hearts, there being no truth, no mercy,
nor knowledge of God in the land; but killing, committing adultery, stealing,
lying, and swearing falsely, etc. Now certainly it was no fault in the Jews, at
that time, to be zealous for the external Worship instituted by the Law of
Moses, (though our Reconciler seems to insinuate that it was; for he matters
not how he reproaches the Institutions of God himself, so he can but reflect
some odium on the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church:) yet they betrayed their
Hypocrisy, by their Zeal for the Externals of Religion, while they neglected
the weightier matters of the Law. And left any man should be so dull as not to
understand the meaning of this Observation, he thetorically introduces it with
a God forbid! Now God forbid that I should say, that it is thus in England: but
he is pleased to put men in mind of it, if they please to think so. This is
true Fanatic Cant and Charity. There must be no Rules prescribed for the
Worship of God, the Church must not take care to reclaim or restrain
Schismatics, because our Reconciler thinks the State does not take sufficient
care to punish other Vices. Certainly there never was any Age of the Church
wherein the public Ministers of Religion took more care to decry this
Pharisaical Hypocrisy of an external Religion, and to teach men that nothing
will recommend them to God without the practice of an universal Righteousness,
than at this day; who will not flatter the greatest men in their Vices, nor
think any man a Saint, because he expresses a great Zeal for the Church, when
his life and actions proclaim him to be a Devil. We leave this, good
Reconciler, to your beloved tender-conscienced Dissenters, who can strain at a
Gnat, and swallow a Camel; who cannot see a Surplice without horror, but can
dispense with Lying and Perjury, with Slanders and Revilings, and speaking evil
of Dignities; with Treasons, and Murders of Princes; and ^ug the most
profligate Villains in their bo^om, and palliate and excuse all their Vices, ^f
they will but espouse their Interest and Quarrel. These are the men who have
weakened the Churches Authority, and exposed her Censur^s to contempt, and then
reproach her for not using her Authority to correct the Vices of the Age. The
Debauchees of our days learn to despise the Censures of the Church, by the
Example of Dissenters; and when they cannot shelter their Vices in our
Communion, they take Sanctuary in a Conventicle.

P. 47.
II. His next Argument against the imposition of Ceremonies upon Dissenters, is
from the kindness and indulgence of our Savior to his Disciples while he was
with them; That he would not impose such a burden as fasting on them, because
they were infirm and weak, and therefore might be prejudiced by it; that like
old Bottles filled with new Wine, 9 Mat. 14, etc.
they might be apt to burst, that is, by these severities imposed on them, they
might be discouraged, and fall from him, and so might perish.

I confess, I have often been troubled what to make of this place; not that I
ever suspected such inferences from it, as our Reconciler has discovered; but
these words being generally expounded by ancient and modern Writers, of
Christ's indulgence to the weakness of his Disciples, I could never understand
what this weakness should be, which made them less able to fast than the
Disciples of John, or of the Pharisees. It could not be weakness of body; for
they were men of mean fortunes, who had been used to more hardship than most of
the Pharisees: and what weakness of mind could they labor under, which should
make fasting so grievous a burden? They were Jews, who were to observe the
public Fasts of their Law, and therefore fasting was no new thing to them: and
why should they be compared to old Cloth and old Bottles, and fasting to new
Cloth and new Wine? These are difficulties which I cannot answer, and shall be
thankful to our Reconciler if he can. And therefore I am apt to suspect it is
all a mistake, from a misapplication of those comparisons which our Savior
brought to illustrate that Answer which he had given to the Question of John's
Disciples.

They asked him, Why do we and the Pharisees fast often, but thy Disciples fast
not? And Jesus said unto them, Can the children of the bride-chamber mourn, as
long as the bridegroom is with them? but the days will come when the bridegroom
shall be taken from them, and then shall they fast. Christ is the Bridegroom,
the Church his Spouse, the Apostles the Children of the Bride-chamber, who
immediately attended his Person in his greatest privacies and retirements. The
appearance of Christ on Earth was a time of as great joy to all that knew him,
as the presence of the Bridegroom; and as it would be very indecent and
improper for those who attend the Bridegroom, to be sorrowful and pensive, so
would it be for his Disciples to mourn and fast (which is an expression of
mourning and sorrow) while he was present. All this refers not to the weakness
of his Disciples, but the unfitness of the season to fast. Now the Question is,
Whether in what follows, our Savior only illustrates this Answer, or gives a
new one. And I confess, it seems most probable to me, that our Savior only
confirms and illustrates the same answer; which he does by two comparisons, the
first to show the indecency of the thing, the second the impossibility of it.

The first is this: No man puts a piece of new cloth unto an old garment:
for that which is put in to fill it up, takes from the garment, and the rent
is made worse. At Weddings and Festival Entertainments, they used to put on new
Cloths; at fasting, to wear any old ^attered Garments. Now, says our Savior,
mourning and fasting in the presence of the Bridegroom, which is a time of joy,
is as indecent, as it would be to patch up a Garment of wedding and fasting
Cloth, of new and old. For the new Cloth is so far from adding to the beauty of
the old Garment, that the rent is made worse, more notorious and visible, and
exposed to the view and scorn of all men; and so indecent would it be for the
Children of the Bride-chamber to fast, as for men to go to a Wedding in such a
patcht Garment.

The second comparison shows the impossibility of the thing, that they should
fast while the Bridegroom is with them. To fast without mourning, is an
hypocritical Fast; it is better not to fast at all, than thus to mock God; and
yet it is impossible they should mourn whose minds are transported with such
new and fermenting joys at the presence of the Bridegroom. Neither do men put
new wine into old bottles, else the bottles break, and the wine rumeth out, and
the bottles perish: but they put new wine into new bottles, and both are
preserved. Wine is proper at Festival Entertainments, and very aptly signifies
the joy and exultancy of the mind: For Wine makes the heart glad; and new Wine
signifies some new and present transports of joy, which boil and ferment in the
breast, as new Wine does upon the Lees; and therefore aptly signifies such a
joy as is in the presence of the Bridegroom. Old Bottles may signify a
mournful sorrowful mind, which is as weak and dejected with grief, as men
usually are with age. Now as new Wine, when it ferments, will burst old Bottles
that are weak and crasie, so such transports of joy as are occasioned by the
presence of the Bridegroom, will dispel all sorrow from our minds, and run out
in all expressions of inward satisfaction, and therefore will spoil our
mourning and fasting. This is the account why the Disciples could not fast
while Christ was with them, but when he should be taken from them, then they
should fast. If this be the true interpretation of the place, as the very
aptness of the application persuades me it is, then our Reconciler is at a
loss: for here is not one word of indulging the weakness of his Disciples; and
it seems very strange to me, that any man should think that by old Bottles our
Savior should represent the weakness of his Disciples, and forbear putting new
Wine into them, imposing the severe discipline of fasting upon them, for fear
of breaking these old Bottles; when no man yet ever refused to put new Wine
into old Bottles, for fear of breaking the Bottle, but for fear of losing the
Wine: which makes the application very absurd.

But yet let us suppose that our Savior, out of condescension to the weakness
of his Disciples, did not impose fasting on them, what follows hence? Why it
plainly follows, that the Governors of the Church must not impose any Rites
and Ceremonies of Worship, things much inferior to this duty of fasting, upon
Dissenters, P. 49.
when they do tend to the ruin and disadvantage of so many Souls as are made
Schismatics upon this account. Let us then briefly consider what likeness or
affinity there is between these two cases.

1. The Fasts of which the Dispute is here, are private and voluntary Fasts,
such as men imposed upon themselves, or observed in imitation of their Sect and
Party, or in obedience to the directions of their several Masters: Christ
imposed no such Fasts upon his Disciples; therefore the Governors of the
Church must not prescribe the Rites and Ceremonies of public Worship, though
in such matters Christ conformed himself, and taught his Disciples to conform
to the Rules and Orders of their Synagogues, which were all as much of humane
institution as our Ceremonies are; which is an admirable way of arguing. The
observing or not observing private and voluntary Fasts, though it might offend
some superstitious Pharisees, was no affront to public Authority, nor made any
alteration or confusion in public Worship; and therefore was not of that
consequence, whatever our Reconciler thinks, as dissenting from public
Constitutions. This Christ never indulged his Disciples in, nor has the Church
any reason to do it.

2. This Indulgence was but temporary, during our Savior's abode with them on
Earth; but he tells them, when he should be taken from them, then they should
fast. And the ancient Writers look upon this saying to be a kind of Institution
of the Quadrigesimal Fast, and will our Reconciler argue from a short
Indulgence for a year or two, granted to the Disciples by Christ, to prove a
perpetual Indulgence to the end of the World, to be granted to Dissenters? For
if his Arguments are good, they will last for ever. Christ did not intend that
his Disciples should be always Children, nor has he imposed upon his Church to
indulge such childish weakness and fancies for ever.

3. Fasting was a very severe duty, very afflictive both to mind and body; and
therefore there might be some reason for our Savior to forbear commanding it
for some time: But what severity is there in the Ceremonies of our Church? What
mighty trouble is it to kneel at the Sacrament? What offense is a white Linen
garment to the eye? What disturbance does the sign of the Cross, made with the
gentle motion of the finger, cause?

But though these Ceremonies are not grievous in themselves, yet they are
burdensome to the Conscience. Let him show then that our Savior had any regard
in this to a doubtful or scrupulous Conscience, and I will grant it a good
proof. How could any Jew scruple the lawfulness of fasting, which was so often
commanded and recommended in their Law? I am sure all the ancient Writers take
notice only of the severity of the Duty, not of its burdensomness to the
Conscience, as the reason of our Savior's Indulgence.

P. 48.
Well, but he tells us, that Theophylact and St. Chrysostom say, That herein
Christ gave them a Rule, that when they should convert the World, they also
should condescend and behave themselves toward them with the greatest
meekness. Whether Christ intended this or not, in what he now said, to be sure
it is a good Rule, and that which the Apostles carefully observed; they
indulged the believing Jews in the observation of the Mosaical Law, and bore
with many weaknesses and infirmities both in Jews and Gentiles: But did this
meekness extend to suffer every man to worship God as he pleased? Did they
prescribe no Rules, or Orders, or Ceremonies of Worship? Or did they prescribe
such Rules, without exacting obedience to them? Did they suffer any Christians
to dispute their Authority in such cases? And was it thought an act of meekness
and gentleness to do so? It is strange then that it should never be thought so
in after-Ages, wherein the Church exercised an absolute and uncontrollable
Power in all such matters, and no Christian ever pretended to dispute their
Authority.

But the Prophet Isaiah describes our Savior as one who will not break the
bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax, and who will gather his lambs with
his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with
young. Well, we readily grant that our Savior was the most kind and gentle
Master that ever was; but does this signify that he would give no Laws about
Worship? Or that if any person scrupled these Laws, he would not insist upon
it, but give them their liberty to worship God as they pleased? If Christ was a
kind and merciful Lord without this, his Ministers also may exercise great
lenity and gentleness, without prostituting their Authority, or the Worship of
God, to the ignorance, or giddiness, or frowardness of Professors.

Christ gave very easy and gentle Laws, instructed his Hearers with great
mildness and calmness, bore their dullness and infidelity, their indignities and
affronts, with admirable patience; conversed even with Publicans and Sinners,
to gain them to repentance; encouraged the least beginnings, and cherished the
first and weak Essays of Faith: but if they would be his Disciples, he expected
they should submit to his Authority and Laws, and still expects that they
should submit to that Authority he has placed in his Church. And if
Church Governors use this mildness and gentleness in their Laws, and in their
behavior; though they assert their own Authority, and exact obedience to their
Laws, they need not fear the censure of the Shepherds of Israel, which our
Reconciler so charitably threatens them with. The diseased have you not
strengthened, neither have you healed that which was sick, neither have you
bound up that which was broken, neither have you brought again that which was
driven away, neither have you sought that which was lost.

P. 50.
III. His next Argument is a wonderful one: That Christ took compassion on the
Jews, as Sheep without a Shepherd; that he went about preaching himself; that
he sent his Disciples to preach; that he commands his Disciples to pray, that
God would send forth more Laborers into his Harvest: The Query then is,
Whether they do conform to this Example, or the matter of this Prayer, who do
exclude so many Servants of the Lord from laboring in his Harvest for a thing
indifferent. Truly I think they may, though they excluded the Reconciler into
the bargain: for, thanks be to God, it is not now with us, asit was in our
Savior's days, at the first preaching of the Gospel. God has now sent out
numerous Laborers into his Vineyard, men of Learning, Piety, and Diligence;
more indeed than there is entertainment or employment for. And the Christian
Church, notwithstanding this Prayer of our Savior, never scrupled casting
Schismatical Presbyters out of Christ's Vineyard. But has our Reconciler the
face to say that they are shut out merely for indifferent things, when they
themselves give another account of it? Renouncing of the Covenant kept them out
a great while; Reordination, Episcopal Government, a National Church,
Liturgies, etc. and are all these indifferent things? But the dissenting
Preachers are not so much beholding to him, but the present Clergy are as
little, to whom he has by very broad signs and intimations applied
Theophylact's observation upon the Text: That our Lord complained the Laborers
were but few, because the Scribes and Pharisees, the present Laborers, not
only did not profit, but did hurt the people, whereas it is the property of a
good Pastor to be merciful-towards them. He knew very well this Objection o^
the paucity of Laborers, could not well be applied to us, who have such a
numerous Clergy; and therefore to make room for Dissenters, he fairly
insinuates, that the present Ministers do no good, but hurt. Such an impudent
Calumny as needs no confutation! and let others consider what censure it
deserves.

IV. His next Argument is taken from our Savior's command, P. 51.
not to scandalize or despise little ones, 18 Mat. where by little ones, he
understands those who are weak in the Faith, or not well instructed in their
Duty, or mistaken in it, though very obstinate and peremptory in their mistake:
for so he must mean, if he will apply it to the case of Dissenters. And by
scandalizing, offending, or despising them, he understands doing any action
which occasions their ruin. And thus he t^inks Church Governors fall under
this Woe, which is denounced against those who offend these little ones, when
they impose such Ceremonies which they cannot and will not submit to; which
occasions the Schism, and consequently the damnation of their weak Brother. No
man can possibly want Arguments, who has such an admirable faculty, not at
finding, but making them: for nothing can be more remote from our Savior's
intention in these words, than such an inference as this. For,

1. It is evident, that by little ones our Savior understands those who are
meek, and humble, and modest; who are as void of pride, and passion, and
earthly ambitions, as a little Child; as is evident both from the occasion of
this discourse, which was to correct the ambition of his Disciples, and from
the example of a little Child, which he proposes to them for their imitation.
Thus St. Chrysostom and St. Ierom expound the words, though the latter observes
also, that those who are scandalized, are upon that account also little ones:
for great and strong Christians will not receive scandal. That is, though they
be humble and modest, etc. yet these Graces and Virtues are not so well rooted
and confirmed in them, but that the ill usage they meet with from the world,
may turn them out of their bias, and occasion their fall. But what is this to
our Dissenters, who are neither in one sense nor other, little ones; who
neither have the modesty, humility, and peaceableness of Children, nor their
soft and ductile nature* but are stiff, and inflexible, and obstinate in their
conceits, that they will neither hearken to Reason, nor yield to Conviction?

(...) ((...)) Chrysostom. in locum, and (...).
2. To scandalize or offend these little ones, St. Chrysostom tells us, is to
dishonor, to reproach, to vilify them, to despise them, as it is expressed v.
10. which, as he observes, is a great temptation and scandal to men of weak
minds. Our Reconciler observes, that St. Ierom says, We are said to scandalize,
when by our actions we give occasion to their ruin. I find no such saying in
St. Ierom upon the place; but however, the saying is a very good one, if we
apply it right, to actions of contempt and scorn, of which both St. Ierom and
St. Chrysostom speak; which are apt to spoil this good temper of mind, when men
see themselves only scorned and derided for it, and exposed to all sorts of
violence and injury. This is the usual reward of great modesty and humility in
this World; and therefore our Savior secures these little ones from contemp^,
by denouncing severe woes against those who offer it.

But what is all this to the Church, which offers no contempt to the meanest
Christian, much less to men of humble, and modest, and peaceable tempers? She
is as much concerned for the salvation of the Poor as of the Rich* and despises
no man who has a soul to be saved, and will submit to wise instructions. Must
the Church be charged with scandalizing little ones, because she will not
renounce her own Authority, nor suffer these little ones to give Laws to her?
Certainly our Savior never intended any such thing, when in this very Chapter,
and upon this very occasion, he asserts the Authority of the Church even in the
point of scandal, and commands us not to converse with those men, who will not
hearken to her Counsels and Reproofs. If thy brother shall trespass against
thee, v. 15, 16, 17, 18.
(shall offend and scandalize thee) go and tell him his fault between thee and
him alone; if he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy brother. But if he will
not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of one or
two witnesses every word may be established. And if he shall neglect to hear
them, tell it to the Church; but if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be
unto thee as an heathen man and a publican. Verily, I say unto you, Whatsoever
ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose
on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. But of the case of scandal or giving
offense, our Reconciler has given us occasion to discourse more in another
place.

V. His next Argument is as wise as the rest. He tells us, ^3 Mat. 13.
Our Lord denounces woe against the Scribes and Pharisees, because they shut
up the Kingdom of Heaven against men. But he should have added the whole verse:
for ye neither go in your selves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go
in. St. Ierom expounds this two ways. 1. They shut the Kingdom of Heaven
against men, by hindering their belief in Christ, in whom they would neither
believe themselves, nor suffer others to believe, who were prepared and
disposed for it: which is certainly the true exposition of the words. But then
he adds, 2. That these Teachers and Rabbis may be said to shut up the Kingdom
of Heaven, who scandalize their Disciples with their wicked lives, that is, who
tempt them to sin by their example. But what is this to the Dispute about
Ceremonies? Does the imposition of Ceremonies, in its own nature, shut men out
of the Kingdom of Heaven? Can none be saved then, who obey the Laws of the
Church about Rituals and Ceremonies, as no man could enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, who followed the directions of the Scribes and Pharisees? Christ
condemns the Pharisees for using their utmost endeavor to hinder men from
embracing the Christian Faith, and entering into the Kingdom of Heaven: Our
Reconciler draws up the same charge against the Church, because some men take
unjust offense against the Order and Decency of her Worship, and will not
enter, though she uses all manner of Entreaties, and Arguments, and wise Arts,
to persuade them to enter. This is just as if we should charge that good Father
who received his prodigal Son with all expressions of joy, and made a great
entertainment for his return, with shutting his eldest Son out of his house,
because he foolishly and wickedly took offense at his Fathers kindne^s to his
Brother, and would not enter; though his Father himself went out to persuade
him, and invite him in, and to satisfy him of the fitness and decency of what
he had done. I doubt this does more properly belong to those Pharisaical
Preachers who are satisfied in the lawfulness of what is required, (as St.
Ierom supposes some of these Pharisees were convinced that Jesus was the
Messiah); but to gratify their own obstinacy, pride, and revenge, will neither
do what they know they may lawfully do themselves, nor suffer others to do it.
St. Chrysostom expounds the words much to the same purpose; and therefore no
wonder if (as our Reconciler observes) he tells us, That these men are called
Pests, and are diametrically opposed to Teachers, their work being to destroy.
For if the Teachers business be to save what is lost, to lose or cause to
perish what might be saved, is the work of the destroyer: (...), that which
otherwise would be saved; the (...), those who were entering, that is, as he
expounds it, the (...), those who were prepared and disposed to enter. Now, I
think, our Church never shut any out of her Communion, who were prepared and
disposed to enter.

But our Reconciler observes, that in the same Chapter our Savior condemns the
Scribes and Pharisees for binding heavy burdens upon men's shoulders, v. 4.
which they would not move with one of their fingers. P. 54.
But what were these heavy burdens and grievous to be born, which the Pharisees
bound upon men's shoulders? were they things burdensome to the Conscience, which
tempted men to forsake their Communion? No such matter, men were not so
scrupulous in those days; and our Savior in that very place expressly charges
his own Disciples not to forsake their Communion: The Scribes and Pharisees sit
in Moses seat; v. 2, 3.
all therefore that they bid you observe, that observe and do. And therefore
our Savior could not charge them, that by these heavy burdens they frighted
men from their Communion, and made Schisms in the Church; and therefore it is
very impertinently alleged by our Reconciler. These heavy burdens did not
concern the Rites and Ceremonies of public Worship, which our Savior never
blamed them for, but conformed to them himself when he worshipped in their
Synagogues. But they were some strict and rigorous Expositions of their Law,
without making such allowances in cases of necessity and mercy, as God
intended; as when they quarrelled with the Disciples for pulling the ears of
Corn and eating them as they walked through the fields on the Sabbath Day,
being hungry; or some arbitrary impositions which made a great show and
appearance of Sanctity, but were very troublesome to be observed. And when our
Reconciler can show any such heavy burdens imposed by the Church of England, we
will think of some other Answer.

But did our Savior condemn the Pharisees merely for binding these heavy
burdens, and laying them upon men's shoulders? Not that neither. The crime our
Savior charges them with, was gross Hypocrisy; that while they were so strict
and severe in their impositions upon other men, they were very easy and gentle
to themselves: They laid heavy burdens on others, but they themselves will not
move them with one of their fingers. Our Reconciler observes; That St.
Chrysostom well notes, that our Lord says not that they cannot, but they will
not move them. Whereby he would have his Readers to understand, that by moving
them, our Savior meant removing them; that they laid on heavy burdens, but
would not take them off again when they lawfully might; as he expressly says,
that not dispensing with these Traditions upon such great occasions, was the
sin of the Scribes and Pharisees. Which is the fault he charges our Church
with, that she will not part with her Ceremonies for the sake of Dissenters:
Whereas St. Ierom and St. Chrysostom, and all good Expositors, understand no
more by it, than that they would not practice the least part of these things
themselves: They were very severe in their injunctions to others, but excused
themselves from such severities; Which, says S. Chrysostom, is quite contrary
to what becomes a good Governor, who will be very rigorous and severe in
judging and censuring his own actions, but a very kind and favorable judge of
those who are under his care. And therefore our Savior urges this as a proof
of what he before charged them with; But do not ye after their works, for they
say and do not.

P. 56.
VI. In the next place he attempts to prove, That Dissenters, though not of our
Communion, should not be forbid to preach for the promotion of Christ's
Kingdom; 9 Mark 38.
because Christ would not suffer his Disciples to forbid the man who wrought
Miracles in his Name, but did not follow them; that is says our Reconciler, did
not hold Communion with them. And thus he has fairly altered the state of the
Question, and unwarily betrayed the secret thoughts of his heart. His open and
avowed design all this while has been, to plead for the removal of our
Ceremonies, that Dissenters might join in Communion with us, and avoid the
guilt of Schism, which is a damning sin; but now it seems it would do as well,
if not much better, if Dissenters had but their liberty to preach in
Conventicles for the promotion of Christ's Kingdom. But is the Kingdom of
Christ then promoted by Schism? Will Schism damn men, (as he asserts, and makes
the principal foundation of all his Arguments) and will the damnation of so
many men as are seduced into Schism, enlarge Christ's Kingdom? Must the Church
part with her Ceremonies, for fear the occasion men's running into Schism, and
being damned for it? And yet may she suffer Schismatics to preach, and allure
men into a Schism? I beg our Reconciler to think again of this, and reconcile
himself to himself.

But how does it appear that this man who cast out Devils in Christ's Name, did
preach the Gospel too? There is no such thing said in the Text; and if it be
true what our Reconciler affirms, that he was not Christ's Disciple, he could
not do it. If he believed in Christ, he was Christ's Disciple; if he did not,
he could not preach the Gospel: and I think there is some difference between
preaching and working Miracles. When our Dissenters can work Miracles, I will
never oppose their preaching.

But how does it appear that this man who cast out Devils in Christ's Name, was
no Disciple? Had Christ no Disciples but those who followed him wherever he
went? Our Savior seems to prove that he was a Disciple, or in a very good
disposition to be one, in that saying, He that is not against us, is on our
part. And if he were not a Disciple, his very working Miracles in Christ's
Name, was a very likely way to make him and others also the Disciples of
Christ; and therefore might be permitted by our Lord for that very reason:
Forbid him not, for there is no man which shall do a miracle in my name, that
can lightly speak evil of me.

But was not our Reconciler asleep, when he tells us, that this man did not
hold Communion with the Disciples? What Communion then was he of? Was he not a
Jew, and a Member of the Jewish Church? And was he not then in Communion with
Christ and his Apostles? For did not Christ, all the time he was on Earth, live
in Communion with the Jewish Church? Did he set up any distinct Church and
Communion of his own? But I perceive our Reconciler is of Mr. Baxter's mind,
that Church Communion is a presential Communion: And because he did not always
follow Christ, and give his personal attendance on him, therefore he could not
hold Communion with him. And now let our Reconciler try again how from this
Example he can prove that Schismatics must be suffered to preach for the
promotion of Christ's Kingdom.

VII. And yet it is wonderful to observe how he turns the Tables in his next
Argument, and proves, from Christ's being the good Shepherd, who lays down his
life for his Sheep, that the Governors of the Church should part with their
indifferent things, to preserve the Sheep from such Thieves, that is,
Schismatical Preachers, those who, if his last Argument be good, ought not to
be forbid to preach, though they do not profess Communion with us. But I must
tell him, That for the Church to destroy her Constitution, to pull down all her
Hedges and Fences, is the way to let in these Thieves, as he calls them, not to
keep them out.

VIII. His last Argument is of the same nature: That because Christ prays for
the unity of the Church, therefore to procure this unity and concord, we must
part with all unnecessary things, which do not in the least advance his
Kingdom. And truly I think so too: but if the external Decency of Worship is
not so unnecessary a thing, nor easily to be parted with; if parting with these
Ceremonies will not heal our Schisms and Divisions, of which I have discoursed
largely already, there needs no other Answer to be returned to this Argument.

He concludes this Chapter with retorting some of these Arguments upon the
Dissenters. I have answered for the Church, let the Dissenters now try how they
can answer for themselves; for he very truly observes, that they fall with more
weight upon them. To prefer some arbitrary Platforms of Worship and Discipline
which God has nowhere instituted or commanded, before the substantial Duties of
Peace and Unity, and Obedience to Government, looks more like an offense
against that Law, I will have mercy and not sacrifice, than what he charges
upon the Church; and to forbid the observation of the decent Rites and
Ceremonies of Worship as unlawful and superstitious, is a much more intolerable
yoke and burden than the imposition of them. But I shall leave the Dissenters
and our Reconcile^ to adjust this matter among themselves.

CHAP. V. Containing an Answer to our Reconciler's Arguments drawn from the
14th and 15th Chapters to the Romans.
THough our Reconciler makes a great flourish with a multitude of Arguments, as
usually those men do, who cannot find one good one; yet he seems to put the
greatest confidence in those Arguments which are drawn from that condescension
and mutual forbearance, which St. Paul requires the Jewish and Gentile Converts
(who differed about the observation of the Mosaical Law) to exercise toward
each other. And this I confess, were a very good Argument, if it were a
parallel Case. But I suppose our Reconciler will grant, that there are some
cases, wherein it is very reasonable to exercise such forbearance; and yet
there may be other cases, wherein it is not prudent and reasonable to allow the
same Indulgence: and therefore it does not follow, that because St. Paul
required the Jewish and Gentile Christians to forbear each other in their
Disputes about the Mosaical Law, therefore the Governors of the Church must
forbear Dissenters, and not prescribe the decent Rites and Ceremonies of
Worship, nor exact Conformity to them; unless it appear that these two cases
are the same, or so like to each other, that we may fairly argue from one to
the other. That these cases are not alike, and that the Apostle's Arguments for
mutual forbearance are not applicable to the case of our Dissenters, I doubt
not but I shall make so plain, as to satisfy all impartial Readers. And this,
I hope, may pass for an Answer to his fourth Chapter.

I. Then I observe, that St. Paul in the 14th Chapter to the Romans, only
exhorts the Jewish and Gentile Christians to mutual forbearance in such cases
which had been already decreed and determined by the highest Authority in the
Church. There is a great Dispute between our Reconciler and Dr. Womack, now the
Reverend Bishop of St. David's, to whom this Epistle was directed, Whether only
to the private Christians at Rome, or to Church Governors also, and
consequently whether it be the duty only of private Christians, or of
Church Governors also, to exercise this forbearance toward Dissenters. The
Bishop supposes, that there was no Presbytery settled at Rome at this time, and
offers several Arguments to prove it. Our Reconciler attempts to answer these
Arguments, and to prove the contrary, that the Church of Rome, whose Faith was
spoken of throughout the World, could not be without a settled Ministry at that
time. I am not willing to interpose in this Dispute: for though it would be of
great moment to answer all our Reconciler's Arguments from this Chapter, were
it certain that St. Paul did not design these directions for
Church Governors, but only for private Christians, as an Expedient to
preserve Peace and Unity till these Disputes should be determined by a just
Authority; yet whatever fair probabilities there may be of this, I doubt there
is not evidence enough for it to convince a Reconciler, or an obstinate
Dissenter.

And indeed, upon the principle which I have now laid down, there is no need of
this: for whether these Exhortations to forbear one another, and to receive one
another, and not to judge, condemn, or despise one another, concern private
Christians, or Church Governors, or equally both, yet since this forbearance
extends only to such cases as were determined by Ecclesiastical Authority to
be the proper matter for the exercise of this Christian charity and
forbearance, every one sees how impertinently it is alleged by our Reconciler
to prove that the Governors of the Church must not impose any indifferent
Customs and Usages which are scrupled by our Dissenters. For what consequence
is there in this? that because private Christians or Church Governors must
allow the free exercise of that liberty to each other, which the Church has
decreed that they should allow to each other, therefore the Church it self must
not impose the observance of any indifferent Ceremonies on Dissenters, or must
alter or abate them in compliance with their Scruples.

This is the plain case here. The Council at Jerusalem had decreed, that the
Gentiles who received the Faith of Christ, 15 Acts.
should not be under a necessity of being circumcised, or observing the Law of
Moses, and left the believing Jews at their liberty to observe the Rites and
Ceremonies of their Law still; but notwithstanding this determination, the
believing Gentiles, who understood their Christian liberty, despised the
weakness and superstition of the believing Jews, who continued zealous for the
Law of Moses; and the believing Jews were mightily scandalized and offended at
the liberty which the Gentile Converts took, and made great scruple of
conversing with them, or of worshipping God together. This Scandal and Offense
which the Council easily foresaw would be taken and given on both sides, did
not hinder them from making a peremptory Decree in this matter, as I observed
before; and when such Scandals as these did arise between the believing Jews
and Gentiles in the Church of Rome, St. Paul in this Epistle earnestly exhorts
them to mutual charity and forbearance, to grant that liberty to each other,
without mutual censures, contempt, and scandal, which the Church had already
decreed should be granted: for he pleads for no other forbearance than what was
expressly decreed by the Council at Jerusalem.

In such cases wherein the Church allows a latitude, and permits different
apprehensions and practices, certainly it becomes all Christians not to judge
or censure, offend or scandalize each other; which is the only case the
Apostle mentions. But will any man in his wits, hence infer that the Church
must make no Laws, nor prescribe any Rules of Worship which are scrupled by
private Christians; and that if she do, she sins against these Laws of Charity
and Forbearance, which the Apostle exhorts the Romans to observe?

The Governors of the Church may exercise the same authority which the
Apostles did in the Council at Jerusalem; they may determine what upon mature
deliberation and advice they judge fit or necessary to be determined, whatever
scruples some Christians have entertained about it; and when they have done so,
it becomes Christian Bishop^ and Ministers, as the Apostle here does, to
persuade private Christians to obey such Constitutions, for the preservation of
the Peace and Unity of the Church; not to turn Reconcilers* and to plead the
Cause of Dissenters against Church Authority, which St. Paul never did.

And it becomes private Christians to submit to such Determinations; and those
who do not, are guilty of the scandal and offense, if there be any, not those
who do. The Gentile Converts were guilty of scandal, if they despised the Jews
for observing the Law of Moses, which the Council had still permitted them to
observe; the Jews were guilty of scandalizing the Gentiles, if they judged and
censured them, and denied Communion to them for not observing the Law of Moses,
because the Council had delivered the Gentiles from any such necessity: but no
man can be guilty of any criminal scandal by obeying the lawful Constitutions
of the Church, whoever is scandalized at it, but scandal always lies on the
side of disobedience. The Christian Jew gave no offense by observing the Law of
Moses, nor the Christian Gentile by not observing it, because they both herein
had the authority of the Apostolical Decree to justify them; and therefore St.
Paul does not exhort the Jews not to observe the Law of Moses, nor the Gentiles
to observe it, to avoid scandal, (which had been somewhat like our Reconciler's
Address to the Church not to impose, and to the Dissenters to obey such
Impositions to avoid Schism;) but he exhorts them both to grant that liberty to
each other which the Church had granted, and not to judge, and censure, and
despise, and separate from each other for the use of this liberty, which in
both of them would be an express violation of the Apostolical Decree.

Governors indeed may be guilty of uncharitableness in the exercise of a just
Authority, (as I have already discoursed, Chap. 2.
and vindicated our Church from any such imputation) but Subjects can never be
guilty of scandal in obeying the lawful commands of a lawful Authority. And
private Christians may be guilty of scandal in the imprudent use of their just
liberties; but this can never extend to the authority of Government. Thus it
was with the Gentile Converts. The Council at Jerusalem had delivered them from
the necessity of observing the Laws of Moses, but yet had not laid a necessity
on them to eat Swines flesh, or any other meats which were unclean by the Law,
when a Jew was present; and therefore herein it became them to use their
liberty without offense, and to exercise a generous charity toward the
weakness of a believing Jew in such cases, as the Apostle argues from the 13th
verse to the end of the Chapter; and yet it became the Church to allow this
liberty to the Gentiles, which they might use uncharitably: for to have
abridged it, had been to impose on them the observation of the Mosaical Law.

The Apostle indeed, as the Reconciler observes, did plainly assert, P. 73.
That the things scrupled by the weak, were pure and lawful in themselves; that
he knew and was persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there was nothing unclean of
it self: which is the very determination of the Council at Jerusalem; and yet
he requires the believing Gentiles to exercise great charity in the use of
their liberty; which is a plain instance of the exercise of a private charity
in such cases, where public Authority can make no such determination in favor
of the scrupulous. The Council at Jerusalem, and St. Paul in this Epistle,
determine against the scruples of the Jews, and assert the liberty of the
Gentiles; and they could not do otherwise; and yet St. Paul requires private
Christians to use this liberty without offense, and to exercise such charity to
their Jewish Brethren, as the Church it self did not, and could not exercise.
P. 71.
And thus St. Paul falls under our Reconciler's lash, as well as Dr. Womack, As
if Church Governors were not as much concerned in the reasons laid down, as
were the common People; that is, that they were not obliged to receive the weak
in Faith, and being strong, to bear the infirmities of the weak; that they
might judge another man's servant, that they might put a stumbling block or an
occasion to fall in their Brothers way; that they might walk uncharitably,
might grieve, and even destroy him with their meat for whom Christ died; that
they might let their good be evil spoken of, and might for meat destroy the
work of God; and that though it is good for private persons not to eat flesh,
nor drink wine, nor to do any thing whereby their Brother stumbleth, or is made
weak, or is offended, yet may Church Governors impose such things, although
God has declared that their power is only for edification, and not for
destruction. For this is the plain case, all these Arguments St. Paul uses to
persuade private Christians to mutual forbearance and charity in the exercise
of their Christian liberty; and yet both the Council at Jerusalem, and St. Paul
in this Chapter, do positively determine, that the Gentile Christians should
have this liberty, though St. Paul persuades them to great charity in the
exercise of it. So that the case of private Christians and public Governors
is so very different, that charity may exact that from private Christians to
avoid scandal and offense, which no charity can justify in Governors: the
Gentile Converts were to deny themselves in the use of their liberty, to avoid
giving offense to the Jewish ^hristians; but a whole Council of Apostles did
not think fit to deny this liberty to the Gentiles, which might prove an
offense and scandal to the Jews. For the believing Gentiles might restrain the
use of their liberty without injuring their Christian liberty; for no man is
bound to use all the liberty he has, and therefore may suspend the use of it
when it will serve the ends of charity: but the Apostles could not deny the use
of this liberty to the gentile Converts, without destroying their Christian
liberty. And therefore our Reconciler is mightily out in his Argument, That
Church Governors in their public capacity are bound to all those acts of
forbearance and charitable condescension, which private Christians are bound
to; when in this very instance from which he argues, it appears to be quite
otherwise: the Church determines for the liberty of the Gentiles to eat all
sorts of meats without any regard to the Mosaical distinction between clean and
unclean, notwithstanding that offense it gave to the believing Jew; and yet St.
Paul persuades the believing Gentile not to use this liberty to the scandal and
offense of their weak Brethren.

In a word: This fourteenth Chapter to the Romans consists of two distinct
parts, though not so commonly observed, which has occasioned very confused
apprehensions about it. 1. That which equally concerns both Jews and Gentiles,
viz. not to judge, despise, or censure each other, nor to break Christian
Communion, upon account of their different apprehensions about the Mosaical
Law: that one believed he might indifferently eat of all sorts of meat, and
another eat herbs; one preferred one day before another, another thought all
days alike. Now all the indulgence to one another which the Apostle exacts in
this case, is only to grant each other that liberty which the Apostolical
Synod had granted them, that the Jews might still observe the Law of Moses, and
that the Gentiles might enjoy their liberty not to observe it; and therefore
the Apostle uses much such Arguments to persuade them to this, as were before
used by the Council when they made their Decree; of which, more presently: and
this part reaches to the 13th verse. But how our Reconciler hence infers that
Church Governors must not make any Determinations about things which are
scrupled, because the Apostle exhorts them to obey such Determinations, and not
to judge and censure one another for such matters which the Church had
determined they might both lawfully do* I cannot imagine. 2. The second part
peculiarly refers to the believing Gentiles, to persuade them to exercise great
charity, and as much as might be, to avoid all scandal and offense in the use
of their Christian liberty. That because their Jewish Brethren were so weak as
to take offense at their liberty, therefore they should forbear the use of it,
when it was likely to give offense. And to this purpose he urges several
Arguments from charity to the end of the Chapter, and in the beginning of the
15th Chapter.

But this you have already heard, peculiarly relates to the duty of private
Christians in the private exercise of their Christian liberty, and can by no
means be applied to the Governors of the Church, as exercising acts of
Government in making public Decrees and Constitutions: for as I have already
shown, the Church could not deny that liberty to the Gentiles, nor make any
Decree in favor of such Jewish scruples, but only exhorted the Gentiles to
exercise this liberty charitably, and without offense. This one thing well
considered, is a sufficient Answer to our Reconciler's fourth Chapter, since it
makes it very plain, that there is nothing in the 14th of the Romans to
restrain the exercise of Ecclesiastical Authority, whatever scruples men have
entertained about it.

II. Another very material difference is, that the subject of the Dispute
between the Church and Dissenters, is of a quite different nature from that
Dispute which was between the Jewish and Gentile Christians, about which the
Apostle gave those directions about mutual forbearance, and a charitable
condescension to each other.

The Dispute between the Church and Dissenters, is about indifferent things;
between the Jews and Gentiles, about the observation of the Law of Moses: Now
these two are so vastly different, that there may be very wise reasons for
allowing some indulgence in one case, but not in the other.

By indifferent things, I mean such things as are neither morally good nor
evil, nor are either commanded nor forbidden by any positive Law of God. Now if
our Reconciler can show any Dispute about such things in Scripture, or any one
Precept or Exhortation either to Governors or private Christians about
forbearance, or the exercise of charity in such matters, I will yield him the
Cause. He has not produced one yet; for the Dispute between Jew and Gentile was
of another nature. P. 79.
This our Reconciler acknowledges, That this Discourse is generally thought to
have relation to the Jewish Converts, who thought it was unlawful to eat of
meats forbidden by the Law of Moses, and that it was their duty to observe the
Jewish Festivals; and says, That his Discourse will be more firm, if the
Apostle speaks concerning the observance of the Law of Moses, or of the meats
and days prescribed by it. And in this sense I desire to take it, and believe
this is the true sense of the words; but it may be, when he sees, that this
interpretation of the place will overthrow his whole Hypothesis, he will be
willing to retreat; and therefore I shall briefly examine what he alleadges to
prove the Apostle did not refer to the observation of the Law of Moses in this
place, but that he rather speaks of meats offered to Idols, and the observing
days of Fasting. His Arguments are these:

Ibid. p. 80.
1. Because the weak Brethren did not abstain from Swines-flesh only, and other
meats forbidden by the Law of Moses, but they abstained from all kinds of
flesh. Whence says the Commentator on the Romans in St. Jerome 's Works, It may
be proved that the Apostle speaks not of the Jews, as some conceive; non enim
carnes secundum legem, sed sola olera manducabant. Because the weak persons
mentioned here, only did eat herbs, abstaining from all flesh, and not from
that alone, which was forbidden by the Law of Moses. But if we will take the
opinion of this Commentator, we must understand also, one who is weak in body,
who has an ill stomach, or ill digestion, and therefore eats herbs, because he
cannot eat flesh, through sickness or old age: Infirmus aetate, aut corporis
vigore: which are the words immediately before; and then how this will reach
the case of Ecclesiastical Ceremonies, I cannot tell.

As for his reason, that these weak persons eat only herbs, it is not evident
from the Text. Herbs may be taken synecdochically for all sorts of meats
allowed by the Law, no sort of herbs being forbidden; or it may signify, that
rather than eat any meats forbidden by their Law, they chose to live on herbs;
which might be often the case of those Jews who lived among Heathens, as the
Jews at Rome, who are primarily concerned in this Epistle, did. And St.
Chrysostom, who positively asserts that this concerns meats forbidden by the
Law of Moses, assigns another reason for their eating herbs. (...). Chrysostom. in
Loc.
Because if they had only abstained from Swines-flesh, and other forbidden
meat, they would have discovered their Reverence for the Law of Moses still
(which he supposes they had a mind to conceal); and therefore to palliate the
business, they abstained from all flesh, and eat only herbs, that it might
look more like fasting and abstinence than the observation of the Law. Whether
this be a good reason or not, I am not now concerned to inquire; it plainly
shows what St. Chrysostom's opinion was in the case, which I suppose may be
thought as considerable as this Commentators.

But there can be no doubt about this, if we consider what the Apostle says,
v. 14. For I know, and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing
unclean of it self; but to him that esteems any thing unclean, to him it is
unclean. (...), common, the word peculiarly used to signify the distinction of
clean and unclean meats among the Jews; and there was no other Law that ever
made such a distinction. For though the Pythagoreans did forbid eating of
flesh, yet that was an inconsiderable Sect of Philosophers, which could not
occasion such a general Dispute as this was; and they did not forbid flesh upon
this distinction of clean and unclean meats, which was peculiar to the Mosaical
Law, but for reasons peculiar to their Philosophy, which were so vain and
superstitious, that we cannot imagine the Apostle would grant any indulgence to
such fancies.

2. His next reason is, Because the Apostle does in the Epistles to the
Galatians and Colossions speak severely against their observation of the Jewish
Festivals, and therefore here would not speak of them as things indifferent;
concerning which, it was only needful that the observers or not observers of
them, should be well assured in their own minds, and be permitted to continue
in their practice, as St. Ambrose says, the Apostle here asserts; nor is it
like, that in such things he would permit them to abound in their own sense.
Which last assertion directly overthrows his whole Hypothesis: for it seems the
Apostle might have required of them to renounce the Law of Moses, and the
observation of it, whatever scruples they pretended; and then how does it
become so necessary a duty in Church Governors, to renounce their own
Authority to gratify and humor every scrupulous Conscience? for if ever there
were reason to be favorable to scruples, it was in the case of the believing
Jews, whose scruples were occasioned by a Divine Law, which they were not yet
convinced was abrogated and out of date: And if, as he says, it was not likely
the Apostle should suffer them to abound in their own sense in such things,
there is much less reason to expect this from Church Governors in other
matters, where no such Authority can be pretended to justify their scruples.
But of the different behavior of the Apostle to the Romans and Galatians, I
shall give such an account in what follows, as will not be much to our
Reconciler's purpose.

3. Because the Apostle confineth his discourse to meats, not speaking of the
whole observance of the Law of Moses, he does not therefore say that Christ had
now abolished that Law, or that it was not made unto, and so could not oblige
the Gentile World, or any thing which seems proper to oppose unto those
judaizing Christians, but only says that meats did not commend to God, and
suchlike things; which are all proper to be spoken unto those who,
understanding of their liberty, freely indulged themselves in eating of the
Idol-Sacrifice. Now this is a notable Argument, if it be well considered. The
Apostle confines his discourse to meats (and days) not speaking of the whole
observance of the Law of Moses. Because his whole Epistle treats upon this
Argument, and he does not repeat all that he said in the foregoing Chapters
about Circumcision and Sacrifices, Washings and Purifications, and the
abrogation of the Mosaical Law, in this 14th Chapter; therefore these meats and
drinks and days, must not refer to Mosaical observances. The whole Epistle
concerns the Dispute between Jews and Gentiles; and if he can find any other
meats and days which the Jews thought themselves bound to observe, and the
Gentiles thought themselves freed from by Christ, he will say something more to
the purpose.

And whereas he argues, that the Apostle does not urge such Arguments as are
proper to prove the abrogation of the Law of Moses, it is evident that this was
not his business in this Chapter; but he proves what he intended to prove, how
reasonable mutual forbearance is in these matters; which supposes the
abrogation of the Law already proved (as indeed he had sufficiently proved it
before): for there is no place for forbearance against a positive Law.

4. His last reason is as good as any of the former: Because had the Apostle
spoken to the strong Jewish Christian, and declared his freedom from the
observation of the whole Jewish Law, he would have contradicted the Churches of
Jerusalem, and his own practice there: 21 Acts 24.
for they were zealous for the observation of it, and did esteem it their duty
so to be; and did not judge him a strong, but a disorderly Christian, who being
a Jew, observed not their Laws and Customs. Now if this proves any thing, it
proves that St. Paul never did, and indeed ought not to dispute against the
freedom of the Jewish Converts from the observation of the Law; and then we
shall want a new Commentator upon most of his Epistles, to deliver him from
that scandal which all Exposi^ors hitherto have cast on him, that he has in
many places industriously proved that neither Jew nor Gentile were under the
obligation of the Mosaical Law.

But it is evident in this very place, that those whom our Reconciler calls the
strong Jewish Christian, St. Paul calls the weak in the Faith, who did not
understand his true Christian liberty; and writing neither to strong Jewish,
nor to strong Gentile Christians, but to the Church of Rome, which consisted of
both, in compliance with the Apostolical Decree in the first Council at
Jerusalem. He imposes no necessity on the Jews to renounce the observation of
the Law, nor on the Gentiles to observe it: and lest such different manners and
customs might occasion Schisms and Divisions among them, he exhorts them to
mutual forbearance; not to judge, nor censure, nor reproach each other upon
this account. And this the Apostle might do, without incurring the censure of
the Christians at Jerusalem, or contradicting his own practice. For he was
charged at Jerusalem not with teaching the abrogation of the Law with respect
to Jews as well as Gentiles, which was a thing so notorious, that he neither
could nor would dissemble it; but with forbidding the Jewish Christians to
observe the Law, which indeed was directly contrary to the Apostolical Decree,
which delivered the Gentiles from that necessity, but indulged the Jews in it.
Thus James the Bishop of Jerusalem tells him, that the Jews, who were then in
great numbers at Jerusalem, and were zealous for the Law, were informed of him,
that he taught all the Jews which are among the Gentiles, that they ought to
forsake Moses, 21 Acts 21.
saying, that they ought not to circumcise their children, neither to walk
after the customs. Now it is one thing to say that they are under no necessity
of doing this, and another to say they are under a neces^ity of not doing it;
the first was the Apostles constant Doctrine, the second was contrary both to
his own practice, and to that liberty he everywhere indulged the Jews, as well
as in this Chapter under debate.

Having thus cleared the way, and proved that St. Paul does here discourse
about the observation of the Jewish Law, and that neither believing Jews nor
Gentiles ought to judge, censure, or condemn each other for observing or not
observing such customs; I come now to show what a vast difference there is
between this case, and those indifferent Ceremonies and Circumstances of
Worship which are enjoined by our Church, and that we cannot argue from one to
the other. And methinks every ordinary Reader cannot but be sensible of the
difference at the first hearing.

For the Dispute here is not about indifferent things, but about the obligation
of the Law of Moses. The Proposition our Reconciler undertakes to prove, is,
That indifferent things which may be changed and altered without sin, or
violation of Gods Law, ought not to be imposed by Superiors as Conditions of
Communion. And this he proves from St. Paul's Indulgence to the Jews in the
observation of the Mosaical Law. Now what relation is there between the Law of
Moses, and the indifferent Circumstances or Ceremonies of Worship?

Did St. Paul allow the Jews this liberty of observing the Law of Moses upon
this reason, that it was indifferent for them to observe, or not to observe the
Law? If he did not, then this Example is impertinently alleged, as not
relating to this present Dispute about imposing or not imposing indifferent
things. If he did, then the observation of the Law is indifferent still: for
that which is once indifferent, must continue so, without some new Law to alter
its nature; and I know of none in this case.

If St. Paul thought the observation of the Law so indifferent, why does he
dispute so earnestly against it in this whole Epistle? Why did he contend so
earnestly even with St. Peter himself, in behalf of the Gentiles, to maintain
their liberty from the Jewish Yoke? for if it were indifferent to the Jew, it
was so to the Gentile: and according to our Reconciler's way, it did not become
such great Apostles to contend about indifferent things either one way or
other. Why did St. Paul so severely chide the Galatians, who chiefly consisted
of Gentile Converts, for their warping to the observation of the Law? and so
passionately exhorts them to stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ had
made them free, and not to be entangled again with the yoke of bondage? 5 Gal.
1.
Why does he so diligently caution the Colossians both against Jewish and Pagan
Superstitions, 2 Col. 5.8, etc.
as contrary to the Doctrine of Christ? This does not argue that the Apostle
thought the observation of the Law of Moses an indifferent thing: for though he
indulged the Jews in it, he would not indulge the Gentile Converts; especially
those Gentile Churches which were panted by himself, and were from the very
beginning instructed in their Christian liberty: which seems to be the true
reason of his different treatment of the Churches of Rome and Galatia. At Rome
it is evident there were great numbers both of Jewish and Gentile Converts; and
as he asserts the liberty of the Gentile Christian from the Mosaical Law, so he
indulges the believing Jew in such observations, and exhorts them both to bear
patiently and charitably with one another, without despising or judging. But
the Churches of Galatia consisted of Gentile Converts, and either had none or
very few Jews originally among them, as is evident, in that St. Paul from the
very beginning had freely and openly instructed them in their Christian
liberty, and freedom from the Law of Moses; which he could not have done, had
there been any great number of Jews there, who were all zealous for the Law:
therefore when in his absence some Jewish Christians had got in among them, and
seduced them from the simplicity of the Gospel to the observation of legal
Rites and Ceremonies, he deals very sharply with them, and chides them for
their Apostasy; for there was not the same reason to indulge them in this case,
as to indulge the Jews. And we may as well from St. Paul's severity to the
Galatians, prove that it does not become Church Governors to indulge the
wantonness and superstitious conceits and scrupulous fancies of private
Christians, as from his indulgence to the Jewish Christians at Rome, prove the
unlawfulness of imposing indifferent things, and with much better reason too.
To be sure, since he so sharply reproves the Galatians for their observation of
the Law of Moses, which he so charitably indulges the Jewish Romans in, he does
neither under the notion of indifferent things; and therefore this Example does
not concern our present Dispute.

But you will say, Were not these things indi^ferent? Does not the Apostle
expressly say, I know, 14 Romans 14.
and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus Christ, that there is nothing unclean of it
self? Was not the Law abrogated which made the di^ference between clean and
unclean meats? And were they not at liberty then to eat or not to eat? Yes, no
doubt of it, as we are at this day. But it is one thing to eat or not to eat,
as an instance of natural liberty, in which Religion is not concerned; and
another thing to eat or not to eat out of regard to the Law of Moses; which was
the Dispute between the Jew and Gentile, and which is the case wherein St. Paul
exhorts them to the exercise of mutual charity and forbearance. Now let our
Reconciler speak his conscience freely, whether there be any thing alike in
these two cases, or whether there be the same reason to indulge a Dissenter in
his scruples about indifferent things, which never were commanded nor forbidden
by any divine Law, as there was at that time to indulge the Jews in the
observation of the Law of Moses, which they knew was given by God, and had been
in all Ages till that day religiously observed by them from the time it was
first given, and which they thought did ^till as much oblige them as ever. The
Dispute is not about the lawful use of indifferent things, but about the
obligation of a divine Law: and though it was very reasonable to indulge the
Jews for a time in observing the Law, till it should be repealed in such an
evident manner as to leave no reasonable scruple about it; yet it can never be
reasonable to indulge men in their scruples about indifferent things, because
there never was, nor never will be any such reason for these scruples as ought
to be indulged.

But our Reconciler, in answer to what Dr. Falkner had urged, P. 77.
That the Apostle in this Chapter (14 Rom.) is not treating about, and
therefore not against the Rules of Order in the service of God, meaning by that
expression the imposed Ceremonies, adds, That still the sequel is firm: for the
Apostle may dispute upon another subject, and yet lay down such Principles, and
use such Arguments as equally confute the pressing or imposing of those
Ceremonies, as the Conditions of Communion, when such an imposition will
silence many able Ministers, and involve many Myriads in the guilt of Schism
and Separation from the Church. Now to this I answer,

1. This may be sometimes true; but then the subjects must be near of kin, and
there must be something contained in the Argument which indifferently relates
to all other cases which are of a like nature.

2. But yet whatever the Argument be, it depends wholly upon a parity of
Reason, and cannot challenge the same authority in any other case, as it has
in that to which it is immediately applied. The Arguments the Apostle uses to
persuade Jews and Gentiles not to judge and censure each other upon account of
observing or not observing the Law of Moses, are St. Paul's Arguments, as
applied to that case, but are only our Reconciler's Arguments, as applied to
the Ceremonies of the Church of England, and have no more authority than he
has; nor any greater strength than his reasoning gives them. And therefore he
imposes upon his Readers, when he pretends to dispute against the Impositions
of our Church from the authority of St. Paul, and confesses at the same time,
that St. Paul does not say one word about the matter. He ought plainly to
declare, that there is nothing in Scripture which expressly condemns the
Impositions of our Church; but there are some Arguments used by Christ and his
Apostles upon other occasions, which he thinks by a parity of Reason condemns
these Impositions. But to pretend Scripture against us, when he cannot produce
any one Scripture which primarily relates to the imposition of indifferent
things, is to set up his own Reasonings for Scripture, though they are
generally such as few men will allow to be sen^e. Our Savior's and St. Paul's
Arguments are Scripture, when applied to those cases to which they apply them;
but when they are applied to other purposes, though the words are Scripture
still, yet this new application of them is not: and I would desire my Readers
to observe this, that though our Reconciler has alleged numerous places of
Scripture, yet he has not one Scripture Proof against the Church of England;
the words are Scripture, but applied by him to other purposes than the
Scripture intended.

3. But yet parity of Reason, where it is plain and evident, is a very good
Argument; and therefore here I will join issue with him, and make it appear
that the Apostles Arguments in the 14th of the Romans, whereby he persuades
them to mutual charity and forbearance in reference to the Rites and Ceremonies
of the Mosaical Law, cannot by any parity of Reason be applied to the
Ceremonies of the Church of England. Now I observed before, that there are two
distinct parts in this Chapter, and Arguments proper to each; and though our
Reconciler confounds them, I shall consider them distinctly.

First, The first part persuades them not to judge, or censure, or break
Communion with each other, for the sake of such different customs. Him that is
weak in the faith receive; 14 Romans 1.
that is, receive to Communion; which the Reconciler himself confesses to be
the true sense of it: but not to doubtful disputations, (...), without judging
of each others differing opinions and persuasions of things. For one believes
he may eat all things, v. 2.
another who is weak eats herbs. This is the matter about which they
differed. The Gentile Converts believed that they were free from the Law of
Moses, which made a difference between clean and unclean meats, and therefore
might eat any thing; the Jew, who was weak in the Faith, and was not yet
persuaded of his freedom from the Mosaical Law, abstained from all forbidden
meats, and fed on herbs. Let not him that eats, v. 3.
despise him that eats not. Let not the Gentile despise the Jew, as ignorant
of the Mystery of the Gospel, and that liberty which is purchased by Christ,
and let not him that eats not, judge him that eats; let not the Jew condemn
and reject the Gentiles as profane and unclean persons, with whom they ought
not to converse, much less to receive them into their Communion, because they
do not observe the Law of Moses. So that the Apostle's design in these words
is to prevent that Schism which was likely to be occasioned between the Jewish
and Gentile Converts upon account of the Law of Moses; he does not say, that
either Jews should yield to Gentiles, or Gentiles to Jews, but each of them
retaining their own liberty in these matters, they should still own each other
as Christian Brethren, and live in Christian Communion together; which shows
how remote this case is from the Dispute between the Church and Dissenters: for
Jews and Gentiles, notwithstanding their Disputes about the obligation of the
Law of Moses, might join together in all the acts of Christian Worship; whereas
the Dispute between the Church and Dissenters is about the very acts of
Worship; and therefore while this difference lasts, they cannot join in one
Communion: of which, more anon. Which is a plain proof that nothing of all this
relates to our present case.

But before I consider the Apostles reasons for this, I must a little more
particularly examine what he means by receiving the weak: for though our
Reconciler and I agree that this signifies to receive to Communion, yet I find
we differ very much about that, what is meant by receiving to Communion; P. 83.
as will appear from a long Paragraph wherein he opposes Dr. Falkner about this
matter, which seems to me to be the very perfection and quintessence of
Gibberish.

By receiving one another, I understand owning each other as Members of the
same Body, i. e. of the same Christian Communion, a necessary consequence or
duty of which, is actually to communicate with each other in all acts of
Christian Worship; or as Dr. Falkner expresses it in other words, Libertas
Ecclesiastica. P. 437.
That they ought to be owned and judged as Christians, notwithstanding these
different observations. -- He forbids the weaker Jews to condemn the other
Jews or Gentiles, as if they were not possessed with the fear of God, because
they observed not the Law of Moses: and prohibiteth those others from despising
or disowning these weaker Jews as not having embraced Christ ((...), v. 3.
signifying here, so to despise, as withal to reject and disclaim; as Mark 9.12.
Acts. 4.11. 1 Cor. 1.28.) because they observed the Rites of Judaism. And
therefore he adds, That if by a parity of Reason we will apply this to any
other case, it must be to condemn them who press their own practices or
judgments in things unnecessary, as being the essential and necessary points of
Religion and Christianity; and thereupon do undertake to censure all those who
differ from them in such lesser things, as having no true Religion, or inward
relation to, or communion with Jesus Christ, though they live never so
conscientiously, and act according to the best apprehensions they can attain.

What now has our Reconciler to say to this, why this is not the true sense of
receiving them, to own them for Christians, as Members of the Body of Christ,
and such as they ought actually to communicate with? Why he says, This is
tacitly presumed in all the Apostle's Arguments, and without that concession
they are not cogent; and of this the miraculous gifts of the Spirit, with which
both parties were endowed, were a sufficient testimony: but he declares, that
they were to be received into communion, and that because God had received
them. He does not only forbid the strong to disown these weak persons, as not
having embraced Christ; for they who thus conceived most suitably unto that
Principle, deny what the Apostle here asserts of these weak persons, viz. that
God had received them, that they were Christian Brethren, or that Christ died
for them, or that they were the work of God; and so all the Apostles Arguments
must be to men of such opinions, weak and unconcluding: but he declares, that
they should join with them in Christian Fellowship, or should admit them into
Communion with them, as God did with him. And having repeated over the same
thing again, almost in the same words, he concludes, Therefore the design of
the Apostle in this Chapter, plainly is to condemn those persons who for these
things did take upon them to despise, judge, and refuse Communion with those
who differed thus in judgment and practice from them. The meaning of which is,
that both Jews and Gentiles did own each other to be very good Christians, and
Members of the same Church and Body of Christ, notwithstanding that one
observed the Law of Moses, and the other did not; but yet they had taken a
pique against each other for these different customs, and would not receive
each other to actual Communion, though there was nothing else to hinder this
actual Communion, but the dispute about the observation of the Law, which by
their own confession was no hindrance at all, since they did believe that those
who observed it, and those who did not observe it, were both of them very good
Christians. Which is so ridiculous a Comment upon the Text, that I could wish
it had been spared, for the credit of Protestant Reconcilers.

But the only way to end this Dispute, is by considering the plain matter of
fact. Now it is evident that the Jews did look upon all persons as unclean, who
were not circumcised and did not observe the Law. For which reason God
instructed Peter by a Vision not to call any man common or unclean; Acts 10.
and the believing Jews retained the same apprehensions even of the believing
Gentiles, after this matter was determined by the Synod at Jerusalem, as is
evident from that Contest between St. Peter and St. Paul at Antioch, which is
generally supposed to be after the Council at Jerusalem. 2 Gal. 11, 12.
The opinion the Jews had about the Law was, that the observation of it was
necessary to salvation. So the Jews taught the Brethren at Antioch, 15 Acts 1.
Except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved: which
occasioned the determination of the Council at Jerusalem. Thus it is evident,
the Jews at Rome, to whom the Apostle wrote this Epistle, did believe also; and
therefore the design of the Epistle, is to prove justification by the Faith of
Christ, without the works of the Mosaical Law. Now men of such Persuasions as
these, could not believe the Gentiles to be perfect Christians, because they
rejected something which they thought as essential as any thing else in
Christianity, viz. Circumcision and the observation of the Law; and for this
reason they judged and condemned them as no Members of the Church, which they
could not be, without being incorporated by Circumcision and observing the Law:
and therefore rejected them from their Communion.

As for the Gentiles, though we do not read that they ever rejected the
Communion of the Jews, who observed the Law, yet this Chapter would persuade us
that at this time they were very near it at Rome; and therefore the Command to
receive the weak, seems to be given to the Gentile believers, who were most
numerous and prevalent at Rome, to receive the Jewish Christians into their
Communion, and not to despise the weak, not to reject them out of contempt and
scorn, as a sort of such imperfect Christians as scarce deserved the name of
Christians, but were still more the Disciples of Moses than of Christ. So that
the reason why both Jews and Gentiles were apt to reject each other from
Communion, was, because those who did so, had no opinion of each others
Christianity: for it is both a contradiction to the account we have of those
times, and absurd in it self, that they should believe one another to be
goodChristians, and yet refuse to join in Christian Communion, upon such
Disputes as did neither hinder their Communion with each other, nor prejudice
their Christianity; which is as humoursome a Schism, as Dissenters themselves
are guilty of, and such as there is no Example of in the first Ages of the
Church.

But says our Reconciler, P. 84.
Were the designs of the Apostle that which Dr. Falkner does imagine, (that
is, that when the Apostle commands them to receive the weak, he means, they
should own them for Christian Brethren, and as such should receive them to
Communion) seeing the Schismatic is by the Doctrine of the Church, without
that Catholic Church in which alone Salvation can be had: Since therefore we
do censure him as one who has no inward relation to, or communion with Jesus
Christ, and therefore no relation to his Body; since we do think him worthy of
exclusion from Communion with the Church, it seems not easy to conceive how we
shall escape the condemnation of the Apostles Discourse, were the design of it
that only which he does imagine. As if it were the same thing to deny
Communion to any persons, as wanting something essential to Christianity, and
so having no right to Church Communion; and to ^hut those men out of our
Communion who are disorderly in it, or separate themselves from it: as if it
were the same thing to deny Communion to those who are not or are judged not to
be Christians, and to cast disorderly and irregular Christians, who will not
submit to the Rules and Government of the Church, out of our Communion. The
first makes the Dispute upon which we part, to be essential to Christianity, as
the Doctor well observed; the second proceeds only upon this Principle, that
those who will live in the Communion of any particular Church, must be subject
to the Rules and Orders of Worship and Discipline established in it. Which may
instruct our Reconciler in the difference between the Jews and Gentiles not
receiving one another upon the Dispute of the Mosaical Law, and the Churches
rejecting those from her Communion, P. 79.
who will not conform to her Rules of Worship; which he endeavors to make
parallel cases.

And as for the Reason he assigns, why the Apostle cannot by receiving mean,
that they should own each other as Christian Brethren, because the Arguments he
uses to persuade them to receive one another, do suppose that they did own each
other as Christians, is plainly false: for the Apostle persuades them to
receive each other, and to own one another for Christian Brethren, because God
had received them, because he owned them for Christians; and therefore if God
received the weak Jew with all his weakness, and the irregular Gentiles (as
they judged them) with all their irregularities, certainly both Jews and
Gentiles ought to receive each other. But this will better appear by
considering the Apostles Arguments, and showing how peculiar they were to that
case, and that they cannot be applied to the case of Dissenters. Now there are
two or three Arguments which St. Paul uses to this purpose, to persuade them to
receive one another, though our Reconciler has made a great many of them, by
applying all the Arguments in this Chapter, which concern Christian forbearance
and condescension, and the avoiding scandal, to this purpose.

1. His first Argument is, That God has received them; 14 Romans 3. 15 Acts 7.
which plainly refers to what is more largely discoursed in the Council at
Jerusalem, where St. Peter gives an account of the descent of the Holy Ghost
upon Cornelius, and those who were with him, all uncircumcised Gentiles, while
he preached the Gospel to them; which was such a visible demonstration of God's
receiving them even in their uncircumcision, that he durst not deny
Water Baptism, when God had already baptized them with the Holy Ghost. This was
confirmed by Barnabas and Paul, who declared what wonders And the same Argument
served for the circumcised Jews, who still observed the Law, that God had owned
them also, by bestowing his holy Spirit in a visible manner on them. Now if
either Circumcision or Uncircumcision had signified any thing in this matter,
God would not have indifferently bestowed his Spirit upon believing, but
circumcised Jews, and uncircumcised Gentiles.

By sending his Spirit on Jewish and Gentile Converts in such a visible manner,
God did evidently declare that both circumcised Jews, and the uncircumcised
Gentiles, who believed in Christ, should be received into the Communion of
Christ's Church; which is here called Gods receiving them. For the gift of the
Spirit belonged only to the Disciples of Christ, and therefore God did in a
visible manner own all those for the Disciples of Christ, on whom he bestowed
such visible Gifts.

But how does this concern our Dissenters? Yes, says our Reconciler, it
rationally follows, that none should be excluded from Communion with us, P. 85.
who will not by our God and Savior be excluded from Communion with them. But
he should have said, whom God has in such a visible and miraculous manner
received into Communion. And if our Reconciler can prove that God has
determined this Controversy about Ceremonies in as visible a manner as he did
the Dispute about Circumcision, he will say something to the purpose.

But this is all a mistake, from the beginning to the end. For I know no way of
judging whether any man be in communion with Christ, but by his communion with
the Church. There is no visible communion with God and Christ, but by a visible
communion with the Church; and as for any communion with Christ which is
invisible, certainly the Governors of the Church, who can see only what is
visible, are not concerned about it: and it is this visible Church Membership
and Church communion of which the Apostle speaks. He proves that God had
received both Jews and Gentiles into the visible communion of his Church by the
visible gifts of his holy Spirit; and therefore that they ought not to deny
external and visible communion to each other, since God had received them both
not merely into an invisible communion with himself, but into the visible
communion of the Church; which gave them a right to all acts of
Church Communion. And from hence our Reconciler proves, that the Church must
alter her Constitutions to receive those Dissenters into the Church who are not
in the Church, and will not communicate with her, because God has received
them: but how does it appear that God has received them into the communion of
the Church, who shut themselves out of it?

Yes, says the Reconciler, P. 86.
the plain result of this first Argument is this, That either we without breach
of charity may judge of all Dissenters, that they are not received into
communion by God, and that they are no living Members of Christ's Body, but a
pack of damned Hypocrites, worthy to be excluded from the Church of God, and to
be under a severe Anathema; or if we cannot charitably judge so hardly of them,
that we ought to receive them into communion with us, notwithstanding their
different conceptions and practice about lesser matters.

But what have we to do with the judgment of charity in this case? for the
Apostle speaks not of a judgment of charity, but of a visible proof and
demonstration of Gods receiving them, from the visible signs and effects of it,
viz. the miraculous effusions of the holy Spirit. What have we to do to pass
any judgment at all concerning those men's internal communion with God and
Christ, who forsake the external and visible communion of the Church? since the
Apostle speaks here of Gods receiving them into visible Churchcommunion. Must
the Church alter the most prudent and wholesome Constitutions for the sake of
every one, whom she does not believe a damned Hypocrite? May we not hope
charitably, that God will be merciful to the prejudices and mistakes of some
well-meaning men, without destroying all Order in the Church, and all the
Decency of Worship, to let such men into our Communion? When God shall as
visibly declare that he receives all those into the communion of the Church,
who dissent from the Constitutions of it, and will not conform to its Worship,
Discipline, or Government, as he did, that he had received both Jews and
Gentiles into the visible communion of the Church, then the Reconciler's
Argument may be worth considering; but till then, it is nothing to the purpose.
And I cannot but observe what dreadful apprehensions our Reconciler has of the
evil and guilt of Schism, who believes that such Schismatics as wilfully
separate from the communion of the Church, may still be in communion with God
and Christ. This his present Argument necessarily supposes: for otherwise it
does no way appear that God has received them; and then it does not follow,
that the Church must receive them: and yet certainly Schism cannot be so
damning a sin, as at other times he pretends it is, if such Schismatics are
still in communion with God and Christ. So that great part of his Book is
nothing but putting tricks upon the Church. And when he declaims mostt
ragically about involving so many precious Souls in the guilt of a damning
Schism, and destroying those with our Ceremonies for whom Christ died, he
secretly laughs in his sleeve at those silly people who are so credulous as to
believe it: for he believes no such matter himself, but thinks it want of
charity to believe that Schismatics are not in communion with God, nor living
Members of Christ's Body. So that whatever strength those may conceive to be in
his Book, who believe Schism to be a damning sin, it is plain, he cannot think
there is any strength in it himself: for upon this supposition, that a man may
be saved as well in a Schism, as in Church Communion, (as certainly all those
shall, who are in communion with God and Christ) it is not worth disputing
about these matters. The Church may keep her Constitutions, and Schismatics
may divide and subdivide into infinite Factions, and no great hurt done; but
that it makes Protestant Reconcilers of no use. It had been a much more
honorable undertaking in him, to have convinced the Church of her mistake
about the damning nature of Schism, and to have satisfied Dissenters that they
might continue in their Schism without any danger, than to scare them both with
panick fears, and to pelt them with such Arguments as are not worth half a
farthing, if this Argument be worth any thing: for if God and Christ have
received such Schismatics into communion, I know no reason they have to be
concerned about the communion of the Church.

2. The next Argument the Apostle uses, or rather a continuation of the former
Argument, is contained in the fourth verse. Who are thou that judge another
man's servant? 14 Romans 4.
to his own master he stands or falls; yea he shall be holden up: for God
is able to make him stand. To the same purpose, v. 10, 12. But why do thou
judge thy brother? (that is, whom God has made thy Brother, and declared him
to be so by visible effects, though thou refusest to own him for such) or why
do thou set at naught thy brother? for we shall all stand before the
judgment seat of Christ. -- So then every one of us shall give account of
himself to God.

This Argument our Reconciler thought fit to pass over: for though it was very
much to the Apostles purpose, it was nothing to his. For what is the meaning of
judging another man's servant? Are not private Christians subject to the
Authority of the Church, and liable to be judged and censured by their
Governors? No doubt of it, if Christ have established any Government in his
Church. And yet it seems this was such a matter, as no man had any authority to
judge in, but was reserved wholly to the judgment of God.

For the plain case was this: God had publicly declared his Will, by the
visible effusion of the holy Spirit both on Jews and Gentiles, that he indulged
the believing Jews at that time in the observation of the Law of Moses, but
would not impose that Yoke on the believing Gentiles. Now when God had so
visibly determined this Controversy, neither private Christians, nor
Church Governors had authority to determine it otherwise, or to judge, or
censure, or deny communion to each other upon that account; for God may accept
Jews and Gentiles upon what terms he pleases: and to judge and reject the Jews
for observing the Law of Moses, when God is pleased to indulge them in it; or
to judge and reject the Gentiles for not observing the Law, when God has so
manifestly declared that he receives them without it, is as if we should judge
another man's Servant for doing or not doing what his own Master either allows
or permits. In such cases as these, as St. James speaks, 4 Jam. 11, 12.
He that speaks evil of his brother, and judges his brother, speaks evil
of the Law, and judges the Law; but if thou judge the Law, thou art not a doer
of the Law, but a judge. There is one Lawgiver, who is able to save and to
destroy; who art thou that judge another? That is, when we judge and condemn
our Brother for doing or not doing such things which God has by a positive Law,
or some other public declaration of his Will, allowed them to do or to omit,
we are not doers of the Law, that is, do not behave our selves as those who are
to receive Laws, and to obey them; but as judges, as those who have authority
to make Laws, or to censure and control them. So that this Argument against
judging another man's Servant, relates only to such matters which God has
determined by his own authority; and therefore cannot concern the case of our
Dissenters, unless our Reconciler can prove that God has plainly determined
that the Church shall not prescribe the Rules of Order and Decency in public
Worship. What God has left to the authority of the Church in such cases, the
Church may judge, and censure, and reject the disobedient, because private
Christians in all such cases are subject to Church Authority, and the Church
does not exceed her authority in judging them. And this is the Dispute between
the Church and Dissenters, Whether they should obey the Authority of the Church
in such matters which God has not determined by his own Authority: whereas the
Dispute between Jews and Gentiles was actually determined by God, that the Jews
should be indulged in the observation of the Law, but that it should not be
imposed upon the Gentiles; and therefore when they judged and censured one
another upon this account, they exceeded their authority, they judged over Gods
judgment, and judged another man's Servant; which the Church cannot be charged
with, when she judges and censures her own refractory and dissenting Members
for their disobedience in such things as are subject to her authority.

3. The Apostle persuades both Jews and Gentiles to receive one another to
Christian communion, because though they differed in their practice, yet both
of them acted out of reverence to the divine Authority. The Jew knew that the
Law of Moses was given by God, and could not be satisfied that it was repealed,
and therefore still observed the Law in reverence to the Authority which first
gave it. The converted Gentiles knew that the Law was never given to them, and
were assured by the same persons, upon whose authority they embraced the
Gospel, that they were not under the obligation of the Law, and therefore they
thankfully accept that liberty which Christ had purchased for them: And
therefore since both of them at that time could truly plead a divine authority
for what they did, and not merely some unaccountable humor and prejudice, they
ought not to judge and censure one another for such different practices. One
man esteems one day above another, another esteems every day alike; let
every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. He that regards a day,
regards it to the Lord; 14 Romans 5, 6.
and he that regards not a day, to the Lord he does not regard it. He that
eats, eats to the Lord, for he gives God thanks; (which would be a profane
and impudent mockery of God, did he not believe that God had given him liberty
to eat indifferently of any thing) and he that eats not, to the Lord he
eats not, and gives God thanks.

Our Reconciler represents the Apostles Argument thus: P. 87, 88.
These persons, says the Apostle, ought to be received into communion,
although they differ in practice and in judgment about these matters, because
it was from conscience toward God, and a desire to do what was most pleasing
to him, that some did eat, and others not, that some did regard a day, and
others not -- If charity therefore will teach us to conclude of such as do
observe, or do refuse observance of the Constitutions of our Church in these
inferior matters, that as they outwardly profess, so do they really observe or
not observe them out of conscience toward God, which they who cannot know men's
Consciences but by their own professions, cannot well deny; then must they both
by the Apostles Rule receive each other to communion, and not reject each other
on the accounts of differences in judgment, or in practice, in these lesser
matters.

Let us then consider what the consequence of this Doctrine would be, if it
were true, viz. that the Consciences of men are under no Government; and when
we consider what is usually meant by Conscience, viz. men's private Opinions and
Judgments of things, the plain English of it is, that every man must do as he
list: and thus all the Authority of Government is overruled by the more
sovereign Authority of Conscience. This is so extremely absurd, that it is
wonderful to me that men of common understanding should not blush to own it.
For 1. It is plain, that God will judge the Consciences of men, and condemn
them too, if they be erroneous and wicked. The Jews crucified our Savior and
persecuted his Apostles out of zeal for God, as St. Paul witnesses; but God
destroyed their City, Temple, and Nation for it. I suppose our Reconciler will
not charge all the Heathen Idolaters, even after the Empire was turned
Christian, with being a pack of damned Hypocrites. Many of them no doubt very
sincerely followed their Consciences, and yet were damned not for Hypocrites,
but for conscientious Idolaters. All the Laws of God oblige the Consciences of
men, whatever their particular Persuasions may be; and if men's Consciences will
not comply with the Laws of God, the Law will judge and condemn them; and yet
it seems as hard a thing, that God should condemn men who act out of
conscience, and a desire to do what is most pleasing to him, as that Earthly
Governors should condemn and punish them.

No, you will say, God is the sole Lord and Judge of Conscience, and he alone has
authority to give Laws to the Consciences of men, which no humane power can;
but all this is senseless Cant: for what is it to be the Lord of Conscience?
and to give Laws to Conscience? Does it signify any more than a Sovereign
Authority to command, under the guilt of sin, if we disobey? And have not all
Governors then, who have received authority from God to command, the
government of men's Consciences too, as far as their authority reaches? But this
is not the Question, Who has authority to give Laws to Conscience: for whoever
has authority to make Laws, has authority to make Laws for Conscience, unless
they have authority to make Laws without obliging any body to obey them: But
the Question is, Whether after Laws are made either by God or men, every man
may equitably challenge a liberty to follow the guidance of his own Conscience,
though his Conscience mistake its rule. Now it is plain, that God does not
grant this liberty: for he punishes such erroneous Consciences, and will
eternally damn those who do wicked actions out of a mistaken Zeal for his
glory; and yet if there were any reason or equity in the case, it would more
oblige God than any Earthly Governors, because such misguided Zealots are
supposed to intend Gods glory in what they do: And if God will not indulge such
men in the breach of his Laws, though they intend to please him by it, what
reason have Earthly Governors to do it, who receive their authority from God,
and cannot imitate a better Example in the exercise of it than God himself?

2. Civil Magistrates ought to take no notice at all of men's Consciences in
making or executing Laws for the good government of the Nation. If the Saints
should think it their privilege and prerogative to rob and plunder and murder
the ungodly, if they should think themselves bound in conscience to pull down
earthly Princes to set up King Jesus on his Throne, should Magistrates be
afraid of hanging such Villains as these, as commit such horrid Outrages from a
Principle of Conscience? Nay, if men refuse to give security to the Government,
or a legal testimony in any civil cause, out of a scruple about the lawfulness
of Oaths, is the Government to take notice, or to make any allowance for this?
If God does not, Magistrates have less reason to do it, because God knows what
men's Consciences are, which Magistrates can never know: Hypocrites may pretend
conscience as well as the sincere; and Government could never be secure, if
Justice must be administered not by known and standing Laws, but in compliance
with every man's Conscience, which is, or may be, no body knows what.

3. The only doubt then is about the Governors of the Church, whether they in
making Laws, and in the exercise of Discipline, ought not to have great regard
to the Consciences of men. Now I would fain know a reason why they are more
bound than either God or civil Magistrates, to suffer men to do what they
please, according to their various and different pretensions of Conscience? If
there be any equity in it, that every man should enjoy the liberty of his own
Conscience, it holds in other matters, as well as these. I suppose our
Reconciler will not say, that the Governors of the Church are bound to suffer
every man to be of what Religion he pleases, to believe what he will, to deny
the Divinity and Satisfaction of our Savior, to worship an Image, or the Host,
or the Virgin Mary, etc. and therefore the most considerable things in Religion
are not left at liberty; and yet of the greater moment any thing is, the
greater imposition it is upon Conscience. I had rather submit to twenty
Ceremonies, than to be required to subscribe to one new Article of Faith.

But our Reconciler pretends only to this Indulgence in inferior matters. Let
us then consider his reason for that: for certainly the less the things are,
the less need there is, and the less reason to humor men's Consciences about
them. The only reason he assigns for it, is this: That those who do observe,
or do refuse observance of the Constitutions of our Church in these inferior
matters, do really observe them, or not observe them, out of Conscience toward
God. And if this be a good reason why every man should be left to the
government of his own Conscience, it is good in all other cases, as well as in
such inferior matters: for why should we impose upon men in any thing which
they observe or not observe in conscience toward God?

But you will say, this is St. Paul's Argument, not the Reconciler's. No, say I,
it is the Reconciler's Argument, not St. Paul's. But does not St. Paul say, He
that regards a day, regards it to the Lord; and he that regards not a
day, to the Lord he does not regard it. He that eats, eats to the Lord, for
he gives God thanks; and he that eats not, to the Lord he eats not, and
gives God thanks. Yes, I grant that these are St. Paul's words: And does not
this signify that they who did eat, and they who did not eat, acted out of
conscience toward God? Yes, I grant that too. The converted Gentiles did eat
indifferently of all sorts of meats, and thanked God for that liberty he had
granted them; the converted Jews abstained from all meats forbidden by their
Law, and thanked God for their Law, which preserved them from all legal
pollutions: but this is peculiar to this case, and cannot be applied to our
Dissenters, that they refuse to observe our Ceremonies out of conscience
toward God.

God had given a positive Law to the Jews by the hands of Moses, which enjoined
the observation of new Moons and Sabbaths, and other Festivals, and made a
distinction between clean and unclean meats; and though this Law was now out of
date, yet it was not repealed in as public a manner as it was given, and God
had no way declared that they should observe this Law no longer; and therefore
those Jews who embraced the Faith of Christ, durst not renounce the Law of
Moses out of reverence to the Authority of God who gave it: and therefore these
believing Jews might well be said to observe days, and not to eat to the Lord,
that is, out of reverence to the authority of God who gave that Law. The
believing Gentiles were never under the obligation of the Law of Moses, and
therefore were more easily instructed in their Christian liberty, which God
declared by sending his holy Spirit on them in their uncircumcision, and by the
Decrees of the Apostolical Synod at Jerusalem, and they were very well assured
by these divine Testimonies, that God had delivered them from the Jewish
observation of days and meats, and therefore they did eat, and they did not
observe days to the Lord, out of reverence to the divine authority which had
delivered them from the Mosaical Law. But where there is no positive Law, nor
any public Declaration of Gods Will, whatever our particular Persuasions and
Opinions may be, we do not act out of conscience toward God. For no man can be
said to do any thing to the Lord, or out of conscience toward God, in such
cases wherein God has not interposed his authority. And therefore unless our
Reconciler can show any positive Law either against Ecclesiastical Ceremonies
in general, or against the Cross in Baptism, the Surplice, or Kneeling at the
Sacrament in particular, how much soever his beloved Dissenters pretend to
Conscience, it is absurd to say that they do not observe these things out of
conscience toward God; nor do Conformists observe them out of conscience
toward God, any otherwise than as they obey that Authority which God has set
in his Church: For there can be no other foundation for Conscience, but either
the express Laws of God, or obedience to that Authority which God has set over
us.

But you will say, may not that man also be said to act out of conscience toward
God, who does, or forbears doing any thing out of a persuasion that God has
commanded or forbid it, though he should be mistaken in it, and he can produce
no Law of God to that purpose? While men design to please God in what they do,
surely they may be said to act out of conscience toward God. I answer, I will
not contend about words and phrases with any man, but let them call things by
what names they please. All that I say is this, That St. Paul does not use it
in this sense; nor is any man in Scripture said to do any thing to the Lord,
who cannot produce a plain Law for what he does. Other men may intend Gods
glory in what they do, but they may miss of their aim, when they have no Rule,
and incur the divine displeasure instead of pleasing God; and neither God nor
men can grant any Indulgence to such a Conscience as this. But when both
contending Parties can produce a divine authority for doing or not doing the
same thing (which never did, and never can happen, but in this case concerning
the obligation of the Law of Moses) there is great reason for them to receive
one another, because they both act out of reverence to the divine Authority. In
a word, two contrary Parties (as the Jews and Gentiles were in this
Controversy) can never both of them be said to do what they do to the Lord,
but only in such cases where there is a divine positive Law, or a divine
Indulgence, permission, or liberty on both sides; which was the case between
the Jews and Gentiles, but has no parallel, that I know of.

Our Dissenters indeed pretend the authority of Scripture to justify their
non-observance of Ecclesiastical Rites and Ceremonies; and so did the Jews for
putting our Savior to death, so do all Heretics and Schismatics, and even
Rebels themselves: and if the Government must take notice of every foolish
Reasoner, who pretends Scripture, it is in as ill a case, as if every
unscriptural Dream and Fancy must pass for an Oracle. This will make no
difference before God, whether men pervert the Scripture to their own
destruction, or follow the wild Enthusiasms of their own brains; and I see no
reason that Governors have to make a difference neither.

By these Arguments St. Paul persuades the believing Jews and Gentiles at Rome,
notwithstanding their Disputes about the observation of the Law of Moses, to
maintain Christian communion with each other; and they are very proper to this
purpose, but can by no parity of Reason be applied to the case of our
Dissenters; as I hope abundantly appears from what I have already discoursed.

Secondly, The Apostle by these Arguments having persuaded them to receive one
another to Christian communion, proceeds to persuade the Gentile Converts, or
those strong Jewish Christians who understood their Christian liberty, not to
give any needless offense and scandal to the weak, by an uncharitable use of
their liberty, 14 Romans 13.
from v. 13. to the end of the Chapter.

These two, to receive into communion, and not to give offense and scandal, are
of a very different consideration, though our Reconciler makes no distinction
between them; and therefore I shall briefly state this matter also, and show
how remote it is from the case to which our Reconciler applies it.

The scandal which he supposes the Church gives to the Dissenters, is this:
That by enjoining the use of some indifferent Ceremonies in Religion which are
scrupled by them, or condemned as unlawful, she tempts them to separate from
her Communion, and rather to involve themselves in the guilt of Schism, than to
submit to such unscriptural Impositions. Let us then consider what that Scandal
is of which St. Paul speaks, and by what Arguments he disswades them from it,
and how ^ar it is applicable to our case. 1. Then I shall consider what this
Scandal was. 2. By what Arguments he disswades them from giving Offense and
Scandal.

First, What this Scandal was. Now the persons who were scandalized, were the
weak; that which gave this scandal to them, was, as they apprehended, an open
contempt and violation of the Law of God, in eating such meats as were on all
hands agreed to be forbidden by the Law; the danger of this scandal was, lest
it should tempt them to renounce Christianity. Let us then compare this with
the case of our Dissenters.

1. The weak Jew was scandalized and offended. So far you will say the Parallel
holds good: for whatever the Dissenters think of themselves, I suppose the
Church looks upon them as a sort of weak Christians; and it is not what they
think, but what they are, which is to be considered in this case: for these
Jews did not think themselves weak, no more than our Dissenters do; and yet the
Apostle declares them to be weak, and requires the strong to treat them as weak
Brethren.

So far I agree; but then we must consider what this weakness was: for all
weakness is not alike, nor equally the object of our charity. Some men are
weak, because they are ignorant, and because they will not be instructed;
others are weak out of prejudice, and some vicious inclinations; some weakness
is to be chastised and corrected, not indulged: and therefore because St. Paul
requires them not to offend the weak Jew, it does not follow, that the Church
must use the same Indulgence to the weak Dissenters, unless their weakness be
alike pityable.

Now the weakness of the Jew consisted in this, that though they had embraced
the Faith of Christ, yet they were not convinced that the Law of Moses was out
of date; and therefore durst not do any thing which was forbidden by that Law,
nor omit doing what the Law commanded, nor could they endure to see others do
so: so that their weakness consisted in a profound reverence for an express
positive Law, which all men ag^eed was given by God, but which was not yet
repealed in so visible a manner as to sati^fie the believing Jews that it was
repealed. Now this was a very favorable case, so favorable, that God himself
still indulged the Jews in the observation of their Law; and therefore there
was great reason why the strong Christian should avoid giving offense to the
weak by the use of his Christian liberty.

But now this is such a case as never was before, and never can be again. Our
Dissenters may be weak, but not weak as the believing Jews were, out of
reverence to an express positive Law, because there is no such Law which ever
did forbid the use of those Ceremonies which they condemn; and certainly there
cannot be the same pretense to indulge those who foolishly reason themselves
into mistakes and scruples, as there was to indulge those who could produce a
plain positive Law to justify their dissent. The case is so vastly different,
that I doubt not but St. Paul, who pleaded for such Charity and Indulgence to
the Jews, would himself have censured our Dissenters. For both the Governors
of the Church, and private Christians, are in an ill state, if they are bound
to humor those mistakes and scruples which are owing to men's ignorance, folly,
interest, prejudice, or unteachable and refractory dispositions.

2. These weak Jews took offense at the open violation of an express Law of
God. For the Gentile Christians did not observe the Law of Moses, but acted in
direct opposition to it. Now this was a just matter of offense to the Jew,
while he retained such a great veneration for the Law of Moses, which at least
he had some fair appearance of reason to do. It is true, the strong Christian
in eating those things which were forbidden by the Law of Moses, did nothing
but what was lawful for him to do; but it does not hence follow, as our
Reconciler infers, that the scandal the weak Christian took at the freedom of
the strong, P. 77.
who used his Christian liberty in eating these things, was scandalum acceptum
non datum, scandal received but not given, the action being such as the weak
Christian could not justly be offended at: For the weak Christian had as much
reason to be offended at this, as he had to believe that the Law of Moses was
still in force; and this was the true reason of his offense.

No man can be justly charged with giving offense or scandal, who does not
break some divine Law. This was the offense the Jews took, that the Gentiles
did not observe the Law of Moses, and is the chief, if not the only case
wherein men may be culpably charged with giving offense, without sinning
against any Law. The Gentiles did break the Law of Moses indeed, but that Law
was now out of date, and they knew that it was so, and therefore were very
innocent in what they did; but the Jews did not believe that the Law was
repealed, and therefore they were offended at the contempt of that Law; and
their offense was so reasonable, that it made it a great fault and breach of
charity to offer this offense to them: but what is this to our Dissenters? What
Law condemns the Ceremonies of the Church of England? Our Reconciler, I
suppose, will not pretend that there is any such Law, or that there ever was
any such Law; and therefore we offer no offense and scandal to them: for we
break no Law of God, which either is now, or ever was in force against our
Ceremonies.

This one Observation, that there is no scandal given, where there is no divine
Law broken, would clear up that perplexed Doctrine of Scandal, (as it is stated
by most men) and make it intelligible to every ordinary understanding; and yet
this criminal giving of offense, is never applied in Scripture to any thing but
the breach of a divine Law. I meet with but two notions of giving offense in
Scripture: the first is, to offend by contempt and ill usage, or persecution;
in which sense our Savior warns us against offending any of those little ones
which believe in him, 18 Mat. 6, 10.
which he calls also despising of them, that is, treating them ignominiously
and reproachfully, which is apt to discourage men in their Christian course:
but this does not relate to our present Dispute, unless the Reconciler will
call the exercise of Church Discipline and Censures against Dissenters,
despising them and giving them offense. The second is, when we offend men by
our Example, by doing something which proves a Snare, and Stumbling Block, and
scandal to them. Now this is never applied to any action, which is not contrary
to some divine Law, which either is in force, or is reasonably presumed to be
in force by those who take offense at it. Thus the Jews took offense at the
Gentile Christians, for not observing the Law of Moses, which they knew was
given by God, but were not satisfied that it was repealed; which is the case
the Apostle refers to in this 14 Romans Another case like this, was concerning
eating things offered to Idols, 1 Cor. 8.10 chapter
which was against an express Law which forbid all Idolatry or communicating
with Devils, as those did who eat of their Sacrifices; and was expressly forbid
the Gentile Converts by the Apostolical Synod at Jerusalem. 15 Acts 29.
To abstain from meats offered to Idols. This Law some expounded not only to
forbid them to eat in the Idols Temple, and to feast upon the Sacrifice which
was there offered to the Idol, which was indeed an act of Idolatrous Worship;
but to forbid the eating of any meat which had once been offered to an Idol,
though it were carried from the Temple and sold in the Shambles, and eat in
private houses at a friendly entertainment, without any relation to the Idol.
St. Paul indeed determines this Controversy, that this Law to abstain from
meats offered to Idols, did only forbid them to eat in an Idols Temple, and to
feast on their Idolatrous Sacrifices; but if they went to buy meat in the
Shambles, or to eat at any private house, they were not concerned to enquire
whether that meat had been offered to an Idol or not; but yet they ought in
charity to have regard to the scruples of others, who supposed this prohibition
to extend to eating any meat that had been offered to an Idol, wherever they
eat it, as well as eating at an Idols Temple; and there being an express Law,
and a reasonable Scruple in the case, they were obliged in charity to their
weak Brethren, to abstain from all such suspicious meats.

Now indeed it is an act of charity not to offend nor scandalize our Brethren
by giving them the least reasonable suspicion of our violation of any plain and
express Law of God, when the Law is not imaginary, but visible: for these cases
have some equity in them, are but few, and can rarely happen; and therefore are
no great and burdensome restraint on our natural or Christian liberty, much
less have any ill influence on public Government; but if we extend this
Doctrine of Scandal to all other kind of scruples, it becomes both ridiculous
and intolerable. For then every humoursome and ignorant and conceited
Christian, who can make Laws by consequences, and can extract such Laws out of
Scripture as the Christian Church for many Ages never heard of, shall prescribe
to me what I shall eat and drink, what Clothes I shall wear, what Company I
shall keep, what Laws of Church or State I shall observe; nay, shall give Laws
to the Church, and repeal Laws, and impose their own Dreams and Fancies upon
their Superiors; which is the very design our Reconciler pursues throughout
his Book, to persuade the Governors of the Church, that it is unlawful for
them to prescribe any Laws or Rules of Worship which are scrupled by our
Dissenters, though without any reason, or without any Law: and truly could he
persuade them to this, I should as much admire their prudence, as I do his
charity.

3. Let us now consider what danger the Apostle designed to prevent in this;
what hurt their weak Brother was like to suffer by it. 14 Romans 13.
Now this he expresses, by laying a stumbling block or occasion to fall in our
brothers way; destroying him with our meat for whom Christ by his stumbling and
being offended, and made weak: Which signifies, that these believing Jews were
in danger of taking such offense at this liberty which the believing Gentiles
so uncharitably used, as to renounce the Faith of Christ, and fall back again
into Judaism; and there was manifest reason for this fear: for since they
retained such a mighty veneration for the Law of Moses, which they knew was
given by God, it was a great temptation to them to suspect that Christ was not
the true Messiah, but an Impostor, when they saw his Disciples so notoriously
break this Law, and themselves derided and scorned for observing of it. And
therefore the Synod at Jerusalem did not determine against the observation of
the Mosaical Law by believing Jews, but excused the Gentiles from it, who were
never under the obligation of that Law for it had been an invincible prejudice
to the Jews, had the Apostles in express terms declared the abrogation of the
Law, which the Jews believed to be eternal; but it was a more plausible
pretense, that the Law, which was originally given only to the Jews, should
not oblige the believing Gentiles. But yet had the believing Gentiles not only
refused to obey the Law themselves, but scorned and despised the Jews for doing
it, and used their Christian liberty in an open contempt and defiance of them
and their Law, this would have been very apt to have alienated their minds from
the Christian religion; which the Apostle therefore calls laying a
stumbling block or occasion to fall in our brothers way, and destroying him
with our meat (by tempting him to infidelity and Apostasy) for whom Christ
died. Thus St. Chrysostom expressly tells us, that St. Paul was afraid, (...),
etc. Chrysostom. in Locum.
lest this contemptuous usage of the believing Jews should tempt them to
renounce the Faith of Christ. But what is this to the case of our Dissenters?
are they tempted to renounce the Christian Religion by the Ceremonies of the
Church of England? It is so far from this, that they learn to despise their
Teachers, and to think themselves a more perfect and excellent sort of
Christians.

But you will say, it makes them Schismatics, and Schism is as dangerous to men's
Souls as Infidelity; and therefore the same charity which obliges us to prevent
the one, obliges us also with equal care to prevent the other. Now though I
think every good Christian will and ought to do what he reasonably can to
prevent a Schism; yet the difference between the case of Schism and Infidelity
in point of scandal, is very great. While men are weak and unsettled in the
Faith, and apt to take offense, and apostatize from Christ, they ought to be
treated with all manner of tenderness and condescension, because they are not
yet capable of being governed; they must be humoured for a while as Children
are, who must be managed by Art, not by Rules of Discipline; but when men are
well rooted and confirmed in the Christian Faith, they are no longer to be
humoured but governed; they must be taught to submit to that Authority which
Christ has placed in his Church, and to obey, not to dispute the commands of
their Superiors, when there is no plain positive Law of God against them. This
is the only way to preserve the Peace and Unity of the Christian Church; and
if men will take offense at the exercise of a just Authority, and turn
Schismatics, it is at their own peril. And this indeed I take to be the true
notion of the weak in the Faith, whom the Apostle in this Chapter commands the
strong Christians to treat with so much tenderness, without giving them the
least offense; those who are not well confirmed in the truth of the Christian
Religion, and therefore are apt to take offense at every thing, and to renounce
the Faith: And so his stumbling, and being offended, and made weak, signifies
his being shaken and unsettled in the Faith. Every one who is an ignorant and
uninstructed, is not therefore a weak Christian; his Understanding may be weak,
but his Faith may be strong; that is, he may very firmly and steadfastly believe
the truth of the Christian Religion, though he do not so well understand the
particular Doctrines of it. But these two sorts of weak persons are to be used
very differently; you must have a care of offending those who are weak in
Faith, but you must instruct and govern those who are weak in Understanding, or
else you prostitute the Authority of the Church, and the truth of Christianity,
and the just liberties of Christians, to every ignorant, and yet it may be
conceited obstinate and censorious Professor: which is a plain demonstration
that those directions the Apostle gives in this Chapter, not to offend those
who are weak in the Faith, cannot concern our Dissenters; who though they are
weak enough, as that signifies ignorant, yet are not weak in the Faith, as that
signifies those who are not thoroughly persuaded of Christianity, or not well
confirmed in that belief; and therefore are not to be humoured like Children,
but trained up to greater seize by wise Instructions, and a prudent
Discipline.

Secondly, Having seen what this Scandal and Offense was, let us now consider
by what Arguments the Apostle persuades those who were strong, not to offend
the weak. Now our Reconciler has turned almost every word into an Argument. One
Argument is, Reconciler, p. 88, etc.
That it is our duty not to judge, or lay a stumbling block before our Brother:
That it is contrary to charity, and evil in it self: That it caused
Christianity to be blasph^med: That it is contrary to the concerns of Peace,
and the edification of the Church, etc. Now I have no dispute with our
Reconciler about this, that it is a very ill thing, and very contrary to the
duty of a Christian to give any just offense or scandal to a weak Brother: if
we were as well agreed what it is to give offense, as that giving this offense
is a very evil thing, the Dispute were at an end: And yet by this artifice he
imposes upon his Readers, is very copious and rhetorical in his Harangue on
this Argument, and transcribes several passages out of St. Chrysostom, and some
other ancient Writers, to show the great evil and manifold aggravations of
scandal, which every one would grant him to be very good, when rightly applied;
but we deny that the Church of England is guilty of giving offend to the
Dissenters in that sense in which St. Paul and other ancient Writers meant it:
and if our Reconciler had pleased, he might have found enough in St. Paul's
Arguments to have convinced him that the Apostle spoke of a case very different
from ours; which because he has been pleased to overlook, I shall be so
charitable as to mind him of it.

Now I take the sum of the Apostles Argument to be this: That the reason why
they were not to offend the Jews by an uncharitable use of their Christian
liberty in eating such meats as were forbidden by the Law, is because their
eating or not eating such meats in it self considered, is of no concernment in
the Christian Religion, and therefore is the proper Sphere for the exercise of
charity. For when we discourse of offense and scandal, the first and most
natural inquiry is, of what moment and consequence the thing is in which we are
required to exercise our charity: for there are many things which we must not
do, nor leave undone out of charity to any man, whatever offense be taken at
it; but if it be of that nature as to admit of a charitable condescension and
compliance, then all the other Arguments against scandal and giving offense are
very seasonably and properly urged.

And this is the case here, as will appear from considering the series of the
Apostles Arguments. In the 13th verse he persuades them not to put a
stumbling block and occasion to fall in their Brothers way. And to enforce this
Exhortation, he adds in the 14th verse, I know and am persuaded by the Lord
Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of it self; but to him that esteems any
thing unclean, to him it is unclean: That is, all distinction of meats is
perfectly taken away by the Gospel of our Savior; and therefore if we be well
instructed in the nature of our Christian liberty, we may eat or not eat, just
as we please; and therefore there is nothing in the nature of the thing to
hinder the exercise of our charity, because it is wholly at our own choice
whether we will eat or not eat: And this makes it a great breach of charity to
eat with offense, to destroy our Brother with our meat, for whom Christ died,
15, 16 v. Which may justly cause our Christian liberty, which is a very good
and valuable thing in it to be censured and condemned on all hands, when it is
used so uncharitably to the destruction of our Brother; and therefore let not
your good be evil spoken of, v. 16.

And as there is nothing in the nature of the thing to hinder our charity, it
being equally lawful to eat or not to eat, and perfectly at our own choice
which we will do; so neither is Religion concerned one way or other in it. The
Christian Religion indeed is concerned in theDispute about the lawfulnessof
eating or not eating such things as were forbid by the Law of Moses, because
this is a point of Christian liberty; and the Apostle does not persuade the
Gentile Converts to renounce this liberty, which the Gospel allows them: but
bare eating or not eating, without respect to our opinions about it, is of no
consequence in Religion; we are neither the better Christians, if we do eat,
nor the worse Christians, if we do not. v. 17.
For the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink. The Gospel of our Savior
prescribes no Laws about the quality of our diet; and therefore it is no part
of the Christian Religion to eat or to forbear. The liberty of eating
indifferently of all things is allowed by the Gospel, but the act of eating is
neither commanded nor forbid; and therefore is no duty of Religion.

But though the Gospel do not give us any direct and positive command about
eating or not eating, yet there are some duties which are essential to the
Gospel, wherein the life and spirit of Christianity consists; which in some
cases may be a collateral restraint upon the exercise of our liberty: for the
Kingdom of God is righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. And
therefore it is an essential duty of Christianity, to deal kindly and
compassionately with our Fellow Christians, to promote the Peace and Unity of
the Church, and that Spiritual Joy and Delight which Christian Brethren ought
to take in each other in the Communion of the same Church, and the joint
Worship of their common Father and Savior. These are the things which are most
pleasing to our great Master, and have so much natural goodness, as recommends
them to the approba^ion of all men: v. 18.
for he that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved
of men: and therefore in the use of our Christian liberty we must be sure to
have this Rule always in our eye, To follow after the And therefore though the
Gospel has taken away all distinctions of meats, and given us free leave to eat
of every thing, yet since it is not matter of duty in all times and in all
places and companies, to eat such meats as were formerly forbidden by the Law;
and since we know that to do so, gives great offense and scandal to the weak
Jews, without serving any end at all in Religion, and therefore is directly
contrary to those essential Duties of Love and Charity, Unity and Peace, and
mutual Edification, let us not so much insist on our Christian liberty in the
use of meats, as to destroy the work of God: for though no meats are now
unclean, but all things (all kind of diet) is now pure and lawful, yet it is a
very evil thing for any man by his eating such meat as his weak Brother thinks
unclean, to give offense It is good (much better) neither to eat flesh, nor
drink wine, nor any thing (of the like nature) whereby thy brother stumbleth,
or is offended, or is made weak, discouraged in his Christian course, and
tempted to apostatize from the Faith of Christ.

Have thou Faith? Do thou believe thou may eat indifferently of all meats?
Believe so still, and use this liberty privately, when it may be done without
offense; but thou art under no necessity of publishing this belief, nor of
acting according to it in all companies; but have this faith to thy self before
God: This Faith makes it lawful for thee to eat, but then thou must take great
care that thou do not do a lawful thing in such a manner, as to make it
become sin to thee; that is, thou must not eat (how lawful soever it be in it
self) with the scandal and offense of thy weak Brother, which makes it very
unlawful. Happy is he that condemns not himself in that thing which he
allows; who does not do a good action in so ill a manner, as to bring
condemnation upon himself.

But then as thy believing it lawful for thee doubts ((...), who stills makes
a distinction between meats, and believes it unlawful to eat such meats as are
forbidden by the Law of Moses) if he notwithstanding this eat such forbidden
meats, he is damned, self-condemned by his own Conscience for doing that which
he believes to be unlawful: for whatever is not of faith, (done with a full
persuasion of the lawfulness of it) is sin: and therefore thou ought not to
judge, and cen^ure, and reproach thy weak Brother in such cases, but to bear
with him, and to avoid giving him any scandal or offense.

This I take to be the true sense of St. Paul's reasoning in this place, to
persuade the Gentile Christians not to give offense to the Jewish Converts by
eating meats forbidden by the Law; and it seems to me to contain the plainest
and easiest determination of the case of Scandal: which I shall therefore
briefly review, and inquire how applicable it is to the case of indifferent
things in the Worship of God, to which our Reconciler applies it.

1. First then I observe, that the Apostles discourse in this place can be
extended no farther than to forbid offering scandal and offense in the exercise
of every man's private liberty. The Gentile Christians, who knew that they were
not under the obligation of the Mosaical Law, which made a distinction between
clean and unclean meats, were perfectly at liberty whether they would eat or
not eat such meats as were forbid by that Law: and this was an instance of
their own private liberty, wherein no body was directly concerned but
themselves, neither any other particular man (excepting the case of scandal)
nor the public state of the Church. For what is it to any man, what is it to
the Church, whether I eat such meat or not, when I may lawfully do either? And
therefore this is a proper Sphere for the exercise of a private Charity: for
Charity (of what nature soever it be) can be exercised only in such matters as
are perfectly in our power; and therefore no private Christian can lawfully
extend his charity any farther than his own private liberty extends: whatever
others are concerned in as well as himself, especially whatever the Church of
God, and the public state of Religion is concerned in, is the object neither
of private liberty, nor of private charity. And yet the Apostle here exhorts
them to nothing but what was in the power of every private Christian. And
whether we say that this Exhortation concerns only particular Christians or
Church Governors also, yet it is evident it concerns only the exercise of
their own private liberty.

Now if any such case should happen again (which I think cannot possibly be)
that in the use of our private liberty in our Diet, or Clothes, or way of
living, we should give such offense to weak Christians, as should make them
suspect the truth of Christianity, and endanger their final Apostasy, this 14th
Chap. to the Romans would be an admirable Text to preach on to correct such
uncharitable abuses of our liberty; but what is this to the use of decent but
indifferent Rites and Ceremonies in the Worship of God? for the decent Rites of
Worship concern the public exercise of Religion, not every Christians private
liberty: every instance of our private liberty may indeed in some sense be
called an indifferent thing, as that signifies what we may do, or may not do,
as we please; but it is not indifferent, as the decent Rites of Worship are
indifferent: for the Decency of Worship is the matter of an express positive
Law, and the particular Rites of Worship the Object of Ecclesiastical Prudence
and Authority. And what a vast difference this makes in the case of Scandal,
will appear from my second Observation on St. Paul's discourse; which is this:

2. That this compliance and condescension to a weak Brother must be in such
matters wherein Religion and Religious Worship is not concerned. For by this
Argument St. Paul persuades them to this forbearance, because Christian
Religion is not at all concerned in it. The Kingdom of God is not meat nor
drink. Their eating or not eating, in it self considered, was no act, nor so
much as a circumstance in Religion; and it did not become the charity and
goodness of the Christian temper to give such great scandal to a weak Brother,
for things in which Religion is not at all concerned.

Those who expound meat and drink in this place to signify all the Externals
of Religious Worship, especially all such Rites and Circumstances as have not a
divine institution and command (as our Reconciler plainly does) do mightily
mistake the Apostles meaning, Prot. Recone. p. 59.
and affix such Doctrines to him as are very absurd and unaccountable. When the
Apostle says, The Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, it plainly signifies
that the Christian Religion does not consist in eating or not eating such or
such meats; that no man is the better Christian for eating Swines flesh or
other prohibited meats, nor the worse Christian merely for not eating them. No
man questions whether the Kingdom of God signifies the Christian Religion, or
the state of the Christian Church; and therefore when he says, that meat and
drink is not the Kingdom of God, he must mean, not that it is not the whole of
Religion (which no man ever dreamt of) but that it is no part of it, no act of
Religious Worship; as I think I need not prove to the Reconciler himself, that
though the Gospel gives us leave to eat Swines flesh, yet it is no act of
Religion to do it. And therefore the Externals of Religion, the decent Rites
and Ceremonies of Worship (how mean and indifferent soever they may be thought)
cannot be comprehended under those general terms of meats and drinks, because
this meat and drink was no act nor part nor circumstance of Religious Worship,
nor any thing relating to it; but the decent circumstances of Religious Worship
are necessary to public Worship. Now when the Apostle exhorts them to exercise
forbearance and condescension to a weak Brother in such matters by this very
Argument, because Religion is not concerned in it, our Reconciler will be a
very wonderful man, if he can prove that we must exercise the same indulgence
in such matters as do concern Religious Worship: if he can prove that the
Governors of the Church must indulge private Christians in the different Rites
and Modes of Religious Worship, because private Christians must indulge each
other in such different practices, as do not at all relate to Religion, I am
resolved never to dispute more with him: for I doubt not but he is at the same
rate able to make good the greatest Paradoxes in Religion or Philosophy.

There is very great reason for Christians not to quarrel with each other, nor
to divide the Unity, or disturb the Peace of the Church for such Disputes as do
not properly belong to Religion: for where it is purely matter of our own
liberty, there is room for the exercise of Charity and mutual Forbearance. And
this is the Apostles Argument, that the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink.
But where Religion and the Worship of God is concerned, it is of another
nature: for it is not in our power to do what we please in such matters, nor to
allow others the liber^y of doing what they please; and therefore this is not
the Object of Indulgence and Forbearance, nor is there any one word in all the
Scripture to countenance any such liberty, which would effectually undermine
all Order, Decency, and Uniformity of public Worship.

And therefore when the Apostle adds, that the Kingdom of God is righteousness,
and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, this does not signify neither, that this
is the whole of Religion, or the only thing that we are to be concerned about,
as the Reconciler understands it: for the external and visible Worship of God
is as essential a part of Religion as these; but these are plain and
acknowledged Duties of Religion, and we ought not to violate a plain and
necessary Duty, for the sake of that which is no Duty at all: Which is the sum
of the Apostle's Argument, as I observed before. The necessary consequence of
which is, that in all such cases wherein not Religion, but our own liberty is
concerned, the great Rule we are to observe is to promote the Peace of the
Church, and the mutual Edification of each other; to follow after the things
which make for peace, and things wherewith one may edify another. Now this is
a plain Rule which all men at first hearing will acknowledge to be reasonable,
not to violate the plain Duties of Religion in contending about such liberties,
the use and exercise of which are of no account in Religion; not to scandalize
a weak Brother, nor destroy the Peace of the Church, and the mutual edification
of Christians in love, by eating such meats as we may indeed in other cases
lawfully eat, but the eating of which is at no time, and in no case, in it self
considered, an act of Worship, or acceptable to God. But if we understand these
words in our Reconciler's way, that the Externals of Religion are of no
account, and therefore must be sacrificed to the dearer interests of Peace, and
Charity, and mutual Edification, I confess the Argument is plain enough; but it
is neither to the Apostle's purpose, nor is it true.

And yet this is the fundamental Principle of all Reconcilers, and of those men
who affect the name and character of Moderation, that the Externals of Religion
are little worth, and of small account with God: But the great business which
Christians ought to mind, is Love and Charity, and the practice of those moral
Virtues wherein they place the life and substance of Religion; and therefore it
does not become them to quarrel about the external Modes of Worship, but an
indulgence in such matters becomes the good and benign temper of the Gospel.

Now how these men come to know that God is so indifferent about his own
Worship, I cannot guess; nor how the Worship of God comes to be a less
essential part of Religion, than justice and charity to men. I am sure under
the Law God appeared very jealous of his Honor and Worship; and though he
rejected all the Worship of bad men, and despised those external acts of
Worship which were separated from Justice and Charity, yet this was no Argument
that he undervalued his own Worship, because he was not pleased with an empty
show and appearance of it. As for his preferring Mercy before Sacrifice, I have
given some account of it already, and may do more in what follows; but
certainly Religion is properly the Worship of God, and therefore that is the
greatest thing in it. And public Worship, which is the most visible Honor of
God, consists in external and visible Signs; and therefore the Order, Decency,
and Solemnity of Worship is so essential to the notion of public Worship, that
there can be no Worship without it: for to worship God visibly without public
and visible signs of Honor, is a contradiction; and therefore it does not seem
to me to be so indifferent a thing, after what manner God is worshipped; and
therefore not to be left indifferently to every man's humor, upon every slight
pretense of Charity and Moderation. However, it is plain that the Apostle does
not speak one word of this here, which had been nothing to his purpose, and I
cannot find any thing to this purpose in all the Scripture.

3. This Apostolical Exhortation to avoid scandal, concerns only such cases
wherein we are not bound to make a public profession of our Faith, nor to do
that in public in the view of all men, which we believe we may very lawfully
and innocently do. Have thou faith? have it to thy self before God; that is,
keep thy Faith to thy self, and enjoy thy liberty privately, when thou may
do it without offense. Now I suppose our Reconciler will not think this a good
Rule in all cases, to dissemble our Faith, and to keep our Religion to our
selves; which would effectually undermine the public profession and practice
of Religion in the World. For if this were once granted, men would find a great
many other as good reasons to keep their Faith to themselves, as avoiding
scandal. Indeed this Rule can hold only in matters of a private nature, such
as I before observed this case to be: for matters of a public nature require a
public profession and practice. For let us consider wherein the force of this
Argument consists to persuade the Gentile Christians to exercise this
forbearance toward their weak Jewish Brethren, not to offend or scandalize
them with their meat. Have thou faith? have it to thy self before God; which
includes these two Arguments: 1. That they are under no obligation to a public
profession or exercise of their Christian liberty in these matters. 2. That
though it be some restraint, yet it is no injury to their liberty, not to do
those things publicly which give such offense. For their liberty in such
matters is maintained as well by a private as by a public exercise of it. For
if they may do it at any time, their liberty is secure, though the exercise of
it may be sometimes restrained. But now if we apply this to the Rites and
Ceremonies of public Worship, what sense is there in this Argument? for
public Worship must be publicly professed, and publicly practiced, or else
it is not public; and therefore there is no place here to avoid public
scandal by keeping our Faith to our selves: for then we must not worship God
publicly, as we think we may, and that we ought to worship him for fear of
giving offense. So that this does not only restrain, but it destroys the
Authority of Governors, and the Liberty and Obedience of private Christians:
for what relates to public Worship, cannot be done at all, if it must not be
done publicly; and that is no Authority and no Liberty, which cannot be
exercised without sin, that is, without a criminal offense and scandal.

As for what our Reconciler frequently urges, and I have already observed and
answered, that it is not desired that the Church should renounce her Authority
and Worship, but only give liberty to Dissenters to worship God in their own
way; this plainly shows how vastly different the case of the Jews and of our
Dissenters is, and how little they are concerned in that forbearance of which
the Apostle speaks. The Jews were offended not at the restraint of their own
liberty, for they were indulged in the observation of the Law of Moses, but at
that liberty which the Gentile believers used in breaking of the Law of Moses;
our Dissenters it seems are scandalized not so much at what we do, as because
they cannot do what they would. The Apostle exhorts private Christians not to
do such things publicly as offended their weak Brethren; This great
Reconciling Apostle exhorts or rather commands the Church to suffer Dissenters
to worship God according to their own way, and to do what is right in their own
eyes, and this would remove the scandal. Now these two do so widely differ,
that the one is true and proper scandal, and the other is not. To offend a weak
Brother by an uncharitable use of our liberty, by doing such things as prove a
stumbling block and occasion of falling to him, is scandal in the Apostle's
notion of the word, and the only scandal of which he treats in this 14th
Chapter to the Romans: but thus it seems we do not scandalize the Dissenters,
who are not concerned, not offended in the Apostle's sense, at what we do, so
they might enjoy their own liberty; and therefore neither the Church nor
Dissenters are concerned in what the Apostle discourses about Scandal in this
Chapter. And as for that offense and scandal they take at the exercise of
Discipline and Government, which restrains their wild and fanatic pretenses to
liberty, it is no other offense than what all Criminals take at Laws and
public Government; which is so far from being such a scandal as the Governors
of the Church ought to avoid, that there is not a greater scandal to Religion
than the neglect of it. But I shall think nothing impossible, if our Reconciler
can prove out of this Chapter, that the Governors of the Church should
prescribe no Rules of Worship, nor lay any Restraint upon the giddy and
enthusiastic fancies of men, for fear of giving offense to them.

4. The last Argument the Apostle uses to represent the reasonableness of this
forbearance is this, that though the Gentile Christians without sin, or without
any injury to their own liberty, might comply with their weak Jewish Brethren,
yet these Jewish Christians who believed it unlawful to eat any meats forbidden
by the Law of Moses, could not comply with the believing Gentiles without
sinning against their own Consciences, which brings judgment and condemnation
upon them. And he that doubts (which does not signify what we commonly call
a scrupulous Conscience, for that was not the case of the Jews, who did not
doubt, but certainly believe that it was unlawful for them to eat such meats;
but (...), as I observed before, signifies him who makes a distinction between
meats, and so believes it unlawful to eat any meats which were forbidden by the
Law of Moses: he who thus doubts) is damned if he eat, because he eats not
of faith: for whatever is not of faith, is sin.

Now here our Reconciler thinks he has us fast: Prot. Reconc. p. 99.
for if this were a good Argument in the case of the Jewish Christians, it must
be also in the case of the Dissenters. If the Gentile believers were not by any
means to compel the believing Jews to eat those meats which they believed
unlawful, because how lawful soever it was in it self, yet it was unlawful for
them to do it while they believed it unlawful to be done; by the same reason
the Governors of the Church must not compel Dissenters to Conformity, which
they believe unlawful, or at least greatly doubt of the lawfulness of it. For
he that doubts, is damned if he conforms, as well as if he eats. This looks
most like a parallel case of any thing yet; and if this fails him, I doubt his
Cause is desperate: and yet I am pretty confident that this will do him no
service.

1. For first, this is not a good Argument in all cases, to grant such an
indulgence and forbearance, that men act according to their Consciences, as I
have already proved at large: for this would subvert all Order and Government
in Church and State, and supersede the Authority and Obligation of all other
Laws, but every man's private judgment and opinion of things.

2. Let us then consider in what cases this Argument is good; for certainly it
is good in the case to which the Apostle applies it. Now I know of but one
general case to which this Argument can be reasonably applied, and that is,
where every man's own Conscience is his only Rule, not where Conscience it self
has a Rule. The Laws of God, and the Laws of our Superiors, when they do not
contradict the Laws of God, are the Rule of Conscience, that Rule whereby all
men ought to act; and it is a senseless thing to say, that when men are under
the government of Laws, they must have liberty to act according to their own
Consciences, that is, according to their own judgment and opinions of things;
which is to say, that though men are under Laws, yet they must be governed by
none; that Magistrates may make Laws, but they must not execute them, but must
suffer every man, when his Conscience serves him, to break both the Laws of
God, and of the Church or Kingdom wherein he lives.

But where we are under no obligation of divine or humane Laws, in such cases
every man's own Conscience is his only Rule; and in these cases it is fit to
leave every man to the direction and government of his own mind, because they
concern only every man's private liberty, and have no influence at all upon the
Public: And if in such cases any man should fancy himself to be under the
obligation of a divine Law, when indeed he is not, it would be barbarously
uncharitable by Censures and Reproaches, and such kind of rude and ungentile
Arts, to force him to a compliance contrary to the sense and judgment of his
own mind: for when there is no other Rule of our Actions, every man's Conscience
is his only Rule; and if he does that which he believes to be forbidden by the
Law of God, though indeed it is not, yet he sins in it; and if we force him to
such a compliance, we are very uncharitable in it, and are guilty of offending
a weak Brother.

This was the very case of which the Apostle speaks. The Law which made a
distinction between clean and unclean meats, was now out of date, and did no
longer oblige them, and therefore it was lawful both for Jews and Gentiles to
eat what meat they pleased; but the Jews still thought that Law to be in force,
and therefore though the Law did not oblige them to abstain from such meats,
yet their own Consciences (which is always a Law when there is no other) did
still oblige them to abstain; and therefore it was very uncharitable in the
Gentile Christians to judge, and censure, and reproach them for this: for
though they who understood their liberty, might use it, yet a believing Jew
could not do this without sin.

And there may be a great many cases in ^ome degree parallel to this: As,
suppose a man scruples the use of Lots, and consequently all Games which depend
upon Lots; or thinks it unlawful to drink a Health, or to see a Play; or
apprehends himself obliged to a stricter observation of the Lords day, than the
Christian Church has in former Ages thought necessary: though we should suppose
that there were no Law of God about these matters, yet this man's Conscience is
a Law to him; and whiles he thinks any of these things unlawful, they are
unlawful to him; and it would be very uncharitable by any Arts to force him to
do such things as are contrary to the dictates of his own Conscience. This is
only a restraint of their own private liberty, and therefore they ought to be
indulged in it, especially while they are so modest as not to censure those who
use their innocent liberty innocently.

In such cases as these, there is no other Rule to guide us, but what the
Apostle gives, Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind; 14 Romans 5.
which is a safe and a sure Rule, when there is no other Law to govern us: for
this must not be extended to all cases, as St. Chrysostom observes upon the
place; for if in all cases we must suffer every man to act according as he is
persuaded in his own mind, this would subvert all Laws and Government; but this
is reasonable in such cases as only concern men's private liberty, and are
under the restraint and government of no Laws but what men make or fancy to
themselves. It is true, all men who act upon any Principles, will in all cases
do as they are fully persuaded in their own minds; yet this is not a Rule to be
given in all cases. It can be a Rule only in such cases wherein let a man's
judgment and opinion be what it will, he acts safely while he acts according to
his own judgment; which can never be, where there is any other Law to govern
us, besides our own judgment of things: for though we act with never so full a
persuasion of our own minds, if we break the divine Laws, we sin in it, and
shall be judged for it.

And that this is the true sense of the Apostle's Argument appears in this,
that he urges the danger a weak Brother is in of sin, if he should be persuaded
or forced to act contrary to the judgment of his own mind, which supposes that
he is in no danger of sin, if he follow his own judgment: for if there were an
equal danger of sin both ways, this Argument has no force at all to prove the
reasonableness of such an indulgence and forbearance. For if this weak Brother
will be guilty of as great a sin by following his judgment if we do forbear
him, as he will by acting contrary to his own judgment if we do not, the danger
being equal on both sides, can be no reason to determine us either way: and
therefore this must be confined to such cases wherein there is no danger of
sinning, but only in acting contrary to our own judgment and persuasions, that
is, only to such cases where there is no other Law to govern us but only our
own private Consciences. And therefore this danger of scandal cannot affect
Governors who have authority to command, nor extend to such cases which are
determined by divine or humane Laws; and therefore not to the Rites and
Ceremonies of public Worship: for whatever our own Persuasions are, if we
break the Laws of God, or the just Laws of men, by following a misguided and
erroneous Conscience, we sin in it.

And the same thing appears from this consideration, that the Apostle persuades
them to exercise this forbearance out of charity to their weak Brother; but
what charity is it to suffer our Brother to sin in following a misguided
Conscience? If our Brother sin as much in following a misguided Conscience, as
in acting contrary to his Conscience, he is as uncharitable a man who patiently
suffers his Brother to sin in following his Conscience, as he who compels him
to sin by acting contrary to his Conscience, or rather by not suffering him to
act according to his Conscience. Nay, since external force and restraint may,
and very often does make men consider better of things, and help to rectify
their mistates, it is a greater act of charity to give check to men, than to
suffer them to go quietly on in sin.

And here I shall take occasion to speak my mind very freely and plainly about
that perplexed Dispute of liberty of Conscience. It seems very contrary to the
nature of Religion to be matter of force: for Religion is a voluntary Worship
and Service of God; and no man is religious, who is religious against his will;
and therefore no man ought to be compelled to profess himself of any Religion:
which was plainly the sense of the Primitive Christians when they suffered
under Heathen Persecutions, as is to be seen in most of their Apologies. And
yet on the other hand, it is monstrously unreasonable, that there should be no
restraint laid upon the wild fancies of men, that every one who pleases may
have liberty to corrupt Religion with Enthusiastic Conceits, and newfangled
Heresies, and to divide the Church with infinite Schisms and Factions. The
Patrons of Liberty and Indulgence declaim largely on the first of these heads;
those who are for preserving Order and Government in the Church, on the second:
and if I may speak my mind freely, I think they are both in the right, and have
divided the truth between them.

No man ought to be forced to be of any Religion, whether Turk, or Jew, or
Christian; though Idolatry was punishable by the Law, and that with very good
reason: for though men may not be forced to worship God, yet they may and ought
to be forced not to worship the Devil, nor to blaspheme or do any public
dishonor to the true God. And this was all the restraint that Christian
Emperors laid upon the Pagan Idolaters; they demolished their Temples, and
forbad the public exercise of their Idolatrous Worship.

But though no man must be compelled to be a Christian, yet if they voluntarily
profess themselves Christians, they become subject to the Authority and
Government of the Christian Church. The Bishops and Pastors of the Church have
authority from Christ, and are bound by virtue of their Office to preserve the
Purity of the Faith, and the Decency and Uniformity of Christian Worship, and
if any Member of the Church either corrupt the Faith or Worship of it, or prove
refractory and disobedient to Ecclesiastical Authority, they ought to be
censured and cast out of the Communion of the Church; which is as reasonable,
as it is to thrust a Member out of any Society, who will not be subject to the
Orders and Constitutions of it. This distinction St. Paul himself makes between
judging those who are without, and those who were within the Church. They had
no authority to force men to be Christians, but they had authority over
professed Christians, to judge and censure them as their actions deserved; and
this is properly Ecclesiastical Authority to condemn Heresies and Schism, and
to cast Heretics and Schismatics, and all disorderly Christians, out of the
Communion of the Church: and no governed Society can subsist without so much
authority as this comes to. As for temporal restraints and punishments, they
belong to the Civil Magistrate; and if we will allow that Christian Princes
ought to take any care of the Christian Church, we must grant them so much
authority as is necessary to suppress Heresy and Schism, and to punish those
who are disobedient to the Censures and Authority of the Church. How far this
may extend, is another Question: I think all Protestants with great reason
reject sanguinary Laws in this case; but whoever grants any authority in these
matters to Christian Princes, must grant what may reasonably be thought
sufficient to attain the end.

Thus I have, as plainly as I could, given an account of the Apostle's
discourse in this Chapter about Scandal and Offense, and proved that it cannot
be applied to the case of indifferent things in the Worship of God by any
parity of reason. I grant St. Chrysostom and some other ancient Writers, do
accommodate this Doctrine of Scandal to other cases, some of which passages our
Reconciler has transcribed from them; that if we must not scandalize our weak
Brother by using our innocent liberty, much less by our wicked examples, by
doing things evil in themselves, which aggravates the guilt of the offense. And
I grant, such accommodations as these are very allowable in popular Harangues:
but I hope our Reconciler does not take them for Arguments; and yet if he did,
he could no more apply them to the case of the Church and Dissenters, than he
can the case of which St. Paul speaks.

But because this Discourse has been somewhat long, (though as plain and
methodical as I could contrive it) I shall reduce some of the most material
things in it into a narrower compass, and compare the Apostle's Arguments with
the Reasonings of our Reconciler; which will enable every ordinary Reader to
judge how unlike they are.

The Case of the believing Jews, 14 Romans
THe Dispute between the believing Jews and Gentiles was concerning the
observation of the Law of Moses, not about things acknowledged to be
indifferent.

The weakness of the Jews, which occasioned their scruples, was the effect of a
great reverence for an express Law which was universally acknowledged to be
given by God, but was not at that time as visibly repealed as it was given.

The offense the Jews took against the Gentiles, was at the breach of a divine
Law, which they still believed to be in force, and so had as much reason to be
offended, as they had to believe the obligation of their Law, which was so much
as to render forbearance reasonable.

That weakness which pleaded for the indulgence of the Jews, was their weakness
in the Faith, that they were not well confirmed in the truth of Christianity,
and therefore ought to be tenderly used and indulged, as being neither capable
at present of better instruction, nor severer government.

For the danger which the believing Jews were in, and which St. Paul
endeavored to prevent, was, lest they should reject Christianity, if
Christianity rejected the Law of Moses, which they certainly knew to be given
by God: and therefore it was reasonable to expect a while till they were
confirmed in the Faith, before they gave them any disturbance about such
matters as would endanger their Apostasy, while they more firmly believed the
obligation of the Law of Moses, than they did the Faith of Christ.

And indeed God himself had by visible signs instructed both believing Jews and
Gentiles, not to judge and censure each other, nor to break Christian Communion
upon the^e Disputes, because he had received the believing Jews and Gentiles
into the visible Communion of the same one Catholic Church, by the visible
effusion of the Holy Spirit on them both, though one observed the Law of Moses,
and the other did not; and therefore it became both Jews and Gentiles to
receive one another as Christian Brethren, and to worship God together in the
Communion of the same holy Offices.

And whoever after this visible determination made by God himself, undertake to
judge, and censure, and deprive each other of Communion for such matters, usurp
an Authority to judge over Gods judgment, to reject those whom God receives;
which is like judging another man's servant, over whom we have no authority: for
we have no authority to judge one another in such cases which God allows, who
is the supreme Lord and Judge of us all.

Besides this, both Jews and Gentiles in observing and not observing the Law of
Moses, did it to the Lord, acted out of reverence to the divine Authority. The
Jews observed the Law, because God gave them this Law by Moses, and had not so
visibly repealed it, as to remove all just scruples about it. The Gentiles
never were under the Law of Moses, and God had received them into his Church
without imposing that burden on them; and therefore they did not observe the
Law, out of reverence and thankfulness to God for that liberty he had granted
them. And therefore Jews and Gentiles had reason to receive each other, since
it was not Humor, Peevishness, or Faction, which made them differ, but a
regard to God, and a reverence for his Authority, which they both pretended,
and which at that time they both had.

And therefore St. Paul exhorts the believing Gentiles not to use their
Christian liberty to the scandal and offense of their weak Brethren.

For this was such a case wherein they might be very kind to their weak
Brethren if they pleased, it being only a restraint of their own private
liberty, wherein no body was concerned but themselves: for though the Gospel
had taken away the distinction of clean and unclean meats, and made it lawful
to eat indifferently of every thing, yet it had not made it our duty to eat
such things as the Law had forbidden, but we might abstain if we pleased; and
therefore this was a proper Sphere for the exercise of a private charity, not
to destroy him with our meat for whom Christ died.

Especially considering that the Christian Religion is not at all concerned in
our eating or not eating: for the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink; and
therefore they ought not to transgress the Laws of righteousness and peace, and
joy in the Holy Ghost; of Brotherly love and charity, and the peace and unity
of the Christian Church, which are great and essential Duties of Religion, for
the sake of eating or not eating such meats, which in it self considered, is no
act of Religion at all.

Especially the case being such, that men may keep their Faith to themselves,
and enjoy the private exercise of their liberty without offense.

Whereas the believing Jew, who believes it unlawful to eat meats forbidden by
the Law, could not comply with the Gentile Christians without sin, because it
is against the judgment and persuasion of his own mind; which makes it very
reasonable, as well as charitable, to leave men to the direction of their own
minds in the use of their own liberty, where they are under the government and
restraint of no other Law, neither of God nor men: for in this case, if they
follow the direction of their own minds, they do no injury to any body but
themselves in an unnecessary restraint of their own liberty, but neither offend
God by it, nor hurt men; but if they act contrary to what they believe to be
their Duty, in compliance with others, they sin in it: for every man's private
Conscience is his only Rule, where there is no other Law to govern him.

The Case of the Dissenters.
THe Dispute between Dissenters and the Church of England, is concerning the
use of indifferent Rites and Ceremonies in Religious Worship.

The scruples of Dissenters are not grounded on any express Law, acknowledged
by all Parties to be a divine Law, but are occasioned by their ignorance, and
perverting of the holy Scriptures, and obstinacy against better instruction.

The Dissenters cannot produce any plain positive Law, which is o^ ever was in
force against the Ceremonies of our Church; and so have no reasonable pretense
to be offended.

The weakness of Dissenters is not a weakness in the Faith (for they firmly
believe the Christian Religion) but at best a weakness of understanding, which
is not to be indulged, but to be rectified by wise Instructions, and prudent
Restraints; unless we think that every ignorant Christian must give Laws to the
Church, and impose his own ignorant and childish prejudices.

Whatever offense the Dissenters take at our Ceremonies, it is not pretended
that the imposition of them tempts them to renounce Christianity, but only is
an occasion of their Schism, and makes them forsake the Church for a
Conventicle. But this is no reason at all in it self for any indulgence and
forbearance, (to be sure is vastly different from the case of the Jews) for by
the same reason there must be no Authority and Government in the Church, or no
exercise of it, lest those who will not obey, should turn Schismatics.

But now besides that it is absolutely impossible for those to receive one
another to Communion without mutual offense and scandal, who observe such
different Rites and Modes of Worship, (of which more anon) God has never by any
such visible signs declared that Dissenters should be received to Communion,
notwithstanding their disobedience to the Authority, and nonconformity to the
Worship of the Church. For as for our Reconciler's invisible communion with
God, which he grants to his beloved Dissenters who refuse the Communion of the
Church, St. Paul never thought of it, and no body can tell how our Reconciler
should know it; especially if Schism, as he asserts, be a damning sin: for no
man in a state of damnation (which it seems is the case of Schismatics) can be
in Communion with God.

But when the Church judges, and censures, and excommunicates those who refuse
to conform to her Worship, she does nothing but what she has authority to do:
for all private Christians are subject to the Authority of the Church in such
matters as God has not determined by his own Authority.

But though our Dissenters pretend Conscience as the reason of their
nonconformity, yet these pretenses are vain, and not to be allowed of, because
there is no plain positive Law of God against it, and neither Governors nor
private Christians are concerned to take notice of, or to make any allowance
for every man's private Fancies and Opinions; especially in matters of public
Worship, which would bring eternal confusions and di^orders into the Church.
There is a great difference between men's doing any thing to the Lord, and
following their own Consciences, or private Opinions; the first requires a
plain and express Law for our Rule, which will justify or excuse what we do
both to God and men; but men's private Consciences, if they misguide them, may
deserve our pity, but cannot challenge our indulgence.

Our Reconciler exhorts the Governors of the Church not to exercise their
Authority in prescribing the Rules of Order and Decency for public Worship,
for fear of offending Dissenters.

But the Dispute between the Church and Dissenters, is of a different
consideration; it does not concern the exercise of a private liberty, wherein
all Christians ought to be very prudent and charitable; but the exercise of
public Government, and the public administration of Religious Offices, which
must be governed by other measures than a private charity. It is not in the
power of private Christians to dispense in such matters as these, nor
absolutely in the power of Church Governors, who are obliged to take care of
the Order and Decency of public Worship, whoever takes offense at it.

And therefore this cannot relate to indulgence and forbearance in the external
Rites and Ceremonies of Religion, wherein Religion is nearly concerned: for
though they be not Acts, yet they are the Circumstances of Worship, wherein the
external Decency of Worship consists, which is as necessary as external Worship
is.

And therefore cannot refer to the public Ceremonies of Religion; which if
they be practiced at all, must be practiced publicly, because they concern the
public acts of Worship. There is no avoiding offense in this case by
dissembling our Faith, or by a private exercise of our liberty, but Governors
must part with their authority, and private Christians with their liberty in
such matters, which the Apostle nowhere requires any man to do, no not to avoid
offense.

Now though our Dissenters pretend that it is against their Consciences to
conform to the Ceremonies of the Church, and our Reconciler pleads this in
their behalf as a sufficient reason why they ought to be indulged; yet this is
not a good Argument in the case of Dissenters, though it was in the case of the
Jews, because their mistakes do not merely concern the exercise of their
private liberty, but public Worship; which is not left to the conduct of every
man's private Conscience, but to the direction and government of the Laws of God
and men. And though it be reasonable to leave men to the government of their
own Consciences, where there is no other Law, yet there is no reason for it
where there is: for if they sin in acting contrary to their Consciences, (which
no man can force them to do) so they sin also in following an erroneous
Conscience; which Governors ought to hinder if they can.

This I take to be a sufficient Answer to all our Reconciler's Arguments from
that condescension and forbearance which St. Paul exhorts the believing Jews
and Gentiles to exercise toward each other, because the case is vastly
different from the case of our Dissenters. The Dispute between the Jew and
Gentile was not concerning the use of indifferent Rites and Ceremonies in the
Worship of God, but about the observation of the Law of Moses; and those
Arguments which the Apostle uses, and which were very proper Arguments in that
case, can by no parity of reason be applied to the Dispute about indifferent
things. But there are several other considerations, which I have already hinted
at, which plainly show how vastly different the case of the Jews was from that
of our Dissenters. For,

3. Another material difference between that Indulgence St. Paul granted to
believing Jews, with respect to the Law of Moses, and that liberty our
Reconciler exacts from the Church for Dissenters, is this: that the first had
no influence upon Christian Worship, it neither destroyed the uniformity of
Worship, nor divided the Communion of the Church; but the second must do one,
or the other, or both; which is such a liberty or forbearance as St. Paul never
did, and never would allow.

The believing Jews thought themselves still obliged to observe that difference
of clean and unclean meats, which was prescribed by the Law, and to celebrate
the Jewish Festivals; and this liberty might be granted them, without dividing
the Communion of the Christian Church, or disturbing Christian Worship: for
whatever private rules of Diet they observed, believing Jews and Gentiles might
all worship God together according to the common Principles of Christianity:
and therefore the Apostle exhorts the Romans to receive those who were weak in
the Faith; 14 Romans 1.
that is, to receive them to Christian Communion, to worship God together in
Christian Assemblies.

This account the Learned Dr. Stillingfleet gave of this matter: Unreason. of
Separation, p. 215, 216.
This being matter of Diet, and relating to their own Families, the Apostle
advises them not to censure or judge one another; but notwithstanding this
difference, to join together as Christians in the Duties common to them all.
For the Kingdom of God does not lie in meats and drinks. Let every one order
his Family as he thinks fit; but that requires innocence; and a care not to
give disturbance to the Peace of the Church for these matters: which he calls
Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost, which is provoked and grieved by the
Dissentions of Christians. And he, says he, that in these things serves
Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of men. Let us therefore follow
after the things that make for peace, and things wherewith we may edify one
another. In such cases then the Apostle allows of no separation from the
public Communion of Christians.

Rec^nc* p. 81.
This our Reconciler very gravely smiles at: As if the business here discoursed
of, were only matter of Diet relating to their own Families; and the command
of the Apostle, Him that is weak in Faith receive, did only signify, Let him
dine with you. This, with submission to that Learned Person, I judge a most
unlikely thing: for what great cause of scandal could their private Dinners
give to a weak Brother, unless they searched into their Kitchins, or had a Bill
of Fare sent in from every Christian Family? This is such lewd trifling with a
Great man, and in a serious Cause, as I leave to the censure of every sober
Christian. For did not the Laws concerning clean and unclean meats, respect
their ordinary Diet in their own Families? Was it not sufficiently known,
without a Bill of Fare, that the Jews did observe these Laws? Did not this
occasion great Heats and Animosities, Judgings and Censurings of one another?
Did not some, both Jews and Gentiles, separate from each other upon these
accounts, and disturb the Peace, and divide the Communion of the Church? Does
not the Dean expound receiving the weak, by joining together as Christians in
the Duties common to them all? Cannot we expound meats, of their ordinary Diet
in their private Families, without expounding Receive him that is weak* by Let
him dine with you? And yet whereas he says, What great cause of scandal could
their private Dinners give to a weak Brother, unless they searched into their
Kitchins, or had a Bill of Fare sent (...) from every Christian Family? I
readily grant they could give none: Nor does the Apost^e command the Gentile
Christians to abstain from such meats in their private Families, when no body
was pre^ent who took offense at it, but only not to use this liberty
publicly, nor in their private Families neither, if any believing Jew happened
to be present who was offended at it.

Well, but our Reconciler thinks it most probable, that the Apostle speaks of
eating in the Idol-Temples. Ibid.
Suppose this were so, it does not alter the state of the case, if they did not
eat there as an Act of Worship to the Idol, but as at a common Feast. And
whether it be private or public eating, it is all one, if it be innocent, it
has no influence upon Christian Worship; and therefore cannot break
Church Communion, while men forbear one another in such matters. And yet it is
evident the Apostle cannot here mean eating at the Idol-Temple, but their
ordinary Diet. For this whole Epistle to the Romans concerns the Dispute about
the obligation of the Law of Moses, as I have already observed, and as our
Reconciler acknowledges to be the general sense of ancient and modern
Expositors, concerning this very Chapter.

But our Author proceeds: The Apostle does not only speak of meats, P. 82.
but also of observing days, v. 6. Now that was not a matter of Diet, but of
public Worship taught in the fourth Commandment. And so the Dean acknowledges.
For some Christians went then on Jewish Holy days to the Synagogues, others did
not; but for such things they ought not to divide from each others Communion in
the common Acts of Christian Worship. Their going to the Synagogues on Jewish
Holy days, did not hinder their Communion in Christian Worship; and therefore
they ought not to break Communion on such accounts.

But now these Controversies about Religious Ceremonies, do wholly concern
Christian Worship; it is not what Clothes men shall ordinarily wear, what Diet
they shall use, or how they shall behave themselves in other matters of a like
nature, wherein a great latitude and variety may be allowed without any breach
of Christian Charity and Communion; but how we shall worship God in the public
Assemblies of Christians; whether the Minister who officiates shall wear a
white Linen Garment; whether the Child that is baptized shall be signed with
the sign of the Cross; whether Christians who communicate at the Lords Table,
shall receive the consecrated Bread and Wine, kneeling, sitting, or standing.
Now I would fain know of our Reconciler, how it appears that these two are
parallel cases, or by what Logic he can fairly argue from one to the other,
That because the Apostle grants a liberty and indulgence to the Jews in such
things as do not concern Christian Worship, therefore the same liberty must be
granted in the Acts of Worship it self; though it must either destroy the
Uniformity of Worship, or divide the Unity of the Church: especially
considering that he has not produced (and I am sure cannot) any one instance of
such indulgence granted to private Christians to dissent from the public Rules
of Worship, and Constitutions of the Church; and if he cannot show any thing of
this nature, all his other Scripture-proofs are nothing to our Case.

And that these cases are so different that we cannot argue from one to the
other, I shall prove by these following Considerations.

First, I observe, that the Apostle himself makes a plain distinction between
an offense offered to private and particular men, and that public offense
which is offered to the Church, or to the Body and Society of Christians: 1
Cor. 10.32.
Give none offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church
of God. Which shows that we are to have a different regard to particular men in
their single or private capacity, whether they be believing or unbelieving Jews
or Gentiles, and to the Church or whole Community of Christians. For this is an
eternal Law in all Societies, to prefer the public good before the interest of
any particular man. And therefore though we must have a tender regard to the
satisfaction of particular men, and have a great care lest we offend a weak
Brother in such matters as are of a private nature and use, yet in all things
of a public nature, i. e. in all things which concern Christian Communion, we
are to have a greater care of offending the Church than particular Christians,
though their numbers may be great. And therefore we cannot argue, that because
we must grant all reasonable indulgence to weak Brethren in such matters as do
not concern Church Communion, which is the case of the Apostles indulgence to
the Jews; therefore the public Constitutions of the Church, and Rules of
Worship, must be made to comply with the private Fancies and Humors of men,
and submit to unreasonable Scruples.

Our Reconciler owns this consequence as to Dissenters: Recon. p. 154.
Seeing the refusal of submission to these things gives great offense unto the
Church of God, it equally concerns the Dissenters, upon these motives, to
submit unto them; and it concerns them both to be as the Apostle, careful to
please all men in all things, not seeking their own profit, but the profit of
many, that they may be saved. But why could not our Reconciler observe that
this Rule equally concerns Governors, as it does Dissenters, not to offend the
Church of God, when he so earnestly disputes that Church Governors are as much
concerned in all these Rules of charity, forbearance, avoiding offense and
scandal, as private Christians; and St. Paul urges this Exhortation from his
own Example, even as I please all men in all things? Now if Church Governors
must not offend the Church, they can grant a liberty and indulgence to the
private scruples and fancies of men only in such things as do not concern the
public communion of Christians. The Rules of Worship, and the Methods of
Government and Discipline, must be fixed and determined according to the general
directions of the Gospel, and with regard to the public edification of the
Church, not to the pleasing and humouring some weak and scrupulous Christians:
for it is a just offense and scandal to the Church, to make some men's private
Fancies and groundless Scruples, the Rule and Measure of Christian Worship.

Secondly, This will more plainly appear, if we consider a very material
difference between indulging men's private scruples which concern matters of
private use and observance, and indulging, such scruples as affect the public
Worship of Christians; that in the first case Christian communion may be
secured: Men might worship God together according to the common Principles of
Christianity, though believing Jews were allowed to abstain from all meats
forbidden by the Law of Moses, and believing Gentiles indifferently to eat of
all; but when men differ about the Rules of Christian Worship, one of these
three things must happen: Either 1. That Christians of different Persuasions in
these matters must divide communion, and separate from each other: Or, 2. That
Christian Worship must be made to comply with the groundless fancies of
scrupulous Christians: Or, 3. That men of differing opinions must be allowed to
observe different Modes and Rites of Worship in the same Christian Assemblies;
each of which are a great offense and scandal to the Church of God.

1. That Christians of different Persuasions must divide communion, and
separate from each other. This is the usual effect of such Disputes about the
Modes of Worship, as our own sad experience witnesses. But this our Reconciler
will not plead for, and to be sure St. Paul never intended; as you shall hear
more presently.

2. Christian Worship then must be made to comply with the groundless Fancies
of scrupulous Christians. That is, there must be no Rules given for the Decency
and Solemnity of public Worship, but what the most ignorant and most
humoursome Professor will readily submit to; which is both absurd in it self,
and inconsistent with all Government, and makes it impossible to secure the
external Decency and Solemnity of Worship, which ought to be the principal care
of Church Governors, as I have already proved.

3. As for the third, That men of differing opinions might be allowed to
observe different Rites and Modes of Worship in the same Christian Assemblies:
This is as absurd as the other; as sufficiently appears from what I have
already discoursed. At this rate the Governors of the Church cannot do their
duty in taking care of the external Decency of public Worship: for who can
foresee what Indecencies will be committed, when every man is left to worship
God as he pleases? Nay, this very thing in it self is extremely indecent: for
what Order, what Decency can there be, where there is no one Rule of Worship?
Uniformity in worship is like the proportion and symmetry of parts in the
natural body, wherein the external grace and beauty of it consists. Though
there were no difference at all as to external reverence in the several
postures of receiving the Lords Supper, whether kneeling, standing, or sitting*
yet it would be indecent and disorderly in the Communicants who receive
together, not to observe the same posture, for some to kneel, others to stand;
others to sit. I am sure we should think it so at any ordinary and common
Feast, should some of the Guests sit at the Table on Chairs, others stand and
eat by themselves in a corner, others sit on the ground, others lean on
Couches: though there were nothing indecent in any of these postures according
to the different Modes and Fashions of different Countries, yet such an odd and
humoursome variety it self is indecent and disorderly at the same Feast. And if
it be so at a common Table, I think the indecency is much greater and more
unpardonable at the Table of our Lord, which requires the most universal
harmony and consent.

Nay, such a variety as this, must needs give mutual offense and scandal to
each other in the very act of receiving, Vid. Supra. chapter 2. p. 124.
as I have already observed. The only reason that is or can be pretended, why
every man should be left to his own liberty to worship God as he thinks best*
is because men are divided in their Opinions about the Modes and Rites of
Worship. One thinks that rude and unmannerly, which another thinks necessary.
One thinks that posture or habit, etc. superstitious or idolatrous, which
another thinks a decent Rite of Worship.

Now is it possible for the Israelites to sacrifice the abomination of the
Egyptians before their eyes, and not give offense to them? Is it possible for
men to join as Friends and Brethren in such acts of Worship which they cannot
agree to perform in the same manner? Is it possible for him that sits at
receiving the Lords Supper, and believes that kneeling is superstitious and
Idolatrous, not to censure, or deride, or despise him that kneels? Or is it
possible for him who kneels, and believes sitting to be a rude and unmannerly
posture, not to be grieved or offended at him who sits? And will you call this
worshipping God together, when men cannot agree about it; but one thinks his
Brother idolatrous or superstitious, and he in requital thinks him rude or
profane? For my part, I think it much better they should be parted, than spoil
each othersDevotion by such mutual antipathies, and reciprocal censures.

No, you will say, there is no necessity of either, that they should judge and
censure each other, or that they should separate. St. Paul gives a better Rule
in such cases to bear with each other, 14 Romans
that the strong should not judge the weak, nor the weak despise the strong.
But what is the meaning of this? That he who believes kneeling at the Sacrament
to be superstitious, should not judge and censure him whom he sees kneel, as
guilty of Superstition? Or that he who believes sitting at the Sacrament to be
rude and profane, should not judge him whom he sees to sit, as guilty of
rudeness and profaneness? This is absolutely impossible, and implies a
contradiction, that we must and must not believe superstition to be
superstition, nor profaneness to be profaneness; or that I can readily join
in acts of Worship with him, whom I believe in those very acts of Worship to be
either superstitious or profane. I may judge charitably of men, whom I believe
to be guilty of some errors and mistakes, and superstitious customs, in
matters which do not relate to Christian Worship; I may charitably hope that
God will not reject men for such mistakes, and therefore may think it
reasonable to receive them to Christian communion, while they comply with the
Rules and Orders of it (which was the case between the Jews and Gentiles, as I
have already proved) but it is impossible to join in communion with such men,
without judging and censuring those whom I believe in those very acts of
Worship in which I join with them, to be either superstitious or profane. And
therefore though such men should worship in the same Church or Religious
Assemblies, yet they do not worship God in one Communion; such men will
naturally separate from each other, and it is, I think, more desirable that
they should.

The sum of this Argument is this: That though St. Paul required and exhorted
the believing Jews and Gentiles to bear with each other in such Disputes as did
not concern the Christian Worship, it does not hence follow, that the
Governors of the Church must not prescribe any Rules of Worship for fear of
offending any scrupulous and ignorant Christians; or that they are bound to
alter them, as soon as they perceive any such offense: which inevitably brings
nothing but Confusion and Disorder into the Christian Church.

4. Another material difference between the case of the believing Jews and our
Dissenters, is this: That the forbearance the Apostle pleads for, was in order
to cement Jews and Gentiles into one body, and to unite them in one Christian
communion, to prevent Schisms and Separations between them; and therefore he
commands them, Him that is weak in the faith receive, that is, 14 Romans 1.
into the communion of the Church, to worship God together according to the
general Rules of Christian Worship. For the Disputes between them, as I
observed before, did not concern Christian Worship; and therefore a mutual
forbearance in other things, about which they differed, would unite them into
one body. Thus he exhorts the Philippians: 3 Philip. 16.
Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule,
let us mind the same thing. Believing Jews and Gentiles were both agreed as to
the truth of Christianity, and what concerned Christian Worship, though they
differed about some Mosaical observances; and therefore the Apostle exhorts
them, notwithstanding their other Disputes, to unite in Christian Worship,
about which they were all agreed.

This occasioned that Dispute between St. Paul and St. Peter, which we have an
account of in the Epistle to the Galatians. 2 Gal. 11, 12, etc.
They were both agreed, that the Gentile Converts ought not to be circumcised;
they were agreed also, that the Jewish Converts should be indulged in the
observation of the Law of Moses, and that both Jews and Gentiles should forbear
each other in these matters: and therefore St. Peter himself at Antioch, before
some Jewish Brethren came thither, did eat with the Gentiles; but when some
believing Jews came to Antioch, for fear of giving offense and scandal to them,
he separated himself from the believing, but uncircumcised Gentiles. Now the
natural effect of this, was to make a Schism between the Jewish and Gentile
Converts, to make two Churches, one of Jewish, the other of Gentile Christians.
This St. Paul could not endure, and therefore publicly rebukes Peter for it.
He was willing to indulge Jewish Converts in their weakness, but not to indulge
them in a Schism, which this very Indulgence was designed to prevent. Now
indeed mutual forbearance of each other, when it tends to unite Christians into
one body and communion, is a great and necessary Duty; but St. Paul never
thought it a Duty, when it would not prevent a Schism, much less when it is
likely to prove the foundation of eternal Schisms.

Now I have already proved, that the removal of our Ceremonies, and such
abatements as our Reconciler pleads for, as they are not the occasion, so
neither would they be the cure of our Schisms; to be sure, Indulgence in these
matters would neither prevent nor heal our Schisms, as that forbearance which
the Apostle pleads for in this place, infallibly would. Their Dispute did not
concern matters of Christian Worship, and therefore if they indulged one
another in those things wherein they differed, as in eating or not eating those
meats which were forbidden by the Law of Moses, they might very well agree in
those things wherein they were already agreed, as they were in all matters of
Christian Worship: and therefore they might worship God together in Christian
Assemblies, as one Body, and one Church; which did effectually prevent a Schism.

But while Dissenters differ from the Church about the Rites and Modes of
Worship, it is impossible they should worship God together, and to grant
Indulgence to such different apprehensions which the Apostle pleads for in the
case of the Jews, would only make a legal Schism; and to remove these scrupled
Ceremonies, as I have already proved, would not unite us in one body; and to
countenance such Scruples as these by the least Indulgence, would lay an
eternal foundation of Schisms: and therefore the Argument does not hold from
the case of the Jews to the case of the Dissenters, because forbearance in one
case would cure the Schism, in the other it will increase it.

5. This indulgence to the Jews in the o^servation of the Law of Moses, was
very consistent with the Apostolical authority in governing the Church, and
prescribing the Rules and Orders of Christian Worship; but an Indulgence of
Dissenters in the use of indifferent things in Religious Worship, is not so.
Our Reconciler proves from St. Paul's condescension to the Jews, that the
Governors of the Church must not impose the use of any indifferent things in
the Worship of God, or that in charity to Dissenters they must alter such Rules
and Canons when as often as there are any who scruple the lawfulness of them;
that is, they must part with their Authority (or for ever suspend the exercise
of it, which is much at one) to govern Religious Assemblies, and to prescribe
the decent Rites of Worship, when there are any persons so ignorant or so
humoursome as to dispute their Authority, or the lawfulness of what they
command. The absurdity of this Principle I have already shown at large; Vide
Supra, chapter 2. p. 118.
but yet if the Apostle had set an Example of such condescension as this, I
would readily submit* as not daring to dispute against an Apostolical practice:
But if this forbearance, which the Apostle persuades the believing Jews and
Gentiles to exercise toward each other, do not entrench upon the Apostolical
Authority in governing Religious Assemblies, then it is no President to the
Governors of the Church to give up their Authority to Dissenters.

Now this is the plain case here: The Dispute between Jews and Gentiles, as you
have already seen, did not concern Christian Worship, nor the government of
Christian Assemblies, but the exercise of men's private liberty; and therefore
St. Paul might grant, and might exhort to this forbearance, without injuring
the Apostolical Authority, which only concerns the government of Christian
Assemblies, and prescribing the Orders and Rules of public Worship.

And indeed it is very evident, that St. Paul would never have indulged the
scruples of Christians to the diminution of the Apostolical Power and
Authority, which he asserted as high as any of the Apostles. He gave several
directions for the government of Religious Assemblies; for the regular exercise
of their Spiritual Gifts in the Church of Corinth, for speaking with Tongues
and prophesying; for their demeanor and deportment of themselves, that men
should pray and prophecy uncovered, and women covered* that women should not
speak in the Church; for their celebrating the Lords Supper and Love Feasts;
for their holy kiss; besides his general directions, that all things should be
done decently and in order: and after these particular directions, reserves the
final ordering of things to himself; The rest will I set in order when I come.
1 Cor. 11.34.
This same Power he committed to Titus in Crete: 1 Tit. 5.
For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou should set in order the
things that are wanting. Now if our Reconciler could show that in such matters
as these, which concerned. the exercise of Church Authority* the Apostles
allowed private Christians to dispute their commands, and gave indulgence to
every one to do as they pleased, who did not like to do what was commanded; it
would be somewhat to the purpose, and might justly be thought a standing Rule
for Church Governors: but the Apostles understood their Authority, and the
Primitive Christians their Duty, better than so; none disputed their commands
in Rules of Prudence and Decency, nor would they suffer their commands to be
disputed without censure. St. Paul commends the Corinthians upon this account:
1 Cor. 11.2. 2 Cor. 7.15.
I praise you, brethren, that you remember me in all things, and keep the
ordinances, as I delivered them to you. He commends them for their obedience to
Titus, and gives the Thessalonians this general Rule; 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13.
To know them which labor among you in the Lord, and admonish you, and to
esteem them highly for their works sake. And what that means, we learn from the
Epistle to the Hebrews: Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your
selves, 13 Heb. 17.
for they watch for your souls. And he commands the Thessalonians, If any man
obey not our word by this Epistle, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14.
note that man, and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed. Which
shows a true Apostolical Spirit and Power; which we have no reason to doubt,
but he exercised in other cases, as well as that which is there mentioned.

Now if this forbearance toward the believing Jews, which St. Paul pleads for,
did not entrench upon Ecclesiastical Authority, if it appears from other places
that he did assert his Authority, and require obedience and submission to it,
one would wonder how the Reconciler should hence prove, that the Governors of
the Church should give up their Authority to the Dissenters, or which is all
one, not impose any thing which through ignorance or scrupulosity, or from some
worse cause, they refuse to obey; which St. Paul never did, where he had
authority to impose: for as for his becoming all things to all men (of which
more in the next Chapter) it referred only to the exercise of a private
liberty, not of an Ecclesiastical Authority.

6. I shall add but one thing more, that this forbearance which St. Paul
pleads for, was only temporary. It was a prudent Expedient for that time,
which was such a critical period as never happened before, nor could ever
ha^pen again, nor could continue long; and therefore there was no such
inconvenience in it, but what might be dispensed with out of love and charity
to weak Brethren. The Jews, who at that time believed in Christ, could not
presently be convinced that the Law of Moses was abrogated, or out of date; but
St. Paul saw a time a coming which would effectually convince them of this,
when God should suffer the Romans to destroy their City and Temple, and put a
final end to the Jewish Worship; which he seems to refer to, when he tells
them, Let us therefore as many as be perfect (thoroughly informed in the
Christian Doctrine) be thus minded; 3 Phil. 15.
and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto
you. Now when we see a fair prospect of the end of such Disputes, and have an
Expedient in the mean time to preserve the Peace and Unity of the Church,
certainly Christian charity obliges all men to mutual forbearance.

But now the case of the Dissenters is quite different from this. They raise
Scruples and Disputes after above fifteen hundred years prescription against
them, and separate from the Church of England upon such Principles as condemn
the best and the purest Churches of former Ages; and if their Scruples be
indulged, it is impossible there should ever be any Peace and Unity in the
Christian Church: for they may entertain and multiply such Disputes for ever,
with the same reason that they do now. And therefore there is always reason to
suppress those Scruples, which c^nnot be cured or outworn by time; when
Indulgence will not cure the Disease, nor time remove it, it must be stifled
and suppressed by Ecclesiastical Authority. Whether our Reconciler will think
this a sufficient Answer to his fourth Chapter, I cannot tell; I am sure I do.

CHAP. VI. Containing an Answer to the fifth Chapter of the Protestant
Reconciler, or his Arguments taken from St. Paul's Epistles to the Corinthians.
HAving in the former Chapter so particularly answered our Reconciler's
Arguments taken, as he pretends, from that condescension and forbearance which
St. Paul exhorts the believing Jews and Gentiles to exercise toward each other
in that great Dispute about the observation of the Law of Moses, there seems
little occasion to answer the rest of his Arguments from Scripture, which every
ordinary Reader may do from the Principles already laid down. But that our
Reconciler may not complain that he is not answered, I am willing to undergo
the trouble of a needless Answer, if my Readers will be pleased to pardon it.

His first Argument is from St. Paul's discourse, 1 Cor. 6. Argum. 1. P. 122.
Where he condemns the Corinthians because they went to law before the
heathens -- which was a blemish to the Christian Faith, and ministered scandal
to the heathens, and made them apt to think that Christians were covetous,
contentious, and prone to injure one another, etc. Since therefore our
Contentions about these lesser matters do minister far greater Scandal to the
Atheist, the Sceptick, etc. our Governors should rather suffer themselves to
be restrained a little, and even injured in the exercise of their just Power
about things unnecessary, than by their stiffness to assert and to exert it, to
continue to give occasion to so great a Scandal to the Christian Faith.

This is an admirable Argument, if it be well considered. The Christians must
not go to law before Heathen Judges, therefore the Governors of the Church
must not prescribe the decent Rites and Ceremonies of Worship. Yes, you will
say, the Argument is good, because the reason is the same, to avoid Scandal.
Let us then suppose this was the reason, if we will make these two cases
parallel, it must be thus: To go to law with our Christian Brethren is
scandalous, and therefore must be avoided; to prescribe the decent Rites and
Ceremonies of Religion is scandalous, and therefore Church Governors must not
exercise this Authority. Will our Reconciler now stand to this Proposition? No,
that he durst not affirm that the exercise of a just Authority in these matters
is scandalous, but the contentions about such Rites and Ceremonies are
scandalous, and therefore Governors must not insist on their Authority to
prescribe them. But now this way of stating it does not make the case parallel,
and therefore he cannot argue by any parity of Reason from one to the other.
St. Paul exhorts the Christians not to go to law before Heathen Judges, because
it was scandalous to the Christian Profession to do so; and therefore if our
Reconciler will make a parallel case, he must instance only in something which
is scandalous, and then by a parity of reason he may prove that to be forbidden
also: But neither the Authority to prescribe the decent Rites of Worship, nor
the prudent exercise of it, is scandalous; and therefore he cannot prove this
to be forbid by any parity of Reason. But contentions indeed in the Christian
Church, whatever be the cause of them, are very scandalous; and therefore all
scandalous contentions are forbid, as all scandalous going to law is. For we
must observe, that though the Apostle in the seventh verse tells them, There is
utterly a fault among you, because ye go to law one with another, yet he does
not absolutely forbid going to law, as that signifies using some fair and
lawful means of righting our selves, when we suffer wrong even from our
Christian Brethren, but only as it signifies going to law before the
Unbelievers or Heathen Magistrates: for he requires and exhorts them to have
their Causes heard and tried before the Saints, that is, either the Governors
of the Church, or any other Christians, whom by joint consent they shall make
Judges and Arbitrators among them. But to go to law in those days, did properly
signify to implead one another before the Heathen Tribunals, because there
were no other Magistrates at that time, who had any legal authority; and this
going to law was scandalous. Thus by a parity of Reason, it is only that
contention which is scandalous, that can be forbid; and therefore for the
Governors of the Church to assert their own Authority in ordering the
Externals of Religion, and for private Christians to defend the Authority of
the Church, though with some vehemence and earnestness, is not scandalous, for
it is what they ought to do; but to contend against the Authority of the
Church, is a very scandalous contention, because it is against the Duty which
private Christians owe to their Superiors: and therefore whatever Scandal is
given by such contentions, is wholly owing to the scandalous Contenders, that
is, to the Dissenters, who scandalously oppose the Authority and Constitutions
of the Church. And therefore our Reconciler ought to have reproved the
Dissenters, and exhorted them to leave off their scandalous contentions; not to
lay a necessity on the Governors of the Church not to exercise their Authority
which these men so scandalously oppose; as we find the Apostle in this very
place turns the edge of his reproof against those who did the wrong, and gave
occasion to these scandalous contentions: Ye do wrong and defraud, and that
your brethren. Contentions either about the Doctrine, Discipline, or Worship of
the Christian Church, are very scandalous; but is this a good reason not to
contend for the Faith, not to oppose Heresies and Schisms, because these
Disputes represent Christianity as a very uncertain thing, and give scandal and
offense to Atheists and Infidels? then the Orthodox Christians did very ill to
meet in such frequent Councils to condemn Arianism and other pestilent
Heresies. Where there is a Scandal only on one side, and Contention is the
only Scandal, this is a good reason against such contentious Disputes; but
when it is more scandalous to suffer Heresies in the Church, to see
Ecclesiastical Authority despised, to permit any indecencies and disorders,
different customs and practices in Christian Worship, than it is to contend for
the Truth, and for the Order and Uniformity of public Worship, we must not be
afraid to contend for these things, the only scandalous contention being to
contend against them.

His second Argument, Argum. 2.
which he draws out to a great length, Recon. p. 123.
is taken from 1 Cor. 7. where he tells us, that the Apostle grants it is good
for a man not to touch a wife. The Apostle says, Not to touch a woman: And why
our Reconciler says wife instead of woman, I cannot tell. I am sure it is a
corruption of the Text, and contrary to the Apostolical command, Let the
husband render unto the wife due benevolence, and likewise also the wife unto
the husband, v. 3. But to let that pass, his Argument in short is this: The
Apostle declares, that a single life has many advantages in it as to the
purposes of Religion, especially in that afflicted and persecuted state of the
Ghuach, above Marriage; and therefore he recommends a single life to them: But
knowing, as our Savior had before declared, that every one could not receive
this saying, he does not impose it upon them; and therefore the Governors of
the Church should not impose our Ceremonies, though it could be proved that
there is like profit, decency, or tendence to perform Gods service better, as
the Apostle says there was under the present circumstances in keeping their
virginity.

Now I would only ask our Reconciler, whether the Apostle had any authority to
impose Virginity on the Christians of those days, or to forbid them to marry?
If he had not, (as I think our Reconciler will not say that he had) then his
Argument runs thus: The Apostle would not impose that upon the Christians which
he had no authority to impose; therefore the Governors of the Church must not
impose that which they have authority to impose. Some things may have great
profit and advantage in them, which yet are instances of so perfect a Virtue,
as is above the common seize of Christians, and therefore not fit to be
made a standing Law; they may be proper matter for an Exhortation, but not for
a Command. But what a wide difference is there between the instances of a
raised and perfect Virtue, and the decent Rites and Ceremonies of Worship? It
is too severe an imposition to command the one, but there is no difficulty in
observing the other. But the difference between Laws of burden and
Ecclesiastical Ceremonies, Vide Supra. chapter 4. p. 209.
has been already observ^d.

Thirdly, His next head of Arguments for condescension to Dissenters, is taken
from that Dispute about eating of those meats which were offered to Idols, 1
Cor. 8. and 10. Now there is no need of any other Answer to this, Recon. p. 127.
but to state this case right, which will convince every ordinary Reader, how
unapplicable any thing which the Apostle here discourses is to the case of our
Dissenters. And to do this plainly and briefly, we must consider, 1. Who those
were who out of a pretense of extraordinary knowledge, went to the
Idol-Temples, and eat of those meats which were offered in sacrifice to Idols.
2. Who the weak were who were offended with this, and what the scandal and
offense was. 3. How the Apostle reasons about this matter.

1. Who these knowing Persons were who eat in the Idols Temples. Now it is very
plain that the Apostle in this place taxes the Gnostick Heretics, who had
occasioned that first Schism ^n the Church of Corinth, and taught the People to
despise St. Paul as very ignorant of the Mysteries of the Gospel, and what the
just extent of Christian liberty was. For 1. it is plain that he here taxes a
vain and arrogant pretense of knowledge, v. 2. If any man think that he knows
any thing, he knows nothing yet, as he ought to know; 1 Cor. 8.2.
which is purposely to warn the Christians against those men who boasted so
much of their knowledge. assuring them that they were very ignorant,
notwithstanding all their brags of knowledge. 2. It is evident that these men
out of pretense of greater knowledge, did eat in the Idols Temple; If any man
see thee which have knowledge (who do so much boast of thy knowledge) sit at
meat, (...), v. 10.
in an Idols Temple. Now this St. Paul in the tenth Chapter absolutely
condemns, not only as sinful upon account of scandal, but as sinful in it
self, as partaking with Devils by eating of their Sacrifices. No true Orthodox
Christian ever did this; but the Gnostick Heretics did, partly out of luxury,
to partake in these splendid Entertainments, and to defile themselves with
those impure lusts which were part of their Mysteries, as the Apostle
insinuates, chapter 10.6, 7, 8. v. These things are our examples, to the intent we
should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted; neither be ye
idolaters, as were some of them, as it is written, The people sat down to eat
and drink, and rose up to play; neither let us commit fornication, as some of
them committed: and partly out of fear of persecution, against which the
Apostle warns and encourages the sincere Christians, v. 13. There has no
temptation (no trial by sufferings and persecutions) taken you, but what is
common to men; but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above
what you are able, but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that
ye may be able to bear it. And to justify this practice of theirs in eating at
an Idols Temple, they pretended that an Idol is nothing in the world; v. 4.
that the Gods whom the Heathen worshipped, were not Gods, but dead men; or
according to the Mythology of the Stoics, (which prevailed in that Age among
the Philosophical Idolaters, and therefore most probably was embraced by the
Gnostics) were only the names of some divine Powers and Attributes of the one
eternal God, which the error and superstition of these People had formed into
several distinct D^^ies; and therefore an Idol being nothing, it could not
pollute the meat which was offered in sacrifice to it, but it was as lawful to
eat of that as of any other ordinary Feast.

2. Let us consider who these weak persons were, who were offended and
scandalized at this liberty which the Gnostics took. Now it is as plain, that
these were a sort of very imperfect Christians, who together with the Faith of
Christ, retained many of their old Pagan Superstitions, as the Jews did the
observation of the Mosaical Law. This appears from that account St. Paul gives
of them, that they were men who did not understand that an Idol is nothing, but
looked upon them at least as some inferior Gods, and frequented their Temples,
and eat of the meat offered to them, under the notion of Sacrifices, and
thereby did defile and pollute themselves with Idolatrous Worship. Howbeit
there is not in every man that knowledge: v. 7.
for some with conscience of the Idol to this hour eat it as a thing offered
unto Idols, and their conscience being weak (a sick, misinformed, corrupt
conscience) is defiled with Idolatry. And therefore the scandal which was given
to these men, was this; that when they saw those who pretended to such perfect
knowledge in the Mystery of Christianity, eat of the Sacrifice in the Idols
Temple, this confirmed them in their error and Idolatry, and made them
conclude that such Pagan Superstitions as these were reconcilabl^ with the
Faith of Christ: For if any man (...) thee, v. 10, 11.
which have knowledge, sit at meat in an Idols Temple, shall not the conscience
of him that is weak be emboldened to eat those things which are offered to
Idols, and through thy knowledge shall thy weak brother perish for whom Christ
died, by being confirmed in his Idolatry by thy Example?

3. Now the Apostle disputes against this practice of the Gnostics, of eating
in the Idols Temple, two several ways: 1. Upon the supposition of the
lawfulness of it: 2. By proving it unlawful.

1. Upon the supposition of the lawfulness of it; and this he does in the
eighth Chapter. He allows that Principle of the Gnostics, That an Idol is
nothing in the world; and supposes for argument sake, that this would justify
those who have this knowledge in eating at an Idols Temple, (for that the
Apostle himself was not of this mind, appears from the tenth Chapter, of which
more presently): yet since there were so many professed Christians among them
who were still leavened with their Pagan Superstitions, and could not presently
renounce that kind of Worship which they had been so long accustomed to, (as
some Copies read it (...) inde^d of (...), v. 7. that some out of custom to the
Idol, instead of with conscience of the Idol) it was very uncharitable by doing
the same thing which they did, though with very different notions and
apprehensions, to confirm them in their Idolatrous Practices. Though these
knowing Gnostics who believed an Idol to be nothing, might eat in the Idols
Temple without being guilty of Idolatry, yet they must acknowledge that those
who believed these Idols to be Gods, and did eat that meat which was offered to
them under the notion of Sacrifices, were guilty of Idolatry, and therefore
they were guilty of a very great sin; when by doing the same thing, though
without Idolatry, they encouraged those to do so too, who were certainly guilty
of Idolatry in it.

And the guilt of this is so much the greater, because though they should
suppose it lawful to eat at an Idols Temple, yet they were under no necessity
of doing it; if they did not sin in it, yet neither did they please God merely
by eating such meats as were offered to Idols: for merely to eat or not to eat
any kind of meats, is not in it self an acceptable service to God. Meat
commends us not to God: for neither if we eat are we the better, v. 8.
neither if we eat not are we the worse. And therefore certainly we may abstain
from it without any other injury than laying some little restraints upon the
exercise of our private liberty; and this is therefore a proper matter for the
exercise of Christian charity, as the Apostle had discoursed in the case of the
Jews and Gentiles.

And though the Gnostics thought that eating in an Idols Temple was a great
argument of the perfection of their knowledge, yet the Apostle tells them, that
charity and the care of their Brothers soul, was to be preferred before such a
vain boast of knowledge: Take beed lest by any means this liberty of yours
become a stumbling block to them that are weak -- and through thy knowledge
shall the weak brother perish, v. 8, 10.
for whom Christ died. For which reason in the beginning he told them,
Knowledge puffs up, v. 1.
but charity edifieth.

This is the sum of the Apostle's reasoning in this eighth Chapter, upon a
supposition that it were lawful to eat in an Idols Temple. Now what affinity is
there between this case and that of our Dissenters? Those who knew that an Idol
was nothing, and therefore that it could not pollute the meat which was offered
in sacrifice to it, might eat in an Idols Temple without Idolatry; but yet
ought not to do it, when their Example, though innocent in it self, would
confirm others in actual Idolatry: therefore the Governors of the Church must
not prescribe the decent Rites and Ceremonies of Worship, because Dissenters
will not obey them, but turn Schismatics. If our Reconciler be not ashamed to
argue at this rate, I am ashamed to confute him.

But it is plain, he mistook the case. For he says, The Apostle grants that it
is lawful in it self for Christians to eat of things offered to Idols, Prot.
Reconc. p. 127.
(he should have added, in an Idols Temple, where it had an immediate relation
to the Idol, which was the matter in dispute between the Apostle and the
Gnostics) because an Idol was nothing in the world. But now the Apostle does
not grant this, but only at present supposes the lawfulness of it: for in the
tenth Chapter he professedly confutes it. He tells them that to partake of a
Sacrifice, signifies our communion with that being to whom the Sacrifice is
offered. 1 Cor. 10.
Thus it was with the Jewish Sacrifices: Behold Israel after the flesh, are not
they which eat of the sacrifices partakers of the altar? Thus it is in the
commemorative Sacrifice of the Lords Supper: The cup of blessing which we
bless, is it not the communion And thus to eat of the Idols Sacrifice in the
Idols Temple, is communion with the Idol. Well says the Gnostick, what
communion can there be with that which is not? or will you say, That an Idol is
any Will you say, that there are any such Gods as the Heathens worship? Or will
you say, that that is a Sacrifice, or that that meat is polluted which is
offered to nothing? No, says the Apostle, I do not say that there are any such
Gods as the Heathens worship; for they worshipped dead men and women, who
cannot be present at their Sacrifices to receive their Worship, or it may be
they worship only some fanciful and poetic Names and Fictions: but this I
say, that though Jupiter and Bacchus, Minerva and Diana, and the rest of the
poetic Deities, are mere fictitious Gods, yet wicked Spirits supply their
places, receive their Worship, and attend their Sacrifices; and therefore
though these Heathen Idolaters be not in communion with those fictitious Gods
whom they pretend to worship, yet they are in communion with Devils, who assume
the names of these But I say, that the things which the Gentiles sacrifice,
they sacrifice to Devils, and not to God; and I would not that ye should have
fellowship with Devils. Whether this can be reconciled with the lawfulness of
eating in an Idols Temple, because an Idol is nothing in the world, let our
Author consider.

But he proceeds. He (the Apostle) moreover grants, that they who out of
conscience did abstain from eating of such things, had a weak conscience, and
that their conscience was defiled by eating of such things, only because they
wanted knowledge, or were not well persuaded of this truth, that Christians had
a liberty or power to be partakers of these things, v. 7, 9. He therefore
grants, that the weak brother was mistaken, and that the strong gave him no
just occasion of offense. Which is every word false, as appears from what I
have already discoursed.

His interpretation of a weak Conscience, to be such a Conscience as did
abstain from eating of such things, is directly contrary to the Text, which
affirms that they did eat: For some with conscience of the Idol, unto this hour
eat it as a thing offered unto an Idol, and their conscience being weak is
defiled. They were such as were encouraged and emboldned by the example of the
Gnostics, to eat those things which were offered to Idols: So that they did
not do this with a fearful, timorous, scrupulous, doubting Conscience, but with
a full assurance and persuasion of the lawfulness of it. And therefore this
weakness did not consist in the tenderness, but in the corruption and
debauchery of their Conscience, that they believed they might still sacrifice
to their Heathen Gods, and that Christianity did allow them to do so; in which
Persuasion they were confirmed by the Example of those professed Christians
whom they saw sit at meat in the Idols Temple. Nor therefore were their
Consciences defiled, as our Reconciler asserts, only because they wanted
knowledge, or were not well persuaded of this truth, that Christians had a
liberty or power to eat of these things: for they were too well persuaded not
of this truth, but of this great and fatal error, that it was lawful for
Christians to sacrifice to Idols, and to eat of their Sacrifices. And thus
their Consciences was defiled, not by acting doubtfully, but by committing
Idolatry. So that the weak Brother was mistaken indeed, but the mistake lay
quite on the other side; and those Gnostick Heretics whom our Reconciler calls
the strong Christians, did give just occasion of offense, not by persuading,
much less compelling the weak to do what he suspected to be unlawful, but by
confirming him in these Idolatrous Practices to which he was so strongly
addicted by their Examples.

And therefore when, as he observes, the Apostle exhorts those Christians who
had attained to this knowledge (or rather who pretended to such extraordinary
knowledge, which indeed they had not) not to use it so as to give offense to
the weak Conscience of their Brother, who had this knowledge, his meaning is
not, that they should indulge such persons in their weakness and mistakes, but
that they should have a care by their examples of confirming them in such
mistakes. They must not use their liberty, which they supposed they had, of
eating in an Idols Temple, not because some ignorant Christians scrupled the
lawfulness of it, but because those imperfect weak Christians who were still
addicted to the Worship of their Country Gods, would be confirmed in their
Idolatrous Worship by seeing them eat of the Heathen Sacrifices, which was a
known and venerable part of the Pagan Worship. And how this pleads for
indulgence to the errors and mistakes of Dissenters, I cannot guess, when the
only scandal the Apostle here mentions, and exhorts them to avoid, is the
confirming such weak Christians in their errors and wicked practices; which
our Reconciler, who has contributed so much to harden these men in their
Schism, should do well to consider.

But let us proceed in St. Paul's discourse about eating those meats which were
offered in sacrifice to Idols. Having in the eighth Chapter disputed against
the practice of eating in an Idols Temple, upon supposition of the lawfulness
of it: for how lawful soever it was, it was very uncharitable, when hereby they
confirmed their weak Brother in his Idolatrous Worship. And in the tenth
Chapter (as I have already shown) having proved the unlawfulness of eating in
an Idols Temple, notwithstanding that pretense, that an Idol is nothing in the
world, he comes to give a more particular decision of this Controversy, to
prevent those scruples which otherwise might disturb very good Christians.

For in that Age and place wherein they lived, without infinite care and
scrupulosity, they could not avoid eating of meats offered to Idols: for what
was not spent in the Idols Feast, was sold in the Shambles, or spent at their
private houses; and therefore they neither could buy any meat in the Market,
nor eat at the private house of any Pagan or Heathen Idolater, but they were in
danger of eating meats offered to Idols.

To salve this difficulty, the Apostle tells them, 1 Cor. 10.25, 26, 27.
that they should eat any meat which was sold in the Shambles, or set before
them at private houses, without asking any questions for conscience sake; that
is, without enquiring whether that meat had been offered in sacrifice to an
Idol, or making any scruple about such matters: for the earth is the Lords, and
the fullness thereof; that is, all Creatures are Gods, who has freely given them
to us for our use, and we may as freely use them, when they have no relation to
any Idolatrous Worship, as to be sure they have not, when they are exposed to
sale in the Shambles, or used for private Entertainments.

But yet if any person present acquaint you that this was offered in sacrifice,
v. 28.
then you must abstain for his sake that showed it: and there is no great
damage in this, since the earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof: God has
made such ample provision for us, that we are not confined to any one dish, but
when it is inexpedient to eat of one thing, we need not be a hungry for all
that, having such variety of provisions, which there can be no scruple about to
support and refresh us.

Who these were for whose sake the Apostle exhorts the Corinthians to abstain
from eating, of meats offered to Idols, even at a private Entertainment, which
yet he asserts they might lawfully do, is not plain in the Text: If any man say
unto you, this is offered in sacrifice to Idols, eat not. But whether this man
for whose sake they should abstain be a Christian or an Infidel, is not said.
The unbeliever, at whose house the Christian is supposed to eat, might
accidentally take notice that such meat had been offered in sacrifice to such a
God, and in this case the Christian might be obliged to forbear, to show his
abhorrence and detestation of Idols, that he might not do any thing which seems
never so little to countenance Idolatry. If it were a Christian who gave this
information, it might either be one who did really scruple the lawfulness of
^ating any meat that was offered to an Idol, though out of the Idols Temple,
and then he who understood his liberty, ought to forbear for his sake who did
not; or it was one of those weak and imperfect Christians whom the Apostle
mentioned in the eighth Chapter, who was so far from scrupling the lawfulness
of eating such meats at a private house, that he thought it lawful to sacrifice
to these Heathen Gods, and to partake of the Sacrifice in the Idols Temple, and
then the sound Christian was to forbear for fear of encouraging such weak
Christians in their Idolatry: for they might apprehend it as lawful to
sacrifice to an Idol, as to eat of the Sacrifice; and as lawful to eat of the
Sacrifice in the Idols Temple, as in a private house. And thus the use of their
innocent liberty in eating what is set before them without scruple, might
confirm such men in their Idolatrous practices, and for that reason they were
to forbear. And it is probable enough that St. Paul might have respect to all
these, from what he adds, v. 32. Give none offense neither to the Jew nor to
the Gentile, nor to the Church of God. Not to the Jew, who had a great
abhorrence of Idolatry, by doing any thing which should make them suspect you
of the least approach to Idolatry, which would confirm them in their aversion
to Christianity; not to the Gentile, by confirming them in their Idolatry; not
to the Church of God, by scandalizing either weak or scrupulous Christians,
much less by scandalizing the Christian Profession, as the Gnostics did by
eating in the Idols Temple.

But how any thing of all this makes to our Reconciler's purpose, I cannot see;
that which comes nearest the business is, if we suppose that the Apostle
commands them to abstain for the sake of those who scrupled the lawfulness of
such meats: but then this forbearance was only in the exercise of their private
liberty in eating or not eating, wherein Religion is not immediately concerned:
for though it were lawful to eat of such meats, yet it was not their duty to do
it; their eating in it self considered, did not please God, though they eat
without scandal, much less when their eating was an offense to weak Christians.
Meat commends us not to God: 1 Cor. 8.8.
for neither if we eat, are we the better; neither if we eat not, are we the
worse, as he had before told the Romans. The Kingdom of God is not meat and
drink: and therefore in such cases it became them to exercise great charity in
the use of their liberty. But how little this makes to our Reconciler's
purpose, I have already shown at large in the fifth Chapter; and our Reconciler
has offered nothing new here to deserve a new Answer.

All that remains to be considered in this Chapter, is the Example of St. Paul
himself; which may be answered in a very few words. He exercised great charity
and forbearance both toward Jews and Gentiles; and therefore being so great an
Apostle, ought to be an Example of the like forbearance to all succeeding
Bishops and Pastors of the Church. Now if our Reconciler can prove from the
Example of St. Paul, that the Governors of the Church ought not to prescribe
the decent Rites and Ceremonies of Religion, or ought to alter and abolish
them, in charity and condescension to Dissenters, I will yield the Cause.

Let us then consider what St. Paul's condescension was, and I observe in
general that he was an Example of the same condescension and forbearance which
he persuaded other private Christians to exercise; and therefore if that
charity and forbearance which he exhorts the Christians to exercise toward
each other, does not overthrow Ecclesiastical Authority, nor plead for the
Indulgence and Toleration of Dissenters, then St. Paul's Example cannot do this
neither. This will appear from considering particulars. Ibid. v. 13.
In this Epistle to the Corinthians he persuades them not to eat meats offered
to Idols, especially in an Idols Temple, for fear of offending and scandalizing
weak Christians: and this he tells them he would observe himself. Wherefore if
meat make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh while the world stands,
lest I make my brother to offend. In the Epistle to the Romans he persuades
believing Jews and Gentiles to receive each other, and not to judge, and
censure, and scandalize one another about the observation or non-observation of
the Law of Moses; and this condescension both ^o Jews and Gentiles, he
exercised himself. Unto the Jew I became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews;
1 Cor. 9.20, 21, 22.
to them that are under the Law, as under the Law, that I might gain them that
are under the Law; to them that are without the Law, as without Law, that I
might gain them that are without Law: That is, when he was among the Jews, he
lived as a Jew, observed the Law of Moses as they did; when he was among the
Gentiles, who had no regard to the Law of Moses, he did not observe it neither;
he complied with the weakness and mistakes both of Jews and Gentiles; he became
all things to all men, that he might by all means gain some; that is, he
practiced that condescension and forbearance which he taught others to
practice. And if that did not concern the case of our Dissenters, nor plead for
the like Indulgence and Toleration for them, (as I have already proved at large
it does not) neither can the Apostle's Example prove any such thing. All this
condescension of the Apostle was not in the exercise of his Apostolical
Authority, but in the use of his private liberty, which he was very willing to
restrain to make his Ministry the more effectual; but he never parted with his
Authority to govern the Church, and to prescribe the Rules and Orders of
Worship, for the sake of any Dissenters, as I have already proved.

Prot. Recon. p. 138.
But there is one instance more of St. Paul's condescension, which our
Reconciler takes notice of, and indeed it is a very notable one, viz. that
though St. Paul asserts his right to live upon the Churches stock as well as
other Ministers, yet he maintained himself by his own labor, that he might
preach the Gospel to the Corinthians without charge, (for it is plain that he
did receive Contributions from other Churches) and this he did, 1 Cor. 9.
lest he should hinder the Gospel of Christ, and to cut off occasion from them
that desire occasion. From whence our Reconciler thus argues: Wherefore,
although the Rulers of the Church have certainly a right to impose things
indifferent, yet with submission to them, I conceive they should not exercise
that power in like circumstances, viz. when by the exercise thereof they give
occasion to them that desire occasion, to traduce them as men who more regard a
Ceremony than an immortal Soul, the exercise of their commanding power, than
the preserving poor Souls from damning Schisms, and the Church from sad
Divisions; when it hinders the preaching of the Gospel to their Flock* as this
imposing seems to do. Ad Populum phalerae.

Now I shall briefly consider the Case, and then I will consider our
Reconciler's Application. The Case is this: St. Paul had a right to live on the
Gospel, v. 14
by Gods own appointment and ordination, as the Priests under the Law, who
ministered in holy things, lived of the things of the Temple, and they which
wait at the Altar are partakers of the Altar, have their portion allotted them
out of those Sacrifices which are offered there; and thus the other Apostles
were maintained. But St. Paul in Corinth, and all the Regions of Achaia,
preached the Gospel freely; took nothing of them, but partly supplied his wants
by his own labor, partly was supplied by the Contributions of other Churches,
as he expressly tells them, I robbed other Churches, taking wages of them to do
you service; when I was present with you and wanted, I was chargeable to no
man; for that which was lacking to me, the brethren which came from Macedonia
supplied, 2 Cor. 11.8, 9. What then was the reason why the Apostle who made no
scruple to receive from other Churches, yet preached, and was always resolved
to preach the Gospel freely at Corinth? Now he has hinted two reasons of this:
1. That he observed something so saving in the temper of that People, that he
greatly suspected it would hinder the progress of the Gospel among them, if it
should prove matter of charge, especially at the first preaching of it. This
reason he assigns for it in those words, Nevertheless we have not used this
power, v. 12.
but suffered all things, lest we should hinder the Gospel of Christ. This is
no universal reason against the public maintenance of Gospel Ministers, that
it hinders the Gospel of Christ; for then God would not have ordained, as the
Apostle tells us he has, that those who preach the Gospel, should live of the
Gospel: and therefore it must have a particular respect to the temper of that
People, as he sufficiently intimates, when he so often repeats, that he
preached the Gospel freely to them, and without charge, and was not chargeable
to any of them, that he kept himself from being burdensome to them, even when
he was in want; which plainly taxes them with a niggardly temper, that they
could see so great an Apostle who preached the Gospel to them, in want, and not
supply his wants themselves, but suffer those of Macedonia to do it. We cannot
imagine that he who was ready to receive from other Churches, should choose
rather to want at Corinth, than to ask them for any thing, or freely discover
his wants to them, if they would not take notice of it themselves, had he not
perceived how unwilling they were to part with any thing, and what a prejudice
they had against a chargeable Religion. And St. Paul gives too much jealousy
of this temper in them, even where he commends them for their charity. There
was a Collection to be made for the relief of the poor Christians in Iudaea;
the Churches of Achaia had done something already, and it seems had promised
more; and St. Paul took the advantage of this to work an emulation in the
Churches of Macedonia to do the like, and it seems it had the effect he hoped
for; for their zeal of which he had boasted, had provoked very many, that is,
had excited them to very liberal Contributions. And now some Brethren of
Macedonia were to go to Corinth with St. Paul to receive their Collections; and
it seems after all his boasts of them, he was very jealous how he should find
things when he came, and therefore sent beforehand to give them notice of it,
that they might be in a readiness: Therefore I thought it necessary to exhort
the Brethren that they would go before unto you, 2 Cor. 9.1, etc.
and make up beforehand your bounty, whereof ye had notice before, that the
same may be ready as a matter of bounty, and not as of covetousness; lest if it
should prove otherwise, both he and they should be ashamed of it, as he speaks
in the former verse: and therefore he uses several Arguments to persuade them
to a liberal Contribution. And indeed it is a sufficient Argument that they
were not very forward to part with any thing, that they did not take care of
the Apostles maintenance, as it is plain they did not: for had they been of a
generous and liberal temper, they would have made provision for the Apostle,
whether he had asked it or not; and it does not appear that at least at first
he ever refused any thing from them, but only that he did not challenge it, as
of right he might.

TheApostle having discovered this to be their temper, was resolved not to
disgust them at the first preaching of the Gospel, by making it chargeable, but
rather chose to work for his living, and to endure some want, than to ask any
thing of them; which being a voluntary service, and more than God himself
required of him, he expected a great reward for it. This was matter of glorying
to him, that he had not used that power which God had given him to require
maintenance from those to whom he preached. To preach the Gospel was his duty,
and this he could not glory in, because he was under a necessity to do it; but
it was not matter of strict duty to preach the Gospel to a People who would not
supply his wants: for God had ordained that those who preach the Gospel should
live of the Gospel. But says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 9.15, 16, 18.
I have used none of these things, (he had not challenged this right) neither
have I written these things, that it should be done so unto me: for it were
better for me to die, than that any man should make any glorying void. For
though I preach the Gospel, I have nothing to glory of; for necessity is laid
upon me, and woe is unto me, if I preach not the Gospel. What is my reward then?
verily that when I preach the Gospel I may make the Gospel of Christ without
charge, that I abuse not my power in the Gospel. Our Reconciler fixes upon
these last words, That if in these circumstances he had used his power, he
should have abused it; whereas (...) signifies to use as well as to abuse, as
abutor does in the Latin; and it can signify no otherwise here: for what
abuse had it been of his power, to have demanded a supply of his necessary
wants, which God had ordained he should have? or what glorying had it been to
him not to abuse his power in the Gospel, any more than it was to preach the
Gospel, which being a necessary duty, was no matter of glorying to him? and yet
not to use his power, was as much his duty as to preach the Gospel, when to use
it was an abuse, that is, a fault; but it was matter of glory not to use the
power he had, which was such a voluntary service as deserved a reward.

Now is not our Reconciler a man of a wonderful reach, who from hence can prove
that the Governors of the Church ought not in like circumstances to exercise
that power, which he acknowledges they have, to impose indifferent things? for
what likeness can there be between these two cases? The power to challenge a
maintenance, is a personal right which men may use, or may not use if they
please; it is their right, but it is not their duty: but the power of imposing
indifferent things, as he calls it, or the power of prescribing the Rules and
Orders and Circumstances of Worship (if there be any such power, as he grants
there is) is the power and authority of an Office, is a Trust and a Duty, the
prudent and faithful discharge of which, they must give an account of; and
therefore must not, when they please, either part with the power or the
exercise of it. St. Paul was contented to part with the temporal rewards of his
Ministry, that he might the more successfully discharge the Ministry it self;
therefore Church Governors must not exercise their Authority in the discharge
of their Ministry, to humor Dissenters. St. Paul did more than his strict duty
required, that he might have something to glory in; therefore the Governors of
the Church must neglect their duty, and lose their reward. Indeed our
Reconciler talks as if the Churches Authority in indifferent things, were only
a personal right, a Complement to Church Governors, an ornamental power, which
they may use or may let alone, as they please; and if this were so, I should
presently be of our Reconciler's mind: but I believe they have no such kind of
useless Authority as this; Christ has not complemented his Ministers with any
power which is not for the use and service of the Church: and therefore if they
have power in indifferent things, this is a useful power, and that which they
ought to use, when there is reason for it, whoever be offended at it.

Another reason why St. Paul preached the Gospsl freely at Corinth, he gives us
in the 2 Cor. 11. 12, 13. What I do, that I will do, that I may cut off
occasion from them that desire occasion, that wherein they glory they may be
found even as we: for such are false Apostles, deceitful workers, transforming
themselves into the Apostles of Christ. The meaning of which is this: There
were several false Teachers who crept in among them, and used all manner of
arts to recommend themselves to the Corinthians; and among others this seems to
be one, that they preached the Gospel freely to them, only as they pretended
out of love of their Souls; which was a very popular art, especially to that
People; and therefore St. Paul resolved to persist in preaching the Gospel
freely to them, to cut off occasion from them that desire occasion, that is, to
disappoint those arts of deceit whereby these false Teachers endeavored to
recommend themselves, that wherein they glory they may be found even as we:
that whereas they glory in preaching the Gospel freely, this may give them no
advantage, since it is no more than what I my self have all along done, and
still continue to do. Our Reconciler paraphraseth these words, thus: To cut off
occasion from them that desire occasion; that is, lest his enemies should take
occasion from the exercise of this his liberty, to charge, Prot. Recon. p. 138.
or to traduce him as one who more consulted his own profit than the glory of
God, and the propagation of the Gospel. But what occasion had there been for
this, though he had taken Wages of them, as he says he did of other Churches,
to supply his necessities? it was sufficiently evident notwithstanding, that he
did exact nothing from them to serve the ends of covetousness and ambition: for
certainly a man may desire the supply of his wants, without being charged with
covetousness; but the Apostle would not suffer these false Prophets, by a
pretended and hypocritical Zeal, to outdo him in any thing. Now the Apostle's
care to give no advantage to false Teachers, is a good Example to the
Governors of our Church not to do so neither; and I am sure they cannot give
them greater advantage, than to sacrifice all Order and Decency to their
pretended Scruples.

Well, but says our Reconciler, the Rulers of the Church, by the exercise of
this power in indifferent things, do give occasion to them that desire occasion
to traduce them as men who more regard a Ceremony than an immortal Soul, the
exercise of their commanding Power, than the preserving of poor Souls from
damning Schisms, and the Church from sad Divisions, etc. These are very
spightful, but very foolish Insinuations. As for Schisms and Divisions, we have
already considered where that charge must rest; and then how do Ceremonies come
in competition with the Souls of men? Does the appointment of some Ceremonies
for the decent and orderly performance of Religious Worship, hinder the
salvation of men's Souls? Cannot men be saved who observe the Ceremonies of our
Church? Then indeed our Reconciler might well complain, that those who impose
such damning Ceremonies, have more regard to a Ceremony than to an immortal
Soul; otherwise there is no competition between Ceremonies and the Souls of
men, and those who will be Schismatics for a Ceremony, will be Schismatics
without it, and will be damned for their Schism, whether there be any
Ceremonies or not.

All that remains in this Chapter, are his Answers to Meisner's Arguments,
which I have already considered, as much as is necessary to my purpose.

CHAP. VII. Containing an Answer to the Motives to Mutual Condescension, urged
in the sixth Chapter of the Protestant Reconciler.
I Find nothing in this Chapter, besides some Harangues and Popular
Declamations, but what has been sufficiently answered already: The whole
proceeds upon those general Topics, of the smalness of these things, the
danger men's Souls are in by these Impositions, the obligations to Love and
Charity; which have been particularly discoursed above in the first and second
Chapters, where the reasons of these things are particularly examined. But
however, I will briefly try whether I cannot give an Answer to all this, which
may be as popular as his Objections are.

I. His first Argument or Motive is from considering how small the things are
which cause our Discords and Divisions, Prot. Recon. p. 166.
when they are set in competition with the more weighty duties and concerns of
Love, Peace, and the Churches Union and Edification, and the avoiding the
offense and scandal of Jew, Gentile, and the Church of God; which he very
pompously proves to be great Gospel-duties. Now suppose the things in dispute
be never so small, if they are of any use in Religion, and the Object of
Ecclesiastical Authority, (as our Reconciler owns they are) what will he
conclude from hence? that the observation of such little things must not be
enjoined? What, not when Christ has given authority to enjoin them? Does Christ
then give any authority to his Church, which she must not use? Must nothing be
enjoined, which is little in comparison of Love, and Peace, and Unity? or must
they be enjoined, and left indifferent at the same time? Must the Church
appoint them to be observed, but command no body to observe them but those who
please? In all well-governed Societi^s there must be Laws about little as well
as about great things; and if there be no Authority to determine the least
matters both in Church and State, it will necessarily occasion very great
inconveniences.

Well, but we must not set these little things in competition with the more
weighty duties and concerns of Love and Peace: No, God forbid we should. But
does our Reconciler know what a competition between two Laws means? I know but
of two ways that this can happen; either when they contradict each each other,
or are so contrary in their natures that they can never be both observed; or
when there is a competition of time, that it so happens that we cannot observe
both at the same time; as when we cannot at the same time go to Church to serve
God, and stay at home to attend a sick Father or Friend; in which cases our
Savior has laid down a general Rule, That God prefers Mercy b^fo^e Sacrifice.
But now upon neither of these accounts can there be any competition pretended
between the Rites and Ceremonies of Religion, and the great duties of Love, and
Peace, and Unity, and Edification. For cannot men observe the Orders and
Constitutions of the Church, as to the external Rites of Worship, and love one
another, and preserve the Peace and Unity of the Church at the same time?
Indeed, can there be a better means to preserve Love, and Peace, and Unity
among Christians, and to promote mutual Edification, than an Uniformity in
Religious Worship, since it is evident that nothing breeds greater Dissentions,
and Emulations, and Envyings among Christians, than different and contrary
Modes of Worship? And if this be so, then there is no competition between the
Ceremonies of Religion, and the Love and Peace of Christians; and consequently,
no reason why the Governors of the Church may not command both, though the
particular Ceremonies of Religion be acknowledged to be small things in
comparison with the great duties of Love and Peace.

Yes, you will say, the imposition of these Ceremonies does come in competition
with these great duties of Love, and Peace, and Unity, because there are a
great many who quarrel at them, and divide the Church upon that account; and if
these controverted Ceremonies were removed, Love and Unity would be restored
among us.

Now supposing this to be true (which I have already proved not to be true)
what is this to the Governors of the Church? See chap. 3.
If they impose nothing which is inconsistent with Love, and Peace and Unity,
then the imposition of these things, in it self considered, cannot be
inconsistent with these great Gospel-duties: for if what we command be
consistent with Love and Unity, then the Command (otherwise called the
Imposition) must be so too. It is not the command or imposition of these
things, which is inconsistent with Love and Unity, but refusal of obedience to
such lawful Commands; which is not the fault of the Governors, but of the
Subjects; not of those who command, but of those who will not obey: and
therefore these are Arguments proper to be urged against Dissenters, but not
against the Governors of the Church.

As to give you a familiar instance of this: A Master commands his Servant to
put on a clean Band to wait at Table, the Servant refuses to do it; upon this
the whole Family is divided, some take part with the Master, others with the
Servant: in steps a Reconciler, and tells the Master he did very ill to cause
such Divisions in his Family; that Love, and Peace, and Unity were more
considerable duties than a Servants wearing a clean Band, which therefore ought
not to come in competition with them: Pray Sir, says the Master, preach this
Doctrine to my Servants, and not to me; I have commanded nothing but what was
fit to be done, and I will have it done, or he and all his Partners shall turn
out o^ my Family. Now let one who is a Master, judge whether the Master or the
Reconciler be in the right. The breach of Love, and Peace, and Unity, is not
the effect (though it be the consequent, which our Reconciler I perceive cannot
distinguish) of the Command or Imposition, but of the disobedience; and
therefore when the Command is fit and reasonable, cannot be charged upon him
who commands, but upon him who disobeys.

But besides this, I observe, that Christian Love, See Defense of Dr. Still.
Separat. about Church-unity.
and Unity, and Peace, in the Writings of the New Testament, signify the
Communion of the Church; and how kind soever they may be to each other upon
other accounts, men do not love like Christians, who do not worship God
together in the Communion of the same Church wherein they live, and there can
be no Edification out of the Church. Now if there be no way of uniting men in
one Communion, but by an uniformity of Worship, then to prescribe the Rules and
Orders and Ceremonies of Worship, is as necessary as Christian Love, and Peace,
and Unity is. Men who worship God after a different manner, must and will
worship in different places too, and in distinct Communions; and those who will
not submit to the Injunctions of a just Authority, will never consent in any
form of Worship: and therefore this may multiply Schisms, but cannot cure them.
This is all perfect demonstration from the experience of our late Confusions,
when the pulling down the Church of England did not lessen our Divisions, but
increase them.

But our Reconciler confirms this Argument, that the Governors of the Church
ought not to insist on such little things, when they come in competition with
Love, and Peace, and Unity, etc. from the example of God himself, who was not
so much concerned for the ceremonial part of his Worship, but that he would
permit the violation of what he had prescribed about it upon accounts of lesser
moment than these are. Recon. p. 170.
He instances in the Law of Circumcision, which was not observed in the
Wilderness, because this would hinder the motion of the Camp: In the Law of the
Passover, which was to be observed on the first month, and the 14th day of the
month, but God expressly provided, that if any man were unclean, or in a journey
far off at that time, they should observe it on the 14th of the second month:
in the Sabbatick rest, which admitted of works of necessity and mercy, which
were never forbidden by God in that Law, nor intended to be.

Now are not these admirable proofs, That God is not so much concerned for the
ceremonial part of his Law, but that upon some accounts he would permit the
violation of what he had prescribed, when it does not appear that he ever did
so? As for the neglect of Circumcision in the Wilderness, I doubt not but God
had given express order about it, otherwise Moses who was faithful in all his
house, and a punctual observer of all the divine Laws and Statutes, would never
have neglected it: and this I may say with as much reason, as our Reconciler
can produce for Gods permission of it without an express Order, and somewhat
more. As for the Passover, let our Reconciler consider again whether the
observation of it on the second month by those who were unclean, or in a
journey on the first month, was a violation of what God had prescribed, when
God himself had expressly prescribed it. And let him consider once more, whether
works of necessity and mercy were a violation of the Sabbatick rest, when our
Savior himself poves that they were not; that God never intended that the rest
of the Sabbath should exclude such works.

I am sure our Reconciler cannot produce any one instance wherein God permitted
and allowed the violation of any ceremonial Law, according to the true intent
and meaning of the Law, without express order for it; but on the other hand,
God was very strict and rigorous in exacting the observation of them, and did
give as signal examples of his Justice and Severity upon such accounts, as upon
any other whatever. Witness the man who gathered Sticks on the Sabbath Day, and
was stoned to death for it. The fate of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, who
quarrelled with Moses and Aaron (which is more like the case of our Dissenters)
and offered Incense; the Earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up, and a
Fire consumed the two hundred and fifty men that offered Incense. 16 Numb.
To which we may add the case of Vzzah, who was struck dead upon the place for
touching the Ark of God; which was not lawful for him to do, though he did it
with a very pious intention to preserve it from falling. 2 Samuel 6.6, 7.
Thus Readiness offering Sacrifice in Samuel's absence, 1 Samuel 13.9, 10, etc.
though he had a very plausible excuse for it, and his sparing Agag the King of
the Amalakites, 15 chapter 7, 8, etc.
and the best of the Sheep and Oxen, etc. cost him his Kingdom. This is no
Argument that God was so little concerned about the observation of his
ceremonial Laws, or thought any thing little which he commanded, when he so
severely revenged the breach of them. God indeed did prefer true and real
Righteousness, before any ceremonial Observances; but he did not therefore
countenance the breach of his meanest Laws. What our Savior tells the
Pharisees, Who paid thythe of mint, and anise, 23 Mat. 23.
and cummin, and neglected the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy,
and faith, is a standing Rule in all these cases, These things ought ye to have
done, and not to leave the other undone: they should observe them both, the
great and the less matters of the Law, and not neglect or despise either.

So that Gods example in the^e matters is so far from helping our Reconciler's
Cause, that it makes against him. God did not equal the Ceremonies of the Law
with the more weighty duties of Judgment, Mercy, and Faith, no more than the
Church equals a Ceremony with the dearer interes^s of Love, and Peace, and
Unity; but yet God instituted these Ceremonies, and commanded the observation
of them, and punished the breach of them, even when the whole Congregation
mutinied and rebelled upon it, as they did in the case of Corah, that is, when
they came as much in competition with Love, and Peace, and Unity, as the
Reconciler pretends our Ceremonies at this day do.

2. But if this will not do, our Reconciler has another way of arguing from the
example of God to oblige the Governors of the Church not to impose these
Ceremonies, when there are so many Dissenters amongst us who will not submit to
them. As 1. The example of Gods love in sending his Son into the World, Recon.
p. 178.
that we might live through him -- why then should they who are commanded to be
followers of God as dear children, and walk in love, refuse to part with their
unnecessary Ceremonies, and to refrain the exercise of their imposing power in
things indifferent -- Now if our Reconciler will give me a reason why they
should not, I will tell him why they should. God has in infinite goodness sent
his Son into the World to save sinners, but still they must be saved in that
method which Christ has appointed. To this end Christ has given us his Laws,
instituted a Church-Society, appointed Stewards of his Family, and Rulers of
his Household, and given them authority to govern Religious Assemblies, to
prescribe the Rules of Worship, and the Methods of Discipline, and all this for
the salvation of men's Souls; and therefore the Governors of the Church must
not renounce this Authority, and the exercise of it, because in its rank and
order it is subservient to the great end for which God sent Christ into the
World, viz. the salvation of men's Souls, and is instituted by Christ for that
purpose. But you will object, that the exercise of this Authority in indifferent
things, is so far from contributing to the salvation of men's Souls, especially
in such an Age as this, that it destroys them. What destroys them? the use of
indifferent things? No, men may observe these Ceremonies without prejudicing
their salvation. What then? is it the imposition of these things? Nor that
neither: for to command that which will not destroy men's Souls, cannot destroy
them. What is it then? an obstinate refusal to obey such Impositions? Right:
for this makes men Schismatics, and will damn them; and thus disobedience to
any other of Christ's Laws, will damn men, though Christ died for them. And
thus, according to this way of arguing, God, who did so infinitely love sinners
as to send Christ to save them, ought to have given them no Laws, nor made any
Conditions of salvation, for fear men should break them, and be damned for it.
For is it not a greater thing to give his Son for sinners, than to indulge them
in some little Follies and Extravagances? Will God, who loved sinners so as to
give his own Son for them, damn them for stealing a shilling or two, for
playing the Good Fellow sometimes, or for some kind and amorous Embraces? Sure
he is so good, that he will repeal all these Soul-destroying Laws; and when we
see this done, it will be time for the Governors of the Church to renounce
their Authority too in imitation of the love of God.

Ibid.
II. His next Argument is, That God is so merciful to weak and erring persons,
as not to judge, condemn, or exclude them from his favor for any errors of
their judgments, which are consistent with true love to him, and which they did
not wilfully embrace, nor do persist in against conviction of their
Consciences, but will upon a general repentance for their unknown sins, receive
them to his favor, though they live and die under such errors and mistakes.
-- Why then should we who are commanded to be merciful, as our heavenly Father
is merciful -- reject them from Communion, whom God will receive? why should we
not forbear to condemn and censure them, whom God will absolve? -- This is so
fulsomly ridiculous, that I should be ashamed to answer it, were it not very
fit to expose such popular Cant. For,

1. Though the infinite goodness of God does incline us to hope well of those
who lived and died in invincible errors, yet we know not certainly how God
will deal with them in the other World. God has nowhere told us any thing of
it; and therefore this is not so certain as to make it a President and Example
for Governors.

2. But suppose this were so (as all of us have reason to hope it is) yet this
is no Example to Governors in Church or State. For there is a vast difference
between Gods judgments in the other World, and acts of Government and
Discipline in this: The one respects men's personal deserts, and determines
their final doom; the other only respects the preservation of good order and
government in Church or State. And therefore the final judgment considers all
circumstances which may deserve reward or punishment, pity and compassion; not
only what was done, but who did it, with what intention and design, whether
knowingly or ignorantly, or the like: the other considers only what is done,
what prejudice it is to the public, and how such an example deserves to be
punished, and therefore it is very fitting for earthly Governors to punish
those sins which God will pardon, because they cannot maintain good Government
withour it. If through ignorance and mistake (though so innocent and
involuntary, that God may see reason to pardon it) any men should disturb the
Peace and Order of Church or State, it would utterly overthrow all Government,
if these men must not be restrained nor punished.

Our Reconciler might have considered, that God forgives us all our sins which
we sincerely repent of, though they were never so great and voluntary; and
methinks he might as well have undertaken the Cause of penitent Thieves, and
Rebels, and Murderers, as of impenitent Schismatics. He should do well, when
he sees the Tears, and Sorrows, and Agonies of such guilty Wretches, and hears
their solemn profession of repentance, to mind the Judge and the Jury of the
mercy and pitifulness of our good God, who forgives the sins of all true
Penitents: and therefore they who are commanded to be followers of God like
dear children, to be merciful as our Father which is in Heaven is merciful, to
put on bowels of compassion as the Elect of God, should not hang up those poor
penitent Wretches, but forgive that on Earth which God will forgive in Heaven.
Now I wonder how a Judge and Jury would gaze upon such a Reconciler as this,
whether they would think him fittest for Bedlam or Bridewel.

It is certain, that this good and pitiful God whose Example our Reconciler
proposes, does himself make a difference between this World and the next, in
executing Judgments; he sometimes punishes those sins in this World, which he
himself forgives in the next: and therefore certainly Earthly Governors,
whether of Church or State, may punish those sins in this World which God will
pardon in the next. Thus it was in the case of David, whom the Prophet Nathan
upon his repentance assured that God had pardoned him, 2 Samuel 12.
and yet at the same time denounced the Judgments of God against him, the
rebellion of his Son Absalom, and the death of the child begotten in Adultery.
Thus we have reason to hope, that so pious a man as Vzzah, though he was struck
dead upon the place, yet was not eternally damned for touching the Ark.

3. And yet Gods final Judgment is no Rule and Pattern for humane Judicatures,
because Earthly Governors do not know the hearts and thoughts of men, as Gods
does. He knows when men's ignorance is invincible and involuntary, which no man
can know; and therefore God can make such allowances in his last and final
Judgment, which no man can or ought. God judges the hearts of men, but man can
only judge of their actions; and therefore an Earthly Governor may and ought
in justice to punish that which God may very equitably pardon.

4. Especially considering that this last and final Judgment of God is designed
to rectify all the necessary defects, as well as miscarriages, of humane
Judicatures. A man who is guilty of some troublesome error and mistake, may
and ought for the public good, to suffer for it in this World, though it may
be hard that he should suffer for it in the next: And this very consideration
(as I have observed before) answers all this difficulty. Schismatics, how
innocent soever their mistake is, ought to be cast out of the Church on ^arth,
or all Ecclesiastical Authority is lost, and the Church left without any
Government to defend it self; but if the case be favorable, God will make
allowances for it in the other World; and he who is guilty of Schism, without a
schismatical mind, we hope may find mercy. And therefore this can be no reason
for the Church not to pass her censures upon such men, if they are visibly
guilty of that which deserves a censure. A temporal Judge does not intend to
damn every man whom he hangs, nor an Ecclesiastical Judge to damn those whom he
censures; they are only concerned to see that the Judgment and Censure be
deserved in this World, but they leave the final Judgment to God himself.

This, I think, is enough to answer to this Argument, though our Reconciler
rhetoricates upon it. He observes, that the Scripture represents God as very
pitiful; P. 179.
and we believe God to be very pitiful as any earthly Parent can be, but not
indulgent to the humor or frowardness of children. But it is this God of mercy
who himself goes into the mountains to save, and to bring home the strayed
sheep: And thus the Governors of the Church ought to do, to bring home stray
Sheep into their Fold, not to indulge them in their wanderings. But God provided
an Asylum for him who ignorantly committed murder, accidentally he means,
without intending any such thing; which is not the error of the mind, but of
the hand, and therefore does not relate to this business. But God remitted the
sin of Abimeleck because he did it ignorantly; 20 Genesis 6.
but Abimeleck had been guilty of no sin, for he had not touched Sarah
Abraham's Wife. But he had mercy of St. Paul for the same reason, though he
persecuted the Church of Christ; but the mercy consisted in bringing him to
repentance: unless the Reconciler will say too, that he had mercy on those who
crucified Christ, because they did it ignorantly; and on all those Jews of whom
St. Paul witnesses, that they had a zeal for God, but not according to
knowledge. And indeed it is worth considering, that this Argument of the
Reconcil^r's pleads ^or a Toleration of all Religions, especially if we can
suppose that there are honest and ignorant men among them; such persons will be
received by God according to our Reconciler's Principles, whatever Religion
they be of, Jews, or Turks, or Pagans; though he does none the honor of a
particular vindication, but only the Papists. If Charity teaches us thus to
hope, says the most learned Bishop Sanderson, of our forefathers, who lived
and died in the idolatrous acts of Worship, why then should we reject them from
Communion, whom God will receive? So that the poor Church of England must
receive Papists into her Communion, as well as the Phanaticks; where we must
observe the Charity is Bishop Sanderson's, the Inference and Application the
Reconciler's.

III. His next Argument is from one great purpose of Christ's Advent, P. 180. 2
Phil. 14, etc.
and the effusion of his precious blood, to make both Jew and Gentile one, by
breaking down the middle wall of partition that was between them, and
abolishing the Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances. Now the conceit of
it is this: He supposes the Ceremonies of the Church of England to be such a
Partition Wall between Conformists and Nonconformists, as the Mosaical Law was
between Jews and Gentiles; and therefore as Christ has broken down one
Partition Wall, and made Jew and Gentile one Church, so our Governors ought to
break down the other Partition Wall to make Conformists and Nonconformists one
Body and Church; which is such a dull conceit, and argues such stupid ignorance
in the Mysteries of Christianity, that I do not wonder he is so zealous an
Advocate for Ignorance and Error.

The Partition Wall is an Allusion to that Partition in the Temple which
divided the Court where the Jews worshipped, from the Court of the Gentiles;
and that which made this Partition was Gods Covenant with Abraham, when he
chose his carnal Seed and Posterity for his peculiar People, and separated them
from the rest of the World; and the more effectually to separate them from
other Nations, gave them a peculiar Law, which was to last as long as this
distinction did. For God did not intend for ever to confine his Church to one
Nation, but when the promised Messiah came, to enlarge the borders of his
Church to all mankind. And therefore this Law was so contrived as to typifie
the Messiah, and to receive its full completion in the perfect Sacrifice and
Expiation of his Death, which put an end to the former Dispensation, and sealed
a Covenant of Grace and Mercy with all mankind. Thus Christ by his death broke
down the Partition Wall, because he put an end to the Mosaical Covenant which
was made only with the Jews, and to that external and ^ypical Religion which
was peculiar to the Mosaical Dispensation, and made a distinction and
separation between Jew and Gentile* that is, as Christ made a Covenant now with
all mankind, so he put an end to all marks of distinction between Jew and
Gentile, and to that typical and ceremonial Worship which was peculiar to the
Jews, as a distinct and separate People.

Now indeed any such Partition Wall as this, which confines the Covenant and
Promises of God to any particular People or Nation, and excludes all others, is
directly contrary to the end and design of Christ's death, and ought
immediately to be pulled down; but must there therefore be no Partion to
distinguish between the Church of Christ, and Infidels, and Heretics, and
Schismatics? Must there be no Walls and Fences about the Church, this Vineyard
and Fold of Christ? Must there be no Laws made for the government of Religious
Assemblies, and the Decency and Order of Christian Worship, for fear of keeping
those out of the Church who will not be orderly in it? How come the Ceremonies
of our Church to be a Wall of partition? the Church never made them so; for she
only designed them for Rules and decent Circumstances of Worship, which it is
her duty to take care of. Let those then who set up this Wall of partition,
pull it down again; that is, let those who separate from the Church, and make
these Ceremonies a Wall of partition, return to the Communion of the Church,
which no body keeps them from but themselves.

As for his modest insinuations, that our Ceremonies are carnal Ordinances,
weak and beggarly Elements, and therefore ought to be removed for their
weakness and unprofitableness, as the Mosaic Ceremonies were, I have already
largely shown the difference between a Ritual and Ceremonial Religion, and
those Ceremonies which are for the Decency of Religious Worship; which are as
necessary, and must continue as long as External Worship, which requires
external Signs of Decency and Honor, does.

Recon. p. 182.
IV. His next Motive to Condescension, is from the Example of Christ and his
Apostles in preaching the Gospel; which in short is this: That when Christ was
on Earth, he did not instruct his Disciples in such Doctrines as they were not
capable of understanding, till after his Resurrection, and therefore left the
revelation of such matters to the Ministry of his Holy Spirit, whom after his
Ascension into Heaven, he sent to them. And the Apostles, when they converted
Jews and Gentiles to the Faith of Christ, did not immediately tell them all
that was to be known and believed, but instructed them in the plainest matters
first, and allowed some time to wear off their Jewish and Pagan prejudices:
therefore the Governors of the Church should forbear imposing of some
practices, at which our Flocks, by reason of their prejudice and weakness, will
be apt to stumble and take offense. But how this follows, I confess, I cannot
understand; if it proves any thing, it proves that the Governors of the Church
must not instruct their People in any thing which they are not willing to
learn; that our Reconciler should never have published his second part, to
convince Dissenters that they may lawfully, and therefore in duty ought to
conform to the Ceremonies of the Church when they are imposed: for if
notwithstanding the Example of our Savior and his Apostles, we may instruct
our People in such things, we may require their obedience too, otherwise we had
as good never instruct them.

But did Christ and his Apostles then intend that Christians should be always
children? Did not St. Paul testify that he had declared the whole Will of God
to them? And when the Gospel has been fully published to the World for above
sixteen hundred years, must the Church return again to her state of infancy and
childhood, to humor Diss^nters? But indeed is the duty of obedience to
Governors in all things which Christ has not forbid, such a sublime and
mysterious Doctrine, that it ought to be concealed as too difficult to be
understood? Is it not a pretty way of reasoning, that Euclid's Elements is too
difficult a book for a young child to learn, therefore his Master must not
teach him to ob^y his Parents neither? I am sure this was one of the first
Lessons which the Apostles taught their Disciples, whatever else they concealed
from them: for there can be no Church founded without Government, and there can
be no Government where Subjects must not be taught Obedience.

But however, there is a great difference between the first publication of any
Doctrine, and the preaching of it after it is published. The first requires
great prudence in the choice of a fit time to do it in, and of fit persons to
communicate it to; which was the case of Christ and his Apostles, which made it
necessary to reveal the Gospel-mysteries by degrees, and to persons well
disposed and qualified to receive them; but when a Doctrine has been fully
published and confirmed by all necessary evidence, and universally received as
a Christian Doctrine, the Governors and Pastors of the Church must continue to
preach it, whether Dissenters will hear or no; for else we may lose all
Christian Doctrines by degrees again, and return to our Milk, which he says is
the Doctrine of Christ's Humanity; and leave off feeding on strong Meat, which
he says is the Doctrine of Christ's Divinity, P. 183.
because Jews and Socinians cannot bear it. Whatever has been published by
Christ and his Apostles, as Christian Doctrine, is the sacred Depositum which
is committed to the Church, and which all Bishops, 1 Timothy 6.20.
as well as Timothy, are commanded to keep.

P. 185.
5. His next Motive to condescension is from the consideration of that great
Rule of Equity, which calls upon us to do to others, as we would be dealt with.
Now I confess, this is a very good Topic to declaim on, as our Reconciler
does: for as it is usually managed, it contains an Appeal to the Passions and
Interests, more than to the Reason of mankind. It is a sufficient Answer to
this, to observe, that this Rule obliges no man to do any thing but what is in
it self just and equitable to be done: for what is more than this, how
passionately soever men desire it, is owing to their fondness and partiality to
themselves, not to a true reason and judgment of things; and therefore unless
it appear upon other accounts to be in it self reasonable to grant this
Indulgence, this Rule cannot make it so.

To discourse the true meaning of this Rule at large, would be too great a
digression from my present design; and therefore in answer to what our
Reconciler says, Would we be contented if we were inferiors, to be punished,
imprisoned, and banished for Opinions which we cannot help; or shut out from
the means of Grace for such Opinions? Or should we not be glad that others
would bear with us in some lesser matters in which we by our judgments are
constrained to differ from them? and would not pass upon us the s^verest
censures because we are constrained thus to differ? I say in answer to these,
and suchlike Popular Appeals, I shall ask him some other Questions: as,
Whether ever any Offender or Criminal is contented to suffer for his fault, or
does not earnestly desire to be pardoned, and to escape? Whether it be
unreasonable to punish any man, because all men are unwilling to be punished?
Whether every man's love to himself in such cases, or that natural pity which
all men have for those who suffer, be a Rule for the exercise of public
Discipline and Government in Church or State? Whether any man in his wits can
think it reasonable that men's private Fancies and Opinions should overruled the
Authority of Church and State? Whether is the most pitiable sight, to see a
flourishing and truly Apostolic Church rent and torn in pieces by Factions and
Schisms, or to see such Schismatics suffer in the suppression of their Schism?
Whether it be reasonable for the Civil Powers to punish Schismatics, when
their Schism in the Church threatens the State, and makes the Thrones of
Princes shake and totter?

The truth is, this Rule, To do to others as we desire they should do to us,
may be a good Rule to direct our private Conversation, but it does not extend
to public Government; and my reason for it is this: That this Rule has respect
only to every man's private happiness, and supposes an equality between them.
For that which makes this a Rule of Equity is, that equals (as all men are,
considered as men) ought to have equal usage; and therefore that natural sense
which every man has of happiness, that natural aversion to suffer wrong, and
that natural desire to receive good from others, should teach every man to deal
by others, who have the same sense of happiness, and aversion to misery, as
they desire to be dealt with themselves. But now public Government has a
greater respect to the Public, than to any man's private good; and a man's
private and particular good, must give place to the public Welfare: and
therefore what aversion soever there is in mankind to suffering, it is very fit
and just that private men, when they deserve it, should suffer for the public
Good; and it is not every man's love to himself, or what he is willing to
suffer, which is the Rule here, but a regard to the public Good. And though
all wise and good men ought to prefer the public Good before their own private
Interest, yet whatever reason there is for this, it is certain men's natural
love to themselves (to which this Rule appeals) will never make them willing to
suffer, especially when the sufferings are great and capital, upon any
considerations; and therefore to do as we would be done by, is not our Rule in
such cases, for then no fault must ever be punished.

Nor is there an equality between Governors and Subjects either in Church or
State: Civil Magistrates are invested with the Authority of God, who is the
supreme Governor of the World; and the Governors of the Church with the
Authority of Christ, who is the supreme Head of the Church: and therefore they
are not to consider the private passions and affections of men, that because
they themselves are not willing to suffer when they are in a fault, therefore
they must not punish others: for they act not as private men, but as public
Ministers of Justice and Discipline; and where there is an inequality, this
Rule of Equity will not hold. Governors and Subjects are equal considered as
men, but very unequal, as Governors are invested with the Authority of God,
which sets them above other men. This I take to be the true reason why the same
men pass such different judgments on the same thing, when they are Subjects and
when they are Governors, because when they are Subjects, they have a principal
regard to a private and particular good, and consult the desires, and
weaknesses, and passions of humane nature; when they are Governors, they have
a greater regard to a public good, and consider what their Character, and
Office, and Authority requires them to do. Thus we know, when some of our
Dissenters had got the Power in their hands, they were as severe in pressing
Conformity to their new Models and Platforms, as loud and fierce in their
Declamations against Toleration, as now they are against Conformity and for a
Toleration: When they had the Power in their hands, they saw plainly what the
necessities of Government required; now the Power is out of their hands, they
consider what is necessary to their own preservation; which makes them dislike
those things, when the Government is against them, which they saw a necessity
of before.

This is universally true of all sorts of People, that when they are under,
they desire that liberty and indulgence which they judge unreasonable to grant
when they are in power: And whereas some attribute this to the weakness of
humane nature, which is corrupted by Power, and grows insolent and domineering;
that Subjects see what is fitting for Governors to do, but Governors lose
that tender regard to their Subjects, when they have Power in their hands: I
take the contrary to this to be the true reason of it; that men who are in
Power, understand the reasons and necessity of Government, and have a greater
regard to a public Good, than to gratify men's private Interests and
Inclinations; but Subjects, when the Power is not on their side, are bribed by
their own interest and self-love, to censure and condemn such acts of
government as they liked very well in themselves when they were in Power. Which
is a plain demonstration that this Rule, To do as we would be done by, is only
a Rule for private Conversation, not for public Government; and that the
private Resentments of those who suffer, is no Argument against the Justice,
Prudence, or Charity of Government.

VI. His sixth Argument is from the nature and obligations of Charity; but I
have considered this at large in the second Chapter, and explained the
difference between a private Charity and the Charity of Government, and made it
appear that there is no want of Charity in the Constitution of the Church of
England.

VII. His next Argument is this: That those Arguments which with the greatest
strength of reason are offered to induce Dissenters to conform to the
Constitutions of the Church of England, Prot. Recon. p. 197.
do with equal force and clearness conclude against the imposition of those
Rites, as the condition of Communion. If this prove true, I am sure such
Arguments are good for nothing on neither side; but let us hear what they are.

1. It is well argued by Conformists, that the Rules and Canons of the
Church Governors imposed for Decency and Order, are to be obeyed by
inferiors, till it be made as clear that they are not bound to obey in the
instances enjoined, as it is evident in general that Inferiors ought to obey
Superiors: for if the exemption from obedience be not as evident as the
command to obey, it must be sin not to obey. Now our Reconciler mistakes the
nature and use of this Argument, which is not directly to press any man to
Conformity, but only to conquer men's unreasonable scruples about Conformity;
that in case they have any doubts and jealousies, whether it be lawful to obey
in such instances, yet if they are not as certain that the thing commanded is
unlawful to be done, as they are that it is unlawful to disobey the lawful
commands of their Superiors, they ought to choose the safer side, that is, to
obey their Superiors, which they are sure is their duty, when they are not
equally sure that to obey them in such instances is a sin. This our Reconciler
says, is a good Argument, and therefore I shall not dispute that point now: But
let us hear how he turns this Argument upon the Church.

That the Precepts of Christ and his Apostles, not to offend his little ones,
not to condemn and scandalize our weak Brother, etc. must be obeyed by
Superiors, till it be made as clear, that by imposing of such things which
grieve and scandalize their Brethren, etc. they do not offend against the
forementioned Precepts, as it is evident in the general, that they ought not to
offend against them. Very good! But to whom must this be made as clear? to the
Dissenters, or to the Governors of the Church? If the Governors of the Church
are only concerned to satisfy themselves in this, all is safe: for I suppose
they have no scruple about it, and therefore may impose these things with a
safe Conscience: and yet this Rule concerns only the private satisfaction of
every man's Conscience, whether he be a Governor or a Subject, in the
lawfulness of what he either commands or obeys.

2. It is strongly urged against Dissenters, that nothing can be unlawful,
which is not by God forbidden; and therefore that Dissenters cannot satisfy
their Consciences in their refusal to obey the commands of their Superiors,
unless they can show some plain Precept which renders that unlawful to be done
by them which is commanded by Superiors. But our Reconciler misrepresents this
Argument, which is this: Nothing is unlawful which is not forbidden by God; the
Ceremonies of the Church are not forbidden by God, therefore they are not
unlawful: for as for the satisfaction of a Dissenters Conscience, that is so
wild and uncertain a thing, that whatever the premises be, you can never
conclude whether they will be satisfied or not: for they can be satisfied when
they please, with, or without, or against a divine Law; and nothing shall
satisfy them when they are not pleased to be satisfied. But let us hear how
this recoils upon Imposers.

Nothing can be unlawful to be forborne or laid aside, P. 198.
for avoiding the scandal and offense of our weak Brother, etc. which is not
plainly by God forbidden to be done for those good ends. Wherefore, unless that
our Imposers can show some plain Precept which renders it unlawful to leave
these Ceremonies indifferent, or alter some few places in the Liturgy which
give this scandal and offense to their weak Brethren -- they cannot satisfy
their Consciences in their refusal to forbear the imposition of those things.
But how does our Reconciler know this? Suppose Governors can satisfy their
Consciences without such an express prohibition, what then? Is it a sin not to
grant that indulgence which they are not forbid to grant by an express positive
Law? For suppose that nothing is unlawful to be forborne which is not plainly by
God forbidden to be done, how does this prove that it is unlawful not to
forbear that which God has not plainly forbidden to be done? The Imposers
cannot show any plain Precept which renders it unlawful to leave these
Ceremonies indifferent, therefore it is unlawful not to leave these Ceremonies
indifferent; that is, it is unlawful not to do that which we are not forbidden
not to do; which cannot be true, unless whatever God does not forbid, he
commands; which would make ill for our Reconciler and all his dissenting
Clients: for then we could easily prove that God has commanded them to observe
all the Ceremonies of the Church of England, because he has not forbid them to
observe them.

And indeed now I think on it, I suppose he takes this to be the meaning of that
Argument which is urged against the Dissenters, that they are bound to do what
they are not bound not to do, that what is not forbidden by God, and therefore
not unlawful to be done, they are bound to do; and then I confess the same
Argument would hold against the Imposers, as well as against the Dissenters:
but it is a very foolish Argument against either. The true Argument against the
Dissenters, is this: That they are bound to obey their Superiors in those
things which God has not forbidden: for where God has not interposed his
Authority, they are subject to the Authority of their Governors. The Argument
is not, That they are in all cases bound to do what God has not forbid them to
do; which is ridiculously absurd: for what is not unlawful, not forbidden by
God, may either be done or may be let alone, without sin, unless some other
consideration, besides its being not forbidden, alter the case: But the
Argument is this, That what God has not forbidden, Governors may command, and
Subjects are bound in Conscience to obey.

Let us see then how he applies this to our Imposers, as he modestly calls our
Governors in Church and State. It is not unlawful, as not forbidden by God, to
leave these Ceremonies indiff^rent; so far indeed it agrees with the case of
the Dissenters, that the Ceremonies are not unlawful, as not being forbidden by
God: but now where is the superior Authority over Governors to make it
unlawful for them to impose that which it is not unlawful not to impose, then
the case of Imposers would be exactly parallel with the Dissenters, who are
under the Authority of their Governors; which makes that their duty which God
had left indifferent, and that unlawful which God had by no express prohibition
made unlawful: but here the Parallel fails, and therefore the Argument is not
the same. For the supreme Authority of Church and State, can have no superior
Authority on Earth to make that unlawful to them which God has not made
unlawful. All that our Reconciler offers to this purpose, is only this: That
the avoiding scandal and offense, and the preservation of Charity, Peace, and
Unity in the Church, lays as necessary an obligation on Governors to forbear
what they may lawfully forbear, for the promoting these ends, as the Authority
of Governors obliges Subjects to obey them in all things wherein they lawfully
may; that is, that Governors are bound not to command any thing which they may
lawfully not command, when hereby they serve the ends of Charity and Peace. Now
if this were the case, yet so the Argument would not be the same; for then we
must state the case of Governors thus: That they must not do that which is
unlawful to be done, not that they must not do that which is not unlawful not
to be done. The Authority of Governors does not alter the intrinsic nature of
things, and therefore we may very properly say, that Subjects must obey their
Governors in all things which are not unlawful; and that the things commanded
are not in their own natures unlawful, is a good Argument to oblige them to
obey: but the end and circumstances of action alters its moral nature, and that
which in some circumstances is not unlawful, in other circumstances becomes
absolutely unlawful. And if this be the case here, that the imposition of these
Ceremonies is unlawful, when it gives scandal and offense, and disturbs the
Peace and Unity of the Church; then the Argument to dissuade Governors from
such Impositions is not, that it is not unlawful to forbear imposing, (which is
parallel to the Argument used against Dissenters, that it is not unlawful to
obey) but that it is unlawful to impose in such circumstances; which differ as
much as to persuade men not to do what they lawfully may not do, differs from
dissuading them from doing what is not lawful to be done. This I think is
abundantly enough to show that our Reconciler is very much out in his Logic,
when he makes this Argument against Dissenters and Imposers to be the same: as
for the Argument it self, that it is unlawful for Governors to impose these
Ceremonies, when it gives offense and scandal to weak Brethren, etc. I have
sufficiently answered that already.

3. His next Argument, which he says equally holds against the Dissenters and
Imposers, is taken from the littleness and small importance of the things upon
which we are divided; and it is in short this: That Dissenters ought not to
disturb the Peace of the Church, by refusing obedience in such little things;
nor the Governors of the Church, by imposing, such little things. Now I need
not concern my self about this Argument, which is not likely to have any effect
either upon Dissenters or Imposers; who, if they understand themselves, and act
honestly, it is plain, do not think these things so little and inconsiderable,
that they are not worth contending about. That the decent Ceremonies of
Religion are not such very contemptible things, I have already proved at large
in the first Chapter; that they are not so little that Governors ought not to
impose them, I have proved at the beginning of this Chapter, and that
sufficiently proves that this is no Argument against Governors; and if, as our
Reconciler says, it be an unanswerable Argument against Dissenters, I am
contented to leave it so.

However, our Reconciler is mightily out, when he thinks the littleness of a
thing to be as good an Argument against the imposition of Governors, as
against the disobedience of Dissenters: for Governors are bound to take care
of little as well as of great things, because things which are little in
themselves, may have very great effects, either good or bad; but there is no
excuse for the disobedience of Subjects in such cases: for the less the command
is, the less reason have they to refuse obedience. I believe all Parents and
Governors in the world think so, excepting our Reconcilers.

In the next place, our Reconciler argues from many general Topics received
and owned by all Casuists: Prot. Reconc. p. 200.
As,

1. Qui non vetat peccare, cum possit, jubet. Which he translates thus: He that
being a Superior, a Father, a Master of a Family, etc. does not what lawfully
he may for the prevention of the sin of those who are subject to his
government, becomes partakers of their sin. Now suppose all this, what care can
be taken to prevent sin, which it becomes Governors to take, which is
neglected by the Church of England? Yes, says the Reconciler, they may abate
those Impositions which occasion the Schism. But this has been so often
answered already, that I shall now only direct my Readers in the Margin where
to find the Answer. See chap. 2. p. 131, etc.


2. He says, Divines, concerning the right interpretation of the Ten
Commandments, and of the Laws of Christ, do generally lay down these Rules,
viz. That when any thing is forbidden by these Laws, all those things are
forbidden also which follow from that forbidden action, and for whose sake it
was forbidden. Now I think this is a very good Rule; and if he can prove that
the imposition of these Ceremonies is a forbidden action, I will grant that the
Schism which is consequent upon it, is imputable to the Church; but if it be
not forbidden, if the Church has this Authority, and ought to take care of the
decent circumstances of Worship, then the Schism can be charged only upon the
disobeying Schismatic. But this I have largely discoursed in the place before
cited.

And now I come to those shrewd Questions which our Reconciler says he has met
with in the Books of the Dissenters, Recon. p. ^02.
to which he finds no answer in the Replys of any of their Adversaries, and
which he entreats the Champions for the Church of England, as they respect the
credit of our Church Governors, the reputation of the Church, and of her
Discipline, not to pass by without the least notice taken of them, as hitherto
they have done. Now though I do not pretend to the honor and character of a
Champion, yet I have such a hearty love and reverence for my dear Mother the
Church of England, that I cannot deny so easy a Request as this; the most
troublesome task being to transcribe all these Questions.

Quest. 1. The first Question is, Whether they do well that unnecessarily bring
Subjects into such a straight by needless Laws for additions in Religion, that
the Consciences of men fearing God, must unavoidably be perplexed between a
fear of treason and disobedience against Christ, and disobedience to their
Prince and Pastors?

Ans. I answer, Such men do certainly very ill in it; but then this is not the
case of the Church of England, for she has made no needless Laws: for Laws to
direct and determine the external circumstances of Worship, according to the
Rules of Order and Decency, are not needless, but necessary, as I have already
proved. Our Reconciler grants, that the Church has this Authority; and if the
exercise of it be needless, the Authority is so too; and then Christ has given
his Church a needless Authority: for I suppose he will not own, that the Church
has any Authority but what she has from Christ.

Nor does the Church make any additions in Religion: for the decent
circumstances of Worship are no additions to external Worship, but as necessary
to it as Decency is; unless our Reconciler thinks that it is an addition to the
Law of God, which commands us to reverence our Prince, and Parents, and
Superiors, to command Children, Servants, or Subjects, to stand bare before
them.

Nor need the Consciences of men fearing God be unavoidably perplexed between a
fear of treason and disobedience against Christ, and of disobedience to their
Prince and Pastors: for a great many men, who fear God, are not thus perplexed,
and therefore it is not unavoidable. I will instance only in the Reconciler
himself, if he will give me leave to reckon him among those men who either fear
God, or reverence their Prince and Pastors. And there is another good reason
why this is not unavoidable, because there is no competition in this case
between obedience to Christ, and obedience to our Prince and Pastors; and
therefore no man need to be perplexed about it: and if there were a plain
competition, there were no need of being thus perplexed neither, because all
men, who fear God, do or ought to understand, that where Christ commands one
thing, and our Prince another, inconsistent with the command of Christ, we must
obey God rather than men.

Quest. 2. Whether Rulers may command any (indifferent and unnecessary) thing
which will notably do more harm than good, or make an unnecessary necessary
thing a means or occasion of excluding the necessary Worship of God, or
preaching of the Gospel?

Ans. If by indifferent and unnecessary things, he means things wholly useless,
and by their notably doing more harm than good, that they are in their own
nature hurtful as well as useless, it is certain Governors ought not to
command such things; but what is this to the Church of England? The Ceremonies
of our Church, though upon some accounts they may be called indifferent, yet
are very useful as contributing to the Decency of Worship, which is as
necessary as public Worship is; and are not apt to do any hurt at all, and
therefore are the proper Object of Ecclesiastical Authority. And with what face
can our Reconciler pretend that they exclude the necessary Worship of God, or
preaching of the Gospel, when God is still worshipped, and the Gospel preached
in all the Parish-churches of England? unless he thinks that God is not
worshipped, nor the Gospel preached any where but at a Conventicle.

Quest. 3. Whether is it more to common good and the interest of Honesty and
Conscience, that all the Parsons in a Nation be imprisoned, banished, or
silenced, that dare not swear, say, and practice all that is imposed on them,
than that unnecessary impositions be altered or forborne?

Now I think I may have the liberty to ask our Reconciler a Question now and
then. I ask therefore, Whether is most for the common good, that there should
be any settled Order and Government in the Church, or that there should be none?
Whether it is possible to maintain any Order or Government, without rejecting
and censuring those who will not conform to it? Whether is most for the public
good, to maintain and encourage a loyal and conformable Clergy (when there is
no scarcity of such men) or to nourish Shism and Schismatics, to say no worse?

Quest. 4. Had Images been lawfully used in places or exercise of Gods Worship,
yet whether was it not inhumane and unchristian in those Bishops and Councils,
who anathematized all that were of a contrary mind, and ejected and silenced
the Dissenters?

Ans. The bare lawfulness of any thing does not make it a fit matter for a Law;
but whatever is both lawful and useful, if it be enjoined by a just Authority,
ought to be obeyed by the Members of that Church where it is enjoined, and
Dissenters ought to be censured according to the nature of the offense: for
without this, there can be no government in the Church. But why he particularly
instances in Images, I cannot tell, unless it be to insinuate that the
Ceremonies of our Church are of the same nature with them; but our Church,
which retains Ceremonies, removed Images, as just matters of scandal and
offense.

Quest. 5. Whether Christ who made the Baptismal Covenant the test and standing
terms of entrance, did set up Pastors over his Church to make new and stricter
terms and Laws, or to preserve Concord on the terms that he had founded it, and
to see that men lived in Unity and Piety according to those terms; and when
they, as Christ's Ministers, have received men on Christ's terms, whether they
may excommunicate and turn them out of the Church again for want of more, or
only for violating these?

Vide Supra. p. 104.
Ans. The Baptismal Covenant is sufficient for our admission into the Church,
but Church Communion requires our submission to Church Authority, as I have
already shown: and to say, that nothing more is required of us in a Society
than what is necessary to our admission into it, is contrary to the nature of
all Societies in the World, wherein the terms of admission are very different
from the Rules of Government. That a man has served an Apprentiship to a Trade,
and is made free by his Master, is sufficient to make him a Member of such a
Corporation; but though he understand his Trade very well, and behaves himself
honestly in it, yet if he prove a disobedient and refractory Member to the
government of the Society, he may be cast out again: and I wonder what the
Master and Wardens of such a Company would say to the Reconciler, should he
come and plead in the behalf of such a disobedient Member, that they ought not
to make any thing necessary to his continuance in and communion with the
Society, but what was necessary to his first admission. The Charter whereon the
Society is founded, is very different from the particular Laws of the Society,
whereby it is governed, as it must be, where there is any power of making Laws
committed to the Governors of it: and therefore if Christ has committed such a
power of making Laws to his Church, as our Reconciler himself acknowledges, it
is a ridiculous thing to say, that they must not excommunicate, or cast any man
out of the Church, who believes the Christian Religion, and lives a virtuous
life, which is the sum of the Baptismal Covenant, how disobedient soever he be
to the Laws and Government of the Church. Which is a sufficient Answer to

Quest. 6. His sixth Query, Whether anathematizing men for doubtful actions, or
for such faults as consist with true Christianity, and continued subjection to
Jesus Christ, be not a sinful Church-dividing means? Only I shall observe
farther, that as he has stated this Query, it does not concern the Church of
England. She anathematizes no man for doubtful actions, for she commands
nothing that is doubtful, though some men are pleased to pretend some doubts
and scruples about it. But I have already shown, that there is a great
difference between a doubtful action, Chap. 2. p. 144, etc.
and an action which some men doubt of; the first ought not to be commanded,
the second may. And then our Church excommunicates no man, who lives in a
continued subjection to Jesus Christ; which no Schismatic does, whatever
pretenses he makes to holiness of life: for subjection to Christ requires
subjection to that Authority which Christ has set in his Church, as well as
obedience to his other Laws.

Quest. 7. As for his next Question, about imposing heavy burdens, Supra. p.
105, etc.
and intolerable yokes, when Christ came to take them away, it has been at
large answered already.

Quest. 8. Whether Christ has not made Laws sufficient to be the Bond of Unity
to his Church, and whether any man should be cut off from it, who breaks no
Law of God necessary to Church-unity and communion?

Ans. Christ has made Laws sufficient to be the Bond of Unity to his Church:
for he has commanded all Christians to submit to the Authority which he has
placed in his Church, which is the only Bond of Union in a particular Church;
and therefore those who are cut off from the Church for their disobedience to
Ecclesiastical Authority, while nothing is enjoined which contradicts the other
Laws of our Savior, cannot be said to break no Law of God necessary to
Church-unity or communion: for they break that Law which is the very Bond of
Union, and deserve to be cut off, though they should be supposed to break no
other Law of Christ.

Quest. 9. Whether if many of the children of the Church were injudiciously
scrupulous, when fear of sin and Hell was the cause, a tender Pastor would not
abate them a Ceremony in such a case, when his abating it has no such danger?

Ans. A tender Pastor in such cases ought to instruct such children, but not to
suffer such childish fancies to impose upon Church Authority. For to disturb
the Peace and Order of the Church, and to countenance men's injudicious scruples
by such indulgence, is a much greater mischief, and more unpardonable in a
Governor, than the severest censures on private persons. If a private
connivance for a time in some hard cases would do any good, it might be thought
reasonable and charitable; but to alter public Laws and Constitutions for the
sake of such injudicious people, is for ever to sacrifice the Peace and Order
and good Government of the Church, to the humors of children; which would not
be thought either prudent or charitable in any other Government.

Quest. 10. If diversity in Religion be such an evil, whether should men cause
it by their unnecessary Laws and Canons, and making Engines to tear the Church
in pieces, which by the ancient simplicity and commanded mutual forbearance,
would live in such a measure of Love and Peace as may be here expected?

Ans. Whoever cause a diversity of Religions by their Laws and Canons, or make
Engines to tear the Church in pieces, are certainly very great Schismatics;
but Laws for Unity and Uniformity can never make a diversity of Religions, nor
occasion it neither, unless every thing produces its contrary; heat produce
cold, peace war, and love hatred. Men may quarrel indeed about Laws of Unity
and Uniformity, but it is the diversity of Religions or Opinions, which men
have already espoused, not the Laws of Unity, which makes the quarrel. The
plain case then is this: Whether when men are divided in their opinions and
judgments of things, and if they be left to themselves, will worship God in
different ways, according to their own humors and persuasions, it be unlawful
for Church Governors to make Laws for Unity and Uniformity, because whatever
they be, some men will quarrel at them? Or whether the Church may justly be
charged with making a diversity of Religions, by making Laws to cure and
restrain that diversity of Religions which men have already made to themselves?
It is certain, were men all of a mind, the Laws of Unity could not make a
difference; and therefore these Laws and Canons are not the Engines which tear
the Church in pieces, but that diversity of opinions which men have wantonly
taken up, and for the sake of which they tear and divide the Church into a
thousand Conventicles.

But had it not been for these Canons, by the ancient simplicity and mutual
forbearance, they would live in such a measure of love and peace, as may be
here expected. But what ancient simplicity does he mean? The Church of England
is the best Pattern this day in the World of the Primitive and Apostolic
simplicity: for a Phanatick simplicity was never known till of late days; there
never was a Church from the Apostles days without all Rites and Ceremonies of
Worship, till of late, when men pretended to reform Religion by destroying all
external Order and Decency of Worship: and therefore he is fain to take in a
commanded mutual forbearance to patch up Church-unity; that is, if men be
permitted to worship God as they please, and are commanded not to quarrel with
one another, and are not permitted to cut one another throats, this is such a
measure of Love and Peace as may be here expected, that is, among Schismatics
and Dissenters. But this is not such a Love and Peace as makes the Church one,
for that consists in one Communion; which can never be had, where men differ in
the Rites and Modes of Worship, and every man is permitted to worship God as he
pleases.

Quest. 11. If a Patient would not take a Medicine from one man's hand, whether
would not a good Physician consent that another should give it him; whether
would the merciful Father let the Infant famish that would take food from none
but his Mother? And if the People culpably will hear no others but Dissenters,
is it better to let them hear none at all, than that they should preach to them?

Ans. Now I would ask our Reconciler one Question, Why all this will not hold
as well in Civil as Ecclesiastical Government? If the People culpably will be
governed not by a King and Parliament, but by some select and trusty Members of
a House of Commons, or by another Oliver, is it better these poor People should
be without any Government, than that they should be governed by Rebels, or a
new modelled Commonwealth? Now here is an excellent Argument to persuade the
King, out of great charity to his People, to resign up the Government, and let
them choose their own Governors; though I am afraid then, they would be
cantoned into as many little Independent Kingdoms, as there are now Independent
Pastors. But let us consider his comparisons.

He says, If a Patient would not receive a Medicine from one man's hands,
whether would not a good Physician consent that another man should give it him?
Yes, why not, so long as the Physician prescribed the Physic? But would such a
Physician suffer such a humorsome Patient (could he hinder it) to go to a Quack
or a Mountebank? or to take Physic very hurtful and pernicious to him? I
believe the College of Physicians are of another mind, who have been as
industrious to suppress such Quacks, as the Church has been to silence
Dissenters.

But whether would the merciful Father let the Infant famish that would take
food from none but his Mother? But suppose he is as fond of a Strumpet as he is
of his Mother, what would the Father do in that case? It is a pretty
in^inuation this, that dissenting Preachers are the true Mother, and therefore
it is very pardonable in the People to long after them.

But is not our Reconciler a great Politician, who thinks it reasonable that
public Government should humor Subjects, as a Physician does a sick Patient,
or an indulgent Father a froward child? that the Hospital or the Nursery should
be the best Platform of Government in Church or State? But now our Reconciler
speaks out, and in downright terms pleads for the toleration of dissenting
Preachers, that the People may have somebody to hear, and it is better to let
them hear them, than that they should hear none at all. But there is no
necessity of either that I know of: for thanks be to God, there are other
excellent Preachers to hear, though the Dissenters were never to preach more;
and there is no danger that those People who have such itching ears, should
ever grow so sullen as to hear none at all: when they cannot hear whom they
would, they will hear whom they can; and by hearing wise and honest
instructions, may in time grow wise themselves; which I suspect some men are
afraid of, whatever our Reconciler be.

These Queries our Author has borrowed from Mr. Baxter, and made them his own
by his approbation of them; and now he tells us, That Mr. Barret has offered
many Questions of the like nature, Recon. p. 20^.
which he being slow of understanding (which I believe the Reader by this time
will take his word for) cannot answer to his own satisfaction; and therefore in
a great fright cries out passionately for help, Men of Israel help. And I will
endeavor to help him out here too.

Q. 1. Might not Conformists with a good Conscience have forborne those needless
Impositions which they very well knew would be so needless and burdensome to
many? Was ever Schism made so light a matter of, and the Peace and Unity of
Christians valued at so low a rate, that for the prevention of the one, and the
preservation of the other, the imposing of things indifferent, and not
necessary in their own judgment, but things doubtful and unlawful in the
judgment of others, might not be forborne?

Chap. 1. p. 24, etc.
Ans. This I have sufficiently answered already in the vindication of the
Savoy-Commissioners, and therefore shall only add here, that it does become
the Governors of the Church to secure the external Order and Decency of
Worship, and the good government of the Church, though they know a great many
men will be offended at it, and turn Schismatics; and when men quarrel with
those Ceremonies which have been anciently received and practiced in the
Church, upon such Schismatical Principles as equally overthrow all decent and
orderly Constitutions, there ought to be no regard had to them, nor any
alteration made upon their account. When these Ceremonies were appointed to be
retained in Religious Worship, as they were purged from all superstitious uses
in the reformation of King Edward the sixth, they were scrupled by no body, nor
could the Governors of the Church foresee that they would be scrupled: and as
for the happy resettlement of the Church under our present gracious Sovereign,
whom God long preserve, to which I suppose Mr. Barret and our Reconciler refer,
it was very unreasonable to justify the late horrid Schism and Rebellion, by
yielding to the unjust clamours of those men who had by a pretense of
Conscience once already overturned both Church and State; such Consciences
ought to be governed and chastised, not indulged.

Q. 2. Whether they pray as they ought, Thy Kingdom come, or whether indeed
they act not against their own Prayers, who endeavor to hinder the preaching
of the Gospel (by making these unnecessary things the conditions of so doing.)
Let us bring the case before our supreme and final Judge, and bethink your self
whether of these two things he will most likely have regard unto; the saving of
Souls which he bought with his blood, or the preserving inviolate certain
humane Institutions and Rules confessed by the devisers of them not to be
necessary?

Ans. As for their being confessed not to be necessary, that has been often
enough answered already; and as for his Appeals to the final Judgment, we are
very well contented with that, as being satisfied that no popular Cant will
pass current there. That the imposition of these Ceremonies does not hinder the
preaching the Gospel, is evident to sense: for the Gospel is still preached,
and I hope to better purpose than in the late days of Rebellion. And as for the
Kingdom of God in this World, it signifies the Christian Church; and to pray
for the coming of his Kingdom, is to pray for the enlargement of his Church,
which was never enlarged yet by the preaching of Schismatics, which divides
and lessens the Church, but will never enlarge it: and therefore those who pray
heartily Thy Kingdom come, must take care to suppress all Schisms and
Schismatical Preachers, who are the great Obstacle to the enlargement of
Christ's Kingdom.

Q. 3. Can you or any mortal man prove that others may not be allowed to differ
from you in such things, wherein you differ from the Apostolic Primitive
Church?

Ans. I dare put the final decision of this Controversy upon this issue,
whether the Church of England or Dissenters come nearest to the Pattern of the
Apostolic Primitive Church.

But though it should be granted that we do not use all those Ceremonies which
were in use in the Apostles times, and that we use some which were not then
used, yet this will not justify Dissenters: for the Church in all Ages has
authority to appoint her own Rites and Ceremonies of Worship, while they comply
with that general Rule of Decency and Order; but private Christians have no
authority to dissent from the Church, while she enjoins nothing which is
contrary to the divine Laws.

Q. 4. What if the old Liturgy, and that new one compiled and presented to the
Bishops at the Savoy, 1661. had both passed and been allowed for Ministers to
use, as they judged most convenient; might not several Ministers and
Congregations in this case have used several Modes of Worship, without breach
of the Churches Peace, or counting each other Schismatics? What if our King
and Parliament should make a Law, enjoining Conformists and Nonconformists,
that agree in the same Faith and Worship for substance, to attend peaceably
upon their Ministry, and serve God and his Church the best they can, whether
they use the Ceremonies and (scrupled expressions of the) Liturgy or no,
without uncharitable reflections, or bitter censures upon one another in word
or writing, where would be the sinfulness of such a Law?

Ans. This is much like Mr. Humphrey's Project of uniting all Dissenters into
one National Church by an Act of Parliament under the King, as the accidental
Head of the Church; which is largely and particularly answered in the
Vindication of the Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet's Unreasonableness of
Separation. The only fault in short, is this: That it destroys the Unity of
the Church, by dividing Christians into distinct and separate Communions, and
lays a foundation of eternal Schisms and Emulations, which no Laws can prevent.
As for Mr. Baxter's Liturgy, I confess, I do not see why men may not as well be
allowed to pray ex tempore, as to use a form of Prayer which was written ex
tempore. It argued very little modesty in those men to present such crude and
indigested stuff to the Commissioners, and it argues as little understanding
and honesty in our Reconciler to plead for it.

Q. 5. Dissenters ought, for the Peace and Unity of the Church, to yield as far
as they can without sinning against God and their own Souls, and should not
Imposers do the like? Were this one Rule agreed on, what Peace and Unity would
soon follow? And if the obligation to preserve the Churches Peace, extend so
far as to the Rulers and Governors of the Church, there may be as much Schism
in their setting up unnecessary Rules, which others cannot submit to, as in
men's varying from such Rules.

Ans. I wonder what these men mean by the Dissenters yielding? as if they stood
upon equal terms with the Church, and that the Church and Dissenters, like two
Equals to compose a difference and quarrel, should yield and condescend to each
other. The Dissenters ought not to yield to, but to obey the Church; the Church
ought not to yield to Dissenters, but to govern prudently and charitably. The
Church has done her part, as I have already proved, See chap. 2.
and the only quarrel is, that Dissenters will not do theirs. But what an
admirable Rule is this to make Peace, when they do not, they cannot tell us how
far the Dissenters will yield, and what the Church must yield, to make Peace:
but for ought I perceive, this is a great secret, and like to continue so. I
suppose the Dissenters, after all, think they can yield nothing, and the Church
sees no reason to alter any thing; and here is an end of this Project. Indeed
it appears, that the design is to persuade the Church to yield every thing,
all her unnecessary Rules which others cannot (otherwise called will not)
submit to; that is, at least all the decent Ceremonies of Worship, if not her
own Authority too. And the only Argument he uses to prove that the Church
ought to yield, is because Dissenters ought to yield; that is, it is the duty
of Governors to submit to their Subjects, because it is the duty of Subjects
to submit to their Governors.

I do not much care to be an Undertaker, and yet I will venture for once to
propose this Expedient for Peace: Let the Dissenter, as in duty bound, yield as
far as he can without sinning against God and his own Soul, and the Church
shall yield every thing else that is necessary to this desired Union. This is
but a reasonable Proposition, not only because Subjects ought first to yield,
but because the Church knows not what is necessary to be yielded, till she sees
how far the Dissenter can yield.

Indeed would the Dissenter yield as far as he can, without sinning against God
and his own Soul, there would be no need for the Churches yielding any thing:
for the Church enjoins nothing which is a sin against God, or injurious to the
Souls of men: and there is great reason to believe that the Dissenters
themselves do not think she does. Both dissenting Preachers and Hearers, when
it serves a secular interest, can hear the Common Prayer, receive the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper kneeling, though the Minister officiate in a Surplice; and
I am so charitable as to hope that when they do so, they do not believe that
they sin in it, and therefore all this they can yield without sinning against
God or their own Souls: and therefore this they ought to yield, and then there
will be little left for the Church to yield.

His two next Questions, Whether the Worship of God cannot be performed
decently and in order, without these Ceremonies? and whether if men must be
without the Word, and without Sacraments, rather than without these Ceremonies
(which yet there is no necessity of, nor is it the intention of the Church,
that it should be so, Chap. 1. p. 79, etc. and p. 109, etc.
as you have already heard) this do not make them of equal necessity with
divine Institutions? have been already answered at large in the first Chapter.

Q. 8. Whether the constitution of the Church should not be set as much as may
be for the incompassing of all true Christians, and whether the taking of a
narrower compass be not a fundamental error in its policy, and will not always
hinder its stability and increase?

Ans. The plain meaning of which Question, is this: Whether it be not the best
way to s^cure the Church against her Popish Adversaries, to unite all
Protestants of what denomination soever into one body? and whether it be not
more probable, that a little Church which has not many Members, nor any worldly
strength and interest to support it, should be sooner destroyed than a
numerous, flourishing, and potent Church? In answer to which, we may consider,

1. It were very desirable, that the Church could be so modelled, as to receive
all Protestants and Papists also into our Communion, that the Christian Church
might have no Enemies who call themselves Christians; but this is impossible to
be done, while both of them recede so far from the Principles of Catholic
Communion.

2. The Unity and Peace of the Church within it self, how small soever it be,
is a better security to it, than Schisms and Discords in its own bowels; and
make the foundation of the Church as large as you please, if the building be
not closely united in all its parts, it will fall with its own weight. While
men are possessed with Schismatical Principles, it is not enough to make a
lasting Union to remove those particular things about which they differ at
present; for when men are given to quarrel, they will never want occasions for
it. Take away every thing which our Dissenters quarrel at, and you leave no
remains of a Church of England; and thus indeed you may enlarge the Church by
pulling it down, by plucking up all its Hedges and Fences, that it shall be no
longer an Enclosure, but a Common. A Church which makes no new Articles of
Faith, nor rejects any old one, which sets up no idolatrous and superstitious
Worship, which observes all the Institutions of our Savior, and secures the
decency of public Worship, and exercises her Authority for the government of
Religious Societies, and the acts of Discipline prudently and charitably, has
laid her foundations as wide as she can, and as she lawfully may; and those who
will not embrace her Communion upon these terms, must stay out.

3. For at best, this is nothing more than carnal Policy, to think to secure
the Church by our strength and numbers. The preservation of the Church is not
owing to an arm of flesh, but to the protection of Christ. His Flock is but a
little Flock, but all the united strength and power of the World cannot destroy
it, the gates of Hell cannot prevail against it.

4. When we speak of enlarging the Constitutions of the Church so as to
incompass all true Christians, we ought to have a principal regard to the
Communion of the Catholic Church; and those who take any other compass than
what is consistent with Catholic Communion, though they should enclose a whole
Nation of Dissenters, they would mightily straiten the foundations of the
Church.

Those who reject all external Rites of Decency and Order, as unlawful in
Christian Worship, and reform and enlarge the Church upon these Principles,
reject the Communion of all Christian Churches that ever were in the World for
1500 years, and of most Churches at this day; and if this should enlarge the
Church in England, the Catholic Church would gain little by it, when it
unchurches most other Churches in the World.

The Church of England is modelled by such Principles, that she can hold
Communion with all sound and Catholic Churches that are now, or ever were in
the World, and all Catholic Churches may have Communion with her; which is as
large a compass as she ought to take: for that Church is a little too large,
which takes in Schismatics to her Communion; and too narrow, which excludes
any true Catholic Churches.

Thus I have answered those Questions which our Reconciler borrowed from Mr.
Baxter and Mr. Barret; and to these he has added some of his own, which I must
consider also.

Q. 9. Whether Baptism being requisite for the new birth of Infants, Recon. p.
207.
and their regeneration by the Holy Spirit -- it be not hardship to lay such an
unnecessary Condition on the Parents, who have power to offer or withold the
Child from Baptism, which shall cause them to deprive their Infants of so great
a benefit; may not such Children complain in the language of St. Cyprian, Nos
parvuli quid fecimus?

Ans. Now though this may be easily answered by observing, that in danger of
death Children are allowed to be baptized privately without the sign of the
Cross, and therefore no Child in ordinary cases can die without Baptism, but by
the great neglect and carelessness of Parents, how scrupulous soever they are of
the sign of the Cross; yet since it is so much in fashion to ask Questions, I
know not why I may not ask a few Questions too, which I would desire our
Reconciler to resolve; and they shall be but very short ones.

As, 1. How do Children come to have any right to Baptism? is it an original
right of their own, or in the right of their Parents? 2. If Children have a
right to Baptism only in the right of their Parents, how do the Children of
Schismatics, who though they are baptized themselves, yet have renounced the
Communion of the Church, come to have any right to be received into the
Communion of the Church by Baptism? 3. How is the Church obliged to receive
those children into Communion by Baptism, whom she certainly knows, if their
Parents live, will be nursed up in a Schism? 4. How is the Church more concerned
to alter her Constitutions for the children of Schismatics, than for their
Schismatical Parents? When he has answered these Questions, I will answer his;
in the mean time I will proceed.

Q. 10. If men conceive themselves obliged to do all they can for the securing
and restoring of the civil Peace, when it is once disturbed, and would not
stick to lay aside a civil, if unnecessary Ceremony for the prevention of civil
Broils, and the effusion of Christian blood, how frivolous soever were the
exceptions of the seditious against it; must they not be as much obliged to do
the like for the prevention of Ecclesiastical Confusions, and the effusion of
the blood of precious and immortal Souls?

Ans. No doubt but they are. But as a wise Prince ought not to part with that
Power and Authority which is necessary to preserve Peace, and to prevent civil
Wars and Confusions for the future, only that he may allay and prevent some
present Heats and Commotions; no more ought the Church to heal a present
Schism, by laying a foundation for eternal Schisms. The example of our late
martyred Sovereign will teach all Princes to beware of the one, and those
infinite Schisms which followed the dissolution of the Church of England, will
convince any man how impossible it is to preserve the Peace and Unity of the
Church, without the exercise of Ecclesiastical Authority.

Q. 11. Would not our Reverend Bishops once have condescended to these terms of
Union? would they not have rejoiced to have seen the Church restored, and
themselves readmitted to the execution of their sacred Function, upon such
terms as the abatement of such trivial things?

Ans. I judge it very likely they might; as a banished Prince would be glad to
be restored to his Crown again, though he parted with some Jewels out of it.
But when the providence of God restores them to the exercise of their Function,
without any such restraints and limitation of their power, it is their duty to
use their whole power as prudently and charitably as they can. The restoring of
Episcopacy, restored the face of a Church again, which was nothing but a Schism
without it; and no doubt but all good men would be very glad of this, though
upon hard and disadvantageous terms: but surely to restore the Church to its
ancient beauty and luster, in a regular and decent administration of all holy
Offices, is more desirable than nothing but the mere being of a Church, still
deformed with the marks and ruins of an old Schism; and therefore when this
can be had, it ought to be had: and it is a ridiculous thing to imagine that
Bishops must use no other authority in the government of the Church, when they
are in a full possession of their power, than barely so much as they would have
been contented to have bargained for with Schismatics, when they were thrust
out of all power. Though whether St. Cyprian would have made any such bargain
with Schismatics as inferred a diminution of the Episcopal Authority, I much
question.

Had the Wisdom of the Nation at the happy return of his Majesty to his Throne,
thought fit to have made any trial and experiment what some condescensions and
abatements would have done, the Reverend Bishops no doubt would have acquiesced
in it, not out of any opinion they had of such methods, but to satisfy those
who do not see the events of things at a distance, by making the experiment.
But that factious and restless Spirit of Phanaticism, which began immediately
to work, convinced our Prince and Parliament how dangerous such an experiment
would be, and prevented the trial of it; and now we have such fresh and
repeated experiments how dangerous these Factions are both to Church and State,
our Reconciler would persuade our Governors out of their senses, to cherish
those men, who if they be not suppressed, will most infallibly involve this
unhappy Church and Kingdom in Blood and Confusion.

As for what our Reconciler adds concerning the Rubric about kneeling at the
Sacrament, Chap. 2. p. 140, 141.
and the Canon about bowing of the body in token of our reverence of God, when
we come into the place of public Worship, have been sufficiently answered
already.

CHAP. VIII. Containing some brief Animadversions on the Authorities produced
by our Reconciler in his Preface: and the Conclusion of the whole, with an
Address to the Dissenters.
THus I have with all plainness and sincerity examined the whole reason of this
book: for as for the remaining Chapters, whatever is of any moment in them, I
have answered before in the first and second Chapters of this Vindication:
whether the Answer I have given be satisfactory or not, I must leave to others
to judge; but I can honestly say, I have used no tricks and evasions, nor have
I used any Argument but what is satisfactory to my self.

All that remains now, is a brief examination of those Authorities our
Reconciler has produced in his Preface, to prove that our own Kings, and many
famous Doctors of our own Church, besides many foreign Divines, have pleaded
for that condescension for which he pleads in this Book. Now I thought it the
best way in the first place to examine his Reasons for this condescension: for
if there be no reason to do this, it is no great matter who pleads for it
without reason; and yet I should be very unwilling to leave such a reproach
upon so many great men, that they declare their opinions and judgment for a
Cause which has no reason to support it. And therefore to give a fair account
of this also, I reviewed his Preface, and found there were two ways of
answering it, either by examining his particular Testimonies, (we having no
reason to believe any thing upon his credit) or by taking the Testimonies for
granted, and showing that this does not prove that they were of his mind. The
first of these I had no great stomach to, as being a tedious and troublesome
work, which would swell this Vindication to a great bulk; which is grown too
big already; and the only end it could serve, is to prove that the Protestant
Reconciler does not quote his Authors faithfully: but I have already given such
evidence of this in my Vindication of Bishop Tailor, as will spoil his credit
with all wary men. And therefore I resolved upon the other way of answering
him, to show that the Testimonies produced by him, as he produces them, do not
prove what he intended them for. But I called to mind that I had a Book written
upon this very subject, entitled Remarks upon the Preface to the Protestant
Reconciler, in a Letter to a Friend, which I read over, and to my great comfort
found my work done to my hand: for that Author has with great judgment said
whatever I can think proper to be said in this Cause; and therefore I shall
only give some little hints of what I intended more largely to discourse, and
refer my Readers to those Remarks for further satisfaction.

The intention of this Preface our Reconciler tells us, p. 3. was to strengthen
the design of his Book, by the concurrent suffrages of many worthy Persons
both of our own and other Churches, who have declared themselves to be of the
same judgment, and have pursued the same design which he has done in his Book.

Now the design of his Book, as I have shown from his own words in my
Introduction, p. 13, 14. is to prove that it is utterly unlawful for the
Governors of the Church to impose the observation of indifferent Rites and
Ceremonies in Religion, especially when these Ceremonies are scrupled, and many
professed Christians rather choose to separate from the Church than submit to
them.

Now to prove this, he first alleadges the Authority of three Kings, King
James, King Charles the first, the Royal Martyr, and best of Kings and men, as
he is pleased to style him, and our present Sovereign; and I know not where he
could have named three other Kings more averse to his Reconciling design. What
King James his Judgment was, is evident from the Conference at Hampton Court,
where he so severely determined against Dissenters, and kept his word all his
reign, without granting any liberty to these pretended scruples; which is very
strange, had he been of our Reconciler's mind, that it is unlawful to impose
these Ceremonies upon a scrupulous Conscience. How much King Charles the first
suffered for denying this liberty and indulgence, is known to all men; and it
is hard to think then that he was a Reconciler, for never any Reconciler was a
Martyr for the Church. And methinks the Act of Uniformity, and the prosecution
of Dissenters upon that and former Acts, might convince any reasonable man that
our present Sovereign is none of his Protestant Reconcilers. But if
notwithstanding all this, he can prove against plain matter of fact, and the
evidence of sense, and the experience and complaints of Dissenters, all these
to be Reconciling Kings, I am resolved I will be a Protestant Reconciler too;
and I hope I may pass for as good a Reconciler as any of these renowned Kings,
without recanting this Book. Let us hear then how he proves these great Princes
to be Reconcilers.

As for King James, he proves him to be a Reconciler, Preface, p. 4.
from Casaubon's Epistle to Cardinal Perroon. Now how faithfully Casaubon
represented the Kings Judgment, is more than our Reconciler can tell; only I
am certain, he did misrepresent him, if he made a Reconciler of him.

But there is no reason to take Sanctuary in this: for whoever considers the
occasion of those words, may put a very sober construction on them, without
giving any countenance to our Reconciler: for the Dispute did not concern the
Rules of Order and Decency in Religious Worship, but the unscriptural
Innovations of Popery, which they imposed upon all Churches as terms of
Catholic Communion. Now in this Controversy any man may safely say what
Casaubon says for the King, without being a Protestant Reconciler. For there is
no nearer way of concord, than to separate things necessary from unnecessary;
to call nothing simply necessary, but what the Word of God commands to be
believed or done, or which the ancient Church did gather from the Word of God
by necessary consequence; that other humane Constitutions, whatever antiquity
or authority is pretended for them, might be changed, mollified, antiquated,
and that this may in the general be said of most Ecclesiastical observations
introduced without the Word of God. Now this does not refer to the decent
Circumstances and Ceremonies of Religion, but to such Ecclesiastical
observations as are in dispute between us and the Church of Rome; as the
Celibacy of the Clergy, Prayers for the Dead, Pilgrimages, Monastic Vows, the
Worship of Saints, and Angels, and Images, and the like; for which the Church
of Rome pretends the Authority of ancient Councils, or the ancient practice and
usage of the Church. Now in these cases I am perfectly of the Kings mind, and
yet do not take my self to be a Protestant Reconciler in our Authors way.

Our Royal Martyr, when he saw what danger Church and State and his own Royal
Person was in from the outrageous zeal of dissenting Protestants, who did not
now humbly beg for Indulgence and Toleration, but contended for Rule and
Empire, was willing, if it were possible, to allay these Heats, and divert the
Storm, by yi^lding somewhat to their boisterous and threatening importunities;
and if he had yielded a great deal more at that time than he did, I think it
had been no argument of his own settled judgment of things. The Reconciler might
hence prove, that the King thought it much better to yield a little at that
time, than to ruin Church and State by too much stiffness, not that he thought
it unlawful to impose any thing on his Subjects in matters of Religion which
they were pleased to scruple.

And yet what is it that the King yielded under these necessities? For that,
our Reconciler produces these words: As for differences among our selves for
matters indifferent in their own nature concerning Religion, we shall in
tenderness to any number of our loving Subjects, very willingly comply with the
advice of our Parliament, that some Law may be made for the exemption of tender
Consciences from punishment, or prosecution for such Ceremonies, and in such
cases, which by the judgment of most men are held to be matters indifferent,
and of some to be absolutely unlawful. Does the King in these words promise to
alter the Constitutions of the Church, to abolish all Ceremonies, etc? By no
means; he only says, that he will comply with the advice of his Parliament to
exempt such tender Consciences from punishment: And how can our Reconciler
hence conclude, that the King believed it unlawful to impose these Ceremonies,
because at such a critical time he was contented there should be some provision
made to secure Dissenters from the execution of the penal Laws? And yet that
ill usage which so excellent a Prince met with from these dissenting
Protestants after such a condescension as this, gives no great encouragement to
Princes to try this Experiment again.

Thus he proves our present Sovereign to be of his mind, by his Declaration
from Breda, which he prints at large, I suppose, for fear People should forget
that there had been such a Declaration, or what were the contents of it. How
the present circumstances of affairs at that time might incline his Majesty to
such a condescension, is not my business to inquire; it is sufficient for us to
know, that the House of Commons presented their Reasons to the King against
that Declaration, which so far satisfied him, that he gave his assent to the
Act of Uniformity; and therefore I suppose is not of our Reconciler's mind now,
and indeed never was, notwithstanding that Declaration: for he never asserted
it unlawful to impose scrupled Ceremonies upon Dissenters, but thought it
expedient at that time to indulge their weakness. And while matters were under
debate for the re-establishment of the Church of England, no wonder that the
King and his great Ministers should make Proposals of Accommodation, and offer
their Reasons and Arguments for it; but I always thought that what is said by
any person on one side or other, while the matter is under debate, is not so
good an Argument what his judgment and opinion is, as what he agrees and
consents to, when the Reasons on both sides have been heard and scanned.

Thus our Kings are our own again, and of all men in the world have the least
reason to countenance such a design as this, which serves only to encourage a
busy and restless Party among us, who first strike at the Church, but will
never be quiet till they have usurped the Throne.

What the sense of our Church is in this matter, is evident from her Articles,
Canons, and Constitutions; and this signifies a great deal more to me than the
opinion of any private Doctors, of what note and eminency soever. It is
unreasonable to oppose the authority of any particular Doctors to the Judgment
of the Church, and it would be an endless work to number the Votes and
Suffrages of private Doctors on both sides; indeed their authority is no
greater than their reason is: and if any of them be of our Reconciler's mind, I
am sure they speak without book, unless they have something more to say than
our Reconciler has; and when we know what it is, we will consider it.

And yet those private Doctors of the Church of England, to whose judgment our
Reconciler appeals, say nothing to his purpose; not a man of them affirm that
it is unlawful for the Church to impose indifferent things, no not when they
are scrupled; as any one may observe, who carefully reads their Testimonies.
Some of them indeed do think it advisable, if it would heal our present
Schisms, to part with some things of less moment for so good an end. And there
seems to be two sorts of these men. 1. Those who think this might be done, were
there good evidence and assurance that such abatements would cure the Schism,
and lay a foundation of a firm and lasting Peace in this Church. 2. Those who
think this way ought to be tried, whether it will effect the cure or no.

1. As for the first, if this were the case, that the exchange of a Ceremony or
two, while the external Order and Decency of public Worship might be otherwise
secured, would certainly heal our Schisms, God forbid that I should ever be the
man who should oppose so good a work. But if I may speak my thoughts freely,
that which I take to be the fault of these great men, is this, that they
trouble themselves and the world in declaring their judgments unasked about an
imaginary case, which it is demonstrably impossible should over be a real case.

This is evident not only from the present temper and complexion of the
Schism, which even among the most moderote Dissenters is improved far beyond
the dispute of a Ceremony, but from this very consideration, that their
Principles whereon they demand such an alteration, are schismatical, and it is
impossible that the Peace of the Church should be built upon Schismatical
Principles. Though it were possible that the removal of our Ceremonies might
for the present quiet our Disputes, yet this Peace would last no longer than
the men are in a good humor, because those very Principles which disturb the
Peace of the Church now, will also disturb the best Order and Constitution of
the Church that can possibly be devised; and while the Principles remain, the
seeds of Discord remain also, and there will never want men or Devils to
improve them into open Contentions.

Whoever believes that nothing must be done in the Worship of God, but what we
have an express divine Law for; that things lawful or indifferent in their own
natures, are sinful when they are commanded, though by a lawful Authority; that
neither the Governors in Church nor State have any authority in indifferent
things; which are the great Principles on which men oppose the Ceremonies of
our Church, will as inevitably be Schismatics under any constitution of
things, as those who believe that the Sovereign Powers are accountable to the
People, will be Rebels whenever they are not pleased, and have power to resist.
Take away these Principles, and we may keep our Ceremonies; and while these
Principles last, it is to no purpose to part with the least Ceremony.

2. As for those who think the Church ought to try this Experiment, whether
such Abatements and Condescensions will reconcile Dissenting Protestants to the
Church, it is in my opinion a very dangerous, as well as a very unreasonable
Experiment. All changes and innovations, unless they be made on great and
urgent necessities, and with wonderful wisdom and caution, are of very
dangerous consequence, and the greatest Politicians cannot always foresee what
the event will be; but to change lightly and wantonly, without a certain
prospect of a good effect, is a reproach to the wisdom and gravity of
Government; it is only like the uneasiness of a sick man, who seeks for some
present relief by changing sides, though when he has done he finds himself as
uneasy as he was before. If such Abatements do not take effect, we part with
the external Decencies of Worship to no purpose, we expose our selves to the
scorn and derision of Sectaries, make them more bold and clamorous, and weaken
the Authority and Sinews of Government, which loses it due reverence, when it
is not steady and true to it self. Of all persons in the world, Governors
ought to make the fewest Experiments, and to confess the fewest faults and
mistakes, if there were any, much less to seem to confess a fault when there is
none: for Government ought to maintain its own Reverence and Authority; and
nothing can maintain the Authority of Government, but a great Opinion both of
its Power and Wisdom, that it can defend it self, and direct others; whereas
all such changes and alterations, though they may be called a charitable
condescension to the weakness and importunities of others, are always expounded
as an Argument of the weakness or mistakes of Government, that it cannot defend
it self against popular Clamours and Oppositions, or that they mistake their
Rule. The first makes their Authority precarious, and teaches people not to
fear their Governors when they see their Governors are afraid of them; the
other destroys the Reverence of their Laws, and teaches people not to obey, but
to dispute: And of all mistakes, the mistakes in Religion are most
unpardonable, and the greatest blemish to the Wisdom of Government, because
here is a standing Rule which is plain and certain, and does not alter with
accidental and mutable events. So that if things be well settled at first, there
is no reason ever to change, as may be in all other Laws, which must be fitted
to times and places, and other changeable circumstances; but even the external
circumstances of Religion must not vary with the unreasonable humors and
fancies of men in every Age; or if it does, Religion it self, as well as
Ecclesiastical Authority, suffers by it. Now whatever private Doctors are of
another mind, it is all one to me: for those who assert any thing without
Reason, assert it without Authority too.

His next Testimonies are borrowed from some foreign Divines, such as Beza,
Zanchy, Iunius; and it were easy to oppose other foreign Divines against them,
if not to answer them out of their own Writings; but I do not think this worth
the while, for it is certain these men are not infallible. I will never value
those men's judgments about Ceremonies, who can be contented to change the
Apostolical Order of Bishops for a Presbyterian Parity.

In the next place he insists at large on those terms of Concord, which have
been proposed both by our own and by foreign Divines between distinct Churches;
and hence very wisely concludes, that the same liberty is to be granted to the
Members of the same Church. But this I have considered already, and refer my
Readers for further satisfaction to the Remarks upon the Preface to the
Protestant Reconciler. Chap. 1. p. 100, etc.


Thus I have done with our Reconciler, and shall conclude this Work with a
short Address to our Dissenters, lest they should not rightly understand how
much they are beholden to our Reconciler for pleading their Cause.

O ye Dissenters! when will you be wise? when will you learn understanding?
when will you be able to distinguish between a Defense and a demure Abuse? I
blush to think that you do not blush for your selves, when you read such an
Apology as this, which casts all the Dirt upon you imaginable, and yet you
read; and admire, and applaud your Reconciler as a man of wonderful charity and
tenderness for you. And yet if you believe that he has said any thing to the
purpose, you must own your Cause to be very bad, and your condition to be very
dangerous.

He all along supposes that you are Schismatics, and in very great danger to
be damned for your Schism; which is his principal Argument to persuade
Governors, out of charity to your Souls, to abate those Ceremonies which are
very harmless and innocent in themselves, but abused by you for an occasion of
Schism. He confesses the fault is your own, for our Governors command nothing
but what is lawful to be obeyed; and the only Apology he can make for you is,
that you are Children, and that you are froward and humoursome Children too,
who will be sullen and refuse your Victuals, unless you can receive it from
what hand you please: That you are very weak in understanding, very ignorant of
your Religion, and this makes you so fearful and scrupulous, that you start at
your own shadows, and stumble as men do in the dark, and are almost scared out
of your Wits, if any knavish Wag make you believe that there are some
Hobgoblins or Fairies in the way.

Now do you indeed believe that this is the true state of your Case? If you do
not, then our Reconciler has said nothing for you, nor against your Governors
(which I know you like as well as an Apology for your selves) for which you
ought to thank him, but has most grossly abused you. If you be not Schismatics,
if you be not in danger of damnation for your Schism, if you be not fools and
children, silly, ignorant, humoursome people, then all those Arguments which
our Reconciler draws from these Topics, to persuade Governors to humor you
with Abatements, have no force in them; and if you be, I will leave you to
consider how reasonable it is, that Schismatics should govern the Church, or
Fools and Children give Laws to their Parents, Masters, and Governors.

And if you say, that your Reconciler only urges this as an Argument ad
Hominem, that those who do think you to be such persons as he there pleads for,
should grant you your liberty, and condescend to your weakness; it is a sign
then that he would have our Governors take you for weak, ignorant, humoursome
Schismatics; which is a wonderful Argument of his charity to you, and a great
sign of your wit and understanding, to be contented to be thought so. But if
you would be thought so (to exercise the charity and condescension of your
Governors) I must advise you by the way, never to boast more of your profound
knowledge and seize in Religion, nor to despise your Governors and
Teachers as ignorant carnal men, lest you confute your Advocate, and spoil his
Reconciling design. This is a hard case indeed, but there is no help for it;
if you will enjoy your liberty upon such suggestions as these, you must
mortify your pride; if you would be indulged as Fools and Children, you must
never more pretend to be wise men, and then there is no danger of any other
discovery: for whatever indulgence is due to the weak and ignorant, yet (I
think all men will grant, that) a proud conceited fool is not to be indulged,
but to be humbled, and made to know himself.

Nay, if you will stand to your Reconciler's Plea for you, you must never write
any more Books to justify your Separation, you must never talk more of
Antichristian Ceremonies, and unscriptural Impositions, nor pretend to teach
your Teachers and Governors: for no man can in modesty make two such contrary
Pleas at the same time, to plead his knowledge, and his ignorance, the weakness
and indiscretion of a child, and the understanding of a man, at the same time
and for the same thing: which is to plead, that Governors must yield to you,
because you are in the right; and that in charity they must condescend to you,
because through ignorance and weakness of understanding you are in the wrong.

Indeed though we should grant that a Reconciler might honestly make such a
Plea as this for Dissenters, yet no Dissenter can honestly make this Plea for
himself, because he does not believe it: He does not think himself a
Schismatic, nor weak and ignorant (though possibly he may be conscious to
himself that he is froward and humoursome enough) and therefore cannot honestly
pretend that he is so, and that he ought to be indulged for that reason. St.
Paul pleaded ^or condescension to the weak Jews, but the Jews never pleaded
this for themselves, but scorned the Plea: for if men know their own mistakes,
they must rectify them; if they are sensible of their own weakness, they must
submit to their Governors, not plead their weakness to excuse their
disobedience. In short, no man can honestly make this Plea, but he who is
sensible of his own weakness and ignorance; and he who is sensible of this,
cannot modestly do it: for it is an immodest thing for any man to desire to be
indulged in his ignorance and mistakes. So that though a Dissenter may like the
general Doctrine of the Reconciler, yet he cannot like the application of it to
himself, and ought never to plead it in his own case; which is to put tricks
upon Government, and to cheat them with false and counterfeit Pleas, which when
it is known, as it is certainly known in this case, is an insolent contempt of
the Wisdom of Governors.

And since no Dissenters can honestly or modestly use this Plea, I have much
wondered to hear them so mightily applaud our Protestant Reconciler, when they
cannot justify themselves in his way. If they think our Reconciler did really
speak his Conscience, when he charges them with a damning Schism, with weakness
and ignorance, and a childish folly, he has given as bad a character of them,
as the worst Enemy they have can do; only he has broken their heads and given
them a Plaster, and it argues great tameness and mortification in them to take
it so patiently: if he did not believe this (as I presume the Dissenters
charitably think he did not) he has put a great abuse upon his Governors,
reproaches them for not indulging Dissenters, who, as he suggests, through
weakness and ignorance, and tenderness of Conscience, fall into Schism, and
destroy their Souls, when he himself believes no such thing of them; and yet
this would prove a very fatal mistake in Government, to grant that liberty to
an obstinate, conceited, incurable Schismatic, which may in some cases be
charitably pleaded for a weak, and ignorant, and scrupulous Conscience.

And I wonder what service our Reconciler could think to do, by pleading for
the Dissenters under such a character as they will neither own themselves, nor
their Governors believe of them. He takes it for granted, that they are guilty
of Schism, and that their Schism is owing to a weak and ignorant, tender and
scrupulous Conscience. Now Dissenters disown all this; they do not think
themselves Schismatics, or at least are too wise to own it; much less do they
think themselves ignorant, but the most knowing and understanding Christians,
the very Gnostics of the Age; nor are they scrupulous, but fully assured that
they are in the right, and their Governors in the wrong; and therefore if they
be wise, they will give him no thanks for his pains. And our Governors know
indeed that they are Schismatics, and that they are ignorant or worse; but do
not take them for weak, tender-conscienced, scrupulous Schismatics, but know
the quite contrary, that they are proud, conceited, troublesome, factious; that
they despise Dominions, and speak evil of Dignities; that they are restless
Underminers of the settled Constitutions of Church and State, wherein they live;
that they despise instruction, and think themselves too wise to learn, or
receive better information; and this they are as certain of, as forty years
experience can make them. So that were our Reconciler's Arguments never so good
to persuade Governors to indulge weak, and scrupulous, and tender Consciences,
yet they fail in their application to Dissenters, and are not so much as an
Argument ad hominem, because our Governors do not, and have no reason to
believe our Dissenters to be such persons; and I cannot imagine what makes our
Dissenters so fond of this Reconciler, unless it be that they find so much of
their own temper and spirit in him, to unsettle the present Constitutions of
the Church, and to censure and reproach the Wisdom and Charity of his
Governors.

And therefore I would advise Dissenters to act like men, and if they are
resolved to continue Dissenters, to keep their Post, and stand upon their
defense, and not to take Sanctuary in such lame Apologies, as no considering
man can make for himself without blushing. If they are in the right, they may
justify themselves against all Imposers, without the help of a Reconciler; and
if they are in the wrong, no Reconciler can help them. And therefore they are
bound in their own defense to answer the Second Part of the Protestant
Reconciler, as I have done the First in the defense of my dear Mother the
Church of England; which God Almighty long preserve and defend against all,
whether Popish or Protestant, Dissenters and Reconcilers. Amen.

THE END.

