(...) OR A KEY of the DOCTRINES contained in this BOOK for the better perusal
thereof: With some Additions

Of Christ's being Heir of all things, in his threefold Right, Heb. 1.2, 3.

And Abraham's being Heir of the World, Romans 4.13.

And of Promised and Covenanted Mercies to the Fathers since that first Promise
made for a thousand Generations, Genesis 3.15.

By W. S. Minister of the Gospel.

London Printed for F. Smith, at the Elephant and Castle without Temple Bar.
16^^

(...): OR The Key of the Doctrine of the Kingdom of God, etc. for the better
perusal of this Work. First, in more brief Assertions: Secondly, in their
larger Explications.
1. The briefer Assertions.
1. THat the substance of these Doctrines contained in this Work, is set down
[for Information of all sorts, and to remove mistakes] in the two folded leaves
after the Everlasting Gospel on Genesis 3.15.

2. That they yield no ground of prejudice to Magistrates; yea such prejudice
is inconsistent with the Tenor of them. See Word written page last, besides
Letters, etc.

3. Their Scripture Evidence is holy, just and good, containing an excellent
part of the Gospel of Christ. See the 12. Foundations, and the S. convincing
Arguments.

4. All holy Prophets and Penmen of Sacred Scriptures give witness to them,
and chiefly, the greatly beloved Prophet Daniel, and the beloved Evangelist
John the first declared, Acts 3.19, 20, 21. The 2d from the Order or Series of
the Rev. in the Letter to Mr. Call. March 20. 1664. and in the Irenicon p. 26,
27. and from the Scheme of the Rev. and Summaries and Abridgement of Daniels
Prophetical Visions, and the Parallels of both Monarchies in both books.

5. That the book of the Revelation is given by Christ to his Church as an
Orderly more full Exposition of many things in Daniel, before shut up to Men
and Angels; and Sealed until that time of the End wherein Christ so revealed
them; Which said book of the Revelation, is a Divine mystical Comment of such
hidden part of Daniel. See thence three sorts of Learned Men's mistakes page 30.
of our General Title page; as may be manifest by our said book of Parallels.

6. That there are eight several senses of Christ's comings in the New
Testament, two before his Ascension and six since. First, in his coming in our
flesh, as in that faithful and true saying, Christ came into the world to save
sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. 2dly, when, (as the Minister of Circumcision, Romans 15. he
came to his own, viz. the Jews, and they received him not, John 1.11.) The
other six since he Ascended, are handled page 41. to page 46. of our Irenicon,
etc. See the last page of the Word written concerning the last coming.

7. That Christ's said Appearance and Reign the thousand years, will both be
personal, may thence be plainly evident, in that he (then) according to
Scripture expressions, is said to come to Judgment, and then as well as at the
last General Judgment, both the Judgment is said to be set, and the Books to be
opened; which are the Scriptural decypherings of both Judicial acts, and quick
and dead at both said Acts are judged, as Dan. 7.10. with Rev. 20.4. and of the
same time, Rev. 11.18. upon the sounding of the seventh, Trumpet, when the
Kingdoms of the world become the Kingdoms of Christ, and he is praised by the
twenty four Elders, for taking to himself his great power and reigning: they
praise him not only that he had so judged, that is, rewarded his servants the
Prophets, and his Saints, and all that fear his name both small and great, but
that he had judged them that destroyed the earth; having so judged the Whore,
and (probably) the Turk also: hence says St. Paul of the same time, who will
judge the quick and dead at his Appearance and his Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.1. and in
the said table of times, chap. 20 4. to verse 11. passes the thousand years of
Christ's said reign, and Satan's binding, and the little space for his attempt
with his last Gog and Magog, before the last General Judgment, most clearly and
fully set down with a great deal of distinct exactness of order; and at the
last said Judgment, the quick (namely the last Gog and Magog) are consumed with
fire, and all the Dead judged when the Jugdment was set and the Books opened,
v. 11, 12, etc. to the end. So Mr. Mede, Mr. Archer, Mr. Maton and others; but
especially Dr. Homes, a collection of whose main Texts of holy Scripture I
shall only here quote, referring the Readers to p. 78. of his R. R. (which here
I set down for the benefit of such as may not (happily) see his book) where first
he has ten Texts for Christ's personal appearance in the New Testament, viz.
Joh. 19.37. expounded by Zach. 12.10. unto which he adds, Rev. 1.7. Mat.
24.30. 2 These 2. v. 1. to 9. Mat. 26.29. 1 Timothy 4.1. Act. 3.19, 20, 21. Mat.
23.38, 39* Mat. 24.3. Also sive Texts in the Old Testament, Dan. 7.11. to the
end, (which Mr. Mede styles the Mother text for it) Jer. 23.5, 6. Zac. 2 10,
11, 12. Zeph. 3.14. and besides his judicious and learned Explications of them
all, a discourse is added thereof after the said texts: And after his opening
of many Prophesies in their order (as they stand Recorded*) to this and other
the like purposes, respecting these said Doctrines very largly and learnedly
out of the Old Testament: He then adds, page 377. twelve texts of holy
Scripture more out of the New Testament for Christ's personal reign, viz. Mat.
24.13, 14. Luke 1.31, 32. and 21.24. and 22.28, 29, 30. Acts 1.6, 7. Romans
11.25, 26, 27. 1 Cor. 15.1, to 29. 2 Cor. 15.16, 17, 18. Phil. 2.9, 10.11. Rev.
2.25, 26, 27, 28. and 3.21. and 18, 19, chap. Concerning all which Scriptures
he says so much, there, and else where, that I judge may satisfy all
impartial and understanding Christians; and those Texts which prove his
personal appearance, will also prove his personal reign as we said, which is
the end wherefore he then appears as the Great King of Kings to sit on David's
Throne and to do his Kingly work, of destroying and slaying his Enemies, Rev.
11.19. Luke 19. and of rewarding his faithful servants the Prophets, and his
Saints, and all that fear his name both small and great Rev. 11.18. and 22.12.
So performing the mercies promised to the forefathers, Luke 1.72. and the Oath
which he swear unto our father Abraham, etc and Luke 2.32. to be the glory of
his people Israel, of which Scripture is abundant [ See Sir Henry Finch his
book forenamed] but note especially the time when the Kingdoms of all Nations
shall be given to him, Dan. 7.13, 14, etc. and all Kingdoms (to make it yet
more evident) under the whole heavens shall serve and obey him, v. 27. with
Ezekiel. 37. chap. and Esa. 24.23. also our Tract on Jer. 3.17. with our paper of
Sept. 27. 1664. p. 27, 28. of our Prodrom or Forerunne.

8. That these Doctrines are summarily the Scriptural explications of two
Articles of Faith, vix. of Christ's coming to judgment, Dan. 7. and Rev. 20.4.
and of his raising of the just at the first blessed and holy Resurrection, v 5,
6.

9. That the Jews aversness from owning Christ's grace to the Gentiles before
Peter's Vision, Acts 11. should caution the Gentile Christians against opposing
those Doctrines from Scripture, containing the Jews stronger title by far, to
much more ample mercies. [ See that renownedly learned and religious Gentleman
Sir Henry Finch his book of the calling of the Jews, and his Epistle to them;]
and that will be when their glorious Messiah shall come to those who are
beloved for their Fathers sakes, Romans 11.28. to take away the Vail from their
hearts, 2 Cor. 3.16.

10. The reason Mr. Mede gave of the clouding of these Doctrines when
Antichrist was to arise, viz. to make way for his coming: The like also may be
given for the clearing of them (in some measure) when the Date of that Man of
sin is wearing out, namly, to help to bring him down: I say, but in some
measure, because the Scripture gives diverse hints that they will not be
received by many, Rev. 19.9. and 21. 5. and 22.6. Luke 18.8. Dan. 12.10. which
now appears by prevailing iniquity, by prejudice of some and interests of
others, engagements of credit, business, shakings of the world, many
distractions, tentations, contrary seducements, and the like. See the emergent
conjecture of 1666. from Christ's Ascension, on Rev. 22.20. p. 36, 37, etc. from
four Mistical Numbes,

11. That the Dominion of Gods people the Jews will be manifest (then) to be
founded in grace, and to be the Generation whom the Lord has blessed Es.
65.23. (probably) more especially the Tribe of Judah, as distinctly so known
from other people, Es 61.9. when they shall be borne in a day (spiritually and
nationally) for the most part (probably) at Christ's appearance to them when his
feet shall stand on mount Olivet from whence he ascended, and then will cause
the cleaving of the Mountain and great Valley to Azal (as the Prophet Zachary c
14. foretells) and their iniquity be taken away in one day, Zac. 3.9. And as
Justice and Judgment are now and for ever the stability of Christ's Throne; so
they will be then of all other Kings besides. See Foundat. 7.

12. That Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and Sarah expected by Faith, their particular
Shares or Lots in the Land of Canaan a far of, Heb. 11. viz. at the
Resurrection of the Just, and in assurance thereof they would be buried there
[as also Joseph would have his bones] as it were to keep possession till that
time of fulfilling Gods promise thereof to each of them. [ See p. 38, 39. of
the Prodr.] therefore they counted themselves Pilgrims. 2dly, they sought no
opportunity to return, v. 15. 3dly, they looked for that heavenly country of
Christ's Kingdom v. 16. Romans 4.16, 17, 18, etc. Gal. 3.8, 9, etc. See our 15
Reasons in New Jeru. and Prodromus p. 38.

13. That some of the Subjects of Christ's Kingdom will be raised Saints, the
Children of the Resurrection in that world, Luke 20.35, 36. others converted
Jews and Gentiles in their natural life in their several conditions, as follows.

14. There will be accordingly two New Jerusalems in the world, the one came
down from God out of heaven Meto-nymicolly, in respect of the Inhabitants for
the time to come, being when they came down, the spirits of just men coming
with Christ to receive their bodies, called the Bride the Lambs wife, Rev. 19.
Rev. 21. and so to be the Inhabitants of that glorious City whose maker and
builder is God Heb. 11.10. Rev. 20. where the said raised Saints will behold
Christ's glory, which was by Christ's last will bequeathed to them, Joh. 17.24.
The other New Jerusalem will be built by men, and partly by strangers, and
their Kings for the use of such as shall walk in the light of the said New
Jerusalem. See Tract. on Jer. 3.17* page 6, 7.

15. The great discoveries to be made to Saints and Angels in the time of
Christ's said Kingom respecting Scriptures, Creatures and Providence, etc. will
(probably) much more enable both sorts of them more excellently to set forth
Gods praise to all eternity. G. Tit. page, and greater discoveries to be in
that Millen. than in all the 6000. years before.

16. Scripture Theology of that world to come in the time of the New Heavens
and New Earth, is of very large consideration, in respect of the many
particularities thereunto appertaining. See first Arg. of the Word Written, of
things before the 1000. years, in them and after them, and our 31. Obser* after
the Tract. on Rev. 22.20. with our 12. Foundat.

17. The knowledge of Christ's execution of his three great Offices [as the work
his Father gave him to do during the continuance of his Mediatorship] in
respect of his Mediatorship in the three great Periods of the World; viz. as
the great Prophet in the Old Testament by his immediate inspired Messengers.
2dly, As the great High Priest in the New: First, by his own Oblation;
Secondly, by his Intercession during Gods Kingdom of the Stone, wherein Christ
appears to be the Fathers Commissioner to open the Sealed Book and execute the
Coments thereof, Rev. 5, etc. In the third, he begins his own Kingdom of the
Mountain, Dan. 2.35. which he went to Heaven to receive, and then to return,
Luke 19. Dan. 7.13, 14. the knowledge thereof (I say) is of very great
concernment to all true Christians, viz. as it is distinct from his particular
execution of his said three Offices for particular Christians Souls in all
times since man's fall; in respect of the particular Application of them all in
their virtue and efficacy, as the Prophet, Priest and King of every beleiving
soul, by the powerful work of his holy Spirit. See 17. These p. 9, 10, 11, 12.
of the Prod. with the addition, p. 44, 45, 46. and especially more largly
handled in our Everlasting Gospel on Genesis 3.15.

18. The last Trumpet, Rev. 11. and the last sounding Trumpet, 1 These. 1. and 1
Cor. 15.52, 53. differ not only in above a 1000. years distance of time, but
also in their natures and uses. See the Series of Prophesies in the Scheme of
the Revelation and the Abridgment of the Revelation and Daniel which may much
help as a standard [with the Parallels] to take due proportions in such cases,
etc.

19. That there are two Gogs and Magogs to be destroyed, the one at the
beginning, the other after the little space, at the end of the 1000. years.
First, the Pope, Dan 7.7, 8, 9, 10* etc. with the latter part of the chap. the
body of which Beast is to be consumed with the burning flame (probably) at the
Armageddon Battle. And the Turk of whom in the latter days, Ezekiel. 38.8, 16. as
to his Army, overthrow, burial, saving the sixth part, etc. as at large set
down in chapter 38. and 39. But of the last Gog and Magog, see Rev. 20.9, 10. about
the general rapture and change of all the Saints, 1 Cor. 15, 52, 53.

20. That the General Rapture and Change of all the Saints about the last
Trumpet, will be (I conceive) of them in a threefold state or condition, first
in the natural life, to be changed in stead of dying, 2dly of Saints before
raised, twice, said to be alive and remain, 1 These. 4.15, 17. 3dly, of the dead
in the 1000. years, then to rise first (before the wicked as others did in the
said time) v. 16. which Interpretation the Revelation seems to point out.

21. As Christ our Savior should not finish that work of Redempt. in the world
which he is appointed to by his Fathers Commission, manifest Rev. 5. according
to his former decreed and promised grace, Genesis 3.15, etc. often since renewed
to the forefathers, when receiving (as the Angel said, Luke 1.31, 32, 33.) his
Davidical Kingdom, he shall return from his Fathers right hand in the clouds of
Heaven in his own glory, and of his Father and his holy Angels, then making his
great enemies eminently his footstool, and bind Satan for the 1000. years. So
taking to himself his great power to reign, and so also temporally, outwardly
and visibly, to deliver his people from the hands of all their enemies to serve
him without fear of them, etc. Luke 1.71, 72, 73, 74, (which seems to be the
possessing of the Gate of their enemies, Genesis 22.27.) at his next coming; as
well as he wrought their spiritual Redemption at the first [that none of his
should be lost] and to be then the glory of his people Israel, as he has since
that been a Light to Lighten the Gentiles, Luke 2.72. all which are grounds of
that truth. So neither should God, without his doing of these things, perform
those promised mercies to the forefathers to those excellent purposes (in the
time of his said Visible and Glorious Kingdom in the world) at several times
made unto them, as in diverse particulars ensuing is observable; as first, that
to Adam and Eve. Secondly, to Noah. Thirdly, to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.
Fourthly, to David, will clearly manifest.

Of Gods great Promised Mercies to the Forefathers made in the Old Testament
through Christ, to be fulfilled by him in the World to come, in the time of his
glorious Kingdom therein.
1. THat all the great Promises and Covenants of God, made to men under the Old
Testament, when the first Adam had lost his own, and his natural Seeds
interest, were to be fulfilled by Christ, whom (as the Apostle says) Heb. 1.
God had appointed him Heir for all things, v. 2, 3. from a threefold Title to
be completed in the time of his Kingdom on earth. First, God having by him
Created the world* 2dly, he has since purged his peoples sins by his own
blood, so procuring to them all grace, and gracious interest therein. And 3dly,
Upholding all things by his word of Divine power, and so disposing them, that
they then with him should be Heirs, even joint Heirs with Christ, says that
Apostle, Romans 8.17. (who was Rapt up to Paradise to learn Divine Mysteries
after Christ had gloriously appeared to him at his Conversion) and as Christ,
by that beloved, and so Divinely taught Disciple John, more fully promises to
all Overcomers; that they shall sit with Christ on his Throne, viz. of his
Mediatory Kingdom even as he having overcome, is now set down with his Father
on his Throne, Rev. 3.21. and that he will give him then power over the Nations
to break them, etc. Rev. 2.27. but he further adds from Christ's Warrant also,
Rev. 21.7. He that overcomes shall inherit all things: and I will be his God,
and he shall be my Son. Which will be obtained from Christ in the completing
of the Redemption of the purchased possession of the said inheritance by our
great Messiah the second Adam in the time of his said Kingdom, whereof they are
now become with him joint heirs, and then with him shall become possessors: in
reference whereunto all the said Promises were made to the Fathers in their
order and times.

1. First that made to Adam and Eve upon their fall and sentence, Genesis 3.15.
The Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head. Which he has been doing
ever since (as we showed) in due order and manner appointed by the Eather, and
still does, and will so do; but upon his receiving of his Kingdom will do it
more eminently, until he make his Foes, even the stoutest of them, his
Footstool, Ps. 110.1. even till the last enemy death shall be destroyed, 1 Cor.
15. which will be, as Scripture witnesses, at the completing of his said
1000. years reign, For he must reign, says the Apostle, v. 25. until he has
put all his enemies under his feet; when death the last enemy shall be
destroyed, v. 26. and when all his overcomers that reigned with him before in
the 1000. years, shall be rapt up with all Saints (in their several states
then) to meet him in the Air, and thenceforth ever be with him the Lord in a
glorious and blessed condition, upon the said complete breaking the Serpent
[Satans] head. See our These. Prodrom. p. 10, 11, 12, 13. and this largely
handled in our Everlasting Gospel on Genesis 3.15. to which I refer the Reader.

2. That Promise and Covenant that God made to Noah, through him whose Type he
was, in saving his own house or family in the Arc, at the drowning of the Old
World, as Christ will also be his Sts. safe Arc both at his next appearance,
when as our Savior says, The Eagles will be gathered to the Carcass, Luke
17.38. and also from the last destruction of the World by fire, at the said
gener. rapture of all the Sts. above a 1000. years after. Now he gives by that
Covenant with Noah for himself, men and beasts, present and future, the largest
and and strongest Assurance of preservation of the Earth from any like
destruction, upon Noah's offering Sacrifices of the clean beasts and fowls
preserved with him in the Arc. Whereupon the Lord smelled a sweet savor [
viz. through the said Antetype of Noah] And the Lord said in his heart: I will
not again any more curse the ground for man's sake. And the freeness of his
grace more gloriously appeared by his following reason, which had a contrary
effect before, ch 6.5, 6. but now he will not destroy it, for the imagination,
says he, Genesis 8.21, 22. of man's heart is evil from his youth: nor will I any
more smite every living thing as I have done. And all this is further enlarged
and illustrated with an ample affirmative Charter. While (says the Lord
[Jehovah]) or yet all the days of the earth, as in Heb. Seed time and Harvest,
cold and heat, summer and winter, day and night, shall not cease. But what was
a Being without a Blessing, but misery? Therefore in chap. 9. he largly
distributes his Blessings to Noah, and his Sons, to the beasts, cattle and
creeping thing, fish, fowls, and every plant or green herb, and subjects all to
man, only forbidding cruelty; as appears by that expression, Flesh with the
life thereof, that is the blood thereof, shall ye not eat; and again repeats
his blessing v. 7. And then God largly establishes his Covenant with all
creatures and men again, in v. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. and then confirms it with the
token of the Rainbow, from v. 13. with a great deal of very gracious inlargment
and improvement when they shall see that token to v. 17* Hence Gods Throne is
compassed with the Rainbow, Ez. 1. Rev. 4. where he gives an excellent
Epephonema of his said grace (as I may say) And God said unto Noah, this is the
token of the Covenant which I have established between me and all flesh which
is upon the earth. Now as the earth with its fruitfulness and varieties of
creatures is made the stage and accommodation too, for all actings of promised
and purposed grace from thence to the end of the world: so the chief and
greatest performances of fruitfulness, are reserved for the time of Christ's
said reign, as Psalm. 67. twice, Then shall the earth bring forth her increase;
and God even our God shall give us his blessings. And hence so many and great
promises of those kinds, upon the great Restoration of the Jews and
Israelites, and for both David's house and Abrabrahams, Isaacs and Jacobs then
to have the Dominion. See from this Covenant a strong assurance made thereof
twice together almost yet in two Visions of the Prophet Jeremiah, chapter 33. v.
20, 21. If, says God, ye can break my Covenant of the day, and my Covenant of
the night, etc. Then may also my Covenant be broken with David my servant, that
he should not have a Son to reign upon his Throne, etc. [that is, Christ shall
most certainly reign as the Son of David to the end of the world] and what man
shall dare to deny this, and make any other meaning thereof? And again, v. 25,
26. If my Covenant be not with day and night, and if I have not appointed the
ordinances of heaven and earth. Then will I cast away the seed of Jacob and
David my servant, so that I will not take any of his seed to be rulers over the
seed of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: for I will cause their captivity to return,
and have mercy on them. Many other places may here be produced to like purpose,
but this in brief at present.

3. That all those Promises and Covenanted Mercies made and given, to and with
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and to their spiritual seed, by that one Divine seed
[Christ] for a thousand Generations; which is a frequent expression in holy
Scripture, Jer. 32.18. Ezekiel. 34.7. Deuteronomy. 5.10. and particularly applied to the
promise and Covenant of the Land of Canaan, and sung out by David at the
bringing home the Arc to his Tent provided for it, 1 Chr. 16.8. and again
recorded Ps. 105.8, etc. in the last place said to be the Covenant which God
remembered for ever: and the word commanded for a thousand Generations, etc. as
largly there set down to all three, who in the grace they received resembled
the Trinity: Abraham as the fountain of mercy to his seed invested in himself;
Isaac as the conveyer thereof, in thy seed alone not in thee, Jacob as the
immediate dispenser to the twelve Tribes, and to Ishmael his natural seed; but
in conjunction with Christ, that what was wanting in Jacob should be made up in
Christ; therefore says God to him, in thee and in thy seed [Christ] shall all
the families of the earth be blessed* and God often styles himself, the God of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in reference to the Promise yet to be fulfilled to
them, personally in their inheriting the promise of Canaan, called the Lot of
their Inheritance, Psalm. 105.11, in the time of Christ's Kingdom on earth: but
the 1000. generations seems to contain 7000. years from the giving the first
promise, Genesis 3.15. to the end of the world. Which Promise, contained in the
bowels of it, all the great Promises made to the Fathers afterward; and as
from that Conduit head, God has disposed through those water pipes of future
Promises, his mercies to this or that person, family or nation as he pleased
ever since; a generation being usually reckoned 7 years, as 21 years is 3
lives, suitable to David's old age of 70 years (which few of very many attain
to) in the intermediat 4000. years of the world (for the ages of the old world,
and of the world to come, differ for distinct reasons) so the other seems to be
the standard, and the said Promise or Covenant seems be to here said to be
remembered for ever, and the other drawn from that for the residue of 1000.
generations, by Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, to their spiritual seed at the
Resurrection of the just, etc. until, as Job says, The heavens shall be no
more, and the earth with all upon it become ve Tohu, ve Bohu, (i. e.) become
again without form and void for ever, etc. or a perpetual prison. Come we first
to Abraham that Pater excelsus, the Father of the faithful, to whom the said
grace was dispensed in a 7 sold gradation, Genesis 12.2, 3. and so forward, etc.
Whereupon his ready obedience to Gods call, he made a large comprehensive
Promise of that land, and all other mercies, to himself alone personally, as
Genesis 1^.18. through the Divine one seed [Christ] conceived then and afterward,
so by faith in Abraham's soul, that as our Savior said, John 8.56. Abraham saw
my day and was glad: yea and his future day also of enjoyment a far of, with
Isaac, Jacob and Sarah, Heb. 11. at the said Resurrection represented in the
deadness of Abraham's body, and Sarahs womb, and Isaacs saving from death in a
figure, etc.

2. Upon his coming to Sichem God appeared to him, and promised that land unto
his natural seed, v. 7. as it is expounded c. 15.13, 14. whereof Abraham in
person was to have no part, v. 15. nor Isaac nor Jacob; who all died long
before the 400. years ended.

3. When he was severed from Lot, God said to him c 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. View
all the coasts, East, West, etc. For I will give it to thee and to thy seed for
ever; namely to his one most Divine seed Christ, Gal. 3.16. who should continue
for ever, and would retain his right, and maintain Abraham's Propriety which he
has purchased for him and all his: and God bids him walk through that land
then, for says he again I will give it unto thee.

4. When upon Gods great encouragement, Abraham represents his Age and
Childless estate unto God, etc. Thereupon he bids him look up to Heaven and
tell the Stars, etc. c. 15.2, 3, and then said he: So shall thy seed be; (i.
e.) all his spiritual seed, and probably both, for number and excellency,
being circumcised or uncircumcised through the said one seed [Christ] and this
occasioned upon that account, that famous act of his faith, so often mentioned;
He believed in the Lord, and it was counted unto him for Righteousness.
Whereupon our so heavenly learned Apostle Paul improving Gods larg Deeds so
strongly, according to Abraham's strong faith, settling his interest upon him in
the world, styles him the Heir of the world by faith, Romans 4.13. by which he
was then secure, and is and will be since that time his interest therein even
to that very moment wherein he shall be actual possessor thereof in that world
to come, Heb. 2.5. and this he largly explains in that c. Rom 4. from v. 8. to
the end, showing how he becomes father of the uncircumcision as well as of the
circumcision and sets forth the excellency of his faith, which was counted to
him for righteousness, in giving glory to God who quickneth the dead, when his
body was dead naturally, and there was deadness in Sarahs womb, yet knew God
could call things that are not as though they were, v. 11, 1^, 16, 17, 18, 19.
So that from and by such a seed which by his faith was conceived in his soul
should proceed all his promised interest, and should by him be made sure to all
his spiritual seed as the stars; in respect whereof he is here styled the heir
of the world, then past by faith but will most certainly then to come by actual
fruition also be possessor thereof, v, 22, 23, 24, etc. So also Gal. 3.6. upon
that great act of Abraham's faith respecting such a seed to secure the real
inheritance of the promised land to him and all the believing world in the time
of the Law or Gospel (for we must know all the Dominion of Gods people and all
their then privileges are founded in grace, and much greater grace than these
days have afforded) in the last v. he concludes for the comfort of all truly
believing souls among the Gentiles, that they have in Christ the same
privilege in that state with the Jews which shall be the sure entrance to all
Abraham's spiritual seed into eternal glory, for (says he) if ye be Abraham's
(spiritual) seed, then heirs according to promise, viz. that which was made to
him for that restored state of Canaan which Abraham, Isaac and Jacob with all
true believers shall most certainly enjoy, and all the faithful till then,
shall also with them inherit; and that in the happy restored state of the New
Heavens and New Earth wherein will dwell righteousness, and yet to confirm to
Abraham both an assured Title and Possession in time to come (though then he
saw it a far of by his faith.) Heb. 11.

5. And again God minds him c. 15. that for that end he brought him him out Vr
of the Caldees to that land to inherit it; which Abraham revolves as desiring
to have a confirmation that he should inherit it, v, 7.8. and thereupon he
gives him a sign by the beasts and fowls, to be used as God appointed, etc. and
then first he explains the condition of his natural seed, for number as the
dust, that should first be afflicted, and a stranger till after 400. years
which he made a promise to, c. 12.7 as follows, v 14, 15, 16, 17. after which,
Sarah from diffidence puts Hagar upon her husband whence came the seed of the
bondwoman? as in the story, c. 16.

6. But afterward, c. 17. when Abraham was 99. years of age, God appears again
to him, and makes a Covenant and stipulation with a seal thereto, viz.
Circumcision then to be first upon his own flesh with all the males in his
family (and as in the Old world that Christ should be the seed of the woman was
the comfort of that sex then first in the trangression: So henceforth he was
made known to be the seed of men lineally from Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and
especially of David, as Gods King to sit on his holy hill of Sion, Ps 2. as
well as David's son to sit on his throne, styled the the Son of man, Ps. 80.17.
that man of his right hand made strong for himself, as also seen in Vision by
Dan. as the son of man when he will come in glory in the clouds to take the
same Kingdom, Dan. 17 13, 14, etc and v. 27. Hence he so often styles himself
the Son of man in the Gospel, which also should be a comfort for man's sex,
besides other reasons) And for man's farther assurance that Seal is to be upon
his flesh peculiar to his sex till Christ was indeed born of a Vir^as foretold
Es. 9.7. and till God did a new thing in the earth* a woman shall compass a
man, Jer. 31.22. So then (I say) c. 17. God renews his confirmation of his
former promises to Abraham more fully and firmly, and adds the said seal to it,
with the changes of his name and Sarahs, to ratify the same, and rely him it
should be an everlasting Covenant, and an everlasting Possession, and he would
be the God of him and his seed, to be fulfilled at Christ's coming with his
Saints, Rev. 21.2.3, etc. which Covenant should be established in Isaac whom
Sarah should bear at this set time in the next year, v. 21.

7. In c. 22. upon Abraham's ready obedience to sacrifice his Son Isaac, after
his long waiting for him and enjoyment of him, God expresses his love to him
passionatly, if I may so speak, (as Joseph to his brethren) in a large and
full manner, ratifying all by an oath, v. 16, 17, 18. thereby farther to
confirm all the said promises and covenants to him and his seed in general,
natural or spiritual, circumcised or uncircumcised; which also afterward he
again and again confirmed to Isaac and Jacob particularly.

8. As first to Isaac, c. 26.23. both for his person and posterity twice, first
when he was at Gerar, and forbids him to go into Egypt: I will, said God, be
with thee and bless thee, and give into thy hand all these countries, and in
thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed, because that Abraham
obeyed my voice and kept my charge, my comandments, my statutes and my laws.
Mark these expressions, he said not to him at all [in thee] as to Abraham, c
12.2, 3. but because Abraham had kept my charge, etc. (probably) in regard
Abraham the father of the faithful, or Pater excelsus as his name then
signified, had by his wonderful faith spiritually conceived Christ in his soul
then seeing thereby Christ's day and rejoiced, as our Savior himself speaks of
him, John 8.56. and was glad, yea and God also again, v. 24. confirms the same
mercies to Isaac who was his great Type, both in his birth and death, and yet
both of them with Jacob and Sarah Heb. 11. saw their own particular interest
(as was said) in Canaan a far of, at the Resurrection, where their bodies and
Joseph's bones lay reposed till they arise then to take their possession of it
and reign with Christ, when at that his last day he will raise them up, Joh. 6.

9. Lastly, God confirms unto Jacob his personal interest in the land of Canan,
and to his immediate natural seed the 12 Tribes, here again said to be as the
dust of the earth: and hence faith God in conjunction with his Divine spiritual
seed [Christ] again v. 14 in thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the
earth be blessed, in that respect (probably) with his blessings given to the
several Tribes, Genesis 49. and to Esau his blessing also; being his immediate
seed which went very far, but what might be wanting in him, was made up in that
one seed [Christ] therefore he adds; [and in thy seed] shall all the families
of the earth be blessed* who will at the first blessed resurrection raise all
his Saints who in their measure have suffered with him as members of his
mistical body to reign (then) with him, 2 Timothy 2.12. and says he, Romans 8.17.
We are made by Christ heirs of God, and joint heirs Christ; viz. in his
Mediators Davidical Kingdom bequeathed to them by our Savior himself in his
last will a little before he died after his divinely propherical Prayer, Joh.
17.24. said he, Father I will that they whom thou have given me be with me
where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou have given me. And lastly,
c. 32. Jacob, as a Prince, wrastled with God and prevailed, whence the name of
Israel was given to him, retained by all Gods people since, to show them how to
prevail with God for promised mercies, viz. by Faith, Prayer and New obedience,
etc. [See of these covenanted mercies Prodrom or Forerun. page 37, 38.] and God
was so mindful of both the everlasting Covenants which Noah and Abraham, etc.
as he calls that Gen 9.16. that by the experience of the former witnessed by
the Rainbow many hundred years after, he teaches the Prophet Esau thereby to
confirm his covenanted mercies to all Israel, with the beloved City. Es. 54 9.
This says he shall be as the waters of Noah unto me, etc. as I have sworn,
etc. so will I not be wroth with thee: yea all that promised grace, v. 17. is
said to be the heritage of the servants of the Lord even from that time whose
Righteousness is of him, etc.

4. We proceed to the promised and covenanted mercies of David for ever,
through the whole state of Christ's Davidical Kingdom, who stands in diverse
relations to David as his Antitype, Seed and Savior wherein consisted the sure
mercies of David in and by him who was the root of David, Rev. 5, as well as
the branch, Zac. 3.8. who was owned to be the son of God at his Resurrection,
Ps. 2.7. and returned not to corruption, whereby was manifest the sureness of
his mercies, Act. 13.32 33. wherein all the faithful partake, Es 55.3. by a
covenant ordered in all things and sure, 2 Samuel 23.5. though chiefly respecting
Christ's said Kingdom, as in Nathans message may appear, 1 Chr. 17. and 2 Samuel
7.8, etc. which we have largly considered in our 7th Foundation of Faith: when
the heathen and the uttermost parts of the earth will not only be given to
Christ for an inheritance, but for a possession, Ps. 2.8. when God sets his
King upon his holy hill of Sion, and though he is the Fathers Commissioner to
execute the contents of the book which he received, Rev. 5. from his ascension
to the ruin of the Roman Empire, viz. during Gods spiritually powerful Kingdom
of the Stone, said to be set up by the God of heaven, Dan. 2.28. yet when the
Kingdom of the Mountain comes, all opposite Kingdoms will become like the chaff
of the summer thrashing-flore, v. 35. for at his ceasing to sit at his fathers
right hand his foes will eminently be made his footstool, Ps. 110.1. and that
man of his right hand will appear to be made strong for himself, Ps. 80.17.
when all the Dominions of the world will be given to him under the whole
heavens, Dan 2.13.14, 27. and God will give him his right in David's Diadem, Ez.
21.27 and all the faithful before styled the Sons of David, as well as the seed
of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; being the meek like David whose soul was as a
weaned child, Ps. 121. shall all then inherit the renewed earth and delight
themselves in abundance of peace Ps 37.11. and be blessed in that state, Mat.
5.^. at the first resurrection, Rev. 20.6. for then he will actually and
personally (as we showed) take to himself his great power before committed or
permitted to others, who had abused it, and will then himself reign with his
Saints upon the earth, Rev. 5 10. Rev. 20.4. Rev. 11.14, 15. when the Angels of
God shall worship him, Ps. 97. Heb. 1.6. and all knees in heaven, earth or
under the earth (now) shall (then) bow or be subject to him, Phil. 2.9, 10. and
all creatures adore him, Rev. 5.8, 9, 10, etc. when not only as the son of
David he shall have that Kingdom, but also as the son of God he will be
actually Gods heirof all things: by his Triple right of creating, ordering and
redeeming all things for that purpose, as Heb. 1.2, 3, and 6. when Abraham by
him, and under him will be actually heir of the world, Romans 4.13. who before
was only by faith so: and this Kd. Dan* 7.13, 14. seems also to be settled upon
Christ as Gods obedient son and faithful servant by his own Donation; as a boon
or (...), for that he had fully done all Gods wills; and so he as the captain
of the Salvation of his suffering members, upon the like account gives his
Kingdom to them, 2 Timothy 2.12. making them joint heirs with himself, Romans 8.17.
and bequeathed the beholding of his glory to them as by his last will, Joh.
17.24. Father, said he, I will, etc. through whom, David's seed living in the
world then, will (probably be blessed in a special manner, Es. 61.9. Then will
kingdom, power and glory all be his from his coming in the clouds, not only in
his own glory, but also of the father and his holy angels, Mat. 25. which he
will resign back unto the father when the last enemy death shall be destroyed,
that God may be all in all, and the son also himself be subject unto him, when
perfect reconciliation is made; Christ having so conducted all his Saints from
their general rapture to meet him at their glorious change to enter upon those
things for ever, that eye has not seen, etc. besides thee, O God, says Esaias,
c. 64.4. and Oh what things says David with an holy admiration, Ps. 31.19. of
which an excellent improvement is made by our so divinely learned Apostle Paul,
1 Cor. 2.7. to the end of that chap. which may be counted amongst his (...)
that Saint Peter speaks of. See Foundat. 7th.

I shall only here, beloved Christians, advertise you all, of these three
particulars. 1. That the 21. said brief assertions, etc. if duly weighed, by
Gods word, may afford you sufficient satisfaction as to these Doctrines of
Christ's said reign the 1000. years upon earth.

2. That both all Gods said general mercies promised to mankind, Genesis 3.15.
that Christ should eminently (then) break the serpents head, as Ps. 110.1. and
also all that said promised and covenanted preservation and fruitfulness to and
with Noah and the New world, etc. Genesis 8, 9, c. are all (then) chiefly and
finally to be accomplished also.

3. That those more particular and special promised and covenanted mercies to
Abraham Isaac and Jacob, and to all their faithful seed both Israelites and
Gentiles and also all those glorious promised and covenanted sure mercies of
David, and his spiritual seed, shall all have their real, true, yea only future
litteral, fulfillings in the said Kind* of Christ on earth.

But as for their larger explications being too large for the intended compass
of this Key, I must at present refer them to some future opportunity.

22th. The Doctrine of Christ's glorious Kingdom [or the New Jerusalem State]
now shortly approaching, is exceeding comfortable and very advantageous to all
faithful Christians, is manifest by the Key and this whole Work; and by the
ensuing [Paraenesis] or Monitory Exhortation, may further appear. Anno Dom.
1672.
ANd now dear Christian Brethren allow me a little freedom in this office of
love, you I mean who are partakers of the grace of God purchased by Jesus
Christ and by the spirit of sanctification wrought in your souls, whether
Episcopal (so called) Presbyterian or Independent; with sundry others upon the
same foundation, First for Unity.
many of which, through Gods especial mercy, have evidently obtained like
precious grace; to you all I speak, as such. Why do you still stand at distance
one from another? Consider, I pray you, That one Heaven (as ye all believe)
shall hereafter contain you all, when ye shall be made perfect in one; yea
moreover, I am well assured, that one Glorious Kingdom of Christ to come will
satiate all your souls as such, a long time before you can obtain the other,
viz. both souls and bodies; all whose degrees of blessedness is only to be
expected in Gods best order, and time and manner revealed in his word; whether
men take cognizance of it more particularly or less: Es 64.4. Ps. 31.19.
And after that great day of Judgment is finished, the expectation of all
Saints to attain Those things which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has
entered into the heart of man to conceive, besides thee, O God, says the
Evangelical Prophet [Esa.] And, O how great things (says holy David) has God
prepared, etc. But the state of things in Christ's said Kingdom, is not
altogether such, in the interim; though very glorious, and excellent, and
blessed, and suitable to that condition (then,) when Judgment shall be given to
the Saints in the world, long before the finishing of the last Judgment. And
most of you, if not all, are one in the things, at present, that are counted
essentially necessary [ad esse Ecclesiae] for the being of the Church of
Christ: how should all sorts agreeing in the main, then also endeavor to be
one in things that pertain [ad been esse] to the well being of the same also?
And I am strongly (from Gods word) assured, that it will not be long before the
Lord, in that great day which he has foretold, will be one, and his name one;
even in respect of such usual dissentments of men in our days, and his people
shall then serve him with one shoulder: how then should all faithful Christians
(what in them is) endeavor, by all good means, for Unity with the bond of
peace, as well as Truth, (though that especially) and so to meet their mercy by
the way; and, if it might be, anticipate it, by so hastening its coming: how
well would Christ (then) take it at all your hands? Whereas, if any should so
be found short of this, that they will from such dissentments, be smiting their
Brethren, (though it be but with the tongue, when they can do no more;) how
will they expose themselves at that day, to Christ's objurgation, before Angels
and Men, etc.? Unite, therefore, Brethren, I say, Unite, Unite in one in these
matters also, at least in your spirits, and the actings of them; that may be
the way, where God may supply what you are wanting in, to bring about the
business (which you so rightly and really endeavor,) by granting his Fiat in
the case. Let each sort cast off their peculiar obstacles, and
any-wayes-thwarting interests; Complying fully with Gods Rules, that should
fully guide us all therein, and They, I humbly conceive, are very few, but
sufficient; only, men must beware they mistake them not* that they pervert them
not in their use and mannagment. The first is that of the Apostle, 1 Cor.
14.26. Let all things be done to edifying* viz. of the souls of Gods people;
and this is a comprehensive and forcible rule and direction, which in every
constitution and counsel of men, ought much to sway the matter, is the thing
pleasing or profitable or creditable, etc.? that may be somewhat in some cases,
but the great Question in matters of such nature, as men may order, is: But is
it so for edifying? If they will not advance that end in Gods Church, what
should they do there? but if they will hinder it, why should they be suffered
in it? And then a second follows, v. 40. Let all things be done decently and in
order: which two rightly applied like our Saviors first and second law of
love, containing all the other: So may these being rightly managed, in all
such cases, regulate the counsels and actings of men in Church affairs; but as
love was the matter of both these laws (though fixed upon distinct octjects;) so
edifying is the substance and the end of both, though the latter for the
manner, ought often more necessarily to be applied with the other, as being
subordinate thereunto, in sundry respects of nature, matter, use and end, etc.
The Apostles instances which occasioned this second Rule, seems to teach us the
right use of it; the one case of decency whether women should speak in the
Church; That, by the Apostle (authoritatively) was once and for all times,
ordered negatively, as being specially guided by Gods spirit: Let not your
women speak, says he, etc. The other was a profitable orderly settling the way
of their prophesieing, that it might more tend to edifycation; and contrary
confusion be avoided, that would hinder the same: And the Apostle seems so to
subordinate the latter to the first, as if no plea of order (or decency at
least) might be approveable, but as in conjunction with in its nature, use or
end with edifycation of the Church of Christ; whereby natural or prudential
agreements, for times or places of worship, and utensels therein, by humane and
Christian qualifications, may be suitably judged of and approved by men, [pro
hic and nunc,] as it is, or ought to be, with some Officers [quam diu se been
gesserint] and so Moses's Brazen Serpent, was approved to be Hezekiah's
Nehushtan; but still by the two former rules to be examined, especially, and
necessarily by that of edifycation; for prudence and decency, and all the
other* if not qualified for edifycation, or being contrary, are (for ought I
can discern from the Apostles said ruled cases) pleas without doors, in
reference to such said constitutions or counsels of men in the Church of
Christ: Whereas, for Officers and Ordinances, and what else is necessary, the
Scripture gives many, and large instructions, and Divine institutions, which
Persons of prudent hearts and sanctified Spirits, will be apt to improve well
(by Divine grace duly sought for, and rightly applied) and the Christian
charity of others, herein (accordingly) acquiesce: But one the other part, as
any appear defective in the said respect of edifycation, or prejudicial
thereunto, they may appear to be more dangerously enjoined or hurtfully
observed, as being excentrical to the Apostle Paul's said boundaries of them:
And in that men have walked so out of these paths of Unity, Piety and peace,
what sad effects has Satan upon the corruption, blindness and intersts of men,
and still does earnestly endeavor to bring about? let every mountain standing
in the way of Union be endeavored by you to be levelled, and every bond be
broken in sunder which is not of Gods allowance: But yet may not piously, and
charitably intended encouragements, in things seemingly only good (but
mistaken) be retained? and applied to really good improvements, which (I
suppose) they may well be judged so to have attained their end, with advantage;
True Christian Charity, piety and prudence will regulate much in many like
cases; God grant them to all sorts in these respects especially concerned, etc.

Secondly, for Piety.
And all ye right Christianly charitable souls of all sorts, how few so ever in
these key-cold, yea chilled last days ye seem to be, you have but a little
time here to bring forth your fruits of faith and love, Let the season of your
present being, first engage you to walk closly with God; be much in private and
secret communion with him your selves; wherein you have (if your hearts be
upright in his sight) the greatest advantage imaginable with the King of Heaven
and Earth, above the favorites of earthly Princes; who sometimes mistake their
faithfullest servants, sometimes hear bad information against them, sometimes
are remote from them, or they hindered from coming to them, sometimes and in
some cases and things they cannot help, (though at Gods pleasure Kings may be
potent) yet only God himself is Omnipotent, many ways beyond thought: earthly
Princes may fail theirs, but God will never fail nor forsake his favorites; in
all times, places and companies, a good thought, purpose, expression of heart,
or word, a spiritual soliloquie, or ejaculation is very kindly taken at Gods
hand from you, who will reckon such soul actings tokens of much love and
sincerity, when sometime more weakness in greater solemnities may appear. 2. Be
much in family duties prudently contrivied, that ye may continue in them; set
your house in order for them; be not slight or fickle in them, judge not your
selves in fit garb or posture for worldly business, without necessity, till God
have his family worshipped at suitable opportunities; a frothie profession and
pretending to Religion has of late times, much more then formerly, thrust
these duties out of doors, though they seldom have had good entertainment
within, (save of some few) true piety has been long, yea ever hitherto, [Rara
avis in terris,] very scarce to be found; families were the first and usually
the best plantation of fruit trees in Gods Vineyard, keep the resolution of
Joshua, especially now, against the floods of ungodlyness; families are like to
be the best nurseries of such young plants, for many advantages, engagements,
endearments; much quickening to increase of grace in family worship, etc. and
that advantage does wonderfully help, encourage and further the public
Ministry of the Gospel, etc. thence are instilled usually, and preserved too
good principles, or patterns of wholesome words, with their improvements; the
defect whereof is now lamentable, for the want both of private and public
Catechisings. Do not all wise builders look mainly to their foundations? for
want of this, so many tottering buildings soon reel aside, to one error or
other, or are in continual danger of falling utterly, or mouldering to nothing
in Religion, etc.

But then, right Pious souls, see that your true Christianity, Thirdly for
Charity.
to help forward your good account, be outwardly manifest in your gracious
works of charity, not only to supply necessities, but to prevent evil and do
good; many poor souls that study faith and good conscience toward God and men,
have much encountering with tentations, in a low and hard condition, by reason
of the prevailing iniquities of the times, and the many ways of the practice
thereof, by the licentious, who fight so against their own outward wants, by
weapons of iniquity, using such unlawful ways, and means, and practices which
others may not, dare not, do not; yet are straightened by others sins (in such
cases) their oppressors, upon such accounts. How should the strong and able in
estate, herein in Christian compassion, help the infirmities of the weak,
especially in reference to their soul-danger thereby; or to see to the good
education of their childeren, and that their widows and orphans (chiefly be
relieved, etc. how by such charitable deeds (especially with the addition of
instructions and encouragments) might you in so doing draw others to Christ and
instrumentally save their precious souls? consider what, out of your Revenues
you can with a cheerful heart and ready hand, yearly, monthly, or weekly return
to God, in a thanks-offering; by his now many, many receivers near you, or
known to you, for the all which you have received besides; and consider,
(according to the Apostles rule) how God has prospered you the preceding week,
and let that grace of an humble, thankful, true christian charity, have its due
operation in you in her proportion; and if rents and gains will not do it as
you desire, then cut off sinful excesses in vain expenses, more closly and
barely, in too costly and curious apparel, lavishing entertainments, in
inconsideratly costly buildings, now the world is near her departure, by her
great shaking fits ceising upon her; yet these are the common sins of the
times, and the breeders of men's future sorrow, and too late repentance, when a
much better and safer improvement should have been made thereof; now you may
make God your debtor, by his promise, and your selves temporally more blessed
by giving than by receiving. If men did but cast in a tenth of what they
receive, or but even of what many vainly consume, etc. into Gods treasury, for
such charitable uses, or any other like, (for the world abounds with objects of
that nature) there is no question, but they would find a better return, yea
(happily) many better returns, of that tenth which they gave, or some others out
of their estates vainly consume (and that with advantage) above all the nine
parts that they or such others detained from such offerings to God; besides the
prayers, praises and thanksgivings from men thereupon, which God will observe
and reward. Let me only add this comprehensive consideration for all, at
present; That your final sentence of approbation or condemnation will, by
Christ himself, be passed mainly upon that account, See Everlast. Gos. p. 19,
20. where Mat. 25. is expounded. Obs. it well.
Mat. 25. as carrying it well or ill in that kind, to such little ones, or
disciples of his, in relieving, visiting, clothing them, (which says Christ,
is done to himself,) but if men injure and persecute them, how heavy will their
judgment be? but if in them Christians relieve Christ? they must labor to do
it, for Christ's sake; in faith, in obedience, out of love, out of thankfulness
to the first giver, who made them large receivers first, whereupon they are
much in his debt, and should endeavor much to come out of some part of it,
(for which God may discharge in full) before death come, which cuts off further
opportunity, and imprisons all unbelievers for such debts, Dan. 4.7.
[oh that men would consider it] before the time of execution come! for then
all such interest is gone, and they leave [most likely] a curse to their
successors, entailed on their estates to consume in sin, or give them up to
serve Satan's interest, or to make them become a prey to the devourer, or a
booty to the supplanter, one way or other, etc. And such persons should in
these times lay to heart this consideration for two reasons. 1. By how much the
times are more provoking of Gods wrath; so all estates are more tottering
therefore it would be more wisdom to secure much, whilst ye may, by committing
it to Gods safe insuring hands; it may, more likely, rescue the rest, or keep
of vengeance the longer, and so more time of well doing will be allowed. Again,
Satan has great wrath, because his time is now very short, and therefore he
marches furiously with his hosts of evil men and devils to ruin all he can;
Christians should then likewise [vi and armis] with all their might give him
the repulse, by laying out themselves in their persons, possession, parts,
posterity, their all for Christ; whence two encouragements. 1. Christ will
surely give them both victory, and recompense; and the devil being resisted, as
the greatest coward, he will also flee, Jam. 4.7.2. As the times are very bad,
so Christians help is more needful; and the rather, because we are fallen into
the dregs of bad times, when upon many weighty considerations, we may expect
Christ's coming very shortly, and the best that live now and lawfully enjoy
plentiful estates, know not whether they or theirs shall retain [then] any of
the things which they now possess: yet let such take this consolation, that
they and their posterity being faithful will gain by that change in this world,
when one in a bed, in the field, in the mill, by the Angels will be carried ^n
the 4 quarters of the earth, to Christ as their arc, or as the Eagles to the
carcass, Mat. 23.28. and planted in a better soil, and much better estate, to
inherit the mercies promised to the forefathers, See Obs. 20. (...) Tract. on
Rev. 20, 22.
etc. I pray God sanctify such as here them, by these Divine truths thus
briefly hinted; and let me to that end, offer this caution to all serious
Christians, to take heed lest (as Israel of old entered not into Canaan because
of unbelief) that their unbelief [if not their slighting of these Divine
truths] cause not Christ in displeasure to bring them late into the New
Jerusalem state at the first blessed Resurrect. when, as some ancients
conceived, there will be [mora] to some, though I doubt not but all the
faithful till then, [and not only actual Martyrs] will have some part in that
state longer or shorter, it is dangerous to contemn or oppose any Divine truths
such as these are; [and as I from good ground know these to be.] As for meaner
Christians I only say this, See Satan's seven Vials. Forerunner p. 41, 42.
which is much in few words, let them walk in their general and particular
callings, wherein they are called, with God faithfully, they then will have
this strong support that he will not fail them nor forsake any of them, and to
that end consider what is said before concerning these last times, etc. Other
improvements of these truths we briefly hinted in our Pract. pieces on Gen
3.15. Rev 22 20. Jer. 3.17. etc. which with this Exhortation I leave to
Christians use and Gods blessing; praying at present, after that ancients mode
with some addition.

Domine Jesu si qua pro tenuitate mea in his scripsi, quae mea sunt, non tua,
tuipse in ^s ignosce mihi; omnia autem quae tua sunt, a me tam indigno, hic
prolata agnoscant etiamque tui. Amen.

(i. e.) L. Jesus, if I have in these things written any out of mine own
meaness, which are my own, but not thine, pardon thou me therein, but let thy
serve. also acknowledge all those things which are thine own, though here tendered
to them by so unworthy a person as my self. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Tit. p. 1. K. for p. 7 r. Tohu vabohu. Word Writ. r. 3. Vaus for 3. Zains. in
fold. leaves r. reunited not recruted. builder not redeemer, veiled not railed.
in S. of Dan. 366. not 666.

An account of the composing and Parcels contained in this Book: with some
Apologetical hints. July 27. 1672.
1. FIrst in general, observe from the beginning of the general Title page, and
the leaf next following, where the nature and use of all parts is showed, that
those books there called the Principles, namely, those first three of the four
parts Printed before the burning of London, An. Dom. 1666. of which, near 600.
of several sorts were burnt and lost: viz. the Prodromus, the Irenicon and
Parallel, contain many things which are Essays of mysterious Discoveries
containing much matter of Arguments, as in the 16. Divine These. p. 3, 4 etc. of
the Iren. 6. Inferences following are deduced: and from the 4, and 5. c. of
Rev. p. 9. ensuing to p. 33. (wherein many observable things are contained) are
7. other pertinent Inferences drawn: So also Arguments from the Scripture sense
of the Lords Prayer, and Articles of Faith, p. 90 91. of Iren. etc. 2. Observe
in general, that from the varietes of the Discoveries in the said three books
were by a special hand of Providence those 8 comprehensive convincing Arguments
deduced in [(...)] or the Word Written, which as strangly was published (as
might be showed:) whereunto likewise very many upon like account might be
added, as being in like manner couched in such mysterious Discoveries and
observable passages upon many occasions therein contained; and many from the
31. Useful observations to understand mystical Prophesies after the Tract. on
Rev. 22, 20. I might here add others from the nature and end of these
Doctrines, as that they are Homogeneal Harmonious and uniform with all other
Christian Doctrines, p. 50. to the end, not new, but only Scriptural
explications of the Old; Assert, eight of the Key, and from the end of them,
viz. the fulfilling of the promised mercies to the Forefathers, p. 5, 6, 7, 8,
9 10. I have observed 4 places in Scripture Divinity, wherein these Doctrines
naturally fall in: otherwise there will be a Chasme and void place from
Scripture grounds observable. First the Consideration of the general Execution
of Christ's 3 Offices is to precede the particular as being the chief part of
that well grounded distinction in the 11, and 12. Divine Thesis, in p. 5, 6. of
the Irenicon. 2dly, Sacred Scripture teaches, that after Christ has satisfied
for sin, risen again, ascended, and sitten the appointed time at the right hand
of God on his Fathers Throne, till he make his foes his footstool: then he will
begin to sit on his own Throne, at his coming the 2d time without sin, only for
Salvation to all his People, to perform that Adoption to the raised Sts. even
the Redemption of their Bodies, Romans 8.23. by freeing them from the corruption
of the grave, etc. And 2dly, all those alive from all their enemies [both Men
and Devils] to serve God without so much as fear of them, all the days of
their lives, Luke 1 71. Rev. 20* etc. and to redeem even the inferior
creatures from the bondage of corruption [from Men or other Creatures] into the
glorious, etc. viz. in their capacity in that state of the restitution of all
things, Romans 8.22. Acts 3.21. See for this in the Everlasting Gospel on Genesis
3.19. p. 8. the 6. particular there.

3dly, From the Scripture explication of the Lords Prayer, that his Name may be
then hallowed in earth as it is now, and till then in heaven: and so his
Kingdom may come and will be done in earth [then] as in heaven [now]: which
will be perfectly done upon the coming of that Kingdom by Angels and raised
Sts. in that world, and by others then alive in a very great measure. See p.
90, 91. of the Iren. and New Jer. p. 4, 15 the first Use.

4thly, It is in part the end of that state both of the faith and hope of many
of Gods servants who now groundedly both believe and hope for, such their
interest in that state of the promised mercies to the Forefathers, as we
showed largly in our Key, being a part of Csts. Purchase, and of the Sts.
inheritance for so long a time; of which, much is said in Scripture, etc. See
the Key of the covenanted mercies to the Forefathers and their (spiritual)
seed, (as we here touch) but that which in gnneral we shall only here farther
set down, as to the former Argum. is this one most comprehensive Foundation of
Multitudes of particular Arguments, in several kinds, from several sorts of
Subjects, considered in the whole work; namly, [That Doctrine is Divine truth,
which has not only clear Scriptures for the nature and substance of it, and
for all useful and profitable parts and branches of it, but also for the
distinct and clear handling of both it and them from Scripture foundations, and
this farther [which is yet of very great weight where the faith thereof is
wrought] that these Doctrines are only in substance the promised mercies to the
Forefathers, Ab. Is. and Jacob, and all their spiritual seed, both circumcised
and uncircumcised for that state in special through that one Divine seed
Christ, Gal. 3. to be fulfilled in that world to come, Heb. 2.3. Luke 20.35,
36. in the time of the New Heavens and New Earth, etc. which is the time of
Christ's great day of Judgment, and of his Davidical Kingdom, which is another
strong foundation of the same promised mercies of all the spiritual Sons and
Daughters of David through and with Christ himself then in that world.] I might
add many others, etc. But now for the first said members, viz. the substance
and main branches of these Doctrines that have clear Scripture grounds, that he
that runs may read, in the whose work: but for the 3d, which is the distinct
handling of those things some may question; therefore amongst the many
distinctions in our Key (whereof many were not before this work observed that I
knew of) I shall instance in the two New Jerusalems, one the immediate work of
God to be made by himself their for the Saints raised after Christ's appearance
or coming, Heb 11.10, 16. and described gloriuosly, Rev. 21. which is not the
future glory of heaven (as formerly mistaken) for fifteen reasons etc. See New
Jeru^. p. 9, 10, 11, 12, etc. The other made by men for the converted Jews and
Gentiles, as the Prophet Esaias says expressly by Strangers and their Kings, Esa.
60.9. See New Jerus. 6, 7. and for the 4th. member that for those promised
mercies to the said Forefathers, and David will then be accomplished to all
the Elect, that have lived before, or suffered with or for Christ before that
his 2d coming in the clouds of Heaven; and that they shall have their rest with
the Apostles, 2 These. 1.7. and be rewarded then, Rev. 11.18, 19. and all such
have their part in all that promised mercy in that state, our grounds of those
covenanted mercies after the preparatorie: 21 assertions laid down in the Key,
may sufficiently (if well considered) I conceive, satisfy all serious
unprejudiced, understanding Christians, which I doubt not, to such may much
more be made evident, from divine Authority; and these things would be greatly
enquired into, if Christians (but compently) knew and believed such their own
mercy and interest in that state with Christ in that long continued, excellent,
holy and happy condition which he has purchased for them, and gives them
interest in with himself, being joint heirs thereof with himself. A large
volume might be written, and to good effect, on these 3 Articles to this end:
1. of Christ's coming to that first judicial act of Judgm. Dan. 7. above 1000.
years before the last trump, and raising of the wicked; suddenly (as probable)
after the faithful that departed in the 1000 years, as Esa. 65.20. 2dly, of the
communion of Sts. both raised and living. 3dly, of the resurrection of the just
only; and all from good scripture warrant, if those obstacles mentioned in
Asser^ 10. of the Key were not too evident in the world, etc. but these hints
may here suffice in general. Now we come to the particular consideration of the
parts and parcels, with things observable and profitable to be pointed out to
those wise specified, Dan. 12.10. and to endeavor to remove such hindrances
in their way (though from many others it seems not to be expected. 1. The
Irenicon, or peaceable consideration of Christ's Kingdom, was at first the only
book intended (as by the method thereof set down chap 1. p 2. may appear) which
being perused by many judicious persons in those studies, and especially by
that one well known, and well approved Mr. Tho Pecke (whose Test is set at the
end of it) after many incitements thereunto, was Printed with the Prodromus,
An. Dom. 1665. which Prodr. much consisting of many occasional useful matters
after put together, and the Printting thereof being much encouraged, was as a
porch to the house, afterward joined to the Iren. and usefully there quoted.
The first mainly remarkable matter therein is the 16. divine Thoses, p 9, 10,
11. introducing that great foundation of distinguishing from scripture warrant,
the consideration of Christ's execution of his 3 great Offices in respect of his
Universal Church under the old and new Testament, and world to come, from the
particular, in respect of every believing soul; the first as the work the
Father gave him to do: the other, as the improvement or application of that
work by his holy Spirit: upon which great Scripture ground that first Practical
Treatise on Gen 3 15. was composed, in which much may be observed of very great
weight, etc. though I found nothing written before of that matter, etc.

The next Paper, p. 14, 15, etc. of the New Jerusalem, etc. being more fully
handled in our next practic. Tract on Jer. 3.17. therefore I say here no more
of it; where the distinction of the New Jerus. the immediate work of God
provided for the Forefathers, Heb. 11.10 16. is explained* in which the Elect
that died before, shall have their part, as differing from those of the nations
that are saved, who shall walk in the light thereof, Rev 21. so Assertion 14.
in the Key, of which little before found. The 3d is the letter to Mr. Call.
showing the order and times (in a latitude) of the Seals, Trumpets, and Vials
in the Rev. as a preparative to the Parallel. etc. p. 22, 23, etc. and then
there was added unto the former, as a supplement to it [for both jointly give
much light to the book of Rev.] the larg Paper of Dec 7 64. p. 26, 27, etc.
concerning two defects in Mr. Durhams [otherwise good] book of Scotland,
wherein many material things are couched, etc. and p. 44: procedure is made to
finish the 16 Theses in the 3d period, etc. Lastly was added the Paper of Sept.
27. 64. p. 47. of the personal appearance of Christ. Of which, see much more,
to prove both that, and the personal reign, Asser. 7 of the Key, where much is
said thereof in a little room, etc.

In the Iren. forenamed, observe in the beginning, the useful table of
Chronology, with the Preface, and the Advertisment, showing the occasion of the
answers, to the reasons against Christ's personal reign in c. 3. p. 35, 36, etc.
but in c. 1. p. 2. is the method of that book, and in c. 2. with the 16
forenamed divine Theses, are joined 6 inferences drawn from them, from p. 3. to
p. 9. unto which were subjoyned in the same chap. many profitable discoveries
of Mysteries, from Rev 4, and 5. chap. with 7. inferences from the same, from p
9. to p. 35. of c. 3. (as we have a little before showed.) In c. 4. p. 41, 42.
are the 6. several senses of Christ's comings in Scripture, well approved of by
the said Mr. Tho. Peck, to which, 2 other are added in our Key Assert. 6. in
the fifth sense many texts of the Apostles are applied p. 44, 45. to 38. but the
6th is explained in the note, page the last of the Word Written, also many
Testimonies of the last times from the Apostles Peter, James, John, and Paul,
to all which 4 Christ appeared gloriously, as p. 49, 50, 51, 52, etc. In c. 5.
are Satan's three Babels defeated in order by God, and all which, Christ in his
reign will bring to utter confusion; not observed else where. Threien also is
showed according to that Foundation he spoke by all the holy Prophets, Act.
3.21. how God spoke by Enoch, Jude 14. by Jacob, Gen 49. by Moses, Deuteronomy. 32,
33. and Lev. 26, etc. and by Balaam, Numb 24. of the latter days. The rest of
the Prophets Testimonies are contained, c. 6. and the larg evidences from the
book of Psalms, c. 7. according as our Savior said in Moses, the Prophets, and
Psalms, it was written of me, etc. Unto these are added the concurring
testimonies in the Gospel and Acts, c. 8. [the Apostles witnessings were spoken
of before, c. 4 p. 44, 45. to 48, 49, 50, 51, 52.] which general Argument being
our third in the Word Written, I have not found else where explained [as for
Jonah, besides his being a Type of Christ, and foretelling the destruction of
Niniveh, as Christ will destroy the Assyrian, (i. e.) he who shall be in his
place at that time, as we have here to our purpose most remarkably spoken of, 2
King, 14. and in p 90, 91, etc. are the Arguments from the Lords Prayer and
Articles of Faith, to p. 97. where lastly is adjoined the Appendix of the first
bodily resurrection, concerning which, I having made enquiry What was written
of it before, but finding nothing considerable, drew up that Appendix to that
effect. And so we briefly come to the 3d part, containing also Principles or
Foundations; namely, the Parallel of the witnessings of the greatly beloved
Prophet Daniel, and of John the dearly beloved Disciple, Evangelist, and most
Seraphical Dr. of Divinity, and also a Prophet, largly endued with the spirit
of Prophecy in his double book of the Rev. containing the Seal Prophecy of
the civil affairs of the Roman Monarchy: and 2d the little book Prophecy,
Rev. 10. of the Ecclesiastic affairs of the Roman Monarchy; from both whose
double Testimony, Gods spirit has laid down (though divinely mistical) the
most strong, and many ways wonderful and excellent evidence and confirmation
of these Doctrines of the world to come, above all others; and left on purpose,
to be the inquiring Christians Key of Prophesies; and for the profitable using
of the same Key, we have endeavored in an untraced path, to manifest the book
of Rev. to be a Divine mystical comment upon the hidden part of Daniel, sealed
and shut up till the times of the end, when in the Rev. Christ so unsealed
them, and commanded John to leave them unsealed, c. 22. 10. And for the use of
this very helpful instrument, was the said Parallel intended: First, to be
short, as the 4th head in our said method, which we found afterward necessary
to make a part by it self; yet as an additional suppliment to the Iren. as p.
1. of it, and it being as a standard, rightly taken from Scripture Texts, was
apt so to discover sundry men's former mistakes (as by the fifth Assertion in the
Key, with the reference thereof, may be manifest) and as a preparative to the
said Parallel, are set down, the sum and order of the Seals, Trumpets and Vials
in the Rev. in the foresaid letter to Mr. Call. Prod p. 22. and the intendment
of the forenamed 2 prophetical books; viz. the Seal Prophecy, and the Book
Prophecy in the Iren p. 26, 27. where observe with Mr. Pecke that note of the
book in the margent: and since so many hundred of both the Prod. and Iren. were
burnt, I drew up the Scheme of the Rev. now joined with the Summary of Daniel,
to be placed before the Abridg. of Dan. Prophetical Visions, as being all 5
very useful preparatives for the right understanding and improvement of the
Parallel of both Books one with another, which both witness the same divine
Truths of these natures; and, though without considerable pains that skill will
not be like to be attained: for (as Gold and Jewels are hidden deep in the
Earth and Sea) so that much better Treasure of spiritual and divine Wisdom,
viz. the understanding (competently) these divine Truths, is with much pains
and industry to be searched out and dug up; since the same divine hand that
has so deeply hidden both, does so point out unto men what diligence they must
use that will obtain them. It may be sufficient for some to understand the
substance of these Doctrines concerning the promised mercies to the
forefathers, and their spiritual seed respecting that state: but such as have
opportunity and ability, especially Ministers, ought to be skilful in all the
parts of their conveyance; as in the end of the Key, upon the faithful and
humble searching whereof, much divine light and comfort may be attained, etc.
but this has much more encouragment of blessing; The secret of the Lord is
with them that fear him, and he will show them his Covenants, Ps. 25.14. [Heb.]
His Covenant to make them know it* of which, this is a choice part, and in that
discovery of such coveynanted mercies opened in the Key, and in the issue of
Revelation Prophecy, to be fully accomplished in the world; and will much fit
all Sts. for the things not seen nor heard, nor which have not entered into the
heart to conceive, for eternity after Christ's last coming or descending from
heaven, These 4.16. of which coming, with the rest named, c. 4. p. 41, 42. of
the Iren. was that last practical piece upon Rev. 22.20. which only remained
now to have an account given of it, which will be best done of that, and of
other Practicals, by due perusals of it and them which with the 31.
Observations, and Answers following, with all the^e Premises I now commend to
the pious Christian Readers care, and Gods blessing: Unto which end I desire
with all cheerfulness, to afford my assistance, etc.

And after all, observe 2 things; First, that many matters be handled 3 times
in the whole work. 1. As discoveries of Mysteries. 2. As Inferences and
Arguments drawn from them. 3. As Practicals and Improvements, and all usefully
and needfully enough.

2. That the books are thus in order; 1. The Key (with this Account) containing
the Marrow of the work. 2. The General Title Page, the Cream of all Evidence of
Christ's Kingdom. 3. The Substance of Argument from the Principles in those 3,
viz. 4. The Prodromus. 5. The Irenico^s; to which, 6. the Scheme with the 7.
the Parallel are annexed. 8. The Everlasting Gospels, 1. part on Genesis 3.15. 9.
Its ^. part on Rev. 22.20. 10. The New Jerusalem, on Jer. 3.17.

FINIS.

