Some PROPOSALS, by a Merchant, touching the COIN.
GREAT Obstructions in Trade and in Receiving the King's Revenues, arises from
these Two Objections:

First, That Money is Clipped, or mixed Metal, or not Sterling.

Secondly, That the Government has not appointed any Persons, or any certain
way for Tradesmen and Collectors of the King's Revenues, easily to know which
is Sterling.

Wherefore to prevent further Clipping, and to make Money pass with more
certainty, and to promote Trade and Ease in Collecting the King's Revenues, and
as some present Remedy 'till Silver can be had and new Money Coined, it is
Proposed,

First, That all old Money, as well Clipped as Unclipp'd, that is now or shall
be by some short time brought into the Exchequer, to have immediately stamped
the exact Weight upon each Piece what it weighs, and also such other Mark
stamped upon it to declare it to be such Sterling Money as shall pass, as the
Government shall think fit to have Sterling Money distinguished and known by,
and that it may be Enacted, That all such Money so stamped and marked, may pass
for Sterling. Crowns, Half-Crowns, Shillings or Six-Pences, as they are Coined
for, but to pass only so long as each piece continues of such Weight as is so
stamped upon it, but yet only 'till such a time to be mentioned as can be
thought New Money can be Coined; and after such a Day the Exchequer obliged to
take in again all that continues of such a Weight as is so stamped upon it: By
this the Exchequer loses Nothing, because the Exchequer receives none back
that is of less Weight than it was stamped for when delivered out. This will
furnish us with a great quantity of Money to circulate for present, 'till we
can have Bullion to Coin: For this way of new Stamping can be sooner done than
new Coining; and may require more Silver to Coin the same quantity of New
Money, if we should Re-coin it: Haste and Speed in bringing out Money that will
pass, is in this juncture almost as necessary, as Money it self.

And by thus Stamping the present Weight upon each Piece, we shall prevent its
further Clipping, because no Man shall be obliged to take such Money as is
tendered with less Weight than is stamped upon it.

Secondly, That Encouragement be given to bring out all old broad Money, which
also must be done with some certainty of Weight, because there is difference in
it; wherefore let the old broad Money be all brought into the Exchequer, to
have the Mark for Sterling put upon it, and on each Piece its exact Weight; and
then it may be Enacted, That all such old Money so marked for Sterling, and of
such and such Weight, shall pass for so much more, as the Government shall
think fit to Enact it to pass for; as suppose the Shilling of such Weight for
12 d. 13 d. 13 d. to be stamped upon it, according to its Weight, and also the
old Crowns, Half-Crowns, and Six-Pences, all pro Rato more or less, as shall be
thought fit, according to its Weight.

Every Man will readily bring in his Money to be so stamped, and take a Tally
for it, though it lies in the Exchequer Fourteen Days or a Month before he get
his individial Money out again without Interest, because in a Months time the
same Money shall be delivered again to (...) that has such a Tally (which
Tally may be made saleable or transferrable) with a Stamp of 5 6 or 8 per Cent.
or more value as the Government shall think fit: Thus he that brings in the
broadest Money shall have the greater value stamped upon it in proportion to
its Weight; whereas if it should be brought into the Mint to be Coined, each
Man cannot have his Money, so soon out of the Mint as it may be by thus
Stamping; but this broad Money also to pass, by the New Stamp only, until such
a certain Day as shall be thought fit to be Enacted, always provided, That the
said broad Money be not diminished of the Weight so stamped upon it; and then
the Exchequer to take it in again on such certain Day as shall be thought fit.

Thridly, That Encouragement be given by Act of Parliament to bring out all old
Milled Money, by Enacting that Milled Money shall pass for some certain rate
more then it is Coined for, but yet only 'till such time as shall be thought
fit, wherein a consideration is to be had in what time all the old Money as
well Clipped as Broad can be new Coined, or other Silver into new Money; and to
make the time for passing the Milled Money accordingly: and that a Clause be
brought in to fix a Day, That after ^uch a Day no old Money Clipped or
unclipp'd (otherwise than Milled Money) shall pass in payment, that so we may
once see an end of all old Money, and have nothing but new and old Milled
Money; and if any old Money, Clipped or unclip'd, shall after such a Day be
found, it shall only sell by the ounce at a rate less than Coined Money.

Fourthly, All old Money that is not brought into the Exchequer by such a Day,
to be marked and stamped for Sterling, the hazard of not being Sterling, shall
lie upon the Proprietor.

Fifthly, That all new Money that shall be Coined may not pass after it is less
in weight than what the same is Coined for.

Thus taking all Money by weight it will for ever (Infallibly) destroy the
Clipping Trade, for which so many have been Hanged.

Object. This will give a great deal of trouble to weigh every piece of Money
we take.

Answer, I. He that will not be at the trouble of weighing, deserves to be the
only Person that can suffer by want of Weight.

II. Were we not better undergo the trouble of weighing, and so know the true
value of what we have, than be at the vast loss and uncertainty we now are
liable unto by Clipped Money.

It is the Wisdom and Practice of some other Countries I have been in, and
Trade to, to take all their Money by Weight; and there no Man is Hanged for
Clipping, he can hurt no Man but himself; for the next Man will refuse it by
weighing.

But we may make weighing of Money very much easier than we (for want of use)
think it to be, as for Instance, we may do as in other Countries; they tell 20
50 or 100 (or more pieces) of a sort, and then putting all together they take
here and there, 5 10 17 or 20 pieces and weigh so many together, and what such
a quantity wants in weight they judge (and pass) or refuse the whole, if the
Man that pays it does not by so much over Money, make good the want of weight.

In some Places every Woman that sells Fish, or Herbs, has her Scales, and
will refuse all light Money.

I take Occasion at this very Instant the more earnestly, to press that all
Money may pass by weight, because within these Two Days I have seen (in
presence of the Tresurer of the Tu^key-Company) 13 Shillings of the Clipped
Money in one Scale, and a Milled Five Shilling piece in another Scale, and the
Five Shilling piece of Milled Money but weighed the 13 Shillings; This the
Author avers to be true: The 13 Shillings were supposed to be mixed Metal, by
which you may Calculate what great Damage the King may lose by such sort of
Coin.

All this is Intended for public Good; and if I were assured that what ever I
should ask touching the Coin should be done, I would only say let it pass by
weight as the only desire of

EDMOND SHERMAN.

POSTSCRIPT.
SINCE the abovementioned, I hear some discourse, That if the King would Order
all such as pay Taxes, Customs and Excise in Milled Money, to have 10 per Cent.
abated by the Collectors; and that it should be paid out again at the old rate
it were Coined for; and this is by some offered as an Expedient to bring out
Milled Money to Circulate immediately.

To which it may be objected the difficulty for the Exchequer to account with
every Receiver, and the difficulty for every Receiver to abate 10 per Cent. to
each Man out of every small Sum he receives: Besides, This must be length of
Time, for every Man would bring out his Milled Money but as his Tax grows due;
It would put the King upon 10 per Cent. loss (immediately) on all his Revenues,
and yet far greater loss follow; for as the Collector receives it he must pay
it into the Exchequer, and the public Affairs will require it to be paid out
again presenly; and if it be paid at the old rate, it will so speedily come
into Peoples hands, that every one will four Times a Year pay his Tax with 10
per Cent. abatement, nay perhaps 40 times over in Excise and Cust^ms, because
Men are Daily paying those Duties, whereby a vast Loss may happen in Twelve
Months.

Whereas by the Method proposed in this Paper, every Man shall as well as the
Exchequer take and pay his Money at such certain Rates as aforesaid, and the
King will not lose above 10 per Cent. by Milled Money at the end; which I
propose, may be a Year before the time shall expire for the Money to pass at
the Rates herein mentioned; in which time, I hope, Affairs may be in a better
poisture to bear 10 per Cent. Loss, and the very Interest the King pays, may
amount to as much.

Lastly, For Speed and Ease of Complaints, I have lately heard from Suffolk,
That the Poor cannot get their Money to pass for Provisions, nor their Money
returned to the Exchequer, nor Exchanged in the Country for New Money when it
comes out. It is Proposed, That Men of Loyalty to the King may be joined to
such as are Skilled in ^i^ver, who have leisure to attend Daily, may by
Commission in every City, Countrey-Town, or Shire-Town have this new stamped
Money and Milled Money, and New Coined Money sent them out of the Exchequer,
and they upon Oath, to the best of their Skill take in all Sterling Money and
pay for it in the aforesaid New Stamped, New Coined, or Milled Money sent them,
and Weekly return to the Exchequer, for Sterling Money under their Seals as
they Receive, to be New Stamped in the Exchequer, as aforesaid, and from thence
issued out again as fast as it can be Stamped; and by every Parcel so returned
under Seal it to the Evchequer, it will be judged what Commissioners perform
their Duty best; This will be great Ease to the common People all the Kingdom
over.

Some Men propose thst the Exchequer should recieve from the Collectors all
Money of mixed Metal which the Collectors may have taken, that is not apparent
Brass, to which may be objected that (if any thing but Sterling be admitted)
there are Reasons to suspect, that so many bushels of mixed Metal-Money may be
paid to the Collectors, or by the Collectors of all Revenues (who are not upon
Oath) paid to the Exchequer as may make Twice Twelve Hundred Thousand Pounds
too little to countervail the King's damage.

But if mixed Metal-Money must pass, then some plain Cautions and Directions
may and ought to be given.

When we make New Money, it were to be wished we might have such a thing in our
Coin as a Pound Sterling: by Coining Twenty-Shilling-Pieces, it would be more
certain, and readier in telling great Sums; yea if we had Five Pound, Ten
Pound, or greater Pieces, it is believed that a way may be contrived to secure
such large Money from being any ways Counterfeited.

January 7th 1695.

