William Penn AND THE QUAKER IN UNITY, THE Anabaptist Mistaken AND IN ENMITY
OR, A Brief Reply to a Sheet sent abroad by JEREMY IVES, Entitled, William
Penn's Confutation of a Quaker: or, An Answer to a late Libel.

William Shown.

Printed in the Year 1674.

William Penn and the Quaker IN UNITY, etc.
TO pass by his Recital of his former Goliath li^e Challenge (which he falsely
calls A Sober Request) in the Front of this Sheet, enough being said to it
already by several Pens, I proceed to consider what follows, And I quickly find
him under Grand Mistakes or Wilful Ignorance: First, In calling my Return to
his Scandalous Paper a Libel, because but the two principal Letters of my Name
were at it; in this he deals not fairly, because he might have known my Name
for asking of the Person that gave him one of the Papers into his Hand, and so
might several of his Brethren also. But further, those Writings, or Printed
Papers, where the two real Letters of the Author's Name is affixed are not to
be called nor accounted Libels, especially when the Name may be known for
asking: Besides, Reader, Jeremy has contradicted and bewrayed himself in this
very Sheet of his, as is manifest by comparing Paragraph the 6th with the 2d;
in the one he says, He knows not who W. S. is: In the other he says so much
as may signify he does know; his words are thus, Some of those Opinions of
mine, which in HIS PAPER AND BOOK, entitled, The Universallity of the Light
Asserted, he calls Absurd and Ridiculous. Now my Name was at large to the Book,
and W. S. to this Paper, and he himself calls them both mine; so its evident he
was not ignorant of my Name (or if he was, it was Wilful Ignorance) only he
seems minded to make himself Sport in a Mountebank manner and to set it up for
a Libel, and to bring William Penn's words against a real Libel, to fight with
it, in this he has imitated his Brother Hicks, who formed and fashioned a
Quaker, and his Opinions, and then Dialogued with him, which is one of the
greatest Abuses among men, to present things contrary to what indeed they are,
the practice of an arrant impostor.

Now as Writings are accounted no Libels, where the two Letters of the Authors
Name is affixed; so it does not always follow, that where a Name is at large to
Books or Writings, that it is the Authors Name; for about the same time this
Scandalous Paper of Jer. Jves's came abroad, Richard Baxter, in a printed
Sheet, warns People of two printed Papers under his Name at large, which he was
not the Author of; so this Jer. Ives has no ground to Carp and Jeer at my
cautious Writing, and putting in these Words, Said to be, within a Parenthesis:
for I say again, if I had not had some other Reasons besides his Name twice
affixe, I might have endeavored to have known it from himself, without
deserving to be charged with Impertinency, Guile or Blame; and he and the rest
of his Brothren would show themselves more like Christians, if they would
manifest the like Care and Circumspection in what they father upon the Quakers.

And now I would have the Reader clearly understand, that William Penn's Answer
(which Jeremy espouses and speaks in against me) was not to such a Sort of
Paper, where the two Letters of the Authors Name was affixt, and might have
been known son asking; he sought and enquired, and could not learn it (neither
would the Baptist, in whose Favor it seemed to be published, own it, nor
discover the Author) therefore this Jeremy has very foully and evilly applied
his Words, and has put this Case in its stead without the like Reason or
Ground; herein he has dealt more like a Forger, then a fair Adversary; and
were he of a tender Spirit, and his Conscience rightly informed, I would appeal
unto him to answer, whether he is not conscious of his Guilt herein: I do tell
him and the World, that I had no Design to conceal my Name; though W. S. was
only in the Copy, yet I gave the Printer express Order to put my Name at
length, though he omitted it, for which I blamed him: It might have prevented
Jeremy of a colorable Pretense for the chiefest Matter in his Answer. But
however, the World cannot see, nor truly say, as he falsely insinuates, That the
Quakers allow Nameless Libels to blast their Adversaries, and he has no Proof
for it, being never their Practice.

Now Reader, the Cause of the Quakers remains the same still; it concerns them
to insist upon their Charge against T. H, and all that abet him in his
Fictitious Forged Dialogues, wherein he has evilly presented them, and their
Principles to the Nation: Now if this Jeremy (who was deputed to be one of the
three or four on the Baptists Part at Barbican) will appear in the stead of T.
H. etc. and answer to their Charge of Forgery, etc. they will be ready to meet
him publicly as Time and Place shall be agreed upon; but as single Jeremy they
have no Reason to regard his daring interposing Challenge, till they are heard
concerning T. H. from his first Dialogue to the Book, entitled, The Quakers
Appeal answered; or till T. H. confesses and acknowledges his Folly and
Unchristian Behavior toward them.

In my Return to his Scandalous Paper, I said, I did not count it worth my Time
to write or discourse with him about Matters relating to the pure Christian
Religion, barely as J. I. and that as so he was not worth disputing with; and I
make the same Account still and say the same again; and W. Penn has not
contradicted me therein, in saying at the Barbican-Meeting, About the Beginning
of his Discourse with him, he had found him a pretty fair Adversary; which had
chiefly Relation to the Experience he had of him nigh two Years before at
Wickam, at which Time he behaved himself more fairly then of late; and W. P.
might expect the like then, and say, 'He was as free to dispute with him as
any: But my Saying is since Barbican and Wheeler-Street-Meeting, occasioned by
my Observation both of the Matter and Manner of his Discourse and unsavory
Behavior, and since his vapouring unchristian Challenge came to Light, and his
manifesting himself a Confederate with T. H. to rescue him in his Forgeries,
etc. And though W. P. said so then, yet since he has given him occasion enough
to be of my Mind now, he having verified that Saying in Scripture, EVIL MEN AND
SEDUCERS WAX WORSE AND WORSE.

And if he understands himself commended by W. R. for a Conscientious,
tenderhearted, Zealous Disputer, who has the Glory of God, the Good of Souls,
and the Prosperity of the Christian Religion chiefly in his Eye; in what he
undertakes he very grossly mistakes himself, and abuses him, as he may plainly
see in his last Sheet in Answer to his Sober Request, etc. Now it is because he
is not such an one, and professes Christianity, and the Office of a Minister
thereof, and talks of God's Assistance in a Work he never set him about; that I
and W. P. also slight single Jeremy, and count him not worth disputing with.

I said also in my Return, That his Tongue (as the Proverb goes) is no Slander
with many grave Citizens and moderate People, who walk not with the Quakers;
and he need not doubt but that I am of the same Mind, and think so still, and
yet not basely contradict my self, in saying, I never met with more Untruths in
so few Lines as in his Paper, and to call them Slanderous Sayings, Lies and
gross Abuses (though I use the Proverb) is no Contradiction; for though many
grave Citizens, etc. do know his Tongue not sufficient to fasten a Slander upon
a Person or People; and that his Reputation, as a Christian, is little
accounted of by many that know him; and that what proceeds from him is not
sufficient to stain or defile the Reputation of others, especially as
Christians; yet it does not follow but that his Lies are Lies, and his
slanderous Sayings are slanderous Sayings, and his gross Abuses are so in
themselves, and may be called so; and some that are not grave Citizens and
moderate People, who know not him, may be traduced by them and deceived so far
as to believe them to be true, to prevent which is the Occasion of those Lines.

And further, I perceive Jeremy thinks it hard, that I should say in my late
Return, etc. That in my Judgment he was fitter to appear pear upon a
Mountebanck's Stage, then in a solemn Religious Christian Assembly to dispute
for Christianity: And he seems offended also that I say, Christianity needs no
Mercenary Agents to propagate its Cause, nor the corrupt Weapons of a Sophister
to defend it: Verily, I do seriously tell Jeremy, I should be glad to see Cause
to alter my Judgment, as to the first; the second no Judicious Christian will
deny; but whether he be the Man, I leave at present upon his own Conscience
further to consider, and do truly tell him, he extremely mistakes me in
charging me with Malice and Railing Accusation, and end avours to blow up his
Reputation, and blast his Credit: I have so much Love to him, that I heartily
wish he had much more of both then he has, that he might be a greater Ornament
to his Profession* and honor that Christianity he in Words professes: I have
no Malice in my Mind toward him, nor no Man upon the Face of the Earth; it is
inconsistant with the Nature of Christianity: I would have him read over my
Lines again, and consider them better; and if his Day of Visitation be not
quite over, I desire he may come to witness that Infallible Evidence of a true
Christian within himself, which no Impostor can give (viz.) The Spirit it self
bearing Witness with his Spirit, that he is a Child of God, etc. he will have
more Cause to rejoice and glory in this then in the Strength of his Arguments,
and Sophistical Reasoning.

This sore Evil is near this Man, to be quick sighted abroad and blind at home,
and to measure others by his own State and private Spirit, censure others for
his own Faults, which he is manifestly guilty of in his Sober Request; to be
sure he has showed little civil Education; neither has he and some of his
Brethren refrained from any Means to endeavor to blow up the Quakers
Reputation in the highest Concern, even as Christians: Now as so, I do not find
by Converse among Men, that he himself has much to blow up, or much Credit to
blast, either among the Baptists or others (some refusing to read any Book or
Paper about Religion, wherein he is concerned) for my Part, I say truly, I
write it more with Sorrow and Grief of Heart, then with Delight to upbraid him,
that he who has been, not only a long Professor of Christianity, but also a
pretended Minister of it, should have so little of either.

And he needs not question the goodness of the Quakers Cause, nor the truth of
Immediate Inspiration, which they are Witnesses of (notwithstanding he seems to
jeer at it) because they count themselves no whit oblieg'd to meet him upon his
own daring Challenge; for as the Controversy now stands, they judge it a mere
Evasion, and wholly Impertinent to the Cause depending betwixt them and the
Baptist; and every Impartial Observer of the whole Series of the Matter will
readily be persuaded so to conclude.

They have not been, nor are not backward to give a Reason of their Faith, and
an Account of their Religion with Meekness and Fear to every one that in
Honesty and Seriousness of Spirit asks them; but some Scribes, Pharisees and
Hypocrites may ask Ensnaring Questions in Enmity and Prejudice, which no true
Christian is obliged to answer in their Way, Will and Time, and have good
Example for it in the holy Scriptures.

And they have been, and are willing to use all Means to remove Ignorance and
Foolishness out of the Hearts of all Men, that they may come to Repentance and
Acknowledgment of the Truth, and be saved; and have not behaved themselves as a
People of lofty disdaining Tempers (as thou falsely suggestest) but with
Meekness have endeavored to instruct those that oppose themselves; and dispute
and reason with them, though they were not the Mouth of a Party, etc. But what
if they count Jeremy (for diverse Reasons) not worth disputing with, seeing he
will not be satisfied without; I will tell him one of my chiefest Reasons,
which is, because it appears to me that he has lost Tendernese of Heart,
Sensibleness of Spirit, Conscientious Zeal, and Circumspectiveness, which I
question not, but he had a Measure of, in the Infancy of his Religion, or the
Day of the Visitation of God's Love, which he was once Partaker of: But now he
is become as the Sale which has lost its Savor, and all his Treasury of
acquired Attainment is but as the Old Manna, which had Worms in it, and stank,
and is now as the deaf Adder, which will not hear the Voice of the Charmer;
etc. and till he better demonstrate himself a Christian in Life, Doctrine and
Practice, and lays aside his Crafty, Acquired, Artificial, Sophistical Way of
Reasoning, by which he deceives the Ignorant, and show forth his Repentance
from dead work, I shall remain of the same Mind; and in the mean Time desire
him to take Notice of the Advice of W. Penn in his last Sheet in Answer to his
pretended Sober Request, viz. That he give better Evidence of his own
Christianity, before he endeavor to unchristian others.

And to help him herein, I also counsel him to take the Advice of his Brother
W. L. in his Letter to him after Barbican-Meeting, 12. October. 74. and consider
his late Book also, which is not to be counted a Libel, though but W. L. affixt
to it: Now if he will not take the Counsel of his Friends, nor of those he
counts his Enemies, it argues, he is not endued with that Wisdom which is from
above, which inclines those that have it to be easily entreated to that which
is good.

And seeing he has taken Pains to set forth some of his Opinions divulged in
Croyden-Market-Place, and has omitted the rest, I think it necessary to insert
them all, as in the Book, which are as follows. THe same Body that is now the
Habitation of the Soul and Spirit, shall rise again, and enter with the Soul
united, into everlasting Joy or Torment. It may be in the great Day of Judgment
God may receive the Heathen to Glory; but it is more then they know whether he
will or no: For those People that have not the Scriptures among them in common,
have no Knowledge of their future Estate. All the Light in men could never
reach them, discover or reveal unto them, That Christ was born of a Virgin, and
that he suffered, etc. It may tell them, that Blasphemy and Drunkenness, etc.
is Sin; but could never tell that God would save them. I do deny that every man
is lighted with the Light of Christ; for the Scripture says, That many are in
Darkness, and stumble, because there is no Light in them. That the Light which
lights every man is not the Light of Christ, yet it is a Divine Light. There
is a Natural Light in all men, which may show them Sin, and this Natural Light
is Divine; for every Gift of God is perfect; therefore Divine. Men may sin out
all Sense of Sin, and become Darkness, and have no Light in them. The Sun may
shine, and some men may shut their Eyes, and will not see it; and some are
blind, and cannot see it: Are they therefore enlightened by it? So likewise,
etc. I will stick by the present Translation of the New Testament, which was
effected by Twenty or Thirty Learned Wise Men, by the King's Authority; and if
I understood Greek never so well, it would be unmannerly to contradict them.
The Light that is come into the World was designed of God to enlighten every
man; but Thousands are not enlightened by it. George Whitehead and William
Gibson are not enlightened with he Light of Christ; though I grant, that there
is a Light an every man, which is Divine, yet not the Light of Christ. I deny
that the Light of God is one with the Light of Christ; the Father and Son are
Relatives, but not one; the Light of the Father, Son and Spirit are Divine, but
not one. That which is Divine in God, becomes Natural when given to men. Some
in the World are without Christ; therefore some in the World are without the
Light of Christ.


Some of these, he says, are laid broakenly down, and not in his Words; he
knows I sent him a Copy of them before they were printed; why would he not tell
me so before now? His saying so now signifies little; if I had noted them
wrong, he showed a lofty disdainful Temper, that he would not show me wherein
in its Season; his saying so now ought not to be regarded: They are all spoken
briefly to in the Book aforesaid; and the Absurdness and Ridiculousness of many
of them is obvious to every Judicious Impartial Reader, to which I refer; the
Title of the Book is, The Universality of the Light asserted, and to be had at
several Shops in and about London.

Now, since his being at Croyden, where he spent some time in Opposing that
word [Inlighteneth] in the first of John, Verse the 9th, contending against our
Friends saying That Christ Inlightens every Man, etc. in a Book of his printed
in the year 1656. Title, Innocence above Impudency, page 16. viz. My Book,
called Quakers Quaking, page 49. viz. I have these Words; I did not oppose the
saying of John, which is, That Christ Inlightene every One that comes into the
World; so if I had met with it timely, it would have saved me that labor of
setting before him, at the end of my Book (if he would have believed himself)
how that Verse is read in diverse Natural Tongues.

But to proceed to the Conclusion with Jeremy at present, he says, He does
once more signify in the Behalf of all Christians generally, and of the
Baptists in particular, offer to prove the Quakers No Christians, and their
Ministers Impostors: I only, in short, say thus much, That the Generallity of
Christians has not employed him, as their Agent (if they should, their Cause
would be at a low Ebb) and for ought I understand, T. H. and the Baptists in
particular, deny and disown their Delegating of him, though he pretended they
had, at Wheeler-street-Meeting: So, for what I see, he would sam be a
Volunteer, Reformado, or Mer enary; and gives himself out to be such, and ready
to do the work thereof before he is listed; This shows he has a Giddy Head, and
a Strong Conceit, and would be doing something which no Christian will thank
him for. Indeed, Jeremy, I advise thee, as before, to take William Penn's
Counsel, and prove thy self a Christian first, and let thy Life and
Conversation preach as loud as thy Tongue, or else besilent for the future.

Now if the Quvkers cannot prevail with the Baptist to have a Public Meeting,
wherein to prove their Charge against Thomas Hicks and those that join with him
in his Ficctious Dialogues People may clearly perceive they are not able to
abide the Test.

Therefore now further: let this Jeremy, T. Hickr and the rest agree together
to give a Description of that Christian and Christian Preacher in all his
Parts, Qualifications, Doctrines, Practices and Obedience, which they charge
the Quaker to be none of: And in the first Place prove and demonstrate
themselves such. and they and the World may receive an Answer thereto; and so
leave all to the Consciences of the Judicious, and all People whose-Profit,
Information and Edification the Quakers desire with all their Hearts, which may
be a Means to bring some Issue to what of late has past between both.

William Shown.
Southwark, the 9th of the 9th Month, 1674.
THE END.

