THE UNIVERSALITY OF THE LIGHT Which shines in Darkness ASSERTED, AND THE
Notions and Opinions OF JEREMIAH IVES (Divulged the 24th of the 2d Month,
1674. in the Marketplace at Crayden in the County of Surrey) DETECTED etc.

Written and Published for the Information of all that desire to know the Way
of Truth, and to walk in it.

By William Shown.

He takes the Wise in their own Craftiness, and the Counsel of the froward is
carried headlong; They meet with Darkness in the day time, and grope in the
Noonday as in the Night, Job 5^13, 14.

This is the Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, and men love
darkness rather because their deeds are evil, John 3.19.

Printed in the Year, 1674.

TO THE READER.
FRIEND,
I Being present, and noting these Opinions of Jeremiah Ives, after some time I
sent the following Letter, with a Copy of them enclosed to him, which I
understand he received with his own Hand; and having received no Line from him,
to signify whether he at the second View, or more mature Deliberation, will
disown any of them, I have now discharged my Mind in a brief Answer to them,
not being Conscious in my self that I have wronged him in a Word: I am not
doubtful, as thou read in an Even Impartial Spirit, and in a Mind void of
Prejudice, but that thou may reap Profit hereby. So commending thee to the
Grace, Love and Light of God, which is able to teach thee to profit, and
preserve thee from Evil present and to come; in a Measure of it I remain thy
Friend,

W. S.

Jeremiah Ives,
I Here-with send thee some of thy Notions or Opinions; My End in so doing is
twofold, First, That thou may take a second view of thy Notions and
Conceits, and see whether I have noted them right, before I communicate them
further. And Secondly, If thou standst by them, I have something in my Mind to
commit to Paper concerning them, in order to show thee, if possible, thy
Darkness and ignorance in the Things of God, though thou have been a long
Professor and pretended Minister of them: And indeed thou did behave thy self
more like a cunning Sophister, with cra^ty Sleights to gain upon the Ignorant
at that time, then like a Grave Conscientious Disputer for the Principles of
the Christian Religion: And whether thou leanest or trustest more upon thy
Acquired Cunning, and Artificial Reasoning in thy Disputes, and other thy
pretended Services for God and the Good of People, then upon the immediate
Assistance, Guidance and Motion of the Spirit of God, I do desire thee
seriously to consider, and leave it to his Witness in thy own Conscience to
answer. The Things of God are very weighty, and ought to be spoaken of and
meddled with by a bridled Tongue, and clean Hands; and in a weighty and serious
Spirit, which is seasoned with Grace and Wisdom, and enabled to divide the Word
aright; which Word is compared to Milk, Strong Meat, Bread, a Hammer, Fire,
Sword, etc. Now he that professes himself a Minister of Christ Jesus, and is
not seasoned and endued with thi^ Wisdom to divide this Word aright, deceives
himself and others. Consider thy Standing and Work, thy latter Day approaches,
lest the Sun set upon thee, or the Spirit of God leave striving with thee, and
thy Candle be put out, and thy Day be turned into Darkness over thee. This is a
Warning in Love to thee, from one who believes the Principles of the true
Christian Religion, professed by these in Scorn called Quahers, and loves all
that walks in them, and lives according to them, which Principle and People I
have known thee to be an Opposer of this 15, or 16. Years; but the God whom
they Fear and Serve, has hitherto blasted thy Endeavors, together with all
the rest of the Champions of Mystery Babylon, and has caused the Knowledge of
his precious Truth to increase, and has established many Thousands in it, and
furnished them with Strength and Wisdom to contend for that one Faith which was
once delivered to the Saints; which Faith purifies the Heart, and gives Victory
over the World; which Faith, and the Work of it, is much wanting among all the
Sects in Christendom, though they have made to themselves many Faiths, every
one contending for the Work of their own Hands, and walking in the Light of
their own Sparks, and in the End lie down in Sorrow; out of which Estate the
Lord has redeemed many, and his Hand is stretched out still to redeem and
deliver more; which is also the earnest Desire and Expectation of him, who
desires the Temporal and Eternal Good and Welfare of all Mankind, and remains
thy Friend,

Southwark, the 5th of the 3d Month, 1674. William Shown.

Some of the Opinions of Jeremiah Ives, divulged in the Marketplace at Crayden
in the County of Surrey, the 24th of the 2d Month, 1674.
THe same-Body that is now the Habitation of the Soul and Spirit, shall rise
again, and enter with the Soul united, into everlasting Joy or Torment.

It may be in the great Day of Judgment God may receive the Heathen to Glory;
but it is more then they know whether he will or no: For those People that have
not the Scriptures among them in common, have no Knowledge of their future
Estate.

All the Light in men could never teach them, discover or reveal unto them,
That Christ was born of a Virgin, and that he suffered, etc. It may tell them,
that Blasphemy and Drunkenness, etc. is Sin; but could never tell that God
would save them.

I do deny that every man is lighted with the Light of Christ; for the
Scripture says, That many are in Darkness, and stumble, because there is no
Light in them.

That the Light which lights every man is not the Light of Christ; yet it is
a Divine Light.

There is a Natural Light in all men, which may show them Sin, and this Natural
Light is Divine; for every Gift of God is perfect; therefore Divine.

Men may sin out all Sense of Sin, and become Darkness, and have no Light in
them.

The Sun may shine, and some men may shut their Eyes, and will not see it; and
some are blind, and cannot see it: Are they therefore enlightened by it? So
likewise, etc.

I will stick by the present Translation of the New Testament, which was
effected by Twenty or Thirty Learned Wise Men, by the King's Authority; and if
I understood Greek never so well, it would be unmannerly to contradict them.

The Light that is come into the World was designed of God to enlighten every
man; but Thousands are not enlightened by it.

George Whitehead and William Gibson are not enlightened with the Light of
Christ; though I grant, that there is a Light in every man, which is Divine,
yet not the Light of Christ. I deny that the Light of God is one with the Light
of Christ; the Father and Son are Relatives, but not one; the Light of the
Father, Son and Spirit are Divine, but not one.

That which is Divine in God, becomes Natural when given to men.

Some in the World are without Christ; therefore some in the World are without
the Light of Christ.

I noted these at the Time and Place aforesaid in Shorthand, and I know not
that I have wronged thee; if thou judge otherwise, I desir^ to hear from thee
suddenly.

W. S.

THE UNIVERSALITY OF THE LIGHT ASSERTED AND THE Notions and Opinions OF
JEREMIAH IVES DETECTED, etc.
Opinion, THe same Body that is now the Habitation of the Soul and Spirit,
shall rise again, and enter with the Soul united into Everlasting Joy or
Torment.

Answer, The Doctrine of the Resurrection of the Just and Unjust in the Day of
Judgment, and their future Estate in Joy or Torment, was always asserted by us
in Scorn called Quakers; though wickedly insinuated and divulged to the
contrary by our Opposers: And this whole Nation may be convinced by our
Conscientious Suffering for bearing witness to the Truth we have received, that
we believe a Future Estate: Else, why should we suffer to keep our Consciences
void of Offense? If we were of the number of those, then might we say, Let Us
eat and drink, and take our fill of Pleasure in the things of this World to
day, for to morrow we shall dye; And let us run down with the Stream of the
Times we live in, and be Men Pleasers, and so preserve our selves from
Suffering: But our Conversation has not been on this manner, but quite the
contrary; and impartial People may see, that it is great Ignorance, if not
Wickedness and Emnity imour Enemies, both Professors and Profane, to endeavor
to father and fasten such a Doctrine upon us: But we pity their Blindness,
knowing that it is the Work of that old Adversary, the Devil (which rules in
the Hearts of the Children of Disobedience) on purpose to make us odious and
hateful to the People, who have a gross Traditional Faith concerning the
Resurrection, as of other Truths of the Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ.

Now the Mystery of Godliness is great, and the Mystery of Iniquity is great
also; and they are revealed to the Babes and Sucklings, and hid from the Wise
and Prudent of this World, the Wit and Cunning of men finds it not out, neither
can the Wisdom of the World comprehend it; the Busy, High-minded, Puffed up,
Contentious Corinthians would be prying into things not made known to them by
the Spirit of the Lord; but Paul, the aged, dealt wisely and gravely with them,
giving them many sharp Reproofs for their high Conceits; telling them, 1 Cor.
4.3, 18.
He could not speak to them as unto Spiritual Men, but as unto Carnal; and
could not minister Strong Meat to them, but Milk; having Envyings, Strife and
Divisions among them; he concludes they were Carnal, and walked as men, wise and
puffed up in their own conceits: But says he to them, If any among you seem to
be wise in this World, let him be a Fool that he may be wise, for the Wisdom of
this World is Foolishness with God, etc. 1 Cor. 3. And in most of his Epistle
he reprehends them for their Failings and Errors.

Now some among them broached this Error also, That there was no Resurrection
of the Dead: Many weighty Arguments he urges to convince them of their gross
Ignorance (1 Cor. 15.) If there be no Resurrection of the Dead, then is not
Christ risen; so on to the 19th verse, where he also says, If in this Life
only we have Hope, we are of all men most miserable, etc. For since by Man came
Death, so by Man came also the Resurrection: In Adam all dye, in Christ shall
all be made alive (he that reads let him understand) Some also among them
might, after they were convinced by his Arguments, enquire, how the Dead were
raised, and with what Body come they forth? To such he says, O Fool, that
which thou sowest is not quickened except it dye; and that which thou sowest,
thou sowest not that Body that shall be, etc. to the end of the Chapter.

And now, if the curious Enquirers of this Age would know further, and presume
above what is written out of the Sense and Knowledge of the Holy Spirit, which
moved Holy Men to write, they are to be answered with Judgment and sharp
Reproof; for the puffed up Spirit and busy Mind, which aspires to know much
beforehand, leads men to neglect the doing that good which they already know;
therefore it was very well said by Geo. Whitchead, (when the Dispute was like
to continue about the Resurrection) That it would be more profitable and
necessary for People to hear a Discourse that may tend to inform them, how they
may be fitted and prepared to be one of that number which shall rise in the
Resurrection to enjoy Everlasting Felicity, and to avoid the contrary; and not
at present to contend about the Sameness of the Body that shall rise, and what
Matter and Form it shall have, and how and when the Soul and Body shall meet,
and be united, and how they shall be entertained in Heaven, etc. About these
things the vain Thoughts and Imaginations of men are many; and some that count
themselves able to teach others, are as ignorant of the Resurrection as
Nicodemus was of the New Birth: And this busy Mind, and unsubjected Spirit,
which learns not at the Feet of Jesus, has great Conceits and Imaginations what
God has done of old, in Generations past, and what he is able to do Thousands
of Years to come; but is ignorant and unacquainted with his Power at present,
believes little of his Power and Ability in their own Particulars in this
present time, wherein they are to know him by his Mighty Power to raise them
out of the Grave of Sin, and give them Victory over it, and so to witness their
part in the first Resurrection: This is of more absolute Necessity then to
enquire, what manner of Bodies God will raise in the Last Day, and how he will
provide and entertain the Soul and Body in Heaven when time shall be no more.

They that know God do believe in him, and can trust him, and do resign up
their Bodies, Souls and Spirits, into his Hand in this World, and in that which
is to come also; and have no doubt but he will provide well for them, if they
persevere in well doing to the end.

Opinion. It may be in the great Day of Judgment God may receive the Heathen to
Glory; but it is more then they know whether he will or no: For those People
that have not the Scriptures among them in common, have no Knowledge of their
future Estate.

Answ. What God will do with the Heathen, it seems thou know not, but art in
thy Thoughts, or may bees about it: They that walk in the Light, in which God
dwells, know more of his Mind; However, thou may read in the Holy Scriptures
of God's Love and Care for the Heathen, in giving his Son a Covenant of Light
to enlighten the Gentiles, and to be his Salvation to the Ends of the Earth;
and that he will give him the Heathen for his Inheritance, and the ends of the
Earth for his Possession: And as some Heathen or Gentiles of old, who had not
an outward Law, condemned the Jews by their Righteous Conversation, by virtue
of God's inward Law in their Hearts; so many called Heathen now, will rise up
in Judgment against titular Christians: And it will be more tolerable or easy
in the Day of Judgment for such Gentiles then for those.

And thou say, Where the Scriptures are not among People, they have no
Knowledge of their future Escate.

In this thou speaks but a Conceit or Divination of thy own Brain, showing thy
Ignorance of the Fountain of all true Knowledge; for there was Knowledge among
men necessary to Salvation before the Scripture was written; and from this
Knowledge the Scriptures proceeded; men were Holy before the Scriptures were
written; men feared God before the Scriptures were written; and the Secrets of
God were with them that feared him; and surely they knew him before they feared
him: And some talked and walked with God before the Scriptures were writ:
Abraham was a Friend of God, and saw Christ's Day, and this is Eternal Life; so
such knew their future Estate; for Eternal Life includes a future Estate: And
God is the same, and Christ is the same; and as he has revealed himself before
the Scriptures were; so he is as able, ready, and willing to reveal himself,
now the Scriptures are, and where the Scriptures are not, and when they shall
be no more; for they were not from Eternity, neither will they continue to
Eternity: And those that had the Scriptures in former Ages, and wanted the true
Knowledge of God, which was before the Scriptures were, knew neither the
Scriptures nor the Power of God, nor their own Estates at that time, nor their
future Estates, but were ignorant of both; yet could boast of the Scriptures,
as thou and many do now, and call themselves Children of Abraham; and say, that
God was their Father; though he of whom the Scriptures testified (whom they
knew not) told them, They were of their Father the Devil, whose Works they did.

So thou and all may see, that the Scriptures did not give them a true
Knowledge of their present nor future Estate, though it is said, they read them
every Sabbath Day, and were as conversant in them as many Sects in Christendom
are now, and thought to have Eternal Life in them, and cried them up and
magnified them, while they cried him down, and crucified him of whom they bore
witness, and from whom they proceeded.

So it is very evident, that the true Knowledge, Fear and Secrets of God were
with men before the Scriptures were writ; and when they were writ, men that had
them were void of the Understanding or true Knowledge of them: as it has been,
so it may be, and is now; men may talk much of the Scriptures with their
Tongues, and carry the Bible in their Pockets, and yet the Devil may rule in
their Hearts.

And People that have not the Scriptures, nor never heard of them, may be
nearer the Kingdom of Heaven then some that have them; as some Heathen, who had
not Moses's Law, did by Nature the things contained in the Law, which was the
Effect of the Law written in their Hearts, this has been, is, and may be: For
we say and affirm, That God affords to all men a Day of Visitation, and puts
them into a Possibility of being saved; else, how would he be clear when he
judges?

Opinion. All the Light in men could never teach them, discover or reveal unto
them, That Christ was born of a Virgin, and that he suffered, etc. It may tell
them, that Blasphemy and Drankenness, etc. is Sin; but could never tell that
God would save them.

Answ. These are Thoughts and Imaginations of thy own Head. and show thy
Ignorance and Unbelief of the Light of God and Christ in men, and the Operation
of it in those that do believe, love and walk in it (and indeed no other knows
the Efficacious Power and Virtue of it to their Salvation, though they may and
shall to their Condemnation) for was it not the Light of God in men, that
showed them, that Christ was to be born of a Virgin, and that told some the
very place, where also, long before the time; and why may not the same Light
show things that are past, as well as things to come? To whom this Light did
not reveal him when he came, they could not know him, but took him to be the
Carpenter's Son, and some said one thing, and some another of him: though they
had the written Prophecies in the Holy Scriptures concerning him; yet they were
as ignorant of him (as he was the Christ of God) as the very Heathen that never
saw the Scriptures; and Christ plainly told them, That they neither knew him
nor his Father.

And it was by the Light of God and Spirit of Revelation in that day, and not
by the Scriptures, that any came to the true Knowledge of him; Flesh and Blood
did not reveal him: Many that talked and walked, eat and drank with him, and
saw his Mighty Works and Miracles, did not see him, nor know him, nor the Power
of his Father, which wrought in him; And this the Holy Scriptures, whom we
dearly own and honor in their Places, bear full witness to; and the same is
now. He that can receive it, let him.

And the same Light which convinces People that Blasphemy and Drunkenness is
Sin, is no less, nor no other, then the Spirit of Truth, which Christ promised
to send, which should convince the World of Sin, Righteousness and Judgment;
and this is the Condemnation of the World, in whom this Light shines,
appears and convinces, that they do not love this Light, nor believe in this
Light, nor bring their Deeds unto it; so they never know it lead them to their
Savior, from whence it comes; and so know not that the Reproofs of a Friend
are better then the Kisses of an Enemy; or that that which convinces,
reproves, smites, wounds and kills, is the same, or one with him, which
converteth, reformeth, heals, binds up and makes alive: So through
Unbelief and Disobedience man brings Destruction upon himself, and God and
Christ is clear of the Blood of all Men.

Opinion. I do deny that every man is lighted with the Light of Christ: for the
Scripture says, That many are in Darkness, and stumble, because there is no
Light in them.

Answ. Thy Denial or Unbelief is contrary to the Testimony of the Evangelical
Apostle John, who said, That Christ is the true Light, which lights every man
coming into the World, Joh. 1.9. A plainer Proof, if Scripture will serve, need
not be sought for. Another like it is, The Grace of God which brings Salvation,
has appeared to all men; the true Christians were taught by it; others walked
despightfully to the Spirit of Grace, and turned from it into W^ntonness. Also,
A Manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal; One
Talent at least is given to improve, though Thousands answer not the End of the
Lord, who is the Giver thereof: Life and Death, Good and Evil is set before all
men; and the Lord is present and ready with his Wisdom and Power, to enable men
to choose Life and Good, and to eschew Death and Evil.

But how men are said to be Darkness, and to walk in it, notwithstanding, the
True Light shines in them, is a Mystery to the cunning Wit of men, which cannot
comprehend the Possibility thereof, and are ready to cry out, If all are
lighted with the Light of Christ, which is in it self a saving Light, then why
are not all men saved? If all have a measure of this Light in them, how can any
be said to be Darkness? And if this Light in it self be sufficient to lead to
the true Teacher, what need has Christ to send forth a Ministry? and what is
the End of your Preaching, and Printing of Books, etc. if all men have a Light
sufficient in them? This has been the Cry of the Spirit of this World, which
savours not the Things of God.

Now such Ministers which Christ sent and sends forth, were and are sent to
open the Eyes of the Gentiles, and to turn their Minds from the Darkness to the
Light, and from the Power of Satan to the Power of God, that they might receive
Forgiveness of Sin, and Inheritance among the Saints, etc.

They had Eyes before, though shut; and Light before, though their Minds were
not turned to it, nor exercised by it, but by the Darkness, and by the Power of
Satan; and so walking in this Darkness, they stumbled; and Mankind being in
this State, joined to the Power of Satan and to Darkness, is called Darkness,
notwithstanding the Light shines in it (as the holy Scriptures fully evidence.)

Now this Darkness and Power of Satan was and is inward, within People; and
this Light and Power of God was also inward, and within People: For it would be
very absurd and ridiculous to imagine, that Christ's Ministers were sent to
turn the Minds of People from outward Darkness to an outward Light; the
Darkness and Power of Satan was spiritual and inward, and the Light and Power
of God was spiritual and inward, and the pure Mind they were to stir up, was
within People.

Now though they walked in Darkness, and sat in the Region and Shadow of Death,
and saw no Light, by Reason that the Eye was shut and the Mind turned another
Way: though it was nigh, they did not see it, so as to have the Benefit of it,
or to believe in it, because the Clouds of Error, Ignorance and Unbelief, were
so thick and gross in them, that though the light shined so far in them, as to
convince and reprove them for Evil; yet they could not comprehend it, or
believe in it as a Light, in that State; but rather accounted Light Darkness,
and Darkness Light (as many in this Age do.)

Now when this Light shined out of Darkness, and dispersed the Clouds and gross
Fogs that were before their Understandings, by means of Christ's Ministry, then
begun the Work of Regeneration; then they became as newborn Babes, desiring
the sincere Milk of the Word; then the Work of Christ's Ministers was, as
Fathers to cherish them and feed them with Food convenient, and as it were lead
them by the Hand till they grew strong Men, etc. And to effect this, they
traveled among them, from City to City and from one Country to another, to
confirm them and establish them in the Light, Power and holy Truth, or Gospel
of Christ Jesus, which their Minds were turned to.

And this is the Work and End of Christ's Ministry now, which we are made
Partakers of; And this is the End we have in writing, printing and preaching:
for though all have one Talent at least; yet Exhortation is needed, that
Improvement may be made according to the Ability given; and that Men receive
the Grace and Love that ^s tendered, and make use of the Means given and
appointed of God to lead to Salvation: and this was, and is the Work of the
Ministry, even to persuade Men to be reconciled to God, who is Light, and
dwells in the Light, and is not far from every one, as a Light ready to lead
them out of the Paths of Darkness, though till their Minds are turned from the
Darkness, to which they are joined, and in which they walk and dwell, they
cannot see him.

Opinion. That the Light which lights every man is not the Light of Christ;
yet it is a Divine Light.

This is a Piece of Ignorance and Contradiction not of the east Magnitude: It
is common with the Builders of Mystery Babylon grossly to err and mistake, and
be confused in their Language [and the clamorous Woman pulls down her House
with her own hands] What! Grant that every man is lighted with a Divine Light,
but not with the Light of Christ? How many sorts of Divine Light are there? Is
not the Light of Christ Divine? What thou may form as a cunning Artificer, by
way of Argument to prove this Nice, Carnal, Corrupt Distinction, will prove
like a Castle built in the Air, or vain Imagination, and fall upon the Head of
him that builds it; For the whole Current of the Scriptures comprehends things
under two Heads, Good and Evil, Light and Darkness, Life and Death, Heavenly
and Earthly, Spiritual and Natural, Old and New, Holy and Polluted, Divine
Nature, Sinful and Corrupt Nature, etc. Now Divine Nature is the same with
Divine Light, Holy, Heavenly, Pure and Spiritual: And it was by this Nature the
Gentiles did those things contained in the Law, etc. they did them not by the
corrupt Nature; for that leads all that are in it further into Transgression,
and Breach of all the Law of God; and as that is given way unto, razeth out and
demolisheth the Law in the Heart. And how J. I. can set forth a Divine, Holy,
Heavenly, Spiritual Light, wherewith men are lighted, and show that this Divine
Light is not the Light of Christ, I judge is a Mystery to himself unknown; for
I cannot find, neither in the Scripture, nor among Holy Men, a President for
the like Doctrine; so for ought I know he may be called the Father of this Vain
Conceit or Notion.

Opinion. There is a Natural Light in all men, which may show them Sin, and
this Natural Light is Divine; for every Gift of God is perfect; therefore
Divine.

Ans. This Conceit or Opinion differs not much from the former; only in this
thou acknowledgest that this Light wherewith every man is lighted, is able to
show or convince men, that Sin is Sin: now what that is that makes manifest and
convinces of Sin, the Scriptures bear witne^s in that of John, Chap. 16. That
which convinces the World of Sin, etc. is the Saints Comforter, even the
Spirit of Truth; it has many Names in the Holy Scriptures, but is one thing:
So this Light, which is Divine, Holy, Heavenly and Spiritual, is one with the
Spirit of Truth in Nature and Operation, and is the Gift of God to all men,
though some rebel against it; and has Power in it, not only to show and
convince of Sin, but to destroy Sin, and convert to God those that love its
Appearance and turn at its Reproof. I perceive thou have read, That every Gift
of God is Perfect, and that the Light is the Gift of God, therefore Perfect and
Divine; thou had better know it so, and prove it by the Experience of its
Virtue and Operation in thy self, then by a Syllogism; then thou might be a
true Witness of its Divine Perfectio; till then however I will take thy
Argument for as good a Proof as thou can give, that the Light is Perfect and
Divine.

Opinion. Men may sin out all Sense of Sin, and become Darkness, and have no
Light in them.

Answ. Men through long Custom of sinning may have their Hearts hardened to
that Degree that they may be compared to a Stone; and to a Deaf Adder, which
will not hear the Voice of the Charmer, etc. And men may be so ignorant of the
Law and Mind of God (even while they profess him) that they may think they do
him good Service, while they are serving the Devil and doing his Work (yet
there is Means of Redemption, and a Possibility of Deliverance appointed of God
out of this State; and the stony Heart may be it be made soft, and become
changed into a Heart of Flesh, and the deaf Ear and Eye may be unstopped, and
the ignorant unsensible spirit removed and done away) and this State is upon
men while the Light shines in Darkness, which Darkness they are, and cannot
comprehend it, etc.

But now, after the Light comes to shine out of Darkness, and men come to
receive it, and for a time to walk in it, and to be so enlightened by it as
that they may in some measure know God, and Jesus Christ, which he has sent,
which is Eternal Life, and may taste of the Power of the World to come, and
witness a Translation from Death to Life, and from Darkness to Light, and a
cleansing from the Pollutions of the World, over which their Faith in Christ
had given them Victory, and their House may be swept and garnished, etc. yet
after all this, they may fall into a worse Estate then that above mentioned,
out of which they may never come to witness Redemption nor Deliverance; seeing
after they knew God, they did not like to retain the Knowledge of him, nor to
Glorify him as God; And seeing they make shipwreck of Faith and a good
Conscience, and turn like the Dog and Swine to the Mire and Vomit again, and
crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and for want of Watchfulness let
seven worse Devils enter, the latter end of such will be worse then their
beginning: And its such that are compared to Trees twice dead, plucked up by
the Roots; and their Consciences are said to be seared as with a hot Iron, etc.
for such its said, there remains no more Sacrifice for Sin: this Estate is
lamentable, and little short of the utmost Hell; seeing the Spirit of God has
ceased striving with such for their Salvation, and that which they hate will be
their Condemnation.

And there is none that ever did or shall sin themselves into such a state of
Hardness and Unsensibleness, as that they shall not feel the Reward of Sin
sooner or later; neither shall they escape the Biting or Gnawing of that Worm
that never dies, nor the Anguish of that Fire which the Breath of the Lord
kindles; if the Wicked, that hate the Light, could dwell in such Darkness,
where the Light could not find them, or if they could destroy this Gnawing
Worm, and extinguish or put out this Fire which the Breath of God kindles, then
should their Sensibleness of Pain and Anguish for Sin be at an end; but as they
cannot do the one, so they cannot escape the other. The Wages of Sin is Death;
even a dying Death, a sensible Death, where the Gnawing Worm will be felt, and
the Wicked shall be able to lift up their Eyes in Hell, as Dives did (when he
saw Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom) and cry for Help in the Sense of their Torment
when it is too late, the Gulf being fixed, etc.

Opinion. The Sun may shine, and some men may shut their Eyes, and will not see
it; and some are blind, and cannot see it: Are they therefore enlightened by it?
So likewise, etc.

Answ, The Strength of this Opinion of thine by way of Similes I take to be
thus; That though the Sun does shine, yet some are not willing, and some are
not able to see the Light of it, and so are not or will not be lighted by it;
and from hence would conclude (notwithstanding thy former Concession, viz.
That every man is lighted with a Divine Light) That some men have no Light in
them, nor are not in a Capacity to receive Benefit by the Light because blind;
And others will not come out of the dark C^lls of the Earth, where they have
taken up their Habitation, to behold it.

Now the Scriptures bear witness, That the Seers or Prophets saw Christ, the
Gift of God, to be the Light of the Gentiles, and to be his Salvation to the
Ends of the Earth; and there was and is a Call to all the Ends of the Earth, to
look unto him and be saved; and the Gentiles and Ends of the Earth looking unto
him, have had, have, and may have Salvation by him: And the Lord desires not
nor wills not the Death of him that dies, nor the Blindness of him that is
blind; but would have all men walk in the Light, and come to the Knowledge of
his Truth and be saved: He bids or commands no men to Hear, See or Walk, when
he has not given them Ears, Eyes and Ability so to do: He calls to all men
every where to Repent; and he has afforded them Light and Grace sufficient to
enable them so to do, if they would believe in it and obey it: He shuts no
man's Eyes, neither is he the Author of any man's Blindness, Wilfulness and
Stubbornness: It Is man's own Sin that separates man from his Maker; and blinds
his Eye, and strengthens his Will, that he cannot and will not see the Light
when it shines in him, so as to be saved by it, and to walk in it; though he
has in this blind sinful State so much Sight, Sense and Knowledge of it, as to
feel its Reproofs and Convictions ( John 3.20.) So every one that does Evil
hates the Light, and comes not to it, lest his Deeds should be reproved; yet
the Light comes to such, and follows such, and finds them out, as it did Adam
in the beginning. And none can be said to hate that which they have not, nor
never had no Sense nor Knowledge of, nor be justly reprehended for not loving
it, and not coming to it, and not bringing their Deeds to it, if they have not
Ability, or are not in a Capacity so to do.

Therefore thy comparing Natural things with Spiritual will not hold true every
way, nor thy Conclusions therefrom: Some indeed are said to stop their Ears,
and to close their Eyes, and to stumble and grope like blind men for the Wall,
yet God is not the Author of this, neither did he make Mankind in this Estate;
but this is come upon him through his own Transgression and Disobedience to the
Law, which is Light, which was before Books or an outward Law was written,
which while he obeyed and walked in, he enjoyed the Presence of God who gave
it, and lived in the Light of his Countenance; but when he transgressed, he
dyed as to that Enjoyment (though be lieved and remained in the Body as a man)
and here began Mankind to hate the Light, and to walk in Darkness, and to
endeavor to hide himself for Fear, and to cover his own Nakedness with the
Works of his own Pands: Now was laid the Foundation of all Self-Will, Self
Works, Self Righteousness, Self-knowledge and Imagination; from this Foundation
Christ, the Lamb of God, was slain (he that reads let him understand.) And
Mankind in this Estate is accounted Dead, ^eaf, Blind and Naked, because that
Life, Eye, Ear, and Covering be has, is of his own ordering and making; and he
is truly Dead, whill be thinks he Lives; ^eaf and Blind, while he thinks he
Hears and Sees; and Naked n^twithstanding his Invented Artificial Coverings:
And Darkness he may truly be called, notwithstanding there is a Light that
shines in him in this Dead, Dark and Blind Estate, wherewith also he is
lighted in some sheastre, and by it may see his lost Estate.

And Mankind in Transgression may hear the Voice of God now, as Adam did in the
beginning, but how men do hear the Voice of God while Shiners; and how they are
afraid of his Appearance or Presence; and how Light shines in Darkness, though
Darkness comprehends it not; and how men are lighted with a saving Light of
Christ, and yet walk in Darkness, and are not saved by it; and how the Word is
as Milk and Honey, and Bread to ome, and as a Hammer Fire and Sword to others,
is a Mystery to the carnal Mind, though plain to the Children of Light, and
evidently declared in the Holy Scriptures.

For the same Light which is the Condemnation of the World (whom it lights)
which it hates, and believes not in, is the Salvation of those that believe,
leve and walk in it. Now that which leads men to do the Will of Christ, gives
them the Knowledge of his Doctrine, and reveals his Secrets to them; but the
Wi^e and Prudent in the selfish ^ensual Widem, which believes not in the Light
of Christ, wherewith every man is lighted, remains ignorant thereof.

Opinion. I will stick by the present Translation of the New Testament, which
was effected by Twenty or Thirty Learned Wise Men, by the King's Authority; and
if I understood Greek never so well, it would be unmannerly to contradict them.

Answ. Surely if thou had been so mannerly, and so full of Reverence and
Respect to Learned Wise Men, who were countenanced with the National Authority
when thou first tookest up thy Religion, or turned Baptist (and thereby
contradicted the Opinions and Meanings of more then Twenty or Thirty Wise
Learned Men, who in their Wisdoms had settled Church Government and Doctrine, as
they thought, according to the Scriptures) thou would never have adventured
to question their Work, though thou knew better things: I judge thou had
more sincerity, Zeal and Knowledge then, and less of this kind of Mannerliness,
when thou did judge they erred in their Meanings put upon the Scriptures
translated, though they were reputed Learned and Wise. And why may not the
Translators commit an Error also, and be short in giving every Word its sull
Signification, according to the Mind of the Spirit from whence it came, though
the King's Authority be with them? Does the Knowledge of Naturel Tongues make
men Insallible? May not a Peter and John, who know not a Letter, know the Mind
of the Spirit in the Scriptures? or understand them better then the Scribes,
Pharisees and Hypoerites?

Indeed Jeremiah, I must tell thee, This Mannerliness would have kept thee out
of thy Religion; and will now, if thou follow it, lead thee to outlive it, or
to differ nothing from those thou come out from, but in Name and Profession
only.

Opinion. The Light that is come into the World was designed of God to
enlighten every man; but Thousands are not enlightened by it.

Answ. Its something that thou grantest so much Truth, viz. That God designed
all men a Benefit by the Light, though Thousands receive it not: It Is true, the
Love of God is Universal; and his Call is to all men every where to Repent; and
his Gospel, which Paul was a Minister of ( Coll. 1.23.) was and is preached in
every Creature under Heaven; his Sun shines and his Rain falls upon the Just
and Unjust: But many, though they hear his Call, Repent not; and though the
Gospel be sounded in their Ear, obey it not; and the Wicked may become like a
Parched Heath, that knows not when Good comes, though the Dew of Heaven descend
upon it, and the Seed of the Kingdom be sown in it, yet it grows not to
Perfection: The Seed is sown in Bad Ground, as well as in Good; and Christ is
as truly the Light of the World, as he is the Light of the Saints, who are
chosen out of the World: the Difference is in its Operation; it reproves and
condemns the World, because its Deeds are Evil; and it justifies and consolates
the Saints, who believe in it, and walk in it, etc.

Now how it can be said, that every man is lighted or enlightened with the
Light of Christ, notwithstanding they remain Darkness, seems a Riddle and
Paradox to the Learned and Unlearned, Professors and Profane: And if that
Scripture which says, The Light shined in the Darkness, and the Darkness
comprchended it not, cannot be understood, I cannot speak plainer to this
Spirit that stumbles at the Light; For if Light shines in a People, who were
and are Darkness, how can it be said that that People are not enlightened by
it, though they love the Darkness rather, and so choose Death and Darkness, and
refuse Life and Light: And how can it be said, That Mankind makes a Choice,
except he has some Knowledge of both? So, which he joyneth to, and walks in,
that he becomes a Child of, whether of Darkness or Light? And the Condemnation
of those who hate the Light, and love the Darkness, will be just, and God and
Christ will be clear in the Day of his Judgment.

Opinion. George Whitehead and William Gibson are not enlightened with the
Light of Christ; though I grant, that there is a Light in every man, which is
Divine, yet not the Light of Christ.

Aas. If J. Ives did believe in the Light, and were obedient to the Light of
Christ, wherewith he himself is lighted, he would be of another Mind, but this
sore Evil is very nigh him, to conclud^, as the Jews did of Christ in another
Case, If this Man were of God he would keep the Sabbath (Joh. 9.16.) So it
seems to be in this Man's Mind, to conclude, that these Men are not enlightened
with the Light of Christ, because they are not Baptist^, as he is, and are not
one with his Profession and Fellowship: for it is the Nature and Property of
every Sect, to mea^ure and judge all by their own narrow Spirits and Notions;
the Righteous met with this Mea ure and Judgment in all Ages, from Ab^l to
Zacharias, and from Zacharias to John the Divine, and down to this Age.
M^ltitude of Examples might be produced, and a Cloud of Witnesses found
throughout the holy Scriptures to witness to this Thing.

But G. W. and W. G. are not only men come into the World, and therefore
lighted with the Light of Christ, according to the Testimony of John (the
greatest Prophet that was born of a Woman) but also are Men chosen out of the
World, to bear Witness to the true Light, and have turned the Minds of many
from Darkness to the true Light, in which they walk, and dwell, and are
Children of: Therefore thy Opinion or Conceit is judged to be the Offspring of
that Darkness in which thou dwell, notwithstanding thou talkst of Light, and
supposest thy self to be a Child of it; but see whether the Spirit of God, or
the Manifestation of it in thee bears Witne's to thy Spirit, that thou art
indeed what thou think and professest thy self to be: This Counsel, if by
thee taken can do thee no Harm. As to the latter part of this Notion, I have
spoken to it already.

Opinion. I d^ny that the Light of God is one with the Light of Christ; the
Father and Son are Relatives, but not one; the Light of the Father, Son and
Spirit are Divine, but not one.

If thou had the Mind of Christ, as the primitive Christians had, thou
would not speak after this manner: Christ's Testimony was, ( John 14.9, 10,
11.) That he and his Father were one (And what signifies thy Denial?) And that
the Father was in him, and he in the Father. And John's witnesses ( John 1.)
That the World was made by him, and without him was nothing made that was made:
And he was in the Beginning with the Father from Everlasting; glorified with
the Father before the World began; manifested in the fullness of time in a
prepared Body; but was before it, and seen and prophesied of by the Evangelical
Prophet Isaiah to be the Wonderful Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting
Father, the Prince of Peace, the Emanuel, God with us. In these Scriptures
their Names are one, their Work one, their Nature one; then how comes their
Light to be two, and yet both Di^ine? And they are such Relatives as differ
more in Manifestation and Despensation, then in Light, Life, Nature and Being;
but these things are too high for thee; for what thou know of them is
Natural and Traditional, and had thou Acquaintance with a Measure of the same
Spirit of Prophecy which was in Is^iah, thou would be ashamed of thy nice and
carnal Distinctions; yet the least in the Kingdom is greater then he.

Opinion. That which is Divine in God, becomes Natural when given to men.

Answ. I know not but thou may be called the Father of this Whin sey or Vain
Conceit. Whisher will the Deceitfulness of thy foolish Heart carry thee? It Is
strong Delusion indeed to believe Lies so contrary to Scripture and Right
Reason. Where did thou learn, that the Gifts of God, which are Perfect,
Divine and Spiritual, become Natural when given to Men? I suppose by men thou
meanst not all men, but wicked men, and not the righteous; that would be gross
and absurd indeed; so I am willing to take thy Notion by the best End: But what
Scripture is thy Rule for this? Did the Talent the Sloathful Man had given him
change its Nature and Property by being tied up and hid in the Earth? Did his
Good Spirit, which he gave to those that rebelled against it, become Natural?
Does the Light, which is the Gift of God, and Spiritual, which shines in
Darkness, become Natural or Darkness in it self, or alter its Nature and
Property? Does the Spirit of Truth, which Christ sends to Comfort his
Disciples, and to convince and reprove the World for Sin, change its Nature
from being the Spirit of Truth, because sent and given into the World? Surely
thou may see it a vain Imagination of thy own Head, that neither the
Scriptures (thy pretended Rule) nor thy own Experience can justify: For that
holy Manifestation of the Spirit in thee, which searches thy Heart, and tries
thy Reins, and consents not to thy vain Thoughts, idle Words and sinful
Actions, is the Gift of God to thee, and is perfect, pure, divine and
spiritual, and has kept its Nature pure and incorrupt, and will remain so, as
a Witness for God against thee, if thou join not to it, and become one with it,
and so be born of it: This is the Word of Truth to thee, whether thou will
receive it or no.

Opinion. Some in the World are without Christ; therefore some in the World are
without the Light of Christ.

Answ. This is answered already in what goes before, yet a few words more:
Christ is said to stand at the Door of men's Hearts and Knock; Is not the Door
of men's Hearts within them? And if he stands there, he is not far off them;
yet they not opening to him, are said, and that truly, to be without him, and
in the World; and they do not know that Christ is in them, therefore they are
Reprobates: Yet in this state of being without Christ in the World, in Darkness
and Reprobation, the true Light shines, as has been already signified at
large; and the Darkness is so far enlightened by it, as that the Worker of
Iniquity cannot hide himself.

And though some are without God in the World, yet God is not so far without
them, but that he searches their Hearts, and tries their Reins, and shows
unto man his Thoughts, and God and Christ is in the World; but this is the
Misery of the World, that it knows him not. Blessed are those that believe in
the Light, which reveals him, and leads to the Knowledge of him, in whom are
hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge; to whom be Glory forever, Amen.

W. S.

Forasmuch as J. Ives and some others judge we put more Weight, and strain that
Saying in the first of John, verse. the 9th, beyond what it is able to bear,
this following is added.
OUr Proof of what we affirm in matter of Doctrine, is not from the Etymology
of Words, nor barely from the Testimony of the Holy Men recorded in the holy
Scriptures, though they bear witness thereto: And our Doctrine, Practices and
whole Conversation (as we walk in that Light, Grace and Spirit of God, from
whence holy Men wrote them) is born witness unto by them; and therein we have
Unity with the Holy Scriptures, and receive the Comfort of them, they being
written for our Learning, who have believed in and received the Gift of God, of
whom they testify.

And others, who receive not this Gift of God, though they may read and profess
the Scriptures, and cry them up in words, etc. yet have they not Unity with
them, nor with the Spirits of those Just Men that wrote them; neither do
receive the Comfort of them, nor are learned and made wise unto Salvation by
them: This is a Word of Truth, that may and does concern all Sects in Christen
dom to confider.

And that we do not over-strain the Words of John's Testimony in the first
Chapter and 9th Verse, when we say, write, print and preach, Lighten,
Enlighten, Enlighteneth or Gives Light to every man coming into the World; I
have here set before thee how that Verse is read in diverse Natural Tongues or
Languages.

The Latin Version to the Syriack has it thus (the Syriack word is Manhar)
Erat enim is lux veritatis quae illuminat omnem hominem venientem in mundum.

The English, For even he was the Light of Truth, which enlighteneth every man
that comes into the World.

The Latin Version to the Porsiack thus, Lux vera venit unicuique qui in mu^ do
est lumen praebeat.

Thus in English, The true Light is come to give Light to every one that is in
the World

Elias Huter in his Novum Testamentum Harmonicum, uses the word Illuminat
Enlighteneth.

And in Hs Doctionary the Greek word is (...), Photizein, to give Light or
lighten.

The Hebrew word is (...), Haer, to give Light or lighten.

The High Dutch, Leuchten, to gave Light or lighten. (...) Heir, to Enlighten.
(...) Epiphainein, to Enlighten. Illuminare, to Enlighten. High Dutch --
Erleuchten, to Enlighten.


In the Arabic thus, Neque vero erat ipse lux, sedut testaretur lumini, qued
erat lumen verum quod ^lluminat (...). The word is [Pasijo] illuminat,
enlighteneth, or does enlighten, or gives Light.

In English thus, Neither was he himself the Light, but that he might witness
to the Light, which was the true Light which enlighteneth, every man.

The Ethiopick has it thus (the word is Zajabarh) Et is est lux justitiae quae
illuminat om^^m hominem veniontem in mundum.

In English, And he is the Light of Righteousness which enlighteneth or does
^^lighten every man that comes into the World.

Multitudus of Examples might be produceed out of other Translations, but
sufficient being extant already by another Pen, I forbear to enlarge.

I have ravelled in Europe, Africa and Amcrica, and never met with any Priest
or other (except one called a Baptist in Rhed-Island in New England) that made
any Cavil or Contention about using the word enlighten, or enlighteneth or
gives Light, etc. instead of lights.

J. S.

THE END.

