(...); OR THE WORD WRITTEN, Concerning the WORD EVERLIVING, VIZ. As
touching his glorious Kingly Office on Earth to come.

Witnessing, That Christ Jesus shall have a visible glorious Kingdom in the
World, consisting of the converted Jews and Gentiles in one Sheepfold under
him; of the quick in this life, and raised Saints in the time of his said
glorious Kingdom, and of the highest Angels worshipping him, and of inferior
creatures bowing the knee unto him.

Confirmed by many Demonstrative Arguments from the holy Scriptures, and many
divine Reasons strongly evincing the same Truths.

By William Sherwin, Minister of the Gospel.

Apoc. 3.21. (...).

Esa. 24.33. Then the Moon shall be confounded, and the Sun ashamed, when the
Lord of Hosts shall reign in Mount Sion, and in Jerusalem, and before his
ancients gloriously.

Psalm. 97.7. (...).

So Heb. 1.6. (...).

Romans 8.21. Because the creature it self also shall be delivered from the
bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the children of God.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Smith, and are to be sold at the Elephant and
Castle, without Temple Bar.

TO THE READER.
CHristian Sufferers, either in Affectu vel effectu.
will or deed, to whom alone the happy interest in these things does belong,
with all the ensuing happiness and glory, through and with Christ Jesus, the
mystical head of his glorified Spouse, the Church, to all eternity; for it is
[Generale Dei Statutum] [whatever otherwise nominal only, and formal Christians
may promise to themselves] what the Apostle Paul declares, 2 Timothy 3.12. that
all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution; and when he
for a pattern was stoned almost to death, Acts 14.19. he confirms the Disciples
souls in this doctrine, that (says he) we must through much tribulation enter
into the Kingdom of God; yet here the Apostle Peter's Caution must be carefully
observed, 1 Pet. 4.19. that it must be according to the will of God, or as he
speaks, Verse 16. as Christians, both for the cause and manner, which is the
condition upon which our Savior entertains all his Disciples, Mat. 10.38. for
(says he) he that takes not up his Cross and follows not me, is not worthy of
me; and it is both a special gift and a special honor so to do, Phil. 1.29. To
you it is given in the behalf of Christ not only to believe on him, but also to
suffer for his sake. But this will be but during the time the Bridegroom is
absent in person, Mat. 9.15. Mar. 2.19. and until the New Jerusalem comes down
from God out of Heaven, and the Tabernacle of God be with men, and he dwell
with them, Rev. 21.2, 3. But for the comfort of all such, the Apostle Paul as
plainly instructs them, 2 Timothy 2.12. If we die (says he) with Christ, we shall
also live with him, if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him. And
although the meek are here at present but strangers and pilgrims on the earth,
yet that time is hastening apace, wherein that gracious promise shall be made
good, Psalm. 37.11. that the meek shall inherit the earth, and delight
themselves in the abundance of peace; which our Savior also confirms,
declaring their blessedness in that respect, saying, Mat. 5.5. Blessed are the
meek for they shall inherit the earth: and his care has remarkably appeared,
in regard his Church was to pass through many sharp pangs and sufferings from
his ascension, in the primitive persecutions, and all along her wilderness
condition, during until Antichrists tyranny, even to his appearance, to destroy
that man of sin, 2 These. 2.8. before the Saints rest in this world will come,
Chap. 1.7. Heb. 4.9. or the times of refreshing from the presence of the Lord,
as the Apostle Peter explains them, Acts 3.19. Therefore to comfort them
aforehand, he has through the whole Revelation provided words of consolation
to each in the order of their sufferings, drawn from the New Jerusalem state in
one respect or other, (as from our seventh Argument in this Parcel may appear)
of all which encouragements his said meek sufferers shall certainly find in
their due times the full accomplishment; for whose further satisfactions
therein, according to what the Spirit of God has set down, (though mystically
yet surely) I have endeavored to wait upon the Dispencer of all grace in all
such ways of his own, as he has been pleased to lead me to such purpose, for
diverse years past, which I believe in much mercy he has manifested unto me,
(however some men's apprehensions thereof may differ) yet in my own soul and
spirit I am sufficiently therein satisfied, and I hope also by his grace, I may
at least (if not before published) yet leave such things behind me, which in
due time may also, I hope, satisfy others, when such errors, pervertings, and
prejudices are removed as I have already endeavored to do in my second and
fourth part of those principles and foundations which I formerly laid down
about 1664 unto which I have since added diverse small Tracts, as examples and
patterns to manifest the usefulness of the former, for the advantage of all
such as would seriously consider them; as that on Genesis 3.15. showing in what
ways and order (accordingly) the seed of the woman, Christ Jesus, has, and
does, and will [hereafter more eminently] and at last totally and finally (when
the last enemy death shall be destroyed break the Serpents [Satans] head.
Another on Jer. 3.17. being a Scriptural Evidence for the New Jerusalem state
to come on earth, with a brief summary of Daniel's prophetical Visions annexed
to it; the intendments of all which have been diverse years obstructed and
retarded hitherto; as also of another to like purpose on Rev. 22.20. Behold I
come quickly, etc. and as the Epistle to that on Jer. 3.17. does point out the
nature and use of the said four parts, which contain the proofs that such
things shall be, so by these hints in reference to those said latter Tracts,
the better use and improvement may be made of them altogether, especially since
each of them refer to the other.

And now I hope at last, if this short summary of much of these divine truths
of this nature therein couched, shall come to the hands of serious and
judicious Christians, that (unjust prejudices being laid aside) it may carry a
strong conviction with it, and consisting of evident Scripture foundations, may
also in Gods time, make way for faith, (when he sets them home on the soul) to
believe the substance of these things upon the same ground, or at least of many
of them; for as at diverse times, and in diverse manners, God has been pleased
to reveal his grace and truth to his Prophets and Apostles, and other his
messingers formerly, so (as the Apostle Peter shows) he has a time to come
further to reveal it, 1 Pet. 1.12, 13. (as judicious Galvm observes from the
7th. verse) when he will again appear for such as look for him the second time
without sin unto salvation, Heb. 9. the last. And as in former times there have
been diverse degrees and measures of such dispensations of Gods grace and truth,
so there is and will be so still, 1 Cor. 12. yet to every man to profit
withal, verse 7. to the riches of whose liberality (true Christian Reader) I
now commend thee, praying for a blessing for thee for the due entertainment of
these, (as they are divine Scripture truths, and no otherwise) who though my
self, a poor shaken earthen vessel for such heavenly treasure, yet do both
earnestly desire, and groundedly hope to be owned herein to be

A faithful servant and witness of our great Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
William Sherwin.
Jan. 17. 1669, and 70.
Some of those Demonstrative arguments taken out of that sevenfold foundation
of the Doctrine of Christ's Kingdom on Earth to come, Rev. 20.4. being in good
part the drift and substance of our Irenicon, with its adjuncts, etc. which
have been offered to the consideration of many judicious persons, and which
being duly weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary, may appear convincing.
THe first is taken from the many particulars which the Scripture mentions to
be,

From sundry Texts of the Old Testament,

From that general reference of the Apostle Peter, 3.21. (applied also by
Christ to those times, Rev. 10.11.) which times (says he) God has spoken of
by the mouth of all his holy Prophets since the world began: as in some good
measure is manifest in our Irenicon, from page 56. to page 89.

Drawn from such portions of holy Scripture,

From what has been made manifest by Bishop Usher, Mede, Helvicus his
Chronicle, Mr. Huit, Mr. Swan in his Calamus mensur. and Others, that the
fourth Monarchy in Daniel is the Roman Monarchy.

From that part of Daniels Visions that concerns the Roman Monarchy since
Christ's first coming in the Flesh (together with the state of his true Church
thence all along under it) which is in great part the subject of the Book of
the Revelation from chap. be seen by our Abridgement, and Parallel on Daniels
Visions; and in our Summarie thereof, besides other observations to confirm the
same, as the last part of the Revelation concerns Christ's second coming, and
the state of things in the World afterward, in chap. 20, 21, 22.

From the promises and encouragements made and given to the Overcomers, and
Sufferers in all those times since Christ: First, Asia^ Churches, Rev. 2, 3,
chap. and all along afterward referring to something in the New Jerusalem
state, until the Roman Monarchy shall be utterly destroyed or go into
perdition, and then those promises, and encouragements, are to take place, and
be fulfilled, as is set forth in Rev. 19, 20, 21, 22, chap.

From the joint witnessings unto these things by the greatly beloved Prophet
Daniel, and the beloved Apostle John, etc.

From the many particulars in Scripture to be fulfilled, Heb. 2.5. Ephesians. 1.21.
of which, large Volumes might profitably be written.

But first of such things as are to be about the beginning of that Period, or to
go before it; First the fufilling of that promise, Mal. 4 5. Behold I will send
you Elias the Prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the
Lord; even as John Baptist who was therefore called Elias at Christ's first
coming, who was said then to come in the Spirit and power of Elias, Luke 1.17.
being also that Messenger spoken of, Mal. 3.1. applied to him, Luke 1.76. by
his Father and by our Savior also, Mat. 11.10. But concerning the other at the
great and terrible day of the Lord: after John Baptist was put to death, our
Savior expressly says to his Disciples, Mat. 17.11. truly Elias shall first
come: concerning whom the ancient Fathers differ not that another should then
come, but whether it should be Elias the Tishbite in Person, or another like
John Baptists in the spirit and power of Elias, as may largely be made to
appear. See Dr. Homes his Resur. Revived. page, 357, 362, 363, 364, 365, 366,
367, 368.

Babylon so largely described many ways by the Spirit of Christ, Rev. 14. but
especially in the 17th. and 18th. Chapter, and probably set forth by the Title
of Magog, to be destroyed with fire in the latter days, Ezekiel. 39.6.

The gathering together to the battle of the great God; Rev. 11.2.) which
battle is Prophetically proclaimed by Joel, chap. 32. and described ver. 3.
etc. to be a gathering of all Nations then to the Valley of Jehoshaphat, which
shall be at the time of the Jews great restoration, where God will plead with
their enemies, as he did with the Ammonites, Moabites, and their Confederates,
2 Chronicles. 20.22. and again it is further and more largely described from v. 9.
Proclaim this among the Gentiles, prepare War, etc. v. 18 read and consider
them with the Context: which preparation is two fold, first of the Turk, Ezekiel.
38.8, 16, etc. set forth to be in the latter days twice, under the title of
Gog (denoting such a great and resolute enemy of the Church) whose description
there fitly agrees to the Turk, together with his time, and the deliverance of
Israel, when he is to fall: as Dan. 11.45. and 12.1. Also his coming is set
down with his prevailing and progress in order by the same Prophet Dan. 11.40,
Mr. Mede Di^c. 48. page 374.
41, 42, 43, 44. as Mr. Mede very judiciously, appositly, and learnedly has
explained that Scripture. Being there styled the King of the North, as the
Saracins before him were styled in the same verse the King of the South, and
fitly agree with the Seasons of the 5t. and 6t. Trumpet, Rev. 9. of which, more
afterward.

Again, another part of the said battle is described in reference to the Pope,
for as in the Old Testament the Turk is foretold to be then the Jews great
Enemy to withstand their return to Christ and their own Land; so the Pope in
the New Testament is set forth to be then the great Enemy of the Gentile
Christians, both which God will (then) bring down as many Scriptures declare.
Who also shall then be gathered with his accomplices, to the Armageddon Battle
(as upon his account it is called, Rev. 16.14, 16.) under the end of the sixth
Vial, or the beginning of the seventh, called also the Battle of the Great day
of God Almighty: and it is more largely set forth, how it will be accomplished,
Rev. 19.11. When the King of Kings with his Armies will come against the Beast
and false Prophet and their Armies and take them both, and for ever destroy
them, etc. And much is also set forth, Dan. 7.9.10, etc. concerning the time
and manner or the Popes destruction: because of whose great words the Judgment
will then sit one the Throne, and by a Fiery Sentence, and Execution the Beast
will then be consumed, and the Body thereof given to the burning Flame, and
much to like purpose in that chapter; and a complication of Judgments are in
many parts of holy Scripture assigned for the ruin (then) of both those great
Enemies, besides what has been named. I only here point out but few of many,
in v. 22. of Ezekiel 38. God says he will plead then with Gog [the Turk] with
Pestilence, with Blood, an overflowing Rain, great Haile-stones, Fire and
Brimstone. Consider seriously the description of his ruin largely set down in
(...) following chapter, and the like of the Pope, Rev. 16. (...) 21. there are
the horrors of Gods indignation in that (...) quake with Thunders and
Lightning when Babylon shall come (...) before God to give unto her the Cup of
the Wine of the fierce (...) of his wrath: as followed in the falling of the
great Hail, whereupon (...) blsphemed God, as follows, whereby the fierceness
of his wrath (...) be most manifest as has been seen in the Devil since Christ
came in the Flesh, who finding himself without remedy, since, blasphemed God;
which, till then, it was thought he durst not so: for in the latter part of
Rev. 19. the Fowls devour their flesh, and they are cast alive into the lake of
fire burning with Brimstone: so Rev. 14.19. those Grapes are reaped, and cast
into the Wine press of Gods wrath, etc.

In the next place unto the destruction of the said great Enemies, Paul joins
them, 2 Timothy 4.1. and he knew he had good ground for it from Daniels Prophecy,
chap. 7. when the Beast is destroyed he had the Vision, v. 13, 14. etc. now the
Son of Man Jesus Christ came in the Clouds of Heaven, to whom all the Kingdoms
and the People are given, as follows, and all Nations under the whole Heaven
are then subject to him, v. 27. read those things deliberately, etc. So when he
had destroyed the Beast and his Accomplices, in the end of Rev. 19. then that
great Angel [Christ] with a great Chain binds the Devil and Satan for a 1000.
years, and sets up his Kingdom, and Reigns with his Saints then to be raised,
and all such as walk in the light of the new Jerusalem all the 1000. years:
that very clear Prophesy has been too well vindicated from Satanicall mists,
and Popish delusions to be again darkened by them, or such as they seduce
against holy Scriptures, most evident light the same Apostle joins them also,
2 These. 2.8. showing the glorious appearance of Christ will be the utter
destruction of Antichrist, which is another forerunner of his glorious
Kingdom, etc.

Come to a fifth the great and national restoration deliverance and conversion
of the Jews and Israelites; for to the former, before in Joel 3. Both temporal
and spiritual in Dan 12.1, 2, 3. And so in many expressions both are annexed to
Gogs destruction, when he shall come with an evil thought against them, Ezck.
38. and 39. Their happiness in both was deciphered, chap. 37. by raising the
great army from the dry bones, and joining the two sticks, both which are
largely and excellently set forth and explained in the whole Chapter, (of which
more (...)) And when in the two next Chapters the hinderers (...) comes the New
Jerusalem, called [ Jehovah shamma (...) end of that Book; all which fully
agree with the (...) ^^velation, which is the sure Key of all mystical
Scripture (...) ^^^pecting the (...), the latter times; their conversion
Zach^^^ speaks of evidently, chap. 12.10. when that Nation will be (...) born
in a day, Isa. 66.8. and the iniquity of that Land be taken away in one day,
Zac. 3.9. then will that Bride make her self ready, when all those Halelujahs
shall be sung at the destruction of the Whore, when the said Kingdom of Christ
shall begin, and the readiness of the Bride shall appear, unto whom the
abundance of the Gentiles shall join themselves, as Rev. 19.1. to the 9th.
verse, and Esa. 60.3, 4, 5, etc.

Then also will Christ's visible Kingdom of power be set up on earth; viz. the
Pope and Turk, (with their adherents) with hypocrites, and those that do
iniquities, all to be removed aforehand, Mat. 13.41, 42. which by the said
judgment, Dan. 7. are to be swept away with a temporal sudden destruction, set
up for to judge then such wicked quick, 2 Timothy 4.1. and Rev. 11.19. and then by
gathering both Jews and Gentiles into his fold, when the Jews shall be
honorably sent into their Land by the Gentiles, and the Gentiles (unconverted
before) shall in great abundance be brought in to Christ by means of the Jews,
upon the manifestation that God is with them, Esa. 60.2, 3, etc.

But then thirdly, That Kingdom of Christ will consist of another sort of
Subjects, such as Christ will bring with him when he comes, and which before
were said by the Apostle to sleep before in Christ, in respect of their bodies,
1 These. 4.14. which shall then be raised from their graves, and then be
reunited unto their spirits at the first blessed and holy resurrection, (as it
is called) Rev. 20.6. who shall then live and reign with Christ 1000 years,
verse. 4. and in the end of verse. 6. which is his judging also of the dead at
that time, Rev. 11.19. by rewarding his servants the Prophets, and his Saints,
and all that fear his name, both small and great, both then living and before
dead; when as for the evil at svch time, he will destroy all such as did before
by their wickedness destroy the earth, in both which respects, as the Apostle
Paul teaches, he will then so judge both the quick and the dead at his
appearance and his Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.1. And for both those parts of judgment
toward good and bad, it was said when Antichrist was to be destroyed, Dan.
7.9, 10, etc. that the Judgment was set, and the Books were opened; as it will
be above 1000 years after when all the wicked shall be raised at the last
resurrection, Rev. 10.11, 12. When also Christ will again judge both quick and
dead, when all the Saints that are then alive and remain, as the Apostle Paul
reckons himself and the Saints in his time then will be, 1 These. 4. and he
twice affirms it, saying, We which are alive and remain, verse. 15. and verse.
17. shall be caught up together with such of the Saints as at that time shall
rise first also, that is, before the wicked, after to be raised; when all those
sorts of the Saints, the living then in the bodily life, and raised Saints
above a thousand years before, which then with the Apostle remain in the world,
shall altogether be caught up in the clouds, to meet Christ in the air,
(whereas those that had their part in the first resurrection, having their part
therein 1000 years before, were said then to be brought from heaven with him,
when that New Jerusalem came down from God out of heaven at Christ's second
coming) but then they shall ever be with the Lord; whereas he seemed to
withdraw himself from the former before the last rapture, which will be in a
moment with a glorious change, which mysteries the Apostle unfolds, 1 Cor. 15.
which he twice confirms also, 51.15.

Also the whole 97. Psalm, which begins, The Lord reigns, let the people
rejoice, let the multitude of the Isles be glad thereof, containing also a
Prophecy of his terrible coming to destroy his idolatrous enemies, and to
deliver the Jews and all his oppressed people, which will cause such exultation
and Halelujahs in the world, and is also in the New Testament applied by the
Spirit of God to his said second coming, Heb. 1.6. when he shall bring again
his first begotten into the world, (as the Greek Text declares) when all the
Angels of God shall worship him, so expounded by Chrysostom, Ribera, and
others, of his second coming; and which also the Apostle himself clearly
explaineth, Chap. 2 5. calling it (...) the world to come, whereof he spoke; to
this agrees Rev. 19.1, 2, etc. when the Whore of Babylon was destroyed, and
that Reign of Christ began, and the marriage of the Lamb was come, so many
Halelujahs were sung, First, By much people, verse. 1, 2, 3. Secondly, By the
representative twenty four Elders, and four Beasts, or living wights, verse 4.
And thirdly, By a voice out of the Throne [the Church] and of great multitudes,
saying, Allelu^ah, for the Lord God omnipotent reigns, etc. that is, in
another manner than before, viz. personally, and at the same time, he is
praised for having taken to himself his great power and to have reigned, Rev.
11.17. who, in his personal absence till then, had left his power in the hands
of others, which for the most part had much abused it, and probably most
provokingly toward that time, etc.

Also concerning the terrible coming of the Lord as it is described by Zachary
chap. Jerusalem when his feet shall stand on Mount Olivet and he will so
terribly shake the Earth, as also in Isa. 1.2. several times is set forth, when
he will Jehoshaphatize his Enemies as before in the 3d. of Joel, and the word
in the Original seems to denote, and at which time Zachary says chap. 14.5.
(as the Apostle Paul said from him, 1 These. 3. and last.) The Lord thy God
shall come, (...) all the Saints with thee: and as chap. 4.14. all that sleep
in Jesus, God will then bring with him, [which is that Jerusalem by a Metonimie
of the subject that then comes down from God out of heaven, Rev. 21.] and the
contexts of Zac. and Joel agree to the same time, and the more to difference
the said coming from that descending from heaven with a shout which the Apostle
speaks of, v. 16. which to creatures apprehension may then seem an other
coming: [yet he says not out of heaven, as when the said Jerusalem descended]
but it will be after the thousand years, when he seems to have withdrawn
himself from the holy City and Camp of the Saints, whilst Satan and his last
Gog and Magog play their last most wicked pranks (which will only amount to an
attempt) wherewith there will he their own, and the worlds ruin brought on
effectually: when the great white throne will be set up for Christ, before
whose face heaven and earth shall flee away, and no place be found for them:
[as being resolved (as is probable) into their first Chaos, etc.] from which
ruin all the Saints (as was said before) by a sudden rapture and glorious
change shall be perfectly freed, and glorified as we showed) and shall ever be
with the Lord from thence forth till the consummation of that last Judgment,
that then shall all ascend with him their head into Heaven, without preventing
each other (as the Apostle also teaches) when death will be swallowed up in
victory, 1 Cor. 15.54.

There is mention of a Trumpet when the Angels shall gather the Elect from the
four winds, and two in a Bed, and two in the Field, and two Women in the Mill,
the one taken and the other shall be left, at the coming of Christ in the
Clouds, as Mat. 24.30, 31.40, 41. but that last descending from Heaven will be
at the last Trump (in regard one of like nature was before.) Again, his second
coming in the Clouds, will be for Salvation to all the ends of the Earth, in
the issue of it: but this descending from heaven with a shout, and the voice of
an Archangel, and the Trump of God, viz. the last Trump will bring utter and
final desolation to all the ends of the Earth; yea then Heaven and Earth shall
flee away before his face, and no place be found for them, Rev. 20.11. These
are according to our Saviors own best exposition in the Revelation, which in
these matters, he has caused to be set down with very great evidence often
attesting them to be faithful and true, etc. foreseeing men would not believe
them though very consonant to the Prophets, and other portions of the holy
Scriptures.

In respect of the large extent of Christ's Kingdom, Sion notwithstanding all
the rage and tumults of the Heathen, Psalm. 2. he also delares he would give him
the Heathen for his Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for his
possession, v. 8. which has been but in a small measure fulfilled to what it
shall be, when there shall be given to him at his coming in the Clouds,
Dominion, and Glory, and a Kingdom, that all People Nations and Languages
should serve him, as Dan. 7.13, 14. and which shall not pass away (as the
former did into whose place his shall succeed) and to avoid the shifting it
from Earth, then, it is said expressly all this shall be under the whole heaven,
v. 27. and all Dominion shall serve him, which it never yet did, etc. and this
to be fulfilled upon the destruction of the Beast, etc.

So likewise of the same time when the third We came, that the seventh Angel
sounded. There were great voices in Heaven, saying, the Kingdoms of the world
are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, etc. Rev. 11.15. So
also Saint Paul from Daniel, joins his judgeing quick and dead, and his
Kingdom, together, 2 Timothy 4.1. (as was showed.) which will be above 1000. years
before the last Resurection, and general Judgment.

That large extent thereof was also foretold, Psalm, 72.8, 11. under the Type of
Solomon, though many things therein are not competible to Solomon, but only to
Christ, who shall in a most large sense have Dominion from Sea to Sea, and from
the River to the ends of the Earth, with other illustrations that could belong
only to Christ's Kingdom, v. 11. All Kings shall fall down before him, and all
Nations shall serve him, with other like, etc. Hence he is styled the Prince of
the Kings of the Earth, Rev. 11.15. And King of Kings, etc. 1 Timothy 6.15. Rev.
1.9. and else where.

Observe the perpetuity of this Kingdom of Christ; to which purpose, in the
said 72. Psalm. ^.7. it is said concerning Christ (which could not be true of
Solomen) that in his days the righteous shall flourish, and abundance of
peace, so long as the Moon endures, and v. 17. His name shall continue for
ever; his name, or his dignity and honor, shall be continued as long as the
Sun, or (as in the Heb.) shall be as a son to continue his fathers name for
ever. So also runs the promise under the Type of Solomon made to David's house,
to be fulfilled in Christ, 2 Samuel 7.13. I will establish the throne of his
kingdom for ever, v. 16. thy house and thy kingdom shall be established for
ever before thee, thy throne shall be established for ever before thee. Hence
with much gratitude, David accepted that great mercy, and said, v. 25. Now O
Lord God, the word that thou have spoken concerning thy servant, and concerning
his house, establish it for ever, and do as thou have said; and again, v. 29.
Let it please thee to bless the house of thy servant, that it may continue for
ever before thee, for thou O Lord God have spoken it, and with thy blessing let
the house of thy servant be blessed for ever. So, in Christ, the Prophet Esaias
shows it shall be fulfilled, c. 9.7. Of the increase of his government and
peace there shall be none end, upon the throne of David and upon his kingdom,
to order it and to establish it with judgment and with justice, from
henceforth even for ever. And after God had manifested his gracious purpose in
the parable of the two sticks, Ezekiel. 37. he shows more especially this
kingdoms perpetuity, v. 25 etc. saying, And they [viz. the twelve Tribes]
shall dwell in that land wherein their fathers dwelt, they, and their children,
and their childrens children for ever; (and then he adds) and my servant David
shall be their Prince for ever; and that this is of Christ's Davidical Kingdom,
to begin at the ruin of the fourth Monarchy, which he will (when death is
destroyed) deliver up again to his Father, 1 Cor. 15.24. not of his spiritual,
which he always had and will have, as God; see the reasons thereof in our
Tract on Jer. 3.17. page So Rov. 11.15. And he shall reign for ever and ever,
while the world shall continue, but spiritually to all eternity, as by the
occasion of those words at the seventh Trumpet, the same time wherein Christ's
said Davidical Kingdom shall begin, may evidently appear.

Furthermore, Israel with the other two, is also foretold about the beginning
of the 1000 years of Christ's said reign on earth, that then they shall become
one Kingdom under Christ, as is largely set down by Ezekiel in the
forementioned 37 chap. First, by the dry bones, explained so by God himself,
verse 11. Son of man, these bones are the whole house of Israel; and after by
the two sticks, one of Joseph, the other of Judah, from verse 15. to verse 20.
where again he explains the resemblance, verse 21. I will take the children of
Israel from among the heathen whither they are gone, and will gather them on
every side (which was never yet fulfilled) and bring them into their own Land,
and I will make them one Nation in the land upon the Mountains of Israel (not
yet fulfilled) and one King shall be King to them all, etc. and David my
servant shall be King over them, and they shall have one Shepherd, v. 22. and
they shall dwell in the land which I gave to Jacob my Servant, wherein your
Fathers have dwelt, and they shall dwell therein, even they, and their
Children, and their Childrens Children for ever, v. 25. Moreover, I will make a
Covenant of Peace with them, and it shall be an everlasting Covenant with them,
and I will place them and multiply them, and will set my Sanctuary in the midst
of them for ever more, etc. v. 26.

And how clear and large a Comment upon this and other Prophesies and Promises
to like purpose concerning all Israel the Apostle Paul has made. Romans 11. Who
so runs may read. God has not cast off his People (says he) which he
fore-knew, it was true at that time when he spoke it (as he shows v. 5.) and
will be of the Elect at all times, and though the diminishing of the Jews was
for a time the riches of the Gentiles to provoke the Jews to jealousy, yet
their restoring and fullness will be a greater riches to them; which he for the
strangness compares (as in Ezekiels Vision) to a Resurrection from the dead, v.
15. and shows they are the natural branches of the blessed Forefathers, and
shall all be graffed in again into their own Olive Tree, and v. 26. declares
the mystery of the long continued blindness of all Israel; (as also (says he)
there is a Vail upon their hearts, but that Vail shall be taken away, 2 Cor. 3.
and then confirms by Prophecy, their general call, and deliverance, from Es.
59.20. And so says he, v. 26. all Israel shall be saved (as it is written)
there shall come out of Zion the deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness
from Jacob; declaring further, That the strength of the Promise consisted in
the Covenant with their Forefathers, for this (said God) is my Covenant unto
them (though made of old with their Forefathers) yet reaching still unto them,
when I shall take away their sins.

Thus we may see in these many particulars, what the holy Scripture speaks of
them, at, or about the beginning of Christ's Kingdom on Earth, which, though but
briefly touched, yet in this respect may sufficiently demonstrate to
unprejudiced Christians the truth of this Doctrine.

But yet more largely it may again appear by what will be done all the said
1000. years, etc.

1. Satan will be bound, and continue shut up in his Prison all the said time,
that he may not in all that time, deceive the Nations any more, till the 1000
years are ended, though afterward for a little season he will be roosed again,
Rev. 20.2, 3.

2. Christ with his raised Saints shall reign on the Earth all that thousand
years, Rev. 5.10. and 20.4.

3. Then will be the new Heavens and the new Earth whereind wells Righteousness
for the said thousand years, 1 Pet. 3.13. Es. 65.17. Rev. 21.1.

4. Then the New Jerusalem that shall come down from God out of Heaven will be
in its glory and peace, Rev. 21.10.11. and after its undoubted rescue from
Satan's last attempt with his last Gog and Magog to besiege it as before was
evident, chap. 20.7, 8, 9, 10, etc. and against the Camp of the Saints all in
vain, and to his own ruin and his followers which is the beginning of a more
flourishing and blessed estate to that Jerusalem and all her Saints, as chapter 21.
and 22. and that for all eternity after their said sudden rapture and change,
thence for ever to be with the Lord, 1 These. 4.16. 1 Cor. 15.51.

5. The inferior creatures will then be freed from the bondage of corruption,
into the glorious liberty of the sons of God, during the same time, Rom 8.21.

6. It is the time of that Adoption the Apostle Paul speaks of, which thus he
explains, to wit the redemption of their bodies, namely, from the corruption
and prison of the grave, to remain alive with Christ in that said state all the
1000 years ensuing, which is the redemption of which our Savior sets down the
signs, Luke 21. and particularly makes a consequent of his coming in a cloud,
v. 27. saying, Then lift up your heads, for your redemption draws nigh, v. 28.
But in v. 31. puts it beyond all ground of doubt, saying, When ye see these
things, the Kingdom of God is nigh at hand, which must needs be that revealed,
Dan. 7.13, 14. and then to begin for 1000 years, Rev. 20.4. and not of the
Kingdom of the stone only, as spiritual, but of the mountain, Dan. 2.35. when
it will fill the whole earth, called then also the Kingdom of God, Rev. 11.15.
and ch 19.6.

7. Then every knee shall bow to Christ, of things (before) in heaven and in
earth, and under the earth, and shall by their subjection to him acknowledge
him Lord of all, of which bowing the knee amongst men is a token, etc. Phil.
2.9, 10. So prophesied of Es. 45.23. and which is excellently set forth in a
Vision, declaring the issue of the revelations accomplishments, Rev. 5.7, 8 9,
11, 12, 13. as is usual in that Book for all the sufferers in order in a
greater or less degree (as after may more appear in our 7th. Argument
afterward.) But in the said Vision, after the Church and innumerable glorious
Angels had done, then all creatures also are said to sing their song of praise
to the Lamb, by rendering blessing, honor, glory, power, unto him, v. 13.

8. Then the promises made to the faithful forefathers, Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, concerning their having the promised land, and their posterities
enjoying it to the end of the world, as Ezekiel 77.25, 26, etc. or as that
emphatical expression is, Deuteronomy. 11.21. as the days of heaven upon earth shall
be fulfilled, [though they in their life time only saw the promises afar off,
and received not the accomplishment of them while they lived, Heb. 11.39.] And
as Stephen speaks of Abraham, to whom that promise was first and often made,
yet says, he had not so much as to set his foot on, [by virtue of the said
promise, Act. 7. which promise is largely rehearsed, Ps. 105.8, 9, 10, 11.

9. Then shall they enjoy that City with its wonderful glory, which God has
provided for them, Heb. 11.16. and of which he himself is said to be the
builder and maker of, which also is said to have foundations, v. 10. where they
and all the faithful sufferers since shall be made perfect in one, Joh. 17.21,
23. and also behold Christ's glory there, v. 24.

10. Then shall they all enjoy all the privileges and benefits of the New
Jerusalem state; all tears shall be wiped away from their eyes, they shall be
the sons of God, and inherit all things, Rev. 21.7. They shall see Gods face,
and his name shall be in their forehead, they shall have their part in the tree
of life, whose leaves are for the healing of the Nations, and in the pure
River, Rev. 22. with many other promises and privileges respecting that state
and time.

11. Then shall those in the natural life, which shall then be of those Nations
that shall then be saved, walk in the light of the said New Jerusalem, Rev. 21.
and have very much teaching, guidance, and help from thence, (in such ways as
God has appointed thereunto) when they and their Kings shall bring their glory
and honor to it, and their Kings shall bring the honor of the Nations to it,
Rev. 24.26. Es. 60.

12. Then shall all those great promises made in Scripture to the posterity of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to be fulfilled on earth, take their full effect,
Deuteronomy. 30. v. 1. to 11. Eze. 37. to the end. Es. 60. and 61. and 59, etc. with
multitudes of others belonging to them in this world, by virtue of Gods
Covenant with their fathers, Jer. 31.32. and 32.37, 38, 39, etc.

13. Then will be that restitution of all things spoken of by the Apostle
Peter, Act. 3.20, 21. and those times of refreshing from the presence of the
Lord, after the heavens shall cease to contain him for that time, therefore
says Paul, Ye shall have rest with us, when our Lord Jesus shall appear with
his holy Angels and render Tribulation to his Adversaries, 2 These. 1, 6. And
that appears to be that Sabbatisme or Rest the Apostle Paul asserted, yet to
remain to the People of God, Heb. 4.9.

14. Then also will the Tabernacle of God be with men, and he will dwell with
them, and he will be their God, and they shall be his People -- Rev. 21.3. and
they his Servants shall serve him, Rev. 22.3. it will then be their joy and
happiness to do so.

Many other particulars are spoken of in Scripture, respecting the duties, the
dignities, the privileges and happiness, both of living (in the Natural life)
and the Saints raised from the death of the body, wherein they will both be
happily exercised, and peacefully, and securely enjoy the benefits, the said
thousand years of Christ's reign upon Earth, from his coming in the Clouds of
heaven for above a thousand years space; until his sitting on that great white
Throne, when the Heaven and the Earth shall flee away before his face, and no
place be found for them, Rev. 20.11. and when these visible Heavens we behold
shall be no more, as is said, Job 14.12.

And so we proceed to make up the evidence of this first way of Demonstration,
a little to touch upon the third sort of those things that are declared by the
holy Scriptures to be done at the end of the said thousand years, which are so
evidently set down in the latter part of the Revelation; [wherein, as Mr. Mede
observes, the Holy Ghost has set down things more clearly than before] and
herein observe what he declares.

1. First concerning Satan's loosing again; who after he had told us of his
binding, and shutting up at the beginning of the thousand years, and for what
reason; (that he might deceive the Nations no more, till the thousand years
were fulfilled) but then he adds, after that he must be loosed for a little
space, v. 2, 3. and when he had set forth summarily the happiness of the raised
Saints reign with Christ, with other divine truths of the different estate of
the rest of the dead, which were not to be raised till the thousand years were
ended, v. 4, 5, 6. he proceeds to show in order, how accordingly it shall fall
out, v. 7. as before he had foretold, that Satan should be loosed then out of
his prison. For what is here delivered concerning Satan, and the state of the
Saints raised, and then of the rest not raised, that are said not to live again
till, etc. is all set out with the greatest distinct clearness, in each
respect, that can in so short a form or frame of words probably be expressed or
conceived, and as most agreeing with the current of the Sacred Scripture
concerning those things; which Christ was so graciously pleased so to make
known, for the benefit of his Church in the time of the end, and therefore
delivers them so clearly and distinctly, and so leaves them (with all the rest
of this book) unsealed, Rev. 22.10. For from the time of the giving this
Revelation, and Christ's receiving his Commission from the Father to open the
Seals, and read and execute the particulars in their order, chap. 5. he has
been, still is, and will also henceforth be in doing, till they all be
accomplished accordingly, and therefore he says, in respect of the order of
accomplishment, the time is at hand, chap. 1.3.

2. And Secondly, after the holy Spirit had so punctually set down the time of
Satan's loosing out of his Prison, he proceeds in the next place, to show what
ill use he would make of his loosing (though permitted to him but for a little
season) at the end of the thousand years, and though he be foretold from the
word of Christ, that his last desperate devilish attempt, will be but a vain
attempt, against the Camp of the Saints and the holy City, and not only bring
on effectually the ruin to that world wherein he would still rule, but
destruction also to himself with them in the said bottomless pit, where the
Beast, and the false Prophet (that he had in former times long seduced) were
cast above a thousand years before, yet so desperately wicked (notwithstanding)
Satan will then be, and (it appears to be the heavy judgment of God upon him)
that he will then so do, viz. go out to deceive the Nations, even in such a
case, etc. as v. 8.

3. The large extent of that most horrible wicked attempt of his, and where
they will be found, that shall thereto be seduced (then) by him, to such a
purpose, namely in the four quarters of the Earth, even such as were removed,
or far withdrawn from the Camp of the Saints, by such time as the thousand
years should end, v. 8.

4. By the quality of such Nations which he will deceive and seduce (then) into
that so vain and horrible an attempt, who are described by the titles of Gog
and Magog, even as those great and implacable Enemies to the Church were
described, to wit, the Turk and Pope, Ez. 38, and 39, which by his long
seducement, were by him brought to their ruin before the thousand years, when
he knew he was to be shut up so long in his prison, and when the Jews were to
be delivered, and placed in their own Land, Ezekiel. 37. and united with the ten
Tribes their Brethren into one Kingdom under Christ; and the new Jerusalem set
up, and described by Ezekiel, from chap. 40. to the end of that Book, there
named [Jehovah Shamma] the Lord is there: this title or description of such
wretched persons, the holy Spirit is here again pleased to use, to set them
forth by, that they will be another Gog and Magog, maliciously attempting the
subversion of Christ's Church, though so incomparably glorious in the world,
etc. v. 8.

5. The course he takes with them, he gathers them together to battle, [for it
is the most natural design of the Devil and his most wicked agents in all
times, to war against the Saints] and it was quarrel enough against them, both
for him and them, that the mannaging well the power of good government, is by
God put into their hands, for restraining evil and promoting good, (as
doubtless in that time it will be) when that attempt shall be made, for the
overthrow whereof that design should (probably) serve [if it might be] to get
such power into their own hands, that Satan by and in them might reign.

6. The seeming advantage they will think probably they shall have, to
undertake that hellish design which Satan will provoke and tempt them to make
use of therein, namely, their very great multitudes and hosts of evil
cumbitants, which are foretold, shall be as the sand of the sea, v. 8.

7. Their general, unanimous, and ready yieldance to such Satan's tentation and
seducement; they went upon the breadth of the earth, v. 9. wickedly, yet
confidently relying on their own multitudes, even against the long and glorious
manifestations of the power and kingdom of Christ in the world then, after and
in the destruction of the Beast above 1000 years before.

8. The high degree of their seeming prevalency in such achievement; they
compassed the camp of the Saints about, and the beloved City, v. 9. they even
seemed then to obtain their end, etc. But then.

9. Observe Gods appearing in the nick of time against them, causing their
horrible disappointment, and bringing upon them their remediless and desperate
destruction; fire [then] came down from God out of heaven and devoured them, v.
9. which was the temporal execution of Gods judgment on Satan's last hosts.

10. Whereupon follows the eternal execution of Gods wrath upon Satan himself,
for he is then cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, to be tormented
perpetually with the Beast and false Prophet, sent thither above 1000 years
before, by means of his seducement, v. 10.

11. Hereupon ensues the general Judgment, first manifested in the sudden
dissolution of the whole frame and fabric of nature, in that heaven and earth
flee away from the face of him that the great white Throne was set for to sit
upon, who had upheld all things till then by the word of his power, Heb. 1.3.
(who it seems) then will ^^solve them into the first Chaos of confusion, upon
the ranture and chinge of the Saints, but from thence no place will be found
for them, v. 11. but as Job says, these material heavens shall be no more. But
then

12. and lastly, The general Judgment proceeds of all men good and bad, both
in respect of declaration or sentence, and execution accordingly, as in many
particulars is set down to the end of the Chapter. And whereas Hell and Death
are in the issue said to be cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, first by
hell there may be understood the grave, as [sheol] in the old Testament, Ps.
16. and Genesis 42.38. so (...) in the new, 1 Cor. 15.55. (...), O grave where is
thy victory, in which Chapter what the Apostle Paul had taught of destroying
the last enemy death, is here (metaphorical) described to be fulfilled; to wit,
in its capacity, the subject matter of death and hell (in that sense) being now
for ever taken away, thenceforth no more use of either to be at all, whereby
Christ is made the death of death, and death the last enemy to be destroyed,
will then [as he speaks] be swallowed up in victory.

Now as the Jews looking only at Christ's second glorious coming foretold in the
old Testament, did usually-overlook such things as set forth the humility of
his first coming, for both his first and second coming [as Mr. Mede observes]
are promiscuously set down in the old Testament, [except in Daniel] so
Christians under the new Testament have been apt to overlook the first
resurrection, (called in Scripture, the resurrection of the just) under a
confused notion taken up of the last general resurrection, which once for all
(for the mysteries thereof were revealed by degrees) our Savior has by his
beloved Disciple John so fully at last declared, by an orderly explication of
both in this 20th. Chap. of the Rev. for a sure Key to open (otherwise) much
mystical Scripture, concerning the last times of the good world, (as part of
the 11th. Chap. before to v. 15. was a Table for part of this Book, in
reference to the order of the bad times of the former evil world) to chap. 19.
adjoining to it there the state of the good world to follow it, with the
continuance thereof, chap. 19, and 20. and proceeds further in the two last
Chapters to explain the glorious state and privileges of it, as he is wont in
this Book after things more generally delivered, to give more particular
explications of them; so here when he had spoken of joy at the marriage of the
Lamb, chap. 19. and that his wise had made her self ready, v. 7. which he
explains, chap. 21.9, 10. to be the New Jerusalem, come down from God out of
heaven, (which appears to be the spirits of just men made perfect) which then
came with Christ at his second coming, as Zach. had prophesied of them, etc.
being by a Metonimy of the subject the inhabitants of the New Jerusalem above,
Gal. 4. till they came to take their bodies: wherefore that City prepared, Heb.
11.10, 16. for the faithful, is said to have foundations, and so is described,
Rev. 21. And the Apostle Paul explains Zach. in 1 These. 3.14. calling it the
coming of Christ with all his Saints; and in chap. 4.14. yet more clearly [he
saith] them also that sleep in Jesus will God bring with him, viz. to be united
to their bodies, at the first blessed resurrection, to inhabit the said New
Jerusalem on earth that has foundations, and behold Christ's glory there, Joh.
17.24. And that this first resurrection is from the death of the body, has
been cleared by many; but Mr. Farnworth in his Millenium, has added lately
diverse evident reasons, respecting that, and other matters of like nature, page
49, 50, etc. and proves that it cannot be understood of a spiritual
resurrection, to which purpose were diverse hints given in the end of our
Irenicon; see the Appendix.

And thus much for the grounds of our first demonstration from those Scriptures
that concern all the said particulars (to which a great deal more might be
added) of which we may say, as our Savior of Moses and the Prophets, that such
as would not believe them, they would not believe though one rose from the
dead; so such as would reject, or evade so many evidences of Scripture, would
not believe, though many more of the like nature were added, so hardly are
prepossessed opinions, and prejudices against some divine Truths of this nature
removed amongst some, etc. as I confess, I experimentally found, till God was
pleased by many providence and helps afforded, together with remarkable
guidance of his word and spirit, to teach me otherwise; as he must do in some
things, before men will rightly learn them, though by the strength of Arguments
conviction may be wrought, etc.

Now from all the particulats before, in, and after the said thousand years of
Christ's reign with his Saints, the Argument may thus be framed.

All such particulars which the holy Scriptures declare, shall be accomplished
before, in and after the said thousand years, shall certainly be fulfilled,

But the holy Scriptures declare most, or all the said particulars, before, in,
or after the said thousand years to be accomplished on earth.

Therefore then they most certainly shall be fulfilled on earth.

The Major Proposition is undeniable to Christians.

The Minor is abundantly proved from many, or all the particulars before
specified under the three heads.

2d. Arg.
I proceed to the second Argument drawn from sundry Texts of the Old Testament,
speaking of what concerns that time of Christ's Kingly Office in the thousand
years which are so explained by the spirit of God in the New Testament.

First, for the beginning of Christ's Kingdom of power on earth, (when the Stone
becomes a Mountain, Dan. 2.35. Answerable whereunto in Christ's Kingdom of the
Stone he is set forth by a Lamb, Rev. 5. that was slain, that had seven horns,
and seven eyes, denoting his perfect power and wisdom in that state: but at the
end of it, he comes with his heavenly Hosts, Rev. 19.11, etc. and conquers the
Beast and false Prophet, and casts them into the Lake, chap. 20. binds Satan
and shuts him up in prison for a thousand years, and reigns with his Saints,
etc. at the same time) but besides that, for the beginning of that his Kingdom,
we have that divine Oracle in the Old Testament, Psalm. 110.1. Sit thou on my
right hand, till, I make thy foes thy footstool, which is often spoken of in
the New Testament, not only to show him to be the Son of God, Mat. 22.44.
though of the seed of David according to the flesh, Acts 2.30. yet from the
time of his ascension into heaven. When he is said so to begin to sit on Gods
right hand, v. 34, 35. he [saith the Apostle Peter, v. 36] was made both Lord
and Christ; and as that Nobleman in the Parable, Luke 19. went into a far
Country, and to return when he had received his Kingdom, which was the
particular occasion of that Parable, v. 11. [because they thought the Kingdom
of God should immediately appear] he teaches, that he must return first from
his Fathers right hand; and this he makes more evident, Luke 21: when he had
spoken of the signs of the last times, he tells them of his coming in a cloud
with power, v. 27. and v. 31. thereby shows them the Kingdom of God is nigh at
hand, namely that Kingdom he said he went to receive, and then returning
should possess.

Secondly, for his foes to be made his footstool, when he comes from the right
hand of the Father, we have in the vision of Daniel, c. 7. first how a judgment
is appointed to destroy the beast, the wicked horn that spoke the great words,
v. 8, 9. and the body of the said Beast was given to the burning flame. [so of
Magog, Ezaek, 38.6.] at the same time he has the vision of one like the son of
man coming in the Clouds of Heaven, to receive the Kingdoms of the world, v.
13.14. and 27. of such his coming St. Paul speaks, 2 These. 1, 7.8, 9, 10. when
he shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking
vengeance, etc. And in the next chap. particularly speaks of the Destruction of
that wicked one, v. 8. whom he will destroy with the appearance of his coming:
the times also reaching to that, are also set down in order, in the book of the
Rev. to chap. 19.11. where is the Vision of the execution of the same judgment.

Again, for another great Foe [ viz. the Turk] then to be subdued* is it large
set forth by the forementioned prophe^^ against Gag. Ex^^. 38. and 39. before
the setting up of the New Jerusalem, c. 40.41, 42. etc. the same we have
described in other respects, Dan. 11.40, 41, 42, etc. whose destruction is
declared, v. 45. that he should come to his end, and none should help him: and
in v. 1. of the following ^. Christ's appearance is revealed to Daniel, with his
peoples deliverance like a Resurrection from the dead, v. 2.3. which
Redemption, Luke 21. is joined with his coming in a cloud with power and great
glory, when, says he to the Jews, of whom he had also spoken before: when ye
see these things come to pass look up, and lift up your heads, for then your
Redemption draws nigh, v. 28. and again v. 31. then know that the Kingdom of
God is nigh at hand; namely, that of the faid 1000 years; to this purpose
speaks the Apostle, Heb. 10.13. after he had offered one sacrifice for our sins
for ever, he sat down at the right hand of God, from henceforth expecting till
his enemies be made his footstool: The end likewise of which his expectation
shall be, (says St. Paul, at his glorious appearance, which in his times he
shall show, who is the blessed and only Potentate the King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords, 1 Timothy 6.15, which title at his coming, is said to be written upon
his vesture, and upon his thigh, Rev. 19.6. and Mr. Mede conceives by the
reaping of the Harvest, Rev. 14. may be meant the destruction of the Turkish
power.

For the confirmation of this argument, to manifest that what is spoken of
things respecting the Kingdom of Christ, so explained in the New Testament,
which to such purpose are foretold in the Old Testament, and may hither be
reduced; are many of those Scriptures spoken of under the two first heads of
those particulars applied to the former argument, besides many others, I shall
here only point them out as it were: first, what was said of Elias, Mal. 4.5.
is explained, so by our Savior, Mat. 17.11. long after John Baptists death,
truly (said he) Elias shall come, etc. see page 2.

Of the burning of the whore of Babylon, Dan. 7.8.11. explained, Rev. 18. see
p. 2.

So of the Armageddon Battle, Joel 3. and Ezekiel. 38, and 39. explained in the
New Testament, Rev, 16. and Rev. 19. as is largely set down, p. 3.

Also the great national restoration and conversion of the Jews, Dan, 1.1, 2,
3 Zac. 12.10. Es. 66.8. Zac. 39. so explained by our Savior, Rev. 19. v. 1. to
v. 9 etc. page 5.

Again, for the setting up Christ's Kingdom, Dan. 7.13.14. with the explication
in the latter part of that chapter, applied so, upon the same ruin of the
beast, at the same time (as our parallel manifests) Rev. 20.4. see p. 7.8.

Likewise for the terrible coming of Christ, Zach. 14. Joel, 3. so explained,
Rev. 19. from ver. 11, to the end, and 1 Cor. 15.24, 25, 26, 27. he must reign
till he has put all his enemies under his seet, see page 8.

In like manner for the large extent of Christ's Kingdom, Dan. 7.13.14, etc. to
the end, and Psalm. 2.8. which shall take place, Rev. 19. from v. 1. to v. 10.
when as our Savior speaks, there will be one Sheepfold, and one Shepherd, Jo.
10.16.

And for the perpetuity of his Kingdom, 2 Samuel 7.13, etc. v. 25. to 29.
explained and applied, Rev. 11.15. at the said Kingdom of Christ at his
appearance; namely, his Davidicall Kingdom, see the 11 particular, page 9.

The Uniting of the ten Tribes with the two, set forth in two parables. Ez. 37.
largely commented upon by St. Paul. Romans 11. see the 10. particular, page 10,
11.

Also the New Heavens and New Earth foretold, Es. 65.17. explained in the time
of Christ's Kingdom, Rev. 21. and the New Jerusalem, Ezekiel 40. to the end of the
book, and Es. 60. and other following Chapters explained, of the same time of
Christ's said Kingdom, Rev. 21. and Esaias his prophecy particularly applied, v.
24.26. and Ezekiels waters and trees, applicable to Rev. 22. to v. 7. See our
15 reasons that these will be on earth, on Jer. 3.17.

And Isreal's general redemption, and great Restoration, Deuteronomy. 30. to v. 11.
Ezekiel. 37. latter part of of the chap. Deuteronomy. 32.42, 43. which our Savior
explains, Rev. 21.28.31. and also St. Paul, Romans 11.

Many other Scriptures so applied and explained in the New Testament may be
observed in what has been already said in reference to the second head in the
thousand years, and others we shall have occasion afterward to consider which
will be obvious to be applied to this purpose, we shall here at present, add
no more: But from hence set down the 2d Argument (which will likewise strongly
back the former) which, from what has been said may be laid down as follows.

That sense and meaning of the said particulars, in the Old Testament, which
the Spirit of God gives of them in the New Testament, or of many of them: is
the best and truest explication.

But the holy Scriptures in the New Testament explain many or the most of them
in the sense aforesaid.

Therefore that sense is the truest and best explication of them.

The Major proposition here is also undeniable.

The minor is sufficiently evident by what has been set down of particulars
before, and more may be: as also many arguments may be drawn from all the
ensuing foundations, Proceed we then to the

Third argument, taken from that general reference of St. Peter, Acts 3.21.
[applyed also by Christ to those times, Rev. 10. when the seventh Trumpet began
to sound] which times (says he) God has spoken of by the mouth of all his
holy Prophets, since the world began.

The confirmation of this argument is somewhat largely set down already (though
much more might be added (if it were needful) from the testimonies of the
several Prophets in the Old Testament, and from the Psalms (as may be seen in
our Irenicon from page 56. to page 89.) some of which are also here named under
the former heads whereunto I wholly referr the Reader in this particular, etc.

And so we come to the fourth, 4th. Argument.
drawn from such portions of Scripture as the holy spirit has set some marks
upon, which may discover unto us, that they speak somewhat that belongs to
those last-times.

As first in Moses song for posterities, Deuteronomy. 32. when he had therein
described (prophetically) the Israelites former sins and sufferings, toward
the end he foretells things that should be when Jews and Gentiles should be
last united into one; and the ruin of their enemies, that then stood in the
way to hinder it, he then concludes with mercies in store for his people and
land, v. 42, 43. rejoice ye Gentiles with his people, which is applied by St.
Paul (with like Texts respecting those times, Romans 5.) as Es. 11. Ps. 117.

So in Dan. 8.26. [as the 2300 days of years were applicable to the Jews long
bondage, from the beginning of the Babilonian Captivity to the end of the Roman
Tyranny] for that a larger and stricter sense is contained in those visions and
the explications we have showed in our summary, on Dan. 11.8.) but v. 26.
Daniel is commanded, in referrence to that larger sense, to shut up the vision,
for it was for many days, and observe the like, c. 10.14. with reference to the
latter days: which said shutting up or sealing in Daniel is the usual note or
mark of things afterward to be revealed more specially, or done in Gospel
times (which are the substance of Revelation visions in order, as in our
parallel is observable.)

In like manner in Baalams Prophecy, Numb. 24.24. Where the Ships of Chiittim
are spoken of, which are again applied by Daniel, to the beginning of the Roman
Monarchy, when by the Roman Navies appearing against Antiochus Epiphanes near
Alexandria, he was last vanquished by them, Dan. 11.30. Which Roman Empire
being to perish for ever (as Baalam had foretold) showing the Roman Tyranny
should be the last, that should afflict Eber or Ebrewes, and accordingly the
last head of that Empire then is described by the feet and toes of the great
image, setting forth those 4 Mettle-Kingdoms, upon the finishing of which
Dominion of the Gentiles over the Jews (called by our Savior the fulfilling of
the times of the Gentiles, Luke 21. when the bondage and long captivity of the
Jews and Israelites is to end, as Dan. 12.1, 2, 3.

So also Moses in those threatenings set in order, Lev. 26. seems prophetically
to include the order of Gods proceedings toward that people, and therefore
when he comes to speak of their deiiverance from the Babylonish Captivity, he
speaks of Prayer and Humiliation to be used as was then accordingly
(remarkably) done by Daniel, who understood by books, c. 9.2. from Jer. 25.12.
and 29.10. that God would accomplish 70 years in the desolations of Jerusalem:
and as Jeremiah had prophesied of such praying, Jer. 29.12, 13. Then ye shall
call upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you,
etc. but ufterwards he promises a free deliverance only from himself from
their last captivity, for his Covenant with the forefathers of that people,
who are beloved for their fathers sake, Romans 11. as the Apostle Paul there
speaks.

And it is usual in the Old Testament, where Prophesies or Promises have that
frequent mark set upoe them, (...) Heb. in (...) ^^tremity of days, or as we
read it, in the latter days, there is something set down concerning Christ, or
his Kingdoms, or people respecting those times, as Jacob, Genesis 49.1. said, he
would show his sons what should befall them in the last days, and then in
Judahs blessing sets forth both the time of Christ's first coming, and then the
enlargement of his Church, by the gatherings of the people, and the great
prosperity of his own people at the last by his washing his garments in wine
and his clothes in the blood of Grapes, and that his eyes should be red with
wine, and his teeth white with milk. v. 10.11, 12.

So Dan. 2.28. it is used to show that the vision of Nebuchadnezzar's Image
contained something that reached to those last days, and the like used Dan.
10.14. in his last large vision to the end, when that glorious person was seen
of Daniel [probably of Christ, represented as to St. John Rev. 1.] he then told
Daniel he was then come to tell him what should befall his people in the latter
days, for (says he) yet the Vision is for many days.

Likewise Esaias 2.2. when that great Prophecy is set down concerning those
times (the same with Mic. 4.1.) there again repeated (he says expressly) it
should be in the latter days.

Also Jer. 23.20. after gracious prophesies of Christ's reign, and prospering
and executing of judgment and justice in the earth, etc. v. 5, 6. and their
last great deliverance from captivity, and his punishing their sins, he tells
them in the latter days, they shall consider is perfectly.

So again when he is about to describe the horrible destruction of the Turk
under the title of Gog, Ezekiel. 38, and 39. in v. 8. and v. 16. of the former
Chapter, he twice informs his people it shall be in the latter days. See
Observe. 14. in our 4th. part.

Thus by both matter and manner, and order, and peculiar marks, the Seripture
points out to us many things in the Old Testament, that especially have
reference unto the last times, as being of things which in that respect are to
be observed especially.

The fifth Argument is taken from what has been made manifest from Bp. 5. Arg.
Usher, Mr. Mede, Mr. Huit, Helvicus Chronicle, Mr. Swan in his Calamus mensur.
and others, that the fourth Monarchy in Daniel is the Roman Monarchy.

Med. Com. in cap. 11. Daniel, v. 35, 36, etc. (...) (says he) v. 36. eximium
quid designat, that is the letter [he] in the word bammelec, (...), the King,
signifies some eminent thing, as there denoting the beginning of the Roman
Kingdom, as by many characters thereof he declares, as that in Esa 7.14. the
word (...) a Virgin, a Virgin shall conceive, that is, continving a Virgin,
where also by the letter (...) is set forth that unparalleld conception of
Christ's body, etc. And he shall lift up himself above every God, which says
Mr. Mede, is the character of the 4th. Monarchy, or Roman Kingdom, after the
time Macedonia was subdued, to the end of Augustus his reign, and so proceeds
to apply the prophesies in order to the succeeding times, with much learning
and judgment, and according to what in experience has been found true, and as
suits with the Revelation in the New. Testament. So Mede on Dan. 7.24. in a
Letter to Dr. Meddus, etc. Also in explaining Dan. 11.41, 42. in the time of
the end, (...), which is the (...) or latter times, that is (says he) the
times of the Roman Kingdom, etc. So page 71. of the Apostafie of the latter
times; our times must needs be a part of the latter times of that Kingdom,
viz. the Roman, the times whereof (he had said before) were the last times in
general. So again he expounds the King of the South, Dan. 11.40. to be the
Saracens, who are said to push at the Roman said King, [as they did in the holy
wars, so called] and the King of the North to be the Turk, in the same v. and
so to the end of the chap. which also by our late annotations are fitly applied
to Rev. 9th. chap. as being there to be understood by the two first woe
trumpets there deciphered, namely, the fifth and sixth in order; and yet they
are again in the same Book of annotations on Dan. 11.40, 41. incongruously
misapplyed to the Greek Monarchy, which are the same by their times and
descriptions with the said two first woe trumpets, as experience has in great
part manifested in their accomplishment hitherto. Bp. Usher also in his annals
reckons the 4th. Monarchy to be the Roman Monarchy. Mr. Swan who treads much in
his steps, counts the Ro^an the 4th. Monatchy, Call. mensur. page 183. and gives
diverse reasons for it, page 184.5, 6. 7.

Also Mr. Huit upon Daniels prophecy all along expounds the 4th. Monarchy in
Daniel to be the Roman Monarchy. In like manner Helvicus in his Chronology
reckons the third to be the Greek, and the fourth to be the Roman Monarchy.
Also Carrion in his Chronicle enlarged and expounded by Phil. Melancthon,
accounts the Roman to be the fourth Monarchy, and with it begins his third Book
under the title of the fourth Monarchy. So Mr. Lee in his Excid: Antichristi;
Mr. Farnworth in his Millennio; also Dr. Homes; Mr. Peck in his sober guess.
And as for that too much (formerly) received opinion of the Seleucidae and
Laegidae, their being the fourth Monarchy, which has been a great obstruction
to many learned men, from discerning the right time and order, yea consequently
the very sense and intention of the Book of Revelation (as might be made
evident) in good part, and which opinion amongst many learned men of later
times, who have been well versed in those studies, is altogether exploded, as
being inconfistent with Scripture, History, and Experience; yea it would cut
off the comfortable evidence of the great promise of setting up Christ's
spiritual kingdom in its due time, namely, in the days of [one] of those
Kings, viz. of the Romans, as Mr. Mede expounds that Text, Dan. 2.44. and gives
an example for it in Judge. 12.7. Jeptha was buried in the Cities of Gilead, so
say the Translators in [one] of the Cities of Gilead; and had not the Roman
been one of the said Kings, how had that prophefie been true? But the holy
Scriptare (as was showed) reckons the Roman Monarchy from their fraying away
Antiochus Epiphanes, Dan. 11.30, etc. and these learned Historians and
Chroniclers, with others of great worth, in many respects agree therein, and
judiciously avouch it so to be, and in many things evident experience in
accomplishments of these latter times, as respecting the fourth Monarchy, which
were prophetically fore-shewed, does prove the same, or in the times of the
end, which is the same, as that of the Saracens and Turks, Dan. 11.40, 41. the
two first woe trumpets, Rev. 9, etc. with many like matters too evident to be
reasonably withstood, etc. And therefore by judicious and unprejudiced persons,
greater evidence (I conceive of this nature) will not be expected, than the
unbyassed judgment of so many able persons, versed in those studies, who give
their reasons for their judgment, and find them made good by experimental
accomplishments, the utmost determination of all such historical dissents.

Come we then to the sixth Argument, 6th. Argument.
which is from that part of Daniels Visions that concern the Roman Monarchy
since Christ's first coming in the flesh (together with the state of the true
Church thence all along under it, which is in great part the subject of the
book of Revelation, from chap. 3. to 20. chap. as some of the said learned
persons and others have likewise cleared, and as also may be seen by our
abridgement and parallel, on Daniel, and of our fummarie thereof besides other
observations to confirm the same as follow, etc. Even as the last part of the
Rev. concerns Christ's second coming, and the state of things in this world,
afterward Rev. 19.20, 21, 22. And as the forenamed learned and judicious
persons, have owned the Roman Monarchy, to be that fourth that was foretold by
Daniel in sundry Visions: so have some of them declared upon solid grounds,
that diverse of Daniels Visions reach to the time of Christ's second coming, and
set down some generals of the state of things afterward, which also may to
unprejudiced persons be made evident by a brief and general view of the
substance of the things considered in that book, especially as respecting
things after Daniels time.

First, there are two general Decypherings of all time to come, as two
witnessings of the same truth: one made to a Gentile. Dan. 2. viz.
Nebuceadnezzar in the great Image setting forth the 4 Mettle-Kingdoms,
succeeding each other (as Mr. Mede observes) namely, by the Gold the Caldean,
by the Silver the Mede or Persian, by the Brass the Grecian, by the Iron the
Roman Monarchies; which were to continue whilst the Gentiles had the Dominion:
called by our Savior the times of the Gentiles, Luke 21.24.

Another made to a Jew, viz. the greatly beloved Prophet Daniel, c. 7. by a
Vision of four Beasts, setting before him again [with Christ's Kingdom to
succeed the last] the times, order, and qualities of the said four Kingdoms,
and with many things of Christ's, from Antichrists destruction, that was not
expressed in the former Vision, or explication of the four metals, Dan. 2.
which Kingdoms by both Visions were to continue during the long bondage of
Daniels own people, till the wicked horn or beasts body be given to the burning
flame, v. 8, 9, 10, 11. and Christ come in the clouds, v. 13, 14. And
concerning this large extent of the times of both these general Visions, Daniel
is taught by the Spirit of God to set his stamp and impression upon it, clearly
to that purpose, chap. 2.28. God (says he) makes known to the King what shall
be in the latter days, Heb. postremity of days, (as likewise does the Angel
again, chap. 10.14.) And accordingly Daniel expounds, when the stone cut out of
the mountain without hands, (that appears to be Christ's spiritual kingdom from
his Ascension to his coming again in person) whilst he is breaking Divinely the
lower parts of the great Image, and especially the feet and toes of the said
Image to powder, like the dust of the summer threshing, etc. and then the said
Kingdom of the Stone will become a great mountain filling the whole earth, ^.
35.

And for the other Vision c. 7. of the 4 Beasts showed to himself, he is
directly guided by the Spirit of God to set down how the beast should be
destroyed as was said when the time of his date was out: viz. his time, times,
and the dividing of a time (or 1260 days of years, as in the Rev. is explained)
That then he had the Vision of Christ's coming personally, in the clouds of
Heaven (which is his second coming) set before him: and Gods giving all the
Kingdoms of the world to him, that all Nations under the whole heaven should
obey him v. 27. personally, during that his Davidical Kingdom in the 1000
years. And as the description of the Iron Kingdom does fitly belong to the
Roman, whose strength and prevailence has been suitable thereunto, so do all
well approved expositors understand it, and as it was in two thighs or legs
since Constantine in the East and West Empires: so the feet and toes (in the
time of the Pope and ten Kings) have been as part of Iron and part of Clay,
under this last said head of Government, the Popedom, both in its Ecclesiastic
and Politic capacity, which as Iron and Clay cannot be mingled: and though the
said ten Kings have sought to mingle themselves with the seed of men (that is,
have endeavored by marriages to strengthen themselves) yet they have not
cleaved one to another: Daniel foretells it shall be in vain, which is so
notorious. That it is said to be the observation of the Grand Signior (the
Turk) that they will never agree till his fingers are all of a length: which so
animates him against the Emperor and Pope to assault them. The other
description of the fourth beast Dan. 7. is also of the said Roman Kingdom set
forth to be so terrible, monstrous, and cruel with the ten horns that arose on
the beast, and another little horn, among them, or behind them, that spoke such
great words against the most high, are orderly described, and suitably
expounded, in the book of Rev. as may be observed in our abridgment and
parallel, and summary of Daniels visions, etc.

And diverse things are again observable in some of the visions that concern the
order and times of the said Kingdoms and Beasts further applied to the Roman
Monarchy, as c. 9. after the end of the 70 weeks when Christ had put an end to
Typical sacrifice; by his death in Tiberius his Reign, Daniel speaks of the
Prince, viz. of the Roman people that should come to destroy the City and
Sanctuary, v. 26. which was fulfilled by Titus and Vespatian: and in the two
last verses he sets forth the very long desolation that should follow upon
Jerusalem and her people in those general expressions: until the consummation,
and that determined should be powered out upon the desolate: which is also
explained by our Savior, till the times of the Gentiles Dominion [in the four
Kingdoms and Beasts] be fulfilled, Luk 21, 24.

In chap. 8. v. 26. the same large space of time is assigned thereto, of 2300
days of years, for which see the reasons in our summary upon that Text, etc.

Also in the last large prophetical vision of the general state of that people,
etc. there are many things referr unto the Roman Monarchy: first, in that the
Angel tells him, c. 10.14. that he came to make him understand what should
befall his people in the latter, or postremity of days: and in c. 11. he sets
before him the degrees of the rise of the Roman Kingdom. First, he intitles him
a Prince, that began to act in his own behalf, v. 18. as before he had done for
another before, v. 13. [see abridgment] after the Romans are set forth by the
Mr. Mede did. 48, p. 376.
Ships of Chittim in v. 30. the old mark set down by Baalam to know their last
oppressor, Numb. 24.24 who was to perish for ever; but at v. 36. he intitles
the Romans [the K. Kings] with an Emphasis (...) Emphaticum aliquid eximium
denotat, said Mr. Mede) and so the state of that Kingdom with several of her
heads of Tyranny coming on, and the enemies that restrain them to the end of
the chapter. Over part of whose Dominions the King of the South, the Saracens,
and the King of the North, the Turk, prevail in the time of the end near or
unto the second coming of Christ: See the Parallel to this purpose, and summary
on Daniel, wherein diverse other things are set down, which may evidence that
all things said to be shut up in Daniel, and such as are referred to the times
'of the end, or latter days, are so explained in the Rev. both respecting the
Roman Monarchy, and Christ's afterward, when the said Kingdom of the Stone
became a great Mountain filling the whole earth: but these brief hints may here
suffice.

The seventh Argument is taken from the promises and encouragements made and
given to the overcomers and sufferers in all times following, both in the Asian
Churches, Rev. 2. and 3. chap and also all along afterward referring to the
New Jerusalem state, till the Roman Monarchy be utterly destroyed and ruined,
and then those promises and encouragements take place and are fulfilled, as
appears from Rev. 19. to the end of that book; which state the spirit of God
three times attesteth, and strongly confirms, c. 19.9. and 21.5.22.6. as
foreshewing the backwardness of men to believe it, for, says our Savior, when
the Son of man comes, shall he find faith upon earth. Luke 18.

To instance in some of the promises, Rev. 2. and 3. c. as first that promise,
c. 2.7. to eat of the tree of life, there recorded, is to be performed in the
New Jerusalem state, Rev. 22.14. So Rev. 3.21. to him that overcomes will I
grant to sit with me in my throne, etc. is to be performed in the time of
Christ's visible Kingdom on earth, Rev. 20.4. when the Saints shall live again
bodily, and reign with Christ a 1000 years.

Likewise, c. 3.12. promise is made to be a Pillar in the house of God, and to
go no more out, and to have the name of God written on them: so also answerably
c. 22.3, 4. his servants shall serve him, they will make it their business, and
it will be their happiness so to do, and they shall see his face, and his name
shall be in their foreheads. See more in the Appendix after the Irenicon, p.
106, 107.

In like manner, for aftertimes of suffering the representative 4 living
wights, and the 24 Elders in their new Song of praise to the Lamb for their
Redemption: not only that they were made spiritual Kings and Priests unto their
God: but in a way of great exultation add that general consolation for all
sufferers afterward, who should have also the same interest therein with them:
And (say they) we shall reign upon earth: and this also was to be accomplished
in the time of Christ's Kingdom (as before said) from Rev. 20.4. and there is
further added, v. 6. they were made Priests unto God and Christ, and reigned
with him a 1000. years and that all these will be upon earth. See the 15
evident reasons manifesting that the New Jerusalem shall be upon earth, in a
small tract, on Jer. 3.17.

And for more particular encouragements, somewhat is set down for following
sufferers, that has particular relation to the New Jerusalem state, and not
improbably, that forementioned, had special reference to the primitive
sufferers by the greatred Dragon, under some of the seals, chap. 6.

Also those sealed sufferers c. 7. which seem c. 9.4. to be referred to the
times of the 5t and 6t trumpet under the Saracens and Turks, have many
decypherings of the New Jerusalem state, set before them, as to be clothed in
white, to have Palms in their hands, v. 9. and to sing praise to the Lamb, v.
10. and again the Lamb shall feed them and lead them to the fountains of living
waters, and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, v. 17. which with
many other like, are again repeated in the order of accomplishment in the New
Jerusalem state, when it shall come Rev. 19. and 20. and 21, 22. as may be seen
in many particulars.

And so also for the sufferers in several times under Antichrist, as first for
the witnesses, Rev. 11. when their time is finished, Christ's Kingdom of power
upon earth will begin, v. 7. and many excellent things are set before them, in
that state of things to the end of the chapter.

Also for all sufferers under Antichrist, c 14. is set before them the Vision
of the 144000. of the Lambs-followers for an encouragement, them and us watch
and pray always that we may be accounted worthy to escape all those things that
shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of Man, etc. But these and
other improvements we only here touch upon, having spoken already else where to
these, and the like purposes.

As to the misapprehensions of some not well verst in these studies, I say (at
present) that I am so far from disowning them, that I reckon Gods manifesting
to me those Divine (though mystically set down) Scripture Truths therein
contained, to be amongst gods greacest mercies to me in this life, and an
excellent part of the Gospel of Christ, etc. as not only that great mystery
searcher, learned and judicious Mr. Mede judged of them, but what by his means
Bishop Usher, Dr. Twisse, and other eminent persons in his time, were greatly
affected with: But as for the ancient errors by some unjustly affixed thereon,
I utterly reject them, and also our Fifth Monarchy men's (so called) scandalous,
both errors and practices (being not well instucted in these Truths) I not
only abhor, as Unchristian, and confute, as Antiscriptural in general, but
also as against relative Obligations by divine Law; and particularly
inconsistent with these Divine Truths, of Christ's eminent destruction of the
man of Sin at his glorious appearance, when he will set up his Kingdom, 2 Timothy
4.1. Which neither can be done by men, nor will be accomplished, till his set
time for it shall come (as page 15. of the first part, the preface of the 2 d.
and page 42. of the same part, page 40. of the 4th. is to be seen, etc.) I
judge the studies of those Divine mystical Truths, well be seeming the greatest
Divines in the whole World; and worthy of great encouragement in the Church of
God: Without which, I believe, much in Moses, the Prophets, and the Psalms,
concerning these things, and also through all the Books of the New Testament,
is not rightly understood, and I am ready to give an account to all serious
Christians, both of the Principles or main foundations of those Truths in my
four parts, already Printed; and of those Praxes of them, prepared diverse years
past, on Genesis 3.15. The Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head, and on
Jer. 3.17. At that time Jerusalem shall be called the Throne of the Lord, etc.
with Rev. 22.20. and others.

REader, note that Christ ^^d. coming, on Rev. 22.20. is meant in respect of
the apprehension of the Creatures then in the World, being called by the
Apostle, 1 These. 4.16. his descending (then) from Heaven, etc. he does not
there say out of Heaven (as was said of Jerusalems coming with him before, Rev.
21.2, 3. where the Earth and Heaven are said to flee away, etc. Rev. 20.11.
when the Faithful shall be changed in a moment, etc. 1 Cor. 15.51, 52.
thenceforth ever to be with the Lord. For although when Satan shall be loosed
at the end of the 1000 years, Christ seems to withdraw from the holy City and
Camp of the Saints; yet we find not warrant to say he will (then) personally be
out of the World, or any more till the finishing of the last Judgment, though
he is there said so to descend from Heaven then: See the Epistle before, Jer.
3.17.

FINIS.

