THE Birth and Burning OF THE IMAGE Called S. MICHAEL.

Containing The Substance of a Narrative lately given into the Vestry of All
Saints Barkin London, by Mr. Edmond Sherman, late Upper Churchwarden, at laying
down his Office in Easter Week, 1681. Fully reporting the truth of Fact
relating to the Image indicted (at the Sessions at Old Baily) by the name of S.
Michael. Together with a Letter to Mr. Jonathan Saunders Lecturer, which may
serve for an Answer to his two late Pamphlets entitled, Apparitions, etc.
Introduced with two Vestry Orders, demonstrating not so good reason for its
Birth as Burning.

Set up Anno 1659/60. Burnt Anno 1680/81. Dedicated (Singly) to the use of Mr.
Jonathan Saunders, Lecturer of All Saints Barkin Parish, without any design to
reflect on the Clergy or Church of England.

Exodus 20.3, 4. Thou shall not make to thy self any Graven Image, nor the
likeness, etc. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them, etc.
Published by a Friend of the late Churchwarden's to prevent false Reports.

LONDON, Printed and are to be sold by Richard Janeway, in Queens Head Alley in
Pater Noster Row, 1681.

At a Vestry held at All Saints Barkin London, April 21. 1659.
Mr. Benjamin Edwards Mr. Tho. Barret
Churchwardens.

THE Churchwardens declared the Insufficiency of the Steeple, and Necessity of
taking the same down to the ground, which was ordered to be done; and it was
hereupon further ordered by this present Vestry in behalf of the Parish, that
the Churchwardens for the time being the impowe^ed to take order for the
building up of the Steeple to this Parish Church belonging; and to call to
their assistance whom they shall think fit to advise withal; and to act and
do, contract, bargain, and agree, with Workmen and others, in and upon all and
every matter and thing needful and expedient for the rebuilding of the said
Steeple.

Copia vera. Examined and compared with the Original per G. Whately Vestry
Register.
I do further certify, That the old Steeple had not the Figures or Images of
Death or Time, or of any Saint or Angel, on the inward side of the Steeple
which stands in the Church. And I find no Order of Vestry for the making or
placing there any Image or Figure; the intent of the abovesaid Order being
only to empower the then Churchwardens to take down and rebuild the Steeple.
So that whatever Image or Figure was put there, was done at the pleasure or
order of the then Churchwardens, who did then cause this Image called S.
Michael, to be made and set up on the Dyal between two Fretwork Figures of
Death and Time, Anno 1659/60.

Certified April 11. 1681. per G. Whately Register.



At a Vestry held at All Saints Barkin London, May 4. 1675.
Mr. James Clement Richard ^eck^^o^d Esquire
Churchwardens.

THE present Churchwardens desired the leave and consent of this Vestry, to
grant the Gallery at the West end of the Church to set the Organ in; whereupon
it was unanimously resolved by Vote, That the Churchwardens shall have liberty
to alter the Gallery, and erect the Organ Frame or Case, and make it fit for
the reception of the Organ.

Copia vera. Examined and compared with the Original per G. Whately Vestry
Register.
And I further certify, That Mr. Clement, Anno 1675, removed the Image of the
carved Saint or Angel called S. Michael, from the inward side of the Steeple,
which stands at the West end of the Church, and caused the same to be placed
upon or over the Commandments at the East end of the Church, without any
particular Order of Vestry for so doing; and that the Figures of Death and Time
do still remain where first placed.

Certified April 11. 1681. per G. Whately Register.



To the Reverend Doctor George Hicks Vicar, Mr. Henry Hunter and Mr. William
Chapman Churchwardens, and to the rest of the Gentlemen of the Vestry of the
Parish of All Saints Barkin London.
Doctor and Gentlemen,
BEcause there has been such a pother and noise made about a rotten, great,
gilded, carved Image in our Church; and because even our own Lecturer Mr.
Saunders has scandalized himself, though he aimed at me, in Printing a couple
of Sham Pamphlets about it, both entitled Apparitions of an Angel, one at the
Old Baily, and another at Tower Hill, which as in truth they are both but
feigned Apparitions, so suitably they are false Relations.

I shall therefore now give you my true Narrative of the matter of fact, to be
imprinted in your Memories, and to represent the Royal Truth to our Successors
in this Parish.

I take this opportunity to do it, upon resignation of my Office this Thursday
in Easter Week, 1681; my accustomary service of two years in the Office of
Churchwarden being now expired.

I lay down that Office at your feet with much more joy than I took it up, and
wish you and this whole Parish, all happiness and success in the conduct of
your Affairs, placed now in the Election of Mr. Henry Hunter and Mr. Will
Chapman; to them and you I render this impartial Narrative, that at the
Sessions held at the Old Baily, when about three parts of the Grand Jury were
of this our Ward of Tower, my self the Foreman, and diverse of them of our very
Parish. Among other things there were some worthy Citizens that were not of the
Jury, came and acquainted us, that there was offense taken at such an Image in
our Church, and at our Lecturer's bowing to it; and said, they more
particularly addressed to us at that time, because we were so many of us of the
same Parish, whereof our Foreman was the Churchwarden.

We gave them such an Answer as we thought necessary to satisfy them; but
nothing being tendered before us upon Oath, we did nothing therein as a Grand
Jury. But soon after that Sessions was done, I told both Dr. Hicks and Mr.
Clements, (and Mr. Saunders knew it also) that it had given offense, and that
there had been a Complaint of it to the Grand Jury, and so it passed over, and
I expected we should hear no more of it. But it seems it made more noise,
partly by our not pulling it down then, but more by Mr. Saunders his Discourse
in defense of the poor innocent Image, (as he was pleased to call it.) Insomuch
that diverse strangers came to our Church to see the Image, and our other
Ceremonies, which we practice more than diverse (I think I may say most) other
Churches in England else.

And thereupon at another Sessions held about the end of February last, there
was an Indictment brought and presented (as I am informed by one Mr. Whittaker
upon Oath) to the Grand Jury, that then served at that Sessions; but who was
their Foreman, and who was of that Grand Jury, I know not; but so it was, they
found the Bill, and returned it into Court Billa Vera.

About which time I was in the Country, and heard not nor knew any thing of the
Indictment, until some few days before the seventh of March, and then meeting
Mr. Barry laughing, asked me, Oh where have you been? you have been Indicted
for such an Image, etc. Whereupon finding Mr. Hunter my Partener Churchwarden,
and he telling me also of it, we both resolved to get a Copy of the Indictment,
in order whereunto I went presently to Mr. Tanner Clerk of the Peace; and there
and then I first saw and heard read the Indictment, and went and took advice
what to do, and I was advised to end the matter as soon and as privately as I
could, and to make the least noise abroad about it, lest the World should think
there was more in the thing than really there was. And I was advised that the
Monday after being the 7th. day of March there would be a private Sessions, no
concourse of people, nor Juries, etc. it being held chiefly on occasion of
reading a Pardon to some Prisoners, and so it would be best to go then and tell
the Court how it was, and so make as good an end as I could, without spending
the Parish Money about a rotten Image.

Now though I had seen the Indictment on Friday, yet it was Saturday night nine
of the clock before I could get a Copy thereof, and on Sunday morning I showed
it to my Partner Mr. Hunter and then sent it to my Friend with whom I advised
to peruse, to whom I went in the Evening, and had the same advice as before;
but I and my Partner both together told the Doctor and Lecturer of the thing,
on Sunday Afternoon, both before and after Sermon in the Vestry House, but
could not show them the Copy of the Indictment because I had sent it away, but
told them the substance of the matter. Hereupon presently the Doctor and
Lecturer, and Mr. Clement as I am informed, went to Mr. Tanner, and saw the
Indictment there themselves; and after they had been there then that very
Sunday Evening, late, Mr. Hunter and my self both met at the Doctors House,
(hearing the Doctor had been at my House to ask for me) and there the Doctor
told us that he had been at Mr. Tanners, and had seen the Indictment, and in
his opinion we might defend our selves well enough, for the Indictment he
thought was grounded upon an old Act that was made in Edw. VI. time, which he
thought was only against some certain Books and Images then in being and
standing, and particularized in that Act; and that this Image was so far from
being standing and being in those times, that it was well known it was set up
but about 20 years ago. Besides, the Doctor told us another defense we might
make, viz. that it is indicted by the name of S. Michael, and every one in
Court (said the Doctor) that has seen S. Michael pictured, knows that S.
Michael is always pictured with a Dragon under him, and this has no Dragon;
therefore let them prove it to be S. Michael, and that it was ever called S.
Michael before. Furthermore the Doctor said, we need not go till next Sessions,
and that we were best to call a Vestry, and consult then what to do in it.

Hereupon I told the Doctor, that seeing it is a great, guilacd, carved Image,
it will look as if we had a mind to defend Images, to plead that it is not S.
Michael, or that it is not an Image meant by that Act, because our Image was
made since that Act. Besides, the advice I have is, that that Act was made
against all Images, and has sundry Clauses in it that look to the future, and
the Proviso is against us, which provides for the standing and remaining only
of such Pictures as are upon Monuments and Tombs, etc. Therefore whether this
be S. Michael or not it is all one, for the Act (as we are advised) may charge
us with suffering the standing and being of a Carved Image of S. Michael, or
some other Saint, or pretended or reputed Saint; therefore it may reach us, and
for this reason we will go to morrow to Sessions, and make the best defense we
can, and hope we shall do well enough, because neither you nor we did set it
up; and therefore what should you or we trouble our selves by Traversing, to
spend a great deal of Money to defend a great silly Image. We cannot call a
Vestry now it is night, and we'll go to morrow and quit our hands this Sessions
if we can, for I shall be out of my Office of course before another Sessions,
and I will try to rid our selves of it before I go out of my Office if
possible, and hope to end it without you, so as you nor we may not have any
further trouble. Then the Doctor replied, If you resolve to go then I will go
with you, or meet you there at Sessions to morrow at two a clock.

Thus with this Resolution we parted, and then Mr. Hunter and my self did both
of us resolve to go next day to Sessions, and appointed to meet at Elfords
Coffee House at two a clock; but in the mean time considering what our Doctor
had told us, that every one in Court would judge this not to be S. Michael,
because he had no Dragon under him; I thought the best way would be to carry I
to Court to show it, that they might judge by view, and accordingly on Monday
at Noonday, I took Mr. Graves our Parish Carpenter, and John Randal our
Sexton, and Eliston our Grave-maker, and a Porter, and no body else, and took
the Image down, the Clerk was not there, nor knew any thing (as I verily
believe) of taking it down, or of carrying it to Sessions, until after it was
gone, nor was Mr. Hunter at the taking of it down, or knew it was down till he
did see it, yet did I not take it down or carry it away otherwise privily, save
only so as to prevent making a noise; And therefore I put it into a Decent,
Clean, White Porters Bag, all but the Arm and Trumpet, which being made to take
off at the Shoulder, and standing out so far, that it would not go into Bag, I
took off that, and John Randall carried that under his Coat, and the Porter
carried the rest in his bag on his Back. I called Mr. Hunter at Elford's
Coffee-house near Lombard Street, and told him I had brought the Image with me
in a Porters Bag; and He and I and John Randal went thence in a Coach to
Sessions, and I showed Mr. Hunter in the Coach, that part of the Image which
John Randal had under his Coat, and I also showed him the Porter, and told him
there is the Image; and I carry it, that the Doctor may help us to defend it by
those Arguments he used to us last night; we will show the thing to the Court,
and so make an end without further trouble.

When we came to Sessions House, Mr. Hunter and I both agreed not to carry it
into Court, Except there should be occasion, but placed it in an outward room.
Soon after we were at Sessions, the Doctor (according to his promise) came and
the Clerk with him; the Doctor seemed angry, that the Image was brought; I told
him, that Remembering his Arguments last night was the reason I had brought it,
that so the Court might see it had no Dragon under it, that so whether the
Doctor had come or not, we might make a full demonstration by the sight, the
Doctor told me we might remove it into the Crown Office, and there it might ly
till the real Saints came indeed.

But I still told him I would, if I could end the matter now, because I should
go out of my Office before another Sessions; then the Doctor and both Mr.
Hunter and I went into Court and sat all three down together about half an Hour
by Mr. Tanne* just by Sheriff Bethel; till at length a little before the cause
came on, the Doctor was pleased to withdraw, and went quite away out of the
Court without giving any reason to us, that I remember; but though the Doctor
had thus deserted us, we still stayed to make the best defense we could, and
when the cause came on, we told the Court, that it had been set up on the Dial
on the inward side of the Steeple at the west end of the Church, between two
fret work figures of Death and Time, about 1659/60. by Mr. Edwards, when he was
upper Churchwarden; Being asked, why it was removed, and set over the Altar or
Communion Table upon the Commandments, and when and who removed it; we told the
Court it was done about Anno 75 or 76. by Mr. Clements, who was then upper
Churchwarden, and not by us, and we supposed it was occasioned to be removed,
(as Mr. Clements told us) upon setting up the Organ, because it could not so
well be seen. We also told the Court it stood there so many years and had done
no miracle, therefore we conceived it could not be a Saint; then it being said
by some in Court, that the Image was without, it was called for in Court, and
there it was viewed, and after both of us had said further what we could in its
defense, the Doctor having deserted both us and the Image, who if he had
stayed, it may be could have defended it better; and Mr. Tanner telling us,
this discourse will not do, you must either plead Gulity or not Guilty, or
traverse, or to such purpose, and being told that to traverse orremove it into
the Crown Office, might cost us Fifteen or Twenty Pound before we could end the
Business that way, and being also told, that to confess would be but a sine of
Ten Shillings a piece, and so there would be a full end for us; thereupon I
said we cannot plead not Guilty, as to such an Image standing, and being in our
Church, for here it is, and we must confess that it is true, this Image has
stood in our Church, and I brought him now from over the Communion Table, I
pulled it down from the Commandments, and it is a carved Image, it is in vain to
deny it, or to spend money out of the Parish stock to defend it by removing it
into the Crown Office, or troubling our selves further about it; there it is,
take it and do what you will with it; but Mr. Tanner still insisting, that we
must either say the word Guilty or not Guilty, then with one consent both of us
said the very word, Guilty, and so it was recorded (as Mr. Tanner assured me)
that both of us pleaded Guilty to the Indictment, not Mr. Sherman singly, as
Mr. Sanders suggested, the Record will not mis-report, whatever Mr. Banders may
please to Print; And this pleading Guilty was done by both of us for no other
Reason, but purely upon advice, that this Course was best, and would make least
noise, and be least charge to the Parish; and we had really no ill intent, or
any other end in all that is done by us, but for saving charges, and preventing
noise and clamours, and believe, it might have so ceased, if Mr. Sanders had
not put out two Narratives, for which he ought to have a double reprehension by
us: First, for printing Parish Matters without order of Vestry, or the Dr. (or
both Churchwardens, or the Upper-Churchwarden (singly) with Mr. Sanders his
good leave) And Secondly for printing an untruth not only against your
Churchwarden, but against the Clerk also; thus in time, he will set us all
together by the Ears: I have been ever civil to Mr. Sanders, he has been free
at my ^able, both here and in the Country, and I had never any difference with
him, I pay him voluntarily as much as I pay the Dr., which is ten shillings a
year, as Captain Burdon, and Mr. Barthwait, who Collect his money for him will
testify: and therefore I wonder at his unkind dealing with me, yet I should
still have as great a value for Mr. Sanders, as ever I had, if he would leave
Parish-Matters to us; to whom, I am advised, they much more properly belong
than it does to him to scrible thus against his Parishioners. He used to tell
us every one should mind his own business, but you see he does not practice so.

When we had pleaded guilty, some cried, knock it to pieces, burn it, but then
I prayed, that I might have it to burn in our Vestry, it would save us so much
Billet; for we make a Fire there, every time there is a Sermon or meeting of
Parishioners in cold weather, and I said I would knock it to pieces, and burn
it in the Vestry, and the Court should hear no more of it: Some in the Court,
said well, well, it is best so to do; it is true, I did not receive any
written, or other order of Court for burning it, but this saying well, well, it
is best so to do, I took as consent, and did then, and still think it best so
to do. The Court finding us submitting, were pleased to say they would consider
of the Fine, or to such effect; Interim, we paid nothing in Court, but ten
shillings a piece to Mr. Tanner for Fees: Mr. Will. Stevens of Greenwich offered
to buy it to set in his Garden; Mr. William Bullivant a known, eminent Broker
on the Exchange, who buys Goods for Foreign Merchants, came to me, (when the
Clerk was present) and told me he came to buy it to Ship beyond Sea, or words
to that effect; others offered to buy it for scandalous uses; no body ever
offered (that I know of) to buy it to set it in a Church, as Mr. Sanders hints;
it may be he might send some body to such purpose, but I never spoke with any
such, that I can remember; it was begged of Mr. Hunter, and I, indeed in Court
by one, (who I suspect would rather set it in a Baudy House, than a Church) but
I as well as Mr. Hunter both refused to give it away; and both of us ordered
the Porter to carry it back in his Bag, and to lay it in some p^ivate Corner in
the Church, which was done accordingly, and I reckoned so soon as we made the
next fire, to cut it in pieces, and burn it in the Vestry, as I had promised in
Court.

This was Monday, but we had no occasion of Fire there, before Sunday
following, for the Minister or my self was at payment of the poor; but on
Wednesday morning one came to tell me that I should be indicted again for
letting it remain in the Church undemolish'd; I told him, pray stay Sir, and I
will fetch it, and you shall see it demolished which was accordingly done, and
has been since burnt at sundry times at Vestry meetings, and at payment of the
poor: the last Log of it being burnt in the Vestry on Good Friday. Now
Gentlemen, Mr. Sanders having put out two Apparitions already, what would he
have done if I had sold it, might he not by Art-Magick have filled the world
with more new Apparitions in a Fortnights time, than he gives us new Sermons in
a (...) for though he says in his last Scrible, Here is the end, yet he
intimates, there is more a coming.

O, But now Gentlemen, you will say, I have done this thing without order of
Vestry, verily it is true, and I cannot find but that one Churchwarden, viz. Mr.
Edwards set it up for his fancy without order of Vestry for this particular
Image above twenty years ago, and another Churchwarden, viz. Mr. Clements
removed it to the Altar about five years ago, without order of Vestry; and I
being first indicted for letting it stand so long, have now burnt it even
likewise without order of Vestry, for as the Learned Textuary, Mr. Sanders
says, the Wise Man tells us, there is a time for all things; and I believe I
have done as well in pulling it down, as they in setting it up, and indeed as I
ought to do, when Images become so publicly offensive, as you know of late
this has been, and merely because Mr. Sanders, and not the Doctor, make so
many Reverend Bows before it, and began so lately other Ceremonies just under
it, especially, if you consider that Mr. Sanders never said these Services, and
Benedictions at the Altar, or Bowed, before the Image was set there.

And thus as to the Narrative of Fact, as Mr. Sanders phraseth it,

Here is the end.

I will acknowledge, that in some Drolling Discourses at Coffee-Houses, and
elsewhere upon this Matter, I may have rendered some of these Transactions in
other expressions; but this Account here now penned, is as to matter of Fact
the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, to the best of my
memory; or if I have varied is any expressions, or minute circumstances, I
shall be more ready to acknowledge and rectify it, then I do yet find Mr.
Sanders to be. Interim, I do affirm, that the substance of the matter, is to
the effect aforesaid.

Thus far; Gentlemen, I have gone seriously on, and now according to the Mode
of dispatching business in our Parish, lets go to the Tavern, and merrily
discourse what all of us can say farther about this matter. There may possibly
be some amongst you of that tender-natur'd, simpathizing humor as to be a
little heated at sight of this poor Image in Flames, and ready to quench them
with compassionate Tears, or at least that have a months mind to put the Parish
into a flame of disputes about it, under a notion of defending it, by calling
it an Ornament of the Church, and so that way defend, Great Gilded, Carved
Images, Let such Gentlemen take their Course, for I give this Account only to
relate the truth, not in the least to preclude (as Mr. Sanders has it) you or
any body from any Legal Porsecution against me for what I have done either
singly or jointly with my Partner.

But Doctor and Gentlemen, be pleased to compare this with Mr. Sanders his two
Pamphlets of Apparitions; and do you and the World judge. what untruth he has
related, and what reason we have to defend such a mighty Carved, Gilded Image
with an argument that it is not against that Act, or that it is not St. Michael.

Gentlemen, you all cannot but know what has given the occasion to indict us
for this Image, viz. Because they say that in our Parish, we are making steps
to something that I will not name, because I will not believe it; but that our steps
have been thus cannot be denied, viz. First in 75 We set up a stately and
chargeable pair of Organs, and in 77 we beautified them, and we set upon our
Altar this Image, which they knick-named Saint Michael: (and Pamphleteers say,
the Rhemish Annotations call him next to Christ, and the Son of God, etc.) and
when we had got Saint Michael up, then in 77 Mr. Whitebread (a Kinsman of that
father Whitebread, that was hanged for the damnable Popish Plot) he gives us a
rich Crimson Carpet with a brave embroidered Glory of the Sun upon it, with a
Cross with this Inscription in the Margin, and as soon as we had this we took
up our clean white Linen Cloth which the Act of Conformity directs should be
used, and which we covered the Table formerly with, on Communion Days, so as
our Linen Cloth hung down to the ground in the West Front of our Communion
Table; nay People would persuade us, our Communion Table looks like an Altar,
Because it stands the Altar fashion, with ends, North and South, as the Papists
do set theirs, Joining close to the Commandments, so that we cause the back
part or East side of our Linen to be tackt up about a foot or more above the
Table, fastening it to the Commandments, and they further allege, that the Act
of Conformity does not direct the tacking it up thus to the Altar, for some
say, that by the Act of Uniforminy it may be allowed for the Table to stand a
yard off from the Commandments in the Chancel, especially in our Chancel,
because there is room enough to stand so in the inward side of the Rails; Nay,
they say that the Communion Table may by that very Act stand in the Body of the
Church, and then, they say, it would not look so like an Altar; they say that
instead of the clean white Linen of our Mother Church we show now nothing in
our front, but this new glorious rich Crimson gift of Mr. Whitebread, and we
have registered it in our Table hanging in our Vestry by the Title of one of our
Church Ornaments, so that they reproach us and say, we have turned up the clean
white Tippet of our virtuous Mother; (meaning the white Linen, which the Act
of Uniformity directs we should use) and foulded the forepart of our Linen now
on the Table, on purpose to show in our front such rich Embroidery, as is not
appointed by the said Act.

They further tell us not only (that we say second service, at this
Communion Table or Altar) but that Mr. Sanders as soon as Sermon is ended gives
neither Prayer nor blessing in the Pulpit, but stops the service of God by
causing the Organ to strike up a Tune to divert the People until he goes into
Vestry to put on his Surplice, which Occasioned the people to say, what shall
we have no Blessing! whither goes the Minister? By and by he comes out of the
Vestry; so habited, mounts the steps, and enters the Rails; then at his
approach toward the middle of the Altar, he makes a formal bow before it, then
he turns to the North-end and kneels, then the people cry, whither goes he now?
But there he says some prayers, sometime more, sometime less, as he pleases,
and then pronounces the Blessing at the Altar, which uses to be done in the
Pulpit; now they confidently say, these are things never practiced since the
Kings happy Restoration in our Church; they add, that Mr. Sanders never went up
to say second service, nor service or a blessing after Sermon, nor ever bowed
except on Sacrament days, when the bread, etc. was there. Before we had got up
Organs in 75. beautified them in 77. set this great carved Gilded Image on the
top of the Altar and Commandments, and got Mr. Whitebread's Glorious Cope or
Carpet; and that Mr. Sanders was the first beginner of these bowing Ceremonies
and other Services and Benedictions after Sermon at the Altar, in Doctor
Layfields time, and that he urged Doctor Layfield to let him begin the same:
Soon after we were prepared with, and had got together all this furniture,
which, were begun by Mr. Sanders, just about the time the Hellish Popish Plot
broke out, though Doctor Layfield diswaded him from beginning those Ceremonies
at such a juncture, saying, O Mr. Sanders! what will the world say of us? that
we should begin such Ceremonies but just now, (which was about the time the
Popish Lords were sent to the Tower) why should we be more forward just now in
our Ceremonies than others? were we not blamed for it in Forty one, etc. or to
some such effect. But Mr. Sanders reylyed, none but a few inconsiderable people
would be offended at it, and therefore he would then Usher in these Ceremonies,
and did accordingly do it.

Now Gentlemen we cannot say, but all these things are very true in Substance or
to such effect, and it is generally known in the Parish, as also by strangers
to be so, for they may read it on our Organs thus made, 75. beautified, 77. and
in a Table hanging in our Vestry, in hac verba (...) Mr. Thomas Whitebread
Citizen and Cloth-worker of London gave in his lifetime, in the Year one
Thousand six Hundred seventy seven, a Rich Crimson Velvet Communion Carpet,
with a Rich Glory Embroidered thereon in Gold, and a Gold and Silk fringe about
the same Carpet, also a Crimson Velvet Cushion with four Golden Tossels to it,
and a Portugal Mat to lie before the Communion Table.

Nor can we deny but that Mr. Sanders was the first that brought up the Use of
these Ceremonies in our Church, and that they never were practiced until after
this Great Carved Gilded Image was mounted on the top of the Altar, and until
we had Mr. Whitebread's glorious Carpet to spread the same. Gentlemen, Pray
consider these things; I wish we could deny any one of these matters, and that
we could say any one Syllable of them in Substance were false, and then we
might desire our Doctor to print an answer in our Vindication, and so Satisfye,
or at least Contradict the people, that thus talk of us.

And really Doctor, if you do not answer and defend us, I fear our Lecturer
cannot; yet it would credit him much to let it come out in his name, and it
would serve our purpose too; for then if any error be found in it, we may only
say (as formerly in other errors in his Apparitions) his hand did shake when he
writ it, and that the Doctor shall mend it next time.

As to the answer, that I would have Mr. Sanders give to the world, pray
understand me, I would have him say, not only why we do these things, for he
has possibly got an answer very ready, by pretending that the Rubric directs
it so to be done, but if he puts his name to it, they will at him in Print
again, with Queries, which I would fain prevent; and therefore I humbly propose
Doctor, that the answer may prevent Scurvey Queries, therefore in our answer,
let us give invincible reasons, why we did never say so much as Second-Service,
much less our Sermon Service and Benediction, nor perform these Ceremonies
exactly as we do, before now of late? And why Mr. Sanders never bowed there
before? and who Mr. Sanders does bow to? whether it be to the Image? or the
Carpet? and to whom or why he bows at all in that place and that way, rather
than in any other place, or other way in the Church? and he must give a
particular reason, why the Doctor does never bow at all, no, not at Sacrament
days? And why Mr. Sanders bows only just two times in a Fore-noon, and never
in an afternoon? and why he does not bow before he enters the Rails, and also
when he passes by the Rails and Altar, as, they say, other very great
Clergymen do in Cathedrals, and some Chapels; And also we must answer why we
account White-bread's Carpet a better Ornament than our own Linen; for if it
be not better, they will say we are Fools, for useing of it, for we ought to
use the very best, else other Churches may be more regularly devout then we.

And then Mr. Sanders must answer for the Carved Image, which he calls Mr.
Sherman's God-son, for in my conscience I am not obliged to answer for him,
because I was not his Godfather; and if Mr. Sanders will not help me out with
this Job, I will never be Godfather as long as I live to any dull Saint or
Angel of them all, nor to no man, woman, or child; if the Brats must be laid to
me, the Pope shall be Godfather to all the Images you shall set up, for all me.

It is true, all the Children laid in our Parish, the Upper Churchwarden
provides for the Brats, and does give them what name he please, but I made the
Grave maker and any Beggar be the Godfather and Godmother, (because we must
have Godfathers and Godmothers, etc.) I gave them a Pot of Ale for their pains,
and so parted; let these Beggars look out for their God-children, if they will,
for all me, for I do not find my Oath obliged my care longer than I am in my
Office; nor do I find them prove such forward Brats to speak in a year;

Though the Poet in a Play tells us, Where Parents are Slaves
Their Brats cannot be any other;
Great Wits and Great Braves
Had always a Pug to their Mother.


But I think there must be these farther Answers to the Image; what need have
we of any Images at all in our Churches? prove that first substantially, and
then what kind of Images, whether of Saints or Angels, or Christ on the Cross,
or Friars, or Benefactors, etc. But pray enlarge much upon our Benefactor's
Images; for I find by experience they bring most money to our Church; and that
the Benevolence of them is the best maintenance we have for our Poor: and by my
Account it will appear, that we have had much more money come in from our
deceased Benefactor, than I and my Parther, and two Sidesmen, and Eliston, and
loud John Bounick have got in two years bawling, all six of us at the door,
Thus, pray remember the poor, pray remember the poor; there ore let us have all
our Benefactors Pictures bravely carved and gilded, as like as ever one Pea
was like another; this may encourage more Benefactors; and if the Answer be
well penned to that point, it may be worth all the Tithes, Easter Offerings,
and Lecture-mony too that we pay you.

My relating how far Mr. Hunter acted, is only to satisfy you how falsely the
Pamphlets of Mr. Sanders have represented the matter in print to the world: not
in the least to vindicate my self by having had Mr. Hunter's consent; for what
Mr. Hunter acted, was but as the Under-Churchwarden uses often to gowith the
Upper-Churchwarden as his Assistant; therefore if any just blame be for what is
done, I had rather bear all the blame and damage too that can happen, than
suffer any body so much as to think ill of Mr. Hunter from any one part of this
matter; I have only this to say, that we both did think we did for the best;
and I say again I believe it will prove so.

For this reason, because the more noise and pother Mr. Sanders has made about
it, the more it may by some be suspected that Mr. Sanders would willingly
defend Images in Churches, because he lays so much blame on a Churchwarden for
not defending them no better, and for not calling a Vestry to consult how to do
it, or how to delay the Proceedings till another Sessions, etc.

But I do conceive, that I may account the burning of this Image (after all
Circumstances considered) no more Sacriledg, than burning an old Broom that
belongs to the Church; and shall be of that mind, until Mr. Sanders do convince
the contrary in print; That this Image has been more dedicated or consecrated
at first, or since, to the Church, than all the Brooms every Churchwarden has
paid for since the Image was made; now it does concern him to tell the world
why he made this Text his subject for the first Pamphlet, viz.

Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacriledg? If ^h do not prove my
burning this Image to be Sacriledg, then he si besides the Text; but I will
grant that the Desk has been more consecrated than the Image; but I do not
know how much the Clerks place in the Desk is less consecrated than the Readers
place in the same D^sk; I answer they are both in one and the same Desk, they
both sit jig by joul together, not an Inch between; nay, the Clerk's place is
on the Reader's right hand; also the Clerk's place is nearer the Pulpit than
the Readers, so that the Lecturer cannot go up into the Pulpit, but (if he be
civil) he must say by your leave Mr. Clerk.

Therefore all these things considered, I find little reason for Mr. Sanders
when he had done Reading Prayers in the Desk lately, to fall out with the poor
Clerk for standing up (where Mr. Sanders had stood) to publish a Vestry; and to
say Sirrah this place is more consecrated than yours; and Sirrah your Shoes are
not clean enough to stand up here: Lord bless us, to what height will this
ceremonious Lecturer bring us; because the Clerk and Mr. Sanders cannot set
their Horses together: must we suffer him to print Sham Pamphlets without order
of Vestry; and so spread false Stories about the Parish to set you and me and
all the Parish into heats and differences: well if it were possible for him to
make you and all the whole Parish fall out with me, yet he shall never be able
to make me fall out with you; for I will not so much as be angry at any
prosecution you can think of; for I am assured that at any Tavern-meeting with
you or any man else with whom I have any difference, the very first Glass of
Wine will wash away the greatest grumbling, that ever I had in my Gizard; and
render me fully reconciled; therefore let us have another merry meeting at
Tavern, and let Mr. Sanders be there; and let us laugh and droll out those
Stories, and drink healths roundly, as we did bravely, when we dined at the
Vine Tavern at our late Election day; and pledge me in a full Glass, and drink
Confusion to the Pope and all his Party, from Dan to Beersheba; let there be no
man in our Parish have any other distinction, but Protestant or Papist, for
could all that are Protestants but truly love and agree one with another we
need not fear Pope, nor Monsieur: O, then we should be a most serious regularly
devout Parish indeed. Mr. Sanders has one fling at me more about my
Proceedings in Vestry. He has a mighty opinion of himself; cannot that please
him which the Doctor or Vestry have printed nothing against; yet when they do,
I will not only say, but make it appear, even by the Lord Bishops own Grant,
that they cannot hold a Vestry without both or at least one of the
Churchwardens; and if one Churchwarden be not at it, it is but a Junto of a
Vestry. Let the Laity keep the power in the hands of their Churchwardens, for
what they yield (perhaps but out of respect) to a Protestant Vicar, it will be
claimed, if Popery comes in, as due to a Popish Vicar; for all Popish
Successors that shall come into our Living, will expect rather more than less,
than was yielded by us Heretics, as they will call us.

But I am so satisfied in what I have done relating both to the Image and
Vestry, that I shall not need to fear to submit the whole matter, nay any other
difference I may happen to have with any one in the world, to the Censure of
our Diocesan himself, to whom as my duty I owe and shall pay as great
Veneration, as any of you all.

But furthermore, I pray forget not likewise to answer, why we call an Image an
Ornament either to the Church or Commandments; for we dare not call such a
great carved gilded Image as this is, an Ornament to the Commandments of God
in a Protestant Church; for Images are directly contrary to one of those very
Commandments. And why we should suffer this Image to stand upon the
Commandments of God, just as if it were ready with its feet to kick that
Commandment out of our number as soon as ever Popery shall enter, for we know
that Papists leave that out of their Decalogue. There are a world more things
we must answer if you will keep Images in our Church; for what will it avail us
to say, that it is not St. Michael, for they will say it is an Image? And what
good will it do us to plead, that it is not against the old Act of Edward VI.
for if these Pleas might have brought us off at the Old Baily; yet it will not
prove Images to be Ornaments to Protestant Churches, for there is a much older
Law made at Mount Sinai against it.

And therefore truly in my simple judgment, Doctor and Gentlemen, we ought to
blame him that let up this Image on the Steeple, and him that removed it to the
Commandments, rather than him that pulled it down and burnt it. Pray what was
the Opinion in the primitive times of Images? and what is your opinion of them?

In sober sadness, are we not all to blame that when the Doct^r and Mr. Sanders
and Mr. Clements and others of us heard that there was a complaint of offense
it had given the Sessions before, (which by the way Mr. Sanders seeming willing
to forget) that we did not burn it presently, before we had been thus
shamefully talked on for it; and now for any one of you to tell the world that
you will prosecute me in the Bishops Court, for destroying of such a filthy
subbardly Image, under pretense of wasting Church-Goods, and calling it an
Ornament, after I had been indicted for letting it stand so long; really,
Gentlemen, if you are not ashamed of such Imprudence; I blush for you, and am
so charitable as to believe, that when you are more cool you will be more wise.
Single me out, any man of you, or Doctor and all of you together, that can
convince me or any man living (but a Tory or Papist) that such a great carved
Image is any Ornament at all to a Christian Church, where God will be worshipped
in Spirit and Truth, and adds the least force to the Commandments of God, and
then to recompense you for loss of this one fusty Image, I will set you up as
many Images as there are Commandments.

Will not the World think that our wise Lecturer knew the very critical time
when Popery was just approaching, and to show his pious Zeal, just then begun
to bow before an Image, and still has the confidence to plead for an Image (by
way of blaming the Churchwarden for not consulting the wisdom of the Vestry
how to defend it better.)

And that this Lecturer should be so zealously forward as to go to Parishioners
houses with the Churchwarden that was in 75, to stir up them and their Lodgers
and Strangers also to contribute Money toward bringing Organs into our Church
in 75.

And that this Image should be advanced from the Steeple and mounted on the
Commandments.

And that our Organs must be beautified in 77.

And that Mr. Whitebreads Zeal should be also just then stirred up in 77 to
give us such Rich furniture to our Altar, O mighty great foresight in this deep
Lecturer, that he should nick the lucky Minute so well, to time it so near the
coming out of the Popish Plot, that so we might plead we had these things in
our Church before! A man would think he had consulted ^a^her Provincial
Whitebread his nown sell in the timing it; especially since Mr. Sanders has a
living at Sandon in Essex so near the Parish of Rittle on one hand, and the
great Popish Family on the other hand, where this Father Provincial had his
usual Residence or Resort.

I do not know who was the Godfather of this Saint Michael, but a hundred of
our Folks in this Parish will tell you, that Mr. Sanders was the first, that
gave occasion to be indicted upon account of Saint Michael; and that Mr.
Sanders was the first, that bowed his body before him, and offered up Prayers
under his Nose.

And for my part I am no other ways offended with the Ceremony my self, but for
that in our Church-warden's Pew, I could not hear the Prayers said at the
Altar, insomuch that I have been asked by Strangers, whom I have let into that
Pew, what is the Minister doing; Is he Churching of a Woman? And now we speak
of Women; the truth is, the Women in many parts, both of the South and North
Isles can neither see nor hear the Minister at the Altar; but perhaps it would
be no great matter for the women, whether they hear or not, if we have the same
Opinion of women here in England, that the Turks have of them. viz. That women
have no Souls; But for my part I am a great Abhorror of that Mohammedan, Turkish
Opinon; for I do really believe that women are the finest Creatures and the
best Souls in the whole World, a mighty pretty invention at first and the whole
Race of mankind would cease if we should be deprived of that noble Sex; And
therefore I am so mightily concerned for them, that I am and must be an Earnest
Petitioner to the Lord Bishop, that our Church Prayers may be said not only
where women may hear, but also where they may all see and be seen by us.

When I tell Mr. Sanders that we cannot hear, he answers, what have you Books
for? nay then quoth I, if Books will serve turn, what need we Parsons? When you
go up to the Altar, let some go down to the Font, and pray to themselves and
others be turned into Cabals, whispering together as some do, or let us pray
privately, thus to our selves, Lord hear us, for we cannot hear the Parson.

Libera nos Domine, For no Parson can we see. Really Gentlemen, these things
ought to be considered by us; and we ought most humbly to beseech our Lord the
Bishop, that we may have our services, prayers, and benedictions all said in
the Desk and Pulpit again, as we used to have till this Damnable Hellish Popish
Plot broke out, that we may all know what the Parson is doing, and so may all
join together in saying Amen, as we ought to do; else prayers in Latin, or an
unknown Tongue may do as much good as prayers that we cannot hear: But yet God
forbid, (though we don't understand a word he says) that ever we should desire
him to alter his course without an Act of Parliament, if it be against Law.

But I must tell you, Gentlemen, because People cannot hear, it drives many from
our Parish; Church; shall we not have many Dissenters at this rate and this
ought to grieve us; for it pleases the Papists to see us begin more Ceremonies
than we did before, they hope we will a step further, and come home to them,
and then they will say we are a regular, devout Parish indeed, as Mr. Sanders
calls us.

You will say, I have a great mind to be examining this Image, because I must
still have this one touch more at him, why he should stand Trumpetting there on
the Commandments with his face toward the Organs; I find no reason upon Record
in our Church Registers; but some late Expositors or Modern Casuists in our
Parish, say it is that Saint Michael may with his Trumpet respond to the
Organs: Nay, some Learned men in the Act of Conformity, say the Act of
Conformity does not forbid us with a Trumpet of Saint Michael to respond to the
Organ; and Learned men (Lecturers of Mr. Saunders cast always excepted) say
that the Act of Conformity does not direct the People and Clark to Respond in
the Reading Psalms, but hold that it is Contra formam Statuti.

Well, what if some of it be contrary to Law, if yet we can say, it is Secundum
usum Sarum, Hereford, York, Bangor, Lincoln, or some or all of them, or if we
can get it pass unexamined, conclude, utrum horum mavis Accipe, Hab Nab at a
venture?

What matter is it, may we not say, all we do is Conformity, and as Mr.
Saunders most elegantly phraseth it, that there is not a more serious, and
regulary devout Parish in this City of London then this of Alhallows Baerkin,
is?

Gentlemen, what shall I do? I displeased the Papists by pulling down one
Image, but I please them again in promising them to set up ten for one; but I
hope they will stay till the condition is fulfilled, that I am convinced they
are Ornaments; and in my Conscience Papists will sooner make it out then Mr.
Sanders: But then on the other side, I am envied by all kind of Phanaticks, and
Quakers for my rigid Conformity, and for my forcing the Quakers to shut up
their shops, at Christmas and other good days, insomuch as we have not one
Conventicle in all our Parish for fear of my prosecuting them; and after all
this Out, and Alas! is it come to this, That you Doctor and Gentlemen of the
Vestry should talk of prosecuting me for burning an Image which you call your
Ornament?

O! Would I had never been Churchwarden; even share and take the Office among
you, who will, so as I may never be Churchwarden of this Parish more, as long
as the Sun and Moon endure.

But prry deal gently with me, because I have had the Great Honor (as some of
you are pleased to call it) to be Churchwarden of this Parish of All Saints
Barkin London; which at this time, and on so laudable an occasion, as an Image,
is printed to be so regularly devout a Parish, but the Prints that calls it so,
are both Titled an Apparition, etc. and therefore I am afraid that we shall
have but a little share of that Honor, because we pulled down and burnt a
rotten Image; and behold the vain Apparitions both disappear.

But Doctor and Gentelemen, if all this will not satisfy you, then in verbo
Guardani Ecclesiae, or in as plain English, as a Layman and an expiring:
Churchwarden can utter at drawing out the last breath of his Office, who though
he ought not to go out us he comes in swearing; yet I cannot forbear to say by
the Oath of a Churchwarden, turn the Buckle of your Girdle behind you: For I
challenge you to charge me with any undue exeution of my Office; and then for
any other Foreign Matter, I care not what you say, for if it be any thing that
does not belong to this Office, it will be thought not only impertinent, but
malicious.

As for Doctor Hicks, he came to our Parish upon the Death of Doctor Layfield
but about eight months ago; I had the honor to give him his Induction, and he
cannot charge me with any disrespect toward him. These Ceremonies were begun
by Mr. Sanders before Dr. Hicks came; and the Dr. finding them, is pleased to
continue them, only the Dr. never Bows, and he is so kind to us, as to come
from the Altar as far as the Rails to read some part of the Service, whereby we
hear the Dr. better than Mr. Sanders, because Mr. Sanders will not budg a foot,
but keeps his station at the North end of the Table. Thus the Dr. and Lecturer
do dissent from each other in performance of the Ceremonies: whereupon some
late Prints have told us that men of least Learning are for most Ceremonies.

The blame now appears to lie upon Mr. Sanders for setting up such Ceremanies
at such a juncture of time. And if blame also may lie upon all the Churchwadens
that had a hand in setting up, or removing or burning this Image; Let every one
then show so good occasion, for the part they have acted, as I have done for my
part in pulling of it down and burning it. What if I had never been Indicted at
Sessions at all; might I not, nay, ought I not to have done it when it had
given such offenses?

The Organs stand on the Gallery a Considerable Distance from the Steeple, and
Mr. Clements had no Vestry Order, to alter the Dyal on the Steeple, yet he did
bring the Dial about 10 Foot forwarder then it was, and if ever be occasion,
any Jury, or any body else, may see he might have had room enough to have
placed this Image again in a void space of 10 foot square between Death and
Time, or just under Death or Time* or in some other place there abouts, where
it might have been conspicuous enough, if the view were so essentially
necessary, without taking so great a leap, as from the Steeple to the Chancel:
and so as Mr. Sanders Phraseth it (as to you.) Here is the End.

Your Late Upper Churchwarden: Edmond Sherman.
POSTSCRIPT.
THIS Image was a Great, Carved, Gilded Image, and about a yard and half long,
with great, broad, spreading Wings, each Wing about three quartters of a yard
long; the right Arm and Hand was in its full proportion, holding a Trumpet near
to its Mouth, the left hand appeared as it were, but just coming out of its
shoulder, holding up the end of a Label of Lead, the other end of the Label
hung down to his right foot: On the Label was wrote to this effect, Arise you
dead, and come to Judgment; his face, hands and feet painted, all the rest of
it was gilded; It had no Dragon under it, yet in weight about 18 or 20 stone.

Mr. Jonathan Sanders Lecturer:
Sir, In execution of my office of Churchwarden, having found two late Vagabond
Brats in our Parish; Christened (I suppose without any Canonical Gossips) by
the frightful names of Apparitions; They are here brought home to your door,
pray take your Brats again, you being Father and Godfather also to both. I find
it also just to charge your late bowing Ceremonies, etc. to be the Stallion
that have occasionally begot these Brats, and all this noise and pother; yet I
have done it with as little personal reflection as to any Foreign Matter, as
possibly I could; because, for me or you to rail and rip up each others, only
by bedaubing the other with stories, how true soever, yet impertinent to the
Matter in hand; and so people would be apt to give no credit to his report that
does so, therefore keep to the Matter. You call me the Guilty Churchwarden;
suppose now that you should plead not guilty at Sessions; and suppose that by
the Common Law you should come off with that Plea, as to this Image standing,
and being in our Church, because it may be more properly Churchwarden's
business, to set up Images, than a Minister's or Lecturer's business, to call
them Ornaments; yet that will not convince the world, but that you are guilty
of the occasion of the Indictment, by the bowing and late Ceremonies begun at
such a juncture of Time when so many believe that Popery was designed to have
entered about that time among.

Come unkind Jonathan, we all have our faults; and it is true, that neither I
nor you, nor the Pope himself is infallible, therefore let us leave this
Scribbling, or else we shall soon be as much talked off as other Scriblers about
Town. For my part I am for letting an honest Vintner take our money, rather
than these mischievous Booksellers: and for your part you have declared (in
your Apparitions) both against Liberty of Conscience, and Liberty of the Press;
therefore, since our humors jump so well, Let Us to the Tavern, and there droll
and laugh, and sing merrily, Thus, Troubles and Fears are never to be found
But in the dull place where the Glass goes not round:
Let Us cast away Care, and hang up our Sorrow,
O come then Drink on,
Say he is a Jon -- a -- thon,
And a Sot that takes care for to morrow:
Store of good Clarot supplies every thing,
K -- And the Man that is drunk, is as great as a -- ing.


Thus in despite of the booksellers, let us drink a little wine for the
Stomach sake, and let You and I be in a merry humor as long as we live.

Me-thoughts we were very merry at Tavern-dinner last Election day, secundium
usum Barkin; you know we had not one word there of this punch-gutted Image, but
were most regularly merry and jolly; for after Churchwardens health had gone
round, I drank the Doctor's health, and then I begun yours too Mr. Jonathan,
and after that our Doctor begun his Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury's good
health: and we had a general health to all the Royal Family at once, all which
were carried on decently, and in order. For though it was somewhat
contradictory to one of his Majesty's Proclamations to quaff healths at that
rate, yet I did it for Conformity sake; and I hope it will not be impured a
violation of Law or Loyalty in such Divine Company: besides, me-thoughts you
and I were particularly merry, and I liked it well, because it still tended
more fully to demonstrate to all the world, that there is not a more serious
and regularly devout Parish in all London, than our All-to be-Sainted Barkin,
not only for Ceremonies, but also for good order in drinking: our Noble Capt.
took indefatigable pains to put our Carrouzes into a strict and regular method,
by giving the necessary words of Command, as forbear firing, make all ready,
each man cling Glasses, and then, Huzza, Ce viva vio Le Roy, etc. And so our
whole volley of Healths went off together bravely, all which being so
Canonically performed, I hope for all the burning of Saint Michael's Bones, our
Renowned Parish shall not lose an Inch of us Reputation, nor be censured as
irregular, but shall still remain as a primitive Pattern for all London, yea,
and all England to imitate in all Ceremonies, both at Church and Tavern; and
let the use of Barkin be for ever hereafter accounted better than all the rest
( Sarum only excepted.)

Now let us drown all animosities in a reconciling Bottle; and so in perfect
charity, most Orthodox, and most seriously Devout Jonathan I bid you heartily
farewell.


REceived from Mr. Sherman, Late Upper Churchwarden, This written Narrative
with his order to put the same among the Parish Papers, but not to deliver it
into Vestry, until after Evening Sermon on Sunday 17th of April, 1681. because
the Lord Bishop of London is not only to preach, but also to solemnize the
public confirmation of such Children, or elder Persons in this Parish as have
the Certificate of the Reverend Dr. Hicks, which, among others, Mr. Sherman's
own Children are all provided with, in order to his Lordships Benediction, and
therefore lest any heats should arise, Mr. Sherman's order to me, is, not to
deliver it till after all that Solemnity is over; and if there be no Vestry
then, to deliver it to Mr. Hunter and Mr. Chapman the present Churchwardens;

Signed by G. Whately Register to the Vestry of the Parish of All Saints
Barkin, London.


POTSCRIPT.
To Mr. Saunders, since added.
SIR, A word more before we part, let the World be Judge and Jury to try these
matters between you and I.

Whether a Carved Image be any Ornament to the Commandments? If not, then why
did you in your first Apparition, Page 1. Print thus, it was set as an Ornament
over the Ten Commandments? Why in the same Page do you Print as spoken by the
Doctor that he conceived it was their duty to consult the Vestry, are not
Churchwardens to learn their duty from the Law, rather then from the Vestry or
Parson; may not the advice of the Parson tend to incroach Parish Right, and if
the Churchwarden suffer it to be entered in Vestry Register; may it not
hereafter be pleaded the Parsons Right by Custom as having such a Precedent?

What if the Parson tells us it is his right to choose one Churchwarden, nay
what if he tells us he will choose both; or else perhaps be so civil as to take
30 for his Assistants, by the name of a Select Vestry, where there are 200
inhabitants; and so exclude the other 170, from such right of choosing any
Officers in that Parish, as the Law allows them; are we bound to lose such
Right?

Why? do you in the same Page print as the Doctors opinion, that the
Churchwardens defense was necessary and easy? Is it necessary to defend
Images, or are Images at all necessary in Churches? also can it be easy to
defend Images, when there is a Law to abolish all Images and Pictures (except
such as are upon Tombs and Monuments?) What need had you (in the same Page) to
alarm all Chapels and Cathedrals? will they or any Protestant but you Print any
thing in defense of such an Image set in such a place, and call it an Ornament
to the Ten Commandments?

Was it reasonable for you to intimate Fol. 2. as if it were not known on what
Statute the Indictment of this Image could be grounded though you may have a
bad memory yet you can read if you look on your book, as you use to do; and
there Page 1. You have quoted the Statute your self in the Mergin, Anno 3 and
4, Edw. VI. c. 10.

Is my Narrative or your two Printed Apparitions truest Relations of the
matter; did my Burning this Image privately in a Vestry Chimney, or your two
printed Apparitions, spread the News and Noise furthest: which was the better
deed, my burning or your printing? who minded their own business most, the
Lecturer or the Churchwarden in so doing? is it not a great abuse (at least) if
not a mighty profanation of the name and order of Godfather which the Church
has so solemnly enjoined, for a Clergyman to call a Wooden Image Mr. Shermans
Godson. I have heard that Papists do Christen their Images, but I never heard
that Images had Godfathers before Mr. Saunders printed it: but take notice that
no Priest of S. Michael shall ever make me stand Godfather to a Wooden Image.

Suppose the Act of Edward the VI. was made only for abolishing such Mass Books
and such Images as were then in being; will your Learning Convince a Jury, that
it is lawful to print those Mass Books, and new make the same Images and bring
them into Churches again, by saying, These are not the same Books nor the same
Images meant by that Act to be abolished, because you can prove that these were
lately printed, or the Image made by Mr. Edwards? by this Logic you would make
the fancy of Mr. Edwards the Churchwarden for setting up Images to be of more
force then the Law of Edward the King was for abolishing all Images: (except,
etc.)

Whether we ought not to petition the Lord Bishop to Command you to keep such
evasive Logic in defense of Images to your self, and not print as is in Page 1.

And would it not be better, if the Bishop did Command you to keep at your
Living at Sandon and not for Lucre of a Lecture is place at London (where is no
want of good Ministers) neglect your Duty in teaching your people of Sandon
their Duty and Ceremonies: and let the Liquor and Company of your Parishoners
at Sandon, Content you better then what you and either at London or Chelmsford,
and leave us of Barking to use our Ceremonies, as we did till the Plot broke
out, and not make our Parish of Barking be thus talked on for Images once in
Forty years, by your thus nicking the time with your Bowings and Doppings, etc.

You say in your second Apparition, that I singly Pleaded guilty to the
indictment, but one of our late London Intelligences, told you in print, that
it ought to be Recorded for a Lie: because it is a Lie against a Record, for
Mr. Hunter was at the Sessions, and did also Plead Guilty at the same time and
place, and it is Recorded that Mr. Hunter pleaded Guilty.

Though he that Kills a man unawares has mercy; yet wilful premeditated
murder is death without benefit of Clergy: so if a Lecturer not having the
fear of God before his Eyes, should study and premeditate how to spread
untruths and scandals furthest, by printing them; ought he to be allowed to
plead benefit of his Clergy or to have any protection from an Action at Law;
and if a Lecturer shall do all this Prava Mentis, (your own Apparition words)
may I not Answer (also in your own Apparition words) that it is to pass for a
voluntary designed prevarication, and is it not a pitiful low spirit (your own
words) of a thing, who I was a going to call Lecturer, to think to gratify
some one party of men (which are also your apparition words:) by scandalizing a
Churchwarden in print: and by printing false stories of a poor Clark also with
design to turn a Clark out of his place, who perhaps, If he were heard, might
show more cause to turn out the Lecturor: (Now in your own Apparition words
again) you ought to Remember, he that sells his Neighbors same (though a poor
Clark, etc.) for a little unsavory and popular breath, will in Conclusion gain
nothing but infamy and disgrace.

I hope, you will not blame me for speaking in your own Language, nor for
giving one Answer to two frightful Apparitions of an Angel; that never was seen
in Apparition but by a Lecturer, nor has ever scared any body else a month out
of town, nor did any Miracle before its burning; save bringing a Lecturer to
perform Ceremonies and bow at the place it stood, which the Lecturer never did
before the Image was these: prithee, fancy that you still see the Apparition of
the same Angel there, and bow and dop as low as you please for now I am out of
my Office, I sit where I can hear and see well enough my self, but pray take
care the Women may hear.

I intend no Reflection on the Clergy or Church of England nor one Mr. Tho
Whitebread, though I had occasion to mention him; therefore whatever Reflection
may seem to be on any body, I charge you and your printed Apparitions to be the
occasion: and pray you to apply all to your own self, that nothing may seem to
Reflect on our reverend and learned Doctor Hicks, nor on the Vestry, nor on any
of the worthy Gentlemen of our Parish; who I suppose will not take part with
you or me in defense of this Image, but leave you to defend your Printing, and
me my Burning, as well as we can O then we shall all practice what you use to
preach viz. That everyone should mind his own business.



FINIS.

