THE CHRISTIANS Triumph over Death. A SERMON AT THE FUNERAL OF RICHARD LEGH of
Lime IN THE County Palatine of CHESTER Esquire AT WINWICK IN THE County Palatine of
LANCASTER Sept. 6. 1687.

By W. Shippen D.D. Rector of Stockport in Cheshire, Sometimes Fellow of
Universe. Coll. Oxon.

depiction of Sheldonian Theater

OXFORD Printed at the THEATER 1688.

Imprimatur.

GILB. IRONSIDE Vice-Can. OXON.
Sept. 12. 1688.
To the much Honored and most Accomplished Mrs. Elizabeth Legh, the Virtuous
Relict of Richard Legh of Lime Esquire
MADAM,
HAD my abilities to perform, been equal to my propension to undertake your
commands, these Papers had presented you with something more worthy the memory
of that half of your self which is in Heaven, and less unfit for the perusal of
the other with which we are still honored upon Earth. But the greatest
ambition, as well as the most proper disposal of them as they are, was to have
heen buried in the same dark Vault with their subject. Yet seeing you would not
be prevailed with to lay aside your authority over me, nor be denied a sight of
that, which your circumstances would not permit you to hear. I committed this
Discourse into your hands, in confidence you would have confined it to your
Closet; where I could have rested secure of a pardon for all its failures, upon
your own native goodness; but could never have admitted the least thought of
suffering it to be more public, had it not been for your irresistible
commands, and invincible resolutions to have it so, notwithstanding the
greatest and justest importunities of my self and friends to the contrary; so
that your Ladyship must be accountable to the world for the many imperfections
it labors under.

The Pictures of our absent friends though they express no more then their
outward and visible features are very desirable and delightful monuments; but
the Character of their minds, and their inward and invisible beauties are far
more excellent and valuable.

Fine spirits like elegant faces are difficult to be drawn to an exactness,
even by the greatest Masters. And this worthy person has been equally unhappy
both under the Pencil and the Pen. How little I have succeeded, and how short
this rude draught falls of the Original: your first reading (I doubt) will
testify with trouble if not with tears: and now when it is too late, force you
to take up my first wish that this Province had been allotted to a more skilful
hand, that might have done him more right, and given you more satisfaction.
Better parts might not only have set a greater luster on so noble a Theme, but
have reflected an honor upon themselves, and together with his consecrated
their own names to Eternity; while my humble Talent only sues for an excuse,
and may not unreasonably expect it too; if either extremity of Passion through
this surprising blow; or distraction of thought, from a like intervenient
Occasion and Office I was called to at the same time, which throws the mind
into confusion, and darkness, may pass for indispositions to such composures.
But what ever Entertainment this discourse may meet with from its deficiencies
of form, and poverty of art, in this nice and censorions age, yet the richness
of the matter, and the excellence of the argument are sufficient (I know) to
recommend it to a place among your choicest Cimelia.

But as the greatness of his worth, inhances the estimate of your loss; so the
displaying of that, does but open and revive your sense of this: which I
finding it more reasonable to appease then aggravate, and observing how much
you resemble the famous Lady Paulina in S. Jerome not only in the eminence of
her Virtues, but in the tenderness of her passions; shall rather recommend to
you those few familier considerations in the close hereof directed to the
stopping of the stream of nature; or allaying the bitterness of your grief, if
not the turning it into the sweeter passion of Joy. To the making all which
advices of reason, and succors of faith there offered, effectual to that
purpose, it is requisite that you bring along with you, a serious attention, and
a greatness of Spirit: The former of which you have in your power, the latter
in your nature. For the awakening of which, I know nothing more prevalent then
to mind you of the original Stock, from whence you Sprung; and of those
personal qualifications, and that elevated Genius, wherewith you are blessed.
Your paternal family has furnished out persons of that eminence both for parts
and virtues, as have adorned the highest stations in Church and State. A
deliberate reflection whereupon will hardly suffer you to stoop to so weak a
passion, or entertain so mean a thought, as must sink you below the dignity of
your Line, or to be dejected with any thing, save what is degenerous, or
inglorious. Your own excellent endowments which have sufficiently appeared on
other occasions; as the serenity of your understanding, the soundness of your
Judgment and constancy of mind, if duly touched and excited with these
meditations can hardly fail of raising the desired effects. But though envy it
self cannot but give place to a reverence for the dead; yet it will not so
patiently brook the commendations of the living. And though his modesty who is
gone cannot be wounded by his Just Character, yet yours is so tender, that it
would be oppressed with your own. So that I know not how to do right to the
rest of your Virtues, without offering an injury to this. I shall therefore
endeavor to supply the omission of your deserved praises, and the weakness of
my other performances, with the sincerity and fervency of my prayers, to him
who can wipe all tears from your Eyes, and make the bones that he has broken
to rejoice, for your support and improvement under this severe Visitation; that
what you have lost in temporal comforts, may be abundantly repayed you in
Spiritual, in this life; and with eternal glory in the next: which shall be the
constant Intercession of

Most Honored Madam Your most Obedient Faithful, Humble servant W. S.
October. 3. 1687.
1 Cor. XV. 55. O Death! where is thy Sting? O Grave! where is thy Victory?
THESE words at the first view, may seem but an improper subject for this sad
and solemn occasion. For what greater soloecism can well be imagined, than a
Text of rejoicing for a Funeral Sermon? than the celebrating a Day of mourning
and lamentation with a song of Triumph? and the drawing the bright scene of
Mirth, and Jubilee, before the clouded minds of the disconsolate and afflicted?
What an incongruity to ask, where are the weapons of Death, and where is the
Victory of the Grave, when every place and object, proclaims their puissance
and achievements? Every Church yard and Charnel-house being stuffd with their
spoils; and the whole earth but one Mackpelah, where they bestow their
prisoners, and bury their slain. The cries of the Mourners that go about the
streets, and the tears of them that weep within doors, do sufficiently confess
the wounds, and acknowledge the conquests of these powerful enemies. And the
sad spectacle before us, being already the Triumph of the one, and suddenly to
become the Captive of the other; seems at once to answer the Question, and
defeat the Insultation of the Text. So that might it not have been better said,
O Death! where is not thy Sting? O Grave! where is not thy Victory?

But notwithstanding all this, he that looks upon the words with senses duly
exercised, may discern a great propriety in them for the present Solemnity:
and by Faith, as through a Telescope, discover a Rich and pleasant Country
beyond the Gloomy region of the Grave, and a fresh Blooming Life springing out
of the Dust of Death. Which though it bears the name of an Enemy, yet to a good
Christian performs the Office of a Friend, in letting him out of this vain and
wretched State of Mortality into a life of unmixt, and unchangeable Glory. This
contemplation has force enough not only to Justify the suitableness of the
Text, but to reform our common Sentiments and practices upon such occasions, by
making us exchange our Cypress for Laurel, and our tears of Sorrow for those of
Joy, which will farther appear upon a due examination of these words.

This Text I have taken at the second hand; it being not Originally the
Apostles (as himself confesses in the verse preceding) but a Quotation of his
out of the Prophet Hosea, c. 13. v. 14. which place though our Translation
reading thus, O Death! I will be thy Plagues; O Grave! I will be thy
Destruction; gives but a faint resemblance to it. Yet the Septuagint comes
nearer to it, especially if we allow the Words Sting and Victory to have been
transposed through the transcribers negligence; which is favored by
considerable Beza and ^^iorum.
Copies and Vulgar Aethiopic.
Versions retaining the Prophets order of the words in this passage of the
Apostle, For then they would be found to differ only in one word, and not at
all in sense, it being to the same effect whether we say O Grave! where is thy
Victory? or, where is thy Cause? wherein thou have so long prevailed. Or, where
is thy Plea which thou used to put in at the Bar of Divine Justice? as for the
word which we here render [I will (...)
be] it also signifies the same with that which is commonly translated [ (...)
Where] in the Judgment of several Eminent Christian Jun. and Tremel. etc.
Interpreters, and of some learned Jews, as well as of the Septuagint, which
here, and generally where not corrupted, is our best Guide to the true sense of
the Original, and for that reason alone, doubtless, was so often followed by
the Inspired Penmen of the New Testament, even when it seemingly departs from
the present reading of the Hebrew Code, (so that Capell. Critic. Sacr.
their conjecture is as needless, as it is groundless, who conceive the latter
Hebrew word was read by the LXX in this place, instead of the former.) But the
Hebrew it self has the greatest affinity of all with the Text, according to
some; and those most Dr. Pocock on this place.
eminently learned in the Oriental Tongues; by whose assistance they have
undertaken to reconcile and adjust all the rest of the words, both as to their
Signification and Order of place; and so completed the agreement betwixt the
Prophet and the Apostle. But however that be, it is sufficient for our purpose,
that the sense of the two clauses in this sentence, is not much different; and
the scope of the whole, even in our version, is exactly the same. O Death where
are thy fatal Plagues? or poisonons Sting; O Grave! where is thy destruction
of, or Victory gained over them.

Which Words though in the Prophet they might literally denote Gods deliverance
of his people from the greatest temporal Dangers and Enemies even Death and the
Grave, and which by some Grotius in loc.
are applied to Gods destruction of Sennacheribs Army; yet by the Apostle they
are raised to an higher sense, and adapted to the general Resurrection: when
Death and the Grave shall be swallowed up in Victory. (...)
i. e. for ever, when they shall be quite Abolished, and Vanish; not only so,
as to be no more, but so as no Footsteps shall remain of their having ever
been; when there shall not be seen so much as the least Marks, or Scars upon
those who have layn under their utmost Force and Cruelty; not a Blemish on
their Bodies, nor a Hair of their heads Singed.

And as this Scripture will then have its Consummation, so it certainly had its
Beginning at Christ's Resurrection; when the groundwork was laid of this our
Rejoicing. Whereupon these words are conceived by some to have been a proper
(...) for the Captain of our Salvation, when having foiled his Enemies, wrested
their Weapons out of their hands, given them their Deathswound, and seeing them
ly grovelling upon the ground, he might draw near, and Insult them saying:
where is now thy Sting, O! Death? wherewith thou have so often wounded and
poisoned mankind? Where Is now thy Victory, O Grave! which thou have so long
carried, and boasted of, over the Children of men. And the Apostle here under
the certain hope, and sweet contemplation of that glorious day of Universal
Triumph cannot for bear to anticipate that joy of the Resurrection: but looking
upon these baffled enemies, a stingless Death, and a powerless Grave, as
hurtless and despicable things; breaks out into this Triumphant song; this holy
Exaltation and Insultation of the Text. O Death! etc.

These words imply a Complete Victory, and express a Joyful Triumph. The better
to represent the reasonableness of which Triumph, and to lay bare the
Foundations of this Rejoicing, we must enquire what Victory this is, and by
whom obtained: but before we can learn its just value and greatness, we must be
acquainted with the nature and quality of the Adversary: so that we have three
parts or steps cut out for the progress of our Discourse,

1. The Nature and Dreadfulness of the Enemies.

2. The Author and Absoluteness of the Victory over them.

3. The Reasonableness of Triumphing, and Rejoicing for the same.

In speaking to the first part, we shall show 1. Who and what kind of Enemies
these are. 2. With what Weapon they assail us. 3. What Success they have
formerly had.

1. The Enemies are Death, and the Grave. That by the former is here meant the
death of the Body, is manifest from the whole bent and scope of this Chapter;
which is to demonstrate the Resurrection of the dead; both of Christ the first
fruits, and of all Christians as the entire harvest, through him at his coming.
And it is thence also no less evident, that by Grave (though the Original Word
both in the Prophet and the Apostle, by its various and doubtful senses, has
afforded a large field to the Critics to show their Reading and Judgment in)
is here to be understood, neither the Prison of the damned, nor the state of
the dead, but the Mansion of our Carcasses till the Resurrection: And though
Death and the Grave are here distinguished by the Apostle, yet in effect being
the same to us, we shall in the sequel of this discourse, for the most part,
speak of them as but One.

This is the enemy then we have to deal with, and how Dreadful it is to the
Children of Corruption needs no other proof, than a bare appeal to the
Universal sense and suffrage of mankind; Job. 18.14.
which Job has roundly summed up in his description of Death by the King of
terrors: and after him Aristotle much to the same purpose, in styling it
(...). There Is nothing in the World can beget a greater dread, or create a more
exquisite horror in the minds of men, than the black and Melancholy
apprehension of descending into the dismal state of everlasting darkness and
solitude; oblivion and senslesness. There Is nothing we are not willing to do,
to suffer, or to part with, rather than be brought under its power. We are
ready to undergo all labors and pains, fasting and Physic, shame and
tortures, nay (I had almost said) death it self to avoid it. So much of truth
is there in That of the Father of lies; Skin for Skin, and all that a man has,
Job. 2.4.
will be give for his Life. And this is so well grounded a passion, that it
seizes and shakes the mind, and shrivels up the Spirits of the stoutest, the
wisest, and most virtuous men. Our natures are aghast, and recoil at the very
thoughts of death, and our countenances wax wan at the sight of the Grave. We
are so unfit to enter the lists with these Combatants, that we are scarce able
to support our selves under the bare prospect or mention of them. These
Basilisks dis-spirit us at their approach, and kill us with their very looks.
The sound of their names (like that of Hunniades to the Turks) strikes a dread
into our Soul, and shoots a chilness through our Veins: which Lewis the 11th
was so apprehensive of, that he would not endure the mention of them, either in
health or sickness; but charged his Servants when ever they should see him weak
and languishing, to exhort him to confess his Sins, but in no wise to name
death to him, least that alone should kill him before the time. The reason of
all which must be sought for, in our Inbred Antipathy to Annihilation. The fear
of Death lies as close to our essence as the Love of Life, and to offer to
reconcile a man to the thoughts of his dissolution, is as contradictory an
attempt, as to persuade him to fall out with his nature, and renounce his
being: And if it be a Natural, it must also be a Necessary, and unavoidable
passion: and consequently it is as impossible to throw off the Fear, as the Fate
of dying.

This Enemy is not only Formidable, and operative merely upon the fancy, but
its really Hurtful and Mischievous. Death smites us in all our Capacities, in
our Relations, and our Persons. It turns us out of our Stateliest Houses and
Palaces; and Sequesters us from our greatest possessions and Empires. It blasts
our fairest Hopes, and dashes in pieces our finest Models: Breaking our
purposes, and the thoughts of our heart. It snatches our tender Children out of
our Arms, and tears away the dearest Guest of our bosom from us. It plunders us
of our beauty and our strength, of our honors and our pleasures. It not only
deprives us of our liberty and the light, by shutting us up in a close dark
prison; but it lays us in a bed of dishonor and loathsomness among worms and
serpents. It throws us into a Pit of stench and rottenness; where it preys upon
our bodies, putrefies our flesh, and consumes our bones. It not only lops off
some of our choicest comforts; but lays the Ax to the root of all our
Enjoyments; in making a divorce betwixt the dearest Couple in nature, our Body
and Soul; and drawing after it (if not timely prevented) an utter destruction
of both eternally.

Add hereunto, that this is an inveterate and implacable Enemy: with whom there
can no league be struck, no amity purchased, no reconciliation had. It gives
quarter to none; but shows the like mercy of the Sword to all. Indeed beaten,
captivated, destroyed it may be, (so it has been by Christ) but appeased,
reconciled, never. The Devil who is General and Parent of this Enemy, being the
Father of Sin, (who is the Mother of Death) has like an infernal Hannibal
sworn all his Offspring to have no peace with the Posterity of Adam.
Nevertheless Death could do us no great mischief, if he came not armed with his
Sting, which is

The second particular: the weapon with which this Enemy assaults us. The
meaning and reason of which Title is next to be examined. The Apostle declares
the former briefly and plainly in the next words. The sting of death is sin. A
dangerous and deadly weapon. The congruity of their names might be deduced from
their common relation to a Serpent; whose natural weapon is a sting, as Sin is
the proper hurtful Instrument of that old Serpent, the Devil. But the
dreadfulness of this Weapon, and its analogy to a Sting, will more fully appear
from a distinct consideration of the Pungent and Poisonous nature of Sin.

1. Sin is of a Pungent and Painful nature; It usually approaches us indeed
with a courtly address, and a fawning salutation: like Solomon's strange Woman;
her lips drop as an honey comb, and her mouth is smoother than oil: but the end
is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a two edged sword. A prosperous and hardened
Sinner, (who resolves to go on in the way of his heart, and in the sight of his
eyes) knowing what smart and anguish the reflection upon his guilt, and the
very thoughts of the Divine Vengeance will necessarily give him, industriously
beats out of his mind all notices and remembrances of these things; and bears
down the first essays of Conscience, either to inform or restrain him. The
Voluptuary endeavors to drown its voice with the louder noise of his Tabret
and Harp. The Mammonist tries to hide, if not smother, this Vice-God, as Rachel
did her false ones, among his Worldly Stuff and Furniture. The Atheist and
Hypocrite strive to overruled its Plea, with Erroneous Principles, and Specious
Pretenses. But at last, when the Conscience has thrown off her chains and
servitude, and asserted her rightful authority and dominion over the Sinner (be
it in old age or sickness, when he is smitten of God or Man) she will change
the whole scene of affairs; she will set up a true light in his soul, and give
him a juster apprehension of things, and another sense of his own condition;
she will pull off the vails and hypocrisies of sin, and bring her forth in her
own horrid shape and native deformity; she will tear away the dress, and wash
off the Paint, wherewith Satan has set off this Jezebel; she will present the
Sinner with the right end of the Perspective, which will give him the true
image, the full size, and the dire prospect of Divine Wrath and Everlasting
Burnings; which will then prove so far from being a Painted or Poetic Fire,
that the mere speculation of them, i.e. the very intelligible species past
through a clear understanding, will like beams through a Burning Glass,
immediately kindle a resembling raging flame in his Breast. One way or other
Sin will manifest it self to be a Sting indeed, either in the sharpness of
remorse to the Penitent, according to the hainousness of his guilt, or in the
prickings and lancings of despair to the Obdurate Sinner. What pangs and
throws, what anguish and torment it breeds even in good Men, may be learned
from David's mourning all the day long, Psalm. 38.6, 3.
and having no rest in his bones, by reason of his sin; from St. Paul's vehement
exclamation, O wretched man that I am; and from St. Peter's bitter tears. Romans
7.14.
And if it be so with the green tree, what will it be with the dry? If the true
Penitent suffer such whips, what wonder if the Despairing Sinner be lashed with
Scorpions?

-- Nam men's sibi conscia facti Lucret.

Praemetuens adhibet stimulos, terretque flagellis.
The most exquisite torments will be his perpetual entertainment; stings and
poisons, fires and furies feed daily on his Marrow and drink up his Spirits,
who is both the Malefactor, and his own Executioner; first, forging and
sharpening the Knives and Goads, and all instruments of pain and cruelty in the
dark and sinful recess of his mind; and afterward in a cool and sober
reflection, desperately sticking them into his own Soul. It is in vain for such
a person to expect relief from outward applications, who has the Wolf within
his Breast, the Gangrene in his Conscience. Bloody Nero may remove from one
appartment to another; may change his Bed every night, and his Companions every
day; but the Fiend still haunts him, his murdered Mothers Ghost follows him
through all the crowds of Men and labyrinths of Business; through Solitudes and
Entertainments; through the Court and the Camp; the Closet and the Theater;
making his Face as ghastly as the Spectre that occasioned it; and filling his
mind with the distractions and black horrors of that place from whence it
came; and though he consulted his chiefest Magicians in the case, yet he could
find no Charm able to lay the Phantasm, or free him from its importunity. Cain
may wander from one Climat to another, seeking rest, but finds none; for so
long as he carries Blood-guiltiness in his soul, he has not so much a Cerberus
dogging him at his heels, as a Fury lodged within his bowels; and whilst that
fatal sting, his guilt, remains, he must needs bleed within, languish and sink
under Insupportable horror and fearful looking for of Judgment. Nay let a
Judas or a Spira not only change Countries, but Worlds; when their souls
through extremity of despair choose strangling (in Jobs phrase) seeking to
Death for a Lenitive, and running to Hell for sanctuary; (as if the Rolling in
Infernal Flames, would be a refreshment to them, in comparison of that more
intolerable Top het within; and the Devils themselves prove less cruel than
their own Consciences) yet in the issue they will find themselves most
dreadfully mistaken, for the Conscience is not to be put off with the Body, but
the immortal worm will for ever stick to the immortal part; and will not cease
to gnaw within, when the Fiend lays on without. Those external sulphurous heats
and scorchings will be so far from calling out, or allaying the internal, that
they will reverberate and enrage them more, and heat the Furnace seven times
hotter.

Besides, our blessed Lord who only lay under the Imputation of sin, felt
greater sharps, and acuter pains in it, than in those Nails and Thorns and
Spear, which pierced not only his Hands and Head, but his Heart; for this Sting
went deeper than the Body, and made its way through that into his very Soul;
throwing him into such vast Extremities, such strange and horrible Convulsions,
as exceeded all things, but the infinite demerit of our Sins which occasioned
them. What oppressions of Spirit? What heaviness of soul unto death? What
dreadful Agonies? What bloody sweat did it cast him into? What vehement and
reiterated Prayers? Mat. 26.39, 42, 44.
What doleful Cries under the Paroxysms of the Conflict, did it extort from
him? And if Imputative guilt was thus terrible and tormenting to the holy
Jesus, what will Inherent be to the wicked Reprobates, when they come to labor
and struggle under it.

2. Sin is of that virulent nature, that like an Envenomed Indian dart, it not
only Wounds, but Poisons: which appears from two particulars; its quick
spreading Contagion, and its fatal Influence.

1. It is of that subtle and quick Efficacy, that it immediately diffuses its
contagion through the whole Man; through all the members of the Body, the
faculties of the soul, and the spirit of the mind. It mounts up into the Brain,
and fills that with unsound notions; it corrupts all the senses, making them
the Panders of Vice and Vanity, inflaming the Eyes with Lust and Anger; and
stopping the Ears like the Deaf Adder against the most charming and wholesome
Instructions. Ps. 140.3.
It sharpens the tongue like a Serpent, and lays the poison of Asps under the
lips; so that nothing but Corrupt Communication proceeds thence. Ephesians. 4.29.
It breaks out in the hands, in all gross acts of Violence and Injustice. Yea,
from the sole of the foot, even unto the head, it leaves no soundness, nothing
but wounds and bruises and putrefying sores. Isa. 1.6.
It sinks into the inward man also; darting its venom through all the secret
channels and paths of life; seizing the noblest appartments of the soul, and
the chief offices of reason. It transforms all its faculties into the powers of
Satan; darkening the understanding, that it cannot discern, or determine aright
of truth; disabling the will for embracing and holding fast what is good; and
infeebling the memory that it can neither retain, nor return the notions that
are stamped upon it. It converts the affections and inclinations of the Mind,
into Carnal Lusts and Appetites; and infects the fountain of them, the Heart;
so as to make it swell and rankle with all manner of malice and wickedness. In
short, it turns the whole Body into a body of Sin; changes that Incarnate
Angel, the Soul, into a Fiend; and taints our very Spirit, that Divine Breath
of Life, making it stink in the nostrils of the Almighty. Nay Sin is such an
exalted Elixir of Poison, that the least grain of it is able to transmute a
whole World in a moment into its Malignant nature. Which unhappy Projection
has been actually made already by our first Parents, who no sooner touched it,
but its Rancorous Ferment impregnated the whole Mass of Humane Nature, streamed
through all the Blood of their Posterity, and so turned the happy Golden Age
into this wretched one of Brass and Iron.

3. Sin is of a deadly Influence; it may make its entry as Ehud did to Eglon,
with a Present in its hand, but will at last leave a secret Dagger in our
Bowels. In a day or less it brings forth death; Judge. 3.17, 21.
In the day thou eats thereof, thou shall surely die, Genesis 2.17. For though Man
did not then presently die, yet in the same instant he became Mortal; that
deadly infusion was then let into his Veins, and mixed with his Spirits, which
was sure to be his Bane in the conclusion. Whereas, without this, nothing in
the World could have been destructive to us; neither Weapon nor Distemper,
Bliting nor Thunder; it is Sin alone that gives an edge to the Sword, an
infection to the Air, and points to the flames of Fire; it is this that gives
malignity to Fevers, virulence to Poisons, and arms every Creature with
instruments of death against us; so that had we not been so wretched, as to be
Sinners, we had been so happy, as to be Immortal. Our naked Innocence would
have been greater security to us, and more impenetrable than a Coat of Mail.
Had it not been for this Sting, Death it self could never have reached us; no,
nor so much as had any being in the World. For Sin brings forth Death, James
1.15. And though our Savior (who knew no Sin) tasted of it, yet that was not
of necessity, but a voluntary undertaking; that as the first Adam by Sin
brought Death into the World, so he the second by Death might cast Sin out of
it. This is the bitter Root from whence springs all the Misery, both for degree
and kind, which ever befell Humane Nature. All the steps and advances toward
our greatest sorrow, (from the first indisposition and slightest pain, to final
Death and utter Damnation) derive from hence. We were once so hardy and firm in
our uprightness, that nothing could pierce or annoy us; but that unhappy fall
that Sin gave us, so bruised and loosened our Constitution, and made us ever
since so feeble and tender, that we are now brought under the power of the
weakest and most Contemptible Creature. The least Fly wants not a weapon to
wound us; and the smallest Kernel has been the fatal Instrument of Death. The
Lamp of our Life is now easily blown out, we being ready to expire with any
extraordinary Passions, even those soft and gayer ones of Mirth and Joy. It Is
this that often makes the ordinary means of our health the occasion of our
sickness; and not only fasting, but food, mortal. To this the several kinds of
Death, whether Temporal, Spiritual or Eternal, owe their Original. The wounds
which this Weapon gives, are so fatal, as to destroy not only Nature, but Grace
also, and Glory; working such a Miracle of Mischief, as to extinguish that Life
which is everlasting. It is so dreadful and ruinous, that it kills the Soul as
well as the Body, and sends not only to the Grave but to Hell. It destroyed the
old World of Men by a Flood, laying waste the Primitive Paradisial Earth, and
turning it into a great ruin. It swept away at once a great part of the
Inhabitants of Heaven, arresting the fallen Angels before the Throne of the
Almighty, and hurrying them headlong into the bottomless Pit; and it will at
last people the woeful Kingdom of Darkness which an unknown number of miserable
deluded Wretches. There is no sort of it, whether Original (if its poison be
not washed out in the Laver of Regeneration) or Actual, how small soever (if
the Viper be not crushed by Contrition and Repentance) but will prove mortal.
One single act of it (if it were possible to stop there) nay the least omission
entitles to eternal Death. That is the wages that will be sure to be paid us,
even for not doing our work. A petty neglect of Charity will deprive us of the
inexhaustible Treasures of the Divine Mercy, and we may purchase to our selves
a portion in the lake which burns with fire, by denying a Cup of cold Water.
Not only an idle word; but sometimes silence it self consigns to Damnation.
Thus deadly is this Sting, in all its kinds and degrees; which is the Weapon
wherewith this Enemy assaults us.

3. The success which this Enemy usually meets with in his Conflict with
Mankind, is Victory. If this were not sufficiently employed in the Question,
Where Is thy Victory? (As if he should say; thy Victory hitherto has been
notoriously both known and felt, but where is it now?) yet all Countries and
Ages, Histories and Observation show how he has gone on Conquering and to
Conquer; what spoils and devastations he has made throughout the World; what
slaughters and massacres he has committed upon the sons of Men. There was
never any universal Monarch upon Earth besides this King of Terrors, to whom
all living Creatures, sooner or later, must bow and obey. The mightiest Princes
as well as the meanest Subjects, are his Tributaries; he neither favors the
Scepter, nor forgets the Spade; but calls for them all in, and piles them up in
one confused heap, to raise a triumphal Pyramid to his name. Cyrus and
Alexander, Caesar and Tamberlane, after all their glorious Conquests and
Trophies, their Temples and Statues, have at last let fall their Victorious
Arms at the feet of this great Conqueror, and laid down their Heads on the cold
Clod, in homage and obeisance to his unbounded Empire. Those Heroic flaming
Spirits who were so fierce and keen for Victory and Honor, and so unsatiable
with All this World could give them, that they were impatient even to the
Effeminacy of tears, that there was no more then this to Conquer and Triumph
over, have yet in fine had all their heat and vigor quenched and tamed by the
cold hand of Death; their Glory covered with Darkness; and themselves led in
triumph, by this great Triumpher; who might insult them too in the Prophetic
Style, saying, Is this the Man that made the Earth to tremble, Isa. 14.
and shaked Kingdoms? That made the World a Wilderness, and destroyed the
Cities thereof? How art thou fallen from Heaven? O Lucifer Son of the morning; O
thou who did weaken the Nations, Art thou also become weak like other Men?
Ezekiel. 32.
Do thou lie among those that are slain with the Sword? And bear the shame of
them that go down to the Pit? How come thy once glittering weapons of War to
lie so quiet and rusty by thee, while those Despicable Enemies the Worms
assault and prevail over thee; entrench within thy bosom, and prey upon thy
Vitals? He was as great a Warrior as a King who acknowledged the Absolute
Sovereignty and general success of this Monarch, in asking the question; What
Man is he that lives and shall not see death? and shall he deliver his Soul
from the hand of the Grave? Psalm. 89.48. And not only David, the Man after Gods
own heart, but the Son of David, the Man to whose heart God himself was
hypostatically joined, the Blessed Jesus, was for some time his Subject and
Captive. Who then can expect an Exemption from walking in this way of all the
Earth?

And yet we should the less envy him the glory and universality of this
Victory, if the effects of it fell not so ruinously upon us. If the overthrow
were no more than the greatest Temporal Destruction, nay, (which is greater)
than an Eternal Annihilation; (so that as our hopes were only in this life, our
fears might be of no other) Our Case were the less Deplorable; We should then,
at worst, be but Negatively Miserable. But when the death of the Body, is but a
Prologue to the death of the Soul; and when this second Death is so far from
being nothing, that it is an everlasting and unconceivable torment; when it is
such a forlorn state, as that the greatest Evil, the utmost Misfortune of this
World, even Death it self, would be the greatest Good, and only Comfort; and
yet not only the hopes, but the very Possibility of Dying, is there extinct;
seeing it is an Immortal Death: This advances our Misery, not more above the
Patience, than the Imagination of Mankind.

These Considerations, of the Dreadfulness of the Enemy, of the Deadliness of
the VVeapon, of the generality of their Success, and the necessary Consequent
thereof, our extreme Desolation may give us just occasion to cry out; Romans 7.24.
O wretched Men that we are, who shall deliver us from the body of Sin and of
this Death? Who shall rescue us from the All-devouring Mouth of this Grave?
Certainly neither Man nor Angel can deliver us from the force and fury of these
Enemies; yet from the fear of them we may be delivered by the happy tidings of
a perfect Victory over them all, which is brought us by,

2. The second General. The Author and Absoluteness of this Victory. Sed quis
nobis Hercules; But alas! who will venture to go forth and fight this Goliath
for us, that thus Dismaies and Defies the whole Host of Mankind, and dares them
to match him with an Equal Combatant. Let no Man's heart fail, for there is one
who will undertake him, and he though not a David, Heb. 2.10. (...). Clem.
Alex. (...).
yet his Son according to the Flesh; one who has already gone out, smitten,
and set his foot upon him. It Is Our great Champion, Christ Jesus, who came down
from Heaven on purpose to fight this bloody Battle for us; to enter the Lists
with Death and the Grave, and Sin, and all the Black Legions of Darkness, who
had held us so long in fear and bondage. And though his whole Life was but one
continued Dispute with them, yet the sharp and doubtful Encounter was at his
Passion, when he was not only sore thrust at, bruised, and wounded, but slain:
Not only lost Blood, but Life too; and his Body closely Imprisoned in a Tomb.
So that now (one would think) Death might be able to answer the Question of the
Text to purpose; and say, Behold here is my Sting fixed in the Body of the Lord
of Life; see the deep wound it has made in his Side, which has let out his
very Hearts Blood. The Grave might also vauntingly reply, My Victory was in
Golgotha, and behold here is my Prisoner, whom I have in safe Custody in this
Cave. But stay a while and you shall see the salvation of the Lord; Exodus 14.13.
who though he fell to the ground, rose up again; and that Antoeus-like, with
renewed force and virtue; when he charged his Enemies afresh, broke all their
strengths, and gave them a final overthrow; when he disarmed Death of his Sting
and quenched its Poison in his Blood; and by taking away the guilt thereof,
destroyed both the power and enmity of Death; though he suffered the Enemy to
continue till the General Resurrection. He conquered the Grave also, making his
way through all its Guards and Rampires: it having no more power to detain him,
than the traveling Woman has the struggling burden of her Womb, when it comes
to the Birth. For how was it possible that a narrow Sepulcher should hold him,
whom neither the Temple of Solomon, nor the Heaven of Heavens are able to
contain. It was a glorious Miracle for him to open the Graves, to unlock those
Chambers of Death for others, when he was alive; but infinitely more to break
its Iron Bars asunder, and throw open its Doors, when he lay Dead, and buried
in it himself; and to rise up, and march out, like the Sun in his full
strength. A Victory this, sufficient to father it self, and which visibly
points to no less than a Divine Author, and an Omnipotent Arm. It could be no
other than our Spiritual Sampson, the strength of our Salvation, who when the
Enemy thought him sure, and sealed up even to an Impossibility of a
Resurrection, awoke thus out of the sleep of Death, shook himself, and carried
away the gates of his Prison to the Heavenly Mount, giving eminent proof of his
ability and fitness for this mighty Enterprise, by beating the Enemy at his own
Weapon, and in his own Strongest Holds, the Grave and Hell; and all this in the
weakness of Humane Nature, which had been so often foiled by the Adversary.

And yet this Victory was not more Eminent for its Author, nor more wonderful
for its Manner, than Complete for its Effect. It was so absolute, that it not
only presented us with our Capital Enemy in Chains, but extended it self to all
its Associates, so as not to leave one Adversary behind, to lift up his hand
against us. There Is no more Condemnation now from the Law, Romans 8.1.
to them who are under Grace, Sin has no more Dominion over us, chapter 6.14.
though it still keeps a Residence among us. Death has never an Instrument of
Cruelty or Terror left him, but being disarmed of his Sting, he is a naked,
gentle, and innocent Enemy. He is destroyed also who had the power of Death,
that is the Devil. And now the Serpents Head being thus broken, though his Tail
may still move and seem to threaten, yet it cannot hurt us. We may safely play
with the Scorpion, that has lost its Sting; for though we may find some
loathing and abhorrence in our selves to it, yet we shall receive no harm from
it. To die now for Christians, is but to fall into a quiet and sound sleep; to
renew our vigor for the Actions of an Everlasting and Divine Life, when we
awake in the morning of the Resurrection.

The Grave likewise is so absolutely vanquished, that it will not withold one
of its Prisoners: but must at the appointed time surrender up all, both good
and bad. Our Savior has so broken the Teeth and Jaws of this Devourer, that
it may swallow, but it cannot grind us; it may receive us into its Belly, (as
the Whale did the Prophet) but not being able to hold us, must of necessity
cast us up again, upon the Land of Immortality. The Righteous shall come forth
of that close Cell of Darkness and Corruption into spacious Regions of Light
and Glory. The Wicked shall be brought forth too, but it will be to a Bar that
will doom them to a far more Dismal Place: They shall rise out of one Pit, only
to fall into another, more horrid and bottomless; They shall be roused out of a
state of Insensibility and still Silence, to be driven into another of Sharpest
Sense, and most shrill and terrible Shriekings; They shall enter upon Miseries
which are no more possible to be undergone by them, than understood by us.

We may now be able to make some Competent Estimate of the greatness both of
the Victory, and of the Mercy to us therein. A Victory over the Enemies of this
Life, is valuable to those who have groaned under a Tyrannizing Conqueror; or
smarted in some Bloody Battle. Those Israelites seem to have fully understood
its price, who having been long harassed by their Enemies, offered to God
whatsoever he pleased for one; Do thou unto us, say they, Judge. 10.15.
whatsoever seems good unto thee, deliver us only, we pray thee, this day.
The Romans were not more satisfied with any Conquest, than with those they had
over the Germans, because they were so near Neighbors, and had been so long
and vexatious an Enemy to them. Surely a right apprehension of the Enemies in
the Text will recommend this Victory over them, as far more glorious in it
self, so more Comfortable to us. For of Enemies, some are Noble and Generous,
aiming like Pyrrhus, only at Glory and Triumph; Others are Imperious and
Tyrannical, designing (like Carthage) Domination and Oppression: yet the
bitterest Feuds and Hostilities in this World, all Bodily Servitudes, and
Temporal Sufferances whatsoever, are perfect friendships, freedoms, and
Entertainments, in comparison of that Mortal (shall I say Immortal) Enmity,
that Spiritual Bondage, that Eternal Misery, which we are delivered from by
this happy Victory.

3. Which shows the Reasonableness of Triumphing and Rejoicing for the same.
It was one of the Fundamental Laws of the Roman Triumphs, Val. Max. l. 2. c. 8.
sect. 1.
that there should be five thousand Enemies slain in the Battle; but that could
not debar our Victorious Lord from a right to this Honor, who had virtually
slain infinitely more in destroying the whole Body of Sin and Death, and in
spoiling Legions of Principalities and Powers. Wherefore as at his Resurrection
he got the Victory, so at his Ascension he Rode in Triumph; when he went up
toward the Heavenly City with a Shout, Ps. 47.5.
and the sound of a Trumpet, Ephesians. 4.8.
having the Clouds for his Triumphal Chariots, leading Captivity Captive, Coll.
2.15.
and making show of the Spoils openly. When he was doubtless met in the way to
the upper Jerusalem, by numberless Troops of Angels and Seraphims, with Psalms
in their Hands, and Hosanna's in their Mouths (as the Daughters of Israel met
his Father David with Music and Dancing in his return from slaying the
Philistin) and by them Conducted with the greatest Magnificence and Jubilation
into the Holy of Holies. 1 Samuel 1.8, 6.


And as he has given us the benefit of his Victory, so the honor of a Triumph
too; though at present in the Inferour Kind. We may have our Christian
Acclamations now, proportionable to the Pagan Ovations; and our Hosanna's to
answer their Jo Paean's; and that upon better ground then any they ever had,
seeing by it we are not only delivered from the power and malice of our Cruel
Enemy, but also from those mighty fears and insuperable Apprehensions we had of
them. He has dispersed all those horrors and amazements, that unavoidably
sprung up in our Minds, under the thoughts of our dropping into an Abyss of
Darkness, and of nothing; if not of endless and Exquisite Misery. He has
released us from that pepetual anguish and perplexity, that formerly stuck to
the Soul in spite of all Humane Relief. That scorned all the powers of Reason;
and mocked at the attempts of Philosophy to remove it. He has freed us from
two greater Evils than Death it self; the precedent fear of it in this Life,
and the dismal Consequence in the next; so that we may now lift up our heads
and hearts with joy, and behold those Insulting Egyptians, our proud and
inhumane Taskmasters, lying dead on the Shore; or their Carcasses floting on
the Waves. We may take a new Song in our Mouths, or else that old one of Moses
with a little variation; Exodus 15.1.21.
The Lord has Triumphed Gloriously, the Pale Horse and the Rider has he
thrown into the Sea, even into the Red Sea of his Blood. Or else resume this
Apostolical Hymn of the Text in a holy defiance of those Enemies; upbraiding
and boldly challenging them now to do their worst, and cheerfully singing, O
Death! Where is thy Sting? Come bring forth all thy Instruments of Mischief,
let loose all thy Plagues and Poisons, exert thy destructive Victorious Power
to the utmost, and hurt me now if thou can; but alas thy Weapon is wrested
out of thy Hand, thy Sinews are Cut, and thy Meager Paleness is now not more
the symptom of thy Envy and Malice, than of thy fainting and languishing
Spirits. O thou great Destroyer of Mankind! thou art now utterly destroyed thy
self. O Grave! Where is thy Victory? Keep me in durance now if thou art able;
make fast all thy Prison-doors, and throw thy strongest Chains and Fetters upon
me, yet these (as in the case of St. Peter) shall all fall off, and the other
fly open. O thou Devourer of all Flesh, thou art now swallowed up in Victory
thy self, by him whom thou had devoured. Who can forbear now not only to
Sing, but Dance for Joy, who could not forbear before to Cry out and Tremble
for fear, under the sight or sense of these hideous Bugbears to the Heirs of
Mortality? seeing they are now so weakened and wounded, that there is little
left for us, save the honor and pleasure to stand upon, and insult these Sons
of Anak, who lie thus prostrate before us.

Let us then bravely despise and deride Death with all his Associates and
Seconds. Let us not so far disparage this great performance of our Lord, as to
receive the Spirit of Bondage again, to fear any of them. This would be to
blemish the glory of his Victory, as if he had left it imperfect; whereas he
was not only an absolute Conqueror of them all himself, Romans 8.37.
But has made us also more than Conquerours, through faith in him; and even
that faith he gives us also, whereby we overcome the World. He has not only
ransomed us from the Insolences and Severities of our Enemies; loosed our
Bands, knocked off our Shackles, and scattered our fears; but bids us fly in
upon the Rich Spoils, seize the glorious Prize; and advances us to the greatest
Privileges and Perferments. He not only settles us in a State of Peace and
Security, but of Grace and Glory. He has not only plucked the Sting out of
Death, but has left Honey in its stead; so that we may suck sweetness out of
that Strong One, Judge. 14.14.
and find Meat and Manna in that Eater. That which was threatened as the
greatest Punishment under the Law, is by our Saviors Victorious Resurrection
become a real Blessing; and under the Gospel it is little less than a Promise
and Privilege, that we shall all be changed. It was formerly esteemed an
unhappiness that we should dye: it would now be one if we should not. We should
be forced to sojourn in this Mesech, and be confined to dwell for ever in these
Tents of Kedar, were it not for Death, which is the happy gate to Everlasting
Life. Wherefore we have no reason to look upon it as Satan's Sergeant, or as
our Executioner; but as Christ's Messenger, and our Usher to Glory. Socrates his
Divinity raised him to such a height, as to tell his Philosophical Friend, that
his Enemies might kill, but could not hurt him; sure our Christianity then will
enable us to look upon Death, not so much as a tolerable Evil, but as the most
desirable good, and the greatest of Mercies: fitter for our Love and Courtship,
than for our Fear and Abhorrence. So that if an Angel from Heaven should bring
us the news that we should never die, we ought to account it as no Gospel, no
good Tidings, but rather as an Anathema to us. We need not shrug at the Grave
neither; for that cold and hard Lodging by our Saviors lying there is become
as warm and soft as a Bed of Down. That place of Stench and Noisomness, since
this Rose of Sharon was planted there, is more fragrant than a Bed of Spices.
It Is now not a Dungeon, but a Repository, wherein the Sacred Dust (the only
Relics) of the Saints are to be inshrined, till the last Trump shall call for
them again, to be built up into a new and living Temple for their own blessed
Souls and the holy Spirit of God to cohabite in for evermore.

And as we have little cause to fear, so less to love these Enemies, or to
enter into any secret friendships and Alliances with them any more; to make a
Covenant with Death, Isa. 28.15.
and to be at an Agreement with Hell [or the Grave] in the Prophets sense, i.
e. to persist in the way of Wickedness, and cherish those Sins in our bosom,
which are both His and Our Mortal Enemies; which cost him so dear, as his own
Blood to subdue; and which if they be suffered to revive, will be the death of
our Souls. Let us have a care that while he has fought our Battles, we do not
thus make war upon him. That would make this Victory over our Enemies, the
greatest overthrow of our selves; and call for a Lamentation instead of a
Triumph. For such a perverse Requital of so great Salvation, must
proportionably inhance our future Everlasting Punishment.

What then shall we render unto the Lord for all these mighty Benefits? Let us
light all our brightest Torches of Joy and Gladness, and kindle all our
Sacrifices of Praise and Thanksgiving, to this Eternal and glorious Conqueror,
who has wrought such wonders of Mercies for us, and destroyed those our Potent
and Cruel Enemies; Let us praise him not only with our Voices, but with our
Affections; in our Hearts and in our Lives; in Pious Remembrances, and pure
Conversations. The grateful Heathens used to Consecrate the Memory of those
Heroes who subdued their Enemies, and freed their Countries from infesting
Monsters and Giants: not only making them their Kings while they were on Earth,
but their Gods afterward in Heaven. And can we do less to our Victorious
General, who has vanquished so many Abaddons and Monsters for us; who has
destroyed a greater Devourer of Man's Flesh than the Minotaur, even Death it
self, in its own Labyrinth the Grave; and has quelled a more terrible Serpent,
than the many-headed Hydra, even that whose name is Legion. Certainly then to
obey him as our King, and to adore him as our God, is both Rational and
Christian. Why should we not Erect a Statue to his Honor (as Victors use to
have) not of Silver or Gold, or the Work of Men's Hands, but the Divine Image of
himself in our Hearts, for a perpetual Remembrance? Let us take the Cup of
Salvation, and sing Everlasting Praises to this Immortal Lord of Life, who was
content once to die, that we Mortals might live for ever: and when by his own
Nature, it was impossible for him so to do, assumed ours, to qualify himself
for Death for our sakes. To this Victorious King of Glory, who rose again to
give us the fuller assurance of the truth of his present, and of our future
Victory at the Resurrection; lastly, to this Triumphant God, who ascended
visibly and gloriously into Heaven, to show us the way thither, and to take
possession of it for us; who has in his Gospel thrown wide open the
Everlasting Gates of Glory, and exposed to our view all the Riches, the
Beauties, and Honors of his Kingdom; that we might behold the glorious
Furniture of those Eternal Mansions, he has prepared for us; and the never
fading Crowns of Immortality, hung out to edge our Appetites, and inflame our
Ardors to be partakers of them, and to support and animate us in all
Difficulties and Conflicts in our passage to this new Jerusalem: To him I say,
let us give (as is most due) all possible Praise and Adoration, both now and
for evermore.

And it could be no less than a firm assurance of this blessed Victory over
Death, and a clear prospect of this glorious Scene of Immortality beyond it,
which fixed this great and good Man (whose Obsequies we are now Celebrating) in
so steady and uniform a Course of Christianity in his Life, and Composed him
into such a Cheerfulness and Serenity of Spirit at his Death.

In shadowing out a more particular, though but faint Idea of this Excellent
Person, I need not borrow any Color from his Blood; nor reflect any Luster
upon his Character, from the shining Virtues and Noble Acts of his Ancestors;
which have Adorned his Family with many Royal Badges of their Loyalty and
Eminent Services to the Crown: though the Honourary Augmentation of a Hand and
Banner to their Arms, and of the Manor of Hanley with its Franchises and
Privileges to their Estate, will never suffer the brave Achievements of
Advancing the Black Princes Standard at the famous Battle of Cressey, and the
taking Prisoner Count Tanquervile the Norman, (that bitter Enemy to the English
Monarch and Nation) to be forgotten; not to mention, that the most Noble Order
of Bannerets, wherewith several of his Progenitors have been honored,
sufficiently proclaim their Martial Virtues and Performances.

But it being not from an Imputed, but Inherent Worth, that I design to
transmit his Memory to Posterity; I shall rather observe, that the greatest
Excellencies of his Ancestors seemed to Concenter in his Person. The singular
Piety of his Grandfather Sir Peter; the extraordinary Charity and Benignity of
his Uncle Francis; the Constancy and Fixedness in Religion of his Father; the
quickness and Gaiety of Spirit of his Mother, with the untainted Loyalty of his
whole Line; conspired with united Rays to render him the more Illustrious.

These hopeful Seeds of Virtue and Excellency being cast into his Original
Elements, were so well watered and cherished by his Careful and Pious Parents
in the first Education of his Green Age; so Cultivated and Improved by the
Liberal Sciences at the University in his Blooming Youth; and so Refined and
Finished afterward at City and Court; as rendered him a most Accomplished and
Useful Gentleman both to his Prince and Country.

The Natural Talents of his Mind were above the Common Standard. He was Endued
with a large Capacity and generous Amplitude of Soul. His Understanding was
able to penetrate and Master whatever he thought fit to turn it to. His Memory
so faithful as to retain every thing it laid hold on, but Injuries and
Vanities. His Judgment solid and clear. His Apprehension quick and sagacious;
and his Will always well disposed, and in a posture to act, as well as embrace
every thing that was good, and praise worthy. He had an absolute Command over
all his Passions, save only those Divine ones, (which it is the greatest freedom
and honor to obey) for though there were many things that might displease, yet
none could disturb him. He had no Anger ever sparkling in his Eyes; no Malice
rankling in his Breast; no Envy gnawing upon his Bowels. He knew no hatred of
any thing but Sin; no fear of any thing but God. His whole frame was so mixed
and interwoven, of so smooth and even a Web, that what Philosophy denies to the
finest of Bodies, was the peculiar Prerogative of his inward Composition,
Temperamentum ad Pondus.

In the happy Acquaintance and Converse I had with him for almost twenty years,
I never perceived in him the least Inclinations to any Immoral, Indecent, or
Dishonorable Action. He was free from all guile and disguise both in his
Dealings and Discourses; not using to wrap himself up in Clouds, the more
undiscernedly to carry on any mean or dark Designs. But esteemed it below him
to dissemble or disown what he judged fit to be either thought or done. He was
not so Complaisant indeed as to indulge in himself, or brook in others, the
Modish Humor of a Profane, Unclean, or Abusive Wit; much less the too
fashionable Dialect of Oaths and Maledictions; so that none came nearer to St.
James's Character of a Perfect Man, the not offending so much as in word. No
Pride strained his Behavior; Jam. 3.2.
no Superciliousness distorted his Looks; no Cynical Humor sowred his
Expressions. But I must not stand on these inferior Commendations; for though a
Negative Description be the highest we can give of God, yet it is the lowest
that can be given of a good Man.

His Social Qualities and Ornaments were too excellent in their kind to be
omitted. He had all the Natural Charms and Graces of a most winning Address,
and a sweet Conversation; which few that came within their happy Influence
could defend themselves from being taken with. None was ever endued with more
Candor and Ingenuity; more Frankness and Affability. He affected a Singularity
in nothing, but in a sincerity, and pitch of virtue above the Age. In every
thing, and under every Condition, he was so easy, free, and well pleased, as
made every one so too about him; which was not the fruit of any Labored Art of
Popularity, but the result of his happy Genius: Cheerfulness and Delight being
as inseparable from his Company, and streaming as easily and as naturally from
him, as Light from the Sun. His Temper and Deportment were so calm and
gracious, so sweet and obliging; that he attracted the Esteem and Love; and
entertained the Eyes and Hearts of all People. So that in him, if ever that
saying was really verified, That none ever departed sad out of his Company,
except that they so soon departed.

He Acquitted himself no less Incomparably in all his Private Relations: He was
the best of Husbands to a most Accomplished, Virtuous, and Excellent Lady,
which he chose out of the Honorable and Renowned Family of the Chicheley's;
and by whom he was answered with an Equal Agreeableness, Fidelity, and Conjugal
Affection. He was the Tenderest of Fathers to a hopeful and numerous Issue; of
which the surviving six Sons and five Daughters, do according to their Age show
Pregnant Symptoms of their Excellent Dispositions, and the fair Fruits of his
Paternal Care; in their Gentile and Liberal Education; in all things becoming
their Sex and Quality; and especially in their seasoning with the true
Principles of Honor, Virtue, and Religion.) How cautious and tender he was in
Marrying any of them without their full Consent, their hearty Affection and
free Choice, he put out of doubt to others, by raising one in himself, and
offering it as a Case of Conscience; Whether it was Lawful for a Man to bend or
incline the Affections of his Children, if Advantageous and Honorable Matches
were proposed; and finding the Negative maintained, he resolved to abide by it.
And according to these no less Prudent, than Indulgent Measures, a little
before his Death he disposed both his Eldest Son and Daughter into very
suitable and happy Marriages.

To his Tenants he was a good Landlord, if that Epithet could be purchased;
either by his so moderate and kind usage of them, when he came to his Estate,
as raised an envy in some of his Neighbors; or his frequent demanding no
greater Fine for three Lives upon an Expired Lease, than what he offered to
give them, for their surrendering up his Lands into his hand sagain.

His Friendships not being founded on Fancy or Interest, but on solid Reason
and Virtue, were durable and generous. He was faithful to his Trusts; of which
he had many. True to his Professions and Promises; which he held as sacred and
inviolable. Constant to his Friend in the greatest extremity of an Adverse
Fortune; and a ready Minister to him in all Offices of Love and Service; a
Counselor in his Doubts; a Comforter in his Distress; a Pillar in his
Weakness; and a Pilot in his Danger.

That he was Master of a fair Estate, was only his good Fortune, and the praise
of his Ancestors; but it was his Commendation, that he was a prudent Manager,
and a Considerable Improver of it; particularly in the Addition he made to it
of that Noble Seignory, the Parliamentary Borough and Barony of Newton, in
this Neighborhood. His Mansion House he so far Rebuilt and Ennobled (partly in
Effect and partly in Design, and preparations for its finishing) as may well
nigh support what was said of Augustus in relation to Rome: Invenit Lateritiam,
reliquit Marmoream. In the projecting whereof, and of another for Gods Service,
as himself was the chief Designer, so in Architecture in general he was a great
Master. Yet the Inward Model of his House, its Government, was no less
Excellent and Regular, than its Outward Structure. For his Menial Servants, he
always made choice of such Persons, as were Intelligent, Civil and Gentile;
such as besides the discharge of their proper Offices, might by their general
Course of Sobriety and Industry, by their good Manners and Ingenious Arts; and
not by any Vice or Vanity; become Exemplary in the Family: and to whom he was a
most gentle, kind, and bountiful Master, according to their deserts. His
Entertainments upon Occasion, were very Splendid and Magnificent; and managed
with that great Decorum, Ease, and Stilness, as if they had been but their
Ordinary Meals. How welcome all Persons were to his Table, has as many
Witnesses as it had Guests: where there was always the greatest plenty that
could be on this side excess; and which he seasoned with that generous Freedom
and Cheerfulness of Humor, that gave a pleasant Relish to all the rest. In
short, There was such an Affluence of all things, so great a resort of Persons
of Quality, and such a peculiar Port and Gentile Air appeared through the whole
Family, that his House might very well be styled a Country-Court, and Lime the
Palace to the County-Palatine of Chester.

And because some may conceive these however laudable Qualities I have touched
upon, to be but of the lower form, I must add, that (besides that a Prudent
Conduct, even in the smallest Affairs, is a true signature of a great Mind) it
is not for want of other Subject in him, nor any abatement to his greater
Virtues, which eminently shone out in those higher Capacities and Stations,
whereto he was deservedly called by his Kind and Country: being furnished with
all proper Endowments for the weighty Debates in the Senate; and for the
discharge of his Public Offices both Civil and Military at home. For though
there was no Man less fond of Business, yet none more fit for it; or who
performed his Trusts with more Courage and Integrity: of which he gave
sufficient Testimony in a steady and impartial Administration of Justice; in a
strict preservation of the Peace; in a Provident Care for the Poor; in a
constant protection of Probity and Innocence; and in a resolute opposition to
all the bold Vices and Debaucheries of the times; as particularly, in the
suppression of Schism in the Conventicles, of Faction in the Towns, and
Mutinies in the Field; and that in the most Critical Junctures both of Church
and State. In his whole Conduct pursuing the public good, pointing at those
great ends of Government assigned by St. Peter; 1 Pet. 2.14.
the Punishment of Evil Doers, and the praise of them that do well.

His Love to his Country was not more sincere and conspicuous than his Loyalty
to his Prince; which waited not (as many others did) till the rising of the
Sun, our late restored Sovereign; but it broke out in the most dismal midnight
of a prosperous Usurpation; when Loyalty was punished as High Treason, and
Faction rewarded as Meritorious; when the name of a King was held as
Antichristian in the State, as that of a Bishop in the Church; and nothing was
Crowned in the Land, so much as in a Metaphor, save only Rebellion with
success; nor any thing accounted more worthy of Consecration, than Schism and
Sacrilege. Even then he engaged in the Cheshire Rising to restore his Exiled
Sovereign; though being surprised by the Enemy, he was prevented from appearing
in that unsuccessful Enterprise, of which both these Palatine Counties, (the
Stage of the Action) and York Castle (the place of his Imprisonment) are
unquestionable Witnesses; when in all likelihood he had fallen as a Martyr for
his Fidelity to King Charles the Second, as his great Ancestor Sir Piers Leigh
had done before, for his Loyalty to that unfortunate Prince Richard the Second
of that name; had not Providence interposing by a sudden and happy Restitution
of the King, left him only in the lower Class of Loyal Confessors: rescuing him
for those subsequent faithful Services he afterward paid that Prince of Blessed
Memory. For though he was actually in every Parliament during his whole Reign,
yet he never joined any Faction in the House, nor so much as once Voted against
the Crown; which owed not its rise to any Court-flattery or Ambitious Designs,
but to that well grounded Maxim, That the Ease and Weal of all the Members,
depend not more necessarily upon the good Estate of the Head, than the
happiness of the People does upon their Sovereigns Welfare. This Loyalty of his
was not mercenary and sordid, but so truly generous and Christian as to keep
above the reach of Passion, Popularity, and Interest; neither was it of the
Phanatick and Unstable Kind, which displays it self no longer than the
Prerogative shines upon it, or it may serve a turn; but it was a constant,
uniform Church of England Loyalty, which is always ready and zealous to
sacrifice every thing to the Sovereigns Service, (let his Religion and Temper
be what it will) (be it Estate or Blood) save only the Cause of God and the
Church; which as they are always inseparable, so may they be for ever
insuperable. He was Proof against all Discontents, because incapable of any
Disappointments. For though his Attendance upon the King and Countries Service
cost him many Thousand pounds, yet he never designed any private Advantage from
either; but proceeding upon the Heroic Principles of Honor, Duty, and Love to
both, thought himself amply recompensed with the satisfaction that sprung up in
his mind from the sense of such worthy and generous Actions. And this is the
Triumph of our Loyalty to our King, as well as of our Love to God, to exert
them both without so much as any prospect of Reward. Hence it was that he had
the honor to be so particularly Esteemed, and Personally beloved by the two
Royal Brothers under whom he lived, as to be entrusted by them in the greatest
Offices which his choice of a Country Life would admit of; in all which he
acquitted himself with such signal Fidelity, that (besides the many honorable
and kind Attestations of King Charles to that purpose) his present Majesty at a
solemn Debate about a reform of the Deputy Lieutenants, when the name of Leigh
of Lime was mentioned, immediately declared, that he himself would undertake
for that Gentleman. And when in his Royal Progress at Chester he heard of His
last fatal Indisposition, he gave an evident Testimony of his great value and
kindness for him, in a free Commendation of his Person, and a Pathetical
Condolance for his Sickness.

As to his Religion, he was a true Son of that purest branch of Christ's holy
Church, the Church of England; from whom he sucked those Pious and Loyal
Principles, which led him on to all his Virtuous and great Actions. In whose
Doctrines he was so fully Instructed, and so firmly Established, and in whose
Offices so well satisfied and exercised, as to continue fixed in a constant and
devout use of her Liturgy; in a frequent and comfortable participation of the
Blessed Sacrament according to her usage; and in an unalterable adherence to
her Communion in all its branches, in despite of all the Arguments and Motives
both of Friends and Enemies to the contrary. For notwithstanding his near
Relation to, his intimate Friendship and frequent Converse with many
Considerable Persons of the Romish Faith in this County; and although in the
other, where he lived, he could hardly breath out of a Schismatical Air; yet he
kept himself untainted by either Extreme, in all Trials and Temptations. So
that the mouth of Envy and Malice it self must henceforth be for ever sealed
up, from calling him either Church Papist, (as he has been by the one) or
Church Puritan (as by the other.) And as no Personal Considerations or
Interests were able to draw him from the Church; so all the Storms and Tempests
which discharged their fury against her, had no other effect, than to make him
stick the closer to her, both for her security and his own; judging it highly
reasonable, to be wanting in nothing to save that Church, wherein he assuredly
hoped to be saved himself. And as the most effectual means for that happy end,
he daily prayed for the peace of this Jerusalem, as he had formerly wept when
he saw her in the dust. These two, Prayers and Tears, being all the Weapons she
allows to be employed in her Defense. And knowing that They shall prosper That
love her and devoutly tread her Courts, he was a diligent frequenter of that
place where Gods Honor dwells; and did not content himself to sit there as an
idle and unconcerned Spectator (as the manner of too many is) but performed his
part with so much Devotion and Exactness, that the Ministers themselves, if
they equaled, did not exceed him. And yet beside his constant Attendance upon
the Public Church Solemnities, he never failed of his Daily Service in his
Domestic Chapel, nor of his yet more retired and secret Devotion in his
Closet; wherein how hearty and sincere he was, those excellent Prayers and
Meditations of his own composing for that purpose do sufficiently testify. But
considering withal, that the Church was not the only place to exercise
Religion in, but that the whole World was the proper and great Theater whereon
its principal parts were to be acted; namely those indispensable Commands of
Natural and Eternal Religion, a faithful Service of God and our Generation, in
a Prudent, Pious and Moral Conversation: he took up neither with good Words nor
good Intentions, being as little satisfied with a Talkative Divinity, as a
Notional Faith; but went on to good Works; applying himself to all Real Acts of
Beneficence in every kind. To the Indigent he showed himself both Compassionate
and Bountiful; no less Cheerful than Charitable in ministering to their
Necessities: scarce seeing a poor Person at a distance, but he prepared to meet
him with his Alms in his hand, to prevent his being asked for what he esteemed a
just Debt, and so doubled the value by the freeness of his gift. And whom he
thus remembered in his life time he forgot not at his death, bequeathing
Considerable Sums to their use, in the several Towns where he was blessed with an
Estate. To the Injured and Helpless Persons he willingly offered himself, as a
Shield for their Defense from the violence and oppression of the unreasonable
and powerful Man. Among the Contentions he was so blessed a Peacemaker, that he
might well be styled the Civil Conciliator of his Country. He Composed many
Differences and prevented more; the former by Mediation, the latter by his
Awful Authority, his healing Advices, and the peaceable Examples which he
himself gave in this kind. For in matters of greatest moment, touching his own
Estate, he was so complying and forbearing before he complained; so earnest and
solicitous for an accommodation when injured; and so patient in waiting for a
friendly issue afterward, that he has not escaped Censure sometimes even from
his Friends, for departing from his undoubted Right and Interest, rather than
make any breach with his Neighbors, to the disturbance of his inward quiet and
outward peace. He had a considerable Difference under his Arbitration, at the
time of his Death, which though it is to be lamented he lived not to finish,
that the Parties concerned might have reaped the peaceable fruits of his
successful endeavors upon Earth; yet it is not to be doubted but he has met
with the happy reward of his good purpose in Heaven. This Gospelspirit of
peaceableness and gentleness, of universal good will and Charity, was by long
use so incorporated into his Constitution, and become so natural to him, that
he was willing to become all things to all Men, to do good unto some. So that
whosoever had occasion to make use of him, found in him according to his
particular Exigence, the faithfulness of a Friend, the Wisdom of a Counselor,
the Uprightness of a Judge, and the protection of a Patron.

And if all this were not Evidence enough of his true Christian Piety in
general, and of his unfeigned Love and Zeal for the Church of England in
particular, we could ex Abundanti present you with a further Heroic proof of
it, in this Parish; where he has at his own proper Charges built a Decent and
Elegant Chapel, and taken care to Establish a Competent Maintenance for a
constant Ministry therein for the Public Worship of God, Secundum usum
Anglicanum. Wherein he showed himself no less the Son of the Divine, than of
the Gentleman; deriving from the former those Pious Affections and Inclinations
to edify the Church in a literal, as his Father had done in a spiritual sense;
and from the latter, the Abilities to perfect so worthy a Design. And as by the
ordinary course of Generation, he made his descent from; so by this
extraordinary Act of Sacred Munificence, he made an ascent to the Dignity and
Honor of his great Grandfather Sir Peter Legh, who was the sole Founder of the
Parochial Chapel of Disley in the Parish of Stock-Port; in which for a better
Augmentation of the Ministers Salary, this worthy Gentleman not only gave
Twenty pounds a year in his life time, but appointed the continuance of the
same after his Death, till his Son should come to Age. Which Magnificent Pieces
of Piety afford a noble Example to all Men of Estates, of honoring God with
their substance, according to Solomon's Advice, Prove. 3.9.
as well as with cheaper services; and will cast an Eternal Glory about his
Name and Memory. This honor of building a House for the Almighty to dwell in,
Holy David was more Ambitious of, than of being the Founder of the Royal Palace
in Sion for himself and the succeeding Kings of Israel. Which though God denied
him, yet he dismissed him not without both a Commendation and Reward, for his
desiring and designing to do it. And that Man's praise is enrolled in the
Everlasting Register of the Gospel, who loved his Nation and built them a
Synagogue. Luke 7.5.


But notwithstanding the largeness of his Heart, and the liberality of his
Hand, his constant Hospitality and Private Charities; his Public Expenses and
Pious Works and Donations: yet at the foot of the Account, at his Death, his
Personal Estate rose up to such an unexpected height, as can hardly be
Accounted for upon any other Hypothesis than that Divine Principle, That the
Blessing of the Lord makes rich, Prove. 10.22. And that he replenisheth the
Treasures of those that love him, Prove. 8.21.
when emptied in his Service. Accordingly this good Man seems to have shared in
the promised Reward of Godliness in this life, and that in a higher degree than
the Widow of Sarepta; for while her Hospitable Barrel and Cruse kept at a stand
only and wasted not, his Wealth by his Religious Disbursements overflowed, 1
King. 17.14.
and like the true Riches of the Mind, improved by using; and so became an
eminent Instance and Justification of that sacred Paradox, That there is that
scatters, and yet increases; Prove. 11.24.

In short, This Excellent Person like an unspotted Pearl, was a Man of many and
bright Virtues, without the least stain of any known Vice. In whom we found the
Loyalty and Charity of a Church of England Man; the Piety and Purity of a
Primitive Christian; the Public Spiritedness and Magnanimity of an Hero, with
the Zeal and Constancy of a Martyr. All which Virtues were in him such
Originals in their several kinds, as taken apart may challenge our Imitation;
but in Conjunction demand our Wonder.

And now reflecting upon what I have done, in attempting to draw a Character,
where 'twas fitter to pay Admiration; as it may appear to be my Crime, so also
my Justification; the former for the Essay; the latter for the ill success of
it. For though the Excellency of the Theme may Impeach my Confidence for
undertaking it at all, yet it will at the same time Apologize for my Deficiency
in performing it no better; the worth of this great Man being such, and so well
known, that it does not need, though it deserve, a better Orator. Besides, the
great commotion which I feel in my own Breast for the particular share I bear
in this general loss has so scattered my thoughts, that it ought to be
admitted not only to excuse a negligence of Style and a disorderly Method, but
to justify them too; as most proper for an Argument too bulky for the
Undertaker; and most becoming the tumultuariness of that Passion which has
possessed my Soul.

Having now attended this Extraordinary Man through the more remarkable and
Illustrious Passages of his Life, we come to the last dark scene of it, that of
his Death; which was uniform and of a piece with all the rest. For as he lived
the Life, so he died the Death of the Righteous, in the Unity and Communion of
the Church of England; thereby giving the most absolute Pattern of an Excellent
Christian in both. This sad cloudy part he adorned with the most vigorous
exercise of all those glorious Graces, Faith, Hope, and Charity, wherewith he
had so richly furnished himself in his life time; and of all those other Divine
habits peculiar to that state: not only of Patience and Meekness, Christian
Courage, and an Entire Resignment to the Divine Disposal, but of Earnest
Longings and Breathings of Soul to be with Christ. In all things performing
this last part so gracefully, as when he went off the Stage not only to deserve
the Plaudits of all good Men and Angels to whom he was a Spectacle, but to
receive an Euge and a Crown from his great Master, who has doubtless exalted
him to a State of full Recompense and Transcendent Glory with himself in
Heaven; to his great and unconceivable Comfort, though to our no less great and
inexpressible Sorrow. His setting like that of the Sun (whose unlimited
influence and bounty he emulated) though it creates a Day and Joy to the other
World, leaves us in the Night and Darkness of gloomy thoughts for our loss. A
loss which must be beholding to time to be understood, and to Eternity to be
forgotten in; a loss that is not confined within the narrow limits of a Family
or a Town; within the Precincts of a Hundred, or a County; but it is National and
Epidemical; it is the loss of so great and good a Man, that the Gentry could not
have lost a more faithful Friend, the Magistracy a more worthy Associate, nor
the Country a more Nobler Patriot. Than whom the King could not have lost a
more Loyal Subject, the Clergy a Stouter Champion, the Church a truer Son, nor
the World a greater Example of all that is truly generous, virtuous, and praise
worthy. Yet we ought not only with patience but cheerfulness to Contemplate and
acquiesce in this great Conjugation of our losses, they being also infinitely
overbalanced by his gain of that Eternal and exceeding weight of glory, which
we are all aspiring unto, and wherewith he is now certainly Crowned amidst an
innumerable company of Angels, and of the Spirits of Just Men made perfect in
the City of the Living God, in whose presence is fullness of Joy, and at whose
right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

What we have hitherto heard and seen, from both these Texts, (I mean the Word
and Work of God) may yield some useful Inferences, that may reach those who are
nearest concerned in this sad occasion. If it be true, that Death to the godly
is now not only a Conquered Enemy, but a real and a Confederate Friend; not so
much a Curse or a Cross, as a great Deliverance and Blessing; and if we ought
to rejoice and give thanks unto God for the Victory he has gained and given us
over it; then surely we ought to be far from murmuring or immoderate Mourning,
when either we, or any of our Fellow Soldiers, are called out to Triumph over
this Enemy, and take possession of those Conquests; as we do in part at Death:
But on the contrary rejoice and give thanks.

Hence we may infer a Double Duty. First the Abstaining from excessive sorrow:
Secondly Admitting of moderate and suitable Joy.

First we should hence Learn to Abstain from Excessive sorrow. The voice of
nature in the Heathens granted a Toleration for men to Lament their Deceased
Friends, and to wait upon them with Tears and Sorrow to their Graves; But she
bestowed her Praises and Encomiums upon those only who bore themselves bravely
above it. Among the Jews (...). Philo Vit. Mosis l. 3^
though mourning was not accounted a Sin, yet such a Defect and Defilement as
Excluded them for a certain time from the use of holy things. And though
Christianity it self has not Entertained so much of Stoicism, as to cancel all
natural affections, and to recommend a perfect Apathy to her Disciples; yet she
undertakes to Limit and Direct their Motions; to assign them their proper
Objects, and their due Measures. She knows that Love is such a Powerful Cement
as works not only a close and firm Adherence, but such a strange Coalition, nay
such a perfect unity of the Lovers hearts, that death cannot snatch away the
one, without Tearing a piece from the other also; and so leave the survivor
under a kind of necessity of smarting and bleeding for it. She therefore
expects, not that men should be insensible of their loss, but only temperate in
their sorrow. She desires they would not show themselves so much Friends to the
Dead, as to become enemies to the Living, to God, and to themselves. Hence S.
Paul's admonition to the Thessalonians, 1 These. 4.13.
concerning them which are asleep, is not that they sorrow not at all, but that
they sorrow not as others who have no hope. What a great disparagement and a
Reproach would it be to our Religion, if we could not show an equal courage at
least with the Heathens under the loss of Friends, which many of them sustained
not only with moderation but unconcernedness. Could we in truth urge that
Argument for our Lamentation which Rachel alleged for her refusing comfort
upon the Death of her Children, because they are not; or did we not really
believe a Resurrection and eternal Life, we might have more pretense for an
exorbitance in this kind: but now, seeing it appears from what has been said,
and all Christians acknowledge that death can have no other force upon a man
than was ascribed of Old to Gyges his Ring; not to unmake, but only to make him
Invisible for a season: why should we so grossly and meanly deny that in our
practice, which we so openly and constantly avow in our Creed? and in despite
of all the evidence of Scripture, and Specious profession of our Faith, by our
unreasonable despondency tell the world that in truth we are destitute of all
hope; that we not only question, but quite despair of the being, or the well
being of the dead. For can we believe that they shall rise again, and yet thus
bitterly bemoan them? what should we have done, if God had left them under the
power of Death, without any Resurrection? nay what should we have done, if we
had reason to believe that he had doomed them to the second, and Everlasting
death? we hereby give too just occasion to the Enemies of our Religion, to
deride and expose our Hypocrisy, and the Contradiction of our Lives to our
Principles; and to wound it through our sides? nay in effect we do it our
selves; for every impatient exclamation, is a kind of Blasphemy against our
holy Faith; and every deep sigh and groan a palpable Mockery and Ridiculing the
Article of Eternal life. Upon which considerations (...). Chrysostom: in Heb. c. 2.
Hom. 4.
St. Chrysostom judges the indulgence of immoderate mourning at Funerals, so
scandalous as to deserve Excommunication; and indeed whatever may be the
pretense, there is nothing at the bottom but a deep tincture of Infidelity which
gives birth and nourishment to this unruly passion. For who can believe that
the Son of God himself died, and yet so impatiently lament that any of the
Children of men should die also? who can believe that he conquered Death and
the Grave, rose again and ascended triumphantly into Heaven, and is there sat
down at the right hand of the Father; and yet lie under such distractions of
mind, when any of our Relations are called out of the body to follow him into
his Kingdom. We do hereby raise an evil report of that good Land, the Heavenly
Canaan; we discover a mean esteem of that blessed seat, Abraham's bosom, whither
good men are carried at death by the Angels; nay we offer an affront to our
Savior himself in deploring their condition as miserable, whom Faith assures
us to be with him in Paradise partaking of his Glories and made like unto him.
And hence St. Paul who had been rapt up into the third Heavens, reckoned it a
Gain to him to dye and to be with Christ. And doubtless one assured thought of
the Christians Heaven, one single glance of the Glories wherewith our Friend is
Crowned, would effectually quash and becalm all those stormy passions, and
impetuous commotions of Soul which we suffer for him. So that in final
resolution, Immoderate mourning is so unchristian a passion, that it evidently
betrays our want of those Gospel-Graces, either Faith in the Doctrine of the
Resurrection, and future happiness; or hope and Charity; if we bewail our
Friend as if he had no share in them. Whereas both his Life and Death were the
greatest indications to the contrary; for as he lived not the common Life, so
he dyed not the common Death of all men, but the peculiar and distinguishing
one of Gods Children, amidst the Ministeries, and in the embraces of those who
would willingly have sacrificed their own lives to have redeemed his; amidst
the prayers of his dearest Relations, returning them his last Counsels and
Blessings; under the greatest calmness of Spirit, and clearness of
understanding to the Fatal moment, his happy Soul being constantly exercised
and inflamed with the purest and most ardent devotion, overflowing with
Spiritual Comforts and glorious Expectations, till at last it went off as it
were in a holy Ecstasy on the wings of Divine Love and Heavenly Meditations,
into the boundless Regions of Light, and Glory, and Immortality.

2ly and Lastly, let us not only shut up natures Floodgates, and quit our
selves like men; but let us open the Channels of grace, and rise up to the
Dignity of Christians, and to the Example which the great Apostle gives us in
the Text; by taking up a song of Joy and Thanksgiving to God, for the happy
deliverance and exaltation of our Departed friend. There is nothing more usual,
nor perhaps more natural for human Minds, than in their affections and
inclinations especially to fly from one extreme to another. Man's whole life is
but a Constant Vibration betwixt the opposite Passions of hope and fear; of
Grief and Joy: which are the Systole and Diastole of the Mind, Alternatly and
almost necessarily succeeding one another. And Tears are as natural Expressions
of Extraordinary Joy, as of common Sorrow. Let us try then the Experiment in
the present Case, and see how happily we can Change the Irrational and dull
Passion of sadness, into that Angelick and Spritely one of cheerfulness and
gladness of Heart: By engaging our passionate and melting Souls in the Divine
and Pathetick transports of Joy and Exultation with this Triumphing Saint: By
Lanching as it were out of the Body, to fly up after him into those Orbs of
Blessedness above, to be present at his Coronation, and to behold how he Reigns
and Shines in the Kingdom of Glory. At least let us turn our Condoleances into
Congratulations; Anoint our Heads and put on both Festival Robes and Spirits,
at this time of his happy Inauguration. How unsuitable are our mourning weeds,
to those white Raiments, with which he is now Arrayed. How Incongruous are our
sad cries and Ditties, to his Joyful Hymns and sweet Hallelujahs. Sure his
blessed Condition which has Advanced him above the Benefit, (though still
below the Addresses and Adorations) of our Prayers is a fitter subject for
Thanksgiving, than Lamentation. One of the best Arguments of true Love is the
sympathizing, in both fortunes, with the party beloved. But what a Strange and
Ridiculous proof do they offer of their Affection, who break their hearts with
Sorrow, because their friend is Transported with Joy: who suffer their own
spirits to be the more Dejected, by how much his is exalted? like the
Representation of the heavenly bodies in the water, the higher the Objects are
in Reality above its surface, the Lower does their Image and Counterpart seem
to sink beneath it. Let us rather Ascend with him in Divine Meditations, and
raised Affections, into the highest heavens. Let us Rejoice with him, who does
now Rejoice, and Sing with him, who is now Singing a new song of glory and
praise, and thanksgiving to Him that sits upon the Throne, for the infinite
mercy of this his happy Translation. There Is none who had any true affection
for him here, but would be desirous to have as much Converse with him still as
is possible. Now the only way, and the highest degree of keeping up a spiritual
Correspondence, a holy Communion with him, is by doing Gods will on Earth, as
he is doing it in heaven; by gloryfying our Creator at his footstool, as he is
doing before his Throne; by bearing (though it be never so mean) a part in that
Universal Consort and Anthem of Divine praise, which is Maintained by the
Church Ecumenical; whereof he is singing the highest and sweetest Notes in the
August Cathedral of heaven. There is Doubtless joy among the Angels at the
Coronation of a Saint, as well as at the Conversion of a Sinner; and if there
be no Expressions but of Sorrow amongst men on that Occasion, what is this but
to walk directly opposite to the Inhabitants of that upper world; and to
justify this Churches title of Militant on Earth, upon this (if there were no
other) reason, that it Clashes with the ways and interests of that which is
Triumphant in Heaven. Let us wipe off this black Infamy from the glorious name
of Christians. Let Atheists and Libertines, whose hopes Expire with their
breath, go whining about in the Low and Lamentable style of Melancholic and
Doleful Elegies at the Death of their friends; and of Despairing Declamations,
and bitter Curses upon the Cruelty of the Fates. It becomes the Enlightened Race
of Christ's Disciples who profess themselves heirs of Eternity to make a higher
and nobler Flight, and in a generous and heroic strain to sing a Triumphant
Song at the Departure of those, who Die in the Lord; and to Congratulate their
happy Advancement with a cheerfulness of Spirit not inferior to that wherewith
they now possess it. This which I propose is no Impossibility in Nature, nor
Romance in Divinity; but a practical Mystery and a Noble eminence of Religion.
The loving our Mortal Enemies, and the rejoicing at the Death of our dearest
friends are perhaps two of the greatest heights in all Christianity; and the
latter seems no harder a task, than the former. The one being but a Reconciling
the Antipathies, the other the divorcing the sympathies of humane Minds. A
pitch this, which was oftener Reached by the Strength of Nature and reason in
the more considering Heathens than the former. The Thracians who mourned at the
Nativity, used to rejoice at the Funerals of their Friends. The Egyptians
Celebrated the Obsequies of their Prophet Isis; The People of Salamis of their
King Evagoras; and the old Massilienses of their Chiefest Friends; not with
sorrowful Lamentations and Cries; but with Feasts and Entertainments; with
Plays and Shows; with Music and Dancing; with Songs and joyful Acclamations,
as for those who were entering upon great Honors and Preferments. Whereas we
run counter to the common stream of nature, as well as to the custom and reason
of those Nations, if at the birth of our Friends, when they weep, we rejoice;
and at their Death when they rejoice, we weep and lament. And though the Author
of nature our blessed Savior wept for Lazarus, yet if we allow the Doluit
Lazarum non dormientem Christus, sed potius resurgentem. Hieron. Consol. ad
Tyras. It. Council. Toletan. 3. Can. 22.
Fathers Descant, it was not for his death, which freed him from the Miseries
of this world; but for his rising from the Dead, which would again expose him
to them. And Religion recommended to the first and best Christians this more
suitable and cheerful practice of Rejoicing at their friends Death; not only
for the Pagans consideration, that they rest from their Labors, and all the
troubles of this Life; but upon a higher reason also, that their works follow
them, and that they are admitted (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 4 in Heb. (...) Nazianz.
in laud. Cesarii. Hieronym. ad O ean. Epitaph. Fabiolae. It. ad Eustach.
Epitaph. Paulae.
into the Joy of their Lord. For the Ancient Church had their gladsome Torches,
and joyful Hymns, and Psalms in their Offices of burial, which they sung at
their Funerals in Testimony of their hope in the Resurrection; and in token
that the Christian Combatants, having now Conquered, were Crowned and advanced
to glory; praising and thanking God for the same, taking Comfort to themselves,
and giving Honor to the person departed: some Footsteps of which Primitive
usage seem still Legible in the Customs of those places among us where Psalms
are sung all the way while the Body is Carried to the Grave. Antiquity
celebrated the anniversary memorials of their Saints also, not with the
drooping and Melancholic ceremonies of tears and cries, nor in the Mourning
habit of Sackcloath and Ashes; but with the most splendid Scenes of Mirth and
Festivity; with the sweetest expressions of Joy and Thanksgiving. And Doubtless
if we had the same vigorous faith and hope which they had, we should not fail
of showing the same serenity of brow, and alacrity of spirit, upon the like
occasions. This is neither an unpracticable, nor a very difficult province to
him that has learned to Live by Faith; to him that not only confesses with his
mouth, but believes with his heart this grand Principle in Religion, of every
man's being after Death, and of the good man's being happy; nor lastly to him,
who in our present Case shall be so just as to believe, that this good man, to
whom we are paying these last Offices of Piety, is entered into the perfections
and joys of Eternity. Whose Glory though it be shut up, and skreen'd from our
eyes below, yet (as the Sun in an Eclipse) it opens and Displays it self
Illustriously to them above. Min gling beams with those bright Stars of the
Morning, the Angels and Cherubims, he is now securely placed in the City of
God, actually Triumphing over Death and Sin; for he can now sin no more, and
therefore can Die no more. His Soul may defy them both and say O Death! Sting
me now if thou can; O Sin! Poison me now, if thou art able. His Body also
resting in hope, may say to the Grave; Rejoice not against me, O mine Enemy:
for though I am fallen I shall rise again, Mich. 7.8.
Though I ly in Darkness, the Lord shall be a Light unto me.

What our Savior said of Jairus's Daughter is true of our Departed Friend,
that he is not Dead but Sleeps, or indeed but one part of him sleeps, his
Body; for his Soul is awake, and sings in Heaven. Nay he Lives on Earth too;
for in many respects Death had no Dominion over him. His Fame still Lives, and
will for ever, in the Mouths of all good men, that knew him. His Blood is still
warm and flows in the veins of his promising Issue. His virtues and the noble
Idea of his great mind still Lives, and fairly Dawns forth, in the hopeful Heir
of his Family; which God grant he may as fully inherit, as he does his outward
Fortune; Or rather may a double portion of the Fathers spirit rest upon the
Son; that he who Succeeds, may (if possible) Exceed him also, in all things
that are great, and honorable, virtuous, and praiseworthy: That he may grow
up to be a support to all the tender Branches, and a Joy to the Disconsolate
Members of that Large family; And that in time he may fill up the great
vacancies made by his Fathers Death, in all stations, whether private or
public, both with satisfaction to others, and honor to himself; and so become
an Ornament both to his Name and Country.

To conclude with St. Paul in his words following the Text; Let us give thanks
to God for giving us and all Christians the victory over Death, and the Grave,
and Sin, Through our Lord Jesus Christ. Let us give thanks to God for this
particular victory, which we assuredly hope he has given our Departed brother
over all his Enemies. Let his Dear Consort give thanks to God and Rejoice, not
that the beloved guest of her bosom is snatched from her; but that He is now in
the Embraces of his Blessed Savior, and Ravished with Ecstasies of Divine Love.
Let his Dutiful Children give thanks and Rejoice; not that He who gave them a
being in this world, is taken out of it himself; but that they had a Father,
who in his Life gave them an Example of great virtue; and left behind him at
his Death, a Name more fragrant than precious Ointment. Let us all rejoice and
give hearty thanks to God, for the great Ministeries and Comforts which he
vouchsafed us in him, during his abode with us, and for the Merciful and
seasonable Deliverance of him out of the Dangers, Temptations, and Miseries of
this sinful world; Beseeching him in the Churches excellent prayer, That of his
Gracious goodness, he would shortly accomplish the Number of his Elect, and
hasten his Kingdom: That we meeting again with this happy Soul, and All those
other that are Departed in the true Faith of his holy name, may have our
Consummation and bliss, both in Body and Soul, In his Eternal and Everlasting
Glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.

