A VINDICATION OF Dr. Sherlock's SERMON CONCERNING The Danger of Corrupting the
Faith by Philosophy.

IN ANSWER TO SOME Socinian Remarks.

By WILLIAM SHERLOCK, D. D. Dean of St. Paul's, Master of the Temple, and
Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON: Printed for W. Rogers, at the Sun against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetstreet. MDCXCVII.

To the Right Honorable Sir EDWARD CLARKE, LORD MAYOR: And to the Honorable
Court of Aldermen.
MY LORD,
I Beg leave to Present Your Lordship with the Vindication of my Sermon lately
Published by the Order of Your Court, against the Cavils, Calumnies, and wilful
Misrepresentations of a Socinian Writer. The Argument is of that great
Consequence that it deserves to be defended; and this Pamphleteer has so rudely
reflected upon the Honor and Sincerity of the Court, for their Order to Print
it, that I looked upon my self under a double Obligation, to Defend so
Important a Truth, and in that to justify Your Lordship's Order. I pray God
rebuke that perverse Spirit of Infidelity and Heresy which is gone abroad in
the World, and secure the Faith of Christians from all the Arts and
Insinuations of Impostors. That God would bless Your Lordship's Government, and
preserve this Great City from all Temporal and Spiritual Evils* is the hearty
Prayer of,

MY LORD, Your Lordship's, Most Obedient Servant, William Sherlock.

A VINDICATION OF Dr. SHERLOCK'S Sermon before my LORD MAYOR, etc.
WHEN I received the threatening and boasting Message from some busy Factors of
the Socinian Fraternity, what work they would make with my late Sermon before
my Lord Mayor, concerning the Danger of corrupting the Faith by Philosophy, my
greatest Concernment was, how to meet with their Answer, which usually comes
last to my hands, and how to bear the Drudgery of reading it; for their
Arguments have been spent long since, and that little Wit they had is now
degenerated into Railing. That scurrilous Treatment they have lately given to
so many Excellent Persons, especially to that Great Man the Bishop of
Worcester, is a fair Warning to all who dare oppose them, what they must
expect: And besides the Experience of their many former Civilities, I had more
than ordinary reason to expect it now, they being touched in a very sensible
part, without any other Defense to make: And this Author has not deceived my
Expectations; for upon a Perusal of his Remarks, I find nothing of Argument, a
very little Wit, and abundance of Railing. His Wit and Railing be to himself;
but I am sorry I can find nothing that looks so like an Argument, as to
administer occasion for any useful Discourse. This there is no help for; if Men
will write Books without any Arguments to be answered, there is nothing to be
done, but only to show that they have offered nothing to the purpose, or that
needs an Answer: And this will be done in a few words; for he has disputed at
large against what I never said nor thought, but has not one word against any
part of the Argument of that Sermon.

His Title Page pretends a great Zeal for the Doctrine of the Catholic Church,
and of the Church of England, concerning the Blessed Trinity: Which is as true,
as that Richard Baldwin printed this Pamphlet, who has publicly disowned it in
Print: But though a Socinian Conscience can digest such Godly Cheats, as a
piece of Wit and Artifice, yet a Wise Man would not venture on them, because
Mankind hate to be abused, and grow very jealous of Men of Tricks. And yet had
we to deal with Modest Men, it would be thought a little of the latest for a
Socinian to talk of defending the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, and of the
Church of England, concerning the Blessed Trinity: For their Cant about Real
and Nominal Trinitarians, and Three Infinite Minds and Spirits, is too well
known to pass for so much as a Jest any longer; and till they can defend the
Judgment of their Disinteressed Person a little better than by scorning the
Answer, which they will never be able to make any other Reply to, it were time
for them, could they find any thing else to say in the room of it, to let that
alone. And yet this is what he would bring this present Dispute to, if he knew
how: He often flirts at Three Infinite Minds and Spirits, though there is no
such Expression in the whole Sermon; but still he says I intimate this in
asserting a Real Trinity: Now if Three Infinite Minds and Spirits be essential
to the Notion of a Real Trinity, (as his Inference supposes) it is the best
Vindication that could possibly be thought of for that Expression: For not to
believe a Real Trinity, is to deny the Father to be a True and Real Father, and
the Son to be a True and Real Son, and the Holy Ghost to be a True and Real
Spirit; and this is to deny the Catholic Faith of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
which cannot be a Real Trinity, cannot be really Three, if each of them be not
truly and really what is signified by those Names. But though that Phrase of
Three Infinite Minds and Spirits was used very innocently by me, only to
signify Three Infinite Intelligent Persons, each of which is Infinite Mind and
Spirit, and neither of them is each other, which is the Catholic Faith; yet I
freely acknowledge, as I have done more than once, That it is liable to a very
Heretical Tritheistick Sense, if understood absolutely, and in that Sense I
always disowned it: And it is a sign Men have very little to say, when they
make such a noise with an inconvenient Form of Speech, The Distinction between
Real and Nominal Trinitarians examined, etc.
though expounded to a Catholic Sense: But the Margin will direct the Reader
where he may find the true State of this Controversy.

But what is all this to my Sermon? which neither explains nor defends any
particular Hypothesis about the Trinity, but is a general Vindication of the
Christian Faith from the Pretenses of Reason and Philosophy. But, The Doctrine
of the Catholic Church, and of the Church of England, concerning the Blessed
Trinity, explained and asserted* against the dangerous Heterodoxies in a Sermon
by Dr William Sherlock, etc And, Remarks upon Dr. William Sherlock' s (False
and Treacherous) Defense and Explication of some Principal Articles of Faith,
etc. were more specious Titles, and both so good, that they knew not which to
choose, and therefore adorned the Title Page with one, and the Frontispiece with
the other, that if ever a poor Sermon was confuted with Titles (which have a
strange Magic in them) this is utterly undone.

But it is time to consider his Remarks, which exactly answer the Title, that
they are nothing to the purpose. I am not at leisure to follow him in all his
Harangues; and his Wit and Buffoonry I despise too much to take notice of it;
and when it appears that a Man has discharged all his Artillery of Witticisms
against his own Mistakes, he is witty at his own Cost too.

He has made an Abstract or Summary (as he calls it, P. 4.) of my Sermon, but
in his own Method, his own Words, and directly contrary to my Sense: That is,
he has abstracted from every thing that is in the Sermon, that no Man living by
his Abstract can tell what the Subject or Drift of the Sermon was, or any one
Argument contained in it: I Am sure I who made the Sermon, knew nothing of it
but by mere guess, as I read it in his Abstract; and would those Men who read
these Remarks, be but so fair and honest as to read the Sermon too, there would
need no other Answer.

The First Branch of my Sermon in his Abstract ( P. 8.) is this; Philosophy and
Reason are the only things which those Men adore, who would have no God at all.
And what makes some Men Atheists and Infidels, even the Philosophic Tincture,
and their adherence to Natural Reason, the same makes others to be Heretics,
that is, to be Arians, Socinians, and Pelagians. Now any one would think that
this were one of the Heads of my Sermon; which is so far from truth, that there
is no such Proposition to be found there, but the contrary to this is to be
found there in express words.

In the first Page of my Sermon there are these words: What some Men call
Philosophy and Reason (and there is nothing so foolish and absurd which some
Men will no call so) is the only thing which those Men adore, who would either
have no God, or a God and Religion of their own making. And what Attempts some
have made to undermine all Religion, and others to corrupt and transform the
whole Frame of the Christian Religion, upon a pretense of its contradicting
Natural Reason and Philosophy, is too well known to need a Proof. And soon
after ( P. 2.) This vain Pretense to Reason and Philosophy; the (...), the vain
deceit in my Text, which is applicable to all vain spurious Philosophy, as well
as Platonism, and is so meant by the Apostle. And P. 7. Truly that which makes
some men Infidels, makes others Heretics, that is, a vain Pretense to
Philosophy.

Now let any man judge, Whether this be to charge Atheism, Infidelity, and
Heresy, upon Reason and Philosophy, or upon what some men call Reason and
Philosophy, which may be very foolish and absurd? Whether the Pretenses of
contradicting Reason and Philosophy, and the vain Pretenses to Philosophy,
signify Reason and Philosophy?

This is wilful Misrepresentation; for it is impossible he should mistake, I
having expressly distinguished between these vain Pretenses to Philosophy, and
true Philosophy, (p. 3.) Whoever considers what an Enemy these vain Pretenses
to Philosophy have always been to Religion, will see need enough for this
Caution (of the Text.) True Reason, and the true knowledge of Nature, which is
true Philosophy, would certainly direct us to the acknowledgment and worship of
that Supreme Being, who made the World, and yet we know, there never was an
Atheist without some pretense to Philosophy: Though it seems, as this Author
tells us, ( p. 9.) there has been an Arch-heretick, even Socinus himself
without it; and so may all his Disciples be too, and yet be vain Pretenders to
Reason and Philosophy; however, I am as Orthodox in this Point, as my Lord
Bacon himself, whom he objects against me, whose Sense I exactly expressed,
though not his Words.

But nothing can more fully declare my sense in this particular, than what the
Reader may find ( p. 10.) 2dly. Let us now consider what great reason we have
to reject all the vain Pretenses to Reason and Philosophy, when opposed to a
Divine Revelation. For that i^ all the Apostle intends in this Caution, not to
discourage the use of Reason, or the study of Philosophy, which are great
improvements, and a delightful entertainment of Human Minds, and with a wise
and prudent conduct may be very serviceable to Religion too; but we must not
set up any Conclusions in Philosophy against the Christian Faith; nor corrupt
the Faith with a mixture of Philosophy; nor reject any Revealed Truths for want
of Natural Ideas to conceive them by. Nothing can be plainer than this; That I
am very far from condemning the sober use of Reason and Philosophy, though with
the Apostle, I will not allow them to oppose the Authority of a Divine
Revelation. So that our Author need not be so terribly frighted, as if this
Innocent Sermon were a designed revenge against the Oxford Heads, the Learning
of the Place, and Philosophy it self, (p. 1.) (though the Apostle indeed will
not allow Philosophy alone to make Decrees in Articles of Faith); here is no
danger of setting up Folly and Falsehood (which would be to encroach upon his
Province) or of writing a second Moriae Encomium, or praise of Folly. Here is
no danger, that the Articles of Faith should disagree with true Reason and
Philosophy, though a vain appearance, a Socinian Philosophy, may contradict the
Articles of Faith. Nay my Lord Mayor, and the Court of Aldermen, (p. 9.)
notwithstanding this Sermon, may very safely send their Children to Cambridge
or Oxford, if they get good Tutors for them, who will reach them no Socinian
Logic or Philosophy: And which is more, we may confute Atheists and Infidels
by Reason and Philosophy, ( p. 8.) without being at the charge of buying a
massy Quarto Bible, with Clasps, and Bosses, to knock'em down with: As he very
wittily, and with great reverence to the Holy Scriptures, expresses it: For
Reason and Philosophy may confute Atheists and Infidels, though they have no
Authority to make or unmake Articles of Faith, as to matters of pure
Revelation. Nay more than this still (if it be possible to please him), we will
allow Reason and Philosophy to confute Heresies, though not to judge absolutely
in matters of Faith: Which I suppose is the reason, why, as he observes ( p.
9.) Heretics, many of them, are no less bitter against this same (damnable)
Philosophy: They protest, especially in their Latin Works, that it is this
Philosophy that corrupted and debauched Divinity. Damnable is a very
fashionable word, and shows him to be well bred, and to have good Acquaintance;
but it is a very great Truth, That though Catholic Christians would never
build their Faith on Philosophy, yet Heretics have always had great reason to
rail at true Philosophy, as I observed in my Sermon ( p. 10.) The importunity
of Heretics did very often engage the Catholic Fathers in Philosophical
Disputes; but this they did, not to explain the Christian Mysteries by
Philosophy but only to show, that as incomprehensible as these Mysteries are,
the Philosophy of Heretics, and their Objections against these Articles, were
very absurd. And such Disputes as these may sometimes be absolutely necessary,
and of great use to shame these vain Pretenses to Philosophy, while we do not
put the trial of our Faith upon this issue. And thus much for his first
Proposition, (for it is none of mine) that Reason and Philosophy are the two
Idols of Atheists and Heretics, and that make Atheists to be Atheists, and
Heretics to be Heretics, (p. 12.)

His second Proposition ( Ibid.) runs thus. That to ascertain the very and true
Faith, we must attend only to that meaning of Scripture which the Words and
Phrases do imply: Rejecting all mixture of Reason and Philosophy in our
Disputes about Religion, and our Inquiries about the meaning of Scripture. Now
let any Reader try, whether he can find any such Proposition as this in all my
Sermon, either in words or sense. I could not for some time guess, what shadow
of pretense he could have for charging such a Proposition on me: I did indeed
in some principal Articles distinguish between Faith and Philosophy; between
what is revealed in Scripture, and what Philosophical Disputes, which the
Scripture takes no notice of, have been raised about them, and warned all men
from mixing and corrupting the Faith with Philosophy; but does this forbid us
Expounding Scripture agreeable to Reason and common Sense, and Philosophy too,
where Sense, and Reason, and Philosophy, are proper judges? They are not the
supreme and absolute judges in matters of pure Revelation; But does it hence
follow, that they cannot judge of their proper Objects? Do I any where say,
That we must always expound the Scripture to a literal Sense? That when Christ
is called a Way, a Door, a Rock, we must understand this literally? And yet
this is plainly what he would have to be my Sense, as his beloved instance of
Transubstantiation shows.

In this Sermon I have given no Rules for Expounding Scripture, which in time I
hope I may. But what I assert is this, That when by all those Methods which
Wise Men observe in expounding any Writing, we have found out what the true
sense of Scripture must be, we must not reject such Doctrines merely because
natural Reason cannot conceive or comprehend them. That Revelation as to such
matters as are knowable only by Revelation, must serve instead of Sense,
natural Ideas, and natural Reason, (p. 11.) This gives a plain Answer to all
his Cant about Transubstantiation, from our Savior's words, This is my Body,
(p. 12.) For is there no way of knowing what is Bread, and what is Flesh, but
by Revelation? Is not this the proper object of Sense and Reason? And then it
does not come within my Rule; for Sense and Reason must judge of their proper
Objects, though Revelation must serve us instead of Sense and Reason, as to
such matters as can be known only by Revelation; that is, as I expressly add, we
must upon the Authority of Revelation believe things which we do not see,
things which we have no natural notion or conception of, things which are not
evident to natural Reason: As for instance, If it be Revealed in Scripture that
God has an Eternal Word, his Only-Begotten Son; and that in time this Word was
made Flesh and dwelt among us; this Son of God became Man; that God sent forth
his Son made of a Woman, made under the Law: Though neither Sense nor natural
Ideas, nor mere natural Reason, give us any notice of it; yet if we will own a
Revelation, we must believe it upon the sole Authority of Revelation: But
though Revelation in such cases be Sense and Reason to us, because we have no
other means of Knowledge; yet Sense must judge of the natural Objects of Sense,
and Reason of the Objects of natural Reason; but Revelation was never intended
to unteach us what Sense and natural Reason evidently teach, and therefore it
cannot teach us, that Bread is Flesh, and Wine is Blood.

But this Socinian is got so far toward Popery, that he will not allow Sense
to be judge of this matter, whether the Bread be Transubstantiated or not, and
that for a very pleasant Reason; his words are these, (p. 13.) He cannot have
recourse to Sense in the case, it is only Reason and Philosophy can help him
out: For though the Apostles, who saw and tasted that it was Bread only, and
not Flesh, might have appealed also to their Senses; yet we that never saw or
tasted the Substance which Jesus gave then to the Disciples, can know by Reason
and Philosophy only, by nothing else, that it was not his Flesh and Blood: That
is, I cannot know by Sense that Christ gave Bread and Wine, and not Flesh and
Blood to his Disciples, because I did not See and Taste my self that very
Substance that Christ gave to his Disciples: But can I judge by Sense that what
I my self See and Taste in the Lords Supper, is Bread and Wine after
Consecration, not Flesh and Blood? For that is the Question between us and the
Church of Rome; not, whether we receive the same now which Christ gave to the
Apostles in the first Institution (which they take for granted, and to question
which, is mere Skepticism) but what that change is, which the words of
Consecration make in the Elements to this day; and if we cannot judge of this
by Sense, the Church of Rome have a better Plea for themselves than I thought
they had. And if I cannot now judge by my own Senses what it was Christ gave to
his Apostles, and what they Saw and Tasted, I fear it will much weaken some
other very good Arguments against Transubstantiation.

But how will this Socinian, who rejects the Evidence of Sense, confute
Transubstantiation? Why that is easily done by Reason and Philosophy; as thus,
The Text expressly says, it was Bread which he blessed and brake, and called it
his Body; therefore it was his Body in Sign and Signification, not in Reality.
All this is Arguing, it is Reason that convinces us, not Sense, that the
Substance he divided to them was indeed Bread, not his Flesh, which he neither
blessed nor brake.

This is Reasoning indeed; But did I ever reject Reasoning and Arguing about
the meaning of Scripture Words and Phrases, and the true Sense and
Interpretation of Scripture? Is there no difference between Reasoning about the
Sense of Scripture, and setting up the Conclusions of mere natural Reason and
Philosophy against the plain and evident Doctrines of Scripture? It is certain
I made a manifest distinction between them, p. 9. In all these cases we are
concerned to enquire what the true sense of the Article is; for this the
Scripture teaches, and so far our Faith is concerned, and these are not only
justifiable, but necessary Disputes, if the true Faith be necessary. And such
were the Disputes of the Catholic Fathers with the Sabellian, Arian, and
Photinian Heretics, etc. So that I allow of Arguing and Reasoning as much as
he does; and add, But that which we are to beware of, is not to mix Philosophy
with our Faith, nor to admit of any mere Philosophical Objections against the
Faith, nor to attempt any Explication of these Mysteries, beyond what the
Scriptures and the Faith and Practice of the Catholic Church will justify.
This distinction he knew very well, but very honestly dissembles it, and
endeavors to impose upon his Readers, as if Reasoning and Arguing about the
Sense of Scripture, and resolving our Faith into mere natural Reason and
Philosophy, were the same thing.

He was aware what Answer would be given to this, and therefore in the very
next Paragraph he confutes his own Reasoning from Scripture, and proves that
the Text does not confute Transubstantiation: But if our Preacher, says he,
believes it was only Bread, because the Text it self calls it Bread (which was
his own Argument), let him consider, that seeing what was called Bread before
Christ blessed it, after the blessing he calls it his Body; we cannot know by
Sense or by the Text, but by Reason and Philosophy only, that it was not
changed (by the blessing) into what now he calls it, namely, his Body. But if
This signifies Bread, then. This is my Body, signifies, This Bread is my Body;
and if Bread be his Body, then his Sacramental Body is not Flesh: But I do not
intend to dispute this Point with him, but only observe, That to set up his
Reason and Philosophy to be absolute Judges in Matters of Faith, he will not
allow either Sense or Scripture to confute Transubstantiation.

It cannot but give all sober Christians a just Indignation, to see the most
Sacred and Venerable Mysteries perpetually ridiculed at this Profane rate! In
the Reign of King James there was a Pamphlet published to reconcile men to
Transubstantiation, by representing the Doctrine of the Trinity to the full as
absurd, and chargeable with as many Contradictions as Transubstantiation it
self: This was then charged on the Papists, and they were sufficiently exposed
for it; but a Great Man has lately informed us, That it was writ by a Socinian,
to make men Papists or Socinians, as it should happen; which was a Glorious
Design at that time of day, for men who take it ill if you will not allow them
to be Protestants, and to enjoy the Liberty of Protestants: For they could not
but see that Popery was then grown very Fashionable and Tempting by the Favor
and Frowns of a Popish Prince; and that the generality of Christians did so
firmly believe the Doctrine of the Trinity, that could they have persuaded
them, as they endeavored, That Transubstantiation was as reasonable a Doctrine
as the Trinity, it was much more likely that they would turn Papists than
Socinians.

Instead of Popery men are now running into the other Extremes of Atheism,
Deism, and a Contempt of all Revealed Religion, and that upon a pretense of
making mere Natural Reason and Philosophy their sole Guide and Judge; and now
our Socinians have a new Game to play; and if they dare not absolutely deny the
Authority of Revelation (which in many Instances they have shown a good
Inclination to), yet they give a superior Authority to Reason, which will serve
as well, and make less noise than to reject all Revelation. And if you show
them how absurd this is, to pretend to own a Divine Revelation, and to make
Revelation submit to mere Natural Reason and Philosophy, they presently take
sanctuary in Transubstantiation, and defend it against the Evidence of Sense,
and the Authority of Scripture, to make Reason and Philosophy the Supreme Judge
in Matters of Faith; and in the mean time matter not what becomes of Religion,
what advantage they give either to Popery or Deism, so they can but expose the
Faith of the Trinity.

He has given us a little Specimen of it here; Considerations on the
Explications of the Doctrine of the Trinity, p. 21, 22.
but the same Author, as far as I can guess from the same Words and the same
Thoughts, has with his usual Civility attacked my Lord Bishop of Sarum upon
this Argument, which upon this occasion I shall briefly consider.

His Lordship in vindication of the Christian Mysteries, with great reason
rejects Transubstantiation out of the number of Mysteries, because it
contradicts Sense in the Object of Sense; his words are these:
Transubstantiation must not be a Mystery, because there is against it the
Evidence of Sense in an Object of Sense: For Sense plainly represents to us the
Bread and Wine to be still the same that they were before the Consecration. Now
I cannot think this Author in earnest in the two first Answers he gives to
this. His first Answer is, That it is not pretended by the Papists, that the
Bread and Wine have received any the least Change in what is an Object of
Sense. This is a Discovery worthy its Author, that the Papists don't deny that
they see, and feel, and taste, and smell the sensible Qualities of Bread and
Wine: For who ever charged them with such a Contradiction to Sense as this? But
our Senses judge of the Substances of things by their sensible qualities; judge
that to be Bread and Wine, which has all the qualities of Bread and Wine: And
therefore to say, as the Papists do, That what our Sight, and Taste, and Smell
tell us has all the qualities of Bread and Wine, is not Bread and Wine, does
not indeed contradict our Senses as to sensible qualities, but contradicts that
Judgment our Senses make of the Natures of things from their sensible
qualities: And this is that Contradiction to Sense which the Bishop justly
charges upon Transubstantiation; as is evident in his very words.

In his Second Answer he Disputes against the Infallibility of our Senses, as
he calls it, by such Common Arguments as every Freshman knows how to Answer;
only I do not remember, that the Delusions of our Dreams used to be objected
against the Evidence of Sense; but suppose our Senses may deceive us in some
few instances wherein both Sense and Reason can Correct the mistake, must they
therefore deceive in the Nature of Bread and Wine? Can he prove, that they ever
deceive us with Qualities and Accidents without a Substance? For that is the
Cheat of Transubstantiation: It is not pretended, as he observed in his First
Answer, That our Senses deceive us in the Color, or Figure, or Taste, or Smell
of Bread and Wine; and therefore all his instances of the Deception of our
Senses are nothing to the purpose; but let him give us any one instance of the
other kind, if he can, and then we will believe Transubstantiation in
Contradiction to our Senses.

But does he consider, what the Consequence of this Argument is? He will not
allow it a good Argument against Transubstantiation, That it contradicts Sense,
because our Senses may deceive us in the Objects of Sense (which by the way
makes his instance of the Delusions of Dreams, which are not the Objects of
Sense, very impertinent;) now if contradiction to Sense be not a good
Objection, because Sense is not Infallible, what will become of his great
Argument of Contradiction to Reason? For all men confess, That Reason is not so
Infallible as Sense is, as is evident from all the Disputes and Clashings of
Reason, and those Absurdities and Contradictions which contending Parties
mutually charge upon each other; and if a Contradiction to Fallible Sense be
not a good Objection against the Truth of any thing, how comes a Contradiction
to much more Fallible Reason to be so unanswerable an Objection? And then we
may much more safely believe a Trinity in Unity, notwithstanding all their
pretended Contradictions to Reason, than we can believe Transubstantiation in
Contradiction to Sense. But in his Third Answer, he seems to be in good
earnest, and I shall consider it as such; and it is this.

Transubstantiation is contradicted by Sense, says his Lordship, in an Object
of Sense; therefore it is a false Mystery. This is as much as to say, That a
Faculty or Power judging of its proper Object, always judges truly, and must
determine our Belief. He must say this, or his Reasoning is nothing. I ask now
of what Faculty or Power is Almighty God the Object. He will Answer, God is the
Object, not of Sense, which discerns him not, but of Reason, which discovers,
and sees this most Glorious Being. Therefore Reason, by his Lordship's own
Argument, judges infallibly concerning God, and must determine our Belief about
him: We must hearken to Reason, when it finds Contradictions in what men affirm
concerning God. Now notwithstanding his vain Brags, and his Triumphant
Challenge to the Bishop, a very little Skill will Answer this Argument. For,

1. The Bishop need not say, because it is not true, That every Faculty and
Power judges as certainly of its proper Object, as Sense does, and then his
Argument is quite lost: For if Sense judges more certainly than Reason, then a
manifest Contradiction to Sense is a more unanswerable Objection, than any
appearing and pretended Contradictions to Reason. I believe this Author is the
first man who ever thus universally equalled the Evidence of Reason to that of
Sense; or that ever affirmed, that Reason could judge infallibly of God. And if
Reason may be mistaken (which I shall take for granted) especially in the
Infinite and Incomprehensible Nature of God, some appearing Contradictions, or
what some men will call Contradictions, are not a sufficient reason to reject a
Revelation, and to disbelieve what God tells us of Himself, and his own Nature.

2dly. Whatever certainty we allow to our Faculties in judging of their proper
Objects, we must extend it no farther than to what belongs to the judgment of
that Faculty: The same thing may be the Object of different Faculties, as it is
of our different Senses; but every Faculty, and every Sense, judges of nothing
in any Object, but only what belongs to it self. All the Objects of Sense are
the Objects of Reason too; but Sense judges of nothing but what belongs to
Sense, and Reason of what belongs to Reason; and Reason can judge no farther of
any Object, than it is knowable by Reason; and not only the Divine, but even
Created Nature has such Secrets and Mysteries as are not knowable by Reason;
and therefore it is manifest Ignorance or Sophistry, to conclude from God's
being the Object of Reason, therefore Reason judges infallibly concerning God:
For, not to Dispute about the Infallible Judgment of Reason, God is the Object
of Reason, because Reason can know something concerning God; but God can be the
Object of Reason no farther than he is knowable by Reason; and therefore if
there be any thing which Natural Reason cannot know of God (as I hope this
Author himself will own), with respect to such matters God is not the Object of
Reason, and Reason cannot judge at all, much less judge infallibly concerning
God. But as Sense leaves room for Reason in the same Object, so Reason leaves
room for Faith.

But must we not hearken to Reason when it finds Contradictions in what men
affirm concerning God? Yes, most certainly, as far as God is the Object of
Reason, and knowable by Reason, but no farther; for in such matters as Reason
cannot judge of at all, it cannot judge of Contradictions. Sense and Reason can
judge of Contradictions only for themselves, or as far as their judgment
reaches, but may appear Contradictions themselves to each other. As for
instance:

Reason assures us that Man consists of Soul and Body, which are closely united
to each other, and yet the Union of Spirit and Matter is no better than
contradiction to the judgment of Sense; for Sense knows no Union but by
Contact, nor any Contact but between Bodies, which have extended and solid
Parts, that can touch each other; so that an Union without Contact is one
contradiction to the judgment of Sense, and a Contact without extended solid
parts, which a Spirit has not, is another; and yet Reason does not matter these
Contradictions to the judgment of Sense, because Sense is not the Judge of such
things: And it is the same Case between Reason and Faith, which receives its
information from a Divine Revelation, concerning such Matters as are not
knowable by Natural Reason: should Reason contradict Faith in such Matters as
Reason is no Judge of, this is no more an Objection against the Superior
Evidence and Authority of Faith, than the Judgment of Sense is against the
Evidence of Reason; such Contradictions are not in the nature of things, but
are owing to our ignorance of Nature, and presumption in judging of what we
cannot understand.

The Example he gives of such a contradiction to Reason, is a Trinity of
Persons, every one of which is perfect God, and yet all of them but One God;
but for my life, I cannot see this plain Contradiction, That Three Persons,
each of which has all the Perfections of Divinity, and is perfect God, should
be so essentially united in the some One Eternal and Infinite Nature, as to be
but One God. This is not a Contradiction in terminis, it is not Three Persons
and but One Person, or Three Gods and but One God, but Three Divine Persons,
and One God. If the Unity of the Godhead consisted in the Unity of a Person, I
grant it would be a flat Contradiction to say, Three Persons and One God, which
would be equivalent to Three Gods and One God; but if the Unity of the Godhead
consists in the Unity of Nature, that there is but One Eternal and Infinite
Nature, which is the One God, and this Unity, and Identity of Nature be
perfectly and entirely preserved in Three Divine Persons, it is so far from a
Contradiction to say, That Three Persons are One God, that it would be a
Contradiction to say, That Three Divine Persons, who have the same One
Identical Nature, should be more than One God; for that is to say, That One
Divine Nature, which can be but One God, is Three Gods.

Now this is all that Natural Reason tells us of the Unity of the Godhead, That
there is, and can be, but One Eternal Infinite Nature, which is but One God;
this we expressly teach, and therefore do not contradict Reason; but then
Scripture tells us, That there are Three, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to whom
the Name and Attributes of God, and therefore this One Infinite Undivided
Nature, belong. This Reason boggles at, and Socinians call a Contradiction; but
it is such a Contradiction, as Sense would judge the Union of Spirit and Matter
to be: At most it is an imaginary Contradiction in the Subsistence of the
Divine Nature, which Reason knows nothing about, and therefore can make no
judgment of; and such appearing-Contradictions are no Objections, because they
may be no Contradictions; as we are sure they are none, when the Doctrines
charged with these Contradictions are taught in Scripture.

There is one distinction, which seems to me to set this matter in a clear
light, and to answer all the Pretenses of Contradictions; and that is, The
distinction between Contradictions in Logic and Philosophy. A Contradiction in
Logic, is when two Propositions in express terms contradict each other; and
all men grant that both parts of such Contradictions cannot be true, as that
there are Three Gods, and but One God, which is to say, that there are, and
that there are not Three Gods; that there is, and that there is not, but One
only God. A Contradiction in Philosophy, is when any thing is affirmed
concerning the Nature or Essential Properties of any Being, which seems to
contradict all the Notions and Ideas we have of Nature in other Beings, and
such Contradictions as these may be both true; for the Natures of things may be
contrary to, and contradict each other and yet both of them be true and real
Beings. There are infinite Instances of this in all Nature; the Ideas of Hot
and Cold, of White and Black, of Light and Darkness, of solid and fluid Bodies,
of Matter and Spirit, are direct Contradictions, in this notion of a
Contradiction, to each other: And had we known but one of these Opposites by
our Natural Ideas, and the other had been revealed to us, we might as justly
have cried out of Contradictions, as the Socinians now do, when you mention a
Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the Divine Nature. For Heat contradicts the
Idea of Cold, and Fluid of Solid; as much as Three Persons in the Unity of
Nature, contradicts the Unity of Nature in the Unity of a Person: This latter
indeed is the natural notion we have, That there is but One Person in One
Subsisting Intelligent Nature; for we have no example of any thing else, and
therefore can have no natural Idea of any other Unity; but this does not prove,
that it cannot be otherwise; for there may be Oppositions and Contrarieties in
Nature; and did we but consider what an infinite distance and unlikeness there
is between God and Creatures, we should not think it reasonable to judge of the
Divine Nature by the Ideas of Created Nature.

This is a very real and sensible distinction between Contradictions in Logic,
and in Nature and Philosophy, and there is a certain way to know them: Logical
Contradictions are always immediately reducible to is, and is not; for they
affirm and deny the same thing in the same sense: The Contradictions in Nature
and Philosophy are only the opposition and contrariety there is between the
Ideas of several Beings, which can never be reduced to a Contradiction in
Logic, but through Ignorance or Mistake, by changing the sense and use of
words. Let any Socinian try the Experiment in the Doctrine of the Trinity in
Unity, and reduce it to such a Contradiction if he can. A Trinity of Persons in
the Unity of the Divine Nature, is a Contradiction to that Idea we have of the
Unity of Person and Nature in created Beings, but this is no Contradiction in
Logic; for it is not a Contradiction in the same Nature and Being, as all
Contradictions in Logic must be, but it is a Contrariety or Contradiction (if
we will so call it) between the Unity and Personalities of two very different
Natures, the Divine and the Created Nature; and all the Contradiction that can
be made of it, is no more than this, That the Unity of the Divine Nature, which
is perfect and undivided in Three distinct Persons, contradicts the Notion of
Unity in a Created Nature, which admits but of One Person in One Individual
Nature: But there are a thousand such Contradictions in Nature, that is,
different Natures, whose Ideas are opposite and contrary to each other, and yet
all of them real Beings: But could they make a Trinity in Unity contradict it
self, that the Trinity should in express terms destroy the Unity, and the Unity
the Trinity, this would be somewhat to the purpose; for it would prove a
Contradiction in Logic, when the Terms destroy each other; but then the
Trinity and Unity must be the same; a Trinity of Persons, and but One Person;
or a Trinity of Natures, and but one Nature: But a Trinity of Persons, true,
proper, subsisting Persons, in the Unity of Nature, which is the Catholic
Faith, is not a Contradiction in Logic, though it contradicts the Notion of
Human Personalities, which it may do, and yet be very true. This is abundantly
enough to show the Weakness and Folly of this Socinian Cant about
Transubstantiation; the Impiety, Profaneness, and mischievous Consequences of
it, let others consider.

His Third Charge is, That I say, That as we are Christians, and unless we will
be understood to reject the Supreme Authority of Divine Revelation, we must
believe those Doctrines which are thought to be most mysterious and
inconceivable, notwithstanding any Objection from Reason or from Philosophy
against 'em. He that believes no farther than Natural Reason approves, believes
his Reason, not the Revelation; he is a Natural Philosopher, not a Believer. He
believes the Scriptures as he would believe Plato or Tully, not as Inspired
Writings, but as agreeable to Reason, and as the result of wise and deep
Thoughts, p. 14.

Here he has taken some of my Words, and so put them together, as to conceal
the whole Force of the Argument, which he always takes care to do. My business
( P. 10, 11, etc.) was to prove, That we ought to believe those Doctrines which
are thought the most mysterious and inconceivable, notwithstanding any
Objections from Natural Reason and Philosophy against them: And this I proved
from the Nature, Use, and Authority of Revelation. That Revelation, as to such
matters as are knowable only by Revelation, must serve instead of Sense,
Natural Ideas, and Natural Reason. That if we believe upon God's Authority
(which is the strict Notion of a Divine Faith) we must believe without any
Natural Evidence, merely because God has revealed it; and then we must believe
such things as are not evident to Sense and Reason. That to believe no farther
than Natural Reason can conceive and comprehend, is to reject the Divine
Authority of Revelation, and to destroy the distinction between Reason and
Faith. He that will believe no farther than his Reason approves, believes his
Reason, not the Revelation, and is in truth a Natural Philosopher, not a
Believer.

Here any man may perceive that our Socinian was plainly baffled, for he has
not one word to answer, but only says, that I contradict this my self in my
Vindication of the Doctrine of the Trinity, where I assert, That suppose the
natural Construction of the Words of Scripture import such a Sense as is
contrary to some evident Principle of Reason, I will not believe it: Of this more
presently; but what is this to the purpose? Is there no difference between what
Reason cannot conceive, comprehend, approve, and what the Reason of all Mankind
contradicts? No difference between believing what we do not see, what we have
no natural notion or conception of, what is not evident to natural Reason, and
believing in contradiction to sense, and such natural Notions, and natural
Evidence, as all Mankind agree in?

But he is very much troubled, according to his Principle of believing
Scripture no farther than Natural Reason and Philosophy approves, how to
distinguish between believing Plato and Tully, and believing a Revelation. He
says, They look upon Plato and Tully, as great Men, but Fallible ( p. 15.) and
therefore may take the liberty to dissent from them; and believe them no
farther than Reason approves: Very right; but will he believe the Scripture any
farther than Reason can conceive, comprehend, approve? Have a care of that: But
they will do as well; if Reason will not approve of such Scripture Doctrines,
as it cannot conceive and comprehend, they will Expound and Torture Scripture,
till it submits to Reason: For it is more congruous to think, that an Inspired
Writer uses a Figurative, or it may be a Catachrestical (very Catachrestical)
Expression or Phrase, than that he delivers flat contradictions, or downright
impossibilities: That is to say, they must by all means believe, or pretend to
believe, the Scripture; but then they must never own any thing to be in
Scripture, which their Reason calls a flat contradiction, or downright
impossibility; which is the very same thing; for the reason why they will not
allow, that the Scripture contains any thing, which their Reason does not
approve, is because they must believe the Scripture, but must not believe it
beyond their own Reason and Comprehension; and the only difference they make
between Plato and Tully, and the Scripture is, That they can safely reject
their Authority, when they please, but must be at the trouble of Expounding
away whatever they do not approve in the Scripture.

This is what I told them in the Vindication; and as Impious as this Author
thinks it, I will venture to Transcribe that whole Paragraph.

But I have not done with our Author thus; Vindicatition, p. 150.
but must give him a little more about Expounding Scripture according to
Reason: For I affirm, that Natural Reason is not the Rule and Measure of
Expounding Scripture, no more than it is of Expounding any other Writing. The
true and only way to interpret any Writing, even the Scriptures themselves, is
to examine the use and propriety of Words and Phrases; the Connection, Scope,
and Design of the Text, its allusion to Ancient Customs and Usages, or
Disputes, etc. For there is no other good reason to be given for any
Exposition, but that the words signify so, and the circumstances of the place,
and apparent Scope of the Writer requires it.

But our Author (as many others do) seems to confound the Reasons of believing
any Doctrine, with the Rules of Expounding a Writing. We must believe nothing
that contradicts the plain and express Dictate of Natural Reason, which all
Mankind agree in, whatever pretense of Revelation there be for it; Well, say
they, then you must Expound Scripture so as to make it agree with the necessary
Principles and Dictates of Reason: No, say I, that does not follow; I must
Expound Scripture according to the use and significations of the Words; and
must not force my own Sense on it, if it will not bear it. But suppose then,
that the Natural Construction of the words import such a sense as is contrary
to some evident Principle of Reason; Then I wont believe it. How? Not believe
Scripture? No, no. I will believe no pretended Revelation, which contradicts
the plain Dictates of Reason, which all Mankind agree in; and were I persuaded,
that those Books, which we call the Holy Scriptures, did so, I would not
believe them; and this is a fairer and honester way, than to force them to
speak, what they never intended, and what every impartial man, who reads them,
must think was never intended that we may believe them: To put our own Sense on
Scripture, without respect to the use of words, and to the Reason and Scope of
the Text, is not to believe Scripture, but to teach it to speak our Language;
is not to submit to the Authority of Scripture, but to make Scripture submit to
our Reason, even in such matters as are confessedly above Reason, as the
Infinite Nature and Essence of God is.

Though I am never so well assured of the Divine Authority of any Book, yet I
must Expound it, as I do other Writings; for when God vouchsafes to speak to us
in our own Language, we must understand his words, just as we do, when they are
spoke by men: Indeed when I am sure that it is an Inspired Writing, I lay it
down for a Principle, That it contains nothing absurd and contradictions or
repugnant to the received Principles of Natural Reason; but this does not give
me Authority to Expound the words of Scripture to any other sense, than what
they will naturally bear, to reconcile them with such Notions as I call reason;
for if one man has this liberty, another may take it, and the Scripture will be
tuned to every man's private Conceit; and therefore in case the plain sense of
Scripture contradicts those Notions I have of things, if it be possible to be
true, I submit to the Authority of Scripture; if it seems to include a
Contradiction and Impossibility, if that Contradiction be not plain and
notorious, and in such matters, as I am sure, I perfectly understand, there I
submit again, and conclude it is no Contradiction, though I cannot comprehend
how it is; if I can by no means reconcile it, I will confess, I do not
understand it, and will not pretend to give any sense of it, much less to give
such a sense of it, as the words will not bear.

His Fourth Charge is, that I say, Difficulty of conceiving a thing, nay, the
absolute unconceivableness of it, must not hinder our assent to what is
contained in Revelation; because we do not disbelieve what is made known to us
by Sense or by Reason, notwithstanding any difficulty or inconceivableness
adhering to such things. These are neither my Words nor my Argument. My
Argument is this; That since, as I had shown, in matters of pure Revelation,
which can be known no other way, Revelation must stand in the place of Sense
and Reason, we must allow no Objections against revealed Mysteries, but what we
will allow to be good Objections against Sense and Reason. Now no man questions
the truth of what he sees and feels, or what he can prove to be true by plain
and undeniable Reason, merely because there are unconceivable difficulties in
it, as there is in every thing, even the most certain and familiar things in
Nature: And if revealed Truths are not more unconceivable than many Natural
Objects of Sense and Reason, why should their being unconceivable be a greater
Objection against believing a Revelation, than it is against believing our
Sense and Reason in matters equally unconceivable? (Sermon. p. 13.)

This Argument is easily understood, but can never be Answered; and therefore
he wisely resolved not to understand it. In Answer to this he tells us, That he
does not always believe his Senses, nor his Reason neither, when it is not
clear, but perplexed with difficulties, or darkening doubts, but especially when
there is a remarkable and manifest inconceivableness. Nor do I require he
should; but my only Question is, Whether he does not believe, both his Senses
and Reason, that there are many things in the World, whose Natures are so
mysterious, that he cannot conceive or comprehend the Reasons and Philosophy of
them? That though he sees Men and Beasts, Heaven and Earth, Sun, Moon, and
Stars, he will not believe, that there are such things as he sees, because he
cannot understand the Philosophy of their Natures, and sees a great many things
done by them, which are perfectly unaccountable, and would have been thought
absolutely impossible, had we not seen them done? These are all the
contradictions and impossibilities, which I say men may make or find, when they
know not the Philosophical Natures of things, nor how they act, and yet will be
reasoning and guessing at them; which this wise Author calls a Sermon for
Contradictions. But do I require any man to believe Contradictions? Nay, do I
say, that there are any such Contradictions? But this, I say, that there are
such unconceivable Mysteries, in all Created Nature, much more in the
Incomprehensible Nature of God, as some Gotham Philosophers (as he who knows
them best calls them) charge with impossibilities and contradictions; and yet
these Gotham Philosophers are so wise as not to disbelieve their Senses as to
the being of those things, how unconceivable and incomprehensible soever their
natures are; and this is all I ask, that in matters of pure Revelation we give
the same credit to Revelation, that in the Objects of sense we give to sense,
i. e. not to disbelieve what is revealed, As, that God has an Eternal Son, and
that this Eternal Son in time was made Man, because the Eternal Generation and
Incarnation are inconceivable Mysteries; as we do not disbelieve, that there
are any Men in the World, because Human Generations, and the Union of Soul and
Body are inconceivable Mysteries in Nature.

Toward the Conclusion of my Sermon, I Answered Two Objections against
believing a Revelation as to such Doctrines which are inconceivable and
incomprehensible to mere Natural Reason. And here to prepare the way, he first
scorns the Objections, as never made before, or however by none but my self.
That I pass over known and very dangerous Objections, and Answer only to
Chimera's and Follies, never suggested or thought of by any. (p. 18.)

I am glad to find, that he grows ashamed of these Socinian Chimera's and
Follies; but let us hear what they are.

1. It is thought very unnatural, that when God has made us reasonable
Creatures, and therefore made natural Reason to us the measure of truth and
falsehood, he should require us to believe without Reason, as we must do, if he
reveal such things to us, as we do not, and cannot possibly know the reasons
of: If we must believe with our understanding, how can we believe things, which
we cannot understand? Now this Socinian does not believe, that any Sect of
Religious ever made this or the like Objection; Let him, as he says, snuff his
Candle once more, and look into the late Socinian Pamphlets: What is the
meaning of all their Zeal for Reason in this Cause, of their great noise and
outcry about Mysteries, Nonsense, Contradictions? What is the meaning of their
Expounding Scripture by Reason, not like Fools, but like Wise men? Why has this
Author shown such a furious Zeal against believing a Revelation notwithstanding
any Objections from mere Natural Reason and Philosophy against it? If, as he
now says, our Reason and Understandings are finite and imperfect, and the
Wisdom and Power of God most perfect: Therefore he may reveal many things to
us, to be believed by us, though we understand them not, nor have any other
cause of our believing them, but only God's Revelation of them, (p. 19.)
Nothing can be more true, than what he says, that Reason is the measure of
truth and falsehood, but not the frail Fallible Reason of Men, but the
Infallible Wisdom of God. If he be sincere and hearty in this, we are perfectly
agreed; for this is the very Doctrine of my Sermon, which he has so furiously
opposed, or would be thought to oppose; for to speak the Truth, he has not
opposed the Doctrine of my Sermon; but, in his own Language, his own Chimera's
and Follies.

But here is either a Fallacy in his Words, or he gives up his Cause, which it
is plain he never intended: The Question is not absolutely, What is the Rule
and Measure of Truth and Falsehood, but what is so to us? Now if he will allow,
that Frail and Fallible Reason is not a Rule to us, then we may believe things,
which our Reason does not approve; nay, which it may judge improbable and
false: And if the infallible Wisdom of God be a Rule to us, it can be so only
in a Revelation, and then we may and must believe the infallible Wisdom of God
in a Revelation against the Objections of Frail and Fallible Reason.

And one may easily guess, there is something amiss still, notwithstanding all
these concessions; for as silly an Objection, as he says, this is (which I am
glad to hear), he will by no means own, that I have Answered it, and then I
have very ill luck indeed, to make a silly Objection, which was never made
before, and not be able to Answer it when I have done.

The Answer I give to this Objection is this, That the Matter of the Objection
is not true; for we do understand both what it is we believe, and the reasons
why we believe it; and this I suppose may pass for an Answer to that Objection:
But then it is farther Objected, That we believe such things, whose Natures we
cannot understand, and cannot account for by natural Reason: To this I Answer,
That Reason is not the judge of the Nature and Phil^sophy of things, nor does
it require us to believe nothing but what we thus understand and comprehend:
For then, as I had shown, we must no more believe Sense and Reason, than
Revelation: And this I take to be a good Answer too; but then to show the
reason of this, I add: When we make an Objection against any thing, that it is
without Reason, or as we apprehend, contrary to reason, we must first consider,
whether it be the proper Object of Reason; otherwise it is no Objection; as it
is no Objection against sounds, that we cannot see them, nor against colors,
that we cannot hear them; because sounds are not the object of sight, nor
colors of hearing. This, I think, is plain Sense, and good Reason too; but
this he says is no Answer to that Objection, Why should reasonable Creatures be
obliged to believe things without Reason? Nor was it ever intended as an
immediate Answer to it; the Answer I give is, That we are not obliged to
believe without Reason; but when such Men as this Author Object farther, That
to Believe things, whose natures we do not understand, and cannot account for
by natural Reason, is to believe without Reason; it is a proper Answer to say,
That Reason is not judge of the Nature and Philosophy of things, and nothing
can be said to be without Reason, or against Reason, which is not the object of
Reason; as no man pretends, that the pure Natures and ^ssences of things, or
their Essential Reasons, Properties, Unions, Operations, are; (Sermon. p. 19.)
But herein, it seems, I was mistaken; for I have met with a Man at last, who
makes Reason the judge of all this; for if these be not the Objects of Reason,
Reason has no Object at all; for our Reason can be no otherwise employed, but
either about Substances, or their Unions, Essential Reasons, Operations or
Properties, (p. 20.) Very right! we may know something of all this; but I speak
of the Philosophy of Nature: Now can this new Philosopher tell us, What the
pure simple Essence and Substance of any thing is? What naked Matter stripped
of all Accidents and Qualities is? How Soul and Body are United, which cannot
Touch each other? How a Spirit should feel Pain or Pleasures from the
Impressions on the Body? How we Think and Reason? Nay, How we See and Hear? How
Thought moves our Bodies, and excites our Passions? And a Thousand such like
Mysteries; which could he Unriddle, he would infinitely gratify the Inquisitive
world: But Christianity not Mysterious, and the Philosophy of pure simple
Nature, are too great Discoveries for one Age; and yet if ever this happens,
they must go together.

For as I observed, this is all the incomprehensibility men have to complain of
in the Doctrine of the Trinity and Incarnation: The first concerns the pure
Nature, Essence, Substance, of God, and the Essential Distinction and Unity of
the Godhead, which we neither do, nor can know any thing of; for all Nature is
a Secret and Mystery to us, much more the Infinite Nature of God. And the
second concerns the Union of the Divine and Human Nature in the Person of
Christ; which is a Mystery, but what we ought not to complain of, since the
Philosophy of all Natural Unions is a Mystery to us. These things are not the
Objects of Reason; and therefore though we believe them upon the Authority of a
Revelation, without understanding the Mystery of them, this is not to believe
without, or contrary to Reason. And what now does this Socinian say to this?
truly not one word, but falls out with Socinus and Crellius, and some of his
best Friends, for talking so much of Mysteries, (which by the way shows, that
this is not such a new and unheard of Objection, as he would pretend) for now
he has found out, that there is no Mystery at all in the Doctrines of the
Trinity, and Incarnation; and he is in the right, if his Socinian Explication
of these Doctrines, (which destroys the Mystery, and the Catholic Faith
together) may pass for the Doctrine of the Church. But there has been enough
said of that in the distinction between Real and Nominal Trinitarians examined,
which the Reader may consult, and this Author answer, at his leisure; though I
am very sensible he can never want such Answers as this for any thing.

2 dly, The Second Objection against such a Revelation, as contains matters
which natural Reason cannot comprehend, is, to what purpose such a Revelation
serves? what merit there can be in believing such Doctrines? and of what good
use such a Faith can be to us? Sermon. p. 2^. This is another Objection, which he
thinks no Sect of Religious ever made (p. 24.) but the Irreligious may make
this Objection, and there are more than one Sect of these.

As to the usefulness of it, I observed, That though neither Natural, nor
Revealed Knowledge extends to the Reasons and Causes of Nature, and of
Essential Properties and Operations, yet both Natural and Revealed Knowledge is
of as much use to us, as if we did perfectly understand all the Secret and
Incomprehensible Mysteries of the Nature of God, or of the Natures of
Creatures. Both Natural and Revealed Knowledge are alike upon this account,
that they only acquaint us what things are, and what ends they serve, and then
we know what use to make of them, without understanding the Secret Mysteries of
Nature. This I showed both in the Knowledge of Nature, and of God, and added;
We may make all the use that can be made of this World, and of every thing in
it, without understanding the Essential Reasons and Causes, or Internal Nature
of any thing. This last Clause he fixes his Remarks on; and that he may have
something to remark, he changes my Words thus. We may use the World as fully,
and every thing in it to as good purpose, as if we understood the Reasons and
Internal Natures of things. And then adds, No, Trisler; not so fully, nor to so
good purpose, as if we better understood the Natures of things. Now this fully,
and to as good purpose, are not my Words but his own; nay we can make no use at
all of it, but only so far forth as we understand the Nature and Reasons of
things in it. We can use nothing to any purpose, till we know or understand
something of its nature; and no farther can we apply it and use it, than we
understand its Nature, and know its Properties and Powers. Now this is not
merely trifling, but Knavery: He represents me very ridiculously asserting,
That we may as fully, and to as good purpose use every thing in the World
without knowing its Nature, Virtues and Properties, as if we knew them; whereas
I expressly assert, That we must first know, what things are, and what ends they
serve (and the better we know this, to be sure the better) and then we know
what use to make of them, without understanding the secret Mysteries of Nature.
That is, when by Experience and Observation, we know what things are good for,
we know how to use them without understanding the secret Mysteries and
Philosophy of Nature: As how God created all things out of nothing; how the
Corn grows, or our Food nourishes us, and the like: And thus I showed it was as
to the Doctrine of the Trinity, and Incarnation, that how unaccountable soever
these Mysteries be, it is the most useful and necessary Knowledge in the world.

But there is one thing still behind, which I find nettles this Author; and I
don't wonder at it: To show how much it became the Goodness of God to reveal
these Mysteries of Salvati^n to us, I observed, That the lapsed state of Human
Nature makes Supernatural Knowledge necessary: -- For though Natural Knowledge
must be allowed sufficient to all the ends of Human Life, while man continued
Innocent -- Yet when man had sinned, he forfeited the Favor of God, and a
natural Immortality; and whether he should be restored or not, and by what
means he should be restored, depended wholly on the Sovereign Will and Pleasure
of God. And therefore the Light of Nature, though it could direct an innocent
man how to please and worship God, and to preserve himself Immortal, it could
not teach Sinners how to make Atonement for Sin; nor give them any certain
Hopes that God would for^ive sins, and bestow immortal Life on them: Which
makes it necessary, that the Religion of a Sinner be a Revealed Religion. This
he imperfectly transcribes, and adds; True, but not in the least to the
purpose: It Is no Answer to that Objection, but to another: Namely to this; Why
Revelation or a ^upernatural Knowledge is necessary? Here he had overshot
himself, in allowing Supernatural Knowledge necessary, and therefore
immediately qualifies it with, or however highly requisite, which declares this
Socinian's Opinion, That we might have been saved without the Knowledge of
Christ or the Gospel-Revelation; for I know nothing that can make any thing
more necessary, than the necessity of ^alvation: And therefore if it be not
necessary, but only highly requisite, we might be saved without it: He adds the
Reason why he says this is nothing to the purpose. The Obje^tion was concerning
a Revelation and Faith, not intelligible, or not conceiveable; the Answer is
only concerning Revelation or Supernatural Knowledge) in general, Why it was
given to men. But it is neither so, nor so; the Objection concerns the use of
such a Revelation as contains matters which Natural Reason cannot comprehend;
This part of the Answer proves from the lapsed state of Human Nature the
absolute Necessity of the Gospel Revelation, which contains these Mysteries.
For if Nature cannot save us, it cannot discover to us the way of Salvation
neither; and if we must be saved by a Supernatural Grace and Power, it must be
supernaturally revealed; and what is Supernatural is the Object of Faith, not
of Natural Knowledge. Sermon. p. 24.

But he adds, There is a great difference between Supernaturally revealed, and
unconceivable; the whole Christian Religion, the Precepts as well as Faith of
it, is a Supernatural Revelation, and yet a System so intelligible that it must
be taught to the Women, to the Poor, and ^ven to little Children. This is true,
but there is a difference between Supernatural Knowledge, as opposed to Natural
Knowledge, and Supernatural Revelation: Such things as Nature can teach us, may
be supernaturally revealed, and the degeneracy of Mankind may make this, in his
Language, highly requisite; as the Nature and Providence of God, a future
State, and the differences of Good and Evil: But Supernatural Knowledge is a
Knowledge which Nature cannot teach, but must be learned only by Revelation;
and this is the Knowledge, and a Mysterious Knowledge it is, which the lapsed
state of Human Nature makes necessary, as necessary as the Salvation of Sinners
by the Incarnation and Death of the Son of God: Which makes a great difference
between the Precepts and Faith of the Gospel, though both contained in the same
Revelation.

He adds, It was not made the matter of Supernatural Revelation, for its
Difficulty, Mysteriousness, or Transcendency of the Human Understanding, but to
ascertain the Truth of it, and to enforce its Authority in the world. Which is
in plain English to say, That the Design of the Gospel-Revelation was not to
teach us any thing beyond the Discovery or Comprehension of mere Natural
Reason, but only to give greater Certainty and Authority to the Laws and
Religion of Nature And here, for a conclusion, I join Issue with this Socinian
(and am glad to take the least Hint for some useful Discourse), Whether the
Gospel Revelation contain any thing which Nature could not teach us, and which
Natural Reason cannot comprehend; or were only intended to give greater
Certainty and Authority to the Religion of Nature?

That the Gospel is a New Revelation of what Nature could not teach, nor mere
Natural Reason comprehend, I shall prove; not from the Name or Notion of
Mysteries, which these men so foolishly and absurdly ridicule; but from the
express Authority of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 2.14. But the natural man receives not
the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can
he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. A brief Explication of
which Words will be of great use in our present Dispute.

The (...), or Natural Man, as Theophilact and other Greek Fathers observe, is
the man who judges only by Natural Light and Reason, and will receive and
believe nothing beyond what Nature teaches: And the Context proves this to be
the true meaning of it. This account the Apostle gives of the Grecian
Philosophers, That as the Jews required a sign, so the Greeks seek after
wisdom, 1 Cor. 1.22. nothing would content them but some Philosophical
Speculations, and Natural Proofs and Demonstrations of Faith; which in this
Chapter he calls, The enticing words of man's wisdom, and opposes to the
demonstration of the spirit, and of power: that is, to the Evidence of Miracles
wrought by the Spirit of God; which are a more certain and infallible Proof
than all their Pretenses to Reason and Demonstration: For where is the wise?
where is the scribe? where is the disputer of this world? has not God made
foolish the wisdom of this world? for after that in the wisdom of God, the
world by wisdom (by natural Reason and Philosophy) knew not God, it pleased God
by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe, 1 Cor. 1.20, 21.
These are the men who rejected the Faith of Christ, of whom the Apostle here
speaks, and gives an account of the reason of their Infidelity in these words,
The natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God.

Which will more fully appear, by examining what these things of the Spirit of
God are: And it is evident from the whole Context, that they are matters of
pure Revelation, which can be known only by the Revelation of the Spirit, or
the whole Economy of our Salvation, by the Incarnation, Death, Resurrection,
Ascension, of Jesus Christ, the Eternal Son of God, which is the Subject of the
Gospel-Revelation. This he calls, The Wisdom of God in a Mystery, even the
hidden Wisdom, which God ordained before the world to our glory, ver. 7. and
what this is, immediately follows; Which none of the princes of this world
knew; for had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory;
which can refer only to the Dispensation of Grace by Jesus Christ. This Nature
could not teach us, as it is written, Eye has not s^en, neither ear heard,
neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared
for them that love him, v. 9. That is, such things as neither Sense, nor
Natural Reason could inform us of: But God has revealed them to us by his
Spirit, for the Spirit searches all things, even the deep things of God; for
what man knows the things of a man, but the Spirit of a man which is in him?
even so the things of God knows no man, but the spirit of God: Now we have
received not the Spirit of the World, but the Spirit which is of God, that we
may know those things which are freely given us of God: Which proves that these
are properly the things of the Spirit, which could never be known but by the
Revelation of the Spirit: For they are the deep things of God, his Secret
Counsels and Purposes for the Redemption of Mankind; the free Results of his
own Wisdom and Goodness, the things which are freely given us of God; and
therefore can be known, and can be revealed only by the Spirit; and these are
the things of the Spirit, which the natural Man, the vain Pretender to Reason
and Philosophy, receives not. Now can any man desire a plainer Proof than
this, how incompetent a Judge mere natural Reason is of the Mysteries of Faith,
of the whole Economy of Gospel Grace? For what the natural Man does not
receive, that mere natural Reason does not receive; for the only Reason why the
natural Man does not receive it, is because natural Reason does not receive it;
and what is foolishness to the natural Man, is foolishness to natural Reason;
and what the natural Man cannot know, because they are spiritually discerned,
that natural Reason cannot discern.

Now can there be a plainer Proof than this (if we believe St. Paul) that there
are such Doctrines contained in the Gospel, as natural Reason does not receive,
or approve, but rejects with scorn: For it is not said, That the natural Man
cannot by the mere Light of Nature find out, or discover these things of the
Spirit; that he had asserted before, but these words give a reason of the
Infidelity of the Wise Men, the Scribes, the Disputers of this World, who
rejected the Faith when it was preached to them by the Apostles; that the
natural Man, (...), does not receive or approve the Faith; and not only so, but
rejects it as foolishness, as absurd, contradictious, impossible, unworthy of a
Man of Reason, and Philosophy. Like the Philoso^hers of the Epicureans, and the
Stoics, who encountered St. Paul, when he preached at Athens; and some said,
What will this babbler say; other some, He seems to be a setter forth of
strange gods, because he preached unto them Jesus and the res^rrection. 17.
Acts 18.

If then there be such Doctrines as these in the Gospel-Revelation, it is
certain, it can be no O^jection against any Article of the Christian Faith,
that mere natural Reason does not receive, approve, comprehend it, but accounts
it absurd, ridiculous, foolish; for thus the things of the Spirit of God were
to the natural Man in St. Paul's days, and thus they will always be. Nay if the
things of the Spirit of God are so far above the comprehension of Human Reason,
then such Doctrines as mere natural Reason does not receive, have this Mark and
Character of Divinity, if they are contained in the Gospel-Revelation: Nay, let
me add farther, That those Doctrines which have been always owned and defended
with the warmest Zeal by the Catholic Church, and opposed and rejected with as
great scorn and contempt by Pagans, Infidels, and Heretics, as a contradiction
to the Reason of Mankind, and the Philosophy of Nature, are most likely to be
the true Christian Faith; for this proves that the Christian Church always
believed them to be Gospel-Doctrines; and Infidels and Heretics rejected them
as incomprehensible, and inconceiveable, and absurd to Human Reason; and such
the Doctrine of the Trinity, and Incarnation, and Cross of Christ, have always
been to such natural Men.

Nay, farther: If there be such Doctrines in the Gospel-Revelation, which mere
Natural Reason receives not, but accounts foolishness; then it is certain,
that is not the true Christian Faith which contains none of these Mysteries,
none of this hidden Wisdom, none of these deep things of God. Let the Socinian
then tell us, What things there are in their Faith, which the Natural Man
receives not, which are above the comprehension of mere Natural Reason: They
glory that they have no such incomprehensible Mysteries in their Faith; that
they have a reasonable Faith, that they have stripped Christian Religion of
Riddles and Mysteries, and fitted it to the level and comprehension of Human
Reason; but this very thing wherein they glory, is a demonstration against
them, that Socinianism is not the true Christian Faith; for that contains such
Doctrines, as the Natural Man and mere Natural Reason receives not.

They commonly laugh at that distinction between things contrary to Reason, and
above Reason, which Human Reason is no judge of. We assert, That a Divine
Revelation can never contradict true Reason; for a Divine Revelation must be
true, and true Reason is true, and Truth cannot contradict Truth: But we
assert, that there are many things in the Christian Faith which are above
Reason; which Reason is not a competent judge of, and which Natural Men may
call contradictions, if every thing must pass for a contradiction to Reason,
which mere Natural Reason does not receive, approve, allow. But after all, they
must find something above Natural Reason, if they will believe like Christians;
for such things there are in the Christian Faith, and then let them distinguish
as they can between contrary to Reason, and above it.

But I must take notice of one thing more in these words, the reason why the
natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, and cannot know
them, viz. because they are spiritually discerned, (...), they are to be known
and judged of only by Spiritual Arguments and Methods; and therefore the
Natural Man, who rejects all means of Knowledge but Natural Reason, can never
know them. The Truth and Certainty of our Faith must be learnt, not from the
Evidence of Natural Reason and Philosophy, which was the Evidence the
Philosophers expected. The Greeks seek after Wisdom, 1 Cor. 1.22. But ^t. Paul
tells us, That Christ sent him to preach the Gospel, not with Wisdom of words,
lest the Cross of Christ should be made of none effect. v. 17. etc 2.4, 5. And
my Speech and my Preaching was not with enticing words of man's wisdom; but in
demonstration of the Spirit and of Power. I did not confirm my Doctrine by
Natural Reasons and Arguments; but by the Evidence of Miracles wrought by the
Power of the Holy Spirit; That your Faith should not stand in the wisdom of
men, but in the power of God. And the true Interpretation, and admirable Wisdom
of these Divine Mysteries, must be spiritually discerned also. Which things
also we speak not in the words which man's Wisdom teaches; but which the Holy
Ghost teaches, comparing spiritual things with spiritual. There is a spiritual
Language belongs to spiritual Things; and we must learn the true Sense and
Interpretation of the Faith, not from Natural Ideas, or the Words and Notions
of Philosophy, that is, in the Socinian Language, by Expounding Scripture by
Natural Reason; but by studying the Language of Scripture, and the meaning of
the Holy Ghost in it, especially by comparing the Old and the New Testament
together; Spiritual things with Spiritual: This is a way of Learning which
Natural Men despise, and therefore cannot know the things of the Spirit of God,
which must be spiritually discerned. All this I think abundantly proves that
there are such Mysteries in the Christian Faith, as mere Natural Reason cannot
discover, cannot prove, cannot receive and comprehend, cannot interpret; which
shows what reason we have to distinguish between matters of pure Faith and
Philosophy; and what danger there is of corrupting the Faith by Philosophy.

And now I think I may conclude; for I suppose no body will expect, that I
should defend my self against his ridiculous Charge, That I am a Socinian;
which had he believed, I should have found better treatment from him: But I
shall leave him to rave by himself, and look upon all these Hurricanes of Fury
and Vengeance, as a good sign that they feel themselves mortally Wounded.

THE END.

