ENGLAND's INTEREST; Or, a DISCIPLINE FOR SEAMEN: Wherein is Proposed, A Sure
Method for Raising Qualified SEAMEN, for the well Manning Their Majesty's Fleet
on all Occasions. ALSO A Method whereby Seamen will be obliged mutually to
Relieve each other on Board the Men of War Yearly, or thereabout; Except where
any Seaman by his own voluntary Consent shall be willing to stay longer.
LIKEWISE Is showed the Advantages, which by these Methods will accrue to the
Nation in General, and in Particular to the Merchants and Seamen: For hereby
the Wages now given in Merchant-Ships will be brought lower, and every Seamen
will have the Liberty of Choosing his own Commander, after the First Year, and
continuing with him, if he so likes.

By Captain George St. Lo.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Clavell, at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard.
MDCXCIV.

Licensed,

October 6. 1694. Edw. Cook.

To the Right Honorable the COMMISSIONERS for Executing the Office of LORD
HIGH ADMIRAL of ENGLAND and IRELAND, etc.
Right Honorable,
THE Transcendency of Your Knowledge and Aptness gained by long Experience in
Naval Affairs, has heightened my Ambition presumptuously to affix on You this
Dedication: And truly I should not so boldly have adventured to commit these
Productions of my Pen to the wide Ocean of Fluctuating Opinions; were I not
assured, that as in Judgment You are able to discern it, so in Your Noble and
Generous Dispositions favorably to accept and encourage it; since the Design
and Tendency hereof, is solely to promote and advance the Interest of Their
Majesty's and their Subjects, and to Encourage Seamen, even to a voluntary
hazarding their Lives and Fortunes, for the Recovering the Pristine Glory and
Reputation of our Navy Royal -- By the Rules of Charity, the Labourer is worthy
of his Hire; and none deserve it more than Seamen, if the proposed Methods be
put in Execution, (which I presume will meet with Your Acceptance and
Concurrence, as being designed for a Public Good; for which Your utmost
Endeavors and Indefatigable Industry has not been wanting) Then will the
Seamens Courage be fortified, Honesty encouraged, deserving Men rewarded, and
Merchants Affairs cheerfully proceeding, and the Reformers of ill Customs be
had in everlasting Memory, for the Good they did in their Generations: -- I
humbly beg Pardon for this Digression, and humbly desire that you would take it
into Your Consideration. For my part I ever did, and shall to the utmost of my
poor Abilities endeavor truly and faithfully to Serve Their Majesty's and
Their Loyal Subjects, and to have a due Esteem and Veneration for this
Honorable Board. Accept therefore this Offspring of some spare Hours,
improved wholly with an intent for a National Advantage: And be pleased (if
Your Lordships approve hereof) to encourage the same by a timely Recommendation
thereof to those concerned therein, for the promoting and advancing the
Interest and Weal of the Present Government, which is the hearty desire of

Your Lordships Most Faithful and Obedient Servant, George St. Lo.

To the READER, Especially the Loyal Subjects of Their Majesty's King WILLIAM
and Queen MARY, of ENGLAND, etc.
Gentlemen,
YOU have here presented unto your View, the various Circumstances and
Grievances, which the Nation in General, and in Particular, the Merchants and
Seamen do labor under, relating to Sea Affairs -- You will also find several
Proposals with Reasons thereto annexed, humbly offered for Redressing the same;
and saving to Their Majesty's considerable Sums of Money, which might be of
great Use otherways, tending to the Welfare of the Nation; and also of
procuring such Numbers of Able Seamen, who on all Occasions, and at a very
short Warning, shall be thought sufficient to well Man Their Majesty's Fleet,
without any sensible Charge to the Nation; whereby the great Inconveniences
and Mischiefs oft-times attending Pressing will be prevented, the Seamen
encouraged, the Merchants negotiating their Sea Affairs, without the least
Interruption from our Men of War, or having their Men Pressed from them as is
usually; and our Fleets in a probability of Reigning as SOVEREIGN of the Seas,
when, and as often as Their Majesty's shall please to Command the same.

It Is true, many Notions and Propositions have been the Product of this Age;
but none of this kind has been yet offered, that I know of, ex^^pt what I
proposed in my former Book.

I confess, I might have been silent as well as others, had not the present
Necessity of Affairs obliged me to appear in this kind: And as in the Body
Natural, the Help and Assistance of its Members is required toward its
Support: So in the Government of a Church or State every Person (by an
indissoluble Bond of Self-preservation) is obliged to propagate and advance the
Interest of that Commonwealth, of which he is a Member: And by how much the
more Benefit he receives thereby, by so much the more he is bound both in Duty
and Conscience to do his utmost, for the Honor and Service of the same.

It being therefore Their Majesty's most Gracious Pleasure, that I should as it
were immediately receive my Bread from their Hands, I must needs be thought
guilty of the highest Ingratitude, not to be studious either of Detecting any
fraudulent Contrivances or Practices, in any wise tending to the wrongfully
lessening Their Majesty's Treasure, or in not promoting whatsoever conduces to
the Benefit and Interest of Their Majesty's and Their Subjects.

Then there is this further Motive, to induce me to a sollicitous Care of the
Nations Good; Namely, as being a Native thereof. For what Person, whose Veins
are filled with true English Blood, can contentedly think of wearing Saboes or
Wooden Shoes; or willingly leave one Stone unturned, that he thinks may conduce
to the Welfare of his Native Soil? And who but a Madman would prefer the
Government of an Insulting and Tyrannical Prince, to that of a Faithful
Defender of our Rights and Privileges, nay of our Faith it self; but rather
with Tooth and Nail oppose whatsoever stands in Competition to its Happiness?

Lastly, The barbarous Usage which I received from the Tyrannical Hands of the
French, whilst I was a Prisoner there, (only for my Constancy and Resolution,
not to be biased to admit even of a dishonorable Thought of Their Majesty's,
or the present Government) puts me upon endeavoring to retaliate their
Kindness, which to do, I know no better way, than by proposing Methods, whereby
we may be Strengthened Abroad, and Prosperous at Home; and if these following
Proposals meet with such Effects, my Design is answered.

To plead for my Book, I will not, the Subject whereon it treats, carrying its
Advocate along with it: I am sure here is a Foundation for a more ingenious
Architect to build on, if this be thought insufficient. As for Curiosity in the
Method, that cannot be expected from me, who pretend only to know something
belonging to a Sailer: My Dishes being dressed not as at a Feast, but as at an
Ordinary; neither are they placed so Methodically as they might have been; I
taking things not orderly, but as they happened to come into my Mind. I believe
that neither my Subject nor Methods will please all, yet I presume it may
please some. What the Ignorant say of it, I value not; They are like the Cock
in the Fable, who despised the Jewel only because he knew not its worth. And
what the Envious say of it, I pass not; They are like the Dog, who would
neither Eat himself, nor suffer the Ox to Eat: It Is the candid Censure of the
Impartial, Judicious and Solid Judgments which I respect, and to which alone
I Will submit, being Servant to all such, whilst.

George St. Lo.

ENGLAND's INTEREST; Or, a Discipline for Seamen.
AMIDST all the Addresses hitherto made, for the redressing Public Grievances,
(it seems very strange) That although there are (doubtless) within this
Kingdom, many Wellwillers to Seamen in general, yet it is observed; That not
one, (as yet) has taken upon him to propose a Method for redressing the
Complaints and Hardships of those Seamen, who have been constantly employed in
the King's Service all this War, and have to their power, born the Fatigues
thereof; by contriving some ways or means, whereby Seamen (without Partiality)
might take Turns to relieve each other, on Board the Men of War. For it is very
obvious, that a great many Seamen, either by Protections, or some other
Evasions, have shifted their Necks out of the Collar (whereby it has lain the
harder on the first mentioned) getting into Merchants Service, only for the
lucre of greater Pay, than is given to Fore-mast-men in Men of War; without any
respect to the welfare of the Nation in general; receiving sometimes Fifty
Shillings, and sometimes Three Pound, Four Pound, and Five Pound per Month;
whilst most part of those on Board the King's Ships, have not received above
Three and Twenty shillings per Month during the whole War. And perhaps kept
Some Seamen harder dealt with thanothers.
out of that for three or four Years, by being turned over from Ship to Ship;
and in all that time, hardly enjoying the comfort of their Families for one
Month. When others by the means aforesaid, have been at liberty to go when they
would, and come when they pleased. Sometimes making more Wages in two Months,
than those (...) in Men of War do in a whole Year, to their Disencouragement
and great Dissatisfaction.

The Men of Wars Men, have not only had cause of Complaint, as before is
hinted: But the Merchants at the same time have been Sufferers considerably
many ways.

First, Not only by giving extraordinary Wages per Month (as before) but also
by losing a great part of the benefit of their Voyages; Their Ships oft-times
Merchants sufferers several ways.
staying a great while longer, than is expected at their Ports, when arrived in
England; only for want of those Men, who were pressed out of them; whereby their
Goods have been much damnified, and especially their Wine and perishable
Commodities: And the King's Customs considerably lessened thereby.

Secondly, Many of their Ships have been Lost, by venturing to Sail without
their Complement of Men; part whereof have been pressed from them, as before is
mentioned. And for those that have had the good Fortune to escape both the
danger of the Sea and of the Enemy, and to arrive at Plymouth or the Downs,
have been obliged to give Ten Pound per Head from the former place, and Five or
Six Pound per Head from the latter, only to carry them up to London: Which from
the latter, sometimes has been effected in two Days.

Thirdly, It Is very hard upon them to be obliged by Doctors Commons to pay
their Men their Wages, after the losing both Ships and Cargo, which usually
amounts to several Thousand Pounds; when perhaps through their Men's Cowardice,
the Ship has been without resistance delivered to the Enemy, and not one Gun
fired in her defense.

Upon the foregoing Reasons, and others which might be produced, the Merchants
are always at uncertainties, as to the time of the performing their Voyages,
(Wind and Weather allowed) neither can they give any reasonable Estimate,
whether to be gainers or losers by their Cargo: It being the Opinion of several
Merchants, that it would be as much to their advantage, for those Ships which
are Insured, to be taken by the Enemy, as to be detained so long, as oft-times
they are for want of their Men: For in the former Case, they would know what to
demand of the Insurers; but in the latter they are most uncertain what to make
of their Voyage; One third part of some of their Goods, as Wines, etc. being
hardly Merchantable when it comes Home; as the Custom-House-Officers during
this War have experienced, by the Abatements made in the Duties thereof.

The Subjects (as in the foregoing Discourse appears) are not only injured and
uneasy, but their Majesty's are also concerned herein -- For the King's Ships
which are Cruizers (for want of a due Method for the acquiring a competent
number of Seamen fit for their Majesty's Why Cruizers are not more abroad.
Service on all occasions) do oft-times, for want of them, lie two or three
Months after they are Clean, ere they can go to Sea, and almost at the same
Charge as if Manned, and abroad in the way to do Service, being many times in
want of a second Cleaning ere they go once out of a Harbor.

Here is likewise a very considerable Charge of many Thousand Pounds per Annum
spent on the Nations account in impressing Men at Sea and on Shore for the
Service: In keeping many Tenders and their Men in Pay and Victuals; besides the
hazard of losing them, which if it so happen, the King is obliged to pay for
them. And many other considerable Sums of Money there are expended on several
Accounts, a great part of which might be saved, the Particulars whereof take as
follows:

First, The King is at a considerable Charge Yearly, in giving Imprest-Mony to
Commanders; every Captain of a First-Rate being allowed Eighty Pound, of a
Second-Rate Sixty Five Pound, of a Third-Rate Fifty Charge of Impressed to
Commanders.
Pound, of a Fourth-Rate Forty Pound, of a Fifth-Rate Twenty Pound; besides the
Bills brought in after for extraordinary Charges in Impressing, etc. amounting
usually to between a Hundred and Four Hundred Pound for a Captain, and the
Lieutenants Bills to little less.

But the Commissioners of the Navy, by their strict scrutiny into the Truth and
Reasonableness of their Accounts, do many times find a sufficient and just
Cause for abatements in their Bills, by putting those said Officers to their
Oaths, for a Justification of the verity of their Accounts, which being by some
Officers scrupled at, gives so great a Suspicion of some Fallacy in the matter,
that thereupon deductions are made, or otherwise the Charge would be much
augmented.

Secondly, There is a very considerable Charge to the Nation in maintaining a
Hundred and Thirty Tenders this Year with their Men, and Provisions for Six
Months in the Year, which one with another is the least time they are in Pay:
Each Smack and Yacht standing the Charge of Tenders.
King in Five Shillings Six Pence apiece per Tun, and each Hoy and Ketch in Six
Shillings per Tun per Month; of which Vessels each Master has Four Pound per
Month, each Mate Two Pound per Month, each Able Seaman Twenty Four Shillings,
and each Ordinary Nineteen Shillings, being in the whole Nine Hundred Fifty and
Five Men and Boys. There is also their Victuals, which rises considerably this
Year, Provisions being very dear; the which stands the King (by a modest
Computation) in Twenty Six Shillings a Man per Month; besides the hazard of
losing those Tenders; it being (almost) no wonder for some, amongst so many, to
come short home: Every one of those taken by the Enemy standing the King in
about Four Hundred Pound. But the Year being not spent so far as for Tenders to
be discharged, I cannot at this time give an Account of that accidental and
uncertain Charge.

Thirdly, In the Year 91. There was given to Seamen 6530 l. Bounty-Mony, for
Encouragement to come into the King's Service; besides Conduct-Mony, which
being not practiced at this time, I shall omit in the Charge of this Year.

Fourthly, There is also about 206 l. given in one Year to the Rulers of
Watermens-Hall, for their Charge Charge to the Rulers of Watermens-Hall.
in sending Men for Sea-Service: But if they were such other Years, as those
sent by them on Board the hired Merchant-ships this Year, 'twas a dear Bargain,
of those sent this Year by them being Boys, as of late has been observed.

Fifthly and Lastly, The Money given to Vice-Admirals of Counties, for their
Charge in sending (for the most part) such Persons as the Watermen did send
this Year, has been very considerable: The least Sum given them being Fifty
Pound, of which there were not above Three in one Year; The rest being between
an Hundred and Six Hundred and Fifty Pound, as by the Accounts of the
Collectors of the Customs given into the Navy-Office does appear: But not
knowing how to collect the whole Charge thereof, I cannot insert it here. The
aggregate of those particular Charges now in use, and what of them have come to
my knowledge (by a modest Computation) do amount to 36030 l. 10 s. per Annum;
The which if saved, or but thereof, which may easily be done by the following
Methods, might be employed several ways for the Benefit, and to the
Satisfaction of the Nation: It being very plain, that the less extravagant and
unnecessary Charge we are at, the less Taxes will be for every Man's share, and
consequently the better able to hold out the War.

See the particular Account of the aforementioned Charge, of what comes to my
Knowledge, Summed up underneath.
Rates. No l. l. s. Imprest-Mony given to Commanders in the Line of Battle. 1
-- 6 at 80 is 00480 00 2 -- 9 65 00585 00 3-30 50 01500 00 4-07 40 00280 00
Those are half of what are out of the Line of Battle, and receive Imprest-Mony.
The other being in foreign Parts are not chargeable as those at Home, and so
are omitted. 3-07 at 50 is 00350 00 4-14 40 00560 00 5-14 20 00280 00 Smacks,
etc. 50 containing 1626 Tun, at 5 s. 6 d. a Tun. per Month for Six Months, is
02682 18 Ketches, etc. 80. Containing 5617 Tun, at 6 s. a Tun. 10110 12 Masters
130. at 4 l. apiece. 03120 00 Masters-mates 130. at 2 l. apiece 01560 00 Able
435. at 1 l. 4 s. each. 03132 00 Ordinary 260. at 19 s. each. 01480 00 955 Men
and Boys Victuals, at 26 s. each. 07449 00 To the Rulers of Water-mens-Hall,
for one Year -- 00206 00 of Captains and Lieutenants Bills for Five Years past,
modestly computed is -- 02255 00 36030 10

The aforementioned Charges to the Nation: The Grievances and Sufferings of the
Merchants, whose Loss usually exceeds the said Sum of 36030 l. 10 s. Yearly,
and that purely for want of their Men, which are taken from them as aforesaid;
whereby many Merchants of good Estates formerly, are now reduced, and Trading
much decayed: Together with the Hardships which many Sailers undergo in respect
of others, and the difficulty of getting those Men which are fit for their
Majesty's Service, notwithstanding the extraordinary Charge attending the same.
I say, all these things being premised, and as they are unquestionably True; it
must needs be thought an acceptable Undertaking (by all those who are well
affected to Their Majesty's and the present Government) to propose a Method,
and probable means of lessening the greatest part of the before-recited Charge;
of redressing the Merchants Grievances, and acquiring a competent Number of
Seamen on all Occasions for the Service; without Pressing any at Sea, and of
disposing them on Board the King's Ships from time to time, with an equal and
impartial Hand, so as that every Man shall take his turn Yearly, or as shall be
thought fit to be in the Service; except where any Seamen shall think fit to
continue longer on Board Men of War, through hopes of Preferment: All which is
humbly proposed to be done by the following Methods.

But it is thought, that want of Encouragement and Patronage (from the Calumnies
and Prejudices of those who are inveterately bent against the true Interest of
the Nation) have been a Check and Restraint to the Genius of several Persons;
who (doubtless) had they been at liberty, might long ago have offered diverse
good and advantageous Proposals, of this and other kinds, tending to the
Nations Advantage and Interest. And it is not to be questioned, but that many an
Engine of that kind stands still, for want of the assistance of noble and
public spirited Persons to set it on work; which if encouraged might be of
great Use. The better to effect what is premised, it is humbly proposed, That
all Self-interest be discarded; and that no Persons of any Rank or Quality, do
protect any Person belonging to the Sea or employed in any River: Or Trading in
Boats or Vessels of any kind whatsoever. For as it is very reasonable, that any
Man's private Opinion ought to submit to a general Council: So it can be no less
equitable, that a few private Interests do give way to a National Advantage; a
Limb being not so valuable as the whole Body.

These things being granted as indispensably necessary, I shall endeavor to
lay down the Method with as much brevity and plainness as I can.

But I know, that whoever exposes himself to the World, in things of this
kind, must expect to meet with many virulent Censures of Detraction, and that
it is impossible to please every one. But since there is not the least design in
the Author, to make himself any peculiar Interest hereby; it is to be hoped, it
may meet with the kinder Reception from all noble and generous spirited
Patriots. The benefit of the Nation in general, and in particular, the Ease and
Encouragement of Sailers, who through the whole Series of this War have
constantly been fatigued therein, being the only aim and design in this
Undertaking.

A Method for the Choosing such Persons as are fitly Qualified to be made
Officers, for the Registring Seamen, etc.
Prop. 1. It Is humbly proposed, that a competent Number of Registers or Naval
Officers, (for so they may be called) be appointed; one for each of those
Counties bordering on the Sea, which are large; and for those Counties that are
small to the Seaward and lie together; one Officer may serve for two. Each
Officer to keep his Office in the chief Port or most convenient Place in his
respective County, for the due Registring Seamen, Shipwrights, Caulkers,
Sailmakers, and Rope-makers; and performing such Offices as hereafter are
proposed.

Ratio 1. These Officers being established one in each County that is large,
and one for any two Counties which are small to the Seaward, and lie together;
will be able to give an account what Seamen are belonging to each particular
Place in their several Counties, from whom the Lords of the Admiralty (as
occasion shall offer) may require a List of their Numbers, and accordingly
issue out Orders for the going on Board such Ship or Ships, as by them shall be
thought meet and convenient, lying near those Places or any other.

Prop. 2. That those Naval Officers shall be such Persons How Persons ought to
be qualified to be Naval Officers.
as have been Captains of Men of War, Four Years at least, without intermission
in the King's Service. And 'twill not only be most proper; but also less
chargeable to their Majesty's, That they be Half-Pay Captains, or Superannuated
ones; if a sufficient Number of those may be had: Likewise that they be
Commissionated to be Justices of the Peace for those Counties in which they
shall be Established: And that they be allowed, (by the King) such an addition
of Pay or Wages to their former Sallaries, as may amount the whole to 400 l.
per Annum, which may be thought a competent Maintenance for them: Whereby they
will not be exposed to the breach of Trust, as otherwise they might, if
straightened in their yearly Allowance of Sallary.

Rat. 2. Why such Officers should be Half-Pay Captains, or Superannuated ones,
is because in all probability, they are most likely to understand Sea Affairs;
and rightly to put in Execution such Orders, as from time to time shall be
directed to them, from the Lords of the Admiralty. These Officers upon
Examination into the Qualities and Abilities of Seamen, are also most likely to
be competent Judges thereof: Further, such Captains have now each of them a
Sallary from the King, as some 136 l. others 273 l. per Annum, according to the
Rates of those Ships they served in last. So that what has been given to
Deputy-Vice-Admirals, etc. as before is mentioned, for sending in those, which
for the most part, have been raw and unfit for the Sea, and many of them never
at Sea; together with the Impress-Mony given to Captains, will over and above
complete their Sallaries of 400 l. per Annum, and their Instruments Sallaries
likewise: So that hereby the Charge of those Offices will be defrayed out of
extraordinary Charges, which may be saved.

Prop. 3. That each Officer be allowed two Clerks, One at 50 l. per Annum and
another at 30 l. a Year Sallary, to be Clerks and their Sallaries.
paid by the Navy, according to the Use and Custom thereof. These two Clerks
shall be resident where the said Naval Officer keeps his head Office. But if
the County be large and has several Seaports in it, then to be allowed as many
more Clerks at 30 l. a Year, as shall be thought necessary for that Service,
and the ease of the Subject.

Rat. 3. These Clerks will be useful in keeping the Registers: and in making
and Copying all the Lists of Seamen, etc. and in making out the Warrants, which
Masters of Ships must take with them, before they Sail: And the Bonds which
they must give to observe the Articles hereafter mentioned. For it cannot be
expected to be done by the Naval Officer himself, who will have business enough
to decide Controversies, and to see to the well Management of his Office in
every respect: And for a further Illustration of the Disposing the Naval
Officers and their Clerks, take the following Example of

Dorset-shire.
The Naval Officer with his two Clerks shall have their place of Residence at
Weymouth, another Clerk at Lime, and another at Pool, which two latter shall
likewise Register those Seamen, Shipwrights, Caulkers, etc. which shall live
nearest and most convenient to come thither. In these Methods, respect being to
be had to that which shall least offend the Subject, or be burdensome to them.
These two latter Clerks (from time to time) shall give An Example of disposing
the Naval Officers.
an exact Acount to the Naval Officer at Weymouth of all their Proceedings; who
himself, as often as need requires shall visit those particular Ports, to hear
all Complaints and to rectify the same; which will be a great ease to those
Inhabitants who live remote from Weymouth: And before his going thither, shall
give timely Notice to the Clerks there resident, that they may cause the same
to be published on a preceding Market Day or a Sunday, that the Inhabitants may
know the same. The chief Clerk to the Naval Officer shall likewise be employed,
as often as occasion shall require, to ride from place to place as a Supervisor
over those two Clerks at the Out-Ports: And also to go on Board all such Ships,
as are at any Ports, in his Precincts, at their going thence, or return Home
from any Voyage: To see if their Warrants do agree with the Original kept in
the respective Office, in every particular. Every Master of a Merchant-Man
being to be obliged, to take a Warrant with the Names of his Men, etc. therein
inserted, from that Port whence he fits out; for which he shall pay half a
Crown to the chief Clerk; and the same price for the Bond he shall give for
bringing back his Men, or giving a satisfactory account what is become of them;
as hereafter shall be explained: A Copy of the Warrant may be this underwritten,

JOhn Jenkins, Master of the William and Mary Pink, Copy of a Warrant to be
taken by Masters of Merchantmen.
(Inhabiting in the Highstreet in Pool) being about an Hundred Tuns, and bound
for the West Indies) aged Twenty Seven Years; having used the Sea Twelve Years;
One whereof he has spent in the King's Service this War, in 1692. Has hereby a
Permit to carry the Eight Persons under-mentioned with him to the West Indies,
without being Impressed from him, or otherwise molested, to the hindrance of his
Voyage:

Given under my Hand and Seal at Weymouth this 27th Day of August, 1694.
Names. Time of being Listed. Place of Abode. How long used the Sea. Whether in
the King's Service, and how long. On Board what Ship. Age D. or R. Whither.
Years. Years. James Clerk. Jan. 3. 91. Leaverpool. 3 Never. Portsmouth. 27
Will. Jones. Ju. 7. 92. Ramsgate. 17 3 Do. 30 Ro^. Burby. July 12. 94*
Newcastle. 1 1 Woolwich. 17 Tho. Horn. Do. Do. 10 4 Dartmouth. 26 Joseph Wood.
Do. Do. 11 3 Do. 28 Francis Rose. Aug. 1. 94. Southampon. 20 Never. Mary. 45
Tim. Thom. Do. Do. 19 4 Do. 36 Charles Holt. Yarmouth. Yarmouth. 30 3 Dover. 50

Prop. 4. In the next place, it will be needful, that a general Office relating
to the particular Offices be kept in London, and managed by a Naval Officer and
a competent number of Clerks, who shall be allowed larger Sallaries than to
those in the Country, in respect of the multiplicity of Business, which must
needs attend the Office, above what may be expected in the Country. Unto this
general Office, every individual Naval A general Office to be kept in London.
Officer in the Country, shall every Month transmit a Copy or List of all the
Men he shall Register from time to time; and of the Quality and Circumstance of
each Man, according as he shall be entered, and what are in the Service, and
what on Shore; and shall keep an Alphabet-Book, beginning with the first Letter
of each Man's Surname, for the ready finding them at any time. He shall also
from time to time, send a particular Account of what Charges he has been at on
account of the Office, and what Money has been issued as a Reward to any Persons
upon the Conditions hereafter-mentioned: Which Accounts shall be adjusted (by
the general Officer) with the principal Officers and Commissioners of Their
Majesty's Navy, from whom all Bills of Impressed (for the defraying any of the
aforementioned Charges) shall proceed.

Rat. 4. This Grand Office being settled, and from time to time receiving an
account of what Men, and how many are Registered at every individual Place, will
be able to signify the fame unto the Lords of the Admiralty upon their
demanding it: And being likewise informed by the said Naval Officers, who are
at Sea, and who on Shore; The Lords upon any great and emergent occasion may
issue out their Orders, for such a certain Number of them, as shall be wanted
on any Expedition in a very short time. As for the general Officer adjusting
the Accounts of the other Officers, with the Commissioners of the Navy (that
will prevent the Charge which a new Office would require for that purpose) And
it being most properly under the Verge of the Commissioners of the Navy, as
things relating to that Office; it is therefore most fit that the Accounts
thereof should be by them examined and approved, or otherwise disallowed and
rejected.

Prop. 5. Lastly, That two Clerks be allowed at Gravesend, Clerks at Gravesend.
if so many may be thought sufficient, at 60 l. per Annum Sallary, who shall
mutually assist one another, and shall be accountable to the said Office at
London for what they do. Unto these two Clerks every Master of a Merchant Ship
that goes down the River shall show his Warrant, which the said Clerks shall
either Snip, as the Searchers do the Cocquets; or otherwise put their Names
thereto, as by Directions to them shall be thought most fit and convenient for
the Prosecution of the intended Design.

Rat. 5. These two Clerks may be allowed 10 l. apiece per Annum, more than
other Clerks in the Country, being supposed to be at extraordinary Duty in the
performance of their Office. Their business will be to examine all Masters of
Ships at their going down the River by Gravesend; and likewise at their return
from any Voyage; Whether they have in every respect complied with the
Conditions required: That is, that their Men are the same specified in the
Warrant which they must take from the grand Office; and that they have given
Bond as they ought, and performed such Articles as they shall thereby be
obliged to observe: A Counterpart whereof they shall produce to the said
Clerks; who shall examine into the Truth thereof by comparing them with the
Copies, which the said Clerks shall receive from the general Office.

The Method for Registring Seamen, Shipwrights, Caulkers, Ropemakers and
Sailmakers, to be in Readiness for Their Majesty's Service at a short Warning.
Prop. 1. THE Magistrates and chief Officers of each individual Place in every
County, as the Mayors in Corporations, the Bailiffs, Constables, Headboroughs,
Tythingmen, and the like, in their respective Towns, Buroughs, Villages,
Hamlets, etc. shall each of them within six Weeks after the Publication hereof,
(by Proclamation or otherwise) bring as perfect a List as possibly they can; of
all Shipwrights, Caulkers, Sailmakers and Ropemakers: And of all Masters of
Ships, Seamen or Watermen; And all other belonging to any Craft in any River,
as Western-barges, Ware-barges, Row-barges, Sand-barges, Tilt-boats,
Ferry-boats, Fishing-boats, Ballast-Lighters, Keels and the like, or that have
used the Sea within these seven Years last; being between the Age of sixteen
and sixty, being in or belonging to any Towns or Places within their Liberties
as aforesaid, with as exact an Account as they can, of the respective Ages of
each Person, and their Place of Abode; How long they have used the Sea, and
whether ever in the King's Service; and how long they have served therein this
War. The which Lists so made out; They shall attest under their Hands and
Seals, and the same deliver (as before directed) unto the said Naval Officer.

Rat. 1. The Registring Shipwrights, Caulkers, Sailmakers and Ropemakers, will
be advantageous several ways: For thereby we shall always be provided with a
Supply of such sort of Workmen at a very short Warning, both for the King's
Ships, and Dock-yards, (without the Charge and The Advantage of Registring
Shipwrights, Caulkers, etc.
Trouble of Pressing) which from the latter, being ofttimes necessitously drawn
to send on Board the King's Ships, are wanted in the said Yards; (for the
expediting and sitting out the Ships on emergent Occasions) whereby they are
delayed, and lie still; when perhaps, if they were sooner dispatched and sent
abroad, they might be in the way to take Prizes, or at leastwise at Sea to
prevent the French Privateers from ranging the Seas, and taking so many
Merchant Men as they do. In the next place, having plenty of those Workmen on
all Calls, there may be more Cordage made in the King's yards, which may be
either cheaper to the King, or better than what is made in Merchants yards, or
both. There may likewise more Men of War be built in the King's own yards, than
now are, which may be worth considering; for it is found by Experience, That
Ships built in the King's own yards, are much more serviceable than those built
in Merchants yards for him. There are several other Advantages that will attend
this Method, if practiced, which, since Time and Practice may discover, I shall
forbear to enumerate at this time. The Registring Seamen, Watermen, etc. will
be the ready way of knowing what Number of Seamen there are in England, and
how many may be had from each individual place, on all occasions to serve in
Their Majesty's Fleet: Which being put in Execution by Virtue of an Act of
Parliament, cannot in all probability miss of its desired Effects; Namely, Of
procuring a competent Number of Saylors to Man Their Majesty's Fleet, on all
occasions, without impressing any at Sea; whereby the greatest part of the
aforementioned Charges to Their Majesty's will be saved, which is worth while
to be considered of, and practiced: For it is evident, That one Third Part of
the best Seamen in England, have by one means or other avoided being in the
King's Service this War. And it is not, that Seamen are wanting in England,
that the King's Ships are so ill Manned, as generally they are; and that so
much unnecessary Expense daily attends the Manning the King's Ships; but only
for want of a due Method for the same, and a Penalty to be inflicted on the
hinderers of its due Execution: For it is observed, That both Justices of the
Peace, Mayors, Bailiffs, Constables, etc. for the most part have been too
remiss in their Duties, in not assisting those Officers (sent to press) as they
ought; for instead of routing Seamen out of their Coves and hiding Places,
many of them ('it is to be feared) have rather concealed or countenanced many
Persons, who ought, and were fit to be in the Service.

Prop. 2. They shall bring all the Persons so listed (except Listed Seamen to
Appear before the Naval Officer.
what are at Sea) unto the Naval Officer, on some prefixed days, that he may see
them, and also search into the Truth of what the Magistrates shall have
certifyed concerning them on the Lists: Which said Naval Officer, together with
an other Justice of Peace, and a Surgeon, shall examine into the Abilities and
Conditions of each Person returned on the Lists, who shall pretend unfitness
for the Sea, by reason of Hurts, Wounds, Bruises, or any other Accidents of
that nature; and according as they shall find the matter, shall either acquit,
or continue them on the Lists, as Persons qualified for the King's Service.

Ratio 2. The appearing of the said persons themselves, will oblige the
Magistrates and other Officers to be as exact as possible they can in giving in
perfect Lists, as is required, for fear of being found out if they do
otherwise: For Seamen in every individual place, being for the most part
acquainted one with another, and missing any one, they know who ought to appear
before the Naval Officer as well as themselves, will be apt to discover the
same. As for the examination by the Naval Officers, Justices of the Peace, and
Surgeons, into the Qualities and Condition, of any, pretending unfitness for
the Sea; it is very reasonable, that those who are really unfit for the
Sea-service in Men of War, be not charged on the Lists; for if so, the Lists
would not only be filled with many unquallified persons, but Their Majesty's
disappointed, by depending on so many able men, from such and such places on
any occasion: When perhaps, a great part of them were wholly unfit for that
service.

Prop. 3. That all those Masters of Ships, who shall be thought Masters of
Merchant Men who shall be Exempted from going to Sea, to find an able Man, or
Pay 5 l.
fit to be exempted from going into the King's Service, shall nevertheless each
of them send an able Seaman in his room, who shall be approved of by the said
Naval Officer; and whose turn it is not to go into the Kings Service that Year,
or otherwise, to pay Five Pounds into the Naval Officers hands, so often as it is
his turn to go on Board the King's Ships: But in case of failure of Payment
within the Six Weeks, wherein it ought to be Paid, then to forfeit Twenty
Pounds, to be levied by Distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods, or as the
Parliament shall think meet to Order. Farther, that every person going out of
his turn, shall be entered in the Registers Books, upon whose Account, and in
whose room he goes; and to be liable to such punishment for any fault by him
committed, as any other person who goes for himself: Lastly, That the Naval
officer shall enter into his Book of Accounts, all such Sums of Money as he
shall receive for any forfeitures from any person, and the same shall transmit
Monthly (or as often as shall be required) to the General Officer in London, upon
Pain of Losing his Employ; or to be Fined as the Parliament shall direct for
his offending therein.

Ratio 3. This cannot be thought hard by Masters of Merchant Men; for in France,
though Gentlemen are exempted from paying Taxes, yet they are obliged to serve
the King in their own persons: And the payment of Five Pounds, or sending an
able Man fit for the Sea, cannot be thought much charge to them, since it will
not come to a man's turn above once in Three Years. One 3d. part of the Seamen
which have not been in the Service this War, together with those who are
willing to continue on Board, and what will go Voluntarily, being thought
sufficient to Man the King's Ships; but if all Masters of Ships and Vessels,
and pretenders to it, should be exempted from sending a Man, or paying Five
Pounds as before, it must Why Masters of Merchantmen should find an able Man,
or pay Five Pounds.
fall much the harder on the Hawl-bowlings; and under this pretext we should
have the best part of Forty Thousand Men Protected; It being evident that most
Ships and Vessels has protected Three Masters: For one being known to be a
Master, is not questioned, and another getting a Protection for the same Ship,
or Vessel, as Master of her, is by that means exempted from being pressed into
the King's Service; and a Third, by carrying a Charter party in his Pocket
keeps himself clear. Nay, the very Oyster-Cocks and other small Craft (as well
as Ships, and other great Vessels) have found out a way, to Free themselves
from the King's Service, as has not long since been discovered by a Captain of
a Man of War. For it is usual, as by some of their own company has been
ingenuously acknowledged, for them to carry Bills of Sale in their Pockets,
formally made for such and such Ships, as if their own, and were really
Masters; when indeed they were not, and only contrived for to cheat the
Press-Masters, and to keep themselves out of the Service: But this Method of
obliging Masters to send an able Seaman, or to pay Five Pounds as before, will
be the ready way to prevent this, or other like Cheats for the future.

Prop. 4. Every Officer or Officers, who shall refuse or neglect Penalty on
such Officers as shall not bring in true Lists.
to bring in such List or Lists as before is directed; shall be liable to such
Penalty as the Parliament shall think fit to impose on them, not exceeding
Twenty Pounds if they so please; and for every person that shall be found in
their respective Towns, Villages, Hamletts, etc. after the Six weeks are
expired, wherein the Lists ought to be given in, and did at the same time
belong to any of their respective places, and ought to have been Listed; and
that it does appear by good evidence to be the said Officers fault, every
Officer and Officers so Offending; shall for every person so omitted, forfeit
Ten Pounds. But if it appears that the neglect is in the Inhabitants, and that
they have by any ways or means concealed any such Persons from the knowledge of
the said Officers, whereby they could not be listed; then every such Inhabitant
shall forfeit the said Sum of Ten Pounds, to be levied by Distress and sale of
the Offenders Goods, or by any other means as the Parliament shall appoint: One
Moiety thereof to be given to the Informer, and the other to be employed in the
bringing up of Youth for Sea-Service, or for the Chest at Chattham.

Ratio 4. The Penalty proposed to be Inflicted on such Officers as shall not
comply with these Propositions to the utmost of their powers, and also on
Inhabitants for concealing Persons from being Registered; cannot be thought hard
or unreasonable, since the design thereof is not intended for their Money, but
only to oblige them to a Performance of their Duties, as herein is required;
which if observed, they themselves will be Sharers in the advantage, which
thereby will accrue to the Nation in general: For by this Method, the King will
be supplied with Able and Dareing Seamen, instead of Raw Lads, and Persons
never at Sea, without the great charge of Pressing, which the King is Yearly
at; hereby also our Ships will be in a condition of Defending themselves better
than many has formerly done, and Offending the Enemy. For one great Reason,
nay, the greatest which can be given; for the Loss of most of our Men of War,
taken by the Enemy, is, that our Ships have been very ill Manned; which by this
Method, being better provided for, the Enemy will ('it is to be hoped) find the
advantage on our side, to their Expense and Cost.

Prop. 5. If any Victualler shall entertain any Seamen, Watermen, etc. a
Fortnight in his house being not Registered, and does not discover the same to
the Naval Officer, or his Clerks, or to the Magistrates and Officers who ought
to bring in the Lists of them; being convicted of the same, shall (ipso
Victuallers not to Entertain Seamen.
facto) forfeit Five Pounds to be paid and recovered as before is provided for
other Forfeitures, and also lose his License, and for the future be utterly
disabled to have another: If he be a Housekeeper only, to forfeit Five Pounds,
One Moiety to be given to the Informer, and the other to the uses aforesaid.

Ratio 5. The Penalty to be Imposed on the Victuallers, cannot be thought to be
a Severity toward them; for of late Years many able Seamen have exercised
that Calling as a Pretext to keep them from going to Sea: Many of which Houses
are prejudicial to the King's Service, by entertaining the Seamen in their
Houses, when they ought to be on Board; and not only so, but many times
concealing them from the Officers of the Ships when they come to fetch them on
Board, whereby many of them are left behind, and consequently Pricked Run, to
the great hindrance, and almost undoing of many Families; so that if those be
themselves caught in the Corn, they ought to be put into the Pound: As for
Housekeepers, if they will hazard the Penalty, and may avoid it, they cannot
grumble if they suffer for their own Folly.

Prop. 6. That no Master Shipwright, Caulker, Sail-maker, or Rope-maker, do
employ or entertain any Shipwrights, Caulkers, Sail-makers, or Rope-makers,
into their Works or Service, but what they know to be Registered, or does so
appear No Master Shipwright, etc. to Entertain unregistred Seamen.
by Certificate under the hand and Seal of the Naval Officer, where he or they
were Registered; upon the Penalty of forfeiting Ten Pounds for each man which
shall be so employed: Except all those Apprentices who have not served 5 Years,
after which time of Service, they shall be Registered likewise. And if any
Shipwright, Caulker, Rope maker, or Sail maker, shall neglect to give in his
Name to be Registered within Six Weeks as aforementioned; and shall presume to
work in Merchants-yards, after the time they ought to be Registered, and are
not, to forfeit 20 s. a Month for every Month they shall so stand out, to be
recovered as aforesaid: One Moiety to be given to the Informer, and the other
to the uses aforesaid.

Ratio 6. By this means the Number of all those kinds of Tradesmen will be
known in general, and in particular, how many are at each individual place; so
that upon the want of any Number of them, to dispatch any Works requiring their
assistance, it is but to send to the Naval Officers, who shall be empowered to
send such Persons; and so many as are desired at a very short warning: And
whatsoever person of them being pricked down to serve in any Yards or Ships,
(and having notice thereof) who shall refuse or neglect to serve according as
he shall be Ordered; shall from that time be liable to serve on Board the
King's Ships during the War: Several of the Advantages attending this Service,
being before hinted in the first Reason, for Registering Shipwrights, Caulkers,
etc. I shall forbear to trouble the Reader any further therewith in this
Reason, although both comes far short of what might be said thereto.

Prop. 7. That the Naval Officers in the Country (upon their Receipt of any
Orders from the Lords of the Admiralty (for the speedy sending any Number of
Seamen from any Port or Ports under their Care and Management, on Board any
Ship or Ships, as shall be appointed) shall cause the same forthwith to be put
in Execution; by causing Lists of all Persons Names so ordered to go to Sea, to
be affixed on Timely notice to be given to Seamen Ordered for Men of War.
the respective Church Doors where they live, and also on all Market-Houses,
and at all public places which shall be thought most proper for the Notifying
the same to the Inhabitants; with the time inserted therein when they are to
go, and on Board what Ship: And every Seaman which shall be found to have
refused or neglected going on Board as he ought, and whereto he was appointed,
upon his being discovered and apprehended, shall be sent on Board one of the
King's Ships; and from that time be obliged to continue in the Service during
the whole War, without benefit of being relieved, by taking turns with those
who shall duly observe Orders: And whosoever shall discover any Seaman so
Offending, shall Receive 40 s. Reward from the Naval Officer, immediately after
the apprehending and bringing the said Offender before the Naval Officer, or
some Justice of the Peace so as that he may be secured: Which 40 s. shall be
stopped out of the first Pay that shall grow due to the said Seaman, after his
being sent on Board; the like Reward to be given to any Person who shall cause
any Deserter from his Ship to be apprehended.

Ratio 7. It is very necessary, That the Naval Officers do observe, and duly
put in Execution, all such Orders as they shall from time to time receive from
the LORDS of the ADMIRALTY; and that Lists of all Men's Names Ordered for the
Sea, with the time when, and on Board what Ship each Seaman is to go, be
timely published, that the Seamen may have no pretense of Excuse, by saying,
they did not know it to be their Turns; and having sufficient Notice, they may
timely provide themselves with necessaries. Further, it being known in public,
who are to go, there will be no hopes of shelter for them to stay on shore:
Neither can they go into Merchants Service, a Penalty being to be inflicted on
all those Masters of Merchantmen, who shall carry any of those Ordered for Men
of War; and either those, whose Turns it is not to go into the Service that
year, will discover them, for fear of being sent themselves, if those men
should be wanted, or else others for the Reward sake will impeach them; so that
being unsafe and uneasy every way, it is presumed, that there will not be many,
but what will comply with the Orders respecting them.

Prop. 8. That a due Care be taken to relieve all those Seamen (who shall
comply with such Orders as are sent for their going on Board) yearly, or as
near to that Time as possibly it may be done, where it is desired; and that at
the time of their Discharge, they be paid off: But as for those Encouragement
for Seamen.
who by reason of a Foreign Voyage, shall serve longer than one year
successively, to be allowed 2 s. 6 d. per Month for the Second Year, as an
Addition to their former Wages; and for the Third Year, 5 s. per Month, for
every Month they shall serve more than they are required by this Method, or
what more the Parliament shall think fit.

Ratio 8. The keeping Touch with the Seamen, by a due relieving them, as is
proposed, and likewise of paying them off at their Discharge, will be a great
Obligation to them to go on Board, as they shall be directed, without Trouble
or Charge; to the forwarding whereof, it is not to be doubted, but that their
Wives will contribute their Assistance, when they are at some certainty of
having their Husbands a shore at such and such times, or thereabouts, with
their Money in their Pockets: As for those who shall serve above their Year,
and could not be relieved, by reason of their Ships being in Foreign Parts,
it is but reasonable, that they be allowed the said additional Wages, as an
Encouragement to, and Reward for, their continuance in the Service, more than
the time they ought according to this Method.

Prop. 9. That every Seaman, within six weeks after his Arrival from any Voyage
(and being out of the Kingdom at the time appointed for the first Listing of
Seamen) shall Seamen to List themselves at their Return from Sea, being not
Registered before.
List himself in the respective place where he intends to inhabit, or
otherwise, to be liable to the same Penalty as is to be inflicted on those
Seamen, who shall refuse or neglect to go in their Turns, after a due Summons
thereunto: And for the more effectual performance of this Proposition, the
Naval Officer, or his Clerk, shall go on Board every Ship and Vessel, arriving
at any Port within their Precincts; and there shall take an impartial Account
of the Masters and Ships Companies Names; as also of their Respective Ages,
etc. as is directed in the Listing Seamen aforementioned; the which shall be
transmitted to the General Office at London: That accordingly from thence, the
said General Office may send a Copy thereof to the Naval Officers at the
respective Ports whereto they belong: But if any Seaman has a Desire (after his
being Registered) to alter his Place of Abode, and to go into another County;
upon his application to the Naval Officer of that Place, by whom he is first
Registered, he shall have a time allowed him, proportionable to the distance of
the Place where he designs to inhabit, not exceeding a Month: And upon his
bringing a Certificate from the Naval Officer of that Place whereto he intends
to remove of his being Registered there, he shall be discharged out of the
Books, where he was last Registered before that.

Ratio 9. This Method will be of use, by degrees, to get all our Seamen Listed,
whereby a more regular Care may be taken, for relieving and exchanging the
Seamen in due Order, according to the Methods proposed: And the Penalty to be
inflicted on Seamen for their Neglect, will be a Spur, both to oblige and
hasten them to a compliance with such Orders, as they shall find themselves
tied to observe: The Naval Officer or his Clerk going on Board as aforesaid,
will much forward this Work; and likewise they will hereby be able to give an
Account thereof to the General Office at London, which may transmit Copies to
the particular Places, whereunto these Seamen say they do belong; that Care may
be taken for Registring them in their proper Counties; the giving Liberty to
Seamen (after their being Registered) to remove into another Place, upon their
acquainting the Naval Officer therewith, by whom they were first Registered, is
but reasonable; because otherwise it would be an Imposition and hindrance to
them, not to be permitted to Live where they do apprehend it to be most for
their Advantage.

Prop. 10. That every Seaman who shall be absent without leave, at the time of
his respective Ships being preparing for a Careen, or to go into a Dock, or to
come out of a Dock, Seamen to attend at the Fitting out their Ships.
or at the time of her taking in, or putting out her stores, or at the time of
any other service, for which Laborers are fain to be hired to do the same, for
want of the attendance of the Seamen belonging to the said Ship; every such
Seaman to forfeit Forty Shillings for such his neglect, to be stopped out of his
Wages the next pay, that shall become due to him. Further, that every
Victualler, who shall Entertain any Seamen in his house between Sun and Sun, at
such time, or times, as a necessity of business requires his attendance and
Labor on Board, and not having Leave given him by his Commanders, or by one of
the Lieutenants, in writing under his Hand, to forfeit Twenty Shillings for
every time they offend in that kind; and Housekeepers the same Forfeiture: One
Moiety thereof to the Informer, and the other to the uses aforesaid; to be
recovered by Distress and Sail of the Offenders goods, by Virtue of a Justices
Warrant for the same, or by any other means, as the Parliament shall think fit.

Ratio 10. It Is but reasonable that Seamen should be obliged to give due
Attendance on Board their Ships, especially at such times, as the King's
Service do more immediately call for their Aid and Assistance; for it is a shame
that Men should be born in Pay and Victuals on Board the King's Ships, and to
be Loytring on shore, when there is most need of them on Board; and by these
neglects it so happens, that the Commissioners of the Yards have been obliged
to hire a considerable number of Soldiers to do that work, which the Seamen
ought to do whereby the King is at a double Charge: For if Seamen dic but stand
to their work, a Crusing-Ship might be cleaned, and in, and out of Harbor in
4. or 5. days, as has formerly been done, Wind and Weather permitting; which
now is oft-times a Month or Two in completing: And if Saylors will be absent
from their business, at such times as they should give attendance, if they pay
for their neglects, it is only themselves that are blameable. As for the
Victuallers and other Housekeepers, if they will persist to entertain Seamen,
when warned to the contrary, it is meet that they pay for such their Contempt of
Orders, and for Encouraging Seamen to stay on Shore, when the King's business
requires them on Board.

Prop. 11. That all Seamen, (after the publication of the Lists as before is
mentioned) who shall not find themselves appointed What Seamen have Liberty to
go in Merchant Men.
for Men of War thereby, for that Year; may be at Liberty to go into Merchants
Service, without being in any wise Molested in the prosecution of their Voyages
that Year; but at their return from their Voyages, if they shall arrive at any
other Port, except what they fitted out from (their Year being expired) then
they shall be obliged to repair unto the Port where they were Registered
forthwith, that they may take their turns duly with those in Men of War.

Ratio 11. Those Seamen who are free to Comply with, and observe Orders for
the going on Board the King's Ships in their turns, and mutually to relieve one
another, ought to be Encouraged; and to have all Immunities and Privileges
proper, to be allowed them in order thereunto: For it is allowed on all Hands,
that our Ships of War, being well Manned with willing and able Seamen, may
rightly be termed the Bulwark, or Brazen-Wall of the Nation: And who, but an
enemy to himself, would dash that Armor to pieces which is able to defend him
from the Violence, and Merciless Cruelty, of a Subtle and Powerful Adversary.
But the obliging them to return to their proper Ports, when their time, in
Merchants Service is expired, which is allowed them, in order to their taking
turns on Board the Men of War, is but reasonable; and only an inducing them to
an observance of that Golden Rule; Do as ye would be done unto.

Prop. 12. It Is humbly proposed, That no Master of any Merchant Ship, or
Vessel, being above 50. Tun, do Sail from any Port in England, until he has
entered into Bond of 500 l. and all Masters of Ships, or Vessels under 50. Tun,
into Masters of Merchant Men Obliged to bring back their men, etc.
Bonds of 100 l. with each of them two able Sureties for the true performance
of the following Articles, (viz.) That they shall not carry any Person, or
Persons to Sea with them, above the Age of Sixteen Years, but what are
Registered by some Naval Officer appointed for the same; who shall likewise
Certify under his hand and Seal, That the said Persons are such as are not
returned on the Lists, for the King's Service that Year; but have their Liberty
to go in Merchants Ships, during the space of one Year, and no longer, till it
comes to their turns again. 2. That at the return of any Ship from her Voyage,
to any Port in England, or Ireland, the Master, or whoever has the Charge of
the Ship, shall immediately send an account (of what men are brought back) to
the Naval Officer, whence he Shipped off his men and if in any Foreign Place,
any Person or Persons so Registered do run away, then the Master of that Ship or
Vessel whereto he did belong, shall bring a Certificate under the Hand and Seal
of the Consul of that place: That the said Master made affidavit before him,
that at such a Time, and at such a Place, such a Person (inserting his Name in
the affidavit) ran away, and that he did his endeavor to get him again, by
requiring the Consuls Assistance therein. But for want of such Testimonial, to
forfeit Ten Pounds at the least for every Person he shall not bring back,
except they have died in the Voyage, or any other unavoidable accident have
happened, of which every Master shall give very good and sufficient proof; one
Moiety of all forfeitures to be paid to the Informer, by the Naval Officer upon
the discovering the same, by such just proof as shall be sufficient to Convict
the Offender, the other to the uses aforementioned.

Ratio 12. The obligation required from Masters of Merchant Men cannot seem to
be an Imposition on them, or Novelty to them; because the same Method is
pract^sed in Barbados and Jamaica, etc. with double the Penalty for smaller
Vessels, to prevent the carrying off Servants, and other Persons from the
Island, without the Governors Pass, as those Masters who use the West Indies,
very well know. In the next place, the Registring Seamen cannot prejudice, or
in any case be Injurious to Merchantdizing; because after a Competent Number of
Seamen is allowed, and pricked down to serve on Board the King's Ships, the
remainder will be free, and without the hazard of being impressed, to serve on
Board the Merchant Men, and not to sculk up and down as they do now, and wear
protection Beards, whereby they look as if they were Fourscore Years old, when
indeed they are not Forty, some of which are not 6. Months in a Year either on
Board the King's Ships, or Merchant Men. By this means the said Masters may
Negotiate their affairs without interruption, or hazard of having their Men
pressed from them, which practice has many times proved of fatal consequence to
the Merchants, as before is discoursed. 2. As for their being obliged to bring
back those men they carry with them into Foreign Parts, or to give a
Satisfactory account, what is become of them, at the return of every Master
home to England, etc. cannot be thought hard: Because there is an Act of
Parliament still in Force, to oblige masters to the same; though time, and defect
of duty in those who ought to see the same executed, has almost worn out its
remembrance. This will also be one way to keep our Seamen together, and not
giving them the opportunity of serving Foreign Princes or States, which too
often happens; for Masters oft-times selling their Ships and Vessels in
Foreign Places, do thereby give a provocation to their men to serve in other
Countries, by being disappointed of a passage home, which by this will be
prevented: And the more Seamen are engaged to serve under their Natural and
Lawful Prince, the more will fall to the Merchants share; and consequently
their Wages will be lessened: For it is observed and agreed on at all hands,
that a scarcity (and not a plenty of any Commodity) raises the Price. The
bringing a Testimonial cannot be hurtful to them; because that will justify for
them, that they have well and honestly complied with what was required of them:
And that they have not incurred any Penalty or Forfeiture for any neglect
thereof. The Moiety proposed to be given to the Informers, will make them look
out sharp, and the Masters themselves be Circumspect, how they take any
Unregistred Persons with them, or any other, but what may Lawfully be carried
without prejudice to the King's service, or themselves, since they will have a
great many eyes over them, who for the reward sake, will use their utmost
endeavors for the discovery of any such Offender. Further, That every Seaman,
whose turn it is to go on Board Men of War, and shall be found personating
another, (who according to those methods) might stay on shore, or go into
Merchant men, upon his being convicted of the same, shall forfeit to the
Informer 40 s. to be paid to him by the Naval Officer immediately after such
discovery, and stopped out of the first wages which shall become payable to him
for his service on Board any of the Kings Ships, and likewise be obliged to
serve therein during the War.

Prop. 13. That all Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs,
Constables, Headboroughs, Tithingmen, and the like, be strictly required, to
apprehend all Seamen whom they shall find inhabiting in any Inland Counties,
where no Justices of the Peace, to take up Seamen and Vagrant Persons.
Naval Officer is appointed; and also all sturdy Beggars, vagrant Persons,
Deer-stealers, such as rob Fish Ponds, Coney-Warrens, Dove-houses, or the like;
and that they do carefully send them to the next Naval Officer, to be sent on
Board Men of War, or disposed of otherwise, as shall be thought fit.

Ratio 13. The obliging Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Bailiffs, etc. to
apprehend, and send those Persons last mentioned, unto the Naval Officer, in
order to their being sent on Board the Men of War, will be of great Service to
the Country: For hereby Gentlemen will not only preserve their Game to
themselves, and the Common sort of People be rid of a great many dangerous
Persons, who only lurk about, and watch Opportunities to break their Houses and
rob them of what they have perhaps gotten with great Labor and Industry: But
the King will have their Service on Board, which may be of use there, though
not on shore; for many of those will make Cooks-mates, Shifters and Swabbers,
etc. which must be had on Board as well as other Men; and doubtless many of
them, when they are broke from their loitering and idle Courses, and see
themselves confined on Board, may take up, and make good Sailers, but if they
are permitted to stay on shore, and to follow the dictates of their own
Inclinations; nothing but Mischiefs and Inconveniences of many kinds must be
expected from them.

Lastly, The Merchants, Shipwrights, Caulkers, Sailmakers, and Ropemakers in
and about the City of London, do not, I presume, need any other Motives to
induce them to a Willingness, to have the aforementioned Propositions put in
Execution, then this Consideration Why the Merchants of London, and other
Persons of several Callings are obliged to forward these Methods.
of their being more especially incommoded, by the continual alarms of
Pressing, which lies much harder on them, than on Places farther distant. For
it is very rare for the City of London and Places adjacent, to be free from the
Press a Month together in a Years time; for fear of which, the Seamen, and
others of the aforementioned Callings, do in such Numbers so abscond and hide
themselves, that thereby the particular Wages of Seamen, Shipwrights, Caulkers
and the like, are so enhaunsed that their Wages are almost doubled -- Besides
the loss which is sustained for want of having Men on all occasions for their
Works and Services, which Inconveniences, being by these Methods likely to be
removed, the Wages brought lower, and Business carried on with freedom, and
without Interruption, must needs meet with a kind Acceptance, and with the
Concurrence and joint Endeavors of the Merchants, Masters of Ships and others
concerned herein, to promote the carrying on the said Methods, and Establishing
the same.

But some Persons, happily may take an occasion to reflect, and say, that if the
whole matter had been contracted into fewer words, it would have done much
better. To which I answer, it is true, I have studied for no Rhetoric to
garnish it, or Flourishes of Oratory to set it out, those being things to which
I am altogether a Stranger; being only a well wisher to a Sailer, and not a
Nice one neither. In the preceding Methods, I have not observed quaintness of
Expressions; which probably might have better pleased the Ingenious and
Sharp-witted: But have with as much perspicuity and plainness as possible I
could, run through every particular; and have the more enlarged thereon for the
facilitating the same, and suiting it to the Capacity of the meanest Sailer,
who may be concerned herein: I have likewise endeavored to leave nothing
doubtful and ambiguous; to the end, that all Seamen and others, might plainly
perceive the drift and scope thereof. And that it is not a mere Project or a
fallacious Invention, as many may suppose it to be, before they have well
weighed and rightly considered the same: But that it is a real Substance, and
that which if practiced must necessarily tend to the Honor and Welfare of the
Nation in general, and in particular, to the Ease, Benefit and Satisfaction
both of Merchants and Seamen, which latter if encouraged as they ought,
together with our Ships of War, may not unfitly be called the Impregnable
Fortress and Safety of Their Majesty's and Their Dominions. But that I may
likewise indulge those Palates, who savor not Prolixity in matters of
Discourse; I shall be as succinct and brief as I can, in enumerating the Heads
of the several Advantages, which the preceding Methods treats of; and also the
Grievances and Disadvantages, which thereby will be removed.

First, It would be needless to recount the number of Men of War lost these
five Years past, it being a thing too well known in England: But how and which
way, and by what means the greatest part of them have been lost, is not obvious
to every one. Therefore to satisfy (in some measure) the Curiosity of those
who desire to know the same, it is believed, and without gainsaying, must be
allowed to be chiefly for want of competent Numbers of Able and Willing Seamen
on Board them: For it is evident, that several of our Ships of War have been
taken of late Years, without losing a Mast or Yard, which was not so formerly:
If these things had happened through the Neglect or Cowardice of the Commanders,
that would soon have been discovered and blazed abroad; which since it appears
not to be so with many of them, it must necessarily follow, that it is for want
of Able Seamen on Board (except where they Want of our Ships well Manned the
cause of many being taken.
have been overpowered, which has been but now and then) And can we think our
selves disinteressed and hurt, if we leave off an old Road, which we follow as
it were for Fashion-sake only, to comply with such Rules and Methods, as will
undoubtedly, with ease and little Charge, procure a competent Number of able
and rugged Sailers (instead of Shacome-filthies, Ragga-muffings and Serovies)
to Man the King's Ships withal, at a very short warning; whereby Fifty Ships
then, will be more Serviceable than One Hundred now: Besides, the French will
then find, that they must pay the best Price for what Ships they take, and that
Men of War will not be so easily parted with, as of late they have been.

Secondly, When we are thus provided, and at a certainty to have Seamen when
they are needed, the King may lay up the great Ships for the Winter Season,
Much Money to be saved by paying and discharging Men from the great Ships at
Winter.
and discharge the Men out of Pay and Victuals, but with their Money in their
Pockets, and liberty to serve in Merchantmen, 'till it is their turns to go on
Board again (which now cannot be done; because for want of Methods, we know not
how or which way to get them again, or others in their room at Spring) and how
many Thousand Pounds in this very thing would be saved Yearly, on the Nations
Account, every intelligent Man, but more especially those who are concerned in
the Navy Affairs, may judge.

But some may object, that the Registring of Seamen will be an abrogating their
Liberties, etc. To this it may be answered, That were it really an Encroachment
upon the Property of the Subject, (which I cannot see how it is) yet the
necessity of using these Methods, or the like, at this time would sufficiently
plead its Excuse: And a desperate Wound must have the most searching and most
probable means applied thereto for its Remedy.

Thirdly, The Registring Shipwrights, Caulkers, Ropemakers and Sailmakers, will
in no wise be hurtful to Benefit by Registring Seamen, Caulkers, etc.
any; for having a sufficient Number of them at all Calls, the Ships and Yards
may be supplied therewith without Pressing. There may likewise be more Ships
bu^lt in the King's Yards, than now are, which always outdo those built in
Merchants Yards. There may also be more Cordage made there than is usual, which
every thing considered, is always the best and cheapest; and many other
Advantages will arise, which are now unthought of.

Fourthly, The Enemy has found the advantages of Registring their Seamen,
thereby fitting out and Manning their Ships with more than an imaginable
dispatch; as I my self, whilst a Prisoner there, observed; Though at treble the
Charge of what we shall be at for one fifth part of the Number of Seamen, we
have in England; it being plain and apparent, to all those who have used the
French-Trade, that we have five times more Merchant Ships (which are accounted
a Seminary for bringing up Seamen) than the French have, and that ours are
bigger than theirs; so that in all likelihood we must have five times as many
Seamen.

Fifthly, As for their Charge in Registring Seamen, Our charge in
Registringmuch inferior to the French.
that considerably exceeds what ours will be in this: For their Intendants,
which are the chief Officers concerned therein, have each of them some
Thousands a Year, and the Inferior Officers, which are very numerous,
Sallaries proportionable: Whereas Four Hundred Pounds apiece, is what is
proposed for our chief Officers concerned herein, and One Hundred Pound for the
chiefest Clerks, of which only those in London will be Sharers. And it is my
Opinion, that we need not be ashamed to practice those Methods, which will
undoubtedly be effected with much less trouble, difficulty and charge, than
what the Advantages which will flow from thence, will make good and answer for.

Sixthly, In the beginning of the War many Volunteers came into the Service, as
particularly from Bristol, Lyn and Weymouth, whence they came by Forties,
Fifties and an Hundred in a Gang; the greatest part whereof that are alive, are
still in the Service, and the only Men which have thoroughly shared in the Toils
thereof; but without any more Respect or Encouragement than those that were
forced; which doubtless has been a means of hindering others from following
their Examples. But were the Methods herein contained effectually prosecuted,
and Seamen Times appointed them, wherein they knew themselves obliged to serve
on Board Men of War; and likewise when they might without Interruption go into
Merchants Service, and at all times that Encouragement that is due to them, we
need not be at any Charge in Pressing, or keeping Tenders, as now we do; nor
ever want brave bold, and undaunted Seamen to Man the Fleet.

Seventhly, It cannot but be matter of wonder, to see with what Dexterity and
Speed the French fit out their Ships; and that with one fifth of the Seamen we
have in England; and how in a few days they are completely Manned, after Orders
given out for the same: And I presume that English Seamen are as Englishmen as
capable of doing good Service as any Nation if Encouraged.
capable of doing any Service proper for them, as the French can be; and were
they Ordered and Encouraged accordingly, might, as formerly, deserve and merit
the Precedence of any others, in Sea-Affairs: But if for want of Courage and
Conduct to adventure, and carry on those Methods (which seem very reasonable
and also very probable to recover the Economy and pristine Glory of our
Fleets; to Animate our Seamen, and as it were, to engage Success on our Side)
we sit as unconcerned, and will not use any means, though never so likely for
the retrieving the decayed Honor of the Nation; we cannot, if we suffer
thereby, blame any but our selves. For what Mischiefs and Miseries do fall upon
us, are, as it were ushered in by our own Consent, if we strive not, to oppose
and hinder them.

Eighthly, The difficulties which may seem to attend this Service in the first
establishing and settling the proposed Methods, may make it look with a sower
Face, and Every thing of moment hard at first.
so retard and hinder its going forward, and thereby many may be startled, who
otherwise see nothing but what is reasonable and needful enough to be practiced
-- It Is true, that in this, as in all other things at the beginning,
difficulties will interfere; and it is likely enough that the most significant
and most material Undertakings, for a Public Good, will meet with the greatest
Hardships, in its first Birth and Infancy; and that it is no easy matter to put
some People out of their old Road, though never so rugged and uneasy: But the
greatest Care and Trouble which can befall the carrying on of the foregoing
Proposals, will be in the first Year; which being with Diligence, Faithfulness
and Industry (in the Management thereof) passed over for succeeding Times,
'twill easily be done. And that sufficient amends will be made for the Toil and
Fatigues thereof, will not be doubted, (upon mature and deliberate Thoughts) by
any, who zealously desire the Welfare and Prosperity of their Majesty's and
their Kingdoms. These Methods, if industriously managed, may in some measure,
run parallel in time with the Post Office, in rise, growth and perfection;
which being known to most Gentlemen, I shall not speak of it here.

Ninthly, If those Methods are followed, we shall Turning over of Seamen
remedied.
have that Epidemical Grievance, which so much gauls and disturbs the Seamen
removed, namely of being turned over from Ship to Ship; which many times delays
their being paid, makes them lose the Benefit and Favor of their Commander (of
whom, by their Care and Industry they have deserved well) by being absent from
them; and from the quality of a Mate, or Midshipman, or the like in a former
Ship, by being turned over to a Captain that knows them not, are reduced to go
before the Mast; and how any Person of Sense or Courage can brook this, I do
appeal to every sober Mans-Judgment.

Tenthly, Although it is proposed, that Seamen be left to their liberty at the end
of the first Year or thereabouts, after they are Registered; yet it is not to be
Many Seamen will continue in the Service notwithstanding the Liberty proposed.
doubted, but that many will still continue in the Service, who might be
relieved from it according to the Proposals, and that out of Respect to their
Commanders; and many who are at liberty will then have the freedom to go with
those Commanders whom they most affect; whereby Commanders and their Men being
united by a free Choice (for no Captain can well refuse a Person that
voluntarily offers his Service under his Command) will then carry such an
harmony of Affections amongst one another, that there will be great reason to
hope for Success in all their Undertakings, according to that Maxim, Force
united is strongest: And further, by these Methods and Agreements amongst
Seamen and their Officers; Pressing, that Scarecrow and Bugbear to many Men,
will be out of Fashion, and the vast Charges and Inconveniences attending the
same, be utterly removed and expelled.

Eleventhly, Then there is another thing, which if confirmed, will encourage
the Seamen to continue in, and also prize and value the Service; it being
reported that the Lords of the Admiralty do intend to prefer none to be
Warrant-Officers, but such as have actually and successively served Three Years
in the Men of War: Which will stimulate and provoke many Seamen to put
themselves forward; a likelihood of Preferment, being of more force to draw
some, than the Whip to drive others into the Service.

Having touched upon some Heads, more particularly relating to Their Majesty's
and the Seamen; I shall add a few words concerning the Merchants Circumstances,
and so conclude.

First, In the first place, the Merchants have been feelingly sensible of the
Effects of the War, as the exhausted Coffers of many (which in the beginning
thereof were full) can witness, occasioned chiefly by the great Numbers of
their Ships taken by the Enemy Merchants great Sufferers for want of due
Methods in getting Seamen for the King's Ships.
this War: One great Reason whereof has been the want of due and proper Methods
for the procuring Able Seamen, who should be in readyness at a very short
Warning to Man the King's Ships: For notwithstanding all the Circumspection and
Care imaginable of the Lords of the Admiralty, for the due ordering of Ships to
Sea, both Convoys and Cruizers; yet if Men cannot be gotten, the Ships must lie
still. But by these Methods a sufficient number of Seamen may be at all times
ready; whereby Cruizers and Convoys may be abroad, and to and again at Sea, to
prevent the Enemy from so often making a Prey of our Merchantmen, as of late
they have done.

Secondly, In the second place, the exorbitant Wages which the Merchants must
give, and still are obliged so to do, or all must lie still, have been a
Pull-back to many of them; And the want of Men (for fear of being pressed from
them) notwithstanding the offers of great Wages, has many times retarded the
Prosecution of their designs, to almost the overthrow of their Voyages.

Thirdly, Many other Inconveniences and Enormities have flowed in upon them, of
which themselves are the most competent Judges and the best Remembrancers; all
which Grievances and Sufferings, or most part thereof, by the proposed Methods,
might (for the future) be prevented. The Merchants likewise might negotiate
their Sea-affairs, without interruption, or Wages in Merchants Ships likely to
be brought lower.
hazard of having their Men taken from them, when once Shipped and willing to
serve them: And the exorbitant Wages, given now, would then be brought down,
and many other Inconveniences removed, which now they labor under: But would
be glad of a Remedy for them.

Fourthly and Lastly, That the consideration of the foregoing Propositions and
Methods, being humbly and timely offered to the Parliament, and by them
approved, some of the Effects thereof may be experienced in the next Summers
Service.

Object. But some may object, That if this had been done in the beginning of
the War, it had been of some Moment, and might have done good Service; but now
it is hardly worth while to set it on foot, a Peace being expected in little
time; and that the War in all probability cannot hold out much longer.

Answ. To this it may be answered, That as to the duration of the War, that is
very uncertain; and The want of these Methods on the like not practiced sooner,
no reason to hinder their progress now.
that it may continue longer than is expected by many People, is likely enough:
However, because so necessary and advantageous a design as this, (if practiced)
may prove to the Nation, has been hitherto unthought of; yet in my Opinion
that is no convincing Argument for to frustrate its being put in Execution now;
since we know not how long or how little while the War may last. But admit a
Peace do in little time ensue: We cannot be sorry, that we have no Occasion to
use these Methods, if the War continues: We have no reason to be offended that
a way is found out, to save a very considerable sum of Money, which is spent in
Pressing and other Services; and to have able and rugged Sailers ready on all
emergencies to Man the Fleet as it ought; whereby the French Kings Fleet will
be more likely to be decreased, than increased by ours.

I remember, that when we had Wars with Holland; nay, not long before the
beginning of this War; The Seamen seemed desirous to have Wars with France, and
would be often boasting what they would do, and how ready they would be to
fight the French. But now we find the Case much altered, and as much, if not
more difficulty now than ever to Man our Fleet; and likely to grow worse and
worse, if not timely prevented by proper Methods for the same: And if those are
not thought sufficient and perfect enough (the Examination whereof I humbly
commit to the unbiased Judgments and candid Censures of those who are
zealously desirous of the Nations Interest) yet, I presume, here is a
Foundation for a more well composed and nobler Structure, than what my Skill or
Pretensions will reach to; which being built upon for the Nations Interest, by
the Endeavors of any public spirited Person, will give the Author as much
satisfaction and content, as if completed by himself; He having no Ambition of
getting himself a Name by these Undertakings, nor of reaping any Advantage
thereby, otherwise than as it centers with a National Interest.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by R. Clavell at the Peacock in St. Paul 's
Churchyard.
THE Reasons of Praying for the Peace of our Jerusalem, in a Sermon Preached
before the Queen at White Hall, on the Fast Day, being Wednesday August 29.
1694. By Thomas Comber, D. D. Dean of Durham, and Chaplain in Ordinary to Their
Majesty's. Printed by Their Majesty's Special Command.

A Daily Office for the Sick; Compiled out of the Holy Scriptures, and the
Liturgy of our Church; with occasional Prayers, Meditations and Directions.

The Pantheon, Representing the Fabulous Histories of the Heathen Gods, and
most Illustrious Heroes; in a short, plain and familiar Method, by way of
Dialogue, for the Use of Schools Written by Fra. Pomey, of the Society of
Jesus; Author of the French and Latin Dictionary, for the Use of the Dauphin.

Q. Horatii Flacci Opera; Interpretatione and Notis Illustravi: Ludovicus
Desprez Cardinalitius Socius ac Rhetor Emeritus, Jussu Christianissimi Regis,
in usum Serenissimi Delphini, ac Serenissimorum Principum Burgundiae, Andium,
Biturigum. Huic Editioni accessere Vita Horatii, cum Dacerii Notis ejusdem
Chronologia Horatiana, and Praefatio de Satira Romana.

L. Annaei Flori rerum Romanarum Epitome; Interpretatione and Notis Illustravit
Anna Tanaquilla Fabri Tilia, Jussu Christianissimi Regis, in usum Serenissimi
Delphini.

Compendium Graecum Novi Testamenti, Continens ex 7959. Versiculis totius. N.
Testamenti tantum Versiculos 1900. (non tamen integros) in quibus omnes
universi Novi Test. Voces, una cum Versione Latina, Inveniuntur: Auctore
Johanne Lusden, Philos. Doctore, and Linguae Sanctae in Academia Ultrajectina
Professore Ordinario. Editio Quinta.


