THE CASE IN LAW AND EQUITY OF TRISTRAM WODWARD Esquire FOR THE Manors of
Tuddington, Harlington, And Tyngrith, and other Lands in the County of Bedford,
Reported to the Commissioners of Obstructions, by Mr St Nichlas the Council
for the Commonwealth.
To the Honorable the Commissioners of Parliament, for removing Obstructions
in the sale of several Lands and Estates forfeited to the Commonwealth for
Treason.
IN obedience to your several Orders of the 11 of September, 30 of October,
and 25 of February 1651. upon the Petition of Tristram Wodward Esquire, who
lays claim out of the Estate of Thomas Earl of Cleveland, to the Manors of
Tuddington, Harlington and Tyngrith in the County of Bedford:

I have examined and find,

That by the copy of an Office taken 35 of Eliz. after the death of Henry late
Lord Cheyne, it appears that the Manors of Tuddington, Harlington and
Tyngrith in the County of Bedford, were the Inheritance of the said Lord
Cheyne, by descent from Anne Broughton his Mother: And it appears that in the
6 year of Queen Elizabeth, the Lord Cheyne did suffer a Common Recovery of the
said Manors, to the use of the Lord Cheyne and Jane his Wise for their lives,
the Remainder to the Heirs of the body of the Lord Cheyne, Remainder in Fee to
the said Jane.

And in Trinity Term 13 of Elizabeth, the said Henry Cheyne, then Sir Henry
Cheyne Knight, and Dame Jane his Wife, did suffer a new Recovery of the said
Manors and Land, and by their Tripartite Deed dated the 2 of April the 13 of
Elizabeth, limit the use to Sir Henry Cheyne and Dame Jane Cheyne and the heirs
males of Sir Henry on the body of the Lady Jane, Remainder to the heirs males
of the body of Sir Henry Cheyne, Remainder to the heirs of the body of the said
Lord Cheyne on the body of the said Lady Jane, Remainder to the heirs of the
body of the said Lord Cheyne, and for default of such Issue, to the use of such
Person and Persons, and for such Estate and Estates as the said Dame Jane
surviving the said Sir Henry Cheyne at any time during her life shall dispose
or appoint, by any writing subscribed with her hand and sealed with her Seal:
and for default of such Issue and disposition and appointment, and after the
expiration of such disposition or appointment, then to the use of the said Sir
Henry Cheyne his heirs and assigns for ever absolutely without any Condition.

And I find by the Answer upon Oath of Thomas Earl of Cleveland, and Sir John
Crofts 12 Jacob. to an Information in the Court of Wards, at the relation of
Thomas Cheyne Esquire the next heir of Henry Lord Cheyne by three Inquisitions,
that the said Lord Cheyne did cause his wife to join with him in a new Recovery
13 Eliz. to the use of the Lord Cheyne and Jane his wife, and to the heirs
males of the body of the Lord Cheyne upon the body of the said Jane lawfully
coming, the Remainder to the heirs males of the body of the Lord Cheyne, the
Remainder to the heirs of the body of the Lord Cheyne upon the body of the said
Jane, the Remainder to the heirs of the body of the Lord Cheyne, the Remainder
to such person and persons, and for such estate and estates as the said Jane
surviving the Lord Cheyne, at any time during her life shall dispose or
appoint, by any writing subscribed with her hand and sealed with her Seal, as
by a Copy of the said Answer deposed by George Beck Gent. to be a true Copy of
the Original appears.

And it is deposed in Chancery, that upon a Reference from the Parliament to
Justice Reeve and Justice Foster, the Earl by his Council and Solicitor, did
produce the other part of the said Deed of 13 Eliz. which limited the
Fee-simple of all the Manors, for want of Issue of the Lord Cheyne and such
disposition of his wife, and after the expiration of such disposition to remain
to the Lord Cheyne and his heirs and assigns for ever absolutely and without
any Condition, as by a Copy of the Depositions of John Cook and Richard Wallopp
Esquires, deposed by George Beck Gent. to be a true Copy of the Original
appears.

And it appears by the Copy of a part of the Will of the said Jane Lady
Cheyne, examined by the Record, and deposed by the said George Beck, to be a
true Copy of so much of the said Will: That the 10 Jacob. she made a Lease for
30 years of the aforesaid Manors, to Sir John Crofts and Dame Mary his wife,
to begin from the death of the said Lady Jane: And it appears by a Memorandum
in the foot of the same Will upon Record, she died the 16 of April 1^ Jacob.
whereby the said Lease ended the 16 of April 1644.

And I find that by Indenture dated the 12 Martij 11 Jacob. made between
Thomas Cheyne Cozen and next heir to the said Henry Lord Cheyne and Tristram
Wodward the Petitioner and Ellen his wife, one of the daughters of Sir Edmund
Pelham of the one part, and Sir Thomas Pelham Knight and Baronet, Sir John
Hungerford Knight, Sir John Wodward Knight, Anthony Dyott, Herbert Pelham Son
and heir of the said Sir Edmund Pelham, William Cobbs Esquire and John Coddrington
Gent. of the other part, Reciting; That whereas the said Thomas Cheyne by Deed
of Bargain and Sale enrolled in Chancery, dated 17 November. 6 Jacob. for the
consideration of diverse Lands, Tenements and Leases for years, amounting to the
value of 10000 pound, which were purchased with the money and goods of the
Grandmother and Grandfather of the said Tristram Wodward, and meant and
intended for the Portions and advancement of Joan the Mother of the said
Tristram, and conveyed away from her unto Elizabeth Cheyne the wife of the said
Thomas Cheyne and sister of the said Joan, and the money thereof spent in the
great Suits of the said Thomas Cheyne, for the obteyning of the Lands
wrongfully sold away from the said Thomas Cheyne by the said Henry Lord Cheyne,
which Lands of the said Elizabeth Cheyne, or so much in value was meant by the
said Thomas Cheyne and Elizabeth his wife, after the death of the said
Elizabeth without Issue, or after the death of the said Henry Lord Cheyne
without Issue, to remain unto Joan the said sister of the said Elizabeth
Cheyne, and mother of the said Tristram. And for diverse other good
Considerations in the said Deed expressed, has given, granted, bargained and
sold unto the said Tristram Wodward and his heirs, the Manors of Tuddington,
Chalgrave, Harlington and Tyngrith, and the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder
and Remainders thereof, and of all other the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments
of the said Thomas Cheyne, whereof the said Henry Lord Cheyne died seized in
the said County of Bedford, after the death of the Lady Cheyne wife of the Lord
Henry Cheyne, which lawfully descended and of right ought to come unto Thomas
Cheyne, as Cozen and next heir to the said Henry Lord Cheyne, and whereof the
said Thomas Cheyne by Inquisition after the death of the said Lord Cheyne, is
found to be Cozen and next heir to the said Lord Cheyne, as by a Copy of the
said Inquisition deposed by the said George Beck to be a true Copy of the
Original to me likewise appears.

Now the said Thomas Cheyne and Tristram Wodward, as well in consideration of
diverse sums of Money paid by the said Herbert Pelham to the said Tristram
Wodward, in marriage with the said Ellen his wife, sister of the said Herbert
Pelham, and in consideration of the said marriage had between the said Tristram
and the said Ellen, the daughter of the said Sir Edmund Pelham and Ellen Lady
Pelham her mother, Cozen of the whole blood to the said Henry Lord Cheyne and
to the said Thomas Cheyne, she being descended from the Cheynes of Crall in
Sussex, who are of the whole blood and family of the said Lord Cheyne: And for
that the said Tristram is of blood of the said Elizabeth Cheyne, and the said
Ellen and her Issue of the blood of the said Cheynes of Crall, and shall keep
the same Name; and for advancement of the heirs of the bodies of the said
Tristram and Ellen his wife, do Covenant to stand seized of the said Manors of
Tuddington, Chalgrave, Harlington and Tyngrith, and of the Reversions thereof,
and of all other the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of the said Thomas
Cheyne and Tristram Wodward or either of them, in Tuddington, Chalgrave,
Horkley, Tyngrith, Harlington, Apsley, Ridgemont, Westonning, Sundon, Pullox
hill, Haughton, Flitwicke, and Strackley in the said County of Bedford, to the
use of the said Tristram Wodward and Ellen his wife, and the heirs of their two
bodies, the Remainder to the right heirs of the said Tristram for ever, which
Indenture was enrolled in Chancery 23 Febr. 18 Jacob. as by the Copy of the
said Indenture deposed by the said George Beck to be a true Copy of the Record
appears.

And I find that the said Thomas Cheyne 4 November. 12 Jacob. did acknowledge a
Recognizance in nature of a Statute Staple of 40000 pound, before the then
Chief Justice Sir Edward Cook, to Tristram Wodward and Cheyne Wodward his
son, defeazanced for performance of the Covenants of the said Deed of 6 and
11 Jacob. as by the Counterpart of the said defeazance not yet proved appears.

And that the Lord Cheyne and Jane his wife, did the 20 Eliz. by Fine Sur
concessit, make a Lease for 30 years of part of every Manor to John Pare,
reserving the old Rent to be paid to the Lord Cheyne and Jane his wife, and to
the heirs of the Lord Cheyne.

And the Lord Cheyne without his wife, 24 Eliz. did suffer a Common Recovery of
another part of every Manor, and made the like Lease to one Francis Bevill.

And the Lord Cheyne and Jane his wife, 27 Eliz. did by Fine Sur concessit,
make the like Lease for 30 years for another part of every Manor, to Ralph
Astrey Esquire, and reserved the old Rents to him and Jane his wife, and the heirs
of the Lord Cheyne.

And the Lord Cheyne and Jane his wife, 28 Eliz. did join in Fines of the Copy
hold Lands of every Manor, to make them Freehold, whereby the Petitioner
Claims to part of the Lands and profits since the death of the Lady Cheyne,
and to the Reversion and profits of the rest of the Manors since the 16 of
April 1644. when the Lease to Sir John Crofts, etc. expired.

And I find that the Earl of Cleveland and Sir John Crofts, do in their
Answers in the Court of Wards, plead two Titles against the said Thomas Cheyne;
The one that 6 Jacob. he had conveyed the Reversion to the Petitioner and his
heirs.

And that the 29 of Eliz. the said Jane Lady Cheyne did by her writing grant
the Reversion of the said Manors after her death, to one Edmund Pooley and
Charles Glenham and their heirs, and that shortly after they re-granted the Fee
to Jane Lady Cheyne and her heirs, which is the now Earl of Cleveland, as by a
Copy of the said Answer deposed by the said George Beck, to be a true Copy of
the Record, appears.

And it is deposed in Chancery, That the said Earl by his Council and
Sollicitors, did produce the said Deed of 29 Eliz. to Justice Reeve and Justice
Foster, upon the Reference to them, who being informed that the said Deed was
not found in the Lord Cheynes Office 35 Eliz. nor in the Lady Cheynes Office 12
Jacob. nor pleaded by the Lady Cheyne in the Exchequer to the respit of Homage
36 of Eliz. nor spoken of by the Lady Cheyne in her last Will, as it likewise
appears to me by Copies of the said several Inquisitions, Pleadings and
Will, deposed before this Honorable Committee to be true Copies: and demanding
the reason why it was not found in the said Offices, M. Sergeant Tailor the
Earls then Council did confess the said Deeds of 29 Eliz. were proffered to the
Jury 12 of Jacob. at the finding of the Lady Cheynes Office, but then the Jury
would not find them; and that Justice Reeves said, those Deeds were no
evidence, which Justice Foster did not contradict. And it is likewise deposed
in Chancery, That the said Earl borrowed Money upon his Title by the Deed of 6
Eliz. and the Inquisition of the 35 of Eliz. and concealed the Deed of 13 Eliz.
and the Deed to Pooley and Glenham, the Copies of which Depositions are
likewise deposed to be true Copies of the Original by the said George Beck.

And I find that by Inquisition taken at Dunstable in the County of Bedford 17
Martij 12 Jacob. upon a Diem clausit extremum, after the death of Jane Lady
Cheyne, it was found that the said Jane Lady Cheyne in her life time, and long
before her death, was seized in her Demeasne as a Fee of the Manors of
Tuddington with the appurtenances in the County of Bedford, and of certain
Glebe Lands in the said Parish called the Portionaries, and of the Manors of
Chalgrave, Harlington, the Rectory of Harlington, the Manor of Tyngrith, and
diverse Messuages, Lands, Tenements, etc. in Tuddington, Chalgrave, Harlington,
Tyngrith, Horkley, Apsley, Rigemount, Westonning, Sundon, Pullox hill, Hauton,
Flitwicke and Strackley in the said County of Bedford, and that she was seized
in her Demesne as a Fee of a certain Grange called Pullox hill Grange, alias
Harlington Grange in the County of Bedford, and of a Close of Pasture called
Muncks Close, and a parcel of Meadow called Cranford Meade, and a water Mill
to the said Grange belonging, sometime belonging to the late dissolved
Monastery of Wooburn, which last mentioned parcels were purchased by the said
Lady Jane, and Henry Lord Cheyne her late husband of one Roger Alford, and of
diverse other parcels of Lands in Tuddington, therein particularly mentioned;
and that she died seized thereof in Fee 16 of April then last past 12 Jacob.
And I find Thomas Wentworth Kinght, Lord Wentworth her Cozen and next heir, as
by a Copy of the said Inquisition deposed by George Beck to be a true Copy of
the Original appears.

But I find in a Suit depending in Chancery, between the Petitioner his wife
and others Plaintiffs, and Thomas Earl of Cleveland and others defendants, upon
opening and long debate of the matter 26 November. 5 Carol. in the presence of
Council learned on both sides, the Lord Keeper being assisted with the Lord
Chief Justice of the upper Bench and M. Justice Crook; his Lordship, and the
said Lords the Judges were of opinion and did so declare, that they held it not
fit that the said Defendant should show his Evidences, or that he should make
any further Answer to the said Bill; and that they found no such Consideration
expressed in the Plaintiffs Deeds, as was fit for that Court to give any
allowance thereof, and therefore did order that the matter be clearly and
absolutely dismissed out of the said Court, as by a Copy of the said Order
hereunto annexed, deposed by John Willis to be a true Copy of the original
Record appears.

And in pursuance of the Order of Jan. 1. 1651. I find it is deposed by Sir
John Thorowgood Knight, That about the year One thousand six hundred forty and
two, the Petitioner Tristram Wodward came to this Deponents house in St. Jones,
and showed a Case formerly drawn up and signed by two or three eminent Lawyers,
which did entitle the said Wodward to the Lands of the Earl of Cleveland in
Bedfordshire, as descending to him by Title derived from the Lord Cheyne; his
Proposition to this Deponent was, that this Deponent would compound with him
the said Wodward, for the Manor of Harlington in the County aforesaid, which
was morgaged to the said Deponent by the said Earl, and that he would use this
Deponent well in it: This Deponent was apt to embrace the motion, which might
free the Manor from all former encumbrances, and give him a Title before the
Earl, and therefore he desired that he might have the said Wodwards Title in
writing, to advize with his Council upon it, which the said Wodward willingly
delivered to this Deponent.

The Opinion of this Deponents Council was, That M. Wodward had not rightly
stated the Case to his Council, because there was nothing more talked of in
Westminster Hall, then that supposed Title which had passed the Court of Wards,
and other Courts of Judicature.

And he did believe that if the Right had been on Wodwards side, one Court or
other would have relieved him, and therefore dissuaded this Deponent from
trusting to his Title or to give him any thing for it.

M. Wodward coming to receive an Answer, this Deponent told him, that his
Council would not advize him to deal with him; M. Wodward then told this
Deponent of one M. Smith an able Gent. and a Lawyer of the Middle Temple, who
as he said did rightly understand his Title, believed it to be good and
intended to deal with him, the said Smith having likewise an Engagement upon
the said Earls Estate, and prayed this Deponent to speak with the said Smith.

This Deponent went to M. Smith, being willing to secure his Debt, and found
him strongly possessed with an opinion that M. Wodwards Title was good; and not
being able to convince him, this Deponent proposed that we should all three go
to M. Hales of Lincolns Inn, M. Wodward should show him his Evidences, and M.
Smith and this Deponent should join in the Fee.

We did so, M. Hales desired three or four days time to consider of the
business, after which time we repaired to M. Hales, who said, that if such a
Deed which he had then in his hands, which this Deponent takes to be a
Counterpart or a Copy of the Deed of Pooley and Glenham, could be proved, which
to this Deponents best remembrance was witnessed with seven or eight witnesses,
some of them persons of quality, then M. Wodwards Title to the said Lands was
nothing worth: then this Deponent asked M. Hales, if the Witnesses were dead
how it could be proved? his Answer was, that if it could be proved to be their
hands it would be sufficient, with which Answer M. Smith and this Deponent were
so well satisfied, that they moved no more in the business, only M. Wodward
came afterward to this Deponent, setting forth his wants and saying, that a
very small matter would content him, and this Deponent verily believes, that
much lesss then one hundreds pounds would at that time have bought his Title to
the Manor of Harlington, which was morgaged to this Deponent by the said Earl.

And at another time meeting with the said M. Wodward, he desired this Deponent
that he would not dissuade other men from dealing with him the said Wodward for
his Title, or words to that effect.

And Tristram Wodward Esquire deposes, that Richard Ruffin the father of Eliz.
Cheyne, took an Administration after the death of Anne Ruffin his wife, mother
of Elizabeth Cheyne and Grandmother of this Deponent; And that the said Richard
Ruffin 2 Eliz. did by Fine purchase a Lease for 65 years of diverse Lands called
Swinford Lease, in which Lease is mentioned to be demised, one hundred Acres of
Meadow, and five hundred Acres of Pasture, and one hundred Acres of Wood,
together also with the Ferry of Swinford, as by a Copy of the said
Aministration and Fine deposed by George Beck Gent. to be true Copies
appears.

And this Deponent further says, That 4 Eliz. there was an Administration
taken after the death of the said Richard Ruffin, wherein there is also
mentioned diverse other Leases of Lands called Great twelve acres, Cloddings,
the Free Lands, Wersey, Tiffins, the Mills and Mill Mores, Perts Close,
Gloverse Close, Millers Close, and Lintorne, and about two thousand six hundred
Sheep, eighteen Oxen, forty seven Kyne, fifty five young Beasts, sixty Horses
of all kinds, diverse ounces of silver and gilt Plate, and some ready Money,
besides Household goods of several sorts, and Corn and Hay in several Reekes
and Barnes; and that in the foot of the Inventory there appears to be Eleven
hundred twenty five Pound thirteen Shillings four Pence, due to the Children of
Anne Ruffin by her former husband William Seacoll alias Salkell, as by the
Inventory under the Seal of the Prerogative Court appears, of which Children
this Deponents mother was a survivor: And this Deponent further says, that 14
Eliz. this Deponents Aunt Eliz. Cheyne, married with Thomas Cheyne Esquire found
heir to the Lord Cheyne by three Inquisitions.

And that the father of Thomas Cheyne, before the marriage of Elizabeth Cheyne,
did Covenant to assure to Eliz. Cheyne in recompense of her Lands, the Manor
of Kynburie and impropriate Parsonage of Kynburie, which this Deponent has
heard and does verily believe, to be of the value of seven or eight hundred
Pound per annum: and before the said Covenant and Conveyance made to Elizabeth
Cheyne, the said Thomas Cheyne the father had made two former Conveyances of
the said Lands, the one for 50 years or thereabouts the 12 Eliz. and the other
of the Fee-simple 13 Eliz. to one Langly of London, as by the Copy of the
Inquisition taken after the death of Thomas Cheyne the father 31 of Elizabeth,
and the Copy of the Deed enrolled dated the 13 Eliz. deposed by the said George
Beck to be true Copies appears.

And this Deponent further says, That the Deed and Recovery 6 Eliz. was only
found in the Lord Cheynes Inquisition 35 Eliz. and the Deed and Recovery of 13
Eliz. was left out of the Inquisition, and 12 Jacob. in the Inquisition then
taken after the death of the Lady Cheyne, to entitle her to die seized of the
Fee-simple, there was neither the Deed of 6 nor 13 of Eliz. found, and so found
her to die seized without Deeds of the Lands in the said Recoveries mentioned,
as by the Copies of the said several Inquisitions deposed by George Beck to
be true Copies appears.

And this Deponent further says, That in the Dismission at large 12 Jacob.
against Thomas Cheyne in the Court of Wards, it appears that the Earl did
plead this Deponents Deed and Considerations to bar Thomas Cheyne, and that
the Clark had entered in the said Dismission, that the Court was satisfied the
Earls Title was good and sufficient in Law, without any such words or warrant
in the Order for the dismission, as by the said Order and Dismission deposed by
the said George Beck to be true Copies appears.

And this Deponent further says, That 4 Carl. the Earl demurred to the
Considerations generally expressed in this Deponents Deed and Bill in Chancery,
for want of the Evidences, and got this Deponents Bill dismissed, and in the
dismission the Earl did cause the Clark to insert, that the Court would not
allow of the Considerations of this Deponents Deeds, albeit it was directed by
the Court and so written in the Registers Note-book, that the Bill was to be
dismissed without prejudice, as by the Notes in M. Edwards his Book Register
did then and after appear to this Deponent, and is so certified by M. Devonish
a Clark in the Registers Office under his hand.

And this Deponent further says, That it appears under the hands of Sergeant
Rolls, Sergeant Godbolt, Sergeant Atkins afterward Judges, and Sir Thomas
Widdrington and others, subscribed in the year of our Lord 1645. which is
deposed in Chancery by John Cook and Richard Wallopp Esquires to be their
hands; that they are of opinion the Considerations are great and valuable
Considerations for the Lands claimed by this Deponent, and that the entering by
the Clark in the Court of Wards, in the dismission against Thomas Cheyne, that
the Court was satisfied that the Earls Title was good and sufficient in Law,
without any such words or warrant in the Order for the dismission and the
pleading thereof against this Deponent at the Councel-Table and in Chancery,
was unduly done and ought to be suppressed, and that this Deponent ought to
have a Decree against the Deeds to Pool^y and Glenham, for diverse reasons under
their hands expressed.

And this Deponent further says, That it appears by the Depositions in
Chancery of George Almery Gent. that he and Justice Phesant did compound with
this Deponent for their part of the Lands Morgaged to them by the Earl of
Cleveland.

And this Deponent further says, That to this Deponents best remembrance, M.
Hales Councellor at Law did advise Sir John Thorowgood to compound with this
Deponent for his part of the Lands morgaged to him by the said Earl, and told
this Deponent he would be of Council for this Deponent against the Title of
the Earl, and to this Deponents best remembrance, the said Sir John Thorowgood
did tell this Deponent that he had lent the Earl three thousand Pound upon a
Morgage of the Manor of Harlington, and that the said Manor was worth six
thousand Pound, and that if this Deponent would allow the said Sir John
Thorowgood his three thousand Pound in the Purchase, he would give this
Deponent three thousand Pound more, or used words to the same effect.

And this Deponent further says, That the profits of one of the Leases of
Elizabeth Cheyne called Swinford Lease, from the time of the marriage of
Elizabeth Cheyne 14 Eliz. to the time of the making of the Deed 11 of Jacob.
did amount to more then the ten thousand Pound mentioned in the said Deed, for
recompense whereof, and for other the Lands and goods of Elizabeth Cheyne, the
said Thomas Cheyne did convey and Covenant to convey the Reversion of the said
Lands claimed by this Deponent.

And this Deponent further says, That after the Lease for 30 years made to Sir
John Croft was ended, this Deponent did prefer a Bill in Chancery to be
relieved against the said Deeds to Pooley and Glenham, which Bill was signed by
Bulstrade Whitlocke Esquire, after one of the Lords Commissioners for the Great
Seal, and by John Bradshaw Esquire, after Lord President of the Council of
State, and by Sir Thomas Beddingfield Knight after one of the Judges of the
Common Pleas, and by Henry Pelham and John Maynard Esquires, who have also
declared in the Bill, that this Deponents remedy is by Decree in Equity against
those Deeds to Pooley and Glenham for diverse reasons; And the president of
Kinersley and Colmers Case in the Bill set forth, which Title of the Earl by
the said Deeds to Pooley and Glemham is now come to the State, whereby this
Deponents Title is to be heard and determined by the Committee of Obstructions
both for Law and Equity, by the saving in the Act for the sale of Delinquents
Lands, as this Deponent humbly conceives by the words in the Act. All which is
humbly submitted to Judgment.

THOMAS St NICHLAS.
November. 20. 1651. Copia examinatur, EDWARD NOELL.

May 13. 1652. By the Commissioners for removing Obstructions in the Sale of
Delinquents Lands and Estates.
WHereas the Cause upon the Petition and Claim of Tristram Wodward Esquire, out
of the Estate of Thomas Earl of Cleveland, to the Manors of Tuddington,
Harlington and Tyngrith in the County of Bedford came to a Hearing this day,
and the Deed of 29 of Eliz. made to Pooley and Glemham, mentioned in the
Councels Report, being not produced in this Cause, Ordered that the further
hearing of this Cause be respited until Thursday the 27 instant, and this to
be without prejudice to the parties interessed herein in the mean time, and
that there do issue forth an Order for the bringing in of the said Deed by that
day.

William Roberts. John Parker. Francis Mussenden. Robert Aldworth. Henry Pit.

Copia examinatur, Edward Noell.

May 13. 1652. By the Commissioners for removing Obstructions in the Sale of
Delinquents Lands and Estates.
ORdered, That M. Thomas Penington do forthwith produce to Mr St Nichlas of
Council for the Commonwealth, such Conveyances as he has in his custody or
can come by, as were made by the Lady Jane Cheyne deceased in the 29 of Eliz.
to Pooley and Glenham, and from the said Pooley and Glenham to Thomas Earl of
Cleveland, or to any other for his use, to be made use of in the defense of the
Commonwealths Title, and then to be safely redelivered to the said M. Penington.

Copia Examinatur, Edw. Noell.

May 27. 1652. By the Commissioners for removing Obstructions in the Sale of
Delinquents Lands and Estates.
Whereas the Cause upon the Petition and Claim therein of Tristram Wodward
Esquire, out of the Estate of Thomas Earl of Cleveland, one of the persons
named in the Act entitled, An Act for the Sale of several Lands and Estates
forfeited to the Commonwealth for Treason, to the Manors of Tuddington,
Harlington and Tyngrith in the County of Bedford, came according to former
Order to a hearing this day, and the Certificate or Repert of Mr St Nichlas of
Council for the Commonwealth made in this Case being read, and Council for
the Petitioner being heard, what they had to offer in reference to the said
Claim, and the same being had in serious debate and consideration, it was upon
the Question resolved;

That the Claim of the said Tristram Wodward Esquire to the said Manors of
Tuddington, Harlington and Tyngrith be dismissed.

Copia examinatur, Edward Noell.

That the Act of Parliament for Sale of Delinquents Lands, does appoint all
Just Claims both in Law or Equity, to be heard, determined and allowed.
The Reasons of learned Lawyers, why the Claim of the said Tristram Wodward Esquire
is Just in Law and Equity.
I Am of Opinion, That the Plaintiff M. Wodward ought to have a Decree for the
Lands and profits since the death of the Lady Cheyne 12 Jacob. of those
parcells of Lands whereof the Fines Sur concessit were levied 20 Eliz. and 27
Eliz. and whereof the Recovery was suffered 24 Eliz. for that the Ladies power
was interrupted from making the Lease for 30 years of those parcells,
notwithstanding the Deeds to Pooley and Glemham, supposed to be made by the
Lady Cheyne 29 Eliz. were true Deeds; but I suspect those Deeds to be false
antidated Deeds, made of purpose to bring the Reversion to the Earl of
Cleveland the Lady Cheynes heir, contrary to the intent of the Lord Cheyne in
the Deed of 13 Eliz. wherefore I am also of opinion, the Plaintiff ought to
have a Decree for the Reversion of all the rest of the Lands, after the
expiration of the Lease for 30 years made by the Lady Cheyne 10 Jac. to Sir
John Crofts, to begin from her death 12 Jac. which ended the 16 of April 1644.

I am also of opinion, That the Lands and Goods of Eliz. Cheyne are good and
valuable Considerations in equity, for Thomas Cheyne her husband to Convey his
own Lands to the Plaintiff, who was sisters son of Elizabeth Cheyne by the said
bargain and sale made 6 Jac. and that the Lands mentioned in the Deed of
Bargain and Sale, ought to be decreed for the Plaintiff in equity, according to
the Conveyances and Covenants of Thomas Cheyne.

I am also of opinion, That the new Assurances made 11 Jac. by Thomas Cheyne to
Sir Thomas Pelham, Sir John Hungerford and others, do in Law raise the uses to
the Plaintiff and his Children, being made for marriage between the Plaintiff
and his wife, the daughter of Sir Edmund Pelham, and Kinswoman of Thomas Cheyne
and of the Lord Cheyne, and that the Conveyance of 11 Jac. and the Statute of
Forty thousand Pounds, are good in Law and equity.

EDWARD ATKINS.
July 18. 1645.
I Am of opinion, That for those parcels of Lands wherein the Ladies power was
interrupted by the Fines of 20 and 27 Eliz. and by the Recovery of 24 Eliz. and
for the profits thereof since the death of the Lady, the Plaintiff ought to be
releeved in equity, albeit the Deeds to Pooley and Glemham should fall out to
be true Deeds; but those Deeds seem to be false and antidated after the Lady
Cheynes Revocation of her Limitation 35 Eliz. and therefore I also conceive
that the Plaintiff ought to be releeved for the Reversion of all the rest of
the Lands, after the expiration of the Lease for 30 years which is now ended,
and the great Estate in Lands and Goods of Eliz. Cheyne the Plaintiffs Aunt,
whereof she was defrauded, were great and valuable Considerations for Thomas
Cheyne to convey this Reversion after the 30 years to the Plaintiff, being the
sisters son of Eliz. Cheyne; and I think that the bargain and sale to the
Plaintiff 6 Jac. Regis, and the new Assurances 11 Jac. Regis, and the Statute
of 40000 Pound ought to be decreed for the Plaintiff in equity, according to
the Covenants of Thomas Cheyne.

I hold that the Lady Cheyne by the Deed of 13 Eliz. had only power to make one
Limitation and no more, and therefore that Limitation of the uses of the
Recovery of 13 Eliz. in the bottom of the Deed of 35 Eliz. were void and idle,
if those Deeds to Pooley and Glemham were made 29 Eliz. and true Deeds, which I
conceive are repugnant to those Deeds 35 Eliz. and also to the last Will of the
Lady Cheyne, which Declares that she never made any Limitation, nor ever
intended to make any without power of Revocation.

If those Deeds to Pooley and Glemham had been true Deeds, it is not probable
that Sir John Crofts the Lady Cheynes Commissioner would have omitted the
proving of them at the finding of the Lord Cheynes Office in 35 Eliz. or have
suffered the Lady Cheyne to have omitted the pleading of them in the Exchequer
36 Eliz. neither would the Earl have omitted the proving of them in his own
Office 12 Jac. Regis after the death of the Lady Cheyne, nor in the Court of
Wards, Councell-Table and Chancery, where he has been called to prove them.

It appears that the Earl in the Court of Wards, pleaded the Plaintiffs bargain
and sale, and Considerations to bar Thomas Cheyne, and therefore it will be a
kind of contradiction, for the Earl to plead in Chancery against the Plaintiff,
that now the Considerations are not valuable.

I am of opinion, That the Clarks undue entering up in the dismission at large
in the Court of Wards against Thomas Cheyne, that the Court was satisfied of
the Earls Title to be good and sufficient in Law, without any such words or
warrant in the Order for dismission, and after pleading the same at the
Councell-Table and in Chancery against the Plaintiff, is unduly done and ought
to be suppressed.

The Lord Cheyne taking the Fee-simple from the Lady Cheynes heirs, given by
the Deed of 6 Eliz. and settling it upon his own heirs by the Deed of 13 Eliz.
after the expiration of the Lady Cheynes Estate, does clearly show, that he
meant his wife should leave the Reversion after 30 years to his heirs and not
to her heir, by such a Deed as is pretended to be made by the Lady Cheyne 29
Eliz. to Pooley and Glemham.

I do not conceive that any of the Fines levied by Earl of any part of the
Land, can bar the Plaintiff of his right of Entry within five years after the
expiration of the Lease for 30 years by the Statute of 4 Hen. 7. And I think
that no Fines at any time can bar the Plaintiffs right in equity, nor his
Statute of Forty thousand Pound at the Common Law.

THO. WIDRINGTON.
Julij 28. 1645. I am of the same opinion for the Reasons aforesaid.

HEN. ROLL.
Aug. 5. 1645.

I am of the same opinion.

JOHN GODBOULD.



The Question is,
Whether the Office of 12 Jac. in Mr St Nichlas Report mentioned, that finds
the Lady Cheyne to die seized of the Fee-simple of her husbands Lands without
finding any Deeds to entitle her, or the Dismission in Chancery of the Bill of
Tristram Wodward Esquire against the Earl of Cleveland 4 Carol. before an Answer
come in, or the Affidavit of Sir John Thorowgood in his own Case in the Report
mentioned, or the Depositions of John Cook and Richard Wallop Esquires, who
depose in Chancery they did see those Deeds dated 29 Eliz. alleged to be made
by the Lady Cheyne to Pooley and Glemham, and the Regrant alleged to be made
by Pooley and Glemham to the Lady Cheyne, showed forth by Sergeant Tailor the
Earls Council to Justice Reeve and Justice Foster upon a Reference from
Parliament 1641. be sufficient proof to prove the Deeds true Deeds and not
antidated, without producing or proving the Execution to be sealed and
delivered 29 Eliz. the year they bear date, upon pretense to the Commissioners
at the hearing of the Cause, that now the Deeds are lost.

See Sir George Caryes book in point of his Reports in Chancery folio 31.
Justice Monsons Case primo Jacob. where a Release was pretended to be lost, and
it was deposed it had been seen, but this was not allowed for proof, unless he
would swear he had seen it sealed and delivered, for it is not sufficient to
say he saw it after it was a Deed, for no Deed is to be allowed unless it be
produced, or the execution thereof proved, those are the words in Sir George
Caryes book of Reports.

That the Act of Oblivion does except from pardon, all Persons that shall give
in evidence any forged antidated Deed, and therefore it is the safest way to
say such Deeds are lost, then to give them in evidence for true Deeds.

That the said M. Wodward before the hearing of the Cause, did Petition the
Committee of Obstructions, to hear and determine the Cause according as to their
wisdoms shall seem to stand with equity and good conscience, for that the
Petitioner is without all means to go to Law any further being in years, and he
and his Children utterly undone by the Earl, which Petition was delivered to
every one of the Commissioners of Obstructions that heard the Cause, and after
dismissed it without any cause showed in the Dismission, as by the Orders
aforesaid appears, whereby the Petitioner and his Children are left in a
distressed estate, without any means to subsist, and his debts unpaid to diverse
Persons of quality, of whom he found great love for his integrity and just
dealing: And it is humbly submitted to judgment, whether in Conscience the
debts of M. Cheyne that married Eliz. Cheyne the heir and Executrix of Richard
Ruffin, ought to be paid out of these Manors and Lands, before the debts of
the Earl of Cleveland that is a stranger to M. Cheyne, nor paid any thing for
the Reversion after the 30 years, being declared by learned Council to be the
Vineyard or Lands of M. Cheyne, and Conveyed and Covenanted to be Conveyed to
M. Wodward for marriage, and for a recompense for the Lands of Elizabeth Cheyne
and her sisters Portions that bought part of the Lands called Swinford Lease.

FINIS.

