WILLIAM PENN And the QUAKERS EITHER Impostors, or Apostates, Which they
please: Proved from their avowed Principles, and contrary Practices

-- Inest sua gratia parvis. 2 Timothy 3.8, 9. Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood
Moses, so do these also resist the truth: men of corrupt minds, reprobate
concerning the faith.

But they shall proceed no further, for their folly shall be made manifest unto
all men, as theirs also was.

By Trepidantium Malleus.

LONDON: Printed for the Author, and are to be Sold by John Lawrence at the
Angel in the Poultrey. 1696.

TO THE Humoursom READERS.
My Brethren,
IN this quarrelsome Age, wherein little that is written can please all, or
most, I must expect to fall under the Censure of not a few. Perhaps in an angry
fit, you will be ready to Object;

Is there not enough, and more then enough in this scribbling Age, written
against this People already? I Answer,

There is too much, and yet too little: Many trouble the world with long
vagaries about things less material; or their more weighty things are not
expressed in so few words, nor their arguments managed with that conciseness as
could be wished.

He is the best Soldier, who attacking an Enemy, runs on him and stabs him to
the heart; whether I have so stabbed Quakerism to the heart, if you will be
sober, be you judges, or the Quakere either, who have any intervals from their
Deliriums.

Two things are often enquired about Books, How large they be? And what they
cost? If they be too large, or cost too much, Men either neglect them, or read
them with a running eye; but if short, and of little cost, not only their
Money, but (that which is more precious to Studious men) their time is well
saved.

Here is a little Book, and of small price, and things not written of by
others. Some may ask,

What should induce you to this work?

A. I have sought for William Penn many years, and coming as a stranger to
London, have here found him; and I think the Queries sent to him are
unexceptionable and unanswerable; and I have more reasons than one to think
William Penn is of the same Opinion; for this I appeal from his mouth to his
conscience, if he has any; he may say as Ahab to the Prophet, Have thou found
me, O mine enemy! 1 Kings 21.20.

It may be you will say, You are too hot. A. Perhaps you are too cold; read the
after-account of the Man before you are so waspish and quick. If you say, I
like not this Dispute; then let it alone, and leave it to them that do: If the
Bookseller have been deceived by me, it is pity you should be so by him. Look
well to your Pockets, and be sure you throw not away your Money for nothing,
especially when good Money is as scarce as good Subjects.

Many Writers get others to recommend their Books to the world; but I care not
to trouble any such; for they overvalue their Friends, and so their Writings: I
will therefore do it my self. In short, I tell you I am a quick writer of
sudden flights. Yet if you will have my opinion, I think it is not jejunely
done, nor to be reckoned among the meanest Books against this People. However I
have pleased my self, and that is something, and many an honest man too (I
doubt not) and that is more. But if I please not you, I care not, and so till
you and I be in a better humor,

Farewell.
QUESTIONS SENT TO William Penn.
Question 1.
WHether He, or any of them will, or dare stand forth and say, I desire no
Pardon from a Holy God, for any Imperfection in Thought, in Word, or in Action,
in the close of a Day, of a Week, of a Month, of a Year, since his or their
imaginary perfect sinless State?

I entreat them into whose hands this Book shall fall, to take notice, That I
kept no Copy of my Queries to him, not intending them for open view, much less
for the Press; I dare not therefore pretend strict exactness to words, but
sense; and for this I dare challenge him to deny it.

Now if they are as Perfect as Adam was before he Fell, as some have said, I
say, he then needed no Pardon; if they be as Holy, as some have blasphemously
said, as God himself, I say, God need not Pardon himself.

Perfection in Scripture is sometimes put in opposition to Hypocrisy. So all
the Saints are Perfect; God so loves Holiness, that he calls the least degrees
of Holiness by this honorable name Perfection, to encourage men in the
thoughts of their present acceptance with him, and to let them know the
unshaken foundation is now laid.

So Noah, Abraham, Job, and others, are said to be Perfect, that is, no
Hypocrites, but Sincere ones. Yet they were guilty of great and visible Sins,
and made Confessions of them to God in this their perfect State.

The instance of Asa is most pregnant; it is said of him, That he put the
Prophet in Prison who Prophesied to him in the Name of the Lord; that he was
wroth with him; very great sins sure, and of a deep die, and one would think
inconsistent with true Grace: When he was pained in his Feet he sought not to
the Lord, but to the Physician; one would think he could be no Good Man; yes,
says the Holy Ghost, He was no formal Hypocritical Man, he was good in the
bottom; and how is this expressed, 1 Kings 15.14. Nevertheless the heart of Asa
was perfect with the Lord his God all his days. What is that? Without Sin? Then
the sense is this, Asa committed very great sins, nevertheless he sinned not
all his days.

Sometimes perfection is put in opposition to imperfection. This distinction is
clear in the words of Paul, 3 Phillip. 13, 14. Not as if I had attained, or
were already perfect; I press on: as many as are perfect be thus minded. In the
first place he speaks of Perfection in opposition to Imperfection; I have not
attained it, says he (if he had not, by the way, we have mad men running up and
down among us that say, they have; but without the breach of Charity I dare be
bold to assert, the Perfection they have attained to, is a perfection of
Stupidity and Obduration); but says Paul, I press forward; I have perfection
in my Eye, tho not in my Heart; as many as be perfect (that is, sincere,
upright) be thus minded. For they that in the former sense are perfect, cannot
be said not to have attained it, or to press after it. Job says of himself, of
whom God gave this testimony, There was none like him in all the earth; a
perfect man, that is, a sanctified man, 1 Job 1. If I should say I were
perfect, that would prove me perverse; say it! no he detests it in the next
words, I perfect (for those words are only found in the Original) I would not
know my own soul, 9 Job 20, 21. Who can say his heart is clean? says Solomon;
Yes, A Pharisee, a Papist, and a Quaker.

The Doctrine of Perfection, or a Sinless State, began among the Pharisees, who
thought mental sins nothing; therefore Christ reproves them, convinces them,
that a Wrathful thought is Murder, an Unchaste thought Adultery, a Covetous
thought Theft; for these are contrary to the Divine Law, and stain the Heart of
Man. The greatest wickedness that ever was acted by the most Profligate man in
the world, was at first but a Thought, and his greatest sin virtually therein.
The greatest Oak was once no bigger than an Acorn; the Fire that Burnt London
but a Spark.

I trouble not the Reader with the usual distinctions among the Learned, of a
Perfection of Parts, and a Perfection of Degrees. Not that I think them
unuseful, but not so intelligible to all Capacities.

He sins in his highest acts of Love to God, that cannot say, I love God so
well it is not my duty to love him more; neither have I reason to bewail the
want of it. So I might enlarge about Time, Prayer, etc.

Now as this Doctrine began among the Hypocritical Heretics in the Church of
the Jews, so it was taken up by such in the Church of Rome, and carried on by
such in the Protestant Church: I affirm, and am able to prove it, The Quakers
borrowed their Expositions and Arguments out of Popish Authors. Let any man
compare Kellison the Jesuit, his Survey of the New Religion, and Barclay's
Apologia pro Theologia vere Christiana, together, and speak his mind in this
point.

I could never get any of our Perfectionists (for so I often call them, as
detesting them for this worst of Doctrines) to Answer this first Question, They
desire no Pardon of God for any Imperfection in the end of a Day -- For fear, I
think, God should take them at their word; few of them now pretend to it, or
talk so much of it, for fear, it may be, they should be laughed at, so many
living and conversing with them, see so much pride, passion, unfair dealing,
neglect of all Family and secret Duties.

I remember one of Bristol, a Scholar, who tells us in Print, his outward name
was Lawrence Steel (a Novice lifted up with Pride, and so fell info the
Condemnation of the Devil) he once said to the Reverend Mr. Fairclough of that
City, Not that I am Perfect, would I were; yet going on in Disputing (or rather
Prating) he urged that much mistaken and abused place, He that commits sin
is of the devil; then you are so, said Mr. Fairclough to him, on your own
confession, according to the wrong gloss you give of the words. Instead of an
argument for an answer, he fell into an angry fit, and so into angry words.

Question 2.
Whether George Bishop, of the City of Bristol (a Scholar) writing a Book
called, A Looking-Glass for the Times, was not a most deceitful Writer, though
then their grand Champion?

He says in the Title page, That the quakers were most like to the ancient
Christians, as was proved, in the Book, out of Eusebius, Socrates Scholastieus,
Evagrius, and Dorotheus. Yet in the Folio is so far from such a proof, that he
does not attempt it: But to do him right, he gives a true account out of those
Authors; but such a description of Ordination by Laying on of Hands, Singing of
Psalms, Swearing against the Arians, and all other things, that prove them to
be altogether unlike the Quakers, and like us.

It is true by the ble, in a few leaves, he speaks of Jerome (and it may be some
others) who were against taking of Oaths; which if true, is not material; for I
knew one worthy Minister against it, and some private Christians; and would to
God this were all the Controversy between us and our Perfectionists. The Book
cured me of the temptation which, I confess, induced me to read it.

Tell me, Was there ever such a cheat since Writing or Printing were known in
the world? Did he think we would look no further than the Title Page, and take
his word for all the rest? One of these Books for this rare admirable
Discovery, was sent to every Doctor in the University in my time, which was
twenty seven year since, for their Conviction and Edification. If any say, the
Quakers were like them for Sufferings; so were the Protestants much more in
Queen Mary's days, the Papist in Queen Elizabeth's days, the Nonconformists in
the Reign of King Charles the Second (that Papist in Masquerade, as he
confessed on his Deathbed): No, he pretends likewise in Principles and
Practice. Since the Reading of his Book, I could never think of the Author
without great detestation, as the greatest piece of Falsehood and Impudence that
ever appeared in the world.

Yet our Perfectionists never testified against this man; have called me a
Persecutor for thus telling the truth. I could name other Quakerish Writers of
History, but will not.

Question 3.
Whether the Quakers, in the time of the violent Proceedings against
Dissenters, begun about almost Fifteen years since, and continued about Five
years, leaving the Places of their Public Worship, for fear of Confiscation of
Goods, Imprisonment, or Banishment, were not either Notorious Impostors, or
Notorious Apostates, acting on our Principles, after the severest Censure of
them?

They have asserted in many, many, many of their printed Books, Speakings, and
private Conference, That it was unlawful for any to leave the Place of their
Public Worship for any Persecution whatever.

That they were moved by the Holy Spirit, sent by the Ever-living God, to
testify to us, in the Name of the Lord, That we were Hypocrites, Carnal
Persons, Lovers of the World more than of God, for not appearing openly. So Pen
and others: Though we declared we so far were from thinking such an open
Appearance to (as they phrase it) bear our Testimony to be Duty, that it was
Folly. Either, say I, when they themselves lest their Meetings, (which they
generally did all England over, where the then Rage was fiery and burning)
their Minds were changed about this thing, or not.

If they were not, they were Notorious Apostates, to live in the sinful
omission of open Duties so many years, as many did, going up and down about
their business, till, not Conscience, but King James's illegal, deceitful
Toleration, brought them to those Places again. They observed not their own
Message from God to us. And if we through ignorance must be damned, they much
more for acting against their Light, and that after thousands of Protestations
to God and man of the contrary.

If their Minds were changed, (as Richard Vicarr confessed privately to me he
believed they were) then were they Notorious Impostors, to bring us a Message
from the Devil, in the Name of the Lord. Then have they blasphemed the Name of
the Eternal God, and belied the Holy Ghost. Then have they defamed, slandered
the Generation of the Righteous, and reprobated and damned them for an
innocent, lawful, justifiable Action.

Know, Reader, that we ever asserted, That it was lawful to flee in a time of
Persecution; Christ has said it plainly, If they persecute you in one City,
flee to another, Matthew. 10.23. Be wise as Serpents, said the same mouth, and
almost in the same breath, that said, be innocent as Doves. Had any of us been
let down in a Basket over a Wall, as Paul was for fear of the Jews, Acts 9.24,
25. they would have made sport of us, though none were so weak in those days to
do so of him.

We told them, That in a time of danger, it was lawful to withdraw, from the
Example of the Prophets, Christ, the Apostles. The Holy Jesus in this respect
was not Holy enough for his Holy Brethren, (in pretense); observe Christ did as
we do; his Brethren, who are said not to believe in him, objected and censured
him almost in the same words as the Quakers (their Followers) do us the
Followers of Christ?, John 7.1, 4. Jesus walked no more openly in Jewry, but
walked in Galilee, because the Jews sought to kill him: There is no man that
does any thing in secret, and he himself seeks to be known openly: If thou
do these things, show thy self to the world, said his unbelieving Brethren to
him.

All our Martyrs did as we did: These said ( Barclay Apol. and Thousands of
them) that by this were they known to be the People of God, That they were not
found in Corners, kept the Places of their Public Worship, which, if pulled
down, they stood on the Rubbish of them, and would have done so even to the
death. But, say I, since they are known not to be the People of God, for they
left those Places in the heat of Persecution. I, being once a Bristol man, will
tell you what was done there, where were the chief Quakers. I will inform you
what I know of this Lawrence Steel of Bristol, once a Candidate for the
Ministry; who left us, and turned a Perfectionist, because of this Principle of
theirs, yet left their Meetingplace a long time. At last, when driven here by
some hot quakers, he was taken only with six or seven persons, as I remember.
He was sent to Gaol a half-year, for refusing the Corporation Oath; after the
expiration of which he never went-more, and so continued to the time of his
death.

R. V. another great man (especially in his own eyes) did the like; and all the
rest, only Elizabeth Sterring, and Dorcas Dole, two zealous Women, wrote a Book
against them all, damning them, in the Name of the Lord, for leaving their
Testimony, contrary to their Manifestation from the Lord. They tell them of
Daniel's opening his Windows; contemned their Plea, that God can hear in
secret; and they drop this charitable, and I doubt not true passage by the way:

Had many of the Professors (for so they call other Dissenters) been of your
Persuasion, they would not have done as you now do. Honestly said. Heaven
forbid!

Is it not worth while to ask William Pen how he bore his Testimony? Did not he
flee? Not Whitehead, after all his mockings of others? They would set some to
watch at doors, to see whether Informers did espy any of them coming into a
House, warily (as others did) for a private Meeting.

This was the great thing these men ever gloried in; it was a good Providence
before this Liberty was given, that these men were tried and cast; else how had
they now triumphed and exalted themselves above all others. The reason of all
was this:

If there were taking away of Goods in one place, it was not so in another till
now; therefore the Sufferers were helped by the Non-sufferers out of their
Fund, (a commendable Practice) but now the Storm comes on all, and no help.
Every Quaker now must stand (or rather run away) on his own Legs.

Question 4.
Whether it were not horrid Impiety to leave Ministers because of their
Learning, and yet follow Pen and others because of theirs?

Latin was once the Language of the Beast, not fit for the mouth of a
Christian. This, with Greek and Hebrew, were the Three Languages nailed at
Christ's Cross; (but they have since cried to them as the Jews to Jesus, Come
down from the Cross); That Philosophy was Aristotle's Vomit; Serpents Meat in
us, and yet Angelical Food in him.

In short, How can Learning make us like Devils, and William Pen like an Angel?
So that the Light within was almost turned to the Light without: Pen's
Dictates. Only some were more eagle^ey'd, and could look through men. Meade
told a Friend of mine, That all Pen's Party were Factors for Popery: But that
he himself was so Loyal, he would spend his All, his Blood, in the Service of
this King. Honestly, said Meade, I believe thou speak thy heart.

Reader, I must stop thee here for a while, and tell thee, Since the sending of
this Question, I have been informed by some, who knew Pen as much as one man
can know another, That Pen is indeed a grand Politician, a great Statesman, one
that has great command of words, (but an Inventer of some, which the Quakers
use as to Un-religion a man, and the Bowed-downness of Souls) but that he could
not talk plain Latin with any man. They believed he could not turn a plain
piece of English into Latin; That he was no Grecian; That he understood little
Logic, or Philosophy; and told me some of his Blunders in Natural Philosophy,
too Comical now to relate. I was surprised.

And now, William Pen, seeing I am better informed concerning thee, that thou
have more escaped the Pollutions of this Learned Age, than I, and Thousands of
others imagined, I beg thy pardon for abusing thee; and clapping this Indignity
on thee, and if Reformation may be thy security, and Repentance (that younger
Brother to Innocence) set matters right, thou needst not fear such foul
Aspersions for the future. However, something of Learning thou have, Barclay
more, but Samuel Fisher most of all; that makes my Question to deserve an
Answer. I know the Learned Quaker that gave Barclay the Collections in his
Apology out of the Fathers, as he told me. Sam. Fisher, and others, could come
with their old heathenish way of Disputing, testified against by the Spirit of
the Ever-living God, by Syllogisms, Major, Minor, Conclusion, and Poetry too,
condemned in others.

I wrote W. Penn, I would not trouble him with one Question more.

Whether it were not Hypocrisy to condemn all Wars (even Defensive) as
unlawful, and Murder, when they were called to serve in this way Protestant
Princes, and yet all was well for a Popish Tyrant? Because I knew he did not
dare on many Accounts to give me a Reply.

After I had sent him these Queries, I went to his Lodgings, but he was not
there. One of his Friends there knew of my Letter, and told me that William Pen
said, He loved not Controversies, (that is, I suppose, Questions he cannot
answer; for Controversies are his work and trade) and that Books might inform
me: But I know none, and I presume he neither. What Books vindicated George
Bishop, that false, deceitful, vile Corrupter and Abuser of History? etc. What
were the Titles of the Books? Who were the Authors? He could not afterward
tell me. This Friend of his told me very soberly and calmly, That if the Charge
against the Quakers, of leaving their Meetings in a time of Persecution were
true, for which they condemned us, I had a just Charge against them, and they
ought to give me satisfaction. No Book meddles with these Questions.

The next morning I sent him another Letter, and told him what Excuses I had
heard why he would not meet with me, which he knew not to be true; that I did
believe he knew no Reply could be given, and therefore declined it; and that he
had as good tell me so in plain words, as thus practically, and by
interpretation. I had promised him if he could give me a satisfactory rational
Answer to my Queries, I would turn Quaker, but not till then. And that I had
some more Questions to propose to him, about which I desired his sober
Consideration; and that I challenged him to a public Disputation about them.

Question 5.
Whether it were not great Folly, or worse, to say, That bowing to a man was
Idolatry, a Breach of the second Commandment; a Sin, which rather than Mordecai
would commit, he would run a Risk for his own Life, and the Lives of all the
Jews; and yet after all this Harangue, turn this Custom of bowing to men, into
a common Practice?

When we were reasoning with them once, Did not Abraham bow to the Children of
Heth, etc? They would reply, If Abraham were satisfied in it, we are not;
following Scripture-Examples has undone the world; and yet, of late years they
observe that civil decent Ceremony.

By the way, Reader, give me leave to tell a pleasant, though plain Story. I
knew two Grave, Learned Divines, who parting, bowed one to another. A zealous
Quaker, in a great Fury, runs to them, and said to one of them, (a facetious
man) Do thou not know it is written, Thou shall not bow down? The Minister
looking on this ignorant, impudent Fool with Contempt, said to him, Do thou
not bow down when thou do Sh -- The Quaker replies, Thou art a Beast to talk
so. And said the Minister, Thou art a veryer Beast if thou do not do so. Nay,
Priest, (said he) why talkest thou like a Beast? Why (said be) quotest thou
Scripture like a Devil? alluding to that Scripture where the Devil setting on
Christ, cites Scripture, of Angels preserving men that they hurt not their feet
against the stones, but left out in all thy ways, Mat. 4.6. So the Quaker
names, Thou shall not bow down, but left out to graven Images.

Question 5.
Whether it were not unheard of Dissimulation, to tell Oliver Cromwell, Thus
says the Lord, I have put the Sword into thy hand -- to to destroy Idolaters,
the Stuarts, and Ma^nants. And yet, after all, to tell K^ Charles II. That all
this was Rebellion, (...) that they gave their Testimony against the m^ there of
his Father?

What George Fox and Buroughs did, well known: He that would fully und^stand
this wickedness, let him read a li^^ Tract, done by a curious hand, called,
(...) Snake in the Grass. The best Thing t^ ever was written on this Subject.
(...) Pennyman's Papers, (once a Quaker) w^ has, out of their Authors, shown
h^ they always shuffled Principles about ^vernment, Scriptures, Ministers, etc.

Question 7.
Whether it were not great wicked^ to pretend to Inspiration, Infallibility, P^
phecies, Miracles, and yet expound so (...) congruous, and contrary to
Scripture?

As Pen and I heard George Whitehead to in Bristol, on Prove. 9.1, 4. Wisdom h^
built her a house -- She cries, Whose simple, let him turn in hither; and for
(...) that is void of understanding. -- A sim^^ thing, said he, is a thing
unmixt, pure? So he that is Holy, h^th no Sin. Now though the latter part of
the Verse explains the former, yet this mighty man of theirs, that has printed
so many large Books, could not see it. Besides, though the word Simple be an
equivocal word in English, yet not so in Hebrew, for here it fignifieth
foolish. That a Quaker, about a year since, in Cullington, prophesied from the
Lord, All Women that are with Child this Year, shall die in Childbirth; which
was far from being true, though some in that Case were in great fear. If this
cost any of them their Lives, I cannot contradict it, if any should say, that
this false Prophet deserved to die, as much as any Thief or High way-man
whatever.

Reader, know, these men condemned all Human Literature, and asserted
Inspiration. But can the Spirit in a Quaker, contradict the Spirit in the
Scripture? They say, That as if a man speak through a Cane, it is not the voice
of the Cane, though it pass through it, but the voice of the Man: So it is not
the voice of the Quaker, but the voice of the Spirit. I needed no more to prove
them Deceivers, but hearing them. Yea, some have p^^ tended to Miracles.

One came into a House where a Chillay dead, and said to the People, Weep no
the Child is not dead, but sleeps. And, i^ imitation of the Prophet, 2 Kings
4.3. Stretched her self on the Child, saying, In (...) Name of Jesus of
Nazareth, arise. I suppose, Reader, I need not tell thee, that the Soul of the
Child returned not to it again^ A Story well known, and by whon^ among Bristol
Friends.

A Quaker told me, that it was said George Fox could, by Inspiration, speak a^
Languages where the Lord sent him, an^ restored a Man to Life who broke hi^
Neck. Impudent Falsehoods!

I knew a Woman, about 22 years since who must fast 40 days, and 40 nights, b^^
soon died, and would have eat, but cou^ not. L -- S of Bristol, before named
asserted he was as much Inspired as wa^ the Prophet, yea, as Balaam's Ass. Thi^
Inspired Ass, after a continued idle Life fell ill of the Diabetes, by drinking
alway^ Red-streak Cider: When on his Death Bed, he said to his Physician, (Dr.
Griffin) who told me the Story, I shall not die, ^ shall be in such a place by
such a day; If should now die, the Lord would reveal it to me. But the Fool
soon turned up his Trotters, and died.

The Spirit, say they, is Infallible. What then, does it make us so? God is
Omnipotent, Omnisicient, does he make us so? This L -- S (the Inspired Ass)
once found out a notable place of Scripture for taking away Baptism, and the
Lord's Supper: Isa. 3.1. For behold, the Lord takes away the stay of bread.
There is the Supper, said he, and of Water, there is Baptism; as honest Mr.
Blinman a Minister had it from him, and told me the Story.

Now who would talk with such profane Wretches, thus playing with Scripture!

AFter this I received a Letter from William Penn, who told me, That he had
consulted some Bristol Friends, and they told him, I was a Hotheaded man, and
a Persecutor of them; and that if I were Sober and Temperate, he would spend an
half hour with me, though much business lay before him.

To whom I presently replied in a Letter, That I was never taken for a Wet
Dissenter; that it was very unfair to put me off with such an excuse; For what
if I should say, I had consulted my Friends about him, and that they told me,
(...) was a Roman Catholic, a Plotter for ^ Popish Tyrant against the best of
Kings But said I, away with such trash. Tha^ I did suppose R.V. was the Man,
no^ with him, who was my Accuser; h^ knew the contrary, that I received him
civilly in my house, he me in his; tha^ many Quakers could testify, that I ha^
been very kind to many of them, shew^ kindness to their Sick when I was in the
same Goal with them; that I once pai^ the Fine of one and caused his Goods t^
be returned.

He bids me in his Letter to take my course; but I observed added not, h^
feared not, as men commonly do; which now I have done, and let him try what he
will gain by it.

READER,

Seeing William Penn would not (that is in plain English, could not) Answer my
Questions; I will treat thee more fairly, I^ will Answer thine which may be in
thy Heart.

Question 1. What is William Penn?
I will tell you some things he wrote, and what I have heard from credible
Witnesses that knew him; then judge you, not I.

He in the Reign of King James the Second saluted him thus, That he was the
most Illustrious Example of Integrity, that for his Conscience sake ventured
the loss of Three Kingdoms. Now it is well known, the excluding Parliaments
never Treated with him, nor made him any Proposals about Religion.

He also then told the world, there are not Papists enough in London to make
the Coal fires, and yet here is such a cry of the danger of Popery. -- To that
Objection, Shall we Tolerate Idolatry? If Popery (said he) be Idolatry, He
makes an If of it. Now he that at that time should say, There was no danger of
Popery, must be a Knave, or a Fool; a Fool, if he thought as he said; a Knave,
if he said as he thought not. Now Penn was no Fool. There were Papists enough
in London once to burn the City; whether enough or no then to make the
Coal-fires. One that knew him very well told me, he was no more a Christian
than a Mahumetan; for they believe Christ to be a Good Man, and that W. Penn
(as he thought) believed not now either Christ's Divinity, or Humanity.

I will tell you one Story more of William Penn, and then speak your Minds; I
have had it from good hands, that Mr. Charles Nicholets has often declared,
that when the late K. J. preferred him for a Paper of Verses in commendation of
his Virtues, offering him first to be Ranger of his Park, which he refused,
afterward by making him Licenser of the Press, that he gave a License to a
Book against Popery; William Penn asked him, What he meant to License a Book
against the King's Religion? Why, said Mr. Nicholets, I am no Papist, and
though I have Licensed Popish Books (which I know I should not) yet I will not
deny a License to a Protestant Writer. So Penn was much displeased, and caused
him to be turned out of his Office. My Friend told me he would give it on Oath
Mr. Nicholets so told him.

Question 2. What are the Quakers?
Quakerism is the sink of all Heresies: Some Quakers are Socinians, believe not
the Trinity, nor Divinity of Christ; some be Sabellians, they believe Christ's
Divinity, but not the Trinity; some of them have respect to
Scripture-Authority, others regard them no more than an old Almanac, not
containing any Duty for us, but for others in their day. Some are for, others
against Women's speaking. A Quaker came from a Meeting and told a friend of
mine, I have heard Nine Women speak this day, but a Man may put in an Eggshell
all the sense they spoke.

Every Wh^m was once a Message from the Lord; but now that folly is so manifest
to all Men, that they are more sober.

One came to another and said, Thus says the Lord to thee James Nobbs, thou
art this and that; the Man heard all patiently, and then said, Hold thy Tongue
thou prating Fool, for the Lord knows I am not James Nobbsae.

Another had a Revelation to go with a Message from the Lord from Oxon to
Abbington, Five Miles; when he returned in the close of the day, his Wife (who
was no Quaker) asked him, Whether he had delivered his Message? No, said he,
the Man was not at home, he is gone a great journey. O thou Child of a Man,
said she, Do thou think the Lord sent thee to a Man that was not at home?
Which, as I remember, made the Man more sober.

In my younger days on a Temptation, I confess, I sought converse with the
chief of them I could meet with, to try their Perfection and Seize above
all others: I found (as others know that went amongst them on the like
Temptation) their hearts, heads, and hands were all in the world; no Family, or
Secret Prayer minded, their Children's Souls neglected; some of them said, they
would teach them to be Sober and no more. I first read G. B's Book, then
Conversed with R. B. of Oxon, a great Quaker, but he was a vile Jester, said he
to one, I can prove thou art an Atheist, How said he? Thus, Art thou a Wise Man
or a Fool? No Wise Man, replied the Man, then said B. Is it not said, The fool
has s^id in his heart there is no God, etc.?

J. L. of Plymouth (who for his Bounty, which indeed was very great) was a most
frothy abusive Jester, though his Name founds with a delicious Air every where
among them, yet a filthy and wicked Jester was he.

J. M. of Pensilvania hardly escaped whipping a few years since for Lying with
his Maid, who had thus Punished others for the same Vice, he being there a
Justice of the Peace, and a great Speaker.

How they painted out one another in Print in their open Meetings in Bristol
for Drunkenness and other Vices is well known. He that would read their
Blasphemies, let him read Rogers's Book, a Quaker of that City, what he says of
Fox and others; and yet these were the Perfect Sinless Creatures all the while.

In their Letters one against another, they would begin on both sides, This is
the word of the Eternal God from me to thee, Thou art an Hypocrite. -- Some
must Blaspheme; Reviling of Ministers was a Meritorious work. Some reported of
Mr. Hughs, once of Plymouth (the best Man that ever that Town was blessed with)
that he would drink Fifty Glasses of Sack at one Meal. Say it as often as they
would, I dare say not one believed it.

Every common thing was from God. Read the Snake in the Grass, a Book worth
Gold. Let Penn, or any other answer it if they can, I am sure it much concerns
them to do it. I saw a Letter from a Quaker to his Sweetheart, no Quaker, and
he began thus:

In my Bed, the other Night, a word passed through me: Here was my Person, but
my Heart was with thee. -- I can remember no more of the stuff, such bring all
Religion into Contempt. What says the Scripture, said one to me, Every Tub
must stand on his own bottom?

They saluted one of their Leaders as the only begotten Son of God, who lay
from everlasting in the bosom of the Father. He received of some Divine Honor,
as was proved.

I knew a Minister disturbed in Preaching by a Quaker Woman. He got her at last
into discourse of practical matters, in which she betrayed so much ignorance,
that she got away as fast as she could. An unhappy Boy followed her to the
Churchdoor, I pray thee, said he, tell me who sent thee here to day? Who, said
she, God. No, said the Boy, I am sure God never sent thee here; for if he had,
thou had never spoken so many things contrary to Scripture. And for my part,
said he, I cannot tell what to say to it, for I cannot easily imagine the Devil
sent thee here; for I thought be had more wit, than to send such a Fool as thou
art about his work. She never disturbed them after.

The heads of many of their Children are Dungeon dark about Scripture, only
learn some of their Cants.

Question 3.
Do not many Ministers mistake, and that grossly in some words, and in their
Exposition, and in their Doctrines too; and many Hearers talk ignorantly as
well as Quakers?

The Answer is easy: They pretend not to Infallibility, or Inspiration; but
acknowledge the imperfection of their Understanding, as well as Faith and
Affection, and the necessity of Human Literature, and much studying: But this
is not the Case of the Quakers, but the quite contrary. Now if I prove a man
that pretends to Inspiration in all that he preaches, (and that therefore he
needs not the knowledge of Tongues) to speak quite contrary to the Scripture,
and says the Spirit tells him, that is the meaning of such a Scripture, which
is as obvious as the Sun, to be quite contrary to what the Spirit there
intended; I prove that man to belie the Spirit, and so to be a Cheat and an
Impostor. And this is done thousands of times by these Quacks in Divinity.

The great mistakes of some of our Ministers, arise from their want of the
culture of good Education. How often is it with us, as in those times of
Jeroboam, 1 Kings 12.31. He made priests of the lowest of the people?

They expose themselves and work to Contempt. I pray all true Protestants,
under what Denomination soever, to take care in this respect, that their
Preachers be not gifted with Ignorance and Confidence, like Quakers Speakers.

The Stories of the three motions of the Sun, and the one was when he stood
still; and the four sort of Seekers; one was them that never sought, are well
known: but I will name some, not commonly talked of which I had from worthy
persons, who know the truth of them, by men which are, it may be, adhuc in
vivis.

One preaching on that Text, Psalm. 139.14. I am fearfully and wonderfully made.
Read, I am fearfully and wonderfully mad. The e being left out by a mistake of
the Printer, this Observation was drawn from the words, (and drawn to purpose
it was) That the best Saints may fall into mad Fits. On goes Mr. Parson, to
show what mad Fits the Saints may fall into, 1. Of Anger. Anger is a short
Madness -- Till the Hearers thought he had been wonderful mad indeed.

Another Tradesman sets up for a Preacher, and to work goes he, on that Text,
Nahum 3.8. Art thou better than populous No? (which No is taken to be
Alexandria in Egypt.) Now, Beloved, says the powerful Preacher, I shall
inquire into two things.

1. What No was. 2. Why he was called populous. No was the eighth person, a
Preacher of Righteousness, and he was called populous, because all the world
was once in his Ark.

Another Reverend Mechanic, very lately preached a Sermon, and a Funeral one
too, on that Text, Psalm. 39.13. O spare me, that I may recover strength, before
I go hence, and be seen no more.

And you must suppose this warm Man, laying about him, beating the Air, O! my
Friends, said he, is one Scripture word, and is used by Daniel three times in
one Verse, Dan. 9.19. O Lord, hear; O Lord, forgive; O Lord, hearken. Spare is
another Scripture word, and is joined with Shield and Buckler.

I remember Col. Crook told me a Story of Col. L- preaching in a great Church
in Ireland on that Text, The Spirit and the Bride say, Come, Rev. 22.17. The i,
by a mistake of the Printer, that should have been put after the Letter r, was
put before it, and now most devoutly and fervently goes our Preacher to work,
and reads. And the Spirit and the Bird say, Come. Now enquiry is made, what is
meant by the Bird? the Church: what Bird was the Church here compared to? Some,
said he, think the Nightingale: As if the Man had consulted many a Commentator
to find out the Mystery. Others thought the Dove. and now a Comparison is made
between the Church and the Dove for Innocence, Chastity, Purity. --

Another setting up for a Preacher, in a Parish I knew, would speak something
from those words ( from, no doubt nothing to) that in all things he might have
the pre-eminence; when he came to this hard word he could not read it well, but
said, That in all things he might have the p r e pre h e he m i mi n e n c e
nence, pre-eminence, Colos. 1.18.

I lately saw the Notes of a Tradesman that had been a Speaker thirty years
(leaving his Trade) full of prodigious nonsense. The world abounds with them.
The Bishops have too often Ordained such, I knew one who gave a Spiritual
receipt; Take a pint of Repentance, with a quart of Faith, and so walk forth
into the fields of Meditation.

I knew also one that was made Deacon, and told this story at his return; When
we sat down at Table my Lord bid me Eat, he had Two or Three Questions to ask
me; Eat thought I, I fell a sweating, sure my Lord will ask me Questions in
Divinity, and in Divinity, said he, I am one of the silliest Rogues in the
world; pray, said my Lord, Is such a Great Man come to Town? No, my Lord: O
thought I, that the other Questions may be no harder; pray, said the Bishop,
When does he come to Town? He is expected, my Lord, very speedily: Where does
he lodge when he comes, said the Bishop? My Lord, at such a place. When, said
he, I heard what the Questions were, I fell to it.

Now such Fellows justify our Quakers in their work. If one Tradesman, why not
another?

Obj. But the Quakers, say some, Preach very Powerfully.

Poor sense, and a powerful Voice, will not do. I cannot believe ever God sends
Fools about his work, and such as expose it to contempt. Too many justify the
Quakers in their affected tones, theatrical gestures, contrary to plain express
words of Scripture, 2 Titus 7. In doctrine showing uncorruptness, gravity,
sincerity; Vncorruptness, respects the soundness of the matter of our Doctrine:
Gravity, the manner of our delivering it: Sincerity, the Principle from which
all should come, and end to which all should be directed.

And for our Hearers, many of them are much more ignorant than any one would
suspect; I know a Man of a great Estate, an Entertainer of Ministers, who asked
lately one of them at his house, Whether Abraham were not a Protestant, and the
Canaanites Papists? Whether Joseph that we read of in Genesis, that was sold
into Egypt by his Brethren, was not the same Joseph that we read of in the
First of Matthew who was Espoused to the Virgin Mary?

If you say, What difference then between their ignorant Speakers and ours?
Much every way. Theirs despise Scripture and helps, Providence puts into their
hands of being better informed, and pretend to Inspiration, and so blaspheme
the Spirit, and talk how they can confound any of the Priests by the Spirit;
when others are ashamed of their folly, and not flee in the face of an
Instructor. I have heard such say, Will thou talk to me against what I feel and
handle of the word of Life? Alluding, no doubt, to the 1 Epistle of John chapter 1.
v. 1. John lay in the bosom of Christ, and his natural hands handled the
natural body of him who is called the Word of life. To question them is to
question the Spirit. I am unwilling to say all I think, and know of such filthy
dreamers, clouds without water, Jude 12. Is it not able to make a Wise Man sick
to hear what I have heard in their Assemblies remote from Religion, Reason, and
Gravity. For a half-witted Fellow and a Jackpudden, that unmans himself to
stand up and say;

I have been in many places in Kersendom, and I will never sell my reason to
think Christ came to save men from sin, and yet sin to be in them -- And now my
Friends ah, may you fe feel ah, the life ah, and the power ah --

Now you must suppose this was some notable Traveller that had compassed Sea
and Land to make Proselytes, according to 3 Matthew 15 verse; and sure if his
reason were to be sold he would be most lamentably choused in a woeful
pennyworth that should buy it; Thou fool and blind, said Christ in another case
to your elder Brethren, 23 Matthew 15. Cannot you believe a Physician should
come to give Physic, or give a Man ease in order to perfect Health in time, if
pains, atches, or any disorders be in him from the crown of the head to the
sole of the foot.

The Women I observed, and Women like Men, when they heard their affected
modes, would according to their frequent custom say, La, La, La, La, etc.

Now tell me, Reader, Whether such a speech of incoherent Blasphemies were not
able to make a Man purge both ways. In the time of great danger, when Twenty
pound was to be paid by the Speaker, they would seldom speak. Therefore I
remember when an Informer came into a Quakers Meeting, he was very busy to
find the Speaker, that he might pay the Money; Where is your Speaker said he?
Up stood a Quaker, Thou art he.

In many Meetings nothing is said, some times only one place of Scripture; I
have heard that when they sat a long time and said nothing, a Quaker was moved
to speak a place of Scripture, and, in my opinion, he chose the most suitable
place for them, he stood up and said, O ye fools when will ye be wise; and down
he sat again. When indeed!

When these sinless Creatures fall out (which is not seldom) you would think
they had gone down to Hell to fetch their Rhetoric from thenee, foully charging
and condemning one another. But presently the Devil transforms himself into an
Angel of Light, the Old Man was stirred in them; nay, their chief Leaders
complain of one another Pride and ill Temper, and say, Their hearts are ready
to break for Friends Disorders. And yet they the Perfect, Sinless, Pure,
Innocent Lambs all the while.

I am not more assured that Turcism is not of God, than that Quakerism is not;
or than that I have proved it in this Book. I declare before all the world,
That I am ready at an open Dsputation to prove my Charge against them. If what
I have writeen recover any Quakers, I shall rejoice: Why should we despair,
seeing the recovery of the Honest and ingenious George Keith, Pennyman, and
many more? However, I cannot but hope (or more than hope) this will prevent the
fall of not a few who till now knew not the Men, as I and others have long
known them, to be some of the greatest Doctrinal, (if not Practical) Enemies to
Christ that ever were in any Age, that would sometimes call themselves by the
Name of Christians.

Reader, I do assure thee by my Observation, and the Observation of others,
that this People that were wont to talk against Pride, are some of the proudest
Persons upon Earth; so Proud, that though they have condemned putting off the
hat, and kirching, as Sins, yet some tell you in plain terms, they expect it of
you, and take it amiss if you do it not, as the abovenamed L. S. said to a
Friend of his and mine. And as great is their Pride, so great is their
ignorance; so that some Wise Men leave them, and are ashamed. Mr. S. of Bristol
seldom, if at all, goes to their Meeting, though at their first appearing one
of their most Learned Advocates; he troubles not himself much now about Men's
Souls, but is well acquainted with what is good for their Bodies (especially
his own) by which he much obliges his Friends, not Quakers, but any Men of
Civility, Churchmen and others. A late Writer, Mr. Norrice, has made this
People not a little to value themselves, by favoring their Opinion about the
Light within; and by telling the world, That he more dreaded one Barclay, than
an Army of Bellarmines or Stapletons; which make me doubt he is not well
acquainted with the latter, though with the former. I doubt that young, rash,
(though ingenious) Gentleman, has a design to make a new Party bearing his
Name, whose grand Particularity is this, that we must love nothing
complacentially but God; I hope whilst he retains this Notion, he will continue
in Celibacy; for he is not fit for Marriage, forgetting that of Solomon, Let
her breasts satisfy thee at all times, and be tho^ ever ravished with her love.

Yet by the way observe, he asserts, That God not absolutely considered, but
relatively, is to be the Object of this Love. This is indeed to make our selves
the end, God the means. To love our selves more than him. Thus he, that
pretends to exalt the Love of God, has debased it above all men. I hope some
learned Bishop or Clergyman, will soon take this conceited Man, and cut him
up, and send him to the Tribes in Israel, with a see, consider, and speak your
minds; who has asserted, that the Quakers Cause calls for their most Learned
Pens, and they may triumph in the Victory if they get it.

The Quakers ignorance discovers it self on all occasions. G. Fox would call
Preachers, Conjurers: But, to do him right, he was none, as all know, that read
his Books, or heard him talk. George Whitehead, that has writ so much, is a
Notorious Dunce, as proved before.

Mr. Speed, Mr. Vickris of Bristol, never speak among them, who are Men of
Parts and Sense. I will imitate the Quakers way of speaking, and judge; what if
you heard such stuff as this, though sometimes better, in their greater
Meetings, where contrary to their first Principles, many of them forbid Women's
speaking, or the speaking of Nonsensical Fools, that talk at this or the like
rate.

Frunds,

I am moved by the -- to speak unto you, though I know not what I shall say.
Noah was a Perfect Man, yet some say Men cannot be Perfect, or without Sin, yet
Noah was so; and his Son Cham was Cursed for uncovering his Father's nakedness,
when drunk. Judas was the Traitor, and bore the Bag, and cared not for the
Poor. It is said, he that takes Kirjah Sepher. -- Now that is the Spirit of
the Book: Now look, Fru^ds, the Heart is the Book, and the Spirit is the Light
within. It is said indeed, I forbid a Woman to speak in the Church; but the
Priests are in the dark mind, and understand it not; by the Woman is meant the
Flesh, and by the Husband is meant the Devil; but they in the Witchcraft cannot
see it; but I say, look to the Light within you. Frunds, If you have motions to
a Woman, and do not do the act; or desire to take another Man's goods, and do
not do it, you Sin not. Mary Fisher had leave from the Lord to go from
New England to save her life, when other^ had not. Now they used carnal Weapon^
Paul said, These hands have ministered to ^ necessities. And whatsoever does
mak^ manifest, is Light. Now we abhor the Papist Transubsistation and
Infannibility, and many things be taken figuratel^ When I shoed a Horse the
other day, the Horse went the better; so you, if you lo^^ to the Light within
you, ah the pure Ligh^ The Priests use Heathenish words, such a^ be not in
Scripture, as Sacrament, etc. The word of the -- is come upon m^ I am to read a
Letter from Friend F. o^ P. though we read not Scripture, the was of old, yet
we may what comes from the pure streams. One came to me (...) know, where John
Steeplehouseman dwel^ whom he profanely called Mr. Chur^^ man; but I bid him
defiance for Wo^shipping the Beast. They say, if you (...) Persecuted from one
City, flee to anoth^^ But these Hell Hounds understand no^ they be Baals
Priests, Hirelings, a Gene^tion of Vipers; for it is revealed unto (...) Flee
to another, is to the City, Heaven O Frunds flee there; flee there Frund There
is none that does good (they say) (...) not one; but David said after, O that
the salvation of Israel were come out of Sion. The Priests say, this world
shall in time end, but they be in the dark, and make Solomon a Liar, who
says, yea he says, One generation passes away, and another comes, but the
earth abides for ever; now mark, Frunds, what abides for ever, shall never
end; but they be Sorcerers, Wolves in Sheeps clothing. They say, That when the
outward fleshly Christ was Crucified, the vale of the Temple was rent in twain,
and the Rocks rent, and the Graves were opened -- But they be blind Guides that
lead the blind, and so both fall into the Ditch. I am moved to tell you,
Frunds, (and now the two thumbs must be put against the Breasts) that this is
meant Men's Hearts were torn, Hearts as hard as Rocks; what think you, Does the
Scripture tell you of outward Temples, and outward Books? Do not, F^unds,
strike any one after the manner of Men; for Paul says, Lay hands suddenly on
no man. The world is angry if we Honor them not by putting off our upper
Covering, and say Thee to them; but abide you in the Light, etc. They talk much
of Paul's Epistles; But what do they tell us of the Epistles of Apostatizing
Jews? And they talk of Abraham's Faith; we must be better than they in their
day. They tel^ us what David and what the Apostles did (...) but being led by
Example has undon^ the world. Now, my Frunds, the People of God of old were
Quakers; Mose^ was a Quaker, for he said, I exceedingly quake and fear; and
Habakkuk was a Quaker, for his lips quivered; yea they were all Quakers, for
they taught Righteousness which is the very Principle of the Quakers; yea, I
say, so do the Quakers say^ Now the world says, That the Body of Christ is
gone to Heaven, but it turned to the dust. They say the Scriptures be Gold's
Word, but they lie, they be dirt, Serpent's meat; some Frunds threw their
Bibles into the fire, and they perished, and therefore are not God's word.
Frunds. It is often said, and truly, the Scripture^ and the Body of Christ be
the Two great Harlots that have deceived the world; many things in Scripture
are evil; in on^ place Circumcision is commanded, in another place forbidden,
etc.

That such and worse Speeches have been made in thousands of their Assemblies,
(...) doubt not, and I am ready to give an account of the things, as their
assertions, that I have read in their Books, or heard in hearing them, or
talking with them.

Because many are decoyed by the Quakers mode of Speaking, as most agreeable to
Scripture, as Thou to a Single Person, not you, which word we use, Thou, not
You, to God: I will consider it.

We are no more bound to Scripture modes of communication, than to Scripture
dresses; and because many, many weak ones are deceived by these specious
pretenses, I will plead this case, Bildad said to Job only, 18. Job 1, 2, 3.
How long will it be ere You make an end of words? How long shall we appear vile
in your sight? for be teareth -- Why may I not say You to one, as well as Thou
to many? When God delivered the Law on Mount Sinai, Thou shall not kill --
Spoke he not to Thousands? We borrow this from the French Vouz; for they have
no other word to a single Person, we took You from it. We despise not the word
Thee to a King (as they often say) in all cases; he that Marries him to his
Queen, says, Will thou have this Woman? He that gives him the Lords Supper
says, The Body of Christ given for Thee, preserve thy Body and Soul -- What if
men agree such a word shall signify such a thing, is not that sufficient?

Quem penes arbitrium est and jus, and norma lequendi.

Barclay's Objection is vain, What if (Apol) says he, a ^cholar should say to
his Master Vos amas, Vos legis; I say we put the Verb als in the plural number
in English; we say not You love, you read, but You love, you read.

I put it to their Conscience, Is it Sinful thus to speak? If not, Why then
trouble they the world about nothing?

I am not willing to run out much into other things that many have written well
of; Read Faldo's Quakerism no Christianity; who has done his work like a
Workman; and the aforementioned Tract which will commend it self, and to which
little need be added.

And now tell me Reader, What think thou? Was there ever such a giddy
Generation upon Earth? As great Apostates from Reason most of them are, as from
Religion. It is true some few Men among them have shaped their Notions for
them, and made them more intelligible than once they were. When such a Question
as this has been under Consideration, Whether it were Lawful for their Women
to Speak in their Meetings; I have been Answered, That Jesus Christ was
Crucified, and that the Priests accused him, and Pilate condemned him, etc.

I remember I have read, Where do thou read, thou Hireling, that ever any of
God's Messengers stood on a Carnal Pulpit? When that Scripture has been urged,
8. Nehem. 4. And Ezra stood on a pulpit of wood, and read the law, and gave the
sense; the Answer has been, What have thou to do with Ezra? Ezra was a Holy
Man, and thou art an Hypocrite. Or when the Question has been about Swearing,
and that Scripture has been urged, 10. Rev. 6. The Angel swore by him that
lives for ever and ever, Time should be no more; the Answer has been, But to
which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, to day have I
begotten thee? Some say, That Ministers must not be paid, because it was said,
The Priests bear rule by their Meant, 5. Jer. 31. That Ministers must not use
helps in Reading, for Paul would not meddle in another man's Line. Some have
asked one another, Have thou experienced that Scripture in thee, The sun shall
be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood? The Answer has been, Yea,
The Spirit was in them, and the Spirit was not to be tried by any thing,
Scripture, nor Man's Reason. So that a Man had almost as good go into Bedlam
and talk with the Wise Men there, as with many of our Inspired Quakers: I
advise any that engage with them, to get a Promise of Two things:

1. To end one Argument before entrance be made on another.

2. To have as much time allowed you to speak, as you allow them.

So have I understood some of them, and there has been some coherence, or
consistency in our discourse. When they have multiplied words, and cracked many
of them, and run on to things nothing to the Question, they go away and say,
That such Ministers could not say a word to them, or could not resist the
Spirit by which they spoke; that a She Friend should silence any Priest of them
all; though they have talked such prodigious Nonsense, that might make any Man
sweat to hear them.

If I knew such glorious nonsense among their Leaders by my little (and yet too
much) converse with them, I may easily imagine, how much they that hear them
often meet with such triflings.

May what I have said be an Amulet to prevent infection from their poisonous
Doctrines, especially such as are incompatible with true Grace: As the Doctrine
of Perfection, of a Christ within in opposition to a Christ without.

This word Outward is in great Contempt with them. The outward word (the
Scriptures) the Outward Christ, (Christ Crucified) and some an Outward Heaven
(that Glorious State above).

Baptism and the Lord's Supper were Outward Ordinances.

But why do not these Men Contemn Outward Meats, and Outward Drink^, and
Outward Clothing? If they did, the Controversy would soon be at an end.

And now, William Penn, I once more declare to thee, and all the world, that I
am ready to meet with thee at an open Disputation, when thou will, to de^^te
the Questions before us, or the main Question, which is this;

Whether your putting in practice our Principles, by you condemned (as you say)
from the Lord, in the time of Persecution, does not most certainly and
evidently prove you to be either Notorious Impostors, or Notorious Apostates?

There is nothing more evident to me, and I suppose to thee, that so it is:
Then is the Mask fallen off thy Forehead, and let me ask thee, or rather thou
thy Conscience, a few Questions.

Question 1.
Art thou not ashamed to hear Folly, Falsehood, Ignorance, fathered on the Holy
Spirit by thy Followers?

Question 2.
Do not thou frequently do what they condemn us for, use Philosophical Terms
and Distinctions in thy Writings, which they say is from the Serpent?

Question 3.
Could thou understand any Physician or Lawyer, speaking of Physic or Law,
in that way these do of Religion?

Here, for a diversion, will I present thee with a Paper given me above twenty
years since, and which lately I saw in Print, and tell me how much like has
been the old common way of the talk of our Perfectionists.

A Welsh Letter.
Good Cousin,
A Coording to my promise, I am to let you understand the unkind dealing of
Edward toward Marmaduke, when Thomas was arrested by Henry, at the Suit of
Leonard, Charles came in with Robert, to entreat Richard to go to John, to
certify William, who was sorry that Jeffery had been at variance with Anthony,
considering that Matthew had done so much for Bartholomew, when old Father
Timothy was contented to take wrong of Gregory, notwithstanding his Kinsman
Ralph was abused by Rowland, sending for James without the consent of Cuthbert,
when Edmond, for the love he bore to Silvester, gave warning to Hugh, that in
case George should make much of his Uncle Peter, little thinking that Simon had
played the knave with Nicholas, in causing of Walter to give Clement knowledge,
how that Martyn had invited Humphrey to Bernard 's house to Breakfast. Now
cunning Roger, perceiving by Godfrey, what was told by sly Ambrose, that if
Alexander was not revenged upon Lawrence, for the Love that he bare to Oliver;
whereas Erasmus, had it not been for Jarvase, had like to have slain Nathanael,
which Jasper perceiving, had certified Luke, that Tell-tale Francis was the
cause of all their falling out, and all this was for Adam 's White Nag, which
was left in Erastus 's Stable by Andrew; and because Hopping Giles would not
believe him, without Philip would bring him some money; whereupon Barnaby and
Christopher sent for Arthur, who, by the help of Felix, brought the same to a
general Conclusion, and was thus ended.

VALE. St. Taff'y's Day.

I declare such kind of Harangues have I often heard from the Quakers, as
incoherent and unintelligible, and so have many others; which makes us weary of
conversing with some of them, who, after all, triumph for Victory. Would not
such a profound Speech, stun the wisest Judge that ever sat on the Bench? And
might not the Welchman say, after all, Her had baffled Her; so that Her had not
one word to say to Her, not being able to remember, no nor understand what her
said.

And now William Penn, not to convince thee (for I think thou art convinced
already) of the madness of this People, for Blaspheming the Name of the Lord;
for Railing, for Incoherencies, for vain Predictions; I will suppose any of us
should accost thee, as the Quakers do us many a time: Would thou not say, We
were so far from being Christians, that we had forfeited the Name of Men? I
shall leave out the words after, Thus says -- the Eternal God, Living God the
Lord. Let none be offended, if their Folly be thus displayed. Suppose I should
thus say --

FRiend; For this is the Name by which you speak one to another, and Christ to
Judas the Traitor, the Son of Perdition, thy elder Brother, and to no single
Person but to him. I say, (by the same Figure Christ said to Judas) Friend
Penn, though I, and others, have taken pains to intellectuate and prudentiate
thee, yet all in vain; Bray thee in a Mortar, thy Folly will not depart from
thee; and therefore in the Bowed-downess of my mind, I do declare unto thee,
Thou have Unreligion'd thy self; Thou Croaking Frog of Egypt; Thou Babylenish
Brat; Thou go up and down the world in the pride of thy heart. O Lucifer,
Son of the Morning, Where are all thy mortified, Self-denying Garments, that
Friends of Old went up and down with? Thou, who art of many years in the world,
have lately gone after Flesh, Young Flesh; Yea, I say unto thee; Very Young
Flesh. And because thy mind has thus strayed after the Visibles, I bear my
Testimony against thee, Thou art yet in the Carnal Mind. This is the word of --
to Thee, Repent, Repent; For thou love the Things of the world, yea, the
things of the world do thou love. William Penn hear, O William Penn, I
testify to thee in the Name -- that because thou haft loved the Man pulled
down, and contrived, yea, hatched mischief against the Man set up, Thou shall
die this year, because thou have committed Rebellion, for which thou, Friend,
deservest now the Captivity of the outward Tabernacle, (so one Quaker lately
wrote to another, that lived four years after.)

Now thou Serpent, thou Deceiver, thou Scarlet-Whore, that fittest upon many
Waters, What if all thy Converses with Jesuits, and Popish Enemies to WILLIAM
the King, were written in thy Forehead, where, yea where would thou hide thy
impudent Face, thy brazen Face, thy iron Forehead? Friend William, it is a
great Principle, and common Saying among you, That what you once hold, you
always hold; for the Spirit is the same, and it dictates the same, but in this
thou lie. Thou art changed in many things, yea, thou art fallen; Thou
Apostate, Thou Conjurer, my Spirit testifies to thee in the Name -- that thou
art full of all Subtilty, the Child of the Devil, one of his Imps; if thou
say I speak not the Truth, I know I do it, by the Light within me, the
infallible Testimony. And I know I have stabbed thy Doctrine to the heart; for
so it is revealed unto me, yea to me is it revealed. As I was looking, yea, as
these fleshly Eyes of mine were looking, I saw thee in thy fine Attire, and
Things of this World. And I looked, and beheld, and lo thou were much like to
the Sons of Men, the Children of Men, Thou art an Offense unto me, etc.

PArdon me, you that read this; for I declare, at this rate do many of the
Quakers (whom Penn owns as Inspired) speak sometimes to the best Men, Ministers
and Christians, and so have they written. Now what mad Discourse would this be,
and worse, should I so apply my self to him? But if William Penn should die
this year, then were I a famous Prophet: But if he should not die, not a word
must be said of it, or some other sense must be put on the words.

And now I humbly beseech and entreat all that are serious in, and zealous for
the Protestant Religion, to consider whether their Time, and Parts, and Zeal
used one against another (who are sound in the Fundamentals of Religion, and so
Brethren) were not better used against the Quakers, who have crafed the
Foundation of Christianity, and so are the worst of Heretics.

The design of the Holy Scripture is to bring man to the sense of two things.

1. His own vileness, deficiency in the best of his Duties, his imperfect state
when in his Zenith for Wisdom, and the love of God. O how much do we debase the
most High in our apprehensions of him, when they are most refined and raised!
How imperfect is our Love to God and Christ, when most flaming! What an
infinite disproportion is there between our Love and its Object! What if our
wandering Thoughts in the heart in Prayer, or other good Duties, should or must
have vent through the mouth, and gush out into words, how should we flee from
one another; or whither should we go? Thoughts are before God, what Words are
before men. How fail the best in Principles and Ends? Humble Nehemiah, when
zealous against Prophaners of the Sabbath, 13. Nehem. 22. Spare me according to
the greatness of thy mercy. The Quakers disdain thus to pray. When Isaiah
beheld the King, the Lord of Glory, he cries out, Woe is me, for I am undone; I
am a man of unclean lips, Isa. 6.5. These make no such Confession, and were he
now alive, they would say he was of the Devil, 1 John 3.8. These, if they sleep
in the time of their Worship, if Passion never so much break out among
themselves, and hateful Words, and many notorious visible Enormities, they
disdain to say what Christ taught his Disciples, to whom God was a Father, to
pray, Mat. 6.12. Forgive us our trespasses. So that I am not more sure of any
one thing in Religion, than this, That no Perfectionist can be saved.

2. To show man the Want, and then the Worth of Christ the Savior. The Apostle
preached nothing more; he tells the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 2.2. I determined to
know nothing among you, but Christ, and him crucified. Nothing in comparison of
this. Now it is well known in their Meetings they determine to know nothing
less than Christ, and him crucified. Salvation by an outward Christ is
disowned. Penn and Whitehead expounded the Lamb slain from the foundation of
the world (in a large Folio), to be the opposing the Lamb-like thing, The Light
within.

Thou talkest (they were wont to say) of the Man crucified at Jerusalem sixteen
hundred years ago: Do thou believe to be saved by Blood shed upon the ground?
Now there is no Name given under Heaven, by which men can be saved, but the
Name of Jesus. There is no Salvation in any other, Acts 4.12.

If it be asked, Why I am sometimes Comical, and Reflect so severely on some of
their Leaders?

I answer, Quacks and Jugglers, and foolish Pretenders to any thing, are not to
be treated as wise and sober men. Answer, says the Wisest of Men, a fool
according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own conceit, Prove. 26.25.

Says the serious Worshipper at Mount Carmel, that approached the Altar of God
with all imaginable Reverence, and not as a Stage player, when he saw the
Priests of Baal (seemingly most devout) cut themselves, and leap upon the
Altar, Cry aloud, 1 Kings 18.27. either he is talking, or in a journey, or
sleeps, and must be awaked. A goodly God!

For my severe Reflections on some Men, I lived nigh them, knew them well; they
were some of the great Advocates for their Cause, talked of all England over
for their Zeal among the Quakers, who spared not the most Learned, Religious
Ministers and People in the world, for want of self-denial (which little
appeared in the Accusers) for leaving the Places of their open Meetings, the
Ministers were Hirelings, 10. John. 12, 13. who did flee when the wolf came,
that cared not for the sheep, and that because the sheep were not their own.
(As if to flee from a Place were to flee from an Office). And after they had
called them, and the People, Hypocrites, Children of the Devil, Haters of
Christ, Lovers of the World, that should be damned for ever for this their
great open Sin and Wickedness; they did the same thing themselves when their
Fund failed.

Either what I have Charged them with is True or False; if it be False, let me
be accounted the greatest Defamer upon Earth, a Persecutor, or what they
please. If it be true (as I call Heaven and Earth to Record it is, and can
justify the Charge before God and Man) I do say it on mature Consideration,
and with great Composure of Mind, That Pen and the Quakers are Impostors, or
Apostates.

Know, Reader, I have made no use of Books nor Men to help me in this Work; tho
it is said by some, it were impossible I could thus describe them without help
from some Man that had been a Quaker.

I have not troubled you with some stories of Quakers upon common fame; though
I doubt not the truth of them, yet cannot prove them if required; as that one
Friend came to another and said, The Lord has sent me to thee to tell thee
thou must lend me Twenty pound. It was a lying Spirit sent thee, said the
other, for the Lord knows I am not worth half the Money.

Neither have I troubled you with their denying such a sense of Scripture when
writing against us, and asserting the same sense to serve their own turn; and
all from one and the same Infallible Spirit: Penn is a notorious instance; who
in a Book called Judas and the Jews, said on those words, Tell the Church, 18.
Matt. 17. That the Church was to judge of matters of wrong between Man and Man,
but not of Faith or Conscience; yet in another Book to all Protestants,
asserts, The Church had Power about matters of Faith and Conscience; when he
pleaded for the Church-Quakers.

Nor much of what I have read of some of them many y -- s since; I remember in
the time of a long continued Drought, about Twenty year since, when many feared
and talked of a Famine, out comes Fox and tells us, What reason we had to
expect a Famine -- That before the Plague he sa^ the Angel of the Lord with a
drawn Sword over the Court. See the Cheat. Rain soon poured down. You false
Prophets, tell us your Prophecies before, not after their accomplishment.

I must recommend to you the aforementioned Book, The Snake in the Grass. If
you are Dissenters, pardon some warm passages proceeding from intemperate Zeal
for Bishops and Liturgies. In the Book may you be informed of,

The Authority of the Church-Quakers, for so Penn's Faction are called, who
often Assemble at London, and assume to themselves power over the Light within,
especially in the Separate Quakers, for so are the Followers of George Keith
called, a Scholar, once Master of Arts; who owns,

Faith in an outward Christ crucified; him that died at Jerusalem. The
Resurrection of the Body, Defects to be bewailed. The insufficiency of the
Light within without Scripture, and speaks favorably of Baptism and the
Supper. All this George Keith has printed, and told me.

He proves George Fox, their Great Apostle, to be a Blasphemer and impostor.
That he said before some Governors, That he said he was equal with God, and
Judge of the world. He received the Title and Worship of Christ from many who
lay prostrate before him; he smoothing them on the face, and blessing them.

(So did Sabbata Sevi, his deluded Followers, and Nathan the Prophet, in the
Year 1666. till he turned Turk to save his Neck.) Penn pleads for this Fox,
attributes his abuse of many Terms to his Ignorance. What! and yet inspired,
and sent of God! That he called on the Army to fight against Rome and the
Turks. That Balaam must be slain, and all the Hirelings turned out of the
Kingdom. He bad them pull down Mass-houses, and Colleges. Give the Priests
Blood to drink, for they are worthy, said Buroughs.

The Blasphemy of many of their Leaders, who said they were as holy as God, not
only in quality, but equality; and that the preternatural distortions of their
Bodies, and their Quakings, at first were of the Devil. Though the Numen that
then inspired them, has now left them.

Though Solomon Eccles, a Quaker before the Fire of London, went up and down
with a Pan of burning Coals, yet he was proved to be a false Prophet in other
things. That the Quakers moved not their Goods, believing it was a Delusion,
and knowing that almost every Week one Quaker or another would go up and down
the Streets in London, and cry, Thus says the Lord; Fire, Pestilence, Sword,
etc. And if Solomon Eccles prophesied of the Burning of the City, all know so
did Oliver's Porter. That Muggleton has his Prophecies too to be printed. How
soon Josiah Coal died after he testified against him. That Muggleton a Tailor,
and Fox a Shoemaker, set up for Inspired Persons together. Though Fox at first
condemned all outward teaching by Man, till he had gotten men from the
Ministry, then he set up Preaching -- but Muggleton does not, but keeps to the
old Principle. He says, The Father to whom Christ prayed was Elijah, who
governed in Heaven, when Christ was on Earth, because in his absence there was
no God there. And such Blasphemous stuff. They pretended to the Spirit of
discerning Persons and Things, and could tell what Men were on the sight of
them. They now Damn one another; the Muggletonians and Quakers call one another
Sorcerers, Serpents, -- and say, what was inflicted by the Civil Magistrate on
one another was just.

That Penn defended (and engaged so to do) Pensilvania by Soldiers and Arms,
against the Indians; Commissions were given to Fight for the recovering of a
Sloop taken from some Privateers; that they Imprisoned some Quakers for
Printing some Books without a License, though but in their own defense.

That Buroughs said, God could Arm Thousands of his Saints, yea, and Ten
Thousands to Fight his Cause, but for the present must not be so, till Christ
command them; and this Christ is the Light within. He asks this one plain
Question of Friends?

Is not force of Arms necessary in England, and all other Nations, though
condemned, and that by the Spirit of God, as Antichristian and Diabolical?

This Gentleman entertains you with a very pleasant Comedy; how they play their
Infallibilities, Inspirations, Prophecies, one against another; how they damn
all the Christian world, and yet assert the Salvation of Heathen.

How Fox, and especially (the Old Cheat) George Bishop, told Oliver, How much
they loved him, and stood by him, and what should be done to prevent the coming
in of Charles Stuart. And yet when he came in, told him, They acted not against
him, but mourned for him: And talk much, how they suffered as he did, and what
was their Loyalty; till Billin, a great Quaker, Protested, That if it cost him
his life he would declare against any such pretenses; for, said he, we were not
for the King, but against him.

Howgil stole whole Paragraphs out of Mr. Seldom of Tithes, verbatim. Yet this
in others has been highly condemned, where not practiced, but injuriously
charged. He gives you an account of their horrid Blasphemies about Scripture,
as Serpents Meat, dust, -- about Christ and the Light within, about Perfection,
Ordinances, etc.

AND now I advise all Persons of Parts and Wisdom that look into the
Controversy between us and the Quakers, especially Gentlemen and Ministers, to
buy and peruse the aforenamed Book, the best (in my opinion) that ever I saw: I
have given you some of the dainties there, to invite you to a more plentiful
eating.

What shame is it for Men to pretend as Preachers to convince Gainsayers, and
yet know not the most convincing Arguments to confute their Folly, whom they
know to be the worst of Heretics, and oppose them as such? Or what a shame is
it for Gentlemen, who should be advocates for truth, not to know what can be
said against such Deceivers as these? These are Heretics indeed, some of the
worst, when others cannot be so called (though they are too often so) but
rather Erraticks; and perhaps we are all such, though some more than others.

As I have recommended the Snake in the Grass; so I will Pennyman's Paper,
called The Quakers Contradictions, according to the Times, and their Interest;
Once a Quaker, but left them for their Folly and Madness.

Some have said (as he proves out of their Writers) That their Writings are
equal to the Scriptures, and of as great Authority. Some, That the Scriptures
are Carnal, Dust, Death.

Others have declared before the Lord, That such words were never spoken by
Friends; which if not great impudence, must be great ignorance. For it may be
Friends in one place know not what Friends in another place do say or Print. I
therefore commend Pennyman for sometimes repeating their words, and no more. He
proves that they that have denied the Scripture to be the word of God, have
called their own Writings so.

Some have said, That they are no Ministers, but are under the curse, that be
not infallible, and speak not immediately from God; that cannot resolve all
doubts, and convince all Gainsayers. What a cursed sort of Teachers then, say
I, are most of the Quakers Teachers, who are so far from this, that they cannot
speak tolerable sense, nor pronounce right many common words?

They also have said, That they that have not the Spirit of discerning, and
know not Men's state infallibly upon the sight of them, cannot apply themselves
to them accordingly, not knowing whether they be holy or unholy. But did they
know all the Priests and Jesuits that came among them, whom they almost adored?
Bedlo told my Brother, how often Whitebread and he, as well as other Papists,
had been at Quakers Meetings; that Whitebread, Executed, was a Speaker. Why
discerned they not such Speakers that have been found to have lived in
Drunkenness, Whoredoms? Must you know hearts too! this is the work of Christ.
Judas was not smelt by the Disciples.

Some say they know Thousands of Friends that are free from Sin. Once they all
pretended to be so, and that they that were not so, were not of God, but of the
Devil.

Some say, That Friends be all of one Mind and Soul. Yet we know there are
great divisions among them here at home, and beyond Sea.

He tells you of a Quaker's stealing the Hourglass out of a Church; and that
Fox said, If a Friend be moved to such a thing by the Lord, by the Eternal
Spirit, it is defended.

Now you Priests and Steeple-house Wardens, look to the Silver Vessels used in
the Sacrament, for if a Friend should be moved to take them away by the Eternal
Spirit, it would be defended.

Some of the Separate Quakers have desired Liberty of Conscience in things not
Evil, as was once pleaded for, but they cannot be heard.

Some have condemned asking any thing of outward Rulers. Others have often
Petitioned King and Parliament.

The Quakers Speakers take the chief Seats in their Assemblies now, though once
they condemned it.

Many now in Disputes and Discourse use terms others condemn as wicked.

Some have said, It is laid on them by Christ, not to Sue any Man at Law.
others (I say) have done it; and as I have been credibly informed, they that
would not take an Oath in Bristol, have in London.

Pennyman tells you, how Penn blamed the Church of England in the Reign of the
Late King James, for Censuring the King's Acts, and Reflecting on Roman
Catholics, as not Manners, nor Justice. He cites the Book.

Some have said, If the Spirit direct to fight, we have nothing to say against
it. Others say, they can never be directed by the Spirit to any such thing, for
it is not of God.

He speaks of their rudeness to him, saying he deserved to be whipped at a
Carts tail; that they thrust him in the side with a stick. Yet all these were
Inspired and Infallible in contrary Doctrines.

Now having given an account of these two excellent Writers; Let me a little
consider the Plea of some among us for this People.

Question 1.
Are not the Quakers more sober than once they were?

Yes, and many know not the Opinions nor Practices of their first old Leaders.
No Men or Women run up and down Naked now, etc.

Question 2.
Are they not a People very Temperate above others?

Let every Man speak as he finds: I lived long next door to one who was found
out to be a notorious secret Drunkard, as his Wife confessed, but would have
hid it, she being a Quaker too. I have known others, that selling strong
Waters, would let the vilest of the Parish drink as much as they would, till
Drunk; and yet one such would say to me, Will thou tell me against what I feel
and handle of the word of life? Wet and dry Quakers is a distinction in other
places besides Bristol.

Question 3.
Are they not very humble Persons?

No, They are more proud of their plainness, than others of their bravery.
Baptism and the Lords Supper are things too mean for them, Shells, etc. but
they were not too mean for the Son of God. What good will a little Water, a
little Bread and Wine do me? It is true, the things be not changed in their
Nature, though in their Use. What good will a little Paper, a little Ink, a
little Wax, do me, may a Pardoned Man say when he reads the King's Pardon to
him? Some now use the Lord's Supper: Barclay in his Apol. says, He would not
condemn them that do.

Question 4.
Are they not more just in their dealings than others, and most careful not to
tell a Lie, and say one thing and do another?

These things are among some of them, and among others too; yea, Turks
themselves. Yet by the way, It is not unlawful to say one thing, and do another
on the change of the mind, 19. Genesis 2, 3. The Angel was desired by Lot to come
into his House; Nay, said he, but we will tarry in the street all night; yet
when Lot pressed upon them, they went in. They observed Providence, their
intentions altered. If they had Sinned, had Lied, they had never found their
way back again to Heaven.

By the way, let all look to it, of what persuasion soever; if they lie for
Gain, they are not upright: To say things Cost them so much, They never sold
them Cheaper, They are as Good as can be had for Money, and know all to be
false, and continue in this Sin, they may call themselves Christians, and
others may call them so, but Christ will call them workers of iniquity. The
getting of treasures by a lying tongue, is a vanity tossed to and fro by them
that seek death, says Solomon, 21. Prove. 16. Death seeks not them, but they
court it. When I wrote to you, did I use lightness according to the flesh,
says Paul, that with me it should be yea and nay? but as God is true; he makes
God his Example; But as Christ is true, says Paul to the Corinthians, 2 Cor.
1.17, 18, 19, 20. all the promises of God in Christ are yea, let ours be so.

To say I will do such a thing, bring it to you at such a day, and know you
cannot, or resolve you will not, and so for paying of Money, and to make this a
common practice, is no more consistent with Grace, than Drunkenness or Theft.

Complemental Lies are an abomination in the sight of a Holy God. To say, I am
glad to see you. I thank you for your good Company. Pray eat. You eat nothing.
When not a word of this is true, and the person that says it was weary of their
Company, as (it may be) vain, and therefore undesirable, and know they eat very
freely, or more than they need. Some Quakers are careful here, and so are
others; would all were so; such as are not, are cursed.

The Quakers, the great ones, in Talking and Printing are not free from Lying.

George Bishop in his Book of Martyrs, called, New England judged not by man's
Spirit, but the Spirit of the Lord; How does he represent the Whipping of the
Quakers there? What Strokes were fetched? Flesh brought off with the Whips:
Which Mr. Blinman, then of New England, professed to me he never there heard
of. They cursed Magistrates and Ministers in the street, blasphemed Christ and
Scripture. If they were banished, they returned again, so that some were put to
death. I know some of their Chief Leaders, whose Tenderness this way was not
very great, but spoke as if they thought a Lie now and then for Friends might
be excused.

Q. Have not the Quakers more of the Spirit than others?

No; nor as much. They (poor men) must not run before their Guide: Must wait
for the Spirit's Call to Prayer. I pray, How came they and the Spirit such
strangers, that it calls them not all the Day long, all the Week long, all the
Month long, all the Year long, to pray alone, or in their Families? Always to
pray, in their sense, is never to pray; and every day a Sabbath, is no day so.
I knew a Quakers Meeting, where I believe was not a Sentence spoken from Month
to Month in a time of danger; but when a Toleration came out, then they were
inspired by it to purpose.

They all talk of The Light within (a Phrase that was never used but once in
Scripture, and that too what was seeming Light, but real Darkness, Mat. 6.22.)
yet they mean not the same thing by it. Commonly they understand by it
Conscience, and that this Light tells a man when he does evil, and when he does
good, and that it was in all men always. And when we pressed them with such
places as these, They that kill you, shall think they do God good service, John
16.2. I verily thought with my self that I was bound to do many things contrary
to the name of Jesus of Nazareth, says Paul, when he persecuted: They could
not tell what to say. But now Barclay tells us, The Light comes in the time of
the Lord's Visitation or day of Grace to every man; if it be received, it
abides; if not, withdraws. That this Light is not God (yet some inspired
Friends, by the way, said it was), nor a Quality, but a Substance, and calls it
a Vehiculum Dei. That the Turks have a Light sometimes that tells them Mahomet
was a Deceiver, the Christian Religion is true. (Away, Poor Robin, with thy
borrowed Collections out of the Fathers.) Now, says he, this is a Supernatural
thing, that comes not at the will of the Creature, therefore we are no
Arminians; yet it is a Resistible Work, and so we are no Calvinists; but our
way is a middle, says he, between both.

I was surprised when I read it, knowing all the Quakers I conversed with, had
no such Notions of the Light within. I pray, How shall I appeal to the Lord's
Witness in every man, and the Testimony of God in his Conscience? Why, it may
be, I speak too soon, the Light is not yet come; or too late, now it is gone.
Any thing! Now it is not God, which some Friends said, and that it was to be
worshipped, as if a man should worship his own Convictions; and this made some
call the Quakers, Idolaters, as the Scots and others; and now R. Vickris
defends Barclay against Norris. Any thing!

Though some Quakers know not the depth of Satan, and seem to speak Orthodoxly
of God, Christ, the Soul, etc. yet their old Teachers (or rather Deceivers)
taught otherwise. The Soul was a part of God, came out of him, and returns to
him again. You senseless Wretches, could a part of God ever sin, or be made
miserable?

That Christ was the Anointings of God, which were once in the Man called
Christ; when he died, his Body turned to dust; and since the same Anointings
are in others, and they are the Christ of God as really as he was, and
therefore some have been so worshipped as he was. The Scriptures are no Rule to
them. Let therefore the Reader remember what, I doubt, few consider. If they
dispute with you by Scripture, it is but to take you in your own way; if he
casts you, he has you; but if you him, he is where he was before. Why? He cast
you by your Rule, Scripture; but you cannot him by his, that is, The Light
within. So that the Quakers Judgment must be tried by his Judgment, and his
Opinion by his Opinion, and his Light by his Light.

I know some Quakers will say, Were it not for the Scriptures, we had been in a
miserable condition; and they will believe nothing said against them; but these
know not the bottom of Quakerism.

The Quakers generally are very ignorant, and yet very conceited. For
Ignorance: In opposition to us, they say, It is not true Christ had but Three
Offices, 1. Of a King. 2. Priest. 3. Prophet: But go on, 4. Bishop. 5. Pastor.
6. Teacher, etc. as if variety of Names did make variety of Offices. For Pride
I could give notorious Instances, which are not convenient; Luther in his
Table-talk speaking to some to whom the Devil did sometimes visibly appear with
his Temptations, To be rid of him (said he) remember, he is a Proud Spirit: Let
a F --: He will soon be gone, for he cannot endure Contempt. It may be some,
when the Quakers in the height of Pride, Talk backwards, answer them so, if I
have erred in my Manners, I have erred by a great Example, Luther.

And now as I have considered William Penn the Quaker, so I will apply my self
to him according to his Grandeur or Magnificence.

To WILLIAM King of Pensilvania.
May it please Your Majesty,
I Humbly offer it to Your Consideration;

1. Whether the first Leaders of the Quakers being proved not to be inspired or
sent of God, coming with Blasphemies, and yet pretending to Inspiration,
Prophecies (all which are proved to be Delusions) are not evidently Cheats, and
the worst sort of Deceivers?

2. What induced the Quakers not to trouble the Churchmen in their Assemblies,
as they did the Presbyterians of old? Some say, they were much worse than the
Churchmen, for they were Hypocrites, but these show what they are. Others say,
They were much better than the Churchmen, and there was a Seed of God among
them to be called out (and all from the same Infallible Spirit). May not all
these be Pretenses, and the true Reason this; Should they disturb or come in
naked in their Churches, or there prate or rave, they shall be punished now,
though they often escaped then?

3. Though they so often talk of The Light within, where do they ever read the
Phrase in Scripture, except in one place, as if wrote on purpose for them? 6
Mat. 23. If the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness?

4. Whether You and Your Brother James, late King of England, were not mere
Pretenders for Liberty of Conscience, when You rowed one way, and looked
another, both oppressing Your Subjects, contrary to Your Protestations?

5. Do not You know more Instances of Quakers pretended Miracles, false
Prophecies, than some of us can tell you? I care not to name Persons nor
Circumstances, for the sake of their Relations. Know You not of them that have
openly declared in the Name of the Lord, That by To morrow, or within such a
Month, such a Judgment should come on a Place, that came not? I will tell you
(if you ask me (but I suppose You may as well tell me) who put Stones into the
Oven, saying, They should be made Bread; but when not Bread, but Stones came
out, said to his Wife, Woman, because of thy Unbelief is it thus: To whom she
replied, If my Unbelief continued some of the Stones Stones, one would think
your Faith should have made half of them Bread.

Govern your Subjects without Carnal Weapons, for they are not lawful. If they
smite one another on the one Cheek, let the other be turned also. If any one
take away their Cloak, let him take the Coat also; lest their fighting by
virtue of Your Majesty's Commission, should be told in Gath, and published in
the streets of Askelon. Great are the Complaints there in Your Kingdom: Many,
because they are not Quakers, are much imposed on and abused. I pray remember
what became of Your great Friend and Brother, James, late King of England, when
an Oppressor; lest being Brethren in Iniquity, Your Majesty should flee into
France, and there once again keep him company. And therefore William King of
Pensilvania, I pray You to imitate Your Brother William, King of England, a Man
who shines in His Integrity, Wisdom, and great Conduct of all His Affairs; a
Man whose Life is a System of the best Morals in the world. So keep Your
Subjects from some late abominable Practices of Drunkenness, Whoredoms, and
Oppressions; lest the Prophecy of John Owen against Friends should be verified,
That their Light, that Ignis Fatuus, would at last lead them into a Bog or
Quagmire of Filthiness and Profaneness. For if such great Wickedness should
abound among the Perfect Ones, Your Majesty may say to them, and they to Your
Majesty, what was said to Simeon and Levi, Brethren in Iniquity, You have made
me stink in the nostrils of the inhabitants of the land.

Your Majesty's Humble Servant, Anonymus.


NOW, Friends, How will you answer me? I am sure no Sober, Rational Answer can
be given. Either you must deny the Principles laid down, or Practices, though
proved: Either that they never asserted, That the Place of Public Worship must
not be left for any Persecution. Or, That they kept to those Places in the
greatest Heat.

Or that Ministers were not testified against for their Learning; or Fisher
followed for his real (as Penn for his imaginary) Learning.

Or that bowing to man was never condemned, or not now practiced, etc. But this
would be unheard of Impudence. What must I expect now I have hedged them in? A
Confession and Humiliation? No. I know them too well to expect it, (yet without
despairing of it) if lying and and railing may be their Resuge, Scripture and
Reason are gone out of sight. I expect they will talk of me, to me, or send
Letters in the old Dialect they were wont to do to the best of men (and now
sometimes do one to the other, when they fall out about Doctrinals, or other
things, as may be seen in Books before-named). Were it not for the sin, I would
not desire a better diversion to shake off Melancholy.

THou scoffing, persecuting Ishmael, thou blaspheming Devil, thou Limb of
Antichrist, I testify to thee in the Name -- that thou have belied the People
called Quakers, yea, I say unto thee, the People called Quakers have thou
belyed. They are an innocent people, and to that do I bear witness. Therefore
thou Devils Bloodhound, thou Thief and Robber, that never did come in at the
door, but did climb up some other way, Thus says, -- Thou art not able to
judge, for thou art blind, Thou Beast, thou Sot, thou Incarnate Devil, I am
full of Zeal, yea, with Zeal I am filled, ready to burst, in testifying against
thee, thou scarlet-colour'd Beast, thou cankered Apostate, thou Son of Belial.

Thou greedy Wolf in Sheeps Clothing, thou Dog, thou dumb Dog, thou barking
Dog, thou Emissary of Satan, thou Beelzebub the Chief of Devils, Repent, and
know that this People whom thou hate and do not love, are dear precious
ones. To this will I set my Seal, and do I bear witness. Hear, O thou Serpent,
fiery Serpent, biting, hissing Serpent, thou unclean Spirit, thou Devildriven
Sot. I am sent to thee to declare against thee. I am sent as Mary Fisher was to
the great Turk, who could speak nothing but English when she came to him, as
honest Friend G. Bishop is forced to confess, in his New England tried. -- Now
I speak to thee in the same Language she did to him.

If any of you intend thus to set upon me, I wish it may be when I am so
costive, that no other Physic would make me soluble. I am sorry for the
Dishonor that such bring to Religion, and the Wrong they do themselves, and
the scandal they give to the Profane; but as for me, I find nothing more easy,
than to forgive them, pity them, and love the Men* though not the Quakers.

I must despair of understanding any thing, or of proving any thing, if in this
little Book I have not sufficiently proved, and that ex abundanti, That William
Penn and the Quakers are either Impostors or Apostates (which they please),
from their Avowed Principles, and Contrary Practices.

BUT, methinks, I hear some say, We see what it is for men to talk of the
Spirit, which is nothing else but a warm Fancy following a deluded Judgment:
What may we think of Prophets of old, and their Inspirations and Prophecies so
much talked off? We doubt all were such as these of the Quakers.

Stop, Reader, if these thoughts be in thee, let us reason together. Though I
doubt not but that this giddy People have contributed very much to the increase
of Skepticism, and Atheism, and Contempt of Religion: Yet why? Because there is
so much bad Coin, adulterate Coin, Case-Pieces, Clipp'd-Money, is there
therefore no Good Money, or Money of full Weight? Is it all alike?

Because there is so much False News going, and so many Mistakes and idle
Stories pass for Truth, is there therefore no True News, or True Relation of
things?

Because we are so often mistaken in men, who are often said to be
good-natured, wise and pious, whom in our nigh approaches to them we find ill
tempered, half-witted, and scandalous, are there therefore no good-natured, no
wise, no pious Men in the World.

To talk of the Spirit, is a Cant among some Men, almost a Community of Men,
who own Scripture and read Lessons out of it. They will talk of God, and of
Christ, but nothing, or next to nothing, of the Spirit. I desire them to read
Neh. 9.20. Thou gave also thy good Spirit to instruct them. 2 Cor. 1.22. Who
has given the earnest of the spirit in our hearts. Romans 8.9. He that has not
the spirit of Christ, is none of his. John 3.5, 6, 8. Except a man be born of
water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. That which is
born of the Spirit is spirit. Romans 8.16. The spirit it self bears witness
with our spirit, that we are the children of God. Psalm 51.11. After David
sinned so foully, he prays, Take not thy holy spirit from me. Consider, their
abuse of such Phrases should not take us off from the use of them. Because the
Papist have abused the words of Christ, This is my Body, by their monstrous
Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and so to worship a Wafer for a God; we are not
therefore to deny the Bread the honorable Name Christ gave it. The Holy Ghost,
or Holy Spirit, is not so called from his Essence and Nature; for so we might
as well say, The Holy Father, or the Holy Son, as the Holy Ghost; but from his
Office. Whom the Father elects, the Son redeems, and the Holy Ghost sanctifies
and makes holy.

Now a skilful Physician is not to be despised, ridiculed, because of some
Quacks; nor a good Lawyer, because of some ignorant Pretenders; nor a Spiritual
Man, because of some senseless, vain Talkers of the Spirit.

Though I have written more already than I intended when I begun, yet give me
leave to add some Directions to cure this Malady, which we find occasioned for
want of these things you are now pressed to, and that our Perfectionists little
mind.

Direction 1.
1. Keep up a due Veneration for the Scriptures and their Authority.

He that cannot see a God, one would think could see nothing. Infinity and
Eternity must be lodged in somewhat. Some Cogitative Being (which word with Mr.
Lock, I like better than Intelligent) suited means to end. Read him in that
excellent Chapter of Human Understanding. Mr. Perkins's Cases of Conscience of
the Being of God.

Is the Soul of Man made for God, to serve and enjoy him? Not to say any thing
of the Reflex Acts of the Soul; That Matter cannot act on it self: The tip of
my finger, that touches thousands of things, cannot return upon it self, touch
it self: But my Understanding, that understands other things, reflects on it
self, and understands it self, and therefore the Spirit of a Man is not as the
Spirit of a Beast. The Poet could say, Sanctius his animal, mentisque capacius
altae
Pronaque cum spectant --
No Creature but Man can turn up his eyes to Heaven, for Man has a Muscle more
than they, to help to look up to God. Does it not convince you (Good Readers)
as well as this Pagan (Ovid Met.) That though Man was made in this world, yet
not for it?

Are not some men designed for the Recovery of the Lost Love and Favor of God?
That is hoped by all. What then will follow? That there must be some Rule
whereby Man may know this God, and serve him. Now this must be either by
Revelation, or there must be some standing written Rule: The former we see is
gone; and our giddy Pretenders to it prove it: Therefore the latter. Then say
I, The Scriptures must be the standing Rule, or some other thing; But no other
thing; Therefore the Scriptures.

If any thing, What is it? Mahomet's Alcoran? I need not confute it: None plead
for it: Nay, It is worthy observation, Not one Family among Christians we can
hear of, turn Turks. The Ignorance and Profaneness of the Man, show what his
Writings are.

Well then: It is not what Objections men can make against Scripture being a
Rule, but what better can they put in its place? Now consider we, What
Signatures and Marks are on Sacred Writ to satisfy us: How is it morally
impossible (or more) that the world should be imposed on? Was there such a man
as Abraham, so called of God? Did the Twelve Tribes come from the Loins of the
Sons of Jacob or Israel? Were these Slaves in Egypt, brought out thence by a
mighty Hand? Was Pharaoh and his Host drowned in the Red Sea in the pursuit of
them? Did they wander in the Wilderness, were fed with Manna, and the Cloud
before them? Were they brought into Canaan by a mighty Hand? How well writes
J^sephus against Appion on this subject. I remember Bishop Stillingfleet in his
Orig Sacra, says, If I meet with any Passage in Profane History, contradicting
Sacred History, I laugh it away with that of Justin, That Moses was the Son of
Joseph; That the Jews were driven our of Egypt because of the Itch, that the
Egyptians might not be infected. -- Were it possible for the Jews to impose
upon the world this way? Gen 49.10. The scepter shall not depart from Judah. --
How unlike was it to an eye of sense, the Scepter should come to any Tribe?
When it did, it came to Moses, who was as a King, of the Tribe of Levi; then to
Saul, of the Tribe of Benjamin; and at last to David, who was of the Tribe of
Judah, and there continued.

The famous Story of Josephus, about Alexander's Conquest of Judea, when he
swore to Parmenio his General, That he would destroy all the Jews, is great.
Jaddus the High Priest, and the Jews, fasted three days and three nights, and
God revealed to him what he should do. Alexander approaching with Fury nigh the
Gates of Jerusalem, Jaddus, as God directed him, opened the Gates, and went out
to meet him in all his Priestly Attire. Alexander fell down and worshipped him.
Parmenio asking him, What he meant to worship the man whose death he had vowed?
He said, Three days ago this man in this dress appeared to me in a Dream in Dio
in Macedonia. Jaddus carried him into the Temple, and showed him the Prophecy
of Daniel concerning him, who was the Grecian Goat, Dan. 8.21, 22. A clear
Prophecy; let Antiscripturists consider it. So he gave the Jews great
Treasures. Could Josephus mention a Story so little time before, if not true,
when thousands of Jews and Pagans could contradict all?

Could the Evangelists tell the world such a loud Lie in Matters of Fact,
Place, Time, Circumstances, of Christ's feeding so many Thousands with a few
Barley-Loaves and Fishes; his opening the eyes of the Blind, making the Lame to
go, raising the dead, especially Lazarus, and all with their Circumstances, had
it not been true? The Disciples knew they saw his Miracles; that they conversed
with him forty days after his Resurrection, and saw him ascend into Heaven.
They often say, as we read in the Acts, We are his witnesses, says Peter. Paul
could not be mistaken whether he heard the Voice from Heaven, Saul, Saul, Why
persecutest thou me? I am Jesus -- Acts 9.4, 5. Or whether he were blind three
days, and recovered his fight by Ananias laying his hands upon his eyes. He and
the Disciples as they were not deceived themselves, could have no design to
deceive others. Not one of them in their most exquisite Torments confessed a
Combination; and, which is more, it was never pretended by any of their
Adversaries they did. When I was a Lad about Seventeen Years old, I often
conversed with a Jew, who had the Old Testament almost memoriter: My urging
that of Paul to him, struck him to the heart, and he was afterward baptized.
Tell me, Reader, if thou have with the men of Herod (men of War) set Jesus at
naught, Does not thy heart now burn within thee? as Luke 24.32.

Yet the Scriptures by our Perfectionists were at first as nothing. You speak
the words of David and Paul -- They were wont to say. But at last it was agreed
upon, Scripture should be used in their Meetings. The story of turning one man
down stairs for looking in a Bible in their Assemblies, is well known. I am
glad some have more Veneration for Scripture now. Some say, They be as good as
Friends Writings: A few say, Better. What would the Church do without a Bible,
but as Mariners at Sea without a Pilot or Compass?

Q. What did they do before Scripture was written?

A. Revelation and Oral Tradition was their Guide, which was at last upon
Record.

Obj. But, say some, You make Scripture not only a Rule, but the only Rule: So
the Assembly in their Catechism: And make not the Spirit a Rule at all.

I answer; The Spirit is not the Rule, but the Author of the Rule. A Counselor
is not his Counsel, nor a Director his Directions. Where did the Heathen
wander, that had no Scripture? What a woeful System of Divinity is Ovid's Metam,
though he borrowed so much out of Moses, and corrupted it?

Ante Mare, and Terras, and quod tegit omnia Coelum,
Vnus erat toto naturae cultus in Orb,
Quem dixere Chaos, rudis indigestaque moles.
Genesis 2.2. Sic erat instabilis tellus, innabilis unda.
The Golden Age was a corrupting of the Account of Man before the Fall.

-- Nec supplex turb a timebat
Judicis ora sui.
Per se dabat omnia tellus.
The Scriptures acquaint man with things necessary to be known, and which the
Quakers have contemned, in their adoring of the Light within, (the Pharisaical
Light, which Christ called Darkness): I say the Scriptures acquaint us with

1. The Fall of Man, and the Corruption of Human Nature thereby. Our Head,
Foederal Head sell. Acts 17.26. God intended of one blood to make all Nations.
Now that was tainted, and a clean thing cannot come out of an unclean. Had he
stood, we had stood by him, and there had been, no doubt, a state of
Confirmation for all Adam's Descendants. How long it was Adam stood (some think
Months, Years,) is easy to conjecture. That it was before the Conjugal Act,
else they being before under the Blessing, Increase and Multiply, had had some
Child born without Original Sin; but Cain was the first Child, and therefore I
conclude the Fall was before Adam knew Eve, and therefore the same day in which
they were made. And it may be had Adam overcome in the first Assault of Satan,
the Serpent, he and all his had been confirmed. Our first Parents by Sin
murdered themselves actually, were under the Curse (though, it may be,
recovered by Grace); they murdered their Posterity virtually, that they then
not born should be cursed; they murdered Christ occasionally, as their Sin was
the occasion of Christ's death, to make Satisfaction to Divine Justice.

In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye, Genesis 2.17. Now Eve was
concerned in this, as well as Adam, though not then made; for she grants it to
the Serpent, Genesis 3.3. God has said, Ye shall not eat of it, lest ye dye. The
Woman being deceived, was first in the Transgression. Now where there is no
Law, there is no Transgression: (...). Now whether God gave the Commandment to
Eve immediately, as he did to Adam; or mediately by Adam, who can tell. This
Sentence, Thou shall dye, was definitive, not barely Comminatory, like that of
Jonah, Jonah 3.3. Yet within forty days, and Niniveh shall be destroyed.
Therefore a Savior to dye in our stead, became necessary. He died that day as
God past Sentence on man, Genesis 3.19. Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall
return. As a wounded man (mortally wounded) cries out, I am a dead man. Adam
was not dead Naturally, for he lived many years, Genesis 5.5. but Legally; so as
when the Judge has past Sentence, we say, He is a dead man, though Body and
Soul be not parted days or weeks after. The Devil made use of the Serpent: And
our first Parents, I think, knew nothing of Devils or Fallen Angels; which is
ignorantia purae negationis, and consistent with a perfect state; as for Christ
not to know (as not the Angels) the day of Judgment. If some say, The Serpent
is not more subtle than any Beast of the field; let them remember, neither does
Moses say he is, but he was; and who can tell what the Serpent was before his
Curse? The Basilisk and other Serpents stand up in curious Colors, like Man.
Now some think from Genesis 3.6. When the woman saw the tree was good for food,
and good to make one wise, she took and did eat, and gave to her husband, and
he did eat: How the Temptation was; for how could she know this before she eat?
They therefore imagine the Devil or Serpent saying to this effect;

O Woman, thou know the great Creator made me a Sensitive Creature, and thou
feast I am now become Rational; I can discourse with thee, understand thee, and
give thee a reply; How came this change? It was by trying the Virtue of the
forbidden Fruit. As I of a Sensitive Creature am become Rational, thou by
trying the secret Virtue of this Tree, of a Rational Creature wilt become
Divine, and so more like God than he will have thee to be. Now wherein could
the Devil more act like himself than this way?

For Sin ( Genesis 3.24.) God drove out the Man from Paradise, the lower Heaven;
and a woeful change was there on Man by the first Transgression.

Of a Man dwelling in Paradise, conversing there with God, he was cast out into
a wide Desert, conversing with Beasts. How sad was it to see Nebuchadnezzar
sitting on the Throne at one time, grazing among Beasts at another! When
Tamerlain caused Bajazet to be carried up and down in a Cage, he beat his Head
against the Cage, and would cry, O give me my Kingdom; Knolls 's Turk. Hist.
How does King James think of Three Kingdoms lost by Perjury, and Tyranny, and
Folly? Of a wise Creature he became ignorant of God, of himself, of things made
by God. How sad was it to see the famous Cheynil, famous for Learned Tracts,
make Balls of his -- in Bedlam! and so others.

Of an holy Creature he became sinful; the seeds of all sins were in his
Nature; out of the heart proceed murders, adulteries, and all wickedness.
Anatomize the heart: The tongue is set on fire of hell; and though many wild
Beasts and Serpents have been tamed by man, yet the tongue can no man tame; it
is unruly, evil, full of deadly poison, James 3.6, 7, 8. His Life is
abominable: Psalm 14.7, 8. The fool has said, There is no God. They are
corrupt, abominable. The same Words, or the same Psalm you read, Psalm 53. Now
this was done twice by David, and not mentioned twice by the Composer of the
Psalms, because the Titles differ, and they were written by the same hand the
Psalms were. The one is, To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David. The other, A
Psalm of David upon Mahalath Maschil. To the chief Musician.

Of a happy Creature, Man became miserable; in his Body, Pains, Sickness; in
his Soul, Trouble, Sorrow, Fears; in his Enjoyments, Disappointment,
Perplexities; miserable in Time and Eternity. Now the Tree of Life was so
sacramentally and symbolically, as signifying and preserving Life to him if he
had stood. The other Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil was only so ab
Eventu; That Man, if he stood, should know the good he had gotten, and the Evil
he had escaped. If he fell, he should know the Good he had lost, and the Evil
he had incurred. For it could not be so called, a forma esse rationalis, nor ab
effectu per se.

Hence says David, Psalm 51.5. I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my
mother ^^ceive me. To say he speaks of his Mother's sin in the Conjugal Act, it
is contrary to David's design. He, confessing his Murder and Adultery, runs up
his Sin to the Fountainhead: What was this to say, My Mother sinned? Dr. Jer.
Tailor, and other Denyers of Original Sin, urge that in Job 33.18. That he took
care of the widow from his mother's womb, which is a Hebrew Phrase for early,
say they. I believe Job was compassionate when young and tender, and knew his
Duty that way: But does he say, I took care of Widows when I was shapen, when I
was conceived? In the Womb, and from the Womb, are different things. I know
this Error is a growing Weed in the Church of England, tho they subscribe to
the 39 Articles, and so to Original Sin. O, say some, they are but Articuli
Pacis: Then may Anabaptists subscribe as well as you, nay, better, who deny
Infant Baptism, though there afferted; and those that deny the Hierarchy: And
what indeed is Subscription worth at this rate? But, I pray, you that put this
Cheat on your selves, Do you not baptize Children according to the Form in the
Liturgy, which bottoms all on Original Sin, and on all men's being born in sin?
Now what need have they of Baptism, the sign of washing away of sin, that have
no sin? Therefore the old Pelagians and the Socinians, that denied Original
Sin, were against Infant Baptism, and must be so unavoidably; but our Arminians
of this mind stick at nothing. Original Sin may be seen early in Children: What
Pride, and Envy, and immoderate Desires after what they would have, see we
early in them? as Austin in his Confessions observes. And besides, Does God lay
Misery where was no preceding Sin? If by Sin comes Death, do they ^^t and
perish, poor Infants, that never sinned?

Sin so set Man against God, that it is said, 6. Genesis 6. It repented the Lord
that he made man on the earth, and it grieved him to the heart. Man soon showed
himself to be such a Creature, that no Messengers from God did him good. Noah
was a Preacher (and no doubt a Liver) of Righteousness an Hundred and twenty
years: To have seen but one Convert a year had been sad, but he sees none at
the end of Twenty, Forty, Threescore, an Hundred years. No pricks of Conscience
did them good. The Spirit strove for a time. Men may roar, that never Repent.
No threats of God do them good; when they were told of a Deluge, they feared
not. Yet Man's Nature, before Sin, was conformable to God's Image, his Will to
God's Law; he was designed to serve God here, and enjoy him for ever; yet after
Sin he is called Flesh, as if dispirited, a Worm, as David says of himself, a
Dog, for without are dogs, says Paul; nay, a Devil, so Christ called not only
Judas, but Peter, when he would hinder him from Suffering. Get thee behind me
Satan, 16. Mat. 23. What Devils are the best (and much more the worst) for
Pride, Passion? etc.

Now how little the Quakers regard the Fall, is notorious. Some make Adam,
Paradise, the Tree of Life, Serpent, and all, an Allegory; and laugh at
Original Sin, and believe all come Sinless Creatures into the world. Here is
the foundation work, this makes Man loathe himself.

Another thing the Scripture teaches as necessary to be known, and which our
Perfectionists will not understand, is.

2. Man's recovery by a Crucified Christ, the Son of God: Who so fit as he, who
was the Son of God by Eternal Generation, to be so by his Conception? Who so
fit to make Man the Son of God by Adoption, as he that was the Son of God by
Nature? Who so fit to be a Mediator, that in some respect was so for ever? Mr.
Ainsworth well observes from 3. Genesis 21. God made of Skins Coats, and clothed
our first parents. That this represented Man's being clothed by the imputed
Righteousness of Jesus, for, says he, their Clothing was not of the Skins of
Beasts eaten, for no Beasts were for food till the time of Noah's Deluge was
over, 9. Genesis 3. Every moving thing that lives shall be meat for you, even as
the green herb have I given you all things. Nor yet of Beasts that died of
themselves, for there was a Ceremonious work of Sacrificing, as did Cain and
Abel; therefore it was, says he, of Beasts Sacrificed, which were Types of
Christ's.

As Men be Redeemed by the Blood of Christ, so are they clothed by his
Righteousness. Bishop Hall in his excellent savory Paraphrase, thinks this is
the sense of the words of Solomon in the Book of Canticles. 8. Can. 5. I raised
thee up from under the apple tree, there thy mother brought thee forth; there
she brought thee forth that bare thee; as Christ speaking thus to the Spouse, O
my spouse, I raised thee up from under the tree of offense; there Eve brought
thee forth (under the curse) she brought thee forth that bare thee. Now Mr.
Cotton observes, when the Church commends Christ, She commends his hands; but
when Christ commends the Church, he commends not her hands, Canticles, chap. 4.
and 5. Man is Justified by Christ's Obedience, not his own.

Now Paul preached a Crucified Christ to all the Gentiles, idolatrous and
profane Gentiles: But when do any Quakers hear any thing of this in their
Christless Assemblies?

God the Father chose some from everlasting, gave them to Christ to be
Redeemed, to the Spirit to be Sanctified; else we cannot (as some observe) talk
of a Predestination, but may of a Postdestination, if Men be Saved on foreseen
Holiness; 2 Ephesians. 5, 6. By grace are ye saved, and are made to sit down in
heavenly places in Christ Jesus. The Church is the lower Heaven; they above,
and they below, make one Family; in whom the whole Family in Heaven and Earth
is named, says Paul. As the Kitchen below, and best Room above.

Christ may say to every Believer, as Pharoah's Daughter of Moses, I drew him
out of the waters. Justice placed us all at the mouth of Ruin; the Son of God,
as the Daughter of Pharaoh, comes and has Compassion. Without understanding
Salvation by Christ, there is no hope. They that reject the outward Crucified
Christ, reject life. Now they once took all in a Mystery, an inward Christ was
inwardly Crucified. This is, says Penn and Whitebread, The Lamb slain; the
Light within, opposed by the Sons of Men.

2. Another thing the Scriptures show, is the way God and Christ have appointed
to Salvation; so we call the Scripture the word of God, Christ is seldom so
called, 1 John 1.19. Rev. 13. The Word was God. His Name is called the Word of
God; Why? He declares the Mind and Word of God to men; but 30. Proverbs 5, 6.
Add thou not to his word. What is that to Christ? You received our testimony
not as the word of man, but as it is indeed the word of God, says Paul. If
they are called Gods, to whom the word of God came, and the Scriptures cannot
be broken, said Christ; You read of them that corrupt the word of God; What,
did they corrupt Christ? The Quakers have thousands of times cursed them that
call the Scriptures the word of God.

Heathens could not find out the way to life by any Light within, but by
Scripture-Revelation. Many Atheists and Quakers object against it, though now
some more sober. Some object,

Moses, 1 Genesis 16. makes the Moon greater than the Stars, which all Astrologers
know to be so only in appearance. What an unnecessary noise do some Divines
make to answer this; to tell what it is Subjectively, what it is Objectively.
Does Moses say, he made the two greater Bodies, the Sun to rule the Day, the
Moon to rule the Night? No: Now though a Star is a greater Body than the Moon,
yet the Moon is a greater Light sure. So 9. Acts 7. it is said, They that were
with Paul heard a voice, but saw no man; yet in the 22. Acts 9. They that were
with me saw indeed the light, but heard not the voice of him that spoke. There
is an Inarticulate and an Articulate sound or voice; they heard the sound, but
not the voice, not the sense spoken. How do some triumph in such trifles? If
any Learned Men be perplexed about things of this nature, let them read
Searphius his Symphonia; If any Unlearned Man be, let him read a Book called,
The dividing of the Hoof; both which Books have done this work incomparably
well, of reconciling seeming contradictions in Scripture. Our Perfectionists
care not to direct their Children to Scripture. Consider how the Old Testament
ends, and the New begins. I have sometimes pleased my self not a little with
this Meditation, Mal. 1.4, 5. what a Prophecy is here of Christ and John
Baptist! and it is a good Providence that the Jews, though in unbelief, never
added any thing to the Cannon of Scripture since; none comes now to tell them
how large, read Isaiah 53. and the Gospel; May not he well be called the
Evangelical Prophet? If you be stumbled, regard it not. As now, How often is it
objected, That the Jews borrowed of the Egyptians Jewels of Silver, and Jewels
of Gold, with an intent never to pay them; and one gives one answer, God bade
them; another, another, they had abused the Jews. For my part, I think the
matter is clear, they gave them, for as the Jews borrowed, so the Egyptians
lent; now did they think, when God by a mighty Hand brought them out of Egypt,
they should see the Men more? no nor the Jewels neither. How often have I seen
others mock 4. Matt. 8.9. The Devil took Christ on a high mountain to show him
the kingdoms of the world. Why, I hope the higher the Mountain was, the more he
might see, and how high he was lifted up above the Mountain, who can tell.
Divines say, there was a Map and Idea of all to Christ. Hobs himself in his
Leviathan seems not to be scandalized here; take his Opinion rather than
blaspheme, That all was done Visionary. Many places in the Old Testament
mentioned in the New, are carried from their primary intention, to a secondary
one; Out of Egypt have I called my Son, 11. Hos. 1.2. Matt. 15. is clear, 8.
Psalm. 4. What is man! is true of all, though carried in a high sense of
Christ. And because some cannot be persuaded but that of the Prophet Isaith, A
Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, 7. Isa. 14. was of the Prophetess to whom
Isaiah went, who bare a Son, one that was a Virgin when Isaiah made the
Prophecy, might not be so after. They say, That what was true in sensu diviso,
of that Prophetess, was in sensu composito, of the Virgin Mary; a Maid and
Mother at the same time, as the Prophetess in a different time. If this be
yielded, I know not but some are sooner and more fairly silenced. I will not
tell my thoughts; if any conjecture, they shall but conjecture. Now the
Scripture direct about matters of Faith and matters of Practice, without which
we should not know the one or the other.

Direction 2.
Timely instruct your Children, and endeavor to transmit Religion from Family
to Family.

Do your Children love History? What is better than that of Joseph and his
Brethren; of Esther, Haman, and Mordecai, and Ahasuerus? The Creation of the
world? Fall of Man? Call of Abraham? Plagues of Egypt? -- Contract some things
in hints, and Books in Verses, English ones such there are; others in Latin, as
the Ten Plagues of Egypt, are expressed in four Verses: Fit cruor ex undis,
conspurcant omnia vanae.
Dat pulvis cimices, postea musca venit:
Dein pectu, post ulcera, grando, locusta, tenebrae;
Tandem proto tocos ultima plaga necat.


Convince them of their natural state, you may say 9. John 20. That this is our
son we know, and that he was born blind we know; blind in Spirituals.

Look well to their Company; Mr. White advises Parents to invite sober Lads to
their House, and make them their Childrens Companions: He that walks with the
wise shall be wise, a companion of fools shall be destroyed, says Solomon.
Above all duties teach them secret Prayer, 6. Matt. 6. show them the necessity,
benefit, sweetness of this; this gives life to all other duties.

Talk most against the Sins they be inclined to, Pride, Passion, Idleness,
Stealing, taking God's Name in Vain, etc.

Allow them convenient time for Diversions and Recreations. Look well they be
such as for nature are Lawful, for time Seasonable, for use Moderate. Avoid
Plays suspiciously Evil. Mr. Perkins condemns, in his Cases of Conscience,
Playing at Cards as an Evil in it self. Dr. Tailor in his Ductor Dubitantium
does not so, yet does dissuade from the use of them. You will at a full Table,
let alone a suspicious Dish, not proper for you, when many safe ones. Plays are
lawful, and the matter of God's Promise.

The Quakers have condemned all, as well as Family Prayer, and other Duties.
How feebly does Robert Barclay, the great Quaker, in his Apology, write against
playing at Bowls and Nine-pins? we have Bodies as well as Souls; 8. Zech. 5.
The streets shall be full of boys and girls playing. Paul took delight to think
of the Family Timothy came from, 2 Timothy 1.5. When I call to mind the unfeigned
faith which first dwelt in thy grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice, and I
am persuaded that in thee also. Not the same numerical Faith, which could not
be without a Transmigration of Souls; but specifical, like for kind. Qui studes
patrimonio terrestri magni quam caelesti, -- filios tuos commendas Diabolo
magis quam Christo. I remember Cyprian somewhere says, Pray consider he that
minds his Child's Body more than his Soul, is like one, that if Child and Dog
were like to he drowned, should take care to save the Dog, but let the Child be
drowned.

To make your Childrens lives Religious, is to make your own comfortable. Let
the Spirit teach my Children, I will not, say some Perfectionists: If you will
not, an evil Spirit, you see, early does.

Catechize them often and well.

Direction 3.
Endeavor to retain what you hear or read, to confirm your Faith against all
unsound Doctrines.

Pray to God for good Heads and Memories, as well as for good Hearts and
Affections; many are turned to and fro with every wind of Doctrine. Many take
want of Memory to be only their infelicity, which, I say, is their fault. To
help you here, take these Directions:

1. Mind the chief word in a sentence, direction, story, or comparison, on
which all depends; revolve that in your mind over and over.

2. Choose some good Companions, whose good Memories may help your bad ones; ask
them what they remember, tell them what you do. Thus let one hand rub another
till both be warm.

3. Write down (if you can) what most concerns you; you do so in other things,
Debts, Directions for Distempers. New Affections many years hence will make old
things heard, new.

4. Beware of Meats and Drinks, for Quantity or Quality, that indispose you to
dullness in hearing.

5. In the close of a Sabbath, and in the opening of the next day, in your
Beds, repeat what you are willing to retain in your mind.

6. Use some mark with a Pen, or Pencil, in reading excellent Books, where you
are most willing to remember.

O what a shame it is for Men to remember every thing; except what they should!
can tell all the News going, long stories of Contentions, or Pastimes, but what
is said to strengthen Faith they have forgot; here Fuller in his Meditations
says thus, I heard a merry story long since, and that I remember; I heard a
good Sermon lately, and that I have forgotten; thus Lord is my Memory like a
filthy pond, where Frogs live, and good Fish dye.

Mind these Directions, so may you give an account of the reason of the Hope in
you; so may you convince Gainsayers; so may you be kept in an hour of
Temptation, for Heresies must be to try Men.

Who could believe the Quakers Sins, possible Sins, if he saw them not, for an
ignorant Creature to say, not only practically, but some in words,

I have no Sin to confess, or beg Pardon for, I need no Scripture, nor
Ordinances, they be low things;

I need no outward Christ to save me?

We may write over their doors, as over the doors of them that have the Plague:
Lord be Merciful to them.

REader, Having told you before, how the Quakers thought Reviling of Ministers
a meritorious work, and in particular how some of them, with others, slandered
Mr. Hughs of Plymouth, (where was the place of my Nativity, and to whom I owed
my self) I shall give an account of a great defamation of that great Man on the
Return of King Charles the Second; it was commonly reported, that he was, with
his Virtuous Consort, so drunk with drinking that King's Health, that he
knocked under the board; a Paper of Verses were Printed on this occasion, but
all borrowed out of Cowly, with some additions about him and her, which I shall
not now Name, as about, S S S, etc.

This Drunkard's Song on this report was in all Men's Mouths: THE thirsty Earth
drinks up the Rain,
And drinks, and gapes for drink again.
The Plants suck in both Earth and Air,
By constant drinking fresh and fair.
The Sea it self, which one would think,
should have but little need of drink;
Drinks ten thousand Rivers up,
So filled, they overflow the Cup.
The Sun it self, as one may guess,
By's drunken fiery Face no less,
Drinks up the Sea, and when that is done,
The Moon and Stars drink up the Sun.
They drink and dance by their own light,
They drink and revel all the Night.
Nothing in Nature sober's found,
But an eternal Health goes round.
Then fill the Bowl, then fill it high,
Fill all the Glasses there, for why,
Shall every Creature drink but I,
Thou Man of Morals tell me why?


A very dull Reply was Printed with this, but by whom I could never certainly
know; at last I met with the following ingenious Reply; which, pardon me, if I
think one of the best Replies ever I saw; wherein Cowly is baffled in all his
Altitudes: THE thirsty Earth, when one would think,
His dusty throat required most drink:
Wets but her lips, and parts the Showers,
Among ten thousand Plants and Flowers;
These take their small and stinted size,
Not Drunkard like to fall, but rise.
The Sober Sea observes her Tides,
Even by the drunken Sailors sides;
The roaring Rivers pressing high,
Seek to get in her company:
She rising seems to take the Cup,
But other Rivers drink all up.
The Sun, And who dares him disgrace?
With drink, that keeps his steady pace;
Baits at the Sea, and keeps good hours.
The Moon and Stars, and mighty Powers,
Drink not, but spill that on the flore,
The Sun drew up the day before:
And charitable Dews bestow,
On Herbs that Dye for Thirst below.
Then fill no more, then let that dye,
That would the Drunkard kill, for why,
Shall all things live by Rule, but I,
Thou Man of More-Ale, tell me why?


It is a great pleasure to me many times to think, when Debauchees and
Heretics have gotten all the Knavery, they have not gotten all the Wit.

I cannot, indeed, understand the Quakers were the Inventers of this story
against that Worthy Man, whose Name will be sweet there, when the Names of
others will stink, though they helped to publish him as a notorious Drunkard,
as before.

If the Quakers can get a Story against a Minister from his Wife, though she be
infamous for an Unquiet Spirit, they care not for that. I remember I was once
with a discreet well-bred Quaker, and some talking of a Minister reputed very
famous for Piety, whose Name is well known all England over for a good Book he
printed; the Quaker said, Ah Poor Man! His Wife knows -- I enquired into the
Story, and found she had given a hard Character of him, and was a sore
Affliction to him, as he confessed on his Deathbed. I never regard the Charge
of a Zipporah. I believe God, who says, M^ses was the meekest man in all the
earth: Not Zipporah, who said, He was a bloody Husband. Hear how the Virago
talks, throwing it at his feet. She circumciseth the Child (for so, with the
leave of Mr. Joseph Mead and his new Reading), I believe. You see she makes
nothing to invade the Office of the Man, and that in the highest Act too. You
Ministers, If God and Conscience know you be meek Mofes's, never be concerned
if Zipporahs say, You be Bloody Husbands. You have excellent Company in this
Abuse. I care not to hearken to the Charge of any Wife against the Husband. I
believe Socrates was the most Patient Philosopher in the World, though Xantippe
chide never so much, and throw -- upon his head.

One of the best Ministers that ever I knew, for Piety, Learning, and
Goodnature, (famous for Learned Tracts) had a hard Name because of his Wife's
Complaints. He would say, All was a little Domestic Talk; but that Domestic
Talk broke his heart; that before he dyed, he said, God has blessed me with
some Parts, that now I begin to be useful in the World, and must I now go out
of the World through the Humor of a Woman? Many dye of the same Disease. Poor
Men! they may pity one another, whose Case is such, but cannot help one
another. The true Reason of all is this; These Good-natured Men, when first
married, thought to win their Wives by throwing up their Authority and all, to
them; but in this they wanted discretion: They sought for Peace out of God's
way, and therefore no wonder if they missed it. Genesis 3.16. He shall rule over
thee, says God to Eve, concerning Adam. Yes, verily, it is so. You Husbands,
especially Ministers, keep your ground: Look to it: Rule over your Wives, or
else they will soon rule over you. One Head or Governor there must be in a
Family: God and Nature has appointed the Man so. Never buy your Peace at so
dear a rate, to throw away the Image of God stamped upon you. Make them to be
Obedient; it is the Apostle's Command and Word, Titus 2.5.

Bishop Usher drank of this Cup. The great Hooker also, Author of
Ecclesiastical Polity; and they that must pledge such Great Men, Drink round
patiently. It may be good Physic, though unpleasing stuff.

The Worthy Dr. Fuller, Author of the Church History, etc. was one of your
Brethren; and see how excellently well he describes the Unquiet Wife on this
Theme,

No Pleasure like Chiding.
SOme men delight at Sea to sail,
As others do in Riding;
But all their Pleasures do them fail,
There Is no such Joy as Chiding.
When in the Morn I open mine eyes
To entertain the day;
Before my Husband can arise,
I chide, and then I pray.
And when at Dinner I take place,
Whatever be the Meat,
I first do Chide, and then hear Grace:
If so disposed, I eat.
Let it be Fowl, or Flesh, or Fish,
It never shall be said,
But I Will find fault with Meat or Dish,
With Master, or with Maid.
Too fat, too lean, too young, too old;
I ever do complain.
Too raw, too roast, too hot, too cold.
I fault will find, or feign.
And when I go to bed at Night,
I then could even weep;
For I must part with my Delight,
I cannot Chide and sleep.
However, this does mitigate,
And much abate my sorrow;
That though to Night it be too late,
I Will early Chide Tomorrow.
And Madam, when asleep, was as quiet as any one in the house, and continued so
till she awoke.

Here I have given you a Copy, but, perhaps, many need it not, having the
Original at home.

You Loyal, Obedient Wives are highly to be commended, but the Number is so
small, a few words may serve the turn.

And now, Friends, a Word or two among Friends: Does not sometimes one of your
perfect Wives make you perfect Men almost perfectly mad. I knew the Woman
mentioned before, that must fast Forty Days and Forty Nights, would not speak
to her Husband a Fortnight together upon a Pett, though he showed her all
imaginable kindness: She would commonly lie by her self. It had been well for
her Husband if she had begun her Forty Days Fast Twenty Year sooner.

A famous Bishop, now dead, after the Death of his Wife, preached on this Text,
In all things be thankful: A most Ingenious Discourse it was, how every
Condition might afford matter of Thankfulness: At last he brought it to the
Wife's death. Now, said the honest Old Gentleman (for so he was) If she was a
Good Wife, be thankful you had her so long; if she were a Bad Wife, be thankful
you were troubled with her no longer. So in every thing be thankful.

Now, Friends, you that take such advantages against Ministers and others, What
if others should serve you so, if they heard what is whispered in your Ears,
Do thou hear, Friends shall know what thou art, etc.? Or the Complaints made
among your selves against one another, which the World must not know, for they
would not then believe you were Perfect Men, b^t Perfect Fools.

Now I know you will not talk of such a Friend's Sin, but of his Fault; and
when you are sometimes ready to take one another by the Throat, you have gone
to Prayer, and confessed others faults (perhaps not your own). David, a better
man than you, confessed often his sins. Though it be a Shame to commit sin, it
is an Honor to confess it. But you Perfect ones (and without being so, the Old
Fox that played with you till he caught you, said you were all of the Devil)
must not confess Sin, no, by no means, but will sometimes Faults, and, to be
plain between Friends, Notorious ones. But tell me, If Friends should go to
Hell for Faults, will it not be as bad as if they had gone there for Sins.

I appeal to the Light within you, you Children and Servants of these Perfect
Sinless Men and Women, Do you not see your Fathers or Masters come home half
drunk, or more so? Do you not hear them speak falsely now and then, and outwit
others? (You know the meaning of the Phrase). Do you not see them fiery and
contentious too often? Are you not sometimes ready to sigh, and say, The Men of
the World, that own the outward Christ, and outward Word, and outward Prayer,
are far better than Friends, yea, Angels in comparison of them? I have known
some of the greatest Pretenders to Perfection, so unquiet, so full of Passion,
that it has cured some I were acquainted with, from desiring their Company,
when no Dissuasions or Arguments of mine could do the work.

For my part, when I heard Whitehead and other Inspired Persons preach, when I
saw the vain Conversations of other Quakers, what the Queen of Sheba said of
Solomon's Wisdom, and the Order of his House, I must say of their Folly and
their Brutality; 1 Kings 10.6, 7, 8. It was a true Report I heard where I
dwelt, of thine Acts, and of thy Folly: Howbeit, I believed not the words, till
I came and mine eyes had seen it; and behold, Half was not told me. Unhappy are
thy Men, and unhappy are these thy Servants, which stand continually before
thee, and hear thy Folly.

A word to She Friends, guilty of the Fault (not Sin) before-named. You Sinless
Perfect Scolds, I have been the happy Instrument of recovering some sinful ones
of your Hue and Complexion; I wish I could hope to recover you. You, like the
Pharisees, say, You see, therefore your sin remains, John 9.41. You whole
ones (in Conceit) need not the Physician, but they that are sick. I cannot call
you righteous ones (in your Conceit) but sinners to repentance. Can your
Husbands, that being without sin, please God in every thing, please you in
nothing? What, are you not only as Holy as God (I tremble to mention the
Blasphemy) but more Holy, more Wise, more Good? Thus you are deceived by the
Serpent, who told the Woman, Genesis 3.5. Ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and
evil. You that by your Disorders, Passion, Revilings, would make not only many
Heathens, but the Devil himself, were it possible, to blush, I tell you these
things, Friends, are Faults, great Faults, though no Sins.

So I might lay the like to Unquiet, Chiding, Restless, Turbulent, Foulmouth
Husbands; for such there are, though not so common as Women that are so. You
beg not Pardon of God by Secret Prayer, nor Family Prayer: None shall you have.
You that all this while boast of your Perfection, and say when we plead against
the Commission of Sin, but for its Confession, we plead for the Devil's
Kingdom; know you, according to your desire, God will shortly render to you
according to your works.

To my knowledge many of you take the Name of God in vain, and suffer your
Children so to do; a great, though a common sin, and a breach of the Third
Commandment; and have been angry with me for reproving you and yours for this.
Yet after all this, I think there was never such an Impudent, Shameless
Generation of men, since God made man on the face of the earth, who disdain to
make any Acknowledgment to God or Man of these and other horrid Impieties, but
boast of a Perfect Sinless State.

I have not said so much of the Immoralities of this People, especially for the
sin of Lying, as others talk of, and I once could not believe, but by
conversing with them, find to be true. What Falsehood and outwitting of men (a
new Phrase for Cheating) is found under Yea and Nay! Who would have imagined
that Barclay, in his Apology, the Goliath of their Camp, vilifying the Scripture
like any Seminary Priest or Jesuit, should dare to say that which carries
notorious Falsehood in the Front of it, That there is hardly any one place of
Scripture, that two men be agreed in the Sense of: When there are so many
Thousands of Places of Scripture, not only Historical, but Doctrinal, that it
is hard to find two men but what are agreed in. But why reply I to that which
is not to be honored with a Confutation? May such Grand Impertinents and False
Speakers learn of Job's Friends, Job 2.13. To sit down, and say not a word: An
Argument, by the way, which this man brought for Silent Meetings. But for my
part, complain who will of their Silent Meetings, I will commend them as the
best Meetings they have, and would theirs were all such: Yea, Friends, hearken
to no Priest of them all that advise you to Speak; for the Wisest of Men says,
A fool is thought to be wise, when he is silent. No Nonsense, no Blasphemy will
then be any more heard in your Assemblies. This Barclay also tells us, If
Infallibility be not in his Enthusiasms, it is not lodged in Scripture, but we
must go for it to the Chair at Rome. Every thing, Poor Robin, to its Center.
Thy Doctrine came from Rome, tends to Rome; and many that knew thee, believe
thou were it not to be reckoned in the number of Protestants.

FINIS.
Books Printed for John Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultrey.
POol's Annotations. Folio.

Mr. Baxter's Life. Folio.

Mr. Lorimer's Apology for the Ministers who subscribed only unto the stating
of the Truths and Errors in Mr. Williams's Book, in Answer to Mr. Trails's
Letter to a Minister in the Country. 4to.

An Answer of Mr. Giles Firmin to Mr. Gran^ tham, about Infant Baptism. 4to.

Some Remarks upon two Anabaprist Pamphlets. By Giles Firmin. 4to.

Mr. Firmin's Review of Richard Davis his Vindication. 4to.

A Proposal to perform Music in Perfect and Mathematical Proportions. By Tho
almon, Rector of Mepsal in Bedfordshire. Approved by both the Mathematick
Professors of the University of Oxford; with large Remarks by John Wallis, P.D.
4to.

Mr. Stephens's Sermon before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, at St.
Mary^le-Bow, Jan. 30. 1693.

Mr. Shower's Winter-Meditations: Or a Sermon concerning Frost, and Snow, and
Winds, etc. and the Wonders of God therein. 4to.

Mr. Slater's. Thanksgiving-Sermon, October. 27. 1692. 4to.

-- His Sermons at the Funerals of Mr. John Reynolds, and Mr. Fincher,
Ministers of the Gospel. 4to.

The Jesuits Catechism. 4to.

Dr. Burton's Discourses of Purity, Charity, Repentance, and seeking first the
Kingdom of God. Published with a Preface by Dr. John Tillotson, late Archbishop
of Canterbury. 8vo.

Remarks on a late Discourse of William Lord Bishop of Derry, concerning the
Inventions of Men in the Worship of God. Also a Defense of the said Remarks,
against his Lordship's Admonition. By J. Boyse. 8vo.

The Works of the Right Honorable Henry late Lord Delamere, and Earl of
Warrington; consisting in Thirty two Original Manuscripts under his Lordship's
own Hand. 8vo.

Bishop Wilkins's Discourses of the Gift of Prayer, and Preaching; the latter
much enlarged by the Bishop of Norwich, and Dr. Williams. 8vo.

Mr. Samuel Slater's. Earnest Call to Family-Religion; being the Substance of
Eighteen Sermons. 8vo.

Mr. Addy's Stenographia: Or the Art of Short-Writing completed, in a far more
Compendious way than any yet extant. 8vo.

The London Dispensatory reduced to the Practice of the London Physicians:
Wherein are contained the Medicines, both Galenical and Chemical, that are now
in use. Those out of use omitted; and those in use, and not in the Latin Copy,
here added. By John Peachey of the College of Physicians in London. 12 s.

Mr Hammond's Sermon at Mr. Steel's Funeral. 8vo.

History of the Conquest of Florida. 8vo.

Mr. Aikin's English Grammar: Or, the English Tongue reduced to Grammatical
Rules. Composed for the use of English Schools. 8vo.

Mr. John Shower's Discourse of Tempting Christ. 12o.

-- Hs Discourse of Family Religion, in Thres Letters. 12o.

Mr. Daniel Burgess's Discourse of the Death, Rest, Resurrection, and Blessed
Portion of the Saints. 12o.

Mr. George Hammond's, and Mr. Matthew Barker's Discourses of Family Worship.
Written at the request of the united Ministers of London. 12o.

Miscellana Sacra: Containing Scriptural Meditations, Divine Breathings,
occasional Reflections, and sacred Poems. 12o.

Monro's Institutio Grammaticae. 8vo.

Sir Jonas More's Mathematical Compendium. The Third Edition. 12o.

Mr. William Scoffin's help to true Spelling and Reading: Or, a very easy
Method for the teaching Children, or elder Persons, rightly to Spell, and
exactly to Read English, etc. 8vo.

The Triumphs of Grace: Or, the last Words, and edifying Death of the Lady
Margaret de la Musse, a Noble French Lady, aged but Sixteen Years, in May 1681:
12o.

The Map of Man's Misery: Or, the Poor Man's Pocketbook: Being a perpetual
Almanac of Spiritual Meditations: Containing many useful Instructions,
Meditations and Prayers, etc. 12o.

Man's whole Duty, and god's wonderful Entreaty of him thereunto. By Mr. Daniel
Burgess. 12o.

Advice to Parents and Children. By Mr. Daniel Burgess. 12o.

Mr. Gibbons's Sermon of Justification. 4to.

Scala Naturae: Or, a Treatise proving both from Nature and Seripture, the
Existence of good Genii, or Guardian Angels. 12o.

Graaf de Succo, Pancreatico: Or, a Physical and Ana^omical Treatise of the
Nature and Office of the Pancreatick Juice. 8vo.

Dr. Packs Praxis Catholica: Or, the Countryman's Universal Remedy: Wherein is
plainly and briefly laid down, the Nature, Matter, Manner, Place, and Cure of
most Diseases incident to the Body of Man, 8vo.

English Military Discipline: Or, the Way and Method of Exercising Horse and
Foot, according to the Practice of this present time: With a Treatise of all
sorts of Arms, and Engines of War, etc. 8vo.

Orbis Imperantis Tabellae Geographico-Historico-Genealogico-Chronologiae, etc.
Curiously Engraven on Copper Plates. 8vo.

Clavis Grammatica: Or, the Ready way to the Latin Tongue: Containing most
plain Demonstrations for the Regular Translating English into Latin; fitted to
help such as begin to attain the Latin Tongue. By F. B. 8vo.

Cambridge Phrases. 8vo.

Mr. Stephens's Thanksgiving Sermon, April 16. 1696.

Mr. Showers Thanksgiving Sermon, April 16. 1696.


