An Additional Supplement to the (...), OR, Peaceable Considerations of Christ's
peaceful Kingdom to come upon the Earth in the Thousand years, Rev. 20. lately
published, 1665.
The PREFACE.
Christian Brethren,
I Having in my late (...), page 2. declared my purpose, to make some parallels
of part of the Prophecy of Daniel, with the things contained in the book of
Revelations of Jesus Christ, which is plainly a Divine Mystical Comment upon
the particulars of the 4th and 5th Monarchies contained in Daniels Prophecy:
that is, of what was more fully to be performed under the Roman and Christ's
Monarchy, both before the Stone cut out of the Mountain without hands had so
stricken the Image on the feet and toes thereof, that it was wholly destroyed;
and also afterward, when the Stone was become a Mountain, and filled the whole
earth: But by the hand of God upon me then, showing me my mistake in respect of
the manner of Christ's coming, and of Christ's Kingdom, that it was not Mystical
(but personal) as before I apprehended, until I found that coming was the
beginning of the day of Judgment; and likewise upon occasion of those other
parallels of the three Babels, which I at first thought not of, until by Gods
guidance led unto them; I was so far thereby taken off from my former purpose,
That only in the 5th Chapter concerning those three Babels, I did but briefly
touch upon that intended parallel of the Books of Daniel and the Revelations.
But since (through Gods merciful goodness) having further discovery of the
usefulness of such an endeavor, I have accordingly (by his grace) set upon
that business in this ensuing order.

First, to set down a brief and plain Abridgment of the sum of the Prophetical
Visions in Daniel contained: First in Nebuchadnezzars dream of the great ^mage,
Chap. 2, and Daniels Vision of the same matter, namely, of four Earthly
Monarchies under four Beasts, to pass before Christ's glorious Kingdom, take
place, Chap. 7. wherein is showed to Daniel a Jew, the beginning of the
Judgment at the destruction of the fourth Beast, which was not showed to
Nebuchadnezzar a Gentile (as Mr. Mede observe,) though he saw the Kingdom of
the Stone. A Second Prophetical Vision was given unto Dan. c. 8. of the
subduing of the second Monarchy, [for the ruin f the first, to wit, of
Babylon, had been showed before to Daniel, chap. 7.4.] namely, of the Kingdom
of the Medes and Persians, by Alexander the Great, the founder of the Grecian
Monarchy, with the dividing thereof to his four Captains, jointly succeeding
him toward the four winds (as the Text speaks) where the Spirit of God
passing by the Greek affairs for a long time, unto that one King of fierce
countenance, Antiochus Epiphanes, at last rising out of one of them, whose
wicked actings against the Church of the Jews, is showed should be short, and
his death terrible toward the end of that 8. chap.

In chap. 9. Daniel had a third Vision of the 70 weeks of years, till Christ
had finished his work of Redemption, and confirmed the Covenant with many, both
Jews and Gentiles, for that time.

But his fourth and last Vision, chap. 10.11.12. sets forth before him again
the Persian, the Greek, and the Roman Kingdoms, with the beginning of Christ's
Monarchy; yet chiefly in the 11 chap. he speaks of the intestine wars, and
thereby the decaying of the Kingdom of Grecia under two principal heads of
Egypt and Syria, called the Kings of the South and North, mutually battering
down each other, and yet both of them sadly oppressing ^he poor Jews that lay
between them, from v. 4, to 21. and from thence to 36. is set down a more full
description of that vile and wicked Antiochus Epiphanes, before the Roman
Kingdom took place, who at last was said to come out of one of the four heads,
chap. 8.9. being that wicked little horn, [that probably may well be reckoned
as a type of the great Antichrist] in whose ruin the Grecian Kingdom, and
Javans rage together ended.

Now after the brief consideration of these Visions, I shall endeavor in such
a said Parallel, respecting the 4th and 5th Monarchy in Daniel, according as
our blessed Savior by his divine wisdom has been pleased to open and set them
down for the use of his Christian Church in his very useful book of
Revelations, for these last times, and leaving particular observations and
applications to Christians in their private Meditations, aiming herein at
brevity and clearness, I shall satisfy my self only

Thirdly, To set down somewhat in general to those purposes (if God will) in
the last place. N w in considering of these, I have to the said purposes or
brevity and clearness, profestedly avoided all those perplexing controversies
whereby some have unhappily obscured both the scope and meaning of the Visions,
as likewise, some commonly mistaken expressions, as, That the Thrones were cast
down, (...) ^onec throni e^ati sunt as A^^^ Mo^^nus, (...) Sept
for the Thrones were set, Chap. 7.9. having en^eavoured (as God has enabled
me) to seek out the most genuine sense, and the most clear and evident drift of
these Visions in the main of them, with diverse natural explications from the
matter and subject of them (which by the assistance of Gods spirit, (together
with the Rule of his Word) I either have, or shall observe to be most consonant
unto truth.

Yet in the intended Parallel between the Fourth, or Roman, and Christ's Kingdom
held out in Daniel and the Revelation, ye may with me take notice of what Mr.
Mede sets down of their different handling thereof, namely, that it is done in
Daniel more darkly, summatim and in genere, summarily, and in general only;
but in the Revelation, Particulatim and in specie, more particularly and
specially: Or, says he in another place, Daniel speaks of the Roman ^mpire in
imagine confusa: But Christ's Revelation contains the series rerum gerendarum,
the order of things to be done, according to the diverse fates and states of
the Church; in which respect many things in Daniel were said to be sealed up,
and shut up till the time of the end, as Chapter 12.9. till Christ Jesus the true
and faithful Witness, had so Divinely made them known for his Churches great
advantage by his Servant John.

This further (beloved Brethren) I would advertise you of, that besides
Daniel's Visions, we shall (beyond former intentions) endeavor to represent
somewhat of Ezekiel's Visions, and especially from Chap. 37. to the end of that
Book; who b^ing a Prophet of the same time of the Captivity, though not in the
same place with Daniel, yet by the same Spirit was guided into the same truth,
then made known to Gods people for their comfort, yet one explaining the other
in some things.

Therefore after Ezekiel (chap. 37.) had the Vision of the Jews last and great
Restoration, when both they and the rest of the twelve Tribes of Israel should
be united into one stick; that it might not be doubted how it should be done,
chap. 38, 39. he showed how the Gog and Magog of the preceding times (then)
namely, the Pope and the Turk, should be destroyed; and that the happy
consequents of this might be known (then) to the faithful Jews, he has another
Vision of the New-Jerusalem suited much unto the Jewish state, but very
excellent, and in this especially, that the Name thereof should be [Jehovah
Shamma] the Lord is there, chap. 40. to the end of the Book, which our Savior
in a manner, more suitable to the Christian Churches excellency, sets forth, as
coming out of Heaven from God, Rev. 21. which he showed to Saint John, was to
succeed upon the destruction of Antichrist and his Accomplices in the Armageddon
Battle, chap. 19.11. to the end, when so great joy had been, v. 6, 7, for that
Brides making ready of Jews and Gentiles, so largely celebrated in the
beginning of that Chapter. The like I may briefly hint of Christ's Spouse, in
that Song of Songs which (as Mr. Cotton judiciously observes) all along to be
Prophetical to the calling of the Jews, with the Gentiles more abundant coming
in at their rising, (as the Prophets phrase is) Es. 60.3, 4, 5, 6, etc. and
whose fullness shall be the greatest riches of the Gentiles, Romans 11.12. which
Spouse will then in the New-Jerusalem, Rev. 21. be the Lambs Wife, in that holy
City where she and Christ will be made perfect in one, and one member with
another, who since the Apostles, believed through their Word, till all these
should so be perfect, (as our Savior prayed) John 17.20, 21, 23. that then in
the time of the New-Jerusalem, the whole world might both believe and know that
God had sent him into the world, when his glory in his Kingdom on Earth should
be so eminently set up there; which Kingdom at his death he willed to them (as
a Legacy) or birthright, with his Fathers Consent and Grant (the Apostles
being Witnesses thereto) as v. 24. of the same Chapter, that they might all
have their part with him there, and that (as our blessed Savior further
teaches) for a thousand years, Rev. 20.4. to which purpose tends likewise the
45 Psalm.

Thus having briefly given you an Account of this my poor endeavor for the
benefit of faithful Christians, and for the greater evidence and clearness of
these (amongst many) so little believed mysteries of such Christ's coming to
begin the Judgment, and such manner of his raising up the Saints in the time of
his said visible glorious Kingdom on Earth in the thousand years: I shall
endeavor by the further assistance of his Grace and Spirit, and by the
evidence of his Sacred Word of Truth, and in the further explication whereof,
Christ Jesus himself has (above what was afforded Daniel in this Book) as the
true and faithful witness so unsealed and opened to his Church in that Divine
Book which was so gloriously given unto him in that Vision which St. John saw,
Rev. 5. concerning things to come; and hereupon in reference to such a future
Parallel, we have premised this ensuing short Abridgment of the whole, that the
particular branches thereof might the better be made use of to their several
due intendments, by such as are rightly conversant in them; and the greater
light of truth might so be made evident to all serious and impartial seekers
thereof, by the blessing of God thereupon, as God may order their Meditations
for their own and others edifying.

Now as that short comprisal in the (...) on the fifth Chapter of the
Revelation, page 27. as likewise in the Letter May 20. 1664. in the
Forerunner, are (as it were) an A. B. C. for some Christians to learn to spell
out the meaning of the substance of things contained in that Book of the
Revelations, which were to come. So may the following short Abridgment of the
Visions of Daniel be for this Book, when they come to be a little acquainted
with it; and by the help of both which together, I hope by Gods blessing both
great clearness of the truth, and of the necessity of the substance of the
Doctrine of Christ's Kingdom upon earth, may unto many sorts of men in due time
be undeniably made evident, to be such Divine Truth as is both profitable and
necessary, appearing so infallibly and strongly grounded upon both those Divine
and blessed Books of holy Scripture, which being once rightly understood, will
manifest them to be (as indeed they are) the sure key for the right opening of
many other Prophetical Scriptures in the Old Testament, and sundry other
pertinent Texts in the New, which otherwise are little rightly understood by
most sorts of men.

But after all such outward means to boused, with humble and faithful prayer,
meditation and conference of them, must then be likewise inwardly done by him
who is said to open the understanding of his Disciples together, after his
resurrection, Luke 24.35. to make them understand the Scriptures: To whose most
gracious guidance and teaching, I commend both you, and all truly Christian and
teachable Spirits, seeking for a blessing to you, and all such in my prayers
upon this my poor and weak endeavors, with all other good means to any like
purpose. Amen.

An. Dom. 1665. Therein remaining yours, and their faithful Servant in him our
great Lord, in what I may be useful. MVNVS.

An Endeavor of a short and plain Abridgment of the Prophetical Visions in
Daniels Prophecy, in reference to a Parallel of what is foretold of the 4th or
Roman Monarchy, and of Christ's Kingdom on earth, further explained by Christ
in the book of Revelations, for the use of the Christian Church.
IN the second Chapter, Nebuchadn^zzars dreamexpounded.
Nebuchadnezzar a Gentile (as Mr. Mede observes) had in a dream represented
unto him a great Image, shaddowing forth the four worldly Monarchies; the first
of which was his own Caldean Kingdom, whereof he was the head of gold, to
contirue after him in Evilmerodack his Son, and Beishazzar his grandchild, unto
which was then to succeed the breast and arms of silver, beg^n by Darius, and
soon after by Cyrus in the Monarchy of the Medes and Persians; to which
succeeded the third of brass, as Daniel expounded, namely, the Grecian Impire,
begun in Alexander the Great; and the fourth after that, of Iron, stronger then
all the former, breaking all the other to pieces, namely, the Roman, of long
continuance under many forms of Government, but especially long in the feet and
toes thereof, all the Popes time, with the ten crowned horns, as appeared more
to Daniel a Jew, Chap. 7. unto which the Kingdom which the God of heaven would
set up in the Stone cut out of the mountain without hands, should succeed,
which should never be destroyed, but should break in pieces and contume the
four former Kingdoms, and then become a great mountain filling the whole earth
it self; and should stand for ever, though the stone was long in beating them
in pieces before it became such a mountain filling the whole earth.

But in Chap. 7. Daniel a Jew in the first year of Belshazzar, has an other
dream, Daniels first Prophetical Vision.
further setting forth all the said M^narchies, in a Vision of four Beasts
rising out of the Sea, upon the striving of the four winds of heaven, again
setting forth the four said Kingdoms: the first like a Lion, having Eagles
wings, to wit, the high soaring Babilonian, which was brought down in
Belshazzar, Chap. 7.4. But the second like to a devouring Bear, with three ribs
in the mouth, conceived to be Media, Persia and Babylon; which last was taken
by Darius and Cyrus, in whom the Median and Tersian Kingdom began.

The third was like a Leopard, having on the back four wings, having also four
heads, and Dominion was given to it; whereby is decyph^red the Grecian Monarchy
begun by Alexander the great, who like a Leopard was swift in catching the
prey, of whom also it may be said, Vini, Vidi, Vici. I came, I saw, I overcame;
whose four Heads or Captains cruelly with their successors, chiefly devoured
the Jews: which four heads appeared to be four Command^rs, entering upon
Alexanders Dominion when he died, viz. Cassander head of Macedonia, Antigonus
of Asia, Seleuchus of Syria, and Ptolomy of Egypt. But the fourth Beast namely,
the Roman Monarchy, Daniel saw in the night, Visions exceeding dreadful,
terrible and strong, with iron teeth (their Commanders) and nails of brass
(their Senate) that devoured and brake in pieces and stamped the residue with
the feet of it, and was diverse from all the beasts that were before it, and
had ten horns: And while Daniel considered the horn, there came up among them a
little horn in appearance at first, before whom there were three of the first
horns plucked up by the roots; and behold in this horn were eyes, like the eyes
of a man, and a mouth speaking great things: those ten horns, one that stood by
expounded, v. 16. to Dan. v. 24. to be ten Kings, that should arise out of that
fourth Kingdom, and that other, to wit, the little horn that should arise
after them, or behind them (for the ten Kings were to arise at one hour with
the beast, Rev. 17.) who being diverse from the ten, should subdue three
Kingdoms, which according to Mr. Mide, were the Lumbards, the Franks and the
Greeks, subdued by the Pope, who during his time, times and the dividing of a
time, that is for the space of 1260 days of years, should wear out the Saints
of the most high, and think to change times and laws, the Saints being so long
given into his hands, v. 25. But then the ancient of days executed his fiery
and severe judgment upon that little horn that spoke great things, with his ten
and ten times ten thousand, by the fiery streams that came from before him,
till the beast was stain, and his body was destroyed and given to the burning
flame, verse 9.10.11. the same expounded again, verse 20.21, 22.

But verse 13. Daniel saw one like the Son of man come in the clouds of heaven
who came to the ancient of days, and they brought him near before him (which
probably) will be done by the faithful prayers of the Saints) whereupon was
given him Dominion, and glory, and a Kingdom, that all People, Nations and
Languages should serve him; and his Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, which
shall not pass away, and his Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed, as the
little Horns or Beasts was, v. 21, 22. who made war with the Saints, and
prevailed against them, as Rev. 13. but yet only until the ancient of days
came, that Judgment was given to the Saints, and that they possessed the
Kingdom, which was the Kingdom of the Most High, whose Kingdom should be an
everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions or Rulers should serve and obey him, v
27. and that (as there is said) All Kingdoms under the whole Heaven.

Again, Daniels second Prophetical Vision.
chap. 8. in the third year of Belshazzar, Daniel had another Vision concerning
the second and third Oppressors of the Jews, after the times of the Chaldeans
were out, namely, of the Ram of Persia, and the He-Goat of Grecia successively,
until the list period of the Grecian Persecution, called the time of the end,
and the last end of the indignation, by the Angel Gabriel, v. 17, 19. and 20,
21. now the Rams, or Persian Kings two Horns, were the Kingdoms of Media and
Persia, against whom the He-Goat of Grecia came so swiftly, that he is said not
to touch the ground, or none in the earth touched him; but in his chollar came
close to the Ram, and cast him down, and stamped upon him; and that notable
Horn between his eyes, appears to be Alexander the Great, whom Stories report
not to have been willing to take any offers of Peace, or terms of Agreement,
or tenders of Marriage with the Persian Kings Daughter, but with indignation
rejected all, saying, The World could not endure two Sovereigns, or chief
Kings; but when he was strong, he was broken; and after six years, his Four
said Commanders, called four notable Horns, v. 8, came in his room, and out of
one of them, namely, Seleuchus Nicanor, by descent came that little Horn which
waxed exceeding great toward the South, and toward the East, and toward the
pleasant Land; which little Horn was Antiochus Epiphanes, who grew great
toward Egypt, and toward the East, where the Persian Ram arose; and toward
the pleasant Land, where his rage was greatly manifest, v. 10, 11, 12. against
the Jews, who by reason of increase of transgressions, had power given him to
afflict them greatly, and do many heinous things against their Laws and
Worship, magnifying himself against the Prince of the Host, so that by his
means the daily Sacrifice was taken away, and the place of Gods Sanctuary was
cast down, for the space of Two thousand three hundred Mornings and Evenings,
or One thousand one hundred and fifty natural days; or, as some take them, for
the whole number of days, which make up Six years, three months, and twenty
days, which is conceived to begin when Menclaus revolted to Gentilism, and
many wicked Apostates with him; as first of Machab. 1.12. whereupon Gods Temple
and Worship was contemned and neglected, and people revolted, as 2 Match. 4.12,
to 18. which Apostasy began in 142 year of the Greek Empire, and continued to
the 148th year thereof, and the 11th of Antiochus, 1 Mac. 4.52. though the
extremity in Antiochus own Reign, was but half the time, which seems more
consonant to Daniels Prophecy, Evenings and Mornings signifying natural days,
as in the Creation; and though his wickedness prospered for a time, ver. 26.
yet after that short time he was broken without hands, being stricken with a
loathsome disease, dyed miserably thereof, as seems very probable from 2 Mac.
9.5, 28, though besides this, a further mystery seems to be intended in this
Scripture, namely, the Jews last Restoration at the end of the 2300 years,
from the beginning of Nebuchadnezzar in the Persian Monarchy, and all the time
of the Grecian and Roman, to Christ's appearance, as afterward; we shall
endeavor to show.

Again, chap. 9. in the first year of Darius the Mede, Daniel understanding by
Books, viz. from the Prophecy of Jeremiah of the Seventy years of the
Captivity of the Jews in Babylon, as is recorded Jer. 25.12. and 29.10. which
then drew toward an end; he set himself by prayers, supplications, and
fastings with sackcloth and ashes, to seek Gods face for himself and his
people, v. 4.20. whereupon at the time of the Evening-Oblation, the Angel
Gabriel came again swiftly flying, and touched him, and made known unto Daniel
what should be done by Gods determinate counsel, after seventy Weeks of years,
that is 490 years, upon his people, and the holy City Jerusalem, to finish
transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for
iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to seal the Vision and
Prophecy, and to anoint the Most Holy, v. 21, 24. so that the seventy years
suffering in bondage, should not only be recompensed with the building of the
City, which should remain seven times seventy years, but should have those
glorious Mercies of Mercies to be acc^mplished in the Messiah, which made the
beauty of that second House much more glorious then the first built by King
Solomon.

Which mystical setting them down, though profane persons neither understood
nor regarded, yet Gods faithful servants that would search into them, might
find them suitable to their Jubilies and Prophetical days, and be comforted in
them, as by Gods Oracles, rather then if it had been plainly said, after 490
years, in v. 25. the former whole number of Seventy Weeks are distinguished
first into seven Weeks, or 49 years from the Edict of Cyrus, in his first
year, for their return from Captivity, wherein was re-edified Jerusalem, to the
sixth of Darius Longimanus, second Son to Darius Histaspis, by Hester, in whose
six years the Temple was built; which being begun in the third year of Cyrus,
was forty six years in building, according to the Jews account, by some thus
reckoned; Cyrus and Cambises 9. Darius Histaspis 14. Xerxes 20. Darius, or as
some, Artaxerxes Longimanus 6. which seems agreeable to the Prophecy. 2dly, Of
the 62 weeks, or 434 years following, wherein appears, chap. 8. and chap. 11.
many remarkable things befell the Jews; which 62 Weeks brought in the Messiah,
and lasted toward the end of his private life; and the one week of the last,
finished the sacrifice of Christ, and begins both the calling of the Gentiles,
and rejection of the Jews, as may be supplied from v. 27. But in v. 26. he
further declares the destruction of the City and Temple by the Romans under
Titus and Vespatian: and after in v. 27. speaks, how the Roman Emperor should
make the Sacrifice and Oblation to cease, which was not all done suddenly, Of
which says Chris^st Se^m. contr^ Judae^: (...).
and at once, but by ^ three distinct degrees remarkably; though the beginning
thereof, then done by Caesar, was in the end of that one last Week; for after
that woeful destraction and captivity by Vespatian and Titus, they sought again
in opposition to Christ, to set up their Typical Worship there. Again, their
City was afterward taken about 130 years after Christ's incarnation, and the
Temple ruined by Adrian the Emperor. And when they had set up their said
Worship again under, or by the Oak in Mamre, Constantine the Great drove them
thence. And lastly, Most remarkably and wonderfully was their enterprise of
building their Temple, disappointed, when that wicked Apostate the Emperor
Julian, in opposition to Christ's Religion, did not only set up variety of
wicked Heathenish Abominations, but encouraged the Jews to build their Temple
at the public Charge, which with great endeavors and costs was set upon; but
when the stones of the old Foundation were dug up, and they went about to
lay a new Foundation, by Earthquakes, Fire, and terrible signs of Gods
indignation against them, many were destroyed which were employed about that
work, and their very tools and Instruments melted and consumed by the fire, the
stones laid for foundations, violently cast up, which occasioned Cyrill then
Bishop of Jerusalem, to say, Now was fulfilled the prediction of our Savior,
That not one stone should be left upon another, that should not be thrown down.
Which seems to be the true Epoch of those 1290 days of years, spoken of Chapter
12.11. which probably end before that 45 years preceding Christ's appearance, as
by v. 12. and v. 1. of the same Chapter may appear. But of these in their due
place.

But it is further added in v. 27. the latter part of it: And for the
overspreading of Abomination, he shall make it desolate, even until the
consummation, and that determined shall be poured upon the desolate, that is,
during the time of the Gentiles, to be fulfilled, as says Christ, Luc. 21.24.
which appears to contain all the time of Jerusalems desolation, and the Jews
dispersion ever since, until their calling about these times of ours, ^hen they
are to begin their spiritual and civil resurrection, which shall end (as was
hinted, and may further from Cap. 12. appear) in a glorious and blessed state,
by the free and rich mercy of their God, and the God of their Fathers, in
respect both of their souls and outward condition, according to the many great
promises God has given, and then to be fulfilled to them, their children, and
their childrens children for ever, through all the Reign of Christ the thousand
years with his Saints on earth, and thenceforth perfect blesseduess to all
Eternity.

Lastly, Daniel in the third year of Gyrus King of Persia, Chap. 10, Danids
fourth Prophetical Vision.
11, 12. had another Vision, having mourned three full weeks, and saw a
glorious person appearing to him by the River Hiddekel, when his Companions
fled for fear (though they saw not the Vision) and Daniel had no strength nor
comeliness left in him, till he was afterward raised and strengthened, when the
Angel made known to him the things that were to come to pass in the latter
days: Whereupon Chap. 11. he had the three Earthly Kingdoms then to come,
before Christ's appearing, set before him: But first briefly of the two former
of Persia and Grecia, I say briefly in respect of what was showed him in chap.
8. but after more fully of the proceedings of the Greek Kingdom divided into
Two Branches, and most largely of the last wicked Tyrant Antiochus Epiphanes,
until he was quelled by the Romans, Chap. 11. v. 30.

Ver. 2. And now will I show thee the truth. Behold, there shall stand up yet
three Kings in Persia, and the fourth shall be far richer than they all; and by
his strength, through his riches, he shall stir up all against the Realm of
Grecia. Only in v. 2. is spoken of the Persian Kingdom, in which after Three
Kings, to wit, Cyrus, Cambises, and Darius Histaspis, should a Fourth, namely,
Xerxes, succeed, richer than them all, who by his strength should stir up all
the Kingdom of Grecia.

V. 3, 4. And a mighty King shall stand up, that shall rule with great
Dominion, and do according to his will. And when he shall stand up, his Kingdom
shall be broken, and shall be divided toward the four winds of Heaven, and not
to his posterity, nor according to his dominion which he ruled; for his Kingdom
shall be plucked up, even for others besides those. But then v. 3, and 4. that
great Alexander of Macedonia, whose Kingdom should be divided toward the four
winds, to his Captains, as was showed, Cap. 8. not to his posterity, which
after was parted into Two, the Kings of the Scuth, namely Egypt; and of the
North, namely Syria; the Wars of Alexander with the Persi^^ being showed to
Daniel in Chap. 8. now here was showed to him those that followed in Egypt and
Syria, who in those times afflicted the Jews that lay between them, by the
spoil and forage of their Armies.

Ver. 5. And the King of the South shall be strong, and one of his Princes, and
he shall be strong above him, and have dominion; his dominion shall be a great
dominion. The King of the South, v. 5. is conceived to be Ptolomeus Lagi of
Egypt; and that one of his Princes there named, is conceived to be Seleuchus
Nicanor, who had Babylon and Syria, with the Dominions which he added of
Antigonus and and Lysimachus.

Ver. 6. And in the end of years they shall join themselves together, for the
Kings daughter of the south shall come to the King of the north to make an
agreement; but she shall not retain the power of the arm, neither shall he
stand, nor his arm; but she shall be given up, and they that brought her, and
he that begather, and he that strengthened her in these times. And v. 6. The two
Sons of Ptolomeus Lagi, Philadelphus and Megas, contended about the Title of
Cyrene, when Antiochus Soter, Son to Seleuchus, aided Megas, to whom he had
before married his Daughter, which was a bone of contention betvveen Egypt
and Syria; to appease which, Ptolomy Philadelphus married his daughter Berncie
to Antiochus Theos, Son to Antiochus Soter: Which Marriage, with the ill
success thereof, is the subject of ver. 6. For Theos had another Wife Laodice,
by whom he had two Sons, Seleuchus Callinchus, and Antiochus Hierax, who
took ill their Mothers Divorce, and causeless rejection; vvhereupon they took
the first opportunity, to cut off Bernice and her young Son, with all her
Train that came with her out of Egypt, and that in despite of what her
Husband Theos, or Father Philadelphus could do for her rescue.

This King of Egypt Ptolomeus Philadelphus so called, for marrying his own
sister, was exceeding rich, and a great warrior; studious of learning, by
whose procurement the Septuagint translation was composed, and his daughter
Bernicee, for her great dowry was styled Phernophoras. But the King of the
North here of Syria, was Antiochus Theos for taking Divine honor to be styled
God, after Laodice seeing her husband Theos his inconstancy, poisoned him, and
to promote her son Callinicus to the Kingdom.

Verse 7. But out of a branch of her root, shall one stand up in his estate,
which shall come with an army, and shall enter into the fortress of the King of
the north, and shall deal against them, and shall prevail: Then v. 7. The
brother of Bernice before slain, namely, Ptolomy Evergetes called a bud of her
root, in revenging of his sisters butchery, prevailed against Egypt, hazzarding
Callinicus his whole Kingdom, who succeeds his Father Theos.

Ver. 8. And shall also carry captives into Egypt their gods with their
Princes, and with their precious Vessels of Silver, and of Gold, and he shall
continue more years then the King of the North. Ver. 8. Ptolomy hearing of
Mutiny at home, left his Conquest of Syria, and returned with his great Booty
of 2500 captivated Idols; but Callinicus dyed of a fall from his Horse, the
refore said [not to continue long] and his Brother Hierax after Civil broils,
was slain by a Troop of Robbers, So ended both those Murderers.

Ver. 9. So the King of the south shall come into his Kingdom, and shall return
into his own Land. Ver. 9. Energetes upon his return home to Egypt, repressed
the Commotions [and so returned] as is said, unto his Kingdom.

Ver. 10. But his sons shall be stirred up, and shall assemble a multitude of
great forces; and one shall certainly come and overflow, and pass through; then
shall he return, and be stirred up even to his Fortress. Ver. 10. The two Sons
of Callinicus, to wit, Seleuchus Serannus, and Antiochus Megas, could not
endure that Ptolomy Philopator that killed his Father Energetes, should possess
any part of Syria under their noses, mustered up what power they could; but
Cerannus being poisoned, Antiochus warred with Ptolomies Captains, who overcame
Attalus, and drew Theodolus to resign Syria unto Antiochus, and to help him
against his own Master, Ptolomy; so he overflowed Syria, and set upon
Philopators strong holds of Egypt.

Ver. 11. And the King of the South shall be moved with choler, and shall come
forth and fight with him, even with the King of the North; and he shall set
forth a great multitude, but the multitude shall be given into his hand. Ver.
11. But Antiochus besieged Raphia, was overcome by Philopator's Army, and his
great multitudes partly slain, and partly captivated.

Ver. 12. And when he has taken away the multitude, his heart shall be listed
up, and he shall cost down many ten thousands, but he shall not be strengthened
by it. Ver. 12. Ptolomy Philopator being purfed up, exercised great cruelty
against the Jews, and would have gone into the Holy of Holies, whom the
High Priest resisted; whereupon he made cruel Edicts against them, and put many
to cruel deaths, as 2 Mac. 3, and 4 chap. but was given up to unclean lusts,
had a Male-Concubine, one Agathocles, killed his Wife and Sister, soon after
struck with death, and left his young Son to the tuition of that vile
Agathocles; whereupon diverse parts under him rebelled; and then Antiochns
having made preparation more strongly, invades his Sons Dominions.

Ver. 13. For the King of the North shall return, and shall set forth a
multitude greater than the former, and shall certainly come (after certain
years) with a great army, and with much riches. Ver. 13. That Child of four
years old, Ptolomeus Epiphanes, the Nobles stomached to be left under the
lascivious Agathocles, encouraged Antiochus expedition [after certain years as
is said] But the Romans having taken the tuition of that young King, gave him a
rub by an Embassage, to forbear the Territories of Epiphanes, which
notwithstanding, after certain years, he did invade Egypt.

Ver. 14. And in those times there shall many stand up against the King of the
South; also the Robbers of thy people shall exalt themselves to establish the
Vision, but they shall fall. Ver. 14. But the Jews finding then content under
Antiochus, took part with him against the Emperor; but diverse Jews having built
a Temple in Egypt to set up their Worship there, were devoured by Antiochus his
Army.

Ver. 15. So the King of the north shall come, and cast up a Mounts and take
the most fenced Cities, and the arms of the south shall not withstand, neither
his chosen people, neither shall there be any strength to withstand. Ver. 15.
Antiochus makes a second expedition against Egypt, with all Warlike
preparation, and gave it a great overthrow, as he had had a great foyl at
Raphia before.

Ver. 16. But he that comes against him, shall do according to his own will,
and none shall stand before him; and he shall stand in the glorious Land, which
by his hand shall be consumed. Ver. 16. Antiochus being helped before by the
Jews, comes among them with his Soldiers, that he might have succor near him;
but those Soldiers did so wast their Land without respect to friend or foe,
that Antiochus his peace, proved to them little better than Epiphanes Hostility.

Verse 17. He shall also set his face to enter with the strength of his whole
kingdom, and upright ones with him: thus shall he do, and he shall give him the
daughter of women corrup^ing her: but she shall not stand on his side; neither
be for him. Verse 17. Antiochus thought of a third expedition into Egypt, to
recover what he had lost, and though strongly prepared and begun with hopeful
success, yet was stopped by the Roman Protectors of Epiphanes their pupil:
But Antiochus pretended amity, and to give his daughter to Epiphanes, and
thought to corrupt her, to destroy her husband, which beautiful Cleopatra the
daughter of women would not do.

Verse 18. After this shall he turn his face unto the Isles, and shall take
many; but a Prince for his own behalf shall cause the reproach ^ffered by him,
to cease; without his own repreach he shall cause it to turn upon him. Verse
18. Antiochus ill bearing two affronts done him by the Romans in Egypt: now to
show his Lordliness, invades Grecia, and spoils the countries of Hellespont
Chersonesus Eubojea Called Isles, as Genesis 10.45.
, formerly belonging to the Roman title, wherein first succeeding, well he
mocked at the Roman terror: but smarted by them afterward: whereupon [the
Prince] (not yet being at the height of their Kingdom) that is the Roman State
[for his own behalf] (not now as formerly, for Epiphanes, v. 12. returned his
reproach upon him, being thrice vanquished by them by Sea and Land, they forced
him to surrender what he had won by Wars in Grecia, and defray their Charges,
and deliver to them his Ships and Elephants which they required, and to give
twenty Hostages, to pay a huge sum of moneys for twelve years, and one of the
Hostages to be his Son.

Ver. 19. Then he shall turn his face toward the fort of his own Land; but he
shall stumble and fall, and not be found. Ver. 19. Antiochus returning to his
strong-hold of Syria, being to pay 1500 Talents laid on him, attempted for
supply to rob the Temple of Juppiter Belus in Persia; whereupon the Barbarous
people tumultuosly slew him; so [he stumbled and fell, not being found.]

Ver. 20. Then shall stand up in his estate a raiser of Taxes in the glory of
the Kingdom; but within few dayos he shall be destroyed, neither in anger, nor
in battle. Ver. 20. Then unto Antiochus the Great, succeeded Seleuchus
Philopator, his Fathers Darling, in his Kingdom of Syria, who to maintain his
pomp, laid heavy Taxes on his Subjects, and attempted by his Captain
Helioderus, to rob the Temple of Jerusalem; and shortly after was poisoned by
the same Captain.

Ver. 21. And in his estate shall stand up a vile person, to whom they shall
not give the Horour of the Kingdom; but he shall come in pea^eably, and obtain
the Kingdom by flatteries. Ver. 21. Then succeeded Antiochus Epiphanes, (or as
some Epimanes the Vile) who was left an Hostage with the Romans, by his Father,
and now Demetrius his Brothers Son, the Heir of the Kingdom, was to be Hostage
in his room; but before his return, the Heir was poisoned (as was thought) by
his means, by the aforesaid Heliodorus. This Antiochus was resisted in the life
time of the Heir Demetrius; but he wound himself in by pleading the Heir was
unable to weild so troublous a state, and so would undertake his Tuition, and
so by flattering, gulled the Nobles.

Ver. 22. And with the arms of a Flood shall they be overflown from before him,
and shall be broken: yea also the power of the Covenant. Ver. 22. Then by three
main assaults, Antiochus Epiphanes attempted in the old quarrel with Egypt.
First, he took occasion by the minority of Ptolomy Philomator, son to Ptolomy
Epiphanes, son to Cleopatra, Antiochus Epiphanes his Sister, to invade Egypt
with great Forces, where he overthrew Philomators two Captains with a storm or
flood of discomfiture. The Prince of the Covenant seemed to be Tryphon, who
upon the former Overthrow, was the principal Actor in a League between him and
the King of Egypt, whereupon he having entrance into Egypt first, took away
Tryphon the chief Witness of the League, the better to conceal his Treachery.

Ver. 23, 24. And after the League made with him, he shall work deceitfully;
for he shall come up, and shall become strong with a small people.

Ver. 24. He shall enter peaceably even upon the fattest places of the
Province, and he shall do that which his Fathers have not done, nor his Fathers
Fathers; he shall scatter among them the prey and spoil, and riches; yea, and
he shall forecast his devices against the strong Holds, even for a time.

Ver. 23, 24 This Antiochus the Vile, regarded not the League he had made, but
entering upon Egypt, scattering handfuls of money to win the Vulgar, which he
had got amongst them, and practiced devices against the Strongholds of Memphis
and Alexandria, the principal Cities, by sowing discord between Philometor the
elder, and Phisochon the younger brother, whose the two said Cities were; but
(as says the Text) it was but for a while, the elder brother by the Mediation
of a Sister to them both, prevented that device.

Ver. 25. And he shall stir up his Power and his Courage against the King of
the south, with a great army, and the King of the south shall be stirred up to
battle with a very great and mighty army, but he shall not stand, for they
shall forecast devices against him. Ver. 25. As the strength of Antiochus the
Vile, at first was Policy and Devices; so in this his second Expedition, he
stirred up all the strength of Syria to try by War.

Ver. 26. Yea, they that feed of the portion of his meat, shall destroy him,
and his army shall over flow, and many shall fall down slain. Ver. 26. Yet the
Courtiers of Philometor secretly plot with this Antiochus the Vile, against all
reason and engagements to the King, their Families, and all Interests.

Ver. 27. And both these Kings hearts shall be to do mischief, and they shall
speak lies at one Table; but it shall not prosper; for yet the end shall be at
the time appointed. Ver. 27. After the Battle fought, the two Kings parley
about a Truce wherein each strives to outreach the other; and Antiochus was
Royally feasted by Philometor, which were but for a time dissembled, till Gods
time came.

Ver. 28. Then shall he return into his own Land with great riches, and his
heart shall be against the holy Covenant; and he shall do exploits, and return
to his own Land. Ver. 28. Antiochus having gotten much Treasure upon the Truce,
and robbing the Temple of Jerusalem, which paid him Tribute for two years
reprieve of the Jews, many of which he corrupted aforehand, 1 Mac. 1.21, to 24.

Ver. 29. At the time appointed he shall return, and come toward the south; but
it shall not be as the former, or as the latter. Ver. 29. So after the said two
years, he invades Egypt the third time, besieging the Royal City Memphis, which
he soon after took, and drove Philometor to fly for his life to Alexandria,
which as he went to besiege, Popilius arrives on an Embassy from Rome, and
discharges Antiochus from any further invasion on Philometors Country, whose
Tuition the Senate and people of Rome had undertaken. But while Antiochus was
complementing of Popilius, and other Romans of his old Acquaintance, the Noble
Roman makes a Circle in the Sand, and charges him to return Answer before he
went out of it; whereunto he obeyed. [Now was the time of the end of the Wars
with Syria and Egypt, mentioned v. 27.]

Ver. 30. For the Ships of Chittim shall come against him; therefore he shall
be grieved and return, and have indignation against the holy Covenant; so shall
he do, he shall even return, and have Intelligence with them that forsa^e the
holy Covenant. Ver. 30. The Romans (called the Ships of Chittim, for they never
landed at Alexandria) came of Chittim one of the Sons of Javan, Genesis 10.4. from
whom Grecia and all Italy was peopled; Latinus having transported the Citians
from the Greekish Islands into Italy; and here the wonderful Numberer sets them
forth by the Ships of Chittim, that so the Jews from Baalams Prophecy, Numb.
24.24. might hence know the rise and ruin of their last great Oppressor, the
Roman Kingdom. And he had intelligence with such as forsake the Covenant; for
many Rebellious Jews desirous to establish Gentilism, did privily pack with him
against their City and people, 1 Mac. 1.14.

Ver. 31. And arms shall stand on his part, and they shall pollute the
Sanctuary of strength, and shall take away the daily Sacrifice, and they shall
place the abomination that makes desolate. Ver. 31. In his Attempts against
Jerusalem, besides treacherous Jews, he had Foraign Captains, Philippius,
Andronicus, and Apollonius, as 2 Match. 5.22, 23, 24. men of insatiable
cruelties to act for him, who having taken the Fort of Sion, committed
miserable Massacres, without respect of Sex or Age, 1 Mac. 1.35. and polluted
the Temple by blood of Infants, 1 Mac. 1.39. Secondly, By their going into the
Temple, being strangers, as Act. 21.28. Thirdly, To meddle with holy things, v.
47. and v 54, and 57. setting up the Idol Juppiter Olimpius, in the Temple,
called the Abomination, as Jer. 32.34. and God hates Idolatry, Isa. 1.13. and
it brings desolation, for which the Jews were so sadly and sorely plagued.

Ver. 32. And such as do wickedly against the Covenant, shall be corrupt by
flatteries; but the people that do know their God, shall be strong, and do
exploits. Ver. 32. Diverse Jews joined with Antiochus against their Brethren,
as Menelaus was guide to Antiochus in his robbing the Temple; and were more
outrageous against their Brethren, than the very Gentiles, 2 Mac. 5.15, 23. So
Jasan Alcimus, who contrary to his Oath betrayed his Brethren, and aided
Bacchides, 1 Mac. 7.5, 15, etc. And the faithful Assideans Godly zeal in
resisting Gentilism, and cleaving to Gods Worship, is recorded 1 Mac. 1.25.
with their Noble Exploits of War, as follows v. 34.

Ver. 33. And they that understand among the people, shall instruct many; yet
they shall fall by the sword, and by flame, by captivity and by spoil many
days. Ver. 33. The Saints then had sad Trials, 1. By the Svvord, 2 Mac. 5.25.
2dly, Cast into the fire, or scalding, 2 Mac. 7.34. 3ly, Sold to Gentiles, 2
Mac. 5.24. spoiled by Robbers, 1 Mac. 1.37, etc.

Ver. 34. Now when they shall fall, they shall be helped with a little help;
but many shall cleave to them with flatteries. Ver. 34. The little help was by
Mattathias and his Sons, Judas and his Brethren, who but an handful to
Antiochus and his Army, yet God prospered their Attempts to be a refuge to
their distressed Brethren, and a vexation to their Enemies, to whom they gave
many foiles, 1 Mac. 2.24, 28, 29, 47. yet were there many false Brethren, as
Alcimus and others.

Ver. 35. And some of them of understanding shall fall to try them, and to
purge, and to make them white, even to the time of the end, because it is yet
for a time appointed. Ver. 35. Thus were the Saints tried by sufferings from
friends and fo^s, to their future honor, in evidence of their faith and
constancy; and now was the appointed end of Javans rage; as in v. 1. was
finished the Tyranny of Babel. And v. 2. contained Four Tyrants of Persia, and
their rage finished in Xerxes famous overthrow. And the third begins Javans
first Oppressor, till Antiochus the Vile, whose death was spoken of Chap. 8. v.
25. which seems to be meant by the time of the end in this place, by reason the
Spirit of God seems to end that Kingdom, then called the appointed time for it,
when the trials and temptations of the Saints by his means was finished in that
appointed time.

Ver. 36. And the King shall do according to his will, and he shall exalt
himself, and magnify himself above every God, and shall speak mavelous
things against the God of gods, and shall prosper, till the indignation be
accomplished; for that that is determined, shall be done. Ver. 36. The King
here spoken of, is the Roman State, who was to prosper unto the end of the
indignation of God against the Jews, as chap. 9.27. he speaks of this King
without distinction of North or South, as before (v. 18.) the Romans were but
the Prince, (v. 30.) he calls them the Ships of Chittim. But here the King
having the chief power, to whom many Kings submitted and crouched, as the two
Antiochusses, Father and Son, Syria's stoutest Warriors. Perseus King of
Macodonia, brought with Wife and Children to trudg after Emilius trium^hing
Chariot. Hannibal flying several ways, was sent for by the Romans, and could
not be freed from them, but poisoned himself. Geutius King of the Illyrians
felt their terror. So Prusias King of Bythinia; Eumenes King of Pergamus;
Ariarathes King of Cappadocia; Deiotarus King of Galatia; Mithridates King of
Pontus, etc. all which felt the Roman yoke, or brake their hearts or Kingdoms
by resisting; and their insolency has been as much over the Jews, and above
any others; for they made Judea a Province, and billetted their Soldiers in
every City, and took away all Capital Government by Laws, Offices and
Penalties, as Florus observes, and others; and after Jerusalem was made equal
to the Earth by Vespatian.

But their insolency over earthly Gods, as Psalm. 82.6. has been seen in the
Roman Antichrist, for History relates at least 20 famous Emperors and Kings
trampled under foot by him miserably etc. besides, such as sp^nt themselves in
his device of the holy wars, and to act for him in other countries, etc. Again
the Church and State of Rome have been manifest by blasphemies, when Ptolomy
and Cleopatra told the Senate, they were more bebolding to them, then to the
immortal Gods, they took it so: When Cicero uttered blasphemies against Gods
Religion, as barbarous superstition, and against God himself, as unworthy to be
owned by the Romans, since his people the Jews, who professed dependence on
him, were overcome; which Blasphemies were entertained and applauded.

The Emperor Tiberius was desirous to Authorize Christ amongst the number of
the Roman gods; but was resisted by the Senate, pretending it belonged unto
them to make or unmake Deities as they pleased.

But this Blasphemy is more palpable on the Roman Antichrist, who challenges
to be styled God, and that by the Emperor himself; and his Disciples style him,
Our Lord God the Pope, a certain Deity on Earth, and the greatest Deity on
Earth, and by open allowance.

And though this Fourth Tyrant over the Jews was to continue long in the
several Heads of that State, and the Pope is the 8th or of the 7th, and also
that Turkish State over the Jews; yet when Gods people shall be raised from the
dust of dispersion and bondage, both Pope and Turk will at once be destroyed,
and cast into the streams of Fire and Brimstone, issuing from the Ancient of
Days.

Yet it seems to me the 36 Verse is rather to be restrained to the former
times of the Roman Kingdom, under the Senate, Kings, Emperors, and other
Governors before the Popes time, and suiteth well thereunto; and it is
remarkable, That the Spirit of Christ teaches the Prophet usually to set down
his Prophesies and Visions, according to the order of accomplishment, except in
occasional explications, as Chap. 7, 8. and 12. in some things; yet Idolatry,
Blasphemy and Tyranny, are such spirits as have run in the blood, through the
whole Body of the Roman Monster.

And that general note of the long continuance thereof, the Roman Kingdom shall
prosper, till the indignation shall be accomplished, etc. that is, to the end
of the Jews dispersion and bondage, and coming of Christ, Cap. 12.

Ver. 37, 38, 39. Neither shall he regard the God of his Fathers, nor the
desire of women, nor regard any God; for he shall magnify himself above all.

Ver. 38. But in his estate shall he honor the God of forces, and a God whom
his Fathers knew not, shall he honor with gold and silver, and with precious
stones, and pleasant things.

Ver. 39. Thus shall he do in the most strong holds with a strange god, whom he
shall acknowledge and increase with glory; and he shall cause them to rule over
many, and shall divide the Land for gain.

But Ver. 37, 38, 39. seems evidently to belong to the Popes time in a special
manner, his not regarding the God of his Fathers, sets forth the Antichristian
Hypocrisy, sub nomine Christi militant, contra Christum, they pretend for God
and Christ, but intend all for themselves; not as the Apostles and first Roman
Christians, that so regarded their God, that with heart and hand not only in
well-doing, but in self-denial and sufferings, to the loss of Estate, Life,
Liberty and all, they steadfastly clave unto him. But now all the honor of
Christ's Prophetical, Priestly and Kingly Offices are taken (in effect) from
him, and ascribed to the Pope, and especially in respect of their Breaden Gods
Idolatry, as might be showed, and particularly follows in the next verse; and
how much the Papists disallow lawful Marriage, and reproach it, [here called
the desire of Women] is too manifest both by their Doctrines and Practices; and
as for Atheistical Blasphemies, their Writings are abominably fraught and
filled therewith.

And how his new-coin'd Breaden God, and what devised honor is given to him,
what Riches and Ornaments bestowed upon him, how set up in Cities, Kingdoms and
Countries, what promotions go with him, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, what
Prohibitions of Traffic, Oppressions and Persecusions, to the Opposers of his
Worship, is too large here to be set down.

Ver. 40. And at the time of the end shall the King of the south push at him,
and the King of the North come against him like a whirlwind with Charets, and
with Horsemen, and with many Ships, and he shall enter into the countries, and
shall overflow and pass over. Ver. 40. But that he might not in the time of the
end be so terrible in Might in the World, as he was grown notorious in
wickedness in the world, God had appointed to send him gradually such a
Checkmate thenceforward, to act another part upon the Worlds Stage, that should
both restrain his Power, and curb his Pride; which was the Mahumitan
Antichrist, arising out of the bottomless pit, as well as the Pope, which to
carry on the Perdition of that wicked Iron Roman Monarchy, in two Wo-Trumpets,
was to blow out the Wrath and Judgment upon the Eastern Empire especially, and
to restrain the Man of Sin, which otherwise might have seemed too much like a
God on Earth indeed: First, Raising the Saracens about An. Dom. 600. or not
long after, to push at the Eastern Roman Empire, by many assaults and
incursions, in which both Saracens and Romanized Christians were both, or at
least by course, the Jews oppressors, in the times of those supposed Holy Wars,
but more especially, since the Turk came against him with his Multitudes, about
the year of our Lord 1300, with Chariots and Horsemen, and many Ships; for his
hour, and a day, and a month, and a year, as Rev. 9.15. that is, 396 years he
should continue to overflow with his Multitudes, and pass over, is not yet
fully complete.

Ver. 41. He shall enter also into the glorious land, and many Countries shall
be overthrown; but these shall escape out of his hand, even Edom and Moab, nnd
the chief of the children of Ammon. Ver. 41. The Turk should possess Judea, and
many other Countries should be subdued by him; yet Edom, Moab, and the chief of
the Children of Ammon, should escape his hands, where multitudes of the Jews
have been shattered, wherein (as Mr. Mede observes) the Providence of God has
been in that respect remarkable, That the Turk has made composition with them,
that they might not prey upon the Borders of his Dominions.

Ver. 42, 43. He shall stretch forth his hand also upon the Countries, and the
Land of Egypt shall not escape.

Ver. 43. But he shall have power over the Treasures of gold and silver, and
over all the precious things of Egypt; and the Libyans and the Ethiopians shall
be at his steps.

Ver. 42, 43. Though Egypt held out long against the Turks by the help of the
Mamalucks, yet about An. Dom. 1517. they were subdued; when as is set forth in
this Text, the Turk having taken Tonumbeias (their King) captive, before he put
him to death, he set him on the Rack, to wring out of him where his Treasure
lay, as he did with others of the Royal Race, and Royal City Memphis, to get
their hid Treasures, as the Text speaks; the Libyans and Blackmoors aiding the
Turk, and supplying him with necessaries in this War.

Ver. 44. But tidings out of the East, and out of the North shall trouble him;
therefore he shall go forth with great fury to destroy, and utterly to make
away many. Ver. 44. Those tidings out of the East appear to be of the Jews,
that gather together about 1290 days of years, after the ceasing of their
public Sacrificing in Julian the Apostates time, and his so public setting up
Heathenish Abominations, making desolate, who before, or then were East from
Judea, or to the Turks; whose gathering together will be to get their own Land,
given to their Fathers and their Seed for a possession for ever, which they
must enjoy to the Worlds end. [And out of the North] appears to be the ten
Tribes of Israel carried captive into Assyria, North from Judea, who probably
at the same time join with their Brethren the Jews upon the like design;
against whom the Turk in ruinous rage, will gather force to cut them off
utterly.

Ver. 45. And he shall plant the Tabernacles of his Palace between the Seas, in
the glorious Holy Mountain; yet he shall come to his end, and none shall help
him. Ver. 45. He will go into Judea, (here again called the holy Mountain) to
secure himself, and maintain his part, but shall not thereby escape his
determined ruin at the end of the 6th Trumpet, or sounding of the 7th
whereupon comes Christ's appearance, as Chap. 12.1. when both Turk and Pope will
be destroyed, making up the body of the great Mystical Antichrist; and all Gods
people freed from that Spirittual Egyptian Bondage.

So that Chap. 12.1. sets out the time when, and the person by whom the Jews
deliverance from their dispersion and bondage should be begun, with the terror
to come upon the World of wicked men, then up, and in great opposition of his
Church and People, both in East and West, the Turk being then in the height of
his rage against the converted Jews, as before; and the Pope about to perfect
the Armageddon Battle at the end of the sixth Viol, when Christ with his Armies
comes to destroy him and them, as Rev. 19. from v. 11, to the end; and Rev. 14.
toward the latter end; and as in this Chapter it is showed it shall be at the
end of his time, times, and half a time, when he shall have accomplished or
finished to scatter the power of the holy people; when as his time, says the
same Angel of the Covenant, Rev. 10. by a solemn Oath, his time shall be no
longer; all which time Christ revealed before, Rev. 12. his Church should be in
a Wilderness condition; for so the wore here (scattered) seems to imply; being
only hid here and there by Gods Providence, and his accomplishing of that
scattering of them, denotes, That then they shall come out of that condition;
and whereas their power till then was scattered, that then they should have a
power to unite themselves, and their enemies not to have any longer power to
hold them under, etc. though as the Jews will first have a beginning of their
Resurrection, both Spiritual, by Conversion; and Civil, from their bondage and
dispersion at the end of the 1290 days of years, v. 11. probably from Julian
the Apostates time, about Ann. Dom. 366, the most probable Epoch of those
days, which will not be perfected until the 1335 days, v. 12, that is, 45
years after, at the standing up of Michael their Prince at his appearing: So at
the end of the 42 months, or his time, times, and half a time, when the last
finishing Witnesses shall arise again, there will be a time for the gathering
of the Pope, with his Antichristian Armies, to the Battle of the great God,
Rev. 16. before he be wholly cast into the Lake of fire, together with the Turk
(probably) but all the faithful Jews shall be delivered, whose names are found
written in the Book of Life, when will be their great and most National
Conversion, as Isa. 66.8. Zach. 3.9.

Ver. 2, 3. Set forth the different condition of several sorts of Jews, from
their first awakening at the end of 1290 days, to the accomplishment of their
more general Call, as v. 11, 12. and what temporal, spiritual, or consequently
eternal glory or disgrace will befall the several sorts amongst them, according
to their faithfulness in cleaving to Christ in their troubles, or prevailing
with their Brethren to adhere to Christ's Righteousness alone against all Jewish
or Heathenish Seducements, wherewith probably they may be assaulted; or the
contrary, as any shall be unfaithful or revolters, being seduced in the 45
years following, either by their false revolting Brethren, or by the Turkish
Tyranny or flattery, and of such arising, Ezekiel is informed, Chap. 37. which
is here peculiarly applied to Daniels people the Jews, and to many of them, not
all, who are turned to righteousness of Justification, which God will accept,
which they owned not before, with many other things considerable from the Text,
as the natural scope of it will show.

Ver. 4, and 9, is the sealing of this Vision from Daniels time, until the time
of the end, as again Daniel was further informed, v. 9.

Ver. 4. the latter end, and v. 6, 7. there seems to be two distinct Notes and
Characters given of the time of the end, under which was used that very same
expression, Chap. 11.40. namely, of the Roman Emperors and Popes days, which
Daniel when he had heard, says, v. 8. he understood them not; whereof two
Reasons seem observable from the Text, First, That they did not directly
concern Daniels people. Secondly, He is again in the next particularly told,
They were then sealed till the said time of the end, Chap. 11.40. and Chap.
12.9.

The first of these Notes or Characters seems to be of the Primative times from
the Apostles, before Antichrists Forty two Months, or time, times and half a
time began, namely, [That many should run to and fro, and knowledge should be
encreased] which appears to be a Mark of those times wherein either the
Apostles and other faithful Ministers of the Gospel, by their travels, and
preaching, and dispersions, and persecutions, and such like means (then) were
successfully instrumental to cause the knowledge and profession of the Gospel
of Christ to abound, (...) and by an Emphasis called Knowledge; being not only
the principal, but the only necessary thing to be known by all men: Or else,
that many that by such means took up the Profession of the Gospel, having only
the light and the knowledge thereof, but not the Grace of the Gospel, might for
a time hasten to take up that Profession; but by tentations and persecutions,
be as hasty to run away from the owning of that Profession, according to the
changes and turnings of the Affairs of those Primative times.

And the second Note or Character is more clear (which likewise gives further
evidence to this) in that it is of the times succeeding those primative times,
stamped with a very evident mark to discover them, namely, Antichrists time,
times and half a time, or dividing of a time, as in Rev. 12.14. which v. 5, 6,
7. is set forth to Daniel in a Vision, and reserved, as follows, to be
explained by Christ himself, v. 8, 9. in the time of the end, which he has
done accordingly, Rev 10.6, 7. to which purpose Daniel saw two persons on each
side of the River, v. 5. and one enquires of the other for the end of those
Wonders; whereupon the man clothed in white Linen (who probably is the same
person, as Rev. 10.) utters in Daniels hearing, the Oath that follows to the
like purpose, as we before noted.

But v. 11, 12. he gives Daniel (that beloved Prophet) two other Marks of the
times, more discernable to him, as having reference to his own people the Jews
(though then particularly hid to him, since they were of things to come)
namely, The continuance of the Jews dispersion and bondage, after the last most
remarkable taking away of Sacrifice, and setting up the Abomination of
Desolation, most probably (as we said before) in Julian the Apostate Emperor's
time, about 366, from about which time the 1290 days of years are to be
counted.

And ver. 12. sets forth the blessed condition of such faithful Jews or
Israelites, as waited on God in doing their duty, and shall still remain so
doing to the appearing of Christ at, or about 1335 days of years after their
first awakening, or call from dispersion and bondage.

And the said man clothed in white Linen, having laid down some general
consolations for the faithful Sufferers all along those evil times, till the
times of the end were past (which he had before newly spoken of) v. 10 he then
concludes with a particular consolation to Daniel concerning his part and lot
he was to receive when his people should be delivered, and when Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob were to receive the Lot of their Inheritance in the Land of Canaan,
which God had sworn to give them; and yet his Word witnesses (in the days of
their Pilgrimage) they possessed not a foot of, even then Daniel is likewise
informed from Christ, that he should then have his own Lot there with them, at
the first Resurrection, Rev. 20. or, as our Savior calls it, the Resurrection
from the dead, Luke 20.35. which here Daniel is taught by him as to his own
Interest, will then be fulfilled in the end of the days, when the aforesaid
evil times are past, of which it is said, Time should be no longer, Rev. 10.6.

The Parallel between Daniels Visions and the Book of the Revelations of Jesus
Christ, which is merely a Divine, Mystical Comment or Exposition of the two
last Monarchies, viz. the Roman Monarchy and Christ's: from the time the
Revelation took place: and first of the Parallel, of what concerns the Roman
Monarchy in both Daniel and Revelation.
IN order unto which said Parallel, we must take notice, that the greatest part
of the Revelations of Jesus Christ from the beginning of the first chapter,
setting forth the glorious person, whom then John saw, who (as he calls himself
afterward, and) appears to be the (...) and (...) therein, in whose second
comeing the Prophesies respecting that Monarchy, are to be fulfilled and
completed, being then to be utterly and for ever destroyed, and to go into
perdition, as Rev. 17 is said; from which period he will set up his own
Kingdom, as chapt. 20. and so forward, except what is spoken briefly from v.
14. of Chap. 11. of the Revelation, to the end of it: where is set down a short
Abridgment of the state of the World, and the Church, after the seventh Trumpet
begins to sound: only many encouragements are intermixed all along for all
sorts of faithful, suffering Christians, from the promises and encouragements,
referring to the thousand years, ensuing the sounding of the seventh Trumpet,
which promises and encouragements are either contained in the first Vision,
respecting the times then present, or past, to the end of the third chapter,
concerning the seven Churches of Asia, then in being: or those that were to
come in the following Visions from the 4th and 5th Chapters; which Visions are
contained first in the Seal-Prophesie, chapters 6, 7, 8, 9. and in the 11th
from v. 14 to the end of that Chapter: In the 6th chapter, are the first,
second, third, fourth, fifth and sixth Seals contained, which last sets forth
the Dragons casting down from his heaven of Paganish worship, to the earth:
whereupon after the sealing of the first 144000 in the Eastern parts, chap. 7.
which were to arise there and be delivered from spiritual ruin (as chap. 9.4.)
by Mahumetan impostures under the two first woe-Trumpets, chap. 9. with the
decyphering the innumerable companies of all nations to arise in the Church
after the sounding of the 7th Trumpet, in those peaceable times, with palms in
their hands. Then in the beginning of the 8th chapter, is the opening of the
7th seal, out of which all the seven Angels with their seven Trumpets, proceed:
and after intercession made by the Angel of the Covenant for the faithful
sufferers under the four first Trumpets which blew out wrath, for the most part
upon the Western Empire, till he that let the coming of Antichrist there,
namely, the Western Emperor was taken out of the way, 1 These. 2.7. By the
incursions of the Barbarous Nations, so making way for the man of sin, and so
by degrees to end that Empire there: Then in the two first woe-Trumpets, (as we
noted before) was brought on the like wrath, or rather much worse, in bringing
in that woeful Mahumetan imposture by the Saracens and Turks (in chap. 9.) upon
the Eastern Empire (as before upon the Western) both for their former cruel
Persecutions of the Saints, and their Antichristian Idolatries and Wickedness,
as in the two last verses of that ninth Chapter is expressly set down. That they
that escaped those Plagues (saving the green grass and trees, v. 4. of chap. 9.
before sealed, chapter 7.) repented not of the Works of their hands, that they
should not worship Devils and Idols of Gold and Silver, etc. nor repented of
their Murders, and Sorceries, and Fornications, and Thefts, but to be
destroyed at the seventh Trumpet, as they had destroyed the Earth, Chap. 11.18.

And after those Antichristian Abominations had been so long advanced in the
West under the Man of Sin, and his Ten Crowned Horns, in the time of diverse
Trumpets, but especially the two first said Wo-Trumpets, under that twofold
Beast, by new-coined Paganism and Idolatry, under a seeming Christian disguise;
The Dragon after his former casting down to the Earth under the sixth Seal
(having given his Power, and Seat, and great Authority to the said twofold
Beast; there are seven Angels, having seven Golden Vials filled with the Wrath
of Almighty God, prepared to pour them out to the said Beasts destruction,
under the second Wo-Trumpet, and beginning of the 3 d Chap. 15, and 16.
whereupon the Kingdoms of the World become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his
Christ, Chap. 11.16. and Chap. 20.

As may more fully appear in the forenamed Abridgment on Rev. 5. in the (...),
and in the Letter of May 20. 1664, in the Forerunner, to which the Reader may
be referred; and in the (...), page 27, 28, 29, 30, etc.

Now what we read to be recorded of the Roman Empire in Daniels Visions, is
sometimes set down more generally, and sometimes more particularly, as seemed
good to the Spirit of God to make them known to him for the benefit of his
Church then, and for the better and more orderly application of what was there
more darkly delivered to Daniel, to what our Lord Jesus Christ has more fully
(though mystically) revealed to St. John his beloved Disciple, for his
Christian Church to the end of the said Empire, we shall (by Gods gracious
assistance) endeavor to proceed in the ensuing order.

First, To set down what Daniel sets forth of the beginning and rise of that
Empire. Secondly, Of the Time and Continuance of it. Thirdly, Of the general
temper, quality or nature of it. Fourthly, Of the several States and Parts of
it. Fifthly, Of the Extent and Largeness of it. Sixthly, Of the End, Ruin and
Destruction of it.
Referring thereunto the several parts of the Book of the Revelations, more
fully explaining each particular accordingly; and so proceed to some general
Observations and Improvements, as Gods Spirit and Word shall direct.

First then, to consider what Daniel sets down of the beginning and rise of
that Roman Empire; and that is done remarkably, when he comes in Chap. 11. to
set down how by degrees it began to arise upon the decay of the Greek Empire,
when the two Heads of Egypt and Syria had long battered each other, then Rome
had advantage first to show her self in another Right, whom as her Pupil she
had taken the defense of, namely, of Ptolomeus Epiphanes, the Son of Ptolomy
Philopator, against Antiochus the Great, when his Father had left him, being a
Child of four years old, as the Stories applied to the 13 and 17 verses in the
Abridgment, makes to appear; and therefore afterward the Romans in v. 18. are
called the Prince, and act afterward against Antiochus the Great, [on their
own behalf;] and to take away those reproaches he had cast upon them, Vide
Abridgment, v. 18. But in v. 30. the Ships of Chittim, that is, the Romans
Navy, as was prophesied by Balaam, Numb 24.24. come against Antiochus the Vile,
by the appearance whereof before Alexandria, he was forced away; which was the
ancient mark for the Jews to know their last Oppressor was at hand, under the
Title of the Ships of Chittim; so conquering that Adversary at present, vide
Abridgment. But after Antiochus the Vile had perfected his outrageous
wickedness against the Jews, by reason of transgressions, chap. 8.23. until
Javans rage ended, as in the latter end of v. 35.

At the 36 ver. the Spirit of God entitles the Romans, of whom he there speaks,
and describes them by [the King;] Not now with limitation (as before) to North
or South, or any other Quarter, but absolutely [The King] to whom belonged the
said Ships of Chittim before, v. 30. Now having obtained the Sovereignty which
was to continue until the indignation of God against the Jews was ended, ver.
36. Chap. 9.27. So that now he began to exalt himself above every god, as he
did eminently till Christ was born; and then spoke mavelous things against
the God of gods, by his Authority blaspheming, rejecting, killing the Son of
God; the Stories whereof are contained in the Gospels, and that time those
things were acted, and before the Revelation was given; yet the Spirit of God
leads Daniel by steps to set forth in such manner the rise, and such
proceedings of the Roman Monarchy, till then, etc.

Secondly, For the time of the enduring and continuance of the Roman Empire,
Daniel shows, chap. 9. last; That the Ships of Chittim being (as was observed,
chap. 11.30.) that last Oppressor of the Jews, (as Numb. 24.24.) that should
afflict Ashur, and should afflict Eber, and that he also should perish for
ever, so that no Oppressor of Eber should remain after him) sets forth his time
in these words, holding out the continuance of the Desolation of Jerusalem, and
the Jewish dispersion therewith, under the Roman Tyranny and Cruelty, [for the
over spreading of abominations, he shall make it desolate,] (after he had
spoken such mavelous things against the God of gods) when in the midst of the
last week of years Christ dying, by his Authority should cause the Sacrifice
and Oblation to cease [ Jure and intentionaliter, by Right, and intentionally]
in regard of Gods institution thereof (though not efficaciter, effectually;)
But then it follows, how long such desolation should continue, even after his
efficatious causingof Sacrifice and Oblation to cease, (as in the Abridgment)
even until the consummation (says he) and that determined shall be poured upon
the Desolate, by that last Oppressor, to perish for ever: Or by such as were to
bring on his perdition in the Fifth and Sixth Trumpets, viz. The Saracens and
Turks, Revel. 9. chap. namely, as Dan. 11.40, 41. The Saracens by pushing at
his Borders about the times of the Holy Wars (so called) and the Turk after
them over flowing a great part of his Dominions, by his multitudes help to
bring him down, which is called by our Savior the fulfilling of the times of
the Gentiles, whilst (from Jerusalems destruction) the Jews should fall by the
edg of the Sword, and be led away captive into all Nations, and Jerusalem
should be trodden down of the Gentiles, Luke 21.24. that is, to the end of the
days, wherein (says Daniel likewise) Antichrists (the wicked little Horns)
time, (as chap. 7.) wherein he shall have accomplished to have scattered the
power of the holy people, at the end of his time, times, and the dividing of a
time, being the Clayie feet of the Iron legs, chap. 12.6. and chap. 7.25. and
till Michael stand up for the deliverance of Daniels people at that season,
chap. 12 1. And again, when from Gods eminent making of public Sacrifice and
Oblation last, to cease openly (as is probable) was in Julian the Apostate
Emperors days, there should from thence be fulfilled 1290 days of years (even
about these times) when the Civil and Spiritual Resurrection of all Israel
should begin, and to 1335 days of years or forty five years more, it should be
perfected; and when Daniel should stand up in his Lot with the Fathers, chap.
12.11, 12, 13. which continuance contains the times of the Roman Monarchy, from
the beginning of the opening of the first Seal, when the Gospel of Jesus Christ
began to be published through the whole World, and so all along through the
series of the Book of Revelations, wherein are all things contained, respecting
the Civil State, and the Affairs of Gods Church from thence, during the time of
the Roman Monarchy, which should be accomplished (as was foreshewed) until the
King of Kings with his Armies in white, Rev. 19.11, 12, 13, etc. should
slaughter the Enemies, and (as Ezekiel. 38, and 39 chapters) delivering all his
people, should set up his own, and his Saints Kingdom, Rev. 20. But in the mean
time, many by trials and sufferings under the Roman Tyrannous yoke, should be
purified, and made white, chap. 12.10. having washed their Robes in the blood
of the Lamb, Rev. 7.14. as also those undefiled Lamb-followers redeemed from
among men, Rev. 14.4. which had his Fathers Name written on their foreheads, be
redeemed also from the Earth, ver. 3, 4. So that the consummation, and that
determined to be p ured upon the desolate, See Ire^ic. page 27, 28, etc.
Dan. 9.27. contained all the time of the six first Seals, after Jerusalems
destruction, Rev. 6. and the six first Trumpets proceeding out of the sixth
Seal, Rev. 8.9. with the seven Vials under the sixth Trumpet; or, which is the
same time, the Churches Ten Persecutions, till Co^stantine's time, with the
Arrian Persecutions afterward, until Antichrists forty two months were
fulfilled, together with the Woman's Wi^derness condition, a time, times, and
half a time, Rev. 12. and the Contemporarie two Witnesses prophesying in
sackcloth 1260 days, Rev. 11. and from thence through the seven Vials at the
end of the Armageddon Battle, Rev. 19.11. even to the beginning of the thousand
years, Rev. 20.

Thirdly, For the general temper and quality of the Roman Monarchy, and the
actings thereof suitable to its nature. First, the nature of it is described in
the great Image, to be of Iron, strong and durable, to the feet and toes,
wherewith a weakness of Myrie Clay was mixed in the Popes time, chap. 2. where
(ver. 40.) the use of it is expressed, namely, that it should break and bruise
all the other in pieces.

Again, chap. 7. whereas the three preceding Kingdoms are set forth by several
Beasts; first, the Caldean by its Lyon-like strength, and by its proud
high-soaring Eagles wings, before they were plucked, and it made to stand on the
feet as a man, v. 4. 2dly, The Persian by a ravenous devouring Bear, with three
ribs in the mouth, of Babylon, Media and Persia, ver. 5. 3dly, The Grecian by a
Leopard, swift to snatch the prey; with four wings upon the back, and four
heads, under which it should afterward rule, v. 6. But the 4th, viz. the Roman
Monarchy, Daniel saw in the night Visions, a Monstrous, Mysterious Beast,
diverse from all others; it was exceeding dreadful, terrible and strong, and it
had great Iron teeth, and devoured, and brake in pieces, and stamped the
residue in pieces with the feet; wherein is comprised the seven Heads of
Government, Rev. 17. with the Nails of Brass (the Senate) destroyed by the
Fourth Trumpet, Rev. 8. all of them before the 8th, which was also of the 7th,
and adjoineth that to them, as the feet, wherewith it at last stamped, and that
together with the ten Horns, as the toes of the feet, whereby the Body is
enabled to walk upright, saying in the end of the 7th v. And it had ten Horns,
wherewith to push and subdue, and wherein the st^ength and power of its so
doing did consist; by which ten Ho^^s, seem not only to be understood the ten
crowned Kings that gave their power to the beast, as Rev. 17. but all such tens
wherein the Roman Power before consisted, as that Decem-virate, till the Twelve
Tables of their Laws were composed, the Decuriones, or Commanders of Tens, ten
of which were put under the Roman Centurions, consisting of Ten times ten, and
so of all greater numbers of Ten; and the Ten Provinces, before they were
crowned Horns, and all Roman Power under the number of Ten, as in their stories
is observable; of which it might be said it had ten Horns. And it is
observable, that Daniel chapter 2. 34, 41, 42, 43. describes it, that the feet and
toes thereof were mixed with Myrie Clay; which are the same with the ten Horns
crowned in the Popes time, which had much weakness in them, and could not mix
themselves with the Seed of men; and they were so distinguished from such
former strength of the Romans, in that they were the last and the lowest part
in that Image to help (as was said) for a time to make that Beast stand, or go
on the feet, as the ten toes thereof, though mixed with Myrie Clay; and with
these ten Horns or Toes, the little Horn which Daniel observed, came up amongst
them, or behind them, at one hour with them, as is explained Rev. 17. before
whom there were three of the first Horns plucked up by the Roots, viz. says
Mr. Mede, the Lumbards, Franks and Greeks; which Horn had eyes as a man, and a
mouth speaking great things; and that, says Dan. chap. 7.25. against the Most
High [by blasphemies and wicked errors] and did think to change times and laws,
and have the Saints given into his hands for a time, times, and the dividing of
a time, or 42 months, Rev. 13. Dan. 12.6.

Again in chap. 11. v. 36. Daniel describes the proud Usurpation, Blasphemy and
Tyranny of the Roman Monarchy, before Antichrists time, and in his time, v. 37,
38, 39. he more especially speaks of his neglect of the true God, and his
Institution of Marriage, with all his errors in both respects, with his Pride,
Idolatry, and false Worship, his wicked Usurpations and Persecutions, to
advance his Creatures to honor his Breaden God, and do all for the advancing of
his Worldly designs, and outward glory.

Now in all these descriptions of the nature and qualities of the Roman
Monarchy, both from its rise under the first Heads of Government by Kings,
Consuls, Tribunes, Decemvires, Dictators, Coesars, five of which were passed in
a few years; but even in them, and more in the two longest and last, have those
qualities deciphered in general, been very observable in their strength, pride,
blasphemy, tyranny, idolatry, persecution of Jews and Gentiles, and actings
against the God of gods, as was hinted before in the Abridgment, but might
largely out of the Stories of them, be set forth both from Heathen and
Christian Writers, before and since the Revelation was given by Jesus Christ;
but chiefly, since their doings have been recorded by the Evangelists in the
Gospels, and the Apostles in all the New Testament; and above all, in Christ's
infallible Prophesies concerning the Affairs of the Roman Monarchy in the
greatest part of the Book of Revelations; for after the Romans were at their
height under the Emperors, besides their Tyranny over the known parts of the
world; what persecutions were raised by their Emperors against the primative
Christians, executed in such Savage and inexpressible tortures all along in the
primative times under most of the Seals, those ages that suffered under them,
have had sad experience, which has since under the Trumpets procured that
wrath of God upon the Empire both East and West, that has long since
extinguished the Power and Authority of the Roman Emperors. And though since
that Roman Antichrist the Pope, of the same fierce, tyrannous and wicked nature
and qualities, by the Dragons Assignment did wind himself subtly into their
place, under a Christian Visor to set up his new formed Idolatry; yet he has
showed himself their Successor in his kind, in their wicked and abominable
proceedings, as well as in place, as the large Comments witness, that have been
made by his persecutions, as the Writers of them testify, according to what
our Savior foreshewed, Rev. 13, and 17. of the Popes making War with the
Saints, and the Whores drunkenness with their blood, and making the World, and
the Kings of the Earth drunk with the Cup of her spiritual Fornications, and
bewitching them with her Sorceries in such an evident manner, as that the
Mysteries of her iniquities are now in large Characters so legible to the whole
Christian World, and have been many ages, that as the Prophets Visions of old,
who so runs may read them; and that in the long continued series of many
hundreds of years past, and which makes the horrid wickedness of these
Antichristians so much the more abominable, that under the Name of Christ, they
have all along fought against Christ, while such horrid wickednesses of all
sorts have been varnished over with pretenses of Christianity, Piety and
Charity, whereby they are the more ripened for heavier Judgments than fell upon
their Heathenish Predecessors, which could not be guilty of their hypocrisy
and fighting against God and Christ in his Saints, in so abundant clearness of
light, against all conviction of Conscience; so that whether we consider the
nature and quality of the Roman Monarchy in general, or their several Heads,
passing in order to Antichrists (the Popes) forty two Months, and weigh their
actings and proceedings accordingly, (as in large Volumes might be made
evident) the descriptions of them are so natural, which Daniel by the Spirit of
Prophecy set down aforehand of them, as we say, [non ovum ovo similius]
nothing is more like then what their doings have proved them to be, as all the
Orders of times under the former Heads of the Roman Monarchy, from the first
Seals, to the end of the Armageddon Battle, Rev. 19.11. See Iren. p. 27, 28,
etc.
both have for the time bypast, and will for what remains, according to Gods
Word, abundantly make evident through all those Ages.

Fourthly, Pass we then to the Fourth Head considerable in the Roman Monarchy,
and that is the several Stat^s and Parts of it: Many of these indeed are not so
evident from Daniel, being (as Mr. Mede observes) set down by him but in
imagine confusa, and not secundum series rerum gerendarum, as they are by
Christ in the Revelation; yet the greatest things to be fulfilled after the
Revelations took place, which did concern the Christian churches since, and
present, under this consideration of the states and parts of the Roman Empire,
are since the division thereof into the East and West, whereof we have these
distinct informations, that the Pope arising with the ten Kings at one hour,
Rev. 17. are particularly decyphered Dan. 7.8. where the wicked little Horn is
observed by Daniel to arise among the other ten; before whom three of the first
horns (as was showed) were plucked up by the roots; in which Horn were eyes like
a man, and a mouth speaking great things; and v. 25. against the Most High; and
shall wear out the Saints of the Most High, and shall think to change Times and
Laws, and that the Saints should be given into his hand for a time, times, and
the dividing of a time, by Christ plainly expounded, which the fulfilling of it
has plainly manifested to have been acted in the Western Empire many hundred
years past, of which chap. 2. of the feet and toes of the Image, mixed with
Myrie clay, Daniel likewise speaks, and of the Pope, and his scattering the
Power of the holy people a time, times, and the dividing of a time, chapter 12.6.
and what we observed to be spoken of him, chap. 11.37, 38, 39. the like we have
of the other part and state of the Roman Empire in the East, when God raised
those two Wo-Trumpets of Mahumetans, the Saracens and Turks, that by degrees
first in the time of the holy War (so called) so pushed in the Eastern Empire;
and since the second Woe Trumpet by the Turks, has so utterly cast it down,
that nothing remains of it to the last Head, now only confined to the West,
and these Parts and States of it are manifestly explained in Rev. 9 and Rev.
13. and 17. chap. and many other places.

Fifthly, It remains that we observe what Daniel informs us of the extent and
largeness of the Roman Monarchy, which (as he observed) had the strength of
Iron to beat in pieces all other Metals, chap. 2. and that of all the Beasts it
was most dreadful, terrible and strange, chap. 7.7. and had teeth of Iron, and
nails of Brass, to devour the whole earth, and tear it down, and break it in
pieces; so it has appeared in actions accordingly, as in part was showed in
the Abridgment, and Stories may at large manifest, till it grew to its height
in Augustus his time, when he Decreed (...), That all the world should be taxed
by his Authority, that is, so far as his power extended, and as far, in a
manner, as we read the Apostles went their circuits in publishing the Gospel to
Jews or Gentiles. And as the former Monarchies subduing those they succeeded,
entered upon their Dominions, and joined them to their own, as the Persian Bear
had the three Ribs of Babylon, Media and Persia, in his mouth; so the Grecian
much of the Persian, together with its own; though many Limbs and Parts
remained of them after their greatest breakings, as Daniel also speaks, their
Lives were prolonged for a time and season, chap. 17.12. So when the Roman, of
all others the strongest, terriblest and fiercest, came upon the Stage to act
its part, besides its own nature so rapacious and cruel, it had advantage after
all, to make use of all the broken parts of the former Three, above any before
it; and therefore so proudly and cruelly triumphed ever their ruinous states on
all parts, on East, and South, and North, and after, and above all, extended
its Dominions very far in the West likewise, even ad toto divisos Orb
Britannos, to these furthest known British Islands, and in those known parts
of the World of Afia, Africa and Europe, was the spreading of the Gospel by the
Apostles, in so many Countries mentioned in their Writings, whose boundary
showed them to be the Roman Empire (in a manner) and the encouraging also
afterward the profession thereof in East and West, by Constantine the Great,
when he threw down Idolatry, and set up, and encouraged Christianity in all the
Empire. And this also is further manifest by what has been since taken away by
the Saracens and Turks after his time, from those Roman Dominions; besides the
considerations of those many Conquests the Romans obtained, till they came to
the height, about our Saviors lifetime, (as in the Abridgment in part is set
down) whence it is manifest upon all the said considerations, that the Roman
Monarchy was of the largest ^^tent of all the other, and therefore by that
Emperors command, the whole World was said to be taxed. The Roman Empire for
its largeness then containing (in some sort) the known habitable World, or
which none could withstand; which Daniels former expressions do eminently
foreshew, and even of the Pope, Rev. 13. it was said the World wondered after
the Beast, and who is able to make war with him? But when the Dragon himself
sat in that seat, with his seven Heads, and ten Horns of Paganish
Persecutions, with such ample Dominions before the Popes time. How much more
might it have been said, The whole world wondered after the Dragon, and who was
able to make war with him? had not Christ himself in the first Seal, undertaken
that encounter, and set him his line, how far he should go, and his limits of
time under the sixth Seal, when his term should end, by casting him from his
Heaven of Paganish Worship, to the Earth, Rev. 6. later end.

Sixthly, And so we proceed to the last step, or period of our Parallel of
Daniels Prophecy, and the Book of Revelations, as respecting what they say
jointly of the end, ruin and destruction of the Roman Monarchy; and first for
the ruin of the Beast, chap. 7.9. the Ancient of Days is said to have the
Judgment set, and that with a fiery Throne, with Wheels of burning fire; and to
that end a stream of fire issued and came forth from before him, and for the
execution of the Judgment those thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand
times ten thousand stood before him; and the Books were opened, and the first
part of the execution, and the special occasions thereof, seems to be upon the
provocation of the Beast, ver. 11. because of the great words which the Horn
spoke; which execution is done first upon the Beast, to slay him, and destroy
his body with the burning flame; and so again ver. 26. the end of the Judgment
is declared to be, to take away the Dominion of the Beast, to consume and
destroy it unto the end. And Daniel then further saw, ver. 13. one coming in
the clouds of Heaven like the Son of man, the same which Rev. 1.7. is said to
come with clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they also that pierced him;
with [Even so, Am^^] added; showing then, that promised Mercy is then to be
fulfilled to the Jews, Zac. 12.10. That they shall then mourn with penitent
contrition, though many others with woeful lamentation at that time; and unto
this was the glorious description of the Alpha and Omega; the said Son of Man
set before him, who at the finishing of the things of this Book, says, he
comes quickly; and of this coming of Christ, speaks the Apostle Paul, 2 Thessalonians.
1.7. When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels
in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power;
when on the other hand, he shall be admired of his Saints, and glorified in all
them that believe: And in the next Chapter, ver. 3, 4. he describes the man of
sin, against whose wickedness, the Apostle shows (with Daniel) he will ^^^ially
be revealed; whom (says he) ver. 5. the Lord shall destr^^ (...) the
appearance of his coming; and in like manner when that King of Kings, with his
Armies in the Armageddon Battle, Rev. 19.11. comes against the Beast and his
Armies; and then takes the Beast and the false Prophet, they are both said to
be cast alive into a Lake of fire and brimstone, thereby describing the Hellish
destruction that then will fall upon that Roman Monarchy for ever. Now as the
Roman Monarchy, the strongest and fiercest, and of much the longest
continuance, has been the most wicked, having attempted by abominable
Idolatries, Bla^phemies, and unheard of cruelties in their persecutions, so
highly against Christ and his Saints, in those ten most barbarous Persecutions,
notwith^anding all the light tendered in their Dominions by the Preaching of
Christ himself, and his Apos^les, whom they likewise had rejected, pe^ecuted
and killed, for the most part; and so all along the prim^tive times bu^ed their
power, to extinguish the Christian Religion, until God raised up Constantine
the Great, to put a period to their Paganish proceedings, in that ^readful
manner that the wrath of the Lamb, as it is said, was executed upon them, that
is, for the terribleness of it resembled to the day of Judgment, as is largely
set down under the sixth Seal, Rev. 6. latter end: But when upon the taking
away of the Successions of those Heathenish Persecutors, the afterward
Apostatical Church of Rome did become Antichristian, though the extent of their
power has been lessened, yet their wickedness, so far as they then could
reach, has been many ways greater, and more notorious, and that for a longer
time after their former owning of the Truth, and again revolting from it, and
even perverting it to their own and others ruin in such a mysterious,
contrived Hellish Apostasy, by such Artifice of bloody cruelty and wickedness,
so monstrously executed above their Paganish Predecessors, so many hundred
years together, by their long holding out the Cup of Spiritual Abominations by
Mystery Babylon the great, the Mother of Harlots and Abominations of the Earth,
who by how much more she has taken pleasure in her wickedness, so much ^he
more torment shall be given her, Rev. 18.7. But besides the last fiery
destruction of the whole Monarchy, by the fiery streams, Dan. 7. there is a
further dreadful description of that Wrath and Judgment, Dan. 12.1. at the time
when Michael shall stand up for Daniels people, and when his people shall be
delivered, which shall be such a time of trouble as never was since there was a
Nation; whereof Babylon must have her portion; for both Gog and Magog, that is,
Turk and Pope, whose destruction was revealed to Ezekiel, chap. 38, 39. to
precede the said deliverance promised, chap. 37. and building of the New
Jerusalem, chap. 40. to the end of the Book; whose Name is Jehovah Shammah, the
Lord is there, appears to be the same with that Jerusalem coming down out of
Heaven from God, Rev. 21. when the Tabernacle of God will be with men, when the
Lamb will be the light of that City, ver. 23. after the Armageddon battle was
ended, Rev. 19.11, to the end; and that the Turk and Pope are meant in Ezekiel.
38, 39. may appear by many passages, some whereof we may point out by the way,
as chap. 38.8. it is said of Gog, That he shall come into the Land that is
brought back from the Sword, and gathered out of many people, against the
Mountains of Israel, which have been always vvast for so very long a time; and
yet (he says) being brought out of the Nations, they shall dwell, safely all
of them. Again it is sald, He shall come out, and many people with him, out of
the North parts, and that in the latter days, ver. 16. with many other notes
decyphering the Turk, as Daniel also did, chap. 11.44, 45. And for Magog the
Pope, (says he also) chap. 39.6. I will send a fire on Magog, and amongst them
that dwell carelessly in the Isles, (as the Jews reckoned such remote parts
under the Name of the Isles) and then he adds, They shall know that I am the
Lord; namely, to their cost at the Beasts destruction, more fully set forth in
the New-T^stament, as was showed before; and then in the next Chapter the
Prophet adjoins the glorious City, whose Name should be Jehovah Shammah, the
Lord is there; and to this likewise agrees that Prophecy of Joel, chap. 3.12.
when God will bring again the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem, and as
follows, with all Israel; when he vvil so dreadfully visit the World, as Joel
2.30, 31, 32. Joel 3.1, 2, etc. as in a great part of that chapter setting
forth the gathering to the Armageddon Battle; and Gods Judgments on them there,
may be evident, as Rev. 16, 18, and 19. chapters; vvhereupon the happy estate
of the Jewish Church (with others) is described, when the Lord shall dwell among
them. Consider these particulars in the last of Joel, and as they are explained
in the Revelation of Jesus Christ; so also Rev. 11.15, 16, 17. Now that the
time of the accomplishment of that terrible last destruction of the Roman
Monarchy does near approach, besides many former conjectures of many Learned
Authors, as Mr. Brightmans, Dr. Alsteds, Mr. Medes, Mr. Parkers, and other
accounts, which upon sundry grounds they drew to some nearness to what we shall
briefly set down, as Dr. Homes in his Dawning of the Day Star, Lib. 7.
judiciously explaineth them, and as daily more and more by Gods Mercy toward
his people, is like to be discovered of the clearness of such mysteries
concerning these last days. We shall, I say, only add four concurring
computations of Scripture, of the time which may bring the last destruction of
Antichrist, at the appearing of Christ's coming, (as 2 These. 2.8.) to be nearer
then their former accounts rise unto.

Not here to insist upon some late Authors computations, who have brought the
accounts of the last things nearer than the former, viz. Concerning the
Appearance of Christ to be at, or about Ann. Dom. 1700; whose grounds, because
I know not what they are, I shall here say no more of them. But I find four
computations of holy Scriptures tending to such purposes: First, two of the
Old Testament, respecting the end of the Jews Bondage, Dan. 8. and Dan. 12. chapter
Secondly, two in the New Testament, for the use of the Gentile Christians,
holding out first the ruin both general and complete, of the great Mystical
Oppressor of the two Sackcloth Prophesiers, and the contemporary Saints with
them, till then, namely, of the Pope, Rev. 11. and 13, and 16. The other the
ruin of the Great Tyrant over the Jews, and Antichristians too, Rev. 9.
namely, the Turk, though not over them alone, but over the outward man of the
444000 sealed ones, Rev. 7. in the East, who after his day, hour, month and
year, or 396 years, to destroy the third part of men, must come to his end,
when none shall help him, as Rev. 11.45. (very probably) at, or about the same
time. Which two Ends, namely, the ruin of Christ's Enemies, and the deliverance
of his people, Dan. 12.1. See plain Discov. after the Parallels.
are the joint work of such Christ's personal Appearance (then) as afterward by
the goodness of God may more fully appear.

And though the concurrence of the said four Periods, seemed strange at my
first apprehensions of them; yet upon serious consideration since, I have found
them exceeding probably to point out unto us the meaning of Gods Spirit
therein, (in a latitude at least;) and let all serious Christians beware of
slighting of them. It had been a very remarkable thing, if four such Numbers
had so concurred only at one period, had the holy Ghost done no more; since it
was his own Divine Work so to set them down, and especially, having such
distinct Epochaes, or beginnings, many hundred of years distant; but when he
has expressly, and remarkably too, caused the Context to speak much to the like
purpose, we are to take notice more groundedly of such hints of Gods own
giving, or rather Divine Foundations of such kind of Truths respecting his own
times and seasons; which as they are always both for discovery and execution
too, in his own power; yet in what degrees he pleases, he uses to make them
known unto his servants in several ages, as in his wise counsel is best and
most seasonable (many times) to stir up his servants to Christian watchfulness
and obedience. I shall therefore endeavor as briefly and clearly as God shall
enable me, to set them down for the use of faithful Christians, and so leave
them, only adding my prayers for them, first to beware of that slight
overlooking of such Gods Warnings, as I find too many too apt to do. See plain
Discov. after the Patal. in 9. use of such Doctrines once for all in writing,
to be enlarged in Discourses, etc. for the benefit of all sorts.
Secondly, That they may really endeavor to make their due improvements of
them; to which purposes we may (if God will) afford some brief hints at least,
by reason of many present restraints from enlarging, as judicious persons will
easily apprehend.

First then, to speak something more particularly concerning the 2300 days,
Dan. 8. in the Original Evening-mornings, which may as well, yea, better
appear, (as I doubt not after is manifest) to be intended for so many natural
days, whereby we are prophetically to understand so many days of years (as is
usual in this kind) allowing an Evening and Morning to every day, rather than
to put them (as some seem to do) for half the time: And they evidently appear
from diverse passages in the Context, to have a further intention, than to be
limited to the wicked Tyranny of Antiochus Epiphanes, or about his time, (which
before in the Abridgment we made mention of) which evil time (happily) might be
typical of the long dispersion, and miserable bondage of both Jews and
Israclites through all their whole captivity, [that is, from the time that the
captivity of both took place] to wit, from Nebuchadnezzars beginning of the
seventy years of his Kingdoms Tyranny over that captivated people, Anno Mundi
3398. and through a great part of the Persian Monarchy, to the beginning of
Daniels Weeks, Anno Mundi 3549. which was 80 years more; which with the former
70 of the Babylonian captivity, amount to 150 years thus reckoned; Cambyses
with the Magi, 8 years; Darius Histaspis 34, Xerxes 20, Artaxerxes Longimanus,
current 20, not complete; which with some other deductings of one year, makes
in Chronology 80 years, from Cyrus his taking of Babylon, Ann. Mundi. 3469, to
the beginning of Daniels Wecks, An. 3549. when the Decree to build Jerusalem,
not the Temple, (that being built before that time) was set forth, as Neh.
9.25. in the 20th year of Artaxerxes Longimanus, as Neh. 1.2, 4. and 2.1, 2, 3,
etc. unto which, if we add the 490 in Daniels Weeks, extending 34 years after
Christ's Birth [besides the last half Week after his death] in both which,
namely 150, and 490, are contained 640 years, where by the way, take those 34
years from Christ's ascension, and add them to this present Anno Dom. 1666. (and
according to what is observable from our four Scriptural Numbers, respecting
both Jews and Gentiles) they reach just to 1700, and so there will be 1666
years from Christ's ascending, to his descending the second time of his coming,
when will be the final ruin of the Beast, (by the said numbers, and as far as
we can guess by the Series of Daniel and Revelation) (which seems remarkable in
the wonderful Numberers Accounts, etc.) according as the Angel told the
Disciples when he was taken by the Clouds out of their sight. Acts 1.11, 12.
that he should so come again, and not only in the clouds of Heaven, Rev. 1.7.
but probably then also his feet may stand again on Mount Olivet to fulfill that
Prophecy Zach. 14.4. when the great things there spoken of largely, may be
fulfilled, and the Nation of the Jews born in a day, Es. 66.8. Zac. 3.9.

Now that the whole time from the beginning of the complete captivity of all
the twelve Tribes, at the carrying of the two last Tribes to Babylon, was the
time thenceforward to be measured out by the 2300 years, Dan. 8.14. may appear
evident from the context, thus, as is further explained in ver. 17, and 19. and
considered with the former; and that both (first) for the matter or things held
out in the Vision. Secondly, For the time of it, and that in two respects; 1.
For continuance thereof 2300 years. 2dly, Of the determination of the period
thereof, at the last end of the indignation the end shall be; and for the
matter of the Vision, that is set forth, ver. 14. upon a question of one Saint
to another, How long? concerning the daily Sacrifice, and the transgression of
desolation, or making desolate, (as the Hebrew word denotes) to give both the
Sanctuary and the Host to be trodden under foot. And further, in respect of the
time both for the continuance and period thereof (as was observed) there is
further added, What shall then be done? ver. 14. Then shall the Sanctuary be
cleansed, ( Hebr. justified;) as if it was said, The purpose of all before set
forth formerly in the Sanctuary, will then be made evident, when the mystery of
God will be finished. And afterward one in the appearance of a man (which it
seems was Christ) spoke unto the Angel Gabriel to make Daniel understand the
Vision, as Rev. 10.7. to wit, when the period thereof should be; which first he
says, ver. 17. it shall be at the time of the end; and ver. 19. he says
further, it shall be at the last end of the indignation, which is again spoken
of, and further explained, chap. 11.36. and also comparing v. 40. of that 11th
chap. with chap. 12.4, 9. and with these three last Verses, compare the last
ver. of chapter 12. when Daniel shall stand up in his lot. And although the two
Tribes, to fulfill Gods promise, were sent back in part from Babylon after
seventy years; yet never were those two of Judah, or the ten Tribes of Israel,
in any great measure comparatively to the whole, either any long time freed
from their bondage and oppressions, or had free Governors, not tributary or
subordinate unto others; and what multitudes of them remained in the 127
Provinces of the Persian Dominions, not much above 70 years afterward, in the
time of Ahasuerus (who is probably conceived to be Artaxerxes Longimanus) from
whom the Decree came to build Jerusalem (as we showed from Dan. 9.25.) Besides,
they wanted the Ark where God formerly manifested his presence with them, and
his pleasure to them, with many excellencies they formerly had; yet God was
pleased to uphold that unworthy people in their low condition diverse hundreds
of years, until the Tyranny of three great Oppressors, viz. the Persians,
Greeks and Romans, till his time of Shiloh his coming, when that blessed
promised Seed of the Woman, that Seed of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in whom all
Nations should be blessed; that offspring of David according to the flesh,
should take our narure upon him from a pure Virgin, being conceived by the Holy
Ghost, and in all other particulars foretold and promised to be the Great
Messiah, at that appointed time to come and take upon him so wonderfully and
holily the humane nature, that he might therein fulfill all righteousness, make
atonement for iniquity; and bring in everlasting righteousness, etc. Dan.
9.24. And because neither Mercies nor Punishments wrought in any suitable
measure upon those that were reduced; but rather they grew for the most part
worse and worse, and did but more fill up the measure of their wickedness, by
abusing of such wonderful mercies from first to last, even so that they, with
their Rulers, against all light and conviction, would join in killing that Lord
of Life that so wonderfully came into, and lived in the World to save their
souls; and therefore they have seemed almost ever since to have had so much a
worse Captivity and scattering throughout the World, and so much the more heavy
wrath lying upon them, than before; and seem more like to be given up to a
reprobate sense, till the end of the Indignation, (as it is several times
called, Dan. 8.19. and Dan. 11.36.) so that a more evident manifestation of the
drift of this Vision to reach to the last end of the indignation, (as will also
be manifest in all the following Mystical Numbers) and when the end shall be,
and in the end, as Chap. 8. v. 19. last words. I say, a greater manifestation
thereof than this, I know not how, where, or upon what ground we can in
reason expect to find.

The Second is, from the years revealed to Daniel for the benefit of his own
people the Jews, namely, The 1290 days of years, the Epoch whereof should be
from the time the public daily Sacrifice was last and most effectually taken
away, and the Abomination of Desolation set up, after our Savior ( Jure, by
his death had put an end to it, being the Antitype of all such Sacrifice) it
was again done providentially by many steps afterward; and that not only at
the great Desolation by Titus and Vespatian, but as we showed in the Abridgment
on Dan. 9.27. at several times afterward, as by Adrian the Emperor, about 130
years after Christ's birth. Again, by Constantine the Great, when he drove the
Jews from Mamre, and set up a Temple for Christians there: But most remarkable
in Julian the Apostates time, when the wonderful hand of God about 366, or as
learned Dr. Usher, 363. showed it self in causing the Jewish public Sacrifice,
especially at the Temple at Jerusalem, efficaciously to cease, even until there
be an awakening of the Jews or Israelites to their Civil and Spiritual
resurrection, foreshewed Ezekiel. 37. unto which said Epoch, if we add the 1290
years, they will reach to 1656. about which time, or sooner, relations were
made by Travelers, of their private actings, by a secret character, sending to
their Brethren in many parts, upon some supposed design, probably conceived to
be that in Dan. 11.44, of their rising to seek their Land, etc. the effect
whereof we have had many times confirmed this year, 1665. So that from their
beginning to look toward Sion, in hearkening after the tenders of Christ's
Grace (as by late information there seems to be hopes of in some measure)
whereunto, if we add again the blessed time of Christ's perfecting such a work
about the 13 35th year after, which is 45 years more, Dan. 12.11, 12. when Dan.
12.1. Michael their Prince should stand up for their full deliverance at the
ruin of the Turk, in the end of chap. 11. So these and the late Authors
computations agree together about An. Dom. 1700.

Thirdly, We may add another concurrent Account of the Turks time, in Rev. 9.
who is reckoned the second Woe Trumpet upon the Roman Empire, whose hour, day,
month and year, Mr. Mede sums up to be 396 years, beginning soon after 1300, as
Chronologers compute his beginning; so by that reckoning about 35 years from
this 1665th year, his time will be out at, or about 1700.

Fourthly, The like reckoning may probably be made from the Popes rise and
ruin, and from the probable proceeding of the pouring out the Viols, and the
killing and rising of the Witnesses.

First, From the Popes rise at one hour, with the ten crowned Horns, Rev. 17.
about 406, as [Excidium Antichristi] makes to appear very probable; and
accordidgly his ruin likely eminently to begin about 1666. To which purpose
further take notice, That Pope I nocent the first, at 406, or sooner, (as some
conceive) did not only challenge Appeals to be made to him from all Churches,
Secundum Patrum illorum inflituta, etc. upon a pretense of a Decree in the
Council of Nice, which afterward proved but a falsification, as diverse Authors
witness; but being Pope, says Helvic. An. Dom. 402, also exalted himself above
all that is called God, manifest by his Excommunicating the Emperor Arcadius in
the East: See Dan. Pareus in Medulla Historiae Ecclesiae Universal, and the
Eastern Churches with him. See Rosse History of the World, lib. 3. chapter 3.

He also is storied to have obtained of Honnorius Emperor of the West, an
Exemption of the Clergy from the Civil Jurisdiction, making them a distinct
Body with the Pope their Head, as the two Horned Beast, Rev. 13. as in respect
of the ten crowned Horns that arose with him, he was the ten Horned Beast also;
besides many other badges to discover him both before, and about 406, and
before in many things, as Idolatry in worshipping Images, Saints and their
Relics, etc. See Wolfius, Cent. 4. forbidding Marriage, Simson Hist. Lib. 4.
Cent. 4. in ^d Council of Carthage. An. (says Helvic.) 396. Siricius (says
Melanct. on Carrion. Lib. 3.) forbad the married Clergy to company with their
Wives, else to be deprived of their Offices; abusively citing St. Paul's words,
They that are in the flesh, cannot please God: About 398. With sundry other
Superstitions and Traditions, which Histories record then to be received and
promoted by the Popes in those times; showing the Beast to be risen at that
time, whereof many Authors give large Evidence.

Secondly, From the pouring out of the Viols; the third whereof Mr. Mede
conceived to be the Laws against the Popes Emissaries in Qu. Elizabeth's days,
with other like actings elsewhere; since which begun that 3d, 4th and 5th; are
conceived to have passed in almost 100 years; and the 6th to be begun, both by
drying up the Popes Euphrates of the German Emperors Dominions by the Turk
lately; and thereby so preparing the way for the Kings of the East, the
Israelites and Jews, as is now more then probable; and so to the Popes utter
ruin, remains the time for gathering to the Battle of the great God, to be at
the end of the 6th Viol, Rev. 16. which may probably be about the said time,
between 30 or 40 years.

Lastly, The rising of the Witnesses will precede the falling of the tenth part
of the Dition of the great City, wherein will be slain 7000 Names of men, at
the Popes eminent beginning to fall.

Now with the Date of the Beasts 42 Months, or the Woman's time, times, and half
a time in her wilderness condition, or the witnesses 1260 years, will probably
be those great changes about 1666. which the Holy Ghost seems to make the
ending term or number of the Beast, Rev. 13. the last ver. as Belshazzar's
Kingdom was said to be numbered when it ended, Dan. 5. when Antichrist will have
probably accomplished to have scattered the power of the holy people the
Saints; but then Christian Churches both of Jews and Gentiles, will be able to
stand up and maintain their open conflicts with both their great Adversaries
the Turk and Pope, the Mystical Antichrist, until Christ's appearing, not
improbable to be about the same time aforesaid, (for some few years difference
there is in the Computations of years in Authors) concerning the last causing
of Sacrifice to cease in Julians time (as was observed) and of the time of the
fixth Viol, the end whereof may happily be sooner felt of many, then known or
believed, when the 7th Viol will be poured out to fulfill that terrible
destruction, which both Old and New Testament (as was showed) give witness
unto. But all circumstances considered, it may seem very probable upon all
these said accounts so concurring in a joint period, That the Great and
Dreadful Day of the Lord, to the wicked World, approaches nigh, before which an
Elias was to be sent to his ancient people of Israel, Mal. 4.5. happily already
come to the Israelites we now hear of, etc. Upon all which considerations it
behooves all sorts of men wisely to weigh in the balance of the Sanctuary both
these and such like Scriptural Advertisements, and all other providential signs
of the times; otherwise our manifold Warnings both from the Word and
Providence, will make our Judgment the more heavy, and our neglect thereof will
make us the more inexcusable; and woe be unto us if we unfaithfully go about to
put off the evil day far from us, when God is about to bring it suddenly upon
us: His Judgments begin now to appear terrible in the World, and he seems to
begin his great Earthquake to come, when the Beasts eminent fall is to begin.
Therefore let all the Inhabitants of the World learn righteousness, both
righteousness of Justification, by the right knowledge and application of the
Doctrine of Faith in Jesus Christ alone, as Dan. 12.3. and righteousness of new
obedience, being led by the Spirit of Sanctification, by the Rule of the Word,
in the paths of Holiness, Righteousness and Sobriety in their whole life and
conversation, which are those Garments most needful at such times to be kept
close to us, Rev. 16.15. against these times wherein the storms of Gods wrath
begin to arise upon the wicked world in these last of days.

And so we have done with the sixth and last Consideration, to wit, of the
utter ruin and perdition of the Roman Kingdom, and all the broken Limbs of the
other with it; whereunto the Monarchy of Christ is solely to succeed, in the
next place to be considered.

Here only let me add the Consideration of the proportioned Degrees of Gods
proceedings against three sorts of men in three great revolutions of times,
wherein partly he has manifested, and partly he will manifest most eminently
his wonderful Grace, since the old Worlds drowning by water, and Sodom and
Gomorrahs destruction by fire, set forth for examples to all succeeding ages;
and yet, for ought we find, they had not the like tenders of Grace that those
since their destruction have had, and yet will have; First, Against the Jews at
their last desolation and captivity. Secondly, Against Antichrist at his utter
perdition. Thirdly, What his word declares shall be against that last Gog and
Magog, at the worlds last destruction; (for these terms of Gog and Magog, are
taken for the great, resolved and implacable Enemies of Gods Church:) First,
The Nation of the Jews were brought near to God after all the twelve Tribes
deliverance out of Egypt, and settling in Canaaan, enjoying above their
Brethren, a peculiar nearness to God, more than any other people, a long time;
having his Oracles, and Ordinances, and Messengers amongst them, and many
tokens of his gracious presence with them, great things revealed to them, great
things done for them, and long patience exercised toward them; but when they
continued not only unreformed, but obstinate, that they set themselves against
God and his Messengers, in such a notorious, rebellious manner, that there was
no remedy, they were led Captive to Babylon; but yet with a gracious promise of
returning again after 70 years. But afterward, when neither Mercy nor
Judgments did them good, but after all their wickedness and transgressions,
they killed the Lord of Life, and persecuted his Messengers that sought to save
their fouls; such an horrible desolation befell them, as in all the world the
like had not been heard. But 2dly, Since the Romans have rejected greater
tenders of Grace, wherein both Christ's and his Apostles both Preachings and
Miracles, were performed, and whereby the Jews Desolation was accomplished for
resisting of Christ and his Gospel, which after the wicked Example of the Jews,
they have so rejected, despised, yea opposed and persecuted both the Gospel,
and all that owned it, in such bloody, cruel and savage manner, that the just
wrath and vengeance of Almighty God, has almost all along pursued them; but
especially it will appear in the utter ruin of the Roman Kingdom, at
Antichrists destruction, who has of all others abused the greatest, clearest
and most glorious light of Gospel Grace, after his forefathers owning of it,
and taking up a profession thereof; yet after by his abominable Apostasy, so
wickedly to pervert such precious Truth, and so many hundred years to proceed
in such abominable, hellish practices of Atheism, Blasphemy, Idolatry, with all
varieties of Wickedness, Persecution and Bloodshed of the Saints, his last
utter ruin will (according to the Word) be so much the more terrible, by an
immediate hand of Christ, by Fire and Sword, and otherways to make it so
dreadful to all succeeding Generations, as is said Dan. 12.1. and Ezekiel. 38, 39.
in reference both to him and the Turk, who has likewise got so great a share
in the Empire, (where the false Prophet Mahomet is also set up) that it will be
a time of trouble, such as never was since there was a Nation; more fully again
explained of the Pope, and (happily) that false Prophet too, Rev. 19, 11, to
the end.

But 3dly, When the Hypocrisy of the last Gog and Magog, so long restrained
by the wonderful Glory, and powerful Grace of Christmanifest, both before in
the destruction of Antichrist, and all along the thousand years, not only to
all the Generations of the faithful, for the inward and outward man; but to the
raised Saints, in so blessed and holy an Estate, continued that time on Earth
all under that Universal Dominion of Christ and his Saints; yet notwithstanding
all reasons and motives to the contrary, when at last by Satan's seducement upon
the advantage of the numerousness of those hypocritical slaves (formerly) to
the Church, they shall so Atheistically, after all dare to break out into open
Enmity and Hostility (probably to free themselves from Christ's and his Churches
outward yoke) to think and attempt to compass the Camp of Saints from all the
Quarters of the Earth, by the Conduct of the Devil, and even to besiege (as it
were) Heaven it self upon Earth, the beloved City, it will be an Attempt so far
beyond all parallel in the height of wickedness both of Men and Devils in the
world, that the Vengeance of God will no longer suffer it to continue, nor them
to have longer time further to attempt any other Evil in it; but both at once,
or near together, shall be destroyed from the face of it, and sent thence to
their own place of torments, and thereupon the dissolution of the world to
ensue: Such Wisdom, Power, Holiness, and Goodness of such Gods great
Proceedings in the world, the Sacred Scriptures seem clearly to hold out to be
observed and improved by all men.

The Parallel of the Fifth Monarchy in Daniel, further Expounded in the Book of
the Revelation of Jesus Christ. To which purpose we shall set down, First, Some
Observations tending thereunto more indirectly and remotely. Secondly, We shall
summarily and briefly adjoin the particular Branches most considerable in the
Parallel between Daniel and the Revelation. Thirdly, We shall add some
Explications and Illustrations of some most material things further to be
considered therein, as God shall assist.
WHere (First) observe, That as the Antichristian Church is set forth by Forty
two Months, according to the course of the Moon that rules in the dark night;
So Daniel says, chap. 2.7. He saw the fourth Beast in the Night-Visions,
wherein much mystery of iniquity was to be observed.

Secondly, Again observe, as Christ ( Rev. 16.15.) warns all men, That he will
come as a Thief in the night: So Daniel (c. 7.13.) saw in the Night-Visions,
The Son of Man come in the Clouds of Heaven.

Thirdly, As the time of the Two Sackcloth Prophets is described by 1260 days
of years, Rev. 11. the day being the time of light and comfort; so the Saints
(the Children of Light) are they to whom the Son of Righteousness, the true
Light, gives the Kingdom to possess it for ever and ever, ver. 18. when the
Beast and his Worshippers shall be cast into utter darkness.

Fourthly, As Christ makes known to his Saints, That the Beast shall make war
with them, and overcome them, and kill them temporally, Rev. 13. So Daniel
shows, that the time would ensue, that the Beast should be slain, and his Body
destroyed, and given to the burning flame, Dan. 7.11. Rev. 14.

Fifthly, As the Lambs Followers ( Rev. 14.) are described to be such as loved
not their lives unto death: So the Kingdom that belongs to them, Daniel says,
shall not be destroyed, v. 14. but they shall possess it for ever and ever, v.
18.

Sixthly, As the Woman (the true Church) is nourished in the Wilderness a time,
times, and half a time, Rev. 12.14. that the Beasts tyranny and persecution
might not destroy her, while her limited time of suffering lasted; so the Beast
speaking great words against the Most High, and wearing out the Saints, is also
limited by the said time, times, and dividing of a time, chap. 7.25. his great
Power and abused Authority cannot lengthen his days.

Seventhly, As in Dan. chapter 2. many chief matters are set down of the times,
nature, order or states, founder or setter up, continuance and prevalence of
Christ's glorious Kingdom on Earth, with the unlimited extent of it; so besides
these, in chap. 7. is more remarkably described the manner of raising it, both
remote, and more near, the Donation of the Founder thereof, with the Owner of
it, namely, the Son of Man his Doputation of it to the Saints, together with
power to judge and rule for him over the whole world; and in chap. 12. the
particular time in order is described, of the second estate of it, which are
all that Daniel speaks directly of it; only indirectly, are the continuance of
the first estate of it, employed chap. 9.24, 26, 27. describing what shall be
done toward the end of the seventy Weeks, when Christ should by his own
Sacrifice of himself, cause the other (jure) to cease, and how he should
confirm the Covenant with many; and after the people of the Prince, to wit, the
Romans, should destroy the City about forty two years after: And then in
general, sets down the time of its desolation, which our Savior calls the
fulfilling of the times of the Gentiles, Luc. 21.24. which contains the first
Estate of Christ's Kingdom. Also it is again indirectly spoken of under the
Popes wicked actings against it, in the said first state of it, by the Roman
Monarchy, Dan. 11.36, 37, 38, 39. So in the Revelation, what directly belongs
to Christ's glorious Kingdom upon Earth, is Rev. 11.15. to the end, and chap.
19, 20, 21, 22. But indirectly, there are many things revealed, and seen, and
promised, which refer to the New- Jerusalem that comes down from God out of
Heaven for encouragements to the faithful sufferers in their successive times,
all along set forth in that Book besides: Of which more afterward. Vide Paper
of Dec. 7.1664. in the Forerunner, p. 36, 37, 38, 39.

Secondly, As to the second head briefly to be adjoined, we may both from
Daniel and the Book of Revelations, jointly observe these particular branches
most considerable.

First, The order and different states of that Kingdom distinguished by the
Kingdom of Patience, and Kingdom of Power, called aptly by Mr. Meds, The
Kingdom of the Stone, and the Kingdom of the Mountain, grounded upon Dan. 2.34,
35. The first is deciphered under Christ's riding conquering and to conquer,
Rev. 6. through all the Seals and Trumpets, to the sounding of the seventh
Trumpet, which contains the time of the first state; the Kingdom of Patience,
or the Kingdom of the Stone set forth directly in all the Book of the
Revelation, saving those last named chap. 11. and chap. 19, 20, 21, 22. wherein
(as was showed) is contained the second state of Christ's Kingdom of Visible
Power, or the Kingdom of the Mountain filling the whole Earth. Both these
states Daniel sets down more largely: First, the first state (though
indirectly) under the actings of the Roman Empire against the God of gods, and
disregard of his Fathers God in the Emperors and Popes time, Dan. 11.36, 37,
38, 39. and so of the actings of the Fourth Beast, with his wicked Horn, chap.
7. and a great part of the Iron Kingdom, with feet and toes of Iron and Clay,
so long as they have been the Persecutors and Oppressors of Gods true Church;
and the other state of it Daniel expresses, when the Kingdom was given by the
Ancient of Days to the Son of Man, chap. 7.13, 14, to the end of that Chapter.

2dly, Again, for the beginning of the States of the said Kingdom; The
beginning of the first was under the first Seal, Rev. 6. which was when Christ
having all power given him in Heaven and in Earth, then gave Commission, Matthew.
28.18, 19, 20. to his Disciples and succeeding Ministers to preach the Gospel
to all, promising to be with them to the end of the World, when he says, Rev.
10. Time (namely, of the Beast and wicked Dominion) should be no more; which
will be finished when the Beast shall be destroyed; which Kingdom will be
perfected upon the beginning of the following state, namely, of the Kingdom of
Power, or the Kingdom of the Mountain, then to succeed, as Rev. 20. and Rev.
11. which, as that of the Stone, was many hundred years in passing to this last
state: So this shall never pass away, or be destroyed while the World
continues, but shall at last be perfected in the Kingdom of Glory in Heaven for
evermore, as that of Patience was perfected in the Kingdom of Power before. Now
of the time of the beginning of the first, says Daniel, chap. 2.44. In the
days of those Kings shall the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom, etc. and of the
beginning of the Second, (chap. 7.) says he again, v. 13, 14. I saw the Son of
man coming with the Clouds of Heaven, and unto him was given Dominion, and
Glory, and a Kingdom, that all People, Nations and Languages should serve him,
etc. Of which more (by Gods assistance) afterward.

3dly, We must especially observe how the first Session of the day of Judgment
begins the said last state of Christ's Kingdom, where the Judgment is said to be
se, and the Books opened, at the destruction of the Beast; and upon that
account, Dan. 7.12. because of the great words which the Horn spoke, ver. 9,
10, 11. will be executed by Christ at the Armageddon Battle, Rev. 19.11. to the
end, spoken of Rev. 16. And likewise another like Session of Judgment after the
thousand years, we may again observe will (according as God has appointed, and
our Savior declared) Rev. 20.11, 13, etc. perfect the said Kingdom of the
Mountain in glory, after the last Gog and Magog shall be destroyed, after the
thousand years shall be ended; when also the Judgment will again be set, and
the Books opened, which is proper only to the Judgment of the great Day (as St.
Jude calls it;) and why should it seem strange that Christ should have such a
great Day to judge and rule in over all creatures, as he is Mediator, whilst the
Kingdom which the Ancient of Days gave him, shall remain in his hand, when
Antichrist had his Day of before? And not to speak of the days of Captivities
of the Jews, or of 1260 years their forty years in the Wilderness, Heb. 4. St.
Peter reckons Eternity under the name of a day, 1 Pet. 3. last; (...) (as in
the Original:) So that upon many considerations, Mr. Mede might well reckon all
that time from Christ's coming with clouds, Dan. 7.13. of which Rev. 1.7. and
Rev. 19.11, etc. to the last Sessions end, under the title of the Day of
Judgment; wherein first, at the destruction of Antichrist, when he destroys the
quick with visible, temporal judgment, and rewards his Servants the Prophets,
and his Saints, and all that fear his Name both small and great, in their
order, Rev. 11.18. and Rev. 20.4, 5. when likewise Daniel shows, the Saints
shall take the Kingdom (being then given to them) and possess it for ever (to
the Worlds end) as Christ then will receive it of his Father, to give it to
them, ver. 13. yet they shall rule for him, ver. 27. all that time, in all
Nations under the whole Heaven.

4thly, In the next place the God of Heaven is said to be first the Founder of
Christ's Kingdom in the whole of it, under both states of the Stone and
Mountain, of Patience and Power, chap. 2.44. In the days of those Kings the
God of Heaven shall set up a Kingdom that shall never be destroyed, etc. And
also he is said to be the Doner or Giver of it to Christ his Son, chap. 7.9,
13, 14. So likewise Rev. 5. Christ has not only the Revelation given to him
from God the Father, to open and make known the same to his Church; but the
Lamb has Riches, and Honor, and Power, and Wisdom, and Strength, etc. to
execute and fulfill all things contained therein, ver. 12, 13. which he himself
declared before his ascension, Matt. 28.18, 19, 20. his Commission from the
Father enables him to fulfill the contents of that Book in both states of that
Kingdom, in order from the beginning of the first Seal, chap. 6. when he sent
out his Apostles, as before, Matt. 28. to, and in his 1000. years reign on
Earth, Rev. 20.4. Rev. 5.10.

5thly, So likewise for the extent of his Kingdom under both States: In the
first state it is large without restraint, unto Jews or Gentiles, Greeks or
Barbarians, in respect of the tender of it, Go preach the Gospel to every
creature, Mar. 16.15. Go preach the Gospel to all Nations, Matt. 28.19. As
Augustus Coesar would have all the World taxed; so Christ's riding on the white
Horse has the same bounds, Rev. 5. No doubt their sound went into all the
world, and their words to the end of the earth, says the Apostle, Romans 10.18.
So Dan. 2.24. It shall never be destroyed, but shall break in pieces all those
Kingdoms, and extend sometimes very largely in the Empire, and at one time or
other all over the known World.

But the other state of the Kingdom of the Mountain, is not only unlimited in
the tender of it, but also boundless in the extent of it over all the whole
Earth, as an huge Mountain it fills the whole Earth, Dan. 2.35. and chapter 7.13,
14. To the Son of Man was given Dominion, and Glory, and a Kingdom, that all
People, Nations and Languages should serve him; and his Deputies, the Saints,
take the Kingdom, ver. 18. and that which was the greatness of the Kingdom,
under the whole Heaven, v. 27. and then all Dominions shall serve and obey him.
So Rev. 20.4. the Saints reigned with Christ a thousand years, and the
representative Church exult assuredly, That they shall reign upon Earth, Rev.
5.10. and Rev. 11.15. The Kingdoms of the World are become the Kingdoms of our
God and of his Christ, etc.

6thly, Again, for the nature of this Kingdom, although the first state of it,
being mostly invisible, and therefore in the outward aspect for the most part
despised, neglected, yea opposed by the men of the World of all sorts, for the
most part of the time of the Kingdom of Patience, in which state, though the
Devil and the wicked World have endeavored earnestly to destroy it, yet it
could never be destroyed, Dan. 2.44. And though the Beast make war with the
Saints, and think to wear them out, yet his time is limited to a time, times,
and dividing of a time; but then the Judgment shall sit and destroy him, Dan.
7.25, 26. even when he shall have accomplished to scatter the Power of the holy
people, Dan. 12.7. for he shall never utterly destroy their Power, Rev. 12.6.
So Rev. 13. Rev. 11.2.

But in the second state it will not only be an inwardly invisible, true
Church, but also an outwardly visible and glorious Kingdom likewise, when Jews
and Gentiles shall be so largely and unlimitedly brought into it, Romans 11.12,
etc. Dan. 7.14. Even such a glory as becomes the Son of God, to have Dominion
and Glory, as was said; and which he willed before his death the Vision of to
his Saints, John 17.24. that they should be where he was [to behold his own
glory] not which he had with the Father, but that which the Father had given
him, as Mediator, at the Beasts destruction, Dan. 7.12, 14. and accordingly
Rev. 1. there is a glorious description of his coming at his Kingdom; and
likewise Rev. 19.11, 12, 13, etc. At his First coming there was no form nor
comeliness seen by most in the World, either in his person, or outward
condition, when the Son of Man had not where to lay his head, Es. 53.2. He was
called a King in scorn at his death, and arrayed like a King in mockery, a
crucified King, in contempt; and such was his Kingdom outwardly in most men's
eyes, in regard of his Subjects, of his Officers, of his Laws, of his
Ordinances in the World, most of the many hundred years of the first state
thereof, by the varieties of Persecutors both Paganish and Popish, etc.

7thly, As Christ's Kingdom in the first State of Patience, is outwardly weak
and oppressed, therefore resembled by a Woman in a Wilderness condition 1260
years, or a time, times, and the dividing of a time, in wearing out, Dan. 7.25.
and having her power scattered, chapter 12.7. yet inwardly, even then, it is
spiritual and strong, to consume and break in pieces, and subdue, as Dan. 2.34.
it smites and breaks in pieces the feet and toes of the Iron and Clay; and v.
44. it shall consume and break in pieces all those Kingdoms; and c. 7.23. it
shall devour the whole Earth, and tread it down, and break it in pieces:
[Observe the expressions] For that which is spiritual, is prevalent and strong,
above that which is outward and temporal. Hence Zac. 4.6. when the Candlestick
had its Lamps supplied with Oil from the two Olive Trees: Christ there
declares, his Church should overcome, not by Power, nor by Might, but by his
Spirit Hence also he says, That he will give Power to his Two Witnesses; that
is, prevalency to prophecy, though in sackcloth, 1260 days of years, to
consume the Beast, and bring him low, Rev. 11. the Saints also overcome, having
washed their Robes in the blood of the Lamb, by a spiritual, powerful Victory;
hence the faithful are styled Overcomers, having spiritual Power from God
derived unto them against all Spiritual and Worldly Adversaries; therefore
says our Savior, He that overcomes, shall inherit all things, Rev. 21.7.
Rev. 2.7, 11. Rev. 12.13. Rev. 15.2.

But the second state of that Kingdom is not only spiritually prevalent, but
also outwardly powerful, to subdue and destroy; and therefore as it had
spiritually smitten the Iron Kingdom in the feet and toes, before, Dan. 2.34.
So by it, and for it shall the Beast be slain, and his body destroyed and given
to the burning flame, Dan. 7.11. Rev. 19.11, to the end. Rev. 14. latter end,
and 16. at the end; and after that there is given to Christ Dominion, and
Glory, and a Kingdom, that all People, Nations and Languages should serve him,
Dan. 7.13, 14. which is the same with Christ's Reign with his Saints a thousand
years, Rev. 20.4. and spoken of the same time in the same order of Affairs to
be accomplished by Christ for himself and his Church; and likewife Rev. 11.15.
relates to the same time of the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, when the
Kingdoms of the World will be the Kingdoms of our God and of his Christ, as
there he is praised for by it the twenty four Elders. And then Judgment (that
is, judicandi potestas, power of Judging) will likewise be given to the Saints
of the Most High, as it is said, Dan. 7.22. and the Kingdom, and the Dominion,
and the Greatness of the Kingdom shall be given to the People of the Saints of
the Most High, Dan. 7.26, 27. Answerable whereunto is that Promise of our
Savior in reference to that state and time, as Mr. Brightman in his
Observations noted, Rev. 3.21. That to him that overcomes, he will grant to
sit with him on his Throne, even as he before had overcome, and was set with
his Father on his Throne.

Now having set down those previous Observations in general; and 2dly, those
Several Considerable Particularities contained in Daniel, and all expounded in
the Book of Revelations, respecting Christ's Kingdom on Earth, we shall further
by Gods assistance endeavor to proceed, and to explain and illustrate the most
material things that we have but hitherto briefly touched upon.
Wherein we may (first) observe how Daniel describes the first State or
Kingdom of the Stone, which is the Kingdom of Patience, wherein the Saints by
Faith and Patience overcome and inherit the Promises, as the Apostle speaks,
and shall inherit all things, as our Savior further promises; and here we
shall endeavor to show how this Kingdom of the Stone has in, and from the
time of Christ's life and death been carried on accordingly both before the
Beasts time under the persecuting Heathenish Dragon, and since the Beasts forty
two Months began; and to show how the Saints have spiritually and powerfully
prevailed for above 1600 years past, by the word of Christ's Testimony, which in
several respects, in several times, they have been enabled by his Spirit to
give witness and testimony unto; and to this purpose Daniel shows, chap. 2.
when he had set a summary of Nebuchadnezzars dream before him, in v. 33. he
proceeds to the Fourth Metal, figuring the Fourth or Roman Monarchy, wherein
were the legs of Iron, and feet and toes part of Iron, and part of Clay; and in
the two next ver. he minds him of the confusion of all those Kingdoms set forth
by the four several Metals (though it was a long time to come) and therefore he
tells him, Thou saw (until) the Stone was cut out of the Mountain without
hands, which time (until) he more particularly explains, v. 44. saying, In the
days of those Kings shall the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom which shall never
be destroyed; that is, says Mr. Mede, In the days of one of those Kings, and
while the broken parts of the other Kingdoms remained; so that they had some
life left to them, though their Dominion was taken from them, as it has been
since the time of the Roman Kingdom, which has had great Contests by the
broken parts of some of the former, as Persians, Armenians, Grecians, as
Stories witness of their wars, and even sometimes been foiled by them too, etc.
(as might be showed;) but the former Text respecting the time of the beginning
of this Kingdom, which the God of Heaven would set up, is more fully explained
in v. 12. and chap. 7. which has reference to that last Text named, and other
places of Dan. 2. where he shows, That the Stone should at last, after it had
long before smitten the feet and toes of Iron and Clay in the Image, that were
the lowest and last parts of it, it should (I say) make those (together with
the Silver, and the Gold, and the Brass, and the Iron) at once become as the
chaff of the Summer Threshing-floor: namely, in regard of what was said in
chap. 7.12. to wit, though the Dominions of all the former Kingdoms were taken
away, yet their lives were prolonged for a time and season, till the last great
and utter destruction of the Fourth Beast should be accomplished, when the
first Great Judgment was set, and the Books opened, Dan. 7.9, 10, 11. and when
Christ came with Clouds to receive the Kingdom which his Father, the Ancient of
Days, gave him over all the world, ver. 13, 14. which should never pass away
nor be destroyed, as he there fully shows.

Now how this First State of the Kingdom of the Stone began to be set up, as it
is styled ver. 23. (until the Kingdom of the Mountain took place, as verse the
34.) by the God of Heaven, and has all along been upheld powerfully and
graciously by him, (as Daniel foreshe^ed) is to be observed from the History of
the ^ all along the times of the Roman Empire being Contemporaries with it,
Vide Irenicon, on Rev. 5.27 28.
in respect both of the affairs of the State under both Seals and Trumpets, now
near to the end of the sixth Trumpet, or second Woe, when the Turk must be
destroyed, Dan. 11. ult. and 12.1. And also in respect of the affairs of the
Church, both true and false, till Antichrist, the Pope (with the former half of
him, the Turk) be likewise destroyed (as is probable) at the same time, or near
together. To which purpose observe how this spiritual Kingdom of the Stone was
set up in that manner as Christ-shewed to Zachary in a Vision, Chap. 4. how the
Oil was supplied to the Candlestick and its seven Lamps, and seven Pipes
thereof, from the two Olive Trees standing by it; the use whereof he explains
verse. 6. Not by power, nor by might, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of Hosts;
which is applied to the two Witnesses, Rev. 11. and in this manner the Spirit
of the Lord was (originally as in the Fountain) upon Christ himself, being
anointed above his fellows to preach the Gospel, as Isa. 61.1. This anointing
was derived from him unto, and fell upon the Apostles in an abundant measure,
and likewise in their measure upon all succeeding Messengers of Christ in the
primitive Times, and so forward in the times succeeding till this day; and also
on all faithful Christians in their degree all along unto the Antichristian
Apostasy, and from thence during the Popes forty two months, wherein those
anointed Ones, or as the original word signifies, those Sons of Oil, (...)
the two Witnesses prophesying in Sackcloth 1260 days of years, Rev. 11. have
fed the Woman, the true Church, in her wilderness condition, her time, times
and half a time, now probably almost expired: all which time this Oil has been
divinely conveyed and supplied to preserve that light of Divine Truth and Grace
by their Ministry in the Candlestick, the true Church. And as it appears this
Kingdom of the Stone was at first set up so divinely by the God of Heaven, and
so spiritually and powerfully upheld by him, that no wicked opposition could
either destroy it, or hinder it, but even his spiritual Power and Grace made
the opposition of men and Devils to promote it in the faithful Christians
inward man: So it may further appear to be his work both to set it up and
preserve it by the unlikeliness of the means whereby he has and still does the
same; not (as was said) by power and might of the World, for that not only
has usually been deficient to help in that work, but has (with Satan's help)
made strong and violent opposition against it, both in the Dragons heathenish
and Antichrists apostatizing times; which has abundantly been evident both in
the time of Christ's own Ministry, and in the Ministry of the Apostles, who were
his ( Legati a latere, or) Ambassadors immediately sent from him on the Message
of the Gospel, with all other mediate Messengers and Ministers sent by him from
their times, and also in all real and true subjects of the Kingdom of the
Stone, ever since to this very day.

To instance a little in each respect: 1. Of their own outward meanness: 2. Of
the Worlds failing to help them: and 3. Of both the Devils and the wicked
Worlds both malicious and violent opposition for the most part made against
them.

First, As Christ himself at his coming in our flesh was that foundation-Stone
elect and precious, which God sets such an [Ecce] Behold unto it, that his
People should take notice thereof, when he should lay it in Sion, Isa. 28.16.
and witnessed unto it by other Prophets long before his coming; yet when he
came into the World every way wonderful, in Conception, Birth, Life, Doctrine,
Miracles; yea, before, in, and after his death; yet was he not by the Great
Ones, or the most, or wisest, or learnedest of men either owned or received:
But even then, though he was very divinely and spiritually wonderful; yet in
regard his outward aspect and garb appeared to the Worlds Eye mean and
contemptible, the very Builders themselves rejected that elect and precious
Cornerstone, though to faithful men's eyes and Angels discovery, very
conspicuous and glorious: So that our Savior toward his Death applies the
Prophecy of David, Psalm. 118.22. unto the then Rulers, which respected both
him and them, Matthew. 21.42. saying, The Stone which the Builders rejected, is
become the Head of the Corner, which was the Lords own doing, and was
mavelous in the Eyes of men. And so it has been with the Kingdom of the
Stone all along that Kingdom of Patience, as we may, by Gods assistance, set
down afterward.

Now how this Stone it self, in respect of his humane Nature, may be observed
eminently to be cut out of the Mountain by the God of Heaven, without hands,
was declared also as a wonder before he came, by the Evangelical Prophet
Isaiah; Behold (says he) a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, and his Name
shall be Immanuel, God with us, Isa. 7.14. So he was conceived by the holy
Ghost, and born of his Mother a Virgin, without any real natural Father of his
Flesh, (though he had a reputed one) appointed by God himself to be a very
useful help to the Virgin Mother of the Son of God; yet how mean and low were
(then) their outward conditions? what attempts were made to destroy that
spiritual King, as soon as he came into the World? How was he driven about, to
endanger him in his tender infant age, soon after he came into the World? How
was he exposed and driven about whilst a child? neglected and despised by the
most of men; and that amongst his own People and Kindred, in the time of his
private life; where it was so much the more hard to do good among them, by how
much men usually disregard a Prophet in his own Country: as he showed that
Proverb to be fulfilled by them in regard of himself; with many other
considerations to this purpose, manifested in the Gospel. But after he showed
himself in public, in preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, declaring how that
Kingdom of God was come unto them, namely, the Kingdom of the Stone, is easily
there observable.

Quest. But why, may some say, was the spiritual Kingdom of Grace called the
Kingdom of the Stone?

Answ. First, because Christ had been promised and prophesied of long before,
under the Name, (as was in part showed before, and might by many places of
Scripture be made further evident.) Secondly, Some Stones, as the Adamant, are
harder then the four Metals, to be bruised by it: hence our Savior says of
himself, Mat. 21.44. Whosoever should fall on that Stone, should be broken; but
on whomsoever it should fall, it would grind him to powder. And though the
Doctrine of the said Kingdom was so powerfully preached by him (as was
acknowledged by the very Auditors themselves to be with authority, and not as
the Scribes; although he did such and so many Miracles as never man did; and
though his life was so perfectly exemplary, who did all things well, (as was
also acknowledged of him) and no evil nor guile was found in his mouth, as Gods
Spirit witnessed of him; and that he went about doing good, though suffering
evil for it: yet it was his meat and drink so to do his heavenly Fathers will,
and to finish his work: and even to suffer so as no man ever did, nor all men
ever could to that end; yea, how was he straightened until he had fulfilled it?
and all that was but to lay that Foundation of that Kingdom of the Stone, which
began to appear when he was declared by his Resurrection from the dead, to be
the Son of God, with power, Romans 1.14. whereupon he was so owned of his Father,
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, Psalm. 2.7. applied Act. 13.33.
and Heb. 1.5. and thereupon all power being given to him (as he declared soon
after to his Disciples) when he gave them Commission to preach the Gospel, and
wherein his Divine Power should chiefly be manifested in the World, Matthew. 28.
viz. in preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, saying, (upon that account of his
Divine Power, verse. 18, 19, 20.) Go preach the Gospel to all Nations, etc.
which Commission in succeeding Ministers was to reach to the end of the World,
that was to be accomplished at his coming again: When God shall bring his Son
(again) into the World, Heb. 1.6. (...), (as the Original shows) when all the
Angels of God shall worship him, and every knee bow to him, Phil. 2. and the
fame World is called (...), Heb. 2.5. the World to come; and by our Savior,
that World at the Resurrection, Luke 21.35. in which interim it was to be
preached to all that should believe through their word, for which our Savior
prayed before his death, John 17. until that great period was come, when all
the World should both believe and know that God the Father had sent him (as he
there speaks) yet after all the Divine Glory showed in Christ's Birth,
Doctrine, Miracles, Life, Death and Resurrection, so neglected, opposed,
gainsaid, persecuted, in all Christ was, did, and suffered, so accomplished
and published in the World, the Rulers believed not on him, but hindered others
that would: and though many Prophecies had been fulfilled all that time in and
by Christ, and he had foretold many others to be fulfilled by the Worlds wicked
actings and proceedings against him, and to be fulfilled upon them for their so
doing, in the ruin of that People, their City and Nation; yet by their
infidelity and wickedness, they brought on the accomplishment thereof upon
themselves: and though his Doctrine was acknowledged to be such as never was
taught, and his Miracles such as never were wrought by any other, and nothing
was found in his Life or Death that justly could be proved against him; yet all
was disregarded and rejected by the most of men living in his time. If it was
acknowledged at one time, he did all things well; another time he was judged a
drunken and a gluttonous man, a friend of Publicans and Sinners: if one time
his Doctrine seemed Divine and Powerful, another time he was esteemed as one
that deceived the People: if at one time he be acknowledged to have done many
wonderful and powerful Miracles, he is again traduced that he cast out Devils
through Beelzebub the Prince of Devils: if by some he be styled the Son of
David, he is by others called the Carpenters Son, the Son of Joseph and Mary,
whose Brethren were with them: if at one time he is thought to be a great
Prophet, or the Messiah, he is again another time called Jesus of Galilee: if
the People one while (by an overruling hand of God) entitle him King of the
Jews that was to come to the Daughter of Sion, and sing Hallelujahs to him in
the highest, and Hosanna's to the Son of David; yet not long after they cried,
Crucify him, crucify him; and fulfilled those horrid evils that brought their
Judgments (declared by him before) upon them, in the most dreadful ruin of
that People, with their City and Country unto this very day, and which must
continue whilst the time of the Gentiles (as our Savior witnessed) be
fulfilled, Luke 21.23.

And after the foundation of the Kingdom of the Stone was ^o said by the God of
Heaven, and after his Resurrection all Power was given to him in Heaven and
Earth, and he had given Commission to his Apostles to preach the Doctrine of
the Kingdom, and to others succeeding under the first Seal, Rev. 6. First, the
Apostles went out without any worldly power; and though they were endued with
Power ^^om on high, when the holy Ghost sat on them, Act. 2. like cloven
tongues of fire on each of them; whereupon they were enabled to speak with
strange languages, who not long before were poor ignorant unlearned Fishermen
of low condition, yet were then suddenly enabled both to speak miracles and
work miracles; and Divine Power was manifest to go along with their Preaching
of the Gospel, to the conversion of many thousands at one Sermon; yet the
powers of the world even then stood up against them, whilst they that were
unlearned before spoke miracles of strange languages; and which was more
miraculous, they heard them when there was so many (as the Text witnesses) of
strange Nations which heard them, every one speak in their own language the
wonderful works of God, yet even then they say blasphemously of this wonderful
work of God, [These men are full of new Wine:] They hear of their miracles, but
they seek to suppress them; for we (say the Rulers) prevail nothing, these men
do many miracles: And they not only do not own their Doctrine, and not help to
promote it, but lay hold upon them and imprison them for preaching of it: and
this did not only befall them amongst the Jews at Jerusalem, but in all places
were they were sent, as the Story of the Acts of the Apostles, and other
Writers of the Primitive times manifest.

Again; The succeeding Primitive Christians, both Teachers and Professors of
the Gospel of Christ, were not only not owned and encouraged by the Potentates
and great men of the world: But the great Red Dragon had gotten such strong
possession of the highest seat of worldly Authority in the Roman Empire at the
height of it, having so mightily engaged them for all sorts of Heathenish
Idolatry, and to decline their embracing of Christianity after such abundant
conviction of the Divine Excellency of Christ Jesus the Son of God, that in
most places under that (then most sovereign earthly Authority) the Officers and
Magistrates were engaged or encouraged to root out Christianity (if it might
be) out of the world; and how for the most part they acted to that purpose, was
so evident, that (as an Ancient records) it was then observed that there was no
day in the year whereupon five thousand Martyrs had not suffered, save one in
the Calends of February: and what large Volumns have been written of the cruel
and merciless deaths and martyrdoms of those primitive Christians, wherein they
were forced to undergo those strange devised tortures and torments (besides all
lesser sufferings) may abundantly appear to those that are observantly
conversant in them; and even then, by a Divine Power going along with this
persecuted Gospel in the Preachers and Professors thereof, as with the
Israelites under Pharoah's Taskmasters, the more they oppressed them the more
they multiplied; so those showe^^ of blood of the Saints made the Gospel to
grow more fertily: and as was observed by the Ancients, [Sanguis Martyrum,
Semen Ecclesiae] the Blood of the Martyrs was the Seed of the Church. And this
continued all along the Primitive times, in the ten much noted Persecutions,
besides less noted ones (which were like not to be a few) wherein, as by so
many grievous and sore pangs and throws of the Woman (the Church) then with
child (through mercy) by the faith and prayers of God's People, till she
brought forth that Man-child, Constantine the Great, under the fixth Seal, Rev.
6. who threw down the Dragon (with his heathenish Idolatry) from the Throne,
with his Sun, Moon and Stars about him, of his worldly powers, that had so long
persecuted the Saints in their successions before: And this was done by the
Divine Power of God's Spirit, converting that famous Emperor, encouraging him
against the Heathenish Opposers, and prospering his proceedings to a wonderful
subversion of those powers of darkness, which, for the terribleness of their
downfall, the Spirit of God decyphers much like a day of Judgment, in regard of
the execution thereof, Rev. 6. latter end: which though it was said to be from
the Wrath of the Lamb, yet there is no sitting of Judgment, nor opening of
Books, which will be at Antichrist's ruin, when the day of Judgment will
begin; and as will be at the last ruin of Gog and Magog, Rev. 20. when the
last accomplishment of the Judgment follows upon it at the end of the world.

Yet this seems to be the great undertaking of Christ to conquer his Enemies in
the first Seal: whose right hand should (then) teuch him terrible things, Psalm.
45.4, 5. whilst (as is there expressed) he rides on in his Majesty
prosperously, because of the Word of Truth, Meekness and Righteousness, for the
first three hundred years, till Constantines Reign, by whom the Empire of
Heathenish became Christian, having cast off the Dragons Worship and Religion,
and owned and received Christ's Religion.

And this appears to be one eminent purpose of God the Father's giving of the
Book to the Lamb, (that as it had been slain, Rev. 5.6. but was alive again) to
open the Seals thereof; and under the sixth Seal was (...) Comm^^^on contained,
to execute this terrible Wrath upon those Paganish Powers, which was the Stones
eminent smiting of the feet and toes of the Imrge at that time, as Dan. 2.34.
and elsewhere to like purpose, as was showed. And from thenceforward Christ the
said Lamb, as it had been slain, had further in Commission, both by reason of
the wicked Apostasy of Church and State in suc^^eding times, and to revenge the
cruel bloodshed and persecutions of the Saints, with blasphemies and other
wickedness of that Roman Empire before when Paganish, and after likewise when
it would be poisoned with Heresy, and again apostatized by Popery; so that
suitably thereunto he should bring down again the power of Satan and wicked men
in their several orders and places, as appears by the 7th Seal, opened by him
Rev. 8. wherein he was accordingly to reveal and execute God's further Wrath,
by his seven Angels with their seven Trumpets; in the four first of them
blowing out chiefly that Wrath and Judgment upon the Western Empire for the
most part, to take away him that let there the revealing of the Man of Sin
in the Western Empire, as 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. (that Antichrist might appear) And the
two following Wo-Trumpets to reveal and execute like Judgments upon the
Eastern Empire, Rev. 9. which since has almost been fulfilled upon it by the
Sarazens and Turks to this very day: And afterward by the sounding of the
seventh Trumpet, to destroy on the sudden all the wicked powers of Men and
Devils from off the face of the Earth, at the Son of Man's coming in the
clouds, and receiving his visible Kingdom on Earth from his Father, over all
Nations, People and Languages, Dan. 7.14. And the Kingdom, and the Dominion and
greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heavens, v. 27. And then at once
breaking in pieces the Iron and the Clay, and therewith the Silver and the
Gold, and Brass, and making the whole Image of the four Monarchies, that is,
the broken parts of the three former, with all that remained of the last Roman
Monarchy, viz. the last and lowest parts thereof, the feet and toes, partly of
Iron and partly of Clay, to become as the chaff of the Summer-threshing-floor,
Dan. 2.35. when the wind of that last wrath from that third Wo-Trumpet of the
7th Ange will carry them all away, as was showed before from Dan. 2. Dan. 7.
Dan. 12. and as may be observed from those parallel places, Rev. 16. toward the
end; Rev. 19.11. to the end; Rev. 11.18. which agree with the Son of man's
coming in the clouds, and when Michael shall stand up for Daniels People, and
when Antichrist shall have finished his time times and a half, to scatter the
power of the holy People, then all these things shall be finished, Dan. 12.7.
though it is made evident to Daniel that his People should have (...) troubles
before all would be finished, at the last said sudden and terrible ruin of the
Roman Monarchy by the destruction of Antichrist.

And here again, observe how God all along the Beasts forty two months, gave
his Spiritual Power unto his two Witnesses prophesying in sackcloth, those Sons
of Oil, (as they are called, Zech. 4.) to prophesy against Antichrist, to
consume him with the Spirit of Christ's mouth, (...) bring on the said
Destruction gradually, accomplished by the seve^ Angels with their seven last
Plagues poured out upon him, Rev. 15 and 16 chapters, till that Destruction be
accomplished at the seventh Trumpet and last Vial of the seventh Angel,
poured-out upon him about the said time fore-spoken of when Christ comes in the
clouds of Heaven, Dan. 7.13, 14. to receive his Monarchy upon Earth, spoken of
likewise Rev. 1.7. when the Jews shall generally be brought home unto him, as
Isa. 66.8. and when the iniquity of that Land shall be removed in one day,
Zech. 3.9. And then will the four living Wights, with the twenty four Elders,
have that honor given to them, which they were assured of to their so great
exultation aforehand, See Iren. page 32.
Rev. 5.10. and whereupon all Angels and all Creatures render to Christ the
glory due to him, which they acknowledge there to be his deservedly, saying,
Thou art worthy to receive Riches, and Power, and Wisdom, and Strength, and
Glory, and Blessing, etc. And then the Kingdom of the Stone will become a
Mountain filling the whole Earth; when there will be given to him, the Son of
man, by his Father the Ancient of days, Dominion and Glory and a Kingdom, that
all People and Nations and Languages shall serve him, and that for ever; whose
Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, that shall not pass away (as the four
former Kingdoms did) and his Kingdom such as shall not be destroyed (as the
four former were, Dan. 7.14.) with many other Texts in Daniels Visions (as we
showed;) which manifest it evidently to be to the utmost extent of Dominion,
both of place Over the whole Earth, and under the whole Heaven, as was said
chap. 7.15, 27. and of continuance and duration for ever while the World
remained, and for ever and ever to eternity, v. 18. when that Kingdom of the
Mountain shall be perfected in the Kingdom of Glory in the highest Heavens.

In that visible Kingdom of Power, Christ having received that Kingdom of his
Father, he will then give it to his Saints, who shall then take it, as Dan.
7.18. and manage it for him, as ver. 27. having the Judgment (that is, the
authority of judging) then given to them, to reign with Christ a thousand
years, Rev. 20.4. And that it is the same Kingdom, given at the same time, as
the series and order of the Prophecy of Daniel and of the Revelation both
manifest, and the same Authority of Judging in the like expressions of Ruling
and Governing, is in both places assigned to the Saints, as follows: For
first, Judicandi potestas illis facta.
Rev. 20.4. It is said, I saw Thrones, and they sat upon them.

Dan. 7.9. So I beheld till the Thrones were pitched down, and the Judgment,
that is, the Judges, were set.

Rev. 20. And Judgment was given to them.

Dan. 7.22. And Judgment was given to the Saints of the most High.

Rev. 20. And the Saints lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.

Dan. 7. And the Saints possessed the Kingdom, with Christ the Son of Man, that
came in the Clouds of Heaven.



But after the finishing of the said thousand years Reign of Christ with his
Saints on Earth, we are to observe what Christ in Rev. 20.7, 8, 9, 10. further
explains shall be fulfilled concerning the last wicked attempt of Satan after
he shall be loosed for a little season, verse. 3. from his thousand years
imprisonment in the bottomless pit; all which time he was bound, that he could
not seduce the Nations until the said thousand years were ended; namely, that
after that time was finished, that he shall then seduce the last Gog and Magog,
the wicked Hypocrites then in the World, who shall then become very numerous in
the four quarters of the Earth, from whence he shall tempt them to come with a
joint consent; who being a wicked generation that had been forced in the
thousand years, unwillingly yet-outwardly did conform to the holy and good
Government of the Saints successively, unto whom before time they were
necessitated to be subject for the said thousand years space, though against
their own heart, yet shall think then upon Satan's seducement and conduct, to
free themselves from their yoke by attempting to compass with their multitudes
the Camp of the Saints, and even attempt to besiege the beloved City too, the
New Jerusalem that came down from God out of Heaven, even Heaven it self upon
Earth; where the blessed and holy raised Saints had all the thousand years
before happily beheld Christ's glorious Presence, shining bright with light and
comfort upon them, the Lamb being in each respect the light of that City, Rev.
21.23. Isa. 60.1. expecting by such means to free themselves from that (by them
supposed) heavy yoke of the Saints good Government, that so the Kingdoms of the
World might again become the Kingdoms of Satan, and of themselves his Vassals:
Upon which abominable attempt of Satan, and those by him seduced hypocrites,
the Vengeance of God by fire (as formerly upon the Beast and false Prophet)
shall again fall from God out of Heaven upon them and devour them, and
thereupon the Devil that deceived them be cast into the lake of Fire and
Brimstone, where the said Beast and false Prophet were cast above a thousand
years before, to be perpetually there tormented with them: unto which will
succeed the end of the World, and the general judgment, when again the Judge
will sit, and the Books will be opened, and another Book will be opened, which
is the Book of Life; and the Dead shall be judged out of those things that
shall be written in the Books, according to their Works: as follows, Rev.
20.11, 12, etc. whereunto succeds Eternity of Blessedness or Misery to every
Man and Woman, accordingly as they stand or fall in that general Judgment.

And thus briefly of the main things of Christ's Kingdom in its several states,
of the Stone, and of the Mountain filling the whole earth, with what respects
the beginning and ending of the latter state of the Mountain, namely, that it
begins upon the destruction of the first Gog and Magog, to wit, of the Turk and
Pope, Ezekiel. 38. and 39. before the New Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 40. to the end of the
Book, which shall be called Jehova Shamma, the Lord is there: and at the end of
the 1000 years reign of Christ and his Saints, will succeed the attempt and
defeat and ruin of the last Gog and Magog, of wicked hypocrites against the
Camp of the Saints, and the beloved City, as was showed; upon which will ensue
the end of the World, and the general Judgment. Now in the second state of it,
we have considered the Founder of this Kingdom of the Mountain, the God of
Heaven; and the Donor of it, the Ancient of Days; the Receiver and Owner of it,
( Luke 19.12.) the Son of Man, Dan. 7.15. also the time of the setting up the
first state of it, viz. the Kingdom of the Stone, namely, In the days of one of
those Kings, in the height of the Roman Monarchy, in Augustus and Tiberius
days: the manner how it was set up in the first state, Not by power, nor by
might, but by the Spirit of the Lord of Hosts, Zech. 4.6. Also the spiritual
force and prevalency of it, to beat down, and break in pieces, and smite the
Image in the Feet and Toes of it, etc. likewise of the largeness of the tender
of the Grace of the first state, to every Creature capable, to all sorts of
People successively, till at the time of the end it shall be perfected in the
Kingdom of the Mountain, filling the whole Earth; which outwardly, visibly and
gloriously, as well as inwardly and spiritually, God, the Ancient of days, will
give to his Son, the Son of Man, upon the destruction of the Beast and false
Prophet; when Christ, the said Son of Man, shall come in the Clouds of Heaven
to receive it, who shall retain it to the end, deputing its Rule and Judgment
to his eminent raised Saints and Martyrs, who shall execute the same for him,
over all People, Nations and Languages under the whole Heaven, for the thousand
years, which afterward Christ will deliver to God the Father, 1 Cor. 15.24. for
ever after the Worlds end. In which Kingdom the Body of the Jewish converted
Nation, with faithful Israelites, Ezekiel. 37. and the abundance of the Gentiles
coming in at their rising, Isa. 60.3, 4, etc. shall continue conjoined in their
successions in one throughout the said Period, to the end of the World.

Now the most evident Forerunners of this Kingdom of the Mountain, are these:

First, The awakening ( Dan. 12.2.) of the Israelites and Jews from their
bondage and dispersion, to seek for their promised Land by such an Elias as God
will send to them before the great and terrible day of the Lord come, as
Malachy speaks, Chap. 4, 5.

Secondly, The eminent fall of Antichrist, the Pope, at the rising and
ascending of the Witnesses, Rev. 11.

The first is founded upon two Scriptural Computations: 1. Of the 1290 days of
years, Dan. 12.11. from the most probable Epoch of Julians time, about 366. or
as learned Usher, 363. ending about 1656. or sooner, which is computed, verse.
12.45 years before the standing up of Michael the Prince of Daniel's People,
Dan. 12.1, 12. about the year 1700. 2. Of the Turks date to slay the third part
of men, being the sixth Trumpet, Rev. 9. for doing of which his time is set
down by an hour, a day, a month, and a year; which date of his Mr. Mede reckons
to be 396 years, which began not long after 1300. as Chronologers compute them,
and to end about the same time: both which together may serve as a Key to open
the mystery of that largest number of 2300 years, Dan. 8. fore-spoken of in the
fifth head of the Roman Monarchy. Page 34


Again, 2dly. That Antichrists eminent fall is near in the tenth part of the
City, Rev. 11. seems probable, 1. From the beginning of his rise at one hour
with the ten Kings, or his crowned Horns, that should give their power to the
Beast, Rev. 17. which seems to be manifest about 406. by the Author of
[Excidium Antichristi] lately published, and so his date reaches to about 1666.

Secondly, By the pouring out of the Vials, 1. Upon the Popes Earth, in
discovering him to be Antichrist. 2. Upon his Seas, when many Nations, Tongues,
and People fell off from him. 3. Upon his Rivers and Fountains, which Mr. Mede
seems firly to apply to the Popes Emissaries, Priests, Jesuits, and other
seducers, who were resirained by a Law made by Q. Eliz. whereby they had blood
to drink, etc. Rev. 16.6. with like things then done elsewhere, etc. since
which time in about 100 years that third Vial and two others are conceived to
have passed, and now the sixth to be begun; so that (probably) about the like
proportion the seventh Vial may be poured out to the Popes utter ruin, when
the seventh Trumpet begins to sound; (probably) about the foresaid period.

Some Observations from the whole.
IT remains now in the last place, that we lay down some general Observations,
to be left to be enlarged, and particularly improved by all judicious and
discerning Christians, as Gods Spirit may guide them therein.

First, As the summary of all Religion shows that the eternal Counsel of God is
always exactly and perfectly in fulfilling, so Gods more especial revealing to
the greatly beloved Prophet Daniel, the orders, the times, the state, the
nature, the rise and the ruin of the four great Monarchies of the World, that
should successively oppress the Jews; to inform the faithful in all ages
following, that God orders according to his most wise counsel, all the
sufferings and trials of his People, men cannot add in the least to their
measure or continuance, above what God has in his most wise counsel appointed.
Therefore trust in the Lord at all times and in all conditions; for as he
orders all things in the greatest Monarchies, so all for the good of his poor
and faithful servants yet in wonderful varieties of his most wise dispensations
ever to be adored. Therefore, if ye see injustice or oppression in a City,
marvel not at it: as Solomon says.

Secondly, As God revealed to Daniel all the Jews oppressors in order with the
times of them, both how many, and how long they should be so held under by
them: So thereby take notice how gracious God is to his faithful People in the
worst times, to let them have ground of comfort, that his Peoples Sufferings
are here limited by himself, and that they might not be without ground of
Faith and Hope of good in the issue of them.

Thirdly, As Daniel saw in Vision the rise of all, so the ruin of them; to
teach the Faithful in their successions to look through the dark Clouds and
Storms of Persecution, to the bright Sunshine that will follow, and in the
dark night of afflictions to the rising of the Sun of Righteousness with
healing in his wings; and that the triumph of enemies in wickedness does but
foreshew their dectruction.

Fourthly, As the Jews at the height of their provocations were captivated by
the Babylontans; and the Israelites before them by the Assyrians; so therein
the impartial justice of God is to be acknowledged, who is so far from sparing
a People, upon whom his Name is called, if they sin against him, that the
nearer he has brought them to himself, he does the more severely punish them
when they greatly rebel against him.

Fifthly, As Judah had a deliverance after seventy years from the captivity of
Babylon, by Cyrus King of Persia, but not the Tribes of Israel from Assyria: So
those that God brings most near unto him, and have most interest in him, he is
propense to show them more mercy, than others that have been more estranged
from him.

Sixthly, As there was a remarkable degree of mercy vouchsafed unto the Jews
after their return from Babylon, even till Christ came in the flesh; thence
take notice, That Gods ancient Promises to the faithful forefathers will
certainly take effect, though their Posterity may for a long time be unworthy
thereof, for the generality of them.

Seventhly, As Judah after their reducement from captivity, were much in an
oppressed and troubled estate, by the three last Oppressors of them; so God
suits the condition of a sinful People, though near unto him, answerable to
their unworthy walking toward him.

Eighthly, As Israel and Judah have had so long time of captivity and bondage
under so many Oppressors successively: So thence may be observed the greatness
of their provocation, that moved God so heavily, and so long time, by such sad
calamities successively to scourge them.

Ninthly, As God had made great and large promises of wonderful mercy to his
People after all the times of their sufferings were over: So he would by the
Visions of Daniel let all his faithful People know thathe was mindful to
perform them all, though it was very long before their deserved sufferings
would be accomplished.

Tenthly, As the wonderful excellency and grace of Christ's Kingdom on earth
has been anciently recorded, and excellently described by the Spirit of Christ
in his Prophets, in all times of the Old Testament successively: So the
wonderful blessedness which the faithful shall enjoy in that state, will prove
worth patient waiting for, when it shall be enjoyed by them.

Eleventhly, As the Gentile Christians were surrogated in the room of the
rebellious Jews, when they were cast off; So observe, That long enjoyment of
Gods mercy, if it be abused, is far from entailing it upon any People; and,
that no People have been so estranged from God (as were the Gentiles a very
long time) but God may have mercy and grace in store for them in his good time.

Twelfthly, As the times of the Gentiles have been eminently more gracious
since the Jews long rejection and cutting off; So the heinous abuse of such
clear and precious grace will make their judgment the more heavy, as will be
manifest in the Popes destruction, especially who has most wickedly turned the
glorious Revelation of the mystery of the Gospel into a pernicious mystery of
iniquity.

Thirteenthly, And as the last Gog and Magog, after the thousand years of
Christ's reign upon earth, will sin most heinously against all former examples
of judgments, and against the most glorious grace set before them in the
Kingdom of Christ the said thousand years; So when they shall against all means
and warnings, and from an inward hatred of goodness follow Satan's last
seducement, to attempt to compass, with their multitudes, the Camp of the
Saints about, and the beloved City: Then God will thereby be so highly provoked
to wrath both against them and the Devil together, that his just vengeance will
fall from heaven upon them, and utterly abandon both Satan and all wicked men
from the face of the earth, so putting an end unto the world.

Fourteenthly, As the fierceness of Gods wrath declared from his Word will be
shortly executed upon Antichrist and his followers in these last and worst
days of Satan's wicked Dominion; So let the consideration thereof be a strong
enforcement to all sorts of men now especially to flee far from Babylon and
Popist seducements, lest they partake of those Plagues and heavy Judgments
hastening to fall on her and them.

Fifteenthly, As God has in his Word recorded several remarkable computations
of times, respecting both Jews and Gentiles in these latter days: So both
should thence be awakened to behold and consider such marks and signs of these
times, that they may especially in these last days prepare for the glorious
coming and appearance of Christ, now near approaching: For (says he himself)
of these very times; Behold I come as a thief, blessed is he that watches and
keeps his garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame, Rev. 16.15.

For now the Adversary watches so much the more diligently and maliciously,
endeavoring to destroy, and that as a ramping and roaring Lion seeking whom he
may devour, by how much he knows that his time in the world is short. And
that day also will come as a snare upon all them that dwell upon the face of
the whole earth, as our Savior himself showed, Luke 21.35. after he had
particularly declared many signs of these last times, now for the most part
accomplished: And thereupon in the next verse, enforces this duty of watching
with prayer, to this end, that they might escape those terrible things that
then at Christ's appearing shall come to pass, and also stand before the Son of
man; which they cannot do without keeping their garments, to wit, those
spiritual garments of Justification by Faith in Christ Jesus, and of inward
Sanctification by Divine Grace in their hearts and souls, showing their living
in the Spirit, by their walking in the Spirit, Romans 8. Both which garments must
be adorned with a Godly and Christian conversation in the sight of men, that
they seeing their good works, may glorify their Father which is in heaven:
Otherwise their shame, as our Savior forewarns, will be manifest before
himself, the great Judge (then) and Angels and men. And they will be found
naked, and lie open (then) to the fierceness of that great and dreadful storm
of the wrath of the Lamb; when will be such a time of trouble, as never was
since there was a Nation, Dan. 12.1. And so great an earthquake as was not
since men were upon the earth, so mighty an earthquake and so great, Rev.
16.18. So that well might our Savior at such a time pronounce them blessed
that so duly watch and pray and keep their garments; which he of his infinite
mercy teach and enable all his faithful People rightly to perform; who by his
own most powerful grace works all their works for them, in the use of his own
good means, and according to the good pleasure of his most holy will, to the
eternal praise of divine Gospel Grace in him the Beloved. Amen.

To the Christian Reader.
Reader,
THE Penman of the preceding parcels, aiming therein next to the glory of
Divine Grace and Truth, at this double benefit to all sorts of persons in the
Church of God in these days, to prevent their evil, and promote their good,
whether they be Independent, Prelatical, or Presbyterian, as to Discipline,
provided they be truly Christian, as to Principles of Doctrine. Yea, and yet
further, Though Seas bear the names of their distinct Coasts, it is all the
same kind of Water.
even aiming at the true good of so many invisible members of Christ's Church,
as yet remain to be called out of great Mystical Babylon it self, that they may
not partake of any of her Plagues, Rev. 18. And this for all such the rather,
however differing in the Modes, Forms, and Ways of seeking, serving, and
worshipping of the great God in Spirit and Truth, and so being real members of
Christ's mystical Body do love him in sincerity; and consequently must love one
another as such (though the selfish persons of all those said ways love
themselves only in reality, and all or any others only for self-respects) But
let sound Christians of all sorts know, Though Rivers fall fiercely into the
Seas, yet suddenly become one with it: there is one Faith, one Hope, to Gods
People: one God and Father of all: who by such graces in Christ makes his all
one in Spirit and soul: We must therefore beware of Disunion, etc.
that herein is Satan's Masterpiece in these divided, and sadly still dividing
times, to work what disunion he can amongst those which he knows (though few
yet believe it) shall shortly be one, or made perfect in one, as our Savior
prajed, John 17. Therefore to prevent Satan's design, all such have great need to
pray and labor earnestly for Unity; and this cannot be without putting on the
Apostles bond of perfection, true Christian charity, so excellently decyphered
1 Cor. 13.4, 5, 6, 7. whose Office is not so much to find what fault she can,
as to hide what faults she may in others; and is not so sollicirous about the
cutting off or ordering the hair of Christ's Spouse, or paring her nails (which
nature will teach) as to preserve her body and person safe and sound; and yet
this Charity will not be without her inseparable companion also Purity, but she
must keep close to her three necessary attendants, Holiness, Righteousness, and
Sobriety, according to Gods pure Word, Psalm. 12. and 19. for without these, all
pretenses of Purity, Piety, or any thing respecting Religion, how specious
outwardly, or otherwise soever they may appear, are but mere vanity at the
best, lut also lesides that, may have many abominations in them, etc. That one
Rule for edification, 1 Cor. 14.26. would regulate all such things amiss: for
what respects Order and Decency, verse. 4. would so in their natural course fall
in of themselves.

The said Penman apprehending these Doctrines of Christ's Kingdom, very
pertinent to improve and increase these needful Graces, gives thee, Christian
Reader, this direction, to use this his prefent help to those ends. First, That
thou may find the Key of such Doctrines by some light of the Book of the
Revelations of Jesus Christ: use that short cornprisal in the Forerunner,
dated May 20. 1664. page 22, 23, 24, etc. And that Summary of the said Book,
given to the Lamb, Rev. 5. In the Irenicon, page 26, 27, 28, 29, etc. which,
together with the Paper of December 7. 1664. In the Forerunner, page 26, 27,
28, 29, etc. Which may serve for many persons as an A. B. C. to spell the
meaning, in some useful measure, of that divine Book; and reckon likewise the
Abridgment on Daniels Visions, a like A. B. C. to spel out some things of that
Book also: and by the help of both those A. B. C's. thou art like to make a
more profitable use of the ensuing Parallel, which contains again, a Summary of
the main matters of both those Books; jointly witnessing unto the same divine
Truth (though the Revelation is the sure Key to unlock Daniel's (before shut
up) Visions in great part) by which means, with Prayer, etc. thou may by
Gods blessing find much light come into thy soul, respecting many other
portions of holy Scriptures, etc. I suppose thy reason will ldirect thee to turn
to pertinent quotations: First, Of Scriptures, only pointed out for brevity.
And Secondly, Of any other of these parcels referred unto for thy advantage;
and these latter parts after the Irenicon, being attentively so perused, will
much enable thee to get a discovery of the substance of all matters contained
in the whole work.

FINIS.
Page 19. line 22. read sheltered, not shattered.


