A LOOKING-GLASS, OR, PARALLEL, OPPOSING The PROFANE, Carnal PROFESSOR, and
true BELEIVER, one to the other.
Profane, Professors, Beleivers, 1. ARe many to Professors, To Beleivers, The
fewest of all, 2. Rest on forms at best, Are but Formalists, Rest not on
formalities, 3. Hate profession, Profese only, Profess and do, 4. Are ignorant
of the Scriptures, Of the truth of the Scriptures, Are acquainted with both, 5.
Will learn nothing, Are ever learning, Increase in knowledge, 6. Tread Christ's
blood under foot. Know not its worth, Acknowledge its excellency, 7. Are led
about by Satan, By their own lusts, Only by the Spirit, 8. Are weary of good
duties, Grow weaker in them, Renew their strength, 9. Grow daily more vile, Wax
worse, and worse, Are best at last, 10. Say they believe, yet believe not. Say
they desire to believe, Believe, yet desire more faith, 11. Use no means but by
constraint, Use means and rest there, Use means, yet rest on none, 12. Think
they may use too much means, Limit themselves, Use means most of all, 13. Think
they may be too holy. Are never truly holy, Have perfect holiness in Christ,
14. Cannot endure to be questioned about Religion, Are full of questions,
Desire to be thoroughly tried, 15. Change Religion with the times, Are easily
changed, Not by death or torture, 16. Will not suffer for Religion, Not much,
Suffer joyfully, 17. Say they are more then they seem, Seem more then they are,
Are more then they seem, 18. Hate all show of Religion, All power, Have both,
19. Are Key-cold, Lukewarm, Truly hot, 20. Are devout, the Sacrament near, The
Sacrament day. Truly devout always, 21. Are glad when the Sabbath's over, When
it comes they say, Rejoice most in that day, 22. Care not for duties, Know not
how to do them, Look for help from Christ, 23. Say they are Sinners, but think
not so, Think they are Sinners, but not sin it self, Know that they are nothing
else but sin, 24. Talk of Christ occasionaly, Speak of him purposely, Delight
only in him, 25. Call for Gospel, Gospel, For Law; Law, For both, 26. Cry down
terrible preaching, Comfortable preaching, Take pleasure in both, 27. Are not
humbled by the Law, Not comforted by the Gospel, Are by both, 28. Account the
Law railing, The Gospel Daubing, Know the use of both, 29. Abuse the Gospel to
looseness, The Law to despair, Use both aright, 30. Place Religion in good
meaning, In good doing, In faith in Christ, 31. Are strangers to all
Righteousness, To Evangelicall Righteousness, Know Christ's Righteousness, 32.
Put all on Christ, and do nothing, Do all and leave Christ nothing, Do most,
yet find fullness in Christ, 33. Zealous at Common Prayer. At Sermons or Fasts,
Always, 34. Talk little of Religion. Will talk much, Know how to be silent,
35. Know no assurance of Salvation, Are never assured, Strive for, and may be
infallibly certain, 36. Brag of any good they do, Are boasters but craftily,
Deny themselves. 37. Post off Repentance till last. Are repenting, yet repent
not, Repent, yet rest only on faith in Christ, 38. Would be Professors at
death, Beleivers at death, Live by faith in life and death, 39. Glory in sin,
In sinful duties, In Christ's Cross, 40. Cavell most at Profession, At
beleiving, Profess and believe, 41. Raise slanders of Professors, Of Beleivers,
Of none, 42. Shun Professors company, Beleivers fellowship, Embrace Beleivers
in love, 43. Join with Atheists rather then Professors, With profane then
beleivers, Love their like, 44. Watch for Professors halting, Beleivers
tripping, Are grieved at both, 45. Publish Professors faults, Beleivers
infirmities, Cover all in love, 46. Mock Professors, Gird at beleivers, Bear
all for Christ, 47. Hate Reprovers, Bear rebukes hardly, Love such above all,
48. Are implacable to Professors, Are so to Beleivers, Are easily appeased, 49.
Take revenge on Professors, On Beleivers, Leave all to God, 50. Deride the
brotherhood, Hold fraternity in time of peace, Part not with it to death, 51.
Are terrified by troubles, Ever Cast down, Glory in Tribulation, 52. Love not
tidings of death, Loath to dye, Long for Christ's coming, 53. Love the praise of
men, Affect applause, Give all glory to God, 54. Are all for the world, Are
much entangled therewith, Are Heavenly minded, 55. Are hard hearted, Close
fisted, Liberal minded, 56. Nourish base Lusts, Have their beloved sins, Hate
all sin truly, 57. Are sad in Professors company, In Beleivers fellowship, Joy
in such Society, 58. Nickname Professors, Beleivers, Are nicknamed of all, 59.
Are high-minded, Much exalted, Are meek and lowly, 60. Love none heartily, Love
in word, Love Believers til death, 61. Requite good with evil, Evil with
evil, Evil with good, 62. Hate their Enemies, Love their friends, Love their
Enemies, 63. Are apt for Lawsuits, Will go to Law for little, Are hardly
provoked, 64. Glory in their Wealth, Are highly exalted thereby, Are content in
all Estates, 65. Are all for mirth, Will be wantonly merry, Rejoice not in sin
at all, 66. Will venture Soul for gain, Will hazard much that way, Love not
filthy lucre, 67. Are all for their belly, Great belly Gods, Hunger more for
Christ, 68. Would have States put down all show of godliness, All truth and
power, To maintain both, 69. Are careless of Salvation, Careful only for that,
To walk as the saved, 70. By sinning grow more expert, More wary, More weakened
to it, 71. Keep others from Profession, Think it enough to profess themselves,
Labor the conversion of others, 72. Are not Professors, nor will be, Are not
beleivers, yet seem to be, Are both, 73. Hear but keep nothing, Hear and
repeat, Hear, repeat, and retain, 74. Are open enemies to Christ's Cross, Secret
Adversaries, Are hearty lovers of the Cross of Christ, 75. Know not Christ at
all, Love him not, Love him unfainedly, 76. Are Devils in black, Devils in
white, Glorious Saints,

By S. S.

