CERTAIN QUERIES Concerning the Receiving of the Sacrament. Preached in a
SERMON ON Saint Luke 9. Verse. 30, 31.

By Richard Standfast, M.A. Rector of Christ-Church within the City of Bristol.

LONDON: Printed for Charles Allen, Bookseller in Bristol, 1680.

CERTAIN QUERIES Concerning the Receiving of the SACRAMENT.
THE Lord Jesus Christ was Transfigured on the Holy Mount, in the presence of
Saint Peter, James, and John, who were eyewitnesses of his Glory: For behold,
there talked with him two men, which were Moses and Elias, who appeared in
glory, and spoke of his decease, which he should accomplish at Jerusalem. By
which passage it is manifest, that among all the Subjects in the world, there
is not any that does more deserve our diligent inquiry, meditation, discourse,
and conference, than the Death and Passion of our Blessed Savior.

And from hence it will appear how much they deserve to be blamed, who
professing Christianity, and living in a Church where this Sacrament may be
had, duly administered according to Christ's own Institution; (and such we are
sure the Church of England to be) shall yet, either out of ignorance, faction,
or profaneness, live in the continual neglect of it, as if the Table of the Lord
were a contemptible thing, and this blessed Sacrament a needless matter, and
lightly to be esteemed. Especially considering that this blessed Sacrament was
ordained by Christ himself, for the continual remembrance of his Death, and of
the benefits which we receive thereby.

For whose conviction and reformation these few lines were intended, whereunto
if they prove effectual, I have my desire: However I have endeavored to
deliver my own soul.

The Queries are these following.

Quer. 1. Whether the deliverance of mankind from the slavery of sin and Satan,
Death and Hell, do not as well deserve to be kept in remembrance, as the
deliverance of the people of Israel out of the land of Egypt, and the house of
bondage? Or, which is in substance all one, Whether there be not as much or
more reason for celebrating of the Lord's Supper, than there was of old for
observing of the Passover?

See Exodus 12.25, 26, 27. their bondage was but a Type of our slavery under
Satan; their deliverance a Type of ours; their Paschal Lamb a Type of our
Jesus; the sprinkling of the blood of the Lamb secured them from the destroying
Angel; the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus upon us will secure us from the
wrath to come, for which we are bound to praise God for ever.

Surely if they had reason to keep their Passover, we have as much, if not more
reason to observe the Lord's Supper, for a memorial that Christ our Passover is
sacrificed for us.

Qu. 2. Whether the celebrating of the Lords Supper, be not as much under
command now as ever the observing of the Passover was of old?

God gave the Jews a special command about observing the Passover, insomuch
that the Passover is called the ordinance of God; yea, an Ordinance to them and
their sons for ever; i.e. as long as their State and Political Government did
continue, Exodus 12.24. We also have a command for the Lord's Supper, when our
Savor said, Do this in remembrance of me; which words of command belong not
only to Christ's Clergy, Disciples, but even to all; for if some are bound to
take, break, and bless, others must be bound to eat and drink, if some are
bound to administer, others are bound to receive, or else what need of any
administration? Nor does this command show only what may be done, but what must
be done, and so make it not only a free will offering, but a necessary duty,
insomuch that to neglect it is the breach of a Commandment, and must needs be
sinful before God.

Nay there are circumstances which will aggravate the sin; for this was
instituted by a loving Master, by a dying Savior, as his last words, Will and
Testament in memorial of the greatest love that ever was shown, and it was
ordained to be an Ordinance for ever: In doing (...) we show forth the Lords
death till he come; i.e. 'till he come again to Judgment. As long as we live
here upon earth, we shall have need of frequent Communicating; when we come to
Heaven, we shall have no need of any Sacrament, for we shall then enjoy the
substance it self: but while we live here, Christ has complied with our
infirmity, and has made it an Ordinance for ever, even to the end of the
World; and therefore they must needs be the more sinful before God that shall
totally neglect it.

Qu. 3. Whether the breach of this command do not as well deserve to be as
severely punished, as the not keeping the Passover?

Almighty God was so careful for every man to keep the Passover, that if he
were not in a condition fit to keep it on the time appointed; scil. the
fourteenth day of the first Month, he was to keep it on the fourteenth day of
the second Month; and if having no lawful impediment he did not observe it, he
was to be cut off from his people, and to bear his sin, Numb. 9.5, 11, 13.
Exscindetur a populis suis, i.e. Hic and in futuro saeculo a sanctorum
consortio excludetur: So Junius, he shall be shut out from the Communion of
Saints both here and hereafter.

Now where there is a parity of sin, there may well be feared a parity of
judgment; and he that thus excludes himself from the society of Gods people
here, is not like to be numbered with the Saints hereafter.

Qu. 4. Whether there can be any better way for the commemoration of the death
of Christ, than that which was instituted by Christ himself for that very
purpose?

In this we show forth the Lords death, and Christ is set forth lively
crucified; neither is the bread and wine only a bare sign or representation of
the body and blood of Christ thus crucified, and thus shed for us, but it is
signum exhibitivum, it is the Communion of the body and blood of Christ, 1 Cor.
10.16. i e. the Communication; for therein there is a real exhibition, a true
tender and proffer of the body and blood of Christ unto every Communicant for
the remission of our sins, and salvation of our souls, and this nothing can do
but Christ's own institution.

Crucifixes, whether in picture, or in carving, either in wood or metal, are
but the imperfect and dangerous inventions of men. Imperfect, for they may
delineate one suffering upon a Cross, which may be as well one of the Thieves
as Christ, and can represent but the suffering of the body, not of the soul;
and but of his Humanity, but cannot represent his Divinity; nor can they
represent the benefits of his Passion: And thus far they may be dangerous, that
thereby men may be invited to superstition and Idolatry; and at best, it is but
the invention of man, and no way fit to come into competition with the command
and institution of our Blessed Savior; and if we shall think that we can
continue the remembrance of the Death of Christ as well by any other means as
the Sacrament, I should think this were to disparage the Wisdom of Christ, and
to make our selves wiser than him; and how he will like of such doings, judge ye.

Qu. 5. Whether the receiving of this Blessed Sacrament be not the great badg
of our Christian, Protestant profession, and witness of our Christianity, a
discriminating of us from all false Religions, and evidencing to the world our
dependence upon Christ for our remission, righteousness, peace, sanctification,
resurrection and salvation?

He that is baptized in the name of Christ in his infancy, may renounce it, and
revolt from it when he comes of years: He that is a Jew, a Turk, yea a Papist,
it is possible that such men may come into our public Assemblies, we do not use
to shut our doors, or to keep any out from hearing of the Gospel, or from being
present at our prayers, unless they are Excommunicate; so that by all this
outward appearance no man can certainly discover what we are; but if we
conscientiously come to this Holy Table, and partake of this blessed Sacrament,
even by so doing we do declare to the world, as much as outward actions can
discover it, that we are Christians, that we are Protestants, and that we do
depend upon the Lord Jesus Christ only, for pardon of our sins, and salvation
of our souls: Insomuch that he who lives in the total neglect of this so
necessary a duty may very well be thought to give the world too much occasion
to think, that either he has as yet his Religion to choose, or that he is not
willing the world should know what Religion he is of.

Qu. 6. Whether the great neglect of this holy duty does not justly deserve to
have it altogether taken from us, and provoke God to send it to another people
that shall be more thankeful for it, and make a better use of it?

The fountain of Goodness cannot endure to be laden at with unthankful hands;
and this we must needs grant, that the vouchsafing of us the liberty of his
Table, savours of extraordinary favor, and love inestimable: While we have
this favor, the glory of God abides amongst us, and the Almighty Goodness is
pleased in a special manner to communicate Himself unto us; and it must needs
be a high privilege for us sinful creatures to be admitted to be feasted with
him at his Holy Table.

Now the greater mercy it is for God thus to condescend unto men, the greater
must needs be the sin in the neglecting of it, and the greater comfort there
may be had in this blessed Ordinance, the more are we enemies to our selves in
the neglecting thereof; and we cannot but confess that God may justly take that
from us which we so little care for, and which we so undervalue as totally to
neglect it.

Is it not thus among men? who will continue favors to those that care not for
them? to those that slight and neglect them? and it is but reasonable that God
should leave us to our selves, and to our own inventions, that account his
favors needless things, and shall undervalue so great salvation.

We are told of some guests that were invited to a great feast, and they took
occasion to be out of the way, which was so displeasing to the great
feast-maker, that he resolved that not one of them that were bidden should so
much as taste of his Supper. And if God should deal so by us, and either take
this blessed Ordinance quite from us, or suffer us to be cheated with an
Idolatrous Mass in the stead thereof, we cannot accuse God of any injustice,
but must needs acknowledge that he has dealt with us but according to our
deserts.

I must needs confess, that if God should give us up as a prey to those that
hate both us, our Religion, and our Peace, which God in mercy prevent: I am
very apt to think that the great neglect of this blessed Sacrament would be one
of the chief reasons which would provoke God so to do.

Qu. 7. Whether the presence of any unworthy Communicant can be a sufficient
excuse for our neglecting of our duty?

Far be it from me to plead one word in the behalf of those that are in deed
and in truth unworthy Communicants; and it were to be wished, that Discipline
were so vigilant, and put in such due execution, that those that are really
unworthy, might be debarred this holy Communion, 'till they had manifested an
hearty sorrow for their past offenses, and a serious resolution for the
reforming of their ways; but if we will allow their presence to be a sufficient
excuse for the omission of our duty, no man can have any comfort in his own
Communicating, unless he could be assured that no hypocrite were present, which
cannot be done but by Divine revelation.

Besides this, let me desire you to take notice of that passage, Joh. 13.10,
11. Ye are clean, but not all, for he knew who should betray him; therefore
said he, Ye are not all clean. Upon which words Saint Augustine does thus
descant: If the presence of Judas could have polluted the rest of the Apostles,
Christ would have said, there are none of you clean, because there is one
amongst you that does defile you; and he would have stayed till Judas had been
gone out, and then he would have said, Now ye are clean, because he is gone
that did defile you; but Christ says while Judas was present, Now are ye
clean, but not all, because there was one amongst them that was unclean.
Whereby, says he, it is manifest, that, In eodem caetu hominum etiam
Sacramenta sumentium, aliquorum immunditiem aliis obesse non posse: As my
worthiness cannot benefit another, so neither can his unworthiness be any
hinderance to me, if I come rightly prepared. And this I am persuaded the
rather to believe, because among the Guests which came to the Wedding, he that
came without a Wedding Garment, was the only man that was questioned for his
unworthiness; it was not said to the rest, Why came ye along in this man's
company? or there are none of you welcome because this man is in your company;
but only, Friend, how came thou in hither? Mat. 22.12. And this I am sure is
according to Saint Paul's Doctine, 1 Cor. 11.29. He that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself, not to another. And
therefore this can be no sufficient excuse.

Qu. 8. Whether real unworthiness, i.e. whether living in Drunkenness,
Adultery, Envy, Hatred, etc. can be sufficient to exempt us from the obligation
to our duty?

Now to this I answer, that none of these can exempt us from the obligation to
our duty, the obligation is still upon us, for we are under a command; and
whatever our condition be, the command is in force: But what then, must we come
though we be unworthy? No, by no means, but we are bound to put away our
unworthiness, that we may the better perform our duty.

I know it will be said, I fear I am not worthy; and if I come unworthily, I
become guilty of the body and blood of the Lord Jesus, and so eat and drink to
my self damnation; and were it not better for me to forbear, than to come
unworthily? Unto this I have many things to say.

First, Here Is a fair show and pretense of humility, and some pretended
reverence to the Ordinance of God; but pretense of humility, may possibly prove
one of the depths of Satan; this brought in of old the worshipping of Angels,
Col. 2.18. for in pretense of humility they would not make so bold as to make
their addresses unto God immediately themselves, because they were such
unworthy creatures, and therefore thought it fitter to make their approaches by
the mediation of Angels; and what mischief this pretense of humility was like
to have done Saint Peter, we may find, Joh. 13.8. for had he had his desire at
that present, it would have excluded him from having any part in the Lord Jesus.

Besides, thou fear thou art unworthy; but let me ask, Is it thy fear that
makes thee so to think? the more fearful any man is, the more careful he will
be to avoid the danger; what makes any man fear? has he examined himself? if
not, it is his own fault; if he has examined, and finds himself so to be, it
is his greater fault if he does not reform himself. Self-examination is not to
keep us from, but to fit us for the Sacrament. Let a man examine himself, and
so let him eat, not stay away. And our Savior has taught us, when we come to
offer our gift, and there remember that our brother has ought against us, not
to carry our gift away, but to leave it there, and to go first and be
reconciled to our brother, and then come and offer the gift, Mat. 5.23, 24.

If thou art not fit, thou may be; Gods commands bring no men into snares:
and therefore here it will be worthy to know what that is that makes us
unworthy Communicants.

There is a twofold worthiness, the one is in strictness of justice, and so
there is none so worthy but that he must confess with the Church, We are not
worthy so much as to gather up the crumbs that are under thy Table. And there is
a worthiness of acceptance, a meetness and fitness to be partakers of these
holy Mysteries, according to which we may every one say with Hezekiah, The good
Lord pardon every one that prepares his heart to seek God, the Lord God of his
Fathers, though he be not cleansed according to the purification of the
Sanctuary, 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19.

There is also a twofold unworthiness: The one of Infirmity: The other of an
evil Conscience. That of Infirmity is what the best are liable unto, when by
reason of our frailty we come not up to that height which is required of us:
The other is of an evil Conscience, which is, when we know that we live in some
sins that we are resolved not to part with, nor repent of; this alone is that
unworthiness which will make us unworthy Communicants; and he that is thus
unworthy is an enemy to his own Salvation, because he loves to go on in
wickedness, and how can that man expect the mercy of God? And yet this
unworthiness cannot exempt us from the obligation to our duty, neither does God
necessitate any man to do evil, for he requires us to Communicate, and shows us
the way to do it worthily; and that is, by repenting us truly of our sins, and
steadfastly purposing to lead a new life. And this be sure of, he that fears to
come unworthily for fear of damnation, that man will be as much afraid to stay
away unworthily for fear of wilful disobedience against God.

We use to say, Of two evils, choose the least; but this holds true in penal
only, not sinful evils; for of sinful we are to choose neither. Nor does God
ever bring men into such straits, but that he shows a way how to come out of
them; and therefore the case is not rightly stated, which is better, but which
is worse; for both of them are sinful before God; and he that refuses to
receive upon this account, may as well refuse to hear the Word of God, lest it
should become the savor of death unto death, in refusing to conform himself to
the Directions thereof.

Qu. 9. Whether he that lives in such an unworthiness, as makes him really to
be an unworthy Communicant, be not also unfit to hear, pray, or die? and he
that is so, must needs be in a sad condition.

To repent truly of our sins, to have a lively faith in Gods mercy through
Christ, and to be in charity with all men, will make a man a meet Communicant;
and without this a man can neither be fit to pray, hear, nor die.

That we may hear as we ought, we must lay apart all filthiness, and receive
the ingrafted word; and we must believe, for it profits not if not mixed with
faith in them that hear it; and we must be doers of the Word, and not hearers
only, or else it will never save our souls: and that Word requires that all our
works be done in charity.

Would we pray? how shall we call upon him in whom we have not believed? and if
we regard wickedness in our hearts, he will not hear us; and how can we pray to
God to forgive us our trespasses, unless we forgive them that trespass against
us? And if we die in impenitence, unbelief, and disobedience, how can we expect
the Resurrection of the body unto life everlasting? If we are fit for these, we
are fit for the Sacrament: if we still neglect the Sacrament, we may as well be
thought to neglect all the rest; and he that lives in that neglect, he is not
worthy the name of a Christian.

Qu. 10. And last, Whether in all excuses that we make for our neglect,
wilfulness be not the principal ingredient? and if we are resolved to follow
our own wills more than the will of God, how can our conversation be suitable
to the Gospel?

In St. Luke 14.18. we find mention of a man that made a great Supper, and bad
many, and they straitway began to make excuse; they were but beginning, they
never made a complete excuse; they began, but they never finished; and indeed
there is no end of making excuses; but their excuses were in effect but denials;
and Saint Matthew says in a like case, that when they were bid, they would not
come, Mat. 22.3.

There Is the truth of the matter, and so it will be interpreted another day.
And the more wilful such neglect is, the more sinful it will be found before
God.

For the close of all.

I will only add this one particular.

It is Christ alone that is the Consolation of Israel, neither is there
salvation in any other; and there is none of us all, but when we come to die,
we would be willing to pray with Saint Stephen, Lord Jesus receive my spirit;
but if our Consciences should then say unto us, You have often refused to
receive Christ heretofore, and how can you now think he will receive you? You
have often refused to receive Christ in the way of his own institution, and how
can you expect he should receive you into everlasting habitations? would not
this be a sad thought at your last departure?

Think on this.

FINIS.
A POSTSCRIPT to the Christian Reader.
THE great neglect of that Blessed Sacrament is so common amongst us, that it
is, and ought to be just matter of a sad lamentation; this was the occasion of
the first composing, and is now of the present publishing of this little paper;
it is but a little one, and yet big enough through the blessing of God to
convince the guilty. And as little as it is, it will one day be found to be a
great witness against such as continue obstinate; and it will also witness for
me, and of my aim and desire to do good.

Who am thine in the Lord Jesus, R. S.


