A short Account of the Process and Trial at the Instance of His Majesty's
Advocat, by special Order of His Majesty's Privy Council, against Thomas Frazer
of Beaufort, and Captain Simeon. Frazer his Son, and their Accomplices, for the
Crimes of Treason, and other Crimes contained in their Indictment.
LOrd Lovat having deceased in the year 1696, leaving four Daughters under age,
in the keeping and custody of their Mother; and the Right of Succession,
according to the Tenor of the Lord Lovat's Infeftments, as well as by his own
express Deeds, divolving upon the eldest Daughter: Nevertheless Thomas Fraser
of Beaufort, and Captain Simeon Fraser his Son, pretending, That they were the
apparent Heirs Male of the Family, and alleging (without any ground) that the
Right of Succession of the Estate of Lovat should only appertain to them;
endeavor to Possess those of the Name, and the Vassals and dependers on the
Family, (who make a numerous Clan in the Highland parts) That the young Lady
the Heiress was to be disposed upon by her Mother and Friends, to a Stranger,
and that thereby their Clan and Chiftainrie (Names of great Value, with that
sort of people) were to be broken, and they brought under Subjection to a
Foreign Lord and Master.

Whereupon the said Thomas Fraser, with his Son Simeon Fraser, (tho Persons of
no Estate, and who for a long time had lived precariously by the allowance and
tollerance of the Lord Lovat, upon a piece of Land of his called Beaufort) do
enter into a Combination and Conspiracy with those of the Name of Faser, whom
they could induce to follow them; and first, holding secret Councils, and
signing Bonds and Leagues amongst themselves, and then making open Convocations
and Rendevouzes in Arms, they resolve about the Month of September, 1697, to
invade and possess the Estate and Lordship of Lovat (to which they knew
perfectly that they had no legal Right or Title) by plain Force and Violence.
And thus proceeding from one Step and Degree of Violence to another, they break
out into a treasonable rising in Arms, and open and manifest Rebellion against
his Majesty. And that attended with the Aggravations of such insolent and
horrid Crimes, as have scarce been heard of in any Civil Nation or Kingdom.

But because the exact account of these their Crimes and Treasons, as also of
the Method taken by the Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council to reduce them to
a better Mind, and prevent the foresaid Extreamities, will best appear from the
two libels or Inditements, which upon t^ occasion are raised against them; the
just and full doubles thereof were and are as follows.

The just double of the first Libel or Indictment exhibit and insisted upon, by
his Majesty's Advocat, before the Lords of her Majesty's Justiciary at
Edinburgh, the 5th. day of September School, Against Thomas Fraser of Beaufort,
and Captain Simon Fraser his Son, and their Accomplices afternamed.
THat where, by the Laws of this, and all other well governed Nations, the
Crimes of Treason and Rebellion; As likewise of unlawful Leagues and
Combinations, and the convocating and conveening of Subjects in Arms, without
the warrant of Authority, and the ocupying, possessing, stuffing, and
fortifying of Houses and Forts, with armed Men, and other Provisions: As also,
the way-laying, Seizing, Apprehending, and making free Subjects Prisoners, and
detaining them in privato carcere, or in Bondage and Captivity, and treating
them with Insolence and Cruelty: As likewise, the ravishing or offering to
Ravish Women by Force and Violence, and without Respect to the Quality or
Condition of the Persons injured, or even to common Humanity; and the
persisting in the said Violence, Rapt, and Ravishing, by carrying the Ravished
about from Place to Place, at the pleasure of the Ravisher, are punishable with
Confiscation of Life, Lands, and Goods. Likeas, by the Act of Parliament King
James 1st. Par. 1st. Cap. 3d. It is statute, That no man openly Rebel against
us, under the pain of Forfeiture of Life and Goods. And by the Act of
Parliament James the 2d. Parl. 6. Cap. 24. It is statute, That who commits
Treason against Our Person and Majesty, rises in feir of War against Us, Resets
and supplies such as have committed Treason, or stuffs their Houses, and holds
them against us, or stuffs Houses of their own, in furtherance of Rebels, shall
be punished as Traitors. And by the Act of Parliament Queen Mary, Par. 9. Cap.
75. It is statute, That none attempt to do, or rise any Bands of Men of War, on
Horse or Foot, with Culverings, Pistols, Picks, Spears, or other Munition
bellical, without special License in writ of our Sovereign Lady, and her
Successors, under the pain of Death, to be execute upon the raisers of the said
Bands. As also upon them that raises and conveens in the Bands. And by the Act,
James 6th Parl. 8th. Cap. 131. It is statute, That none of our Subjects presume
to convocat, conveen, or assemble, for holding of Councils to treat, consult,
or determine in any matter of State, Civil or Ecclesiastic, except in the
ordinary Judgment, without our special Command, or express License, under the
pain made against such as unlawfully convocats our Leidges. And by another Act
James 6th. Parl. 10th. Chap. 12. It is statute, That no Leagues or Bands be
made against our Subjects, of any Degree, without Privity and consent, under
the pain to be holden and execute as movers of Sedition, to the breach of the
peace: Which two last Act are ratified by Charles 2d. Parl. 1st. Cap. 4th. And
by the Act Charles 2d. Par. 1. Chp. 5th. It is declared, That it is, and shall
be high Treason to the Subjects of this Kingdom. or any number of them, more or
less, upon any Ground or pretext whatsoever, to rise and continue in Arms, to
maintain any Forts, Strength, or Garrisons, or to make any Treaties or leagues
with Foreigners, or amongst themselves, without our special Authority and
Approbation, first had, and obtained thereto. And by the Act Charles 2d. Par.
1st. Session 2d. cap. 2d. It is statute and declared, That to plot, contrive,
or intend to levy War, or to take up Arms against us, or any commissionat by
us, is punishable as high Treason. Likeas, by the Act Charles 2d. parl, 2d.
Cap. 11th. It is statute, That in time coming, in all cases of Treasonable
rising in Arms, and open, and manifest Rebellion against us and our Authority,
our Advocat for the time, may and ought to insist against, and prosecute such
persons as he shall be ordered by us, or our privy Council to Pursue: And if
they be Cited and do not compear, the Judges (notwithstanding of their absence)
may and ought to proceed to consider, and give Interlocutor upon the Libel; and
if it be found Relevant, admit the same to the knowledge of an Assise, and upon
their Verdict, find the same to be proven, The Doom and Sentence of Forfeiture
ought to proceed, and be given in the same manner, as if the persons accused
had compeared, and were present. Which raising Convocatting and Conveening in
Arms without or against our Authority, which the other Crimes foresaid are
highly aggravated, and the Treason and Rebellion yet more open and manifest,
while the persons guilty presume to persist and continue therein, after having
been charged in our Name, by our Officers, or by a Herald thereto Waranted, to
lay down their Arms, and render their persons to bide the Law; under the pain
of Rebellion. As also, by the 34th Act Parliament 1st. Sess. 1st. Chapter 2d. It is
statute, That the celebrater of Clandestine Marriages be banished the Kingdom,
never to return under the pain of Death. NEVERTHELEES, It is of verity, That
Captain Simon Fraser, Eldest lawful Son to Thomas Fraser of Beaufort, William
Fraser of Foger, Hugh Fraser in K^nmonavie, William Fraser in Dulleraig,
William Fraser of Erechit, Alexander Fraser of Kilduthill younger, Hugh Fraser,
alias Huiston Oig in Leadclune, Alexander Fraser in Ruthven, Jhon Fraser his
Brother, Alexander Fraser Son to Farratin, Alexander Frasor Son to Meggivie,
Tais Fraser Brother to Litlegarth, Thomas Huiston Son to the Minister of
Stratherick, Aeneas Macbaine Brother to Drummond Macbaine, Hugh Fraser Son to
Struie, Hugh Fraser younger of Boch rubine, John Fraser Brother to Old
Kilduthill, Major Thomas Fraser Elder of Struie, Hugeh Fraser Brother to
Srechits, and John Fraser younger of Meggive, Shaking off all fear of God and
regard to our Laws and Authority, are guilty, airt and part of the Crimes above
and under mentioned. In so far as, The said Captain Simon Fraser having on one
or other of the days of the Month of September last sent to the foresaids
persons to come and meet him at Moniack, a House belonging to Fraser of
Strichen, they agreed and came to the foresaid House, belonging to Strichen,
and there then being several other Gentlemen of the Name of raser and others;
They unlawfully leagued and combined together for to rise in Arms and prosecute
their mischievous Practices. Likeas, for their better effectuating thereof,
Intimation having been made by one or other of the Persons abovementioned to
the Men of Stratherick, (which is a part of the Lord Lovats Estate and
Interest,) They within three or four days after the meeting at Strichens House,
did rendezvous about two hundred Men in Arms at Esseck. And when the Men of
Stratherick, did come to the said Rendezvous at Esseck, about two hundred Men
in Arms, as said is, the said Thomas and Simon Frasers of Beaufort, and the
other Persons above-complained upon, did encourage these Men, unlaufully
conveened in Arms, as said is, by swearing, and causing them swear to join and
concur for maintaining the said Thomas and Simon Fraser's Pretenses to the
Estate of Lovat, against all Opposers. Likeas after the Rendezvous, the said
Thomas and Simon Frasers, and others above complained upon, that had been at
the Rendezvous, went into a Change-House near by, and there contrived and drew
up the Letter subscribed by them, directed to the Lord Fraser: And of which
Letter a Copy is hereto subjoined (the principle being put in the Clerk of
Justiciaries hands) and does manifestly contain an unlawful League and
Combination, for mutual Adherance in their wicked Designs, which League and
Combination is the rather aggravated than paliated by any exeception therein of
the King and Government, as being protestatio contrario facto. Likeas, the said
Letter of Association does also contain bold and wicked Threatenings against the
Lord Saltoun, and false and undue Reflections and Insinuations against the
Marquess of Athol and his Family. And this Letter being framed, and agreed to
as said is, to be sent to the Lord Fraser, after his parting from the Banders
and Leaguers, does further declared their purpose to continue in the said
unlawful Association, and to have the same recorded ad futuram rei memoriam.
And the Letter was accordingly sent to the Lord Fraser, to his House of The
Lord Saltoun having gone North the next day, to visit the Lady Dowager of Lovat
at her House of Castledounie, after he had stayed there a few days, and as he
was returning homeward with the Lord Mungo Murray, Son to the Marquess of
Athol, and some other Gentlemen, by the way passing throw the Wood of Bonchrew,
about four Miles from Castledounie, the said Lord Saltoun, Lord Mungo Murray,
and their Company, were upon the sixth, or one or other of the days of October
last, surprised by the said Captain Simon Fraser and his Father, who having
convocat a great many Men in Arms, above fourscore, or a hundred, did place
themselves in ambush, for way-laying and seizing the said Lord Saltoun, Lord
Mungo Murray, and their Company. Whom they accordingly s;eised with great
Violence and Barbarity, Disarming, Dismounting, throwing them down, and Beating
them, with many Threatenings, to Murder them outright. And the said Thomas and
Simon Frasers having, with their foresaid Company, (whereof several were
Subscribers of the foresaid Letter of Association) taken Prisoners the Lord
Saltoun, Lord Mungo Murray, and their Company, unable to resist so great a
Force, they caused them to Mount on little pitiful Beasts, instead of their own
Horses, whereof they had robbed them as also of their Armr, and other things
about them, and thus carried them away Captives, under their Guards of Men and
Arms, to the House of Fanellan, where they made them closs Prisoners every one
in a Room by himself, for the space of six or seven days, having in the mean
time fortified and stuffed the House with Armed Men and other Provisions. And
further, in prosecution of their wicked Band and League to rise in Arms, the
said Thomas and Simon Frasers, and their Accomplices, sent the Fiery Cross
through the Country, to raise their Men and People in Arms; whereby they
conveened to the Number of two hundred Men in Arms, to assist and join with the
said Frasers, and others above-complained upon, in their foresaid open and
manifest Insurrection and Rebellion: In further prosecuting whereof, the said
Thomas and Simon Frasers, and their Accomplices above-complained upon, did the
same day that they made the Lord Saltoun, Lord Mungo Murray, and others their
Prisoners, march with a Company of about one Hundred Men in Arms, to the Lady
Lovat's House of Castledounie, and there, violently and wickedly seized upon
the Widow Lady and her Servants, and made them Prisoners; and robbed and
spoiled the Goods in and about the House, at their pleasure. And thus the said
Thomas and Simon Frasers, and their Accomplices above complained upon, having
broken out into open Rebellion and Arms, and seized the foresaid two Houses
with the Prisoners therein, they garisoned the same, and appointed Captains,
and other Officers over their Troops and Garrisons: And adding yet more
Barbarity to all their Violence, they set up a Gallows before the House of
Fanellan, and in the View of the Windows where the Prisoners were, threatening
to hang them thereon. And by sending tee said Fiery Cross as said is, they
convocat and conveened yet more Men in Arms, and after they had kept the
said Prisoners, some six or seven days in the foresaid Captivity and Terrors,
they carried them from Fanellan by armed Guards, to the Isle of Aigies, where
they kept them Prisoners in a Creel House for their Lodging, and did treat
them in a most miserable manner, so that the Lord Saltoun fell so sick, that
they were obliged to dismiss him, but still keeping the Lord Mungo Murray
Prisoner for some days thereafter: And about the same time, they have the Lady
Dowager of Lovat still their Prisoner in Castledounie. And during their
Imprisonment, the said Thomas and Simon Frasers, and their Accomplices
above-complain'd upon, propone Conditions, extort Articles and Agreements, and
whatever they pleased to demand, there being no resisting such a wicked and
barbarous Force, which continually proceeded to greater Violence and Barbarity.
For not only the said Thomas and Simon Frasers and their said Accomplices,
refused to lay down their Arms, and desist from their Violence, when commanded
and charged by the Sheriff of Inverness; But going on in their Villainous
Barbarities, they kept the said Lady Dowager, in most miserable Captivity.
And when nothing that she could propose or promise would satisfy them, the
said Captain Simon takes up the most Mad and Villainous Resolution that ever
was heard of: For all in a sudden, he and his said Accomplices makes the Lady
closs Prisoner in her Chamber, under his armed Guards; And then comes upon her,
with Mr. Robert Monro Minister at Abertarse, and three or four Ruffians in the
Night time, about two or three in the Morning in the Month of October last, or
one or other of the days of the said Month of October last: And having dragged
out her Maids, Agnes Mackbrayer, and Fraser, he proposes to the Lady, that she
should Marry him. And when she fell in Lamenting and Crying, the great Pipe was
blown up, to drown her cries, and the wicked Villains order the Minister to
proceed. And tho she protested with Tears and Cries, and also offered all
promises of any thing else, and declared she would sacrifice her Life, sooner
then consent to their Proposal, nevertheless the said Minister proceeds, and
declares them Married Persons: And Hugh Fraser of Kinmonavie, and the said
Hutcheon Oig, (both of them Thieves and Murderers) are appointed for her
waiting Maids. And tho she often swarfed and again cried out most grievously,
yet not relenting, but the Bag-pipe is blown up as formerly, and the foresaid
Ruffians rent off her Clothes, cutting her Stays with their Durks, and so
thrust her into her Bed. After this most horrid violent Rapt, when the Ladies
Friends offered to make some Attempt, for her Rescue out of Captain Simon's
hands, the said Captain Simon, and his said Accomplices, carry her away to the
Hills, and raising the Country, to the number of four or five hundred Men in
Arms, of their own Name and Dependers, did detain still the afflicted Lady, and
did stand to their own Defense. And further, when the Lords of our Privy
Council, having Intelligence of this Violence and Insurrection in Arms, and of
the foresaid wicked Practices and Rebellion of the said Frasers, and others
above complained upon, did order an Herald to charge the said Traitors and
Rebels, to lay down their Arms, and set the Lady at Liberty, and render
themselves Prisoners, to abide the Law: And did also order the Sheriff, with
the Pass Comitatus, as likewise our Troops and Forces to march against them,
and subdue them. Yet the foresaids Thomas and Simon Frasers, and their said
Accomplices, disobeyed the said Charge, and in manifest Contempt thereof,
continued in Arms and Rebellion for a considerable time after they were so
charged, and detained the said Lady Prisoner for several days thereafter. By
all which it is evident, that the whole foresaids Persons, and each of them
Respective, are guilty as Actors, at least as airt and part, of the Crimes of
Treason and open Rebellion, convocating and conveening in Arms, unlawful
Banding and Leaguing, Robbery, Ravishment, and the other Violences and Crimes
abovementioned, or of one or other of them. As also, the said Mr. Robert Monro
Minister, is guilty of celebrating a Clandestine Marriage: Which being found by
the Knowledge of an Inquest, they ought to be punished by Confiscation of Life,
Lands, Honors, and Goods, and other pains of Law, to the Example and Terror of
others to commit the like in time coming.

Follows the just Double of the Second Lybel or Indictment against the Frasers.
THat where, by the Laws of this, and all other well governed Realms, the
Crimes of Treason and Rebellion, and open Insurrection in Arms, as likewise of
unlawful Leagues and Combinations, and the Convocating or Conveening of our
Subjects in Arms, without the Warrant of our Authority, and the Occupying,
Possessing, Stuffing, and Fortifying of Houses, and Fortifying of Houses and
Forts with Armed Men, and other Provisions: As also the way-laying, seizing,
apprehending, and making free Subjects Prisoners, and detaining them by
Violence in Bondage and Captivity, and treating them with all hardships, are
punishable with Confiscation of Life, Lands and Goods: Likewise by the Act of
Parliament, Ja. 1st. Par. 1st. Cap. 3d. It is Statute, That no Man openly Rebel
against us, under the Pain of Forfeiture of Life and Goods: And by the Act of
Parliament Ja. 2d. Par. 6th. Cap. 24th. It is Statute, That who commits Treason
against our Person and Majesty, rises in Feir of War against us, resets and
supplies such as have committed Treason, or Stuffs their Houses and holds them
against us, or Stuffs Houses of their own in Furtherance of Rebels, shall be
punished as Traitors. And by the Act of Parliament Queen Mary, Par. 9th. Cap.
75. It is Statute, That none attempt to do or raise any Bands of Men of War,
upon Horse or Foot, with Culverings, Pistols, Picks, Spears, or other Munition
Bellical, without special License in Writ of her Majesty and her Successors,
under the Pain of Death to be execute upon the Raisers of the said Bands, as
also upon them that rises and conveens in Bands. And by the Act, Ja. 6th. Par.
8th. Cap. 131. It is Statute, That none of our Subjects presume to Convocat,
Conveen or Assemble for holding of Councils, to treat, consult, or determine in
any Matter of State, Civil or Ecclesiastic, except in the ordinary Judgments,
without our special Command or express License, under the Pains made against
such as unlawfully Convocats our Leiges: And by another Act, Ja. 6th. Par. 10th
Cap. 12th It is Statute, That no Leagues or Bands be made amongst our Subjects
of any Degree, without our Privity and Consent, under the Pain to be holden and
execute as Movers of Sedition to the Breach of the Peace. Which two last Acts
are ratified, Chapter 2d. Par. 1st. Cap. 4th. And by the Act, Chapter 2d. Par. 1st.
Cap. 5. It is Declared, That it is, and shall be High Treason to the Subjects
of this Kingdom, or any number of them, more or less, upon any Ground or
pretext whatsoever, to rise and continue in Arms, to maintain any Forts,
strengths or Garrisons, or to make any Treaties or Leagues with Foreigners, or
amongst themselves, without our special Authority and Approbation first had and
obtained thereto. And by the Act, Chapter 2d. Par. 1st. Ses. 2d. Cap. 2d. It is
statute and declared, That to plot, contrive, or intend to levy War, or to take
up arms against us, or any Commissionat by us, is punishable as high Treason.
Likeas, by the Act, Chapter 2d. Par. 2d. Cap. 11th. It is statute, That in time
coming, in all Cases of Treasonable rising in Arms, and open and manifest
Rebellion against us and our Authority, our Advocat for the time, may, and
ought to insist, and prosecute such Persons, as he shall be ordered by us, and
our Privy Council to pursue. And if they be cited, and do not appear, the
Justices notwithstanding of their Absence, may, and ought to proceed to
consider, and give Interlocutor upon the Libel: And if it be found relevant,
admit the same to the knowledge of an Assize, and upon their Verdict, finding
the same to be proven, the Doom and Sentence of Forfeiture ought to proceed,
and be given in the same manner, as if the Persons accused had compeared, and
were present. Which raising, convocating, and conveening in Arms, without, or
against our Authority, with the other Crimes foresaid, are highly aggravated,
and the Treason and Rebellion becomes yet more wicked and attrocious, when they
are perpetrat by Persons under Process for former Treasons, and other capital
and wicked Crimes, and after having been Charged in our Name by our Officers,
or by a Herald thereto warranted, to lay down their Arms, and render their
Persons to abide the Law, under the pain of Rebellion. Likeas, to attempt to
seize, and actually seize, and keep back by force and Violence, Persons cited,
and under Bail, to appear before the Court of Justiciary, or any other Court or
Judicature, to bear Witness, and give evidence, or for any other Cause or
effect. As also, to extort by Force and Violence, Bonds, Declarations, or any
other Write or Paper from any one of our free Leiges, are likewise Crimes of a
high nature, and ought to be severely punished. NEVERTHELESS, it is of verity,
That the said Thomas and Simon Frasers, and the whole other persons above
complained upon, shaking off all fear of God, and regard to our Laws and
Authority, are guilty, airt and part, of the Crimes above, and after mentioned.
In so far as the said Captain Simon Fraser and his Accomplices above named, being
either already under a Process of Treason, or designing to frustrate the
foresaid Process raised against others of their Accomplices, did upon the
occasion that certain persons Witnesses, were to come, or be brought from
Stratherick, and the bounds adjacent thereto, within the Shire of Inverness,
for to give evidence in the said Process anent the Crimes of Treason, and
others therein libelled, wickedly add to all their former Rebellions, and
wicked horrid Crimes, their convocating and conveening in Arms of Men, to the
Number of Two or Three hundred Men less or more; who appearing in an open
Insurrection, and manifest Rebellion in Arms, did upon the fifteenth of June
last bypast, the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth, or one or orher of the
days of the said Month, March in feir of War, and open Hostility, against
certain of our loyal Subjects, conveened by our Authority: And for furthering
of Justice within the foresaid bounds of Stratherick, and others within the
Shire of Inverness, and their invading and incompassing, threatening and
over-mastering them, did seize upon their Persons, and make them Prisoners, and
violently kept back such as were either cited, or under Bail, to appear and
give Evidence and Witness in the Process abovementioned. As also, they
extorted from our free Lieges, certain Bonds, Declarations and Writs, according
to their own wicked Imaginations and Purposes: Likeas, that they might raise
and promote their foresaid manifest Insurrection and Rebellion, they sent the
fiery Cross through the Country (a sign and symbol used amongst them, to gather
their Accomplices in Arms) for making Insurrection and Rebellions, and other
unlawful Convocations: As also, they did place a Garrison in John Frasers House
of Meiklegart in Stratherick, and in a word, have committed most manifest
Treason and Rebellion by open rising in Arms against our Laws and Authority,
and using Hostilities and Violences upon our good Subjects. By all which it is
manifest, That the foresaids persons complained upon, or one or other of them,
are guilty of the Crimes of open and manifest Rebellion in Arms, Treason,
unlawful Convocations, Violent Imprisonment, and the hail other Crimes above
libelled: Which being found by the knowledge of an Inquest, they ought to be
condignly punished by the Forfeiture of Life, Lands, Honor, and Goods; to the
Example and Terror of others to commit the like in time coming.

This being the Libels and Inditements raised and pursued by his Majesty's
Advocat, against the forenamed Persons, and the Criminal Letters, containing
the same, with the Execution thereof by Pursevants and Heralds, with Coats of
Arms displayed, and sound of Trumpet, and other Solemnities appointed by Act of
Parliament, having been duly returned to the Clerk of the foresaid Court of
Justiciary, at the Days and Diets thereof: His Majesty's Advocat, after the
Court was fenced, and that he had first given in the Order and Warrant of the
Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council, for his pursuing of the foresaid Process
of Treason, produced the criminal Letters of Treason duly execute; and the
Pursevant who execute the Letters, with his Witnesses being solemnly sworn, and
having made faith upon the Truth of the Executions, his Majesty's Advocat
declared, that the persons summoned, against whom he intended to insist, being
absent, and not compearing, to underly the Law, he did insist against the
persons after named, in order to their Forfeiture in absence, viz. Captain
Simon Fraser, eldest lawful Son to Thomas Fraser of Beaufort, William Fraser of
Foyr, Hugh Fraser in Kinmonavie, William Fraser in Dulleraig, William Fraser of
Erech it, Alexander Fraser of Kilduthil younger, Hugh Fraser, alias Huiston Oig
in Leadclune, Alexander Fraser in Ruthven, John Fraser his Brother, Alexander
Fraser, Son to Farralin, Alexander Fraser Son to Meggivie, Tais Fraser Brother
to Litlegarth, Thomas Huiston Son to the Minister of Stratherick, Aeneas
Mcbaine Brother to Drummond Mcbaine, Hugh Fraser Son to Struie, Hugh Fraser
younger of Bochrubine, John Fraser, Brother to old Kilduthill, Major Thomas
Fraser Elder of Struie, Hugh Fraser, Brother to Erchit, and John Fraser younger
of Meggivie. Whereupon the Lords of Justiciary, having with consent of his
Majesty's Advocat, deserted the Diet as to certain other persons contained in
the Indictment, and his Majesty's Advocat, having restricted the Libels against
Captain Simon Fraser, and the other persons insisted against, to their
Treasonable rising in Arms, and open Rebellion against his Majesty, in the
terms of the Act of Parliament 1669, which in the case of these Crimes, allows
and ordains Process of Treason to proceed before the Lords of Justiciary,
against the persons thereof accused, tho absent, with all the Aggravations
libelled, or aggravating the said Treason and Rebellion. The Lords
Commissioners of Justiciary, after consideration of the said Libels, and as
restricted in manner foresaid, found the said Libel so restricted, relevant, to
infer the pains of Treason, and remitted the same to the knowledge of the
Assise.

And the Assise consisting of fifteen Persons, being called and chosen out of
the forty five Persons that had been named and given out in a List with the
Libel and Criminal Letters, that the Defenders mtght see and object (if they
had any Exception against them) And no objection being moved against them, they
were all lawfully sworn.

And then his Majesty's Advocat produced for Probation the Letters
abovementioned in the Libel, directed by the Lords of his Majesty's Privy
Council against the said Captain Simon Fraser and his Accomplices, charging them
to lay down their Arms, render up the houses by them stuffed and fortified, and
to submit themselves, and enter their persons in Prison, in the Tolbooth of
Inverness, to underly and abide the Law, within the space of Forty Eight Hours,
under the pain of Treason and Rebellion, and denuncing them as such to the
Horn. And also (in case of their Disobedience) commanding the Sheriff of
Inverness, and all other his Majesty's Officers, and good Subjects, to rise,
concur, and act in Arms in feir of War, for reducing the said Rebels and
Traitors to Obedience, and to apprehend and bring them to underly the Law, as
the said Letters more fully bear, together with the Execution of the said
Letters, whereby it appeared, That the foresaid Defenders were both lawfully
charged upon the day of And for their Disobedience and Contempt, duly denunced,
and put to the Horn upon the day of the said Month of thereafter. And for the
more Verification of the said Charge and Execution, his Majesty's Advocat did
further adduce the Pursevant who execute the same, with the Witnesses to the
Executions, who being all solemnly sworn, made Faith upon the Truth thereof in
all Points

But here it is to be observed, That albeit the foresaid Letters were directed
by the Lords of his Majesty's privy Council for charging the said Defenders to
lay down their Arms, etc. And in case of their Disobedience for denuncing them
Rebels, and commanding the Sheriff of the Shire, and all others his Majesty's
Officers, and good Subjects, to march against them as such: And that the
foresaid Letters and Executions were also made use of by his Majesty's Advocat
for a further Evidence of the Defenders Treasonable rising in Arms in open
Rebellion, in regard of their obstinate continuing in Arms after they were
thereby charged; yet that the Defenders might have all fair Justice, and that
no pretext might be left them to allege, that it was incongruous and unjust to
proceed to try them for their Crimes in Judgment, for adducing probation
against them, when in the mean time they stood legally debarred, and were
rendered incapable to compear, as having been denunced Fugitives, and so
deprived of personam standi in judicio, care was taken before the day appointed
for their Compearance, to take out other Letters by Deliverance of his
Majesty's Council, for relaxing them from the Horn, and discharging their
Out-Lawrie as Fugitives, that if they had pleased to compear in Judgment, and
defend, they might have done it as freely as any other of his Majesty's Lieges;
but the persons insisted against, not compearing, his Majesty's Advocat went on
with his Probation. And the principal points to be proven conform to
Interlocutor, being their treasonable rising in Arms, and open Rebellion
against his Majesty: He adduced in all Fourteen Witnesses, whereof Eleven Men
and three Women. The Men, Alexander Fraser of Balnean, Thomas Fraser of
Gortilick, William Fraser of Kilbokie, Robert Spence in Suddie, Alexander
Mackinsh in Groom, Mr. Leonard Robertson of Stralock, Mr. George Fraser,
Sub-principal of the College of Aberdeen, John Monro late Servitor to Captain
Simon Fraser, Alexander Stewart, Brother to Ulart, Peter Fraser Servant to
Balnean, and William Oig Fraser Tenent to Balnean.

Who being all Witnesses in this Case above Exception, and many of them Landed
Men, did prove the Defenders their Treasonable rising in Arms, and open
Rebellion, with the greatest Evidence that could be desired. For tho it was not
to be expected, that Eleven Witnesses should depone uniformly against Twenty
Persons, all engaged in a Treasonable Combination, and rising in Arms,
consisting of several steps, Convocations, Rebellions, Meetings, Actings in a
Tract of Time, and in several places; yet, it is most clear and Apparent from
the Testimonies lying in Process, and upon Record, That against every one of
the Defenders, there were at least two or three Witnesses to prove their
Accession: And further, That as to the Principal and most attrocious Acts of
their Treasonable Insurrection, There was an evident Concurrence of the
greatest part of them all; In as much as the Witnesses being solemnly sworn,
did make Faith, and give their Depositions upon the whole Points and Articles
of both the Libels, in reference to all these particulars. First, the
Combination, Convocating, and conveening in Arms, without any lawful Authority.
2. The violent seizing of the Prisoners. 3. The taking the House of Fanellan,
and keeping the Prisoners under Guards therein. 4. The keeping Garrisons and
Guards upwards of a Hundred Men in the House of Fanellan and Castledounie. 5.
The raising of the Country by sending the fiery Cross, and making the Cry
called the Coronoch pass through it, the ordinary signal for raising the Country
in Arms in these parts. 6. The mustering of men in Arms, under Commanders, and
with Colors, sometimes above Two Hundred, and sometimes above Three Hundred.
7. The setting and keeping of Sentinels and Guards, and detatching of Parties.
8. Their marching with their Prisoners under Armed Guards through the Country,
to remote places. 9. And wherein, in effect the whole Defenders were engaged;
Their continuing in Arms in feir of War, and an open hostile manner, sometimes
above two hundred, after they were charged in his Majesty's Name, by warrant of
the foresaid Letters directed by the Lords of Privy Council, to lay down their
Arms under the pain of Rebellion. And, 10. and lastly, Their again convocating
and conveening in Arms, several Months after they had been charged to lay down
their Arms, under the pain of Rebellion, as said is, to the Number of Two or
Three Hundred, and marching against, and again seizing his Majesty's free
Lieges, for acting for his Majesty's Authority, and making them Prisoners.

All which particulars, the several and manifest steps of a most Treasonable
raising in Arms, and open Rebellion, having been proven, and for the greatest
and most attrocious part against the whole Defenders. The Probation as to the
principal point was concluded with the most full and satisfying evidence.

And as for the Aggravations, viz. The Injuries and Indignities done to his
Majesty's free Lieges, and those persons of Honor and Quality, the making and
treating them as Prisoners with all severity, the threatening them with Death,
by setting up a Gallows in their View, before their Windows, when under close
Restraint in several Chambers, their carrying them about under Guards as
Prisoners, and detaining of them for several days, their most inhuman, cruel,
and barbarous Usage of the Lady Dowager of Lovat, and carrying her with them,
in a most Afflicted captive Condition for several Weeks, through the most
Barbarous and Mountainous places that can be imagined, and extorting from her,
by the Extremities of Violence, such Writings and Declarations, as they were
pleased to demand: All these Aggravations were also proven by the foresaid
Witnesses, at least two of them to every particular, of which the following
Testimonies are a positive proof, viz.

Alexander Fraser younger of Balnean, aged Twenty One years, examined, purged
and sworn, Depones, That he was present at Fanellan, when he saw the Lord Mungo
Murray and the Lord Saltoun brought Prisoners there, and made close Prisoners
there in several Rooms, with Sentinels put on them, and that they were brought
Prisoners there by Captain Simon Fraser, and that when they came to Fanellan, a
House belonging to the Lord of Kinaries, the Doors were shut close, and they
forced them up, and put a Garrison of armed Men in the House. Depones, That he
saw at Fanellan, about two or three days after the Lord Saltoun, etc. was
brought Prisoner, about two or three hundred Men in Arms under Captain Fraser's
Command, and saw him muster them there, and that they had Arms, such as Guns,
Swords, Pistols, Targes, etc. Depones, That about seven or eight days after the
Lord Saltoun was made Prisoner, he was at Castledounie, where he see the Lady
Lovat, and that he saw a number of armed Men within the House, and Sentinels at
the Gate, and that he saw Captain Simon Fraser about the same time there.
Depones, He saw Sentinels sitting on the Treshold of my Lady's Chamber Door,
and that they continued there for a Night, after which time, the Deponent went
away. Depones, He saw Parties sent from Fanellan to Castledounie too and fro
several times. Depones, That after the Lord Saltoun and Lord Mungo Murray were
brought Prisoners to Fanellan, he saw a Gallows standing before the Windows,
where the said two Lords were kept closs Prisoners, which was not there the
day they were brought Prisoners. Depones, That about nine or ten days after the
Lord Saltoun and the Lord Mungo Murray were taken Prisoners, he did see one
Night at Castledounie, Captain Simon Fraser and Mr. Robert Monro the Minister
at Castledounie, and being desired by Captain Leonard Robertson of Straloch, to
get him notice of my Lady's Condition, he went to my Lady's Chamber Door, and
heard her Sighing and Moaning, and it was then about the Reik of Day, and that
he heard the Pipes playing in the Dining Room next to my Lady's Chamber. The
same Night he saw my Lady's two Women in another Room, with Sentinels set upon
them, and the two Women Weeping, and this was about Midnight he saw them. And
this is the Truth, as he shall Answer to GOD. Sic Subscribitur, Al. Fraser.
Lothian, I. P. D.

Thomas Fraser of Gortulig, aged Thirty Years, Married, Purged and Sworn,
Depones, That about the beginning of October, Captain Simon Fraser and the
Deponent coming from Inverness, and the Lord Saltoun and the Lord Mungo Murray
from Castledounie, there having met them in the Wood of Moncreive some Armed
Men, when they were met together, they did make up Thirty or Forty Foot,
beside Horses, all in Arms, where the Lord Saltoun and Lord Mungo being Riding
peaceably, Captain Simon gave Orders to his Company, to take my Lord Saltoun
either Dead or Alive, and accordingly came up closs to my Lord Saltoun and Lord
Mungo, and assaulted them with Bended Pistols, and commanded them to render
themselves Prisoners, My Lord Saltoun asking for what cause, he Answered,
because it was his Pleasure: And the Deponent did see Captain Simon, and his
Party, Dismounting and Disarming the Lord Saltoun and Lord Mungo, and all that
were with them, and threatening them, the Foot having Guns presented and Durks
drawn, and the Horsemens Pistols cocked, and thereafter they were set on
Country Horse in stead of their own, with Guards in Arms surrounding them, and
carried them in that Posture to Fanellan, where they were made closs Prisoners
in several Rooms, and Sentinels put upon the Rooms, and a Guard kept in the
House, where they stayed four or five Nights. Depones, That immediately
thereafter, he heard the Fiery Cross was sent through the Country, to conveen
the Men, and accordingly the next Night, there conveened at Fanellan about
three or four hundred Men with Guns, Swords and Pistols, and Pipers: And
Depones, That they were all commanded by Captain Simon, and under him, by their
several Under-Leaders. Depones, That there was a considerable Party sent from
Fanellan, to my Lady Lovats House at Castledounie, and that Parties were from
time to time relieved, and that there were Sentinels put upon several Rooms of
the House, and particularly upon my Lady's Chamber, and that he saw Captain
Simon there, and that he was the Person that gave the Orders. Depones, That he
saw the Lord Saltoun and Lord Mungo carried prisoners to the Isle of Egies,
where they were kept Prisoners with a Guard of Fifty or Sixty Men in Arms.
And this is the Truth, as he shall Answer to GOD. Sic Subscribitur T. Fraser.
Lothian, I. P. D.

William Fraser of Kilbokie, Aged Forty Years, Married, Purged and Sworn,
Depones, That in October last, the Deponent came to the House of Fanellan,
where Captain Simon was with two or three hundred Men all Armed, who had
conveened there upon a Fiery Cross, which was sent by Captain Simon's Order
through the Country, and it was the third day after the Lord Saltoun and Lord
Mungo were taken Prisoners: And the Deponent saw them there, and Guards and
Sentinels upon them as Prisoners; And likeways saw a Gallows erected over
against the Windows of their Chambers: And the Deponent having asked at Captain
Simon, what that mean'd, he Answered, That it was to terrify the Lord Saltoun
and Lord Mungo. Depones, That he was present when the said Lords were carried
Prisoners from Fanellan to the Isle of Egies, where they were detained
Prisoners by the said Captain Simon's Command. Depones, That before the
Deponent went first to Fanellan, he was at Castledounie my Lady Lovats
Dwelling, where there was a Party of upwards of three or fourscore of Armed
Men, and saw them keeping Guard at the Gates, and Captain Simon was there, and
gave them Orders as Commander.

Robert Spence in Suddie, Aged Twenty Four Years, Married, Purged and Sworn,
Depones, That Captain Simon Fraser having carried my Lady Lovat along with
him from Kirkhill, and having heard, that there was a Party of Red-Coats, with
Lord James Murray and some Gentlemen, coming to rescue my Lady, Captain Simon
did send word through the Country, to raise the Fiery Cross, to warn the
Country to come for their Defense. Depones, That when my Lady left Captain
Simon, there would have been about two or three hundred Men in Arms with him.
And this is the Truth, as he shall Answer to God. Sic Subscribitur, Robert
Spence. Ad. Cockburn, I. P. D.

Mr. George Fraser Sub-Principal of the College of Aberdeen, Purged and Sworn,
Depones, That when my Lord Saltoun, Lord Mungo Murray, and others were made
Prisoners the time libelled, he was one of the Company, and that Captain Simon
commanded the Party that apprehended them, which consisted or Fourteen Horse
and Fifty Foot, or thereby, all armed with Swords, Pistols and Guns; and one of
them called Hutcheon Oig came up with a Bended Pistol on my Lord Saltoun, and
desired them to render, and dismounted them, and put them on little Horses, and
carried them Prisoners to Fanellan, and kept them there Prisoners under
Guards by the space of six days, and that there was a Gallows put up, and there
was a Convocation of Men in Arms, sometimes to the number of three or four
hundred Men in Arms, with Colors displayed and Pipers playing. And this is the
Truth, as he shall Answer to GOD. Sic Subscribitur, Geo. Fraset. Lothian, I. P.
D.

And further, the Detestable and Horrid Violence done to the Lady Dowager by
Captain Simon Fraser, and his wicked Accomplices, was yet more particularly and
distinctly proven by Mr. Leanord Robertson of Straloch, and three Women, who no
doubt, in a case so Circumstantiat, were not only necessary, but most lawful
sufficient Witnesses. But because this Violence was acted and perpetrat by the
said Captain Simon, with such Cruelty and Barbarity, as is scarce Credible, the
sum of the Evidence given in this Matter, is here more particularly set down
as follows.

Mr. Leonard Robertson of Straloch, Aged 44. solutus, purged and Sworn, Depones
That upon the sixteenth of October last, being Saturday, he came to Inverness,
and was there informed, that the Lady Dowager of Lovat was under Restraint at
Castledouni, whereupon he repaired to that place, and after some difficulty
made, got Access to my Lady, who acquainted him with the Proposals that Captain
Simon Fraser had made to her; and entreated the Deponent to persuade the Lord
Saltoun, and her Brother Lord James Murray, to condescend to the Terms; which
the Deponent undertook: And having returned to Inverness, prevailed with them
to sign the Articles, for her own, and Lord Mungo's Liberation, and brought
them back to Castledounie on Tuesday, to get my Ladies hand to them. Which
being done, the Deponent expected nothing, but that my Lady was fully at
liberty. But when he was conveying her to her Horse, they were both stopped at
my Lady's Chamber Door, and there was a Chair and a Centry set at my Lady's
Door, and all the rest of the Centries doubled; and the Deponent himself, after
some time, was put under a Guard of Sentinels, and was so detained under
Restraint, till the next day at ten of the Clock; That complaining to Captain
Simon, the Deponent was permitted to pay a Visit to my Lady, whom he saw in a
very disconsolat Condition, and softly spoken in his Ear, For Christ's sake take
me out of this place either dead or alive, and that he observed my Ladies Face
all swollen, and she fell in a Sownd the time the Deponent was with her; and
the Lady suspecting that he had not fully heard what she had spoken to him,
sent her Servant Mrs. Mackbryar with Commission to repeat the same words to
him, which she did. And the Deponent thinks Captain Simon had at least Three
Hundred Men with him at that time, all well armed, in, and about the House of
Castledounie, and that he heard at the time some person lamenting, and the
Bag-pipe played about the same time, but knows not whether it was to drown the
Voice, or not. And further depones, That the next time he saw my Lady, was, That
the Lord of Collodine, and the Deponent came to the Water side, near the Isle
of Aigis; and Captain Simon having come over to them by Boat, the Deponent
desired to see my Lady, which he shunned, telling him, That my Lady did not
desire to see him; and the Deponent replied, That it was not done like a
Comerad; especially seeing it was reported at Inverness, That my Lady was dead,
or near expiring. Captain Simon answered, That he should be soon cleared of the
contrary; and returning in his Boat, he caused bring out my Lady in their
sight: But so weak, as she was supported by two, and then carried her back
again to a little House upon that Island: But the Deponent having asked at Mrs.
Mackbryar from the other side of the Water, to try at her Lady, if she had
discharged the Deponent to see her; she went accordingly, and brought back
word, That she desired nothing more than to see the Deponent, except her own
Liberation, and to tell her Brother Lord James, that she was some better, and
lived longer than she desired; And that the Deponent saw my Lady several times
after that, where she made heavy Complaints of the bad and rude usage she had
met with; but her Guards, and others suspecting the Deponent, because he would
not comply anent some Papers, they were drawing up for their own pretended
Security, he had not that free converse which he had formerly; and that this
was the third or fourth Night after the Charge given them by the Herald, to
dissipat and lay down their Arms, and set my Lady at liberty. And at the time
when my Lady parted with them, and went away with my Lord Forbes, the Deponent
saw about two hundred Men in Arms with Captain Simon Fraser. Sic Subscribitur
Leonard Robertson.

Amilie Rioch, late Servitrix to Lady Lovat, aged 16 years, sworn and purged,
depones, That about the time libelled, she being a Servant to my Lady, Captain
Simon Fraser, with several Armed Men, came to Castledounie, and set Sentinels
on my Lady's Chamber without, and within the Doors, with drawn Swords; That
Captain Simons Men carried by force my Lady's waiting Maids, Mrs. Mackbryar,
Mrs. Janet Fraser, and the Deponent out of her Room, and made them Prisoners in
another Room, That about two of the Clock in the Morning, two armed Men came,
and carried the Deponent back to the Lady's Chamber, where she did see the Lady
sitting on the Ground, her Hair hanging down about her Head, leaning backward
upon the Bed-stock; That one Donald Beaton was pulling off my Lady's Shoes, and
Captain Simon was holding Aquavitae and burnt Feathers to her Nose, because she
was then in a swarf; that thereafter they commanding the Deponent to take off
my Lady's Shoes, and when she offered so to do, my Lady spurned her away with
her feet, showing her unwillingness; That the Deponent refusing to take off her
Clothes, Captain Simon ordered to beat her; that Fraser of Kinmonavie did then
hold up the Lady in his Arms, and Captain Simon pulled off her Petticoats, and
sought a Knife from Hugh Monro to cut her Stays; and because he had none, the
Captain ordered Fraser of Kinmonavie to cut her Stays with his Durk; and then
they threw the Lady upon the Bed: But the Deponent saying that she would take
off the Lady's Stays, they went a little out of the Room, in which time the
Deponent did again fasten the Stays; but they returning, were displeased, that
the Stays were not take off, and commanded to put the Deponent out of the Room;
and then they turned the Lady upon her Face, and stretched out her Arms, and so
took off her Stays, which the Deponent did see, because she went not out of the
Room, but stood at the foot of the Bed. And when the Deponent was going away,
she heard my Lady cry, but the Bag-pipe did play all the time in the next Room
to my Lady's Chamber, that her Cries might not be heard. Depones, That next
Morning she went in to the Lady's Chamber, and see her head hang over the Bed,
and nothing upon it, except a Handkerchief; the Deponent did see all the Lady's
Face swollen, and she spoke nothing, but gave her a broad look. And the
Deponent thought that my Lady was not sensible for a day or two thereafter; for
she did not know Lord Mungo her Brother the next Morning, when he came to see
her, and when her Servant told her, here is your Brother at the Bed side, the
Lady asked, what Brother, albeit she was looking him in the Face with fair
Daylight. Depones, That when she and the other Servants were carried by force
the first Night, out of my Lady's Chamber; the Lady stood up, and held out her
Arms, and cried: And when Dumballocks Lady came the next Morning to the Room,
and called her Madam; my Lady answered. Call me not Madam, but the most
miserable wretch alive. Depones, That she see my Lady carried prisoner from
Castledounie to the Isle of Aigis at twelve of the Clock at Night, and from
that to Culgrain, and from that to Deanie, and then to the Isle of Matlie. The
Reason of her Knowledge, because she went along with her.

This Deposition was the more credited, That the Maid, tho young, not above
sixteen years, did nevertheless, in the presence of the Court, and Hundreds
attending it, depone with a firmness and constancy, particulary observed by all
that heard her, and her foresaid Deposition was immediately confirmed by Janet
Fraser, Daughter to Dumballoch, who agreed in her Deposition with Amilie Reoch,
as to the Violence put upon the Lady, and her being carried forcibly from her,
and as to the sad and afflicted Condition, wherein she see her the next day.

Janet Fraser, Daughter to Dumballoch, aged 16 years, unmarried, sworn and
purged, depones, That at the time libelled, Captain Simon Fraser, and several
armed Men, came to the House of Castledounie; and thereafter there being Guards
and Centries set on my Lady's Chamber Door, the Deponent and Mrs. Mackbryar
being my Lady Lovats Servants, were about Twelve of the Clock at Night, carried
by force out of my Lady's Chamber, and my Lady taking hold of the Deponents
Clothes, and crying out when the Deponent was pulled away by Force, my Lady
fell on her Face. Depones, That next Morning the Deponent came to my Lady's
Chamber, about Eight a Clock in the Morning, and did see my Lady's Head hanging
over the Bed-Stock, and see her Face swollen. And the Deponent enquiring anent
my Lady's Health, my Lady answered, I am Dead. And about Twelve a Clock that
day, my Lady appeared altogether unsensible, and did take the Deponent for Lady
Catharine my Lady's Sister, who had died several Years before, and about Four a
Clock the same Afternoon, my Lady did not know her Brother my Lord Mungo, and
could not speak to him. Depones, that about Two a Clock the same day, my Lady
fell in a Swerf and continued out and in the Swerf about two Hours. And this is
the Truth, as she shall answer to God. And Depones she cannot Write.

Likeas Christian Macklain, late Servitrix to James Fraser of Relict, did
likewise in her Deposition agree with them.

Christian Macklain, late Servitrix to James Fraser of Relict, Aged 24 Years,
un-married, Purged, and Sworn, and Interrogat by the Aberuchil, and Mr. Thomas
Fraser Sworn Interpreter, in respect she cannot Speak the English Language,
Depones, That the time Lybelled, particularly that Night that they talk of the
pretended sham Marriage, she being a Servant in the Family, had the Charge of a
young Child, being in the next Room to my Lady's, and the Door of my Lady's
Room, and the Room where the Deponent was being open, and the Doors Guarded by
Armed Men, she heard my Lady Moan and Lament: In the mean there were Bag-pipes
playing, and yet she heard my Ladies Voice so loud, that the Sound of the
Bag-pipe did not drown her Voice. Depones, That she saw Kinmonavie drawing a
Durk from one of the Centries that was at the Room where the Deponent was, and
rush into the Room where the Lady was with it. Depones, That the Deponent was
Guarded so strictly, that she could get neither Meat nor Drink for her self nor
the Child, nor none allowed to come near her from Twelve a Clock of the Day, to
Eight a Clock next Morning. Depones, she saw Captain Simon Fraser there, with
the most part of the other Persons insisted against, all in Arms, and saw a
great many more People in Arms, in and about the House. Further Depones, That
before the Pipes were bended up, she heard my Lady crying and clap her hands,
saying, Is there no Person that has any Christian Blood in them, who will have
no respect to my Woes, and repeated very often, Lord have Mercy on her Soul.
This is the Truth, as she shall Answer to GOD. And Depones she cannot Write.
Sic Subscribitur, Thomas Fraser.

All which Depositions, as to the Centries set within, and without the Lady's
Chamber, and the Violence then done her, and the playing of the Bag-Pipe to
suppress her Cries, and the carrying of her Captive from Place, to Place, were
further confirmed by what the foresaid Men Witnesses did Declare in their
several Depositions as to these Points.

His Majesty's Advocat did also produce, and lay before the Assise, the
principal Letters mentioned in the first Libel, Write by Beaufort Elder and
Younger and their Accomplices, for Declaring their wicked Conspiracy and
Combination, and which Letter was also Attested by several of the Witnesses.

From all which it is most manifest, That the Defenders their Treasonable
Rising in Arms and open Rebellion against his Majesty, and the Aggravations
above-libelled, were fully and clearly Proven: And accordingly the Assise did
return their Verdict, bearing, That they all in one Voice did find the Libel,
with the Aggravations thereof, as the same was restricted by the Interlocutor
of the Lords, clearly proven against the said Captain Simon Fraser, and the
other Persons insisted against in absence, as said is.

After opening and reading of which Verdict of Assise, the Lords Justice
General, Justice Clerk, and Commissioners of Justiciary, in respect thereof,
Decerned and Adjudged the said Captain Simon Fraser, and the whole Persons
contained in the above-written Verdict, to be Execute to the Death, Demeaned as
Traitors, and to undergo the Pains of Treason, and utter Punishment, appointed
by the Laws of the Realm, at such Times and Places, and in such Manner, as the
said Lords should appoint: And ordain their Name, Fame, Memory and Honors to
be extinct, and their Arms to be riven forth, and delete out of the Books of
Arms; so that their Posterity may never have Place, nor be able hereafter to
Bruik or Joice any Honors, Offices, Titles, or Dignities, within the Realm in
time coming: And to have Forfeited, Amitted, and Tint, all and sundry their
Lands, Heretages, Tacks, Steedings, Rooms, Possessions, Goods and Gear
whatsoever pertaining to them, to our Sovereign Lord, to remain perpetually
with his Majesty in Property. And this Sentence was by Sound of Trumpet, and
all other Solemnities, given for Doom.

For Conclusion then of this Account, it remains only to be remarked. First,
That both the Lybels are so evidently relevant, and the Probation so full and
clear, that there cannot remain the least Scruple or Doubt, as to the orderly
Procedure, and just Issue of this Trial.

It may possibly occur, that all the foresaid Convocations, Meetings and
Actings in Arms, were only upon the Occasion of a pretended private Quarrel, and
not designed against His Majesty and his Government. And further, that the
foresaids Persons found guilty, did several times openly declare, That from all
their Bonds and Engagements to maintain and stand by one another, the King was
expressly excepted. But to this it may be Answered, that the Duty and Crimes of
Subjects are to be measured and judged by Deeds, and not by Words. That the
Words of the Law are most express, And it shall be high Treason to the Subjects
of this Kingdom, or any Number of them, more or less, upon any Ground or
Pretext whatsoever, to rise and continue in Arms, to maintain Forts or
Garrisons, to make Peace or War, to make Treaties and Leagues with Foreigners,
or amongst themselves, without his Majesty's special Authority and Approbation
first interponed thereto. That there is nothing more easy and ordinary for Men,
than to color their Treasonable Rising in Arms, with specious Pretenses and
Excuses. And Lastly, That it is most certain, That as the foresaid Criminals,
and their Accomplices, did disobey and contemn His Majesty's Authority, charging
them to lay down their Arms under the Pain of Rebellion, so had they been able
to have opposed and overthrown the whole Forces and Strength of the Government,
they had certainly done it, in the Prosecution of their Wicked Designs.

It may likewise appear strange to some, to hear and see so many Forefeited
upon this Occasion. But these Persons ought first to consider, that the Persons
found guilty, were the Chief Ringleaders in all the Steps of the foresaid
Rebellion, and Barbarous Outrages, and who forced others to take Arms.

As also they ought to reflect, that several Hundreds whom the Law reaches, are
nevertheless past by and overlooked, and the foresaid Persons only insisted
against, as necessary Examples to restrain such Lawless and Pernicious
Practices; And that tho the foresaid twenty Persons be condemned, for the
Indispensible Maintaining of His Majesty's just Authority, and Repressing and
Curbing the Madness of such Heady Desperate Traitors: Yet the Estate and
interest of all of them taken complexly, are not worth Fifty Pound Sterling by
Year; nor are they in the least valuable as to the Peace of the Kingdom, it
being known, that the greatest part of them were Thieves and Murderers, and so
glad of any pretense to continue their Lawless Practices, and keep themselves
out of the Hands of Justice.

Some few Months after the foresaid Trial, the said Hugh Fraser alias
Hutcheon Oig, and John Fraser younger of Migavie, two of the Convict Persons
abovenamed, being apprehended in the North, were sent Prisoners, under a Guard
of his Majesty's Forces, to the Tolbooth of Edinburgh: And being called upon
the 11th of April last before the Lords of Justiciary, and Interrogat, if they
did bear the Names and Designations above-written, and if they knew any others
of these names and Designations, they acknowledged their Names to be as above,
viz. Hugh Fraser, alias Hutcheon Oig, and John Fraser younger of Migavie, and
that they knew of no other Persons of their Names and Designations, which
judicial Acknowledgment they Signed.

The said Hugh Fraser, alias Hutcheon Oig, and the said John Fraser younger of
Migavie, by the former Sentence, being ordained to undergo the Pains of
Treason, appointed by the Laws of this Kingdom, at such Times, Places, and in
such Manner, as the Lords of Justiciary should appoint, in respect they were
then absent: And they being now brought before the Lords, to hear the time,
Place, and Manner of the Execution appointed, the Lords of Justiciary Decerned
and adjudged the said Hugh and John Frasers to be taken to the Cross of
Edinburgh, upon the fourth of August thereafter, betwixt two and four a Clock
in the Afternoon, and there to have their Heads severed from their Bodies.

It being certain, that there is a Remission under his Majesty's Royal Hand,
which is appointed to pass the great Seal per Saltum: It is thought necesary to
publish some Paragraphs of two of his Letters, containing dangerous
Insinuations against his Majesty, and most Villainous Expressions concerning
the late Queen of Blessed Memory, for satisfying all his Majesty's loving
Subjects, how unworthy the said Captain Fraser is of his Majesty's Pardon; The
true Copy of the said Paragraphs, whereof the Principals are ready to be
produced, is hereto subjoined.

Beaufort 12 January 1695.
Tell Sir Robert, That I hope he will pledge me a Bumper that I am drinking to Q.
M. Dredgie.

Sic subscribitur, Sim. Frazer.
Direct to Thomas Frazer.




A Paragraph of another Letter.

Beaufort 12 January 1695.
I doubt not you will be in mourning for Queen Mary, but I am resolved to buy
none till K. W. die, which perhaps may serve for the next Summer Sure; and I
hope you will give me a Hat and Gloves for it.

Sic subscribitur, Simon Frazer.



