TRACTS THEOLOGICAL.

I. Asceticks, or the Heroic Piety and Virtue of the Ancient Christian
Anchorets and Coenobites. II. The Life of St. Antony out of the Greek of St.
Athanasius. III. The Antiquity and Tradition of Mystical Divinity among the
Gentiles. IV. Of the Guidance of the Spirit of God, upon a Discourse of Sir
Matthew Hale's concerning it. V. An Invitation to the Quakers, to rectify some
Errors, which through the Scandals given they have fallen into.
LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Dan. Brown, at the Black-Swan and Bible
without Temple Bar: And Rich. Smith, at the Angel without Lincolns-Inn-Gate,
near the Fields, 1697.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Liturgy of the Ancients represented in English Forms; with a Preface
concerning the Restitution of the most Solemn part of the Christian Worship:
And diverse other Papers and Tracts by the same Author. Sold by Dan. Brown and
Rich. Smith.

ASCETICKS: OR, The Heroic Piety and Virtue OF THE Ancient Christian ANCHORETS
AND COENOBITES.

PART I. Exemplary Asceticks.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1696.

ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
IT has been a usual, subtle and wicked Policy of the Devil and Evil Men,
first to render Names Odious; and then by affixing them to Persons and Things,
thereby to render them so too, with the vulgar; whom, by that means, they
impose upon, and make their Tools. By such means have not only the Christians
of Old, but also some of the chief Principles of Christianity been much injured
and abused: And few Parties there are, who have not one time or other smarted
by it. That the well-meaning Reader therefore may not be so abused and imposed
upon in his Judgment of the things here put together for the Benefit of all,
who can receive them, by the Odious Names of Monkery and Popery, it is to be
observed, that though POPERY, taken properly for the Abuses and Corruptions of
the Bishops and Church of Rome, may deserve all the Odium cast upon it, yet may
most vile and wicked Abuses be committed by Pretense and Imputation of that
Odious Name: And in some things it is hard to say, Whether the People have been
more abused by Popery it self, or by the Odium and Imputation of the Name? And
not only the People, but the Gospel it self: I may add, and the Reformation
too. For, while Christian Truths have been misrepresented, and exposed to
Contempt and Odium under the Name of Popery, the Cause on the side of Popery is
supported, strengthened, and made so much the more defensible by the
intermixture of so much Truth; and the Cause on the side of the Reformation so
much the more weakened and disparaged by the intermixture of so much
indefensible Error. Whereas, if they were only things inexcusable in them which
were questioned, as Charity does require, they must have sunk in the Cause long
before this; but an indiscreet Affectation of Reformation and uncharitable
seeking Occasions, have made a Reformation now as needful on the one side, as
the other. Instances of this might be showed in diverse particulars; but I need
not step out of my way for that, the other Name mentioned may serve for that
purpose here.

MONKERY is not only rendered Odious, as of it self, but also as a part of
Popery. And, indeed, if we imagine all that is believed or practiced by the
Church of Rome to be Popery, it may be so: but then we shall leave little of
true Christianity for the Reformation: But if what is true Christianity be not
Popery, than neither is Monkery, as some are pleased to call the Monastic
Life; And that it is not only true Christianity, but the Practice of it in the
greatest Perfection that Mortals are capable of, I am apt to think will be very
plain to any who will consider what here follows with an unprejudiced and
competent Judgment. And therefore I shall not need to say more here, but only
desire the Reader to suspend his Judgment till he has perused and considered
it well.

THE Beginning and Progress OF Contemplative Living, AND Religious Societies.
THAT there are in the very Nature of Man some Principles of Inclination to
Religion, which, if not corrupted by Evil Education, or other unhappy
Occurrences, do insensibly grow and increase in Strength and Vigor, and in due
time exert themselves in Action; though for some time they lie dormant as it
were, and do not appear; even as some others, which in all Animals are
manifestly most Natural, and yet appear not till after some growth toward
Maturity; has been observed, believed, and asserted, by Men of greatest
Reputation for Learning and Wisdom, both in Ancient times, and to this Day.

These Principles have among Mankind been, in many much corrupted and stifled
by Evil Education, or Conversation with Evil Persons, and by the Impressions,
Energy, and Instigations of Evil Spirits; but in others again much cherished
and improved, not only by Good Education and Conversation, and by Consideration
of the Works of Nature; but moreover, and especially, by the kind Influences of
the Divine Majesty, and of his Good Ministering Spirits.

From hence, in all Ages, and in all Parts of the World, have been produced and
raised up Philosophers, and Wise, and Holy Men and Women, who have been as
Lights and Examples to the rest, of several sorts, according to their different
Ways of Living; some living a Life of Civil Conversation with others, but
strictly conscientious, walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the
Lord, blameless, as is said of Zacharias and Elizabeth, Luke 6. or, to speak
more comprehensively, living in all Good Conscience before God, as St. Paul
says of himself, Act. 23.1. or according to the Character of Job, Perfect, and
Upright, fearing God, and eschewing Evil, Job 1.1. Others living a more
abstracted Life of Retirement and Contemplation; abstracted not only from
Business in the World, but also from ordinary Conversation with Men, that they
might without Distraction converse with God, and his blessed Ministering
Spirits: and others again living a kind of mixed or middle Life between these
two, avoiding unnecessary Business and Incumberances, and exercising
Recollections and Abstraction, as much as their Occasions would permit, and
even in, and amidst their Business.

Of those Three Ways of Living, that more strict and Contemplative Life is
believed, by diverse Learned Men, to have been begun by ENOS, or in his time;
and not without reason: For, as the Principles beforementioned were apt to
produce such an Effect, so there seems to be something singular noted
concerning Religion, or some Religious Institution or Practice in that Sacred
Record, Genesis 4. ult.

But of the more ancient Times, not only before the Flood, but also for some
Ages after the Flood, we know but very little: But in the Times of which, we
have some more Knowledge, besides PRIESTS, and professed PHILOSOPHERS, there
have always been both single Persons, and complete or formed Societies of
People, who, discerning the Vanity and Emptiness of Earthly things, and
Solidity and Perminence of Heavenly things, withdrew themselves from those of
the Earth, as much as their Mortal State could bear, and applied themselves
entirely to the Contemplation and Prosecution of those of a more excellent
Nature, living an Abstracted and Angelick Life in Mortal Flesh, in Holy
Conversation, and Favor with God and his blessed Ministering Spirits. And some
did actually and expressly consecrate themselves by Vow unto the special
Service of God.

Of which Sort were those among the Jews, called NAZARITES, because they did so
separate themselves from among Men, to attend upon God. The Sacred History,
Numb. 6. is a Record, not of the Original, but of the Divine Approbation of
Nazarites, which, though that be very ancient, yet were much more ancient, and
more ancient than any Man can tell: And God's Ordering of the Rites and
Circumstances of their Consecration and Observations for that People, is a
manifest Indication of his Divine Approbation of the thing it self, which had
been in use long before.

All do agree that they were of Two sorts; some, only for certain time; others,
perpetual for their whole Life; and those may again be distinguished into Three
sorts, viz. Such as were called or appointed by God, as Samson, a Nazarite unto
God from the Womb, Judge. 13.5, 7: 16.17. and as St. John the Baptist,
consecrated effectually, and filled with the Holy Spirit even from his Mother's
Womb, Luke 1.15. Such as were dedicated by their Parents, as Samuel by his
Mother, 1 Samuel 1.10, 28. And such as did freely offer themselves: And this
Free Will Offering of themselves, though but for a certain time, God did accept
no less than the Free Will Offerings of their Goods, or any thing they had, v.
Lev. 22.18, 21, 23: 27.2. and therefore ordered the Rites and Circumstances of
their Consecration and Observations, as was said before. And, on the contrary,
the Calamities of Nazarites is reckoned as a part of the Punishment of the
People, by Jeremiah the Prophet, Lam. 4.7. But it is reckoned by God among his
Divine Favors to that People, that he raised up Nazarites amongst them; and
reckoned with his bringing them up from the Land of Egypt, and raising them
Prophets amongst them. Amos 2.10, 11. I raised up of your Sons for Prophets,
and of your Young Men for Nazarites. Though they might freely offer themselves,
yet it was God that did secretly inspire and incline their Wills. And therefore
these were Holy, as Origin has well observed, Hom. 11. in Levit. If any one
devotes himself to God, if any one intangles himself in no secular Business,
that he may please Him, to whom he has approved himself; if any one is
separate from the rest of Men, who live Worldly Lives, and are obliged in
secular Business, not seeking the things which are upon Earth, but which are in
Heaven, he is deservedly called HOLY, or SAINT. And after much to this purpose,
he concludes in these Words: From all which it is clear, how every one of us,
who will be Holy, ought to be consecrated to God, and thenceforth be employed
in no Business or Acts which relate not to God.

So likewise the Colleges or Schools of the PROPHETS, though we meet with no
express mention of them till in 1 Samuel 10.5. yet certain it is, that they were
much more ancient, who, under the Name of Prophets, lived very abstracted
Lives. The very change of the Denomination, mentioned in the chap. next
foregoing, 1 Samuel 9.9. is an Evidence of that, viz. That he, who was then
called a Prophet, was afore-time called a SEER; and therefore when one went to
inquire of the Lord, they said, Come, and let us go to the Seer. And if to
inquire of the Lord, was to go to the Seer, than that leads us back to the time
of Rebecca, Genesis 25.22. for Seers; and how much farther back no Man knows: for
that certainly was no new thing then. Nor does it appear that the Schools of
the Prophets were first instituted by Samuel: But that they lived such
abstracted Contemplative Lives, is undeniable, both from the Nature of their
Profession, and from the Particulars of the Matter of Fact of their
Conversation mentioned in the Holy Scriptures.

Nor were there Men only, but WOMEN also, who did very anciently, leaving the
World, apply themselves to Matters of Devotion, though perhaps not with so
solemn Consecration; such as Anna, a Prophetess, who having lived seven years a
Wife, lived afterward a Widow till eighty four years of Age, and departed not
from the Temple, but served God with Fastings and Prayers Night and Day. For of
this sort of Religious Women were there many among the Israelites, as anciently
as the Tabernacle in the Wilderness, as we are informed by the Jews, and the
most learned Critics of this Age; as Munster, Fagius, Vatablus, and others,
upon Exodus 38.8. And this, it is very probable, was a great Aggravation of the
Sins of the Sons of Eli, 1 Samuel 2.22. that the Women, whom they abused, were
such as these, who assembled at the Door of the Tabarnacle, as learned Critics
inform us. And putting all these Notices together, it seems that such Religious
Devout Women there were among the Jews, at least from the time of their first
abode in the Wilderness, while they had the Temple standing amongst them.

And if so, Why not long before, even while in Egypt? Had they not received
Religious Instructions from their Ancestors? or, Did they retain none of them?
or, Did they see nothing of Religion practiced among the Egyptians? and, Had
they not the same Natural Propensation to Religion, which is common to all Men?
We see how ready and expert all the Women were at the Red Sea, Exodus 15.1, 20.
with Miriam, a Prophetess, to answer Moses and the Men; and, Can we imagine that
all Religion had been extinguished, or lain dormant in their Abode in Egypt? No
certainly; their hard Servitude, though it might hinder their more Solemn
Worship, yet it could not hinder, but did rather excite and provoke to more
retired and secret Devotion. And indeed, that Servitude with Rigor and hard
Bondage, was not till a little before their Deliverance; and even then do we
find that generous Magnanimity, even among the Hebrew Women, the Midwives, as
to obey God rather than Man, Exodus 1.17.

The Companies of the PROPHETS, mentioned 1 Samuel 10.10. and 19.20. such as
elsewhere are called the Sons of the Prophets, 1 King. 18.4: 20.35. 2 King.
2.3, 5, 7, 15: 4.38: 6.1, 2: 9.1. were a sort of Religious Persons, who lived
Abstracted Contemplative Lives; many of them plainly Coenobitical Lives, and
some Anachoretical or Hermete Lives, as St. Antony, and others among the
Christians did, as Elias, 1 King. 17.1. and Elisha, 1 King. 19.6. So that St.
Hierom said very truly, Every Order or Institution of Life has its Principals
or Leaders; and then after diverse Instances in others, he adds; Our Leaders are
such as Paul, as Antony, as Julian, as Hilarian, as the Macerius 's: And to
return to the Authority of the Scriptures, our Prince or Leader was Elias, was
Elisha; our Leaders were the Sons of the Prophets, who dwelt in Fields, and
Deserts, or Solitary Places, and made themselves Tabernacles or Cells by the
River of Jordan: Of this Company were also the Sons of Racab, etc. Ep. 13. ad
Paulin. p. 34. and elsewhere, The Sons of the Prophets, whom we read to have
been Monks in the Old Testament, did build themselves Cottages or Cells near
the River of Jordan, and leaving the Crowds of the Cities, lived on
Barley-Cakes and Field-Herbs, Ep. 4. ad Rusticum. pa. 11. And if some of them
lived in Cities, that does no more invalidate what St. Hierom says, than
Monasteries being brought into Cities by St. Basil, is an Argument against
their being Monks, who have dwelt in such ever since. Such Cavils do only prove
the Partiality and Disingenuity of the Authors, and signify no more to any
Person of Judgment and Candor; since they cannot deny, but are forced to
confess, That the Prophets, Samuel, Elias, and Elisha, did institute Colleges,
in which many Disciples did live together. So then they lived a Coenobitick
Life: and, What was their Food and Raiment? Was it costly and delicious, or
poor and mean? and, What was their Employment? Can we imagine it to have been
other, than Studying the Scriptures, after Moses his time, and the large Book
of Nature, the Works of God, of Creation, of Providence, Prayers, Psalms, and
Divine Contemplation, and Works and Labors about what was necessary for them,
and no more? And if we consider the admirable Graces of the Ancient Christian
Monks, it will be an hard matter for an honest Man to find any difference
between the Christian Monks and the Jewish Prophets, more than in Name. And for
the Antiquity of these, Is it any Argument that there were none before, if we
do not read of any before? How and by whom did they inquire of the Lord? Was
Israel only without Prophets? Was Balaam the first in his Nation, or any other?
or, Were there Prophets, who did not ordinarily live Prophetic Lives? or, if
they did, What was the Difference? But such Profane Spirits as have too long
contemned and insulted upon the most Heroic Professors of Christianity, and
abused the People with their Sophistry, must answer for their Presumption,
Rashness, Temporizing, and encouraging of Sacrilege before God, though the
Degeneracy of the Modern Monks had provoked his Judgments upon them; and among
Men their Names will be little regarded hereafter. But all are not alike, and
therefore I will here add a Note of Peter Martyr's, concerning this Matter,
upon 2 King. We will moreover observe, (says he) that the Disciples of the
Prophets did live together with their Preceptors; For so they say; The Place
where we dwell with thee, is too strait for us. It seems to have been a kind of
Monastic Life, but free without Vows or Superstitions. (But Vows we find
approved by God in the Nazarites, and practiced by St. Paul, and others; and
that they were not in use among these, is more than any one can prove: but he
goes on:) They exercised themselves in Divine Scriptures and Hymns; and also in
Holy Prayers: They were often sent to edify the People, and to confirm Holy
Men, who lived amongst Idolaters in sound and true Religion. They seem moreover
to have exercised some Arts, working with their Hands to get a Maintenance for
themselves, etc. And so much for this.

At the same time with Elisha lived Jonadab the Son of Rechab, 2 King. 10.15.
who instituted another Order of Religious Persons, called after his Father's
Name, RECHABITES. These were not of any of the Tribes of Israel; but Kenites
descended of Jethro, Moses his Father-in-Law. v. 1 Chronicles. 2.55. Jud. 1.16. who
was Priest of Midian, Exodus 2.16: 3.1: 18.1. and one who worshipped the true
God: for he blessed God, when he heard the Relation of what he had done for the
Israelites, Exodus 18.10. and in the usual Form in such Cases, just as
Melchizedeck did long before, upon the Victory of Abraham, Genesis 14.20. but they
are reckoned among them of the Tribe of Juda, 1 Chronicles. 2.55. because they came
up with them out of the Wilderness, Jud. 1.16. and for that reason, and because
they dwelt in Tents, are thought to be called the Tents of Juda, Zech. 12.7.
But they are called, the Families of the Scribes, 1 Chronicles. 2.55. And therefore
both from their Descent, and from their Quality of Scribes, and from their
Institution, and from the very Form of God's Promise to them, we may reasonably
conclude them to have been a Religious Order. And indeed, that alone is
sufficient to demonstrate it was some special Service to God, they were
employed in: for it is expressed in the same terms, which are used concerning
the Tribe of Levi, when the Lord separated them to his special Service, viz. to
stand before the Lord, Deuteronomy. 10.8. v. 2 Chronicles. 29.11. Ezekiel. 44.11, 15. And
though we have little more Account of them, than only in Jer. 35. yet there
have we a plain Account of these Three great things concerning them. 1. The
Institution of their Progenitor. 2. Their Religious Observance for Three
Hundred Years past. And, 3. the Approbation of both by Almighty God. The
Institution may be thought very severe; and the more, because without any
special manifest Reason: and, by consequence, their so punctual Observance
rather Superstitious than Reasonable; and yet both are greatly approved by God:
Whence it is very plain, that such Institutions, and the strict Observance of
them, are lawful, and well-pleasing to God; and therefore that it is great
Presumption and Inconsiderateness to censure them as Superstition. But the
Evidence of Truth has extorted this Confession from an Adversary, and as
Sinister an Interpreter of these things, as he could well tell how to be; viz.
That their Father gave them these Precepts for this very purpose, that thereby
he might set them free from the Cares and the Pleasures of the World, that so
they might, with the more leisure, employ themselves in the Study of the
Scriptures, and of Divine Matters: Which was the very Business of the Christian
Monks. And if they continued in Being at the Destruction of Jerusalem, as is
believed; (as well it may, if we believe the Promise of God to them;) and that
Simeon, who succeeded James, Bishop there, was one of them; there is no doubt
but many of them received the Christian Faith, and retained the Institutions of
their Progenitor, there being nothing inconsistent between them. Some of the
Jews understand that of Zechar. 12.7. The Lord shall save the Tents of Juda
first; of this People, because they lived in Tents, came up with that Tribe out
of the Wilderness, and are reckoned among them, 1 Chronicles. 2.55. and that the
Lord shall save them first, because to them the Messiah shall first be
discovered. And whether the Therapeuts, of whom Philo writes, and the first
Converts by St. Mark about Alexandria, might not be of those People, may be
considered.

It is true, we have no mention of them in the Gospel; nor have we of the
ESSEANS, who yet are known to have been a Religious Sect among the Jews, of
great Antiquity, though not once mentioned in all the Scriptures; a People, who
lived a Religious Abstracted Life: But of them I shall say no more in this
place, because I intend the full Relations both of Josephus, and of Philo,
concerning them hereafter.

Nor shall I here say any thing of the THERAPEUTS, another Religious Society of
the Jews, as Philo says, not only for that reason, because I intend Philo's
Relation of them hereafter; but because I conceive this no proper place for it:
For I am well satisfied that they were some of those who were first converted
to Christianity, probably of the Jews, and possibly of the Esseans,
notwithstanding all the Cavils which some disingenious and prejudiced Persons
have, in these last Ages, strained their Wits to raise against it; though they
might retain some Sentiments and Practices peculiar to themselves for some
time; as did they at Jerusalem, as may be understood from Act. 15.1, 5. Gal.
2.4, 12. etc. For, it is certain, they were never heard of before that time,
nor any such since, but Christians, who, from that time, inhabited the same
places; and from thence, after the Persecution ceased, were the Ascetick
Communities propagated to Palestin, and those parts first, and afterward into
Europe.

The Precursor to our Savior, St. JOHN BAPTIST, according to the Prediction of
the Angel, Luke 1.15. was filled with the Holy Ghost even from his Mother's
Womb, and drank neither Wine nor strong Drink; had his Raiment of Camels Hair,
and a Leathern Girdle about his Loins; and his Meat was Locusts and wild Honey,
Mat. 3.4. and was in the Desert till the day of his Showing unto Israel, Luke
1.80. but in the Fifteenth Year of the Reign of Tiberius Coesar, Annas and
Cajaphas being the High Priests, the Word of God came unto him in the
Wilderness, Luke 3.1, 2. and being sent of God, Joh. 1.6. he preached and
baptized in the Wilderness, Mat. 3.1. Mar. 1.3. and the People from Jerusalem
and all Judea went out to him, and were baptized of him, Mat. 3.5, 6. This was
a Life not only of Retirement and Abstraction from the World, such as was also
that of the Coenobites, who lived in Religious Communities, but plainly an
Eremetick, or Hermetick Life. And this being by one filled with the Holy Ghost
from his Mother's Womb, and therefore by one raised up by Him, who had raised
up the Nazarites before; with good cause do the ancient Christian Writers
repute Him a Prince of the Monks and Hermites raised up among the Christians;
and so good cause, that they who oppose it, may seem to oppose not only the
Sentiments and Opinions of Men, but, out of Prejudice and misguided Zeal, the
very Acts of God, very disingeniously and inconsiderately to serve a Party.

And for our SAVIOVR Himself, though we have no particular Account of his Life
till about the Thirtieth Year of his Age, yet we cannot question but he did
practice Himself what he did recommend to others; and that it was a Life of the
Highest Perfection: The only particular of his Life before, that is left upon
Record, is, That when he was Twelve Years Old, he tarried behind at Jerusalem
at the Feast of the Passover, and Joseph and his Mother knew not of it; and
after Three Days was found in the Temple sitting in the midst of the Doctors,
both hearing them, and asking them Questions; and that all who heard him were
astonished at his Understanding and Answers: and when his Mother asked him, why
he had thus dealt with them; and told him, that they had sought him sorrowing;
he replied, How is it that ye sought me? Wist ye not that I must be about my
Father's Business? and that he went down with them, and came to Nazareth, and
was subject to them. At his Baptism we see how careful he was to fulfill all
Righteousness Afterward he declared to the Jews, That he sought not his own
Will, but the Will of the Father, who sent him; and to his Disciples, That it
was his Food to do the Will of him who sent him and to finish his Work, ( Joh.
5.30: 4.34.) That he lived a Life of Poverty from his Birth, is very plain in
the Evangelical History; and that by his own choice, certainly no ingenuous
Person will deny; and therefore of voluntary Poverty. And that he lived also a
Life of Chastity, is not to be questioned. Much less that it was a Life of
Abstraction, Recollection, and continual Adherence to, and Communion with the
Father. And all this being put together, and well considered, what was it other
than a most perfect Ascetick Life; the Great Exemplar so generously and
heroickly Exemplified by those many and numerous Choires of Holy Christian
Nazarites, of whom the World, especially this Lazy, Tepid, Unprofitable,
Sensual Generation, which despises the Memory, and reproacheth the Common Name
heretofore with them, and others venerable, is not worthy.

And this Life which he lived Himself, he did recommend to others, as by his
own Illustrious Example, so also by his Doctrine: though he enjoined it to none,
especially in that high degree. For Chastity and Celebacie, he does not barely
approve it, but speaks of it as a special Gift of God, Mat. 19.11. which all
cannot receive, save they to whom it is given. And when he had said, There be
Eunuchs, who have made themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heavens sake; he
adds, He that is able to receive it, let him receive it: in both speaking of
something more excellent than ordinary; and besides, in these Words, There be
Eunuchs, who have made themselves Eunuchs, etc. he plainly affirms, that it was
a thing in Use and Practice at that time, (as it had been long before) which he
so approved and recommended to all, who could receive it. And concerning
voluntary Poverty, to the Young Man, who desired to know what he should do that
he might have Eternal Life; and had kept the Commandments from his Youth up; he
replied, one thing thou lackest; if thou will be Perfect, go and sell
whatsoever thou have, and give to the Poor, and thou shall have Treasure in
Heaven; and come, take up the Cross, and follow me, Mat. 19.21. Mar. 10.21.
Luke 18.22. And Forsaking all, he makes an indispensible requisite to the
being his Disciple: Whosoever he be of you who forsakes not all that he has,
he cannot be my Disciple, Luke 14.33. As to Religious Obedience, and voluntary
Subjection to the Order and Determination of another well experienced in the
Ways of God, for an Exercise of an entire Subjection of the Creature to the
Creator, What else is it but a very proper and useful Mean and Expedient for
the acquiring the Habit, and a continual Exercise of that great Doctrine of our
Savior, of Self-denial, and taking up the Cross, Mat. 16.24. Mar. 8.34.
warranted and approved by God in the Recabites, and by our Savior in his
Subjection to Joseph and his Mother? Which, though Self-denial be a Precept, is
a voluntary Act of the nature of a Reasonable Free Will Offering; and a doing
it daily, as is expressed, Luke 9.23. a Living in it, and a continual
Reasonable Sacrifice of the prime Faculties of the Soul for the Service of God.
And the whole Business of an abstracted Ascetick Life, What is it but a
reasonable, religious and devout Exercise of our Savior's Doctrine, in his
Admonition to Martha, Luke 10.41, 42. against being careful and troubled about
many things, when it was only for a short Entertainment of Himself; and that
One thing is needful; and that Mary's Choice was of the better part? In his
Sermon upon the Mount, of taking no thought for our Life, Mat. 6.25. -- 34. In
his Parable of the Sower, concerning the Cares, and Riches, and Pleasures of
this Life; the Thorns which choke the Seed of the Word, that it brings no
Fruit to Perfection, Luke 8.14. and concerning Watching, that we be not
surprised, Mat. 24.42: 25.13. Mar. 13.35. Luke 21.36.

And now, if any one please, as many have done, to make any question concerning
the meaning of our Savior, or the Interpretation of any part of this, what
more Authentic Evidence of that can be reasonably desired than what the wisest
of Men have always approved and had recourse to in such Cases, Usage and
Practice afterward; which daily Experience in the Construction of Laws, and
ancient Records and Deeds, does sufficiently confirm. The APOSTLES certainly
practiced all this, as far as was consistent with their Circumstances and
Business they were employed in; and Preached it, and recommended it by their
Doctrine too, as far as the Circumstances of the People and the Times would
bear. They forsook all; not one of them Married any Wife afterward, though they
might have done it; and were so far abstracted from all Diversions and
Distractions of the World, that they ordered Deacons for other necessary Works,
that they might give themselves continually to Prayer, and to the Ministry of
the Word, or to Preaching. And the effect of their Preaching, and of the
powerful Operation of the Holy Spirit upon the People, was, that they continued
steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, in Communion in breaking Bread, and in
Prayers. And all that believed were together, and had all things Common; and
sold their Possessions and Goods, and parted them as every Man had need, etc.
Act. 2.42. And again, Act. 4.32. The Multitude of them that believed, were of
one Heart, and of one Soul; neither said any of them, that ought of the things
which he possessed, was his own, but they had all things Common: For as many as
were Possessors of Lands or Houses, sold them, and brought the Prices of the
things that were sold, and laid them down at the Apostles Feet.

What is here briefly said of the first Converts and Primitive Christians at
Jerusalem, agrees so well, all things considered with what Philo more largely
relates concerning those about Alexandria, whom he calls THERAPEUTS, who were
never heard of before, nor after, under any Denomination, unless of that of
Christians; which began early at Antioch, and was soon spread over the World
where any Disciples of Christ were, and took place of all others, that, as the
Ancients do affirm, we also have great reason to rest satisfied, that they were
indeed such, notwithstanding all the Cavils of some of the last Age, which have
since been sufficiently refuted. It is true, they did not long appear in that
form of Communities; for they were dissolved at Jerusalem, and dispersed into
diverse Regions by that great Persecution, after the Death of Stephen, and,
doubtless, by like Occasions in other Places: But the Example and Doctrine of
our Savior and his Apostles could not but provoke many, especially among the
Jews, before well-disposed for it, to forsake the World, and betake themselves
to a retired, abstracted, Contemplative Life. The Natural Inclination in them
was excited and fortified by the various Examples which were common among them
before; and then receiving such further Encouragement from our Savior and his
Apostles, both directly and indirectly, from several Doctrines of the Gospel,
concerning Self-denial, Mortification, Contempt of the World,
Heavenly-mindedness, etc. this could not but mightily affect them generally
with an Heroic Contempt of the World, and of the Body, and all Earthly things:
The very Doctrine, Promises, and Miracles, with which they were confirmed, were
apt, of their own Nature, to produce all this; but much more, being accompanied
with such a Spirit and Power, as the Preaching of the Apostles and the
Primitive Christians then was. And certainly they wanted nothing but
Opportunity, even then in the Apostles times, to have settled in Coenobitical
Societies; which as soon as the commom obstacle, the Persecutions, was removed,
by the Providence of God, in raising Constantine to the Throne of the Empire,
they presently began to do, first in Egypt, where, it is probable, were many
descended from the Recabites and Esseans, and in no long time after in most
other Parts. Concerning those in Egypt in his time, St. John Chrysostom gives
us this Account: Should any one come now to the Deserts of Egypt, he would see
all the Wilderness altogether more excellent than a Paradise, and innumerable
Companies of Angels shining in Mortal Bodies. For there is to be seen spread
over all that Region the Camp of Christ, and the admirable Royal Flock, and the
Conversation of the Heavenly Powers illustriously shining upon Earth. And this
you may see most splendid, not in MEN only, but also in WOMEN. Heaven it self
does not so shine with various Constellations of Stars, as Egypt is beset and
illustrated with innumerable Convents of Monks and Virgins: But of this more
hereafter.

These things being well considered, it will be very plain, 1. That they who
have derived these Religious Institutions from our Savior and his Apostles, by
their Example and Doctrine, and the Inspiration of the Holy Spirit, had a good
Foundation of Truth to maintain their Assertion. 2. That they who have raised
such Prejudice in the Minds of the People against such Holy, Religious
Societies in general, as to beget in them an Odium against all; if they did it
in simplicity, and merely through the Prejudice they themselves had conceived
from the Scandals of those of their time, yet did they very rashly and
inconsiderately in so doing: but if they did it to temporize and ingratiate
themselves with Princes and Great Men, who had enriched themselves with the
Spoils of the Monasteries, and the Revenues of the Church, they did very
wickedly and impiously. We must not deny or question the Justice of the
Judgment of God upon them: but, Who are they by whom the Righteous God does
usually execute such Judgments? And at this time we have great reason to take
that for a Warning to our Selves. Were they cast out for their Laziness and
Corruptions? What then have we to expect? Suppose ye that they were Sinners
above all that have succeeded them? I tell you, Nay; but except ye Repent ye
shall all likewise perish. God is able to restore them again: The Vineyard
shall be taken from you, and given to other Husbandmen, who shall render him
their Fruits in their Seasons.

I Thought I had done here: For though I know many have written very bitterly
against Monks and Monkery, I thought them not worth the looking into: because I
believed the Truth, which I have asserted, will stand as an impregnable Rock
against all their Blasts. Yet, at last, it coming into my mind, that an
excellent Person of great Learning, Judgment, Piety and Candor, of this Church
of England, had written something to like purpose, I thought fit to look into
him; and finding, to my Sorrow for him, but great Satisfaction in this Case,
how unworthy of himself, and of how little weight it is, which he has said
against them, I intended to have spared his Name, and to have passed it over
with a short Note that it needed not, nor deserved an Answer. But considering
that that is only the way of the World; that we ought to sacrifice all Esteem
of Men, whether our selves or others, to the Truth, and to the Service of God,
and of Men too, for their Admonition; and that the Holy Scriptures spare not to
record the Failings of Holy Men; I resolved to do the like. To be plain
therefore, that Excellent Person, Mr. Joseph Meed, having concluded the
Apostasy of the latter times, foretold, 1 Timothy 4.1. to be the Worship of
Saints introduced into the Christian Church, through the Hypocrisy of Liars,
forbidding to Marry, and commanding to abstain from Meats; to make good his
Interpretation of that first part of the Prediction, and make it complete,
concludes the latter part to be understood of Monks, that they were the chief
Advancers of Saints Worship: And to prove this, he produces the Testimony of
Chemnitius, a known Adversary to them, who lived about 1200 Years after the
time he speaks of; and Eunapius, (a known Enemy not only to them, but to all
Christians) whom he calls wretched Catiffe, and damned Dog. And why so? Why,
because he blasphemes the Saints and Servants of Christ, who loved not their
Lives unto Death, the Dust of whose Feet he was not worthy to lick up.
Competent Witnesses indeed; and a special Testimony this: but he adds: Yet may
we make a shift to gather hence, etc. But without Shifts we may see plainly to
what Shifts his unadvised and preposterous Zeal had reduced him, thus to expose
the Weakness of the Cause he had undertaken, when all his Learning, Diligence,
and Inquiry, and all Antiquity, could afford him no better Evidence; and to
expose himself to the same Censure he had deservedly given to his own Witness.
Had they been Monks and only Monks, who had been guilty of this, had it been
fair to cast an Aspersion upon all? and, Was it fair, within a dozen Lines
after, to print Bishops and Monks in different Characters, while both were
under the same Circumstances? At this rate, What Calumnies might not be raised
against the People of God in all Ages; the Israelites, the Christians, the very
Apostles themselves, and such as pretend most of all to Reformation? The Devil
has always sowed his Tares, and most industriously amongst the best. But upon
this Evidence, there is no question but the Accused will be acquitted by all
impartial Judges.

As to what St. Austin says of some Hypocrites rambling about in the Habit of
Monks, it is very disingeniously, not to say dishonestly, alleged concerning
Monks in general. But St Austin's Mind concerning the Monks of his time is so
plain in what follows, that I need say no more of it in this place. And for
further answer to this Abuse of his Testimony, they who please may peruse it in
his own Words upon Ps. 99. and 132. and Ep. 137. And the same may be said
concerning Gregory of Towers. v. Cassian. Coll. 18. c. 16.

He had unhappily concluded before, that those Words of St. Paul are a
Description of Monkery; and when that Conceit was once fixed in his Mind, it
presently set all his Parts and all his Learning to work to prove it to others;
and gave easy admittance to all that might seem to favor it. Hence it was
that he imagins Abstaining from Meats may comprehend Renouncing of Possessions.
Nor could he otherwise have thought that the Monks did any more It was Conc.
Chalced. did that, c. 15. to them, not to all.
forbid Marriage, than St. Paul himself did; nay, than our Savior himself did:
Nor have set himself ( Disc. 28.) to derogate from that Obedience of the
Recabites to the Institutions of their Progenitor, which God himself had so
highly approved, and testified his Approbation of by so gracious a Promise: Nor
have imagined that the Law of Nazarism was ever imposed upon any; much less
that it is one of the things expressly named, which the Apostles decreed at the
Council of Jerusalem, should not be imposed upon the Gentiles, who believed in
Christ; or that Act. 21.25, did prove any Prohibition of that, whereby the
Apostles decreed the Gentiles should observe no such thing. There is a great
difference between a Prohibition of Impositions, and a Prohibition of a free
and voluntary Act. But how does Prejudice blind Men's Minds! That a Man of his
Parts, of his Learning, of his Judgment, Candor, and Generosity in asserting
the Truth in other matters, should be so affected with a mere Imagination of
his own, as to maintain that, to do such an Indignity to so glorious a part of
the Christian Church, which St. Gregory Nazianzen calls the most Choice and
Wisest part of the Church; and St. Hierom, the Flower of the Church, which
produced so many Glorious Saints of so great Virtue, and adorned with such
various and illustrious Graces; produced so many Bishops, innumerable, and
amongst them the most illustrious Lights of the Church, both for Virtue and
Learning; was so much respected not only by the People, but by the best of the
Christian Emperors, and approved and favored by the most Eminent Bishops of
the Church, and has so many Testimonies of their Excellence by Persons of the
greatest Credit and Reputation, and deserved so well in many respects; that
such a Man, for the sake of a Fancy of his own, should set up a Chemnitius, a
prejudiced Adversary to them; and Eunapius, a Pagan Adversary to the
Christians, against such a Cloud of Witnesses, and so wrest and strain the Holy
Scriptures, and thereby so expose himself to just Censure, is one of the most
remarkable Instances of the Mischief of Prejudice that I can think of: an
Edifying instance to make all Men, good Men, learned Men, and wise Men, jealous
of themselves, and cautious that they do not impose upon themselves; not to do
God Service: for he needs no such Shifts, nor is at any time pleased with them.

OF THE ESSEANS, OUT OF JOSEPHUS.
THERE are Three Sects of Philosophers amongst the Jews, [of long Continuance
and Antiquity.] One, is that of the Pharisees; another, of the Sadduces; and
the third, of the Esseans, which is the most Famous of the Three. The Esseans
are Jews born, but live in the greatest Union together imaginable: They
consider all Pleasures, as Vices that are to be avoided; and esteem Continence
and Victory over Passions, as the greatest Virtues. They reject Marriage, and
account other Men's Children put to them to be taught, whilst young, as their
own Kinsmen; whom they diligently instruct in their Manners and Opinions; not
for that they condemn Marriage and Propagation of Mankind, but to avoid Women's
Incontinence: for they think that none of them keep themselves true to one Man.
Also, they contemn Riches, and all things with them are Common, and no Man
amongst them is Richer than other. And they have a Law amongst themselves, that
whosoever will embrace their Sect, he must make his Goods Common: for so,
neither any amongst them seems abject for Poverty, nor any great for Riches;
but they have, as it were, all equal Patrimonies, like Brethren.

This is a Custom worthy Admiration, and such as is not to be found amongst any
other, either Greeks, or Barbarians, that make account of Virtue, which they
have practiced from all Antiquity.

They account it a Shame to anoint the Body with Oil; and if any Man, though
against his Will, be anointed therewith, they use all diligence to wipe it
away: And they account themselves fine enough, if their Clothes be white.

They have amongst them Stewards to oversee all things for their Common
Benefit; who are chosen from amongst themselves by a Common Consult. Their
Revenue is distributed according to the Need that every one has. They have not
one certain City, but are dispersed in many Cities; and if any of their Sect,
though a Stranger, come to them from another Place, they give him any thing
they have, as if he were their ancient Acquaintance. In like manner they go
boldly to those whom they never, in their Lives, saw before, as though they
were familiarly acquainted with them: And therefore when they take a Journey,
they only arm themselves against Thieves, and carry nothing with them else. In
every City there is one appointed, whose Office is [to entertain Strangers] to
receive and lodge those of their Sect that come thither; and to see that they
neither want Clothes, nor any thing else necessary for them. All Children under
Government, brought up by them, go apparelled alike; and they never change
their Apparel nor Shoes, except they have worn out their first Apparel. Amongst
themselves they neither Buy nor Sell; but every Man that has any thing which
another wants, gives him it, and takes that of him which himself needs;
yea, every one of them may take any thing he has need of, from whom he
pleases, without any Change.

Above all, toward God they are very Religious. They attribute to Him the
Government and Disposition of all things. They say that the Souls of Men are
immortal; and all the uttermost of their Endeavor and Delight is to maintain
Justice and Equity. They send their Offerings unto the Temple, yet Sacrifice
they not with other Men, by reason they use more sacred and different
Ceremonies; for which they are secluded out of the Common Temple, and Sacrifice
apart. Otherwise, they are Men of most composed Behavior.

Before the Sun rise they speak of nothing but Holy things, and then they make
certain Vows and Prayers, after the Custom of their Country, as it were,
praying that God would please to make it rise upon the Earth.

After this, every one is dismissed to work, or practice the Art he knows:
And when every one has diligently labored till Eleven a Clock, they all meet
together again, and being covered with Linen Clothes, they wash their Bodies
with cold Water; and having thus purged themselves, they go to their Cells,
into which no Man that is not of their Sect is admitted. And then they come to
the Refectory, as into a Holy Temple, where, all sitting down with Silence,
there is set before every Man, in order, a Loaf of Bread and a little Mess of
Pottage, all of one sort. Before they eat, a Priest gives Thanks, and no Man
may eat any Meat till his Prayer be made to God. Likewise, when Dinner is ended
they pray again; for both before and after they give Thanks to God, the Giver
of all: And then putting off the Apparel, as Sacred, they apply themselves to
their Work till Evening. At Supper they do, as before, causing their Guests to
sup with them, if by fortune any come. Their House is never troubled with Cries
or Tumults; for every one is appointed to speak in his turn; so that their
Silence produces respect in Strangers. The Cause of this Moderation, is, their
continual Sobriety, and that every one is limited how much to eat or drink.

And although that in all other Matters they are ruled by their Superior, yet
in these two, to wit, Compassionating and Helping, they may do as they think
good: for every one may, when he pleases, help those whom he thinks deserve
Help; and, when he pleases, give Meat to them that are in Need. Yet may they
not give any thing to their Kindred, without the Leave of their Superior.

They take great care to suppress their Anger; they keep their Promise, and
maintain Peace; and People account every Word they speak of as much force, as
if they had bound it with an Oath: And they shun Oaths worse than Perjury; for
they esteem him a Liar, who is not to be believed without he call God to
witness. They study diligently Ancient Writers, chiefly gathering out of their
Writings what is most convenient for the Soul and the Body: Out of them they
learn Remedies for Diseases, and the Virtues of Herbs, Stones, and Metals.

Those who are desirous to be of their Order, do not strait-way converse with
them; but, for a Year before, live out of the College, and have the same Diet,
a little Hatchet, and such a Girdle as is before spoken of, and a white
Garment: But, at the Years end, if they perceive such a Person to be continent,
they give him a Diet more agreeing with their own, and he is permitted to wash
himself in cold Water, to the end to purify himself; yet he is not admitted in
common amongst them, till for Two Years more they have observed his Life and
Manners: And, at last, when he is thought worthy, he is admitted to their
common Company. But before he is received to the common Table, first he is to
protest solemnly to honor and serve God with all his Heart; to observe Justice
and Fidelity toward all Men; never willing to hurt any Man, nor injure any for
another Man's Command; but always to hate the Wicked, and assist the Good; to
keep his Faith to all, but especially to his Superiors; because they hold
their Power from God. To which they add, that if he be put in Authority over
others, he never will abuse it, to the Prejudice of those who are under him,
and neither exceed the rest in Apparel, nor any other ambitious Pomp: that he
will always love the Truth, and severely reprove Liars: and that he will keep
his Hands and Soul pure from all Theft and unjust Gain: and that he will not
conceal any Mysteries, or Secrets of their Religion, from his Companions, nor
reveal them to any Strangers, although he should be threatened thereto by
Death. Adding moreover, that he will never deliver any Doctrine, save that which
he has received; and diligently preserve the Books, as well as the Names, of
those from whom they received it. These Protestations they oblige those to take
solemnly, who enter into their Order, to the end to fortify them against all
Vices.

Those of the Society who transgress notoriously, they thrust out of their
Company: And who-ever is so punished, for the most part dies a miserable
Death; for, it being not lawful for him to eat with any Stranger, he is reduced
to feed on Grass, like Beasts, and so he perishes through Famine. For which
cause oftentimes they are moved with Compassion to receive many into their
Order again, when ready, by Famine, to yield up the Ghost; judging them to have
endured Penance enough for their Offenses, who, with Famine, were almost
brought to Death's door. They are very severe and just in their Judgments; and
to decide any Matter, there is never fewer of them than an Hundred, and that
which is by them agreed upon is irrevocable. Next after God they reverence
their Lawgiver, insomuch, that if any one revile him, they forthwith condemn
him to Death. They take it for a great Duty to obey their Elders, and what is
appointed by many; so that if Ten of them sit together, no Man of them must
speak, without he be licensed thereto by ^^^e of the Company. They account it a
great ^^^ivility to be in the midst of the Assembly, or on their right hand.

And they are more severe than any other Jews in observing the Sabbath; for
they do not only abstain from dressing Meat (which they dress the Evening
before) that Day; but also, they may not remove any Vessel out of its place,
nor satisfy the Necessities of Nature.

Upon other Days they dig a Pit, a foot deep in the Ground, with the Hatchet
which (as we before said) every one, at his Entrance into their Order, has
given him; and then covering themselves diligently with their Garment, as if
they feared to be Irreverent to the Light of Heaven; in that Pit they ease
themselves, and then cover their Ordure with the Earth they took out of the
Pit: and this they do in the most secret places. And though this purging of
their Bodies be natural, yet do they, by washing, purify themselves after it,
as after great Uncleanness.

Furthermore, amongst themselves they are divided into Four Orders, according
to the time which they have continued this Exercise of Life: and they that are
Juniors bear such respect to their Seniors, that if they do but touch one of
them, they are obliged to purify themselves, as though they had touched a
Stranger.

They are long lived, so that most of them live an Hundred Years; which I judge
is, by reason of their well-ordered Diet, and their Temperance.

They contemn Adversity, and by Constancy and Fortitude triumph over Torments.
They prefer an honorable Death before Life. The Wars which the Jews made
against the Romans showed what invinsible Courage and Hardiness they have in
all things; for they suffered the Breaking of the Members of their Bodies, Fire
and Sword, and all kind of Tortures, rather than be brought to speak the least
Word against their Lawgiver, or to eat Meats forbidden. They could not be
forced to any of these, neither would they entreat the Torturers, nor show any
Sorrow amidst their Torments. Yea, in the midst of their Pains they scoffed at
their Tormentors, and joyfully yielded up their Souls, as though they hoped to
pass to a better Life.

For it is an Opinion amongst them, That the Body is mortal and corruptible,
but the Souls remain ever immortal; and being of a most pure and etherial
Substance, wrap themselves in Bodies, as in Prisons, being drawn thereunto by
some natural Inclination: But when they are delivered out of these carnal
Bonds, then presently, as freed from a long Bondage, they joyfully mount into
the Air. And of the Good Souls they say, as did the Grecians, that they live
beyond the Ocean in a place of Pleasure, where they are never molested with
Rain, nor Snow, nor Heat; but have always a sweet and pleasant Air. But the
Wicked Souls (as they say) go into a Place very tempestuous, where there is
always Winter Weather, always Lamentations of those who for ever are to be
punished. For I judge that the Greeks are of this Opinion, when they say there
is an Isle for the Virtuous, whom they call Heroes and Half-Gods; and that the
Souls of the Wicked go to a Place in Hell, where it is feigned, that some are
tormented, as Sysiphus, Tantalus, Ixion, and Titius. Those Esseans also believe
that they are created Immortal, that they may be induced to Virtue, and averted
from Vice; that the Good are rendered better in this Life, by the Hope of being
Happy after Death; and that the Wicked, who imagine they can hide their Evil
Actions in this World, are punished for them in the other with Eternal
Torments. This is the Esseans Opinion, touching the Excellence of the Soul;
from which we see very few of those depart, who have once embraced it.

There are also some among them, who promise to foretell things to come: which
Faculty is obtained as well by the Study of Holy Books and Ancient Prophecies,
as by the Care they take of sanctifying themselves: And their Predictions
seldom fail.

They are, at least, Four Thousand in Number, who have neither Wives nor
Slaves; supposing that Women are the occasion of Injustice, and Slaves do cause
Insurrections; and living apart by themselves, they serve one another; and
choose out certain upright Men among the Priests, to gather the Fruits and
Revenues of the Land, to the end they may be maintained and nourished thereby.
In a Word, they follow the same Course of Life that they do, who are called
Plisti among the Danes.

There is another sort of Esseans, agreeing with the former, both in Apparel,
Diet, and kind of Life, and Observance of the same Laws and Ordinances; only
they differ in the Matter of Marriage: Affirming, that to abstain from Marriage
tends to abolish Mankind. For (say they) if all Men should follow this
Opinion, presently all Mankind would perish. Notwithstanding, these People use
such Moderation, that for Three Years space they observe the Women they intend
to Marry; and then, if they appear sound enough to bear Children, they Marry
them. None of them lie with their Wives when they are with Child; to show that
they do not Marry to satisfy Lust, but to have Children. When their Wives wash
themselves they are covered with a Garment, as the Men are: And this is the
Manner and Custom of this Sect.

OF THE ESSEANS, OUT OF PHILO.
IT IS a strange and lamentable thing to consider, what a continual Faintness,
and how much Listlessness, we find in our selves to those things which we
should prosecute with the greatest Vigor, as being the nearest related to us,
and most proper for us: It Is this Sluggishness which putrefies all the Seeds of
Integrity, that are in our Natures. On the contrary, we have an unsatiable
longing after and desire of those things of which it is fitting we should be
divested. Hence it is that both the Sea and Land are full of Wealthy, and
Vainglorious, and Voluptuous Men. Whereas the Number of Wise, and Righteous,
and Good Men, is very small. But though that which is small is rare, yet it is
not quite not existing in Nature. This both Greece and the Barbarous Countries
can attest: For, in Greece did flourish those who were truly called the Seven
Wise Men, (besides whom, others also, as is very probable, flourished, both
before and since them) whose Memory, inasmuch as they were the Ancienter, has
not vanished; though, the Memory of the later of them, through the great
Neglect of their Contemporaries, lies in Obscurity. And in other Kingdoms were
many Ancients, venerable both for their Actions and Discourses, even numerous
Armies (if I may so say, because of the difficulties of Virtue) of Good and
Excellent Men. Such among the Persians are the Magi, who diving into the Works
of Nature for the Knowledge of the Truth, are quietly, by much Leisure and
Opportunity, instructed in Sacred things; and do also teach others the Divine
Virtues by clearer Demonstrations. Such also among the Indians are the
Gymnosophites, who, besides Natural Philosophy, applied themselves to Moral
Philosophy; and made their whole Life a Demonstration of Virtue.

Neither does Palestine and Syria want their share of Excellent Virtue; for
there no small part of a Numerous sort of Jews does dwell: for there are some
there which are called Esseans, in Number (as I think, for I cannot be exact)
above Four Thousand: They have their Denomination from Holiness, in the Greek
Dialect; for although they have the best and most Worshippers, yet they
sacrifice no Creatures; but they are ambitious to prepare their Minds so, as
that they may present their Thoughts in a fit Temper to be consecrated, and as
becomes Holy Men.

They dwell only in little Villages, avoiding Cities and great Towns, because
of the Immoralities of the Inhabitants of such Places, being very sensible that
Souls receive an incurable Wound from the Conversation of such Men; just as our
Bodies imbibe a Disease from corruptive Air. Some of them Till the Ground, and
others follow such Arts and Trades as are of use in Times of Peace, and by
which they may be helpful to their Neighbors.

None of them hoard up Gold and Silver, or possess great Estates of Land out of
Covetousness of Revenues; but they are all contented with what will just supply
the Necessities of Life. These are the Persons that, of almost all Men, keep
themselves Monyless and Estateless. These are very Rich by their Industry, and,
indeed, more Wealthy by their wise Institution, than it is possible that those
whose Minds stand in need of the Favor of Fortune should be, or their own
voluntary choice of only what is just necessary can make them Poor. These are
they who look upon a Temper, which makes a Man need very little, and be soon
satisfied, to be true Affluence, and a brave Estate; as indeed it is.

You cannot find a Gun-Smith, or a Cutler; not one that makes Arrows, or Darts,
or Javelins, or Daggers, or a Headpiece, or a Breast Plate, or a Shield, or,
indeed, any of those Trades amongst them which work upon Arms, or any
Instruments which belong to War; or upon any of those things which promote or
tend to the Promotion of Vice in Peace. They own no Use to be in Merchandise,
or Taverning, or keeping Public Houses, or Navigation; for they avoid all
Provocations of Covetousness.

There is not one amongst them a Servant; but they are all Freemen, and wait
upon one another mutually by turns; and they condemn Masters, not only as
unjust Persons that lay Holiness wast; but as impious ones too, who destroy the
Established Law of Nature; for she, like a common Mother, has brought us
forth, and bred us all up alike, as Natural Brethren, having made us not only
Nominally, but Really Brethren. But that treacherous Principle, Covetousness,
(which prompts us easily to overlook one another) has made a Breach in this
Universal Alliance, and wrought in us Strangeness instead of Familiarity, and
Enmity in the place of Friendship.

They resign the Logical part of Philosophy, as being not necessary in order to
the Acquisition of Virtue, to Word-Hunters; and the Physical part of it, (so
much only excepted as proves the Existence of God, and the Genesis of the
Universe,) as that which exceeds the Comprehension of Humane Nature to those
who affect to prattle at random about Sublime things. But they take a great
deal of pains in cultivating the Moral part thereof, making great use of some
Traditional Laws of their Fathers, which encourage the Soul mightily in its
prosecution of Heroic Virtue: and, indeed, they are such Laws, as it is
impossible for a Humane Soul to discern and think of without some Divine
Instruction. These they teach on Seventh Days, (besides other times) with
extraordinary Care, and in very excellent Methods; for the Seventh Day is
reckoned Holy by their Laws; and in it they abstain from all other Business,
and go to their Sacred Places, (which they call Synagogues) where the Young Men
sit in their Orders, according to their different Ages, below the Elders, and
hear attentively and reverently with all befitting Decency. When they are sat,
one of them takes the Books and reads; and then another of the most Experienced
reads, passing by those things which are not so practical and thoroughly known:
Part of their Philosophy they communicate by Signs, [or Riddles,] [or
Hieroglyphics,] in Imitation of an ancient Custom. The Subjects of their
Instruction are, Sanctity, Righteousness, Economy, Polity, the Knowledge of
Helps to, or Hindrances of the Truth, the Differences between things really
Good, and really Bad, and things that are Indifferent; the Choices of things
which ought to be chosen, and Avoidances of contrary things; making use herein
of Three general Terms and Canons, (viz.) (...), or the Love of God; (...), or
the Love of Virtue; and (...), or the Love of Man. Of the first they give
infinite Demonstrations, Namely, a continued Series of Chastity through the
whole Life, refraining from Oaths and Lies, and a steady Belief that the Deity
is the Author of all Good things, but of nothing that is Evil. For Evidences
of their Love of Virtue, (which was their Second general Canon) they prescribed
Freedom from Love of Money, Freedom from Love of Glory, and Freedom from Love
of Pleasure, Continence, and Patience; also Needing but little, Simplicity,
cheap and spare Diet, Freedom from Swellings of the Mind, regular Obedience,
and Stability, and all other Habits of the like Nature. For Indications of
their Love of Man, (which was their third general Canon) they taught
Benevolence, Equality, (which is better than the highest Pretenses in Words)
and having all things Common; of which it may not be unseasonable to speak
briefly.

In the first place then, you must know, no one has a House of his own, but
what does as equally belong to all; for, because of their cohabiting together
in Multitudes, their Houses are open to all Comers from other Parts, in case
they are those that like the same way of Living. They have all one Refectory,
common Banks and Expenses, and common Clothes, common Victuals, and common
Lodgings. One common united Roof, and one and the same common Diet and Table,
is what you cannot find amongst any others [of them,] and perhaps no where else
at all.

In the Evening, when they have received their Hire, they don't keep it to
themselves, but bring it and cast it in, in the midst, before all, for the
common Benefit of those who want to make use of it. Those also that are Sick
are not neglected, because they are not able to help themselves, having common
Banks laid up in readiness for the Healing the Sick, so that they may be at
extraordinary Expense on such extraordinary Occasions without fear. They
revere, honor, and take great Care of their Elders, maintaining and cherishing
them in their Old Age by their Manual Labor, and many other means, in all
Plenty and Security.

OF THE THERAPEUTS. OUT OF PHILO.
HAving spoken concerning the Esseans, who were zealous of, and studiously
exercised in an Active Life, more exactly than all, or, to speak indeed more
tolerably, than very many others: I come now, keeping close to the thread of my
Design, to speak as much as is true and pertinent concerning those who have
embraced a Contemplative way of Living: And here I shall add nothing of my own
to set off my Narrative, as Poets and Orators, whose ends of Writing are mean,
and who are at a loss for good and excellent Matter: It Is Truth, and that only,
which I unfeignedly love and salute, how unwelcome soever this Method may be to
the Artificial Speaker. But in my Entrance on this Subject, I find a great
Contest with my self; however, the Greatness of the Virtue of those Men ought
not to be the Cause of Silence in those, who don't think it fair that what is
admirable should be concealed.

What the Purpose of these Philosophers was, their very Name discovers; for
they are called Therapeuts and Therapentesses, from (...), either from Healing,
and more truly than other Physicians, since they profess a nobler Medicinal Art
than that professed in the City; for that only heals Bedies, but this cures
Souls of Diseases very severe and hard to be cured; Souls beleagur'd and
oppressed with Pleasures and Lusts, Griefs and Fears, irregular Desires, and
Follies, and Iniquities, and an infinite Multitude of other Passions and Vices:
Or from Worshipping, because they have been taught by Nature and Holy Laws to
worship the Being which is Better than Good, and Smpler than One, and Ancienter
than Unity.

Those that enter upon the way of Living which the Therapeuts use, don't do it
out of Custom, or at the Instigation of any Persons; but because they are
ravished with an Heavenly Love, and struck powerfully by the Deity, and feel
Spiritual Exultations of Joy in their Souls, and will not be at rest till they
see the Object they long for: Wherefore, because through their desire of an
Immortal and Blessed Life, they reckon themselves Dead to this Mortal Life,
they leave their Estates to their Sons, or Daughters, or any other Relations,
making them their Heirs cheerfully, and with a free Mind: Those of them which
have not Relations, leave them to their Friends and Acquaintance. The Greeks
celebrate Anaxagoras and Democritus, because they, being smote with the Love of
Philosophy let their Estates be devoured by Sheep. I admire those Men, because
they themselves were above Riches: But, How much better were those, who, not
suffering their Estates to be devoured by Cattle, applied a Remedy to the Needs
of Men, and made the Indigent Rich? for that was an inconsiderable (not to say
Mad) Act, for which Greece admired those Men: But this is a sober Custom, which
shows much Consideration, Prudence, Humanity, and Sweetness of Disposition.
What can Enemies do more than devour and make the Countries of their Enemies
bare of Corn, Fodder, and Trees, that being brought into the straits of
Necessity, they may yield. Just thus did Democritus serve his Kindred,
contriving, as it were, with his own Hands Streights and Poverty for them, not
designedly perhaps, but by not fore-casting and having in his Eye the Benefit
of others: How much better are these, though the Efforts of their Affections
for Philosophy were not less than his. These preferred an extensive Concern and
Generorosity of Mind before Contempt of their Friends, benefitting others with
their Estates, and not making a corrupt use of them, that they might benefit
both themselves and others; others, by ample Estates; themselves, by
Philosophizing; because the Cares of Money and Lands devour much Time: But it is
an excellent thing to be frugal of Time, since, as the Physician Hippocrates
said, Life is short, but Art long. But to proceed in our Narration.

When they quit their Estates, and are no longer caught by any Baits, they
depart without ever turning back, and leave their Brethren, Children, Wives,
Parents, numerous Relations, friendly Intimacies and Engagements, and the
Countries in which they were bred and born; because Custom and Familiarity are
very attracting, and have the greatest Power to ensnare. And when they do thus,
they do not remove into another City, like miserable, unfortunate Servants,
who, instead of Exchanging Slavery for Liberty, only exchange their Masters;
for, indeed, such are they, who part with one Estate, to purchase another in
some other City; for every City much inhabited (though it be governed by Good
Laws) is full of unspeakable Tumults and Hurries, which any one that is once
led by Wisdom cannot away with: But they live and exercise themselves without
Walls, in Gardens and By-Fields, seeking after Solitude, not out of a morose
affected Disgust against Men; but because they are sensible Mixtures are
unprofitable and hurtful, by reason of the Dis-agreeableness of their Manners.

This sort of Men are in all parts of the habitable World; and, indeed, 'twas
but fitting that both Greece and the Barbarous World should partake of this
perfectly good Sect.

They abound in Egypt in every one of their Provinces, and especially about
Alexandria: But the principal of them retire, as to their own Country, from
all Parts, to a Colony of Therapeuts, at a commodious Place about the Lake
Maria, situate upon a little rising Hill, and very convenient both for
Security, and good Temperature of Air. As for Security, that Place is best
which is surrounded with Neighboring Villages and Cottages: And as for good,
well-tempered Air, continual Gales, which proceed from a Lake that lies open to
the Sea, and that part of the Sea which is nigh furnish them with that; for the
Sea sends fine, thin Gales, and the Lake, which lies open to the Sea, thick,
fat Gales; which two, so curiously mingled together, make a very Healthy Air.

The Houses in which they live together are very mean and slight, and just
serve for Defense against two very necessary things, the Scorching of the Sun,
and the cold Crudeness of the Air: But they are not near together, as the
Houses in the Cities; for Neighbourhoods are troublesome and ungrateful to
those who court Retirement: Neither are they far distant from each other;
because they love Communion and Society together, and that they may help one
another if they should be set upon by Thieves.

In every House they have an Oratory to themselves, called a Sanctuary and
Monastry; in which, alone by themselves, they celebrate the Mysteries of a
Sacred Life, never bringing thither any such thing as Meat, or Drink, or any
other things else which are necessary for the Repairs of Nature's Decays; but
only Laws, and inspired Oracles, which were spoken by the Prophets, and Hymns,
and other things by which Knowledge and Piety are increased and perfected. They
always preserve an unintermitted Remembrance of God; so that even in their
Dreams their Fancies form and present them with no other Images, but the
Beauties of the Divine Powers. Hence many speak out in their Sleep, and whilst
they are dreaming do interpret the venerable Decrees of the Holy Philosophy.
They are used to Pray twice every Day, viz. Morning, and Evening: When the Sun
rises, begging due Composedness, Illumination, and Gentleness of Mind, and that
their Mind may be filled with Heavenly Light: When it sets, they beg that the
Soul may be quite eased of the Tumor and Vanity of the Senses and Objects of
Sense, and that being fixed in her own Sanhedrim and Consultory, she may trace
the Tracts of Truth. All the space of Time between the Morning and Evening,
they give themselves to Exercise: For reading the most Holy Scriptures they
Philosophize, Allegorizing the Philosophy of their Ancestors: For they
interpret the Composure of a plain literal Sense, as the Symbols [or
Signatures] of a secret or concealed Nature, by probable Conjectures. They have
also Composures of Ancient Men, who, being the principal Promoters of this
Sect, have left Monuments of this Model in their Allegories, which they make
use of as certain Archetypals, imitating the Manner of their Design; so that
they don't only contemplate. Moreover, they also make Songs and Hymns upon God,
of all sorts of Measures and Tunes, to which they are obliged to prick the
Graver sort of Notes. Six Days together every one of them apart Philosophize by
themselves in their Cells, never going over the threshold, nor so much as
peeping out; but on the Seventh Days they meet together in a common Body and
sit down together in Order, according to their Age, in a very decent Posture,
keeping their Hands out of sight; to wit, their right Hand between the Breast
and their Chin, and the left Hand upon the Cavity of their right Side: The
Eldest and Expertest of them, when he is come, discourses to them with a fixed
Eye, and a steady Voice, with Reasoning and Wisdom, not affecting out of
Ostentation Excellency in Words, like Orators and Sophisters; but with great
Searchingness of Thought, and Accuracy of Interpretation, which does not sit
upon the tip of the Ears, but by hearing goes into the Soul, and continues its
fixed Dewlling Place there. All the rest hear the Exhortation with Silence,
signifying their Approbation only by Motions of their Eye or Head.

The common Temple, in which they meet together on Seventh Days, has Two
Enclosures; one being allotted for the Men, called (...); the other for Women,
called (...); for the Women ordinarily hear together with them, having the same
Emulation and Purpose. The Wall which parts the Enclosures is built about three
or four Cubits high from the Pavement, like a Fortress, being higher up open to
the top. By this Contrivance the Female Sex preserve that Modesty which becomes
them, and hear well enough as they sit in the Auditory, because nothing hinders
the Voice of the Speaker.

They first lay Temperance in the Soul, as it were for a Foundation, and raise
a Superstructure of other Virtues upon that. Not one of them uses any Meat or
Drink before Sunset; for they reckon the Exercise of Philosophy worthy of the
Day; but Bodily Necessities to belong to Darkness: Wherefore, they bestow their
Days upon that, and some small part of the Night upon these. Some of them
having a peculiar Desire after Knowledge raised in them, forget to Eat for
Three Days together: And others are so luxuriously and deliciously cheered and
feasted by Wisdom, supplying them liberally with Sentiments, that they
withstand their Appetites double that time, and hardly taste the least
necessary Food for Six Days together, being used (as they say of a certain sort
of Grasshoppers) to be fed by Air; for their Singing makes Want very easy.

And because they reckon the Seventh Day all Holy and all Festival, they
vouchsafe it a peculiar Honor; for after the Care of the Soul, they anoint the
Body also, allowing it Relaxation, just as they do their Cattle, from continual
Toil. They eat nothing that is costly, but feed upon cheap Bread, and Salt:
Those of them that live deliciously, dress it with Hyssop. Their Drink is
Spring Water. Thus they appease those Two Tyrannesses, Hunger and Thirst, which
Nature has placed over [or under] the Mortal kind, bringing nothing to allure
them, but only such things as are needful, without which it is not possible to
live. For this Reason they eat that they may not be hungry, and drink that they
may not thirst; but they avoid Fullness and Satiety, as the Enemy and Traitor
both of Soul and Body.

Covering being of Two kinds, namely, Clothes, and a Dewlling Place; (having
acquainted you that their Dwellings are mean, made without Art, of whatever
comes to hand, and only for use) I come now to acquaint you, that their Raiment
also is very mean, worn only for Defense against Cold and Heat: They have a
thick Cloak over some rough Skin or other, in Winter; and in Summer, a lighter
short Garment over their Shoulder, or Linen. They also exercise themselves to
a perfect Freedom from all Arrogance and Vanity, knowing very well that
Falsehood is the beginning of Tumor, and that Truth is the Source of the
Avoidance of vain Pomp and Ostentation; and that both these have the Nature of
their different Spring and Fountain; for from Falsehood flow numerous and diverse
Idea's [or kinds] of Evils; but from Truth, a great Abundance of both Humane
and Divine Goods.

The manner of their Feasting is thus; For Seven Weeks together they assemble
together, which they do not only out of Respect to the Number Seven, but also
to the Power of it; for they know it to be a chaste and Virgin Number. This
Festival is a Preparatory to the greatest Feast, (viz. Pentecost,) so called
for its belonging to the Number Fifty, which is the most Holy and Natural
Number, because of the Power of a right-angled Triangle, which is the Principle
of the Production of all things. When they are met together, arrayed in White,
as soon as the Ephemereuts (for that is the Name they call their Beadles by)
give the Sign, all of them, before they sit down to eat, standing in a very
decent Order, with all Gravity, do, with their Eyes and Hands lifted up to
Heaven, (their Eyes, because they have been taught to see things so worthy of
Veneration; their Hands, to signify that they are not guilty of Eating any
Food before, out of pretense of Necessity) pray to God that their Banqueting
may please Him, and be according to his Mind, or [according to understanding.]
The Seniors sit down according to their Admissions; for they don't reckon those
who have lived many Years, and are very Ancient, the Seniors there; but, on the
contrary, they look upon them as Young Children, if they have but lately been
enamored with that way of Living; but they count those who began betime, in
the Flower of their Age, to betake themselves to the Contemplative part of
Philosophy (which, indeed, is the best and Divinest part) their Seniors, though
their Youth be not yet expired. The Women also are at the Feast with them, many
of which are very Ancient, and Virgins out of pure Love to Purity, not out of
Necessity, as some of the Priestesses amongst the Greeks, who live so upon that
Account, rather than out of free Choice: No; these live so because of a true
Zeal for, and desire of Wisdom; for, having a fervent desire to live by Wisdom,
they make no account of Bodily Pleasures; neither do they desire Mortal, but
Immortal Offsprings, which only a Soul that truly loves God is able to bring
forth out of its self; for it is God who has shed into it the Intellectual Rays
of the Father, by which 'twill be able to contemplate the Decrees of Wisdom.
When they sit together, the Men sit on the Right hand, and the Women on the
Left. If any one supposes that softer Seats than ordinary (though not so
costly) were prepared for such Noble, Virtuous Exercisers of Virtue; let him
know, that they have cheap sort of Carpets made of some Leaves and Barks of
Trees that grow there, on which they lean a little; for they remit something of
the hard way of Living that the Lacedoemonians use; though, in all respects,
they study Frugality, and have a strong Antipathy against the Philtres of
Pleasure. They are not waited upon by Slaves; for they look upon the keeping of
Servants to be a Custom against Nature; for she made and brought forth all Men
free. But the Iniquity and unreasonable Covetings of those who have affected
Inequality, the Ringleader of all Mischief, have brought Camps into the World,
and set the stronger Men on Fire, to exert their Strength against the Weak.
Here, as I said, is no Servant; but Freemen give all necessary Attendance,
which they do heartily, and with all readiness, even to the Prevention of
Request; for the Juniors of the Company, which are appointed from Meal to Meal,
do, with all Diligence, serve those who have arrived to a great pitch of
Virtue, (just as Natural Sons do, with great Pleasure and Emulation, serve
their Parents) reckoning these their common Parents to be nearer related to
them than their Parents by Blood, since nothing is nearer than Integrity to
those who have right Minds. Those that wait come with their Garments loose
about them, lest there should be the least Appearance of Servility amongst them
at this Feast. I know some will laugh at the Hearing of this; but they are such
as do those things for which they ought to weep and lament. At those Feasts no
Wine is brought in, but only very clear Water; cold Water for the most, and
warm Water for the Tenderest of the Old Men. Their Table is pure from all
Bloody Creatures; Loaves are their Meat, and Salt is their Sauce. The most
dainty of them, indeed, make it more palatable with Hyssop; for Right Reason
charges them, like Priests, to sacrifice Sacrifices without Wine, and to live
upon them; for Wine is an incentive of Folly, and chargable Dishes provoke
Lust, which is the most Insatiable of all Beasts. And so much for the First
part.

After the Guests are sat in the Orders forementioned, the Waiters do stand
decently in Order, ready to serve. There is no Drink brought, but every one
calls for it as he wants it; and, which is more than any thing already
mentioned, no one dares Belch, or fetch his Breath indecently: But some body
either offers a Query upon some place of the Holy Scriptures, or solves
something proposed by another without any Solicitude about the manner of the
Solution; for not one amongst them desires Fame by fine Speaking: But every one
loves to see another more exact; and when they see him so, not to envy him,
though they are not so accute themselves. They have all the like Desire to
learn. Sometimes one of them takes more time when he teaches, repeating and
dwelling upon what he says, that he may imprint his Notions on their Souls;
for, many times, the Mind of the Auditors being not able to keep pace with the
Interpretation of one that speaks too closely, or too fast, falls short of
comprehending what is said; the rest look with their Faces upright upon him who
speaks, in one and the same Posture, and give Notice of their Understanding and
Comprehending what they hear by a Nod, or a Look. They discover their
Commendation by the continued Cheerfulness of their Aspect; but a Doubt is
signified by a stiller Motion of the Head, and their Right hand's little
Finger. The Juniors also that wait give no less Attention than those that sit
at Table. Their Expositions of the Holy Scriptures are Allegorical Hints; for
the whole Constitution of their Law seems to them like an Animal; in which the
literal Expressions, are the Body; and the invisible Sense infolded in the
Words, the Mind; wherein the Reasonable Soul begins distinctly to consider the
Properties thereof, as through the Perspective of the Names, after it (having
beheld the admirable Beauties of the Notions, and unveiled the Symbols) has
brought to light the deeper [or more recondite] Sense to those, who, from a
small hint, are capable of tracing obscure Truths by the Light of those that
are manifest. After the President seems to have made a sufficient Discourse, so
as that his Applications successfully hit what he aimed at, and the Attention
of the Auditors perceive his meaning, they all give an Humm, thereby
signifying that they are pleased, and choose, for the future, to put his Advice
in Execution.

After this, he rises up, and sings an Hymn in Praise of God, which is either
of his own, or some ancient Poets composure; for their Poets have left them
Measures and Songs of all sorts; (...), Trimetres; (...), Introits, [or
Processional;] (...), Laudatory; (...), Sacrifical; (...), Altar-Songs; (...),
Stationary; (...), Choiral with Stanza's of various Measures; some of which are
used with their Faces turned from, and others with their Faces turned toward
the Altar: After whom the others, according to their Orders, in a very decent
manner, do also sing, the rest hearing with deep Silence, except when the last
Lines, or the short after-Hymns, are to be sung; for then they all sing out,
both Men and Women.

When every Precentor has finished his Hymn, the Juniors bring in the Table, as
was just abovementioned; upon which they have all their Holy Loaf of Bread
leavened with Salt and Hyssop mingled together. They have Hyssop in the
Hall-Loaf, out of Reverence to their Holy Table in the Church Porch; for on
this Table they have Loaves and Salt without Sauces; the Loaves unleavened, and
the Salt unmixed: For 'twas fitting that the simplest and purest things should
be allotted to the Principal part of the Sacra, as the Reward of the
Ministration; and that others should imitate the same, and abstain from those
Loaves, that their betters may have them as their Prerogative.

After Supper, they keep a Holy Vigil all Night. They keep the Vigil thus: They
all rise together, and in the middle of the Hall make two Choirs; one of Men,
and the other of Women; each choosing their Eminentest person for Music for a
Precentor; and then they sing some Hymns made in the Praise of God, with
variety of Measures and Stanza's, sometimes singing all together, and sometimes
alternately, with peculiar Gestures, and dancing about, as those who are struck
with a Divine Fury. Sometimes they sing Processional, sometimes Stational
Hymns, altering their Postures with respect to the Altar, as they see occasion:
Then when each of them has been separately and by themselves entertained, just
as though they had been drinking some Divine Wine, they both mingle together,
and make one Choir, in imitation of the Choir at the Red Sea, upon the account
of the Miracles wrought there, which exceeded the Thought and Hope of the
Israelites, and made them all in one Company exult, as though they were beside
themselves, and sing Eucharistical Hymns to God their Deliverer; the Prophet
Moses, being the Men's Precentor; and Miram the Prophetess, Precentress to the
Women: The Choir of the Therapeuts and Therapeutesses, is just like it, singing
with different Notes; for the treeble Voice of the Women mingled with the Base
of the Men, makes a lovely and truly Musical Harmony. Their Thoughts are truly
fine, their Words are fine, and their Choiristers are comely: in short, the
Thoughts, the Expressions, and Choiristers, are all pious and devout. After
they have continued their Holy Transport till the Morning, they do (...) feel
their Heads disordered, or their Eyes heavy; but they are more wakeful than
they came; and as soon as they see the Sun rise, with their Eyes and their
whole Body toward the East, and their Hands lifted up toward Heaven, they
pray for Lightsomness of Mind, and Truth, and Rational Quick-sightedness. After
these Prayers every one of them retreat to their own Oratories, to cultivate
and traffic in their usual Philosophy.

Since therefore the Therapeuts have embraced the Theory of Nature, and lived
together with one Soul, and were Citizens both of Heaven and Earth, and were
truly commended and conformed to the Father and Maker of all things by Virtue,
which procured them that Friendship which is the truest Honor; do thou, by
applying thy Mind to a Prosecution of Virtue, which is better than all
Prosperity, reach the Top and Perfection of Felicity.

The Judgment and Observations of Eusebius, Bishop of Caesarea, (in his Eccl.
Hist. l. 2. c. 16.) and other Ancient Writers, concerning Philo's Book of the
Therapeuts, and that they were Christians.
MARK (the Evangelift) going into Egypt, is reported to have been the first
Publisher there of the Gospel he had written, and to have settled Churches in
the very City of Alexandria. And furthermore, that so great a Multitude both of
Men and Women, who there embraced the Faith of Christ, professed from the very
beginning so severe and so Philosophical a Course of Live, that Philo
vouchsafed in his Writings to relate their Converse, their Assemblies, their
Eating and Drinking together, and their whole manner of Living.

It is reported that this Philo, in the times of Claudius, came to be
familiarly acquainted with Peter at Rome, who then Preached the Word of God
there: neither is this unlikely. For that Work of his, of which we speak, being
by him elaborated a long time after, does manifestly contain all the
Ecclesiastical Rules which are to this present observed among us. And seeing he
describes evidently the Lives of the Ascetae amongst us, he does make it
sufficiently perspicuous that he did not only see, but also very much approve
of and admire the Apostolical Men of his time, who being, as it is probable,
originally Jews, upon that account did then observe, in a great measure, the
Judaical Rites and Customs.

First of all therefore, in that Book which he entitled, Of Contemplative
Life; or, Of Suppliants, having professed that he would insert nothing
disagreeable to Truth, or of his own Head into that Account which he was about
to give, he says, That the Men were called Therapeutae, and the Women that were
conversant among them Therapeutriae: And he adjoyns the reason of that
Appellation, either because, like Physicians, they healed the Minds of those
that resorted to them, curing them of their vicious Affections; or because they
worshipped the Deity with a pure and sincere Service and Adoration.

Further, whether Philo himself gave them this Name, devising an Appellation
agreeable to the Manners and Dispositions of Men; or whether they were really
so called from the beginning, the Name of Christians not being every where
spread and diffused, it is not necessary positively to affirm or contend about
it. But he attests that, in the first place, they part with their Goods,
saying, That as soon as they betake themselves to this course of
Philosophizing, they put over their Wealth and Possessions to their Relations.
Then, casting away all Care of Wordly matters, they leave the Cities, and make
their Abode in Gardens and solitary Places; well knowing the Conversing with
Men of a different and disagreeing Persuasion to be unprofitable and hurtful.
Which thing the Christians of that time seem to me to have instituted out of a
generous and most fervent Ardour of Faith, endeavoring to emulate the
Prophetical severe Course of Life. Therefore in the Acts of the Apostles (which
contain nothing but the perfect Truth) it is showed, That all the Disciples of
the Apostles selling their Possessions and Goods, divided the Price among the
Brethren, according as every one had need, that so there might not be any
indigent Person amongst them. For as the Word says, As many as were Possessors
of Lands or Houses sold them, and brought the Prices of the things that were
sold and laid them down at the Apostles feet: and Distribution was made unto
every Man according as he had Need.

After Philo has attested the very same things with these, of the Therapeutae,
he adds thus much farther concerning them, word for word, saying, This sort of
Men, indeed, is diffused far and wide over the whole World. For it was
requisite that both Greeks and Barbarians should be partakers of so excellent a
Benefit. Egypt especially is full of them, throughout all its Divisions; but
most of all about Alexandria. But from all places, the principal of them retire
themselves into a most commodious place above the Lake Maria, situate upon a
little rising Hill, excellently well seated both for Wholsomeness of Air, and
Convenience of Abiding, as into the Country of the Therapeutae.

Then, after he has described their Houses, after what manner they were built,
he speaks thus of the Churches they have in diverse Places. In every House there
is a Chapel, called a Semnaeum, and Monasterium, in which, alone by
themselves, they perform the Mysteries of an Holy Life. They bring in thither
neither Meat nor Drink, nor any Corporal Provisions or Necessaries; but only
the Law, and the divine Oracles of the Prophets, and Hymns, and such like;
whereby Knowledge and Piety are increased and perfected.

And a little while after, he says: All the interval of time, from Sun rising
to the Evening, they spend in Meditations of Philosophy: For reading the Holy
Scriptures, they Philosophize after their Country way, and expound
Allegorically. For they suppose that the Words are only Notes and Marks of some
things of a Mystical Nature, which are to be explained Figuratively. They have
Writings of some ancient Persons, who have been heretofore famous Leaders of
their Sect, and have left them many Monuments of that Learning, which consists
in dark and secret Expressions, which they, using as original Platforms, do
imitate thereby that Course of Study.

These, certainly, seem to be the Words of such a Man as had heard some of our
Religion expounding the Holy Scriptures. And it is very likely that the
Writings of those ancient Persons, which he says they had, were the Gospels and
Writings of the Apostles, and certain Expositions of the ancient Prophets, of
which sort many are contained both in other Epistles of Paul, and also in that
written to the Hebrews.

Afterward Philo thus writes concerning the New Psalms composed by them. They
do not only spend their time in Contemplation, but they compose Songs and Hymns
to the Praise of God of all sorts of Meeter and Musical Verse, which they write
in grave and seemly Rhymes.

He relates many other things of them in that Book I mentioned: But I judged
these fittest to be selected and picked out, in which certain Marks of Church
Discipline are proposed.

But if any one should think what Philo here says to be in no wise proper to
the Evangelical Polity, but may be adapted to others besides those I have
mentioned; he will certainly be convinced by Philo's following Words; in which,
if he shall duly weigh the Matter, he will receive a most undoubted Testimony
of this thing. Now he writes thus: Having first laid Temperance, as a certain
foundation, they build thereupon the other Virtues. For none of them takes
either Meat or Drink before Sunset: for they hold it requisite to spend the Day
in the Study of Philosophy, and the Night in making necessary Provision for the
Body. Therefore they allot the whole Day to study, but allow a very small
portion of the Night for Bodily Provision. Some of them forget to eat for Three
Days together, so great is the desire of Knowledge that possesses them. But
some others of them are so well pleased with, and feed so richly and
deliciously upon the Banquets of Wisdom, which sets before them wholesome
Precepts, as a most sumptuous Feast, that they are wont scarce to taste any
necessary Food in twice that space, to wit, in Six Days time.

We suppose these Words of Philo to be evidently, and without all doubt, spoken
concerning those of our Religion. But if, after all this, any one shall still
persist in a peremptory denial of these things; he will, at length, recede from
his obstinate difficulty of Belief, being persuaded to submit to such manifest
Demonstrations as are no where to be found but in the Christian Religion,
composed according to the Rule of the Gospel.

Philo says further therefore, That among these Men, of whom we speak, there
are certain Women conversant, many of which continue Virgins being old; not out
of Necessity, like some of those amongst the Grecian Priests, but voluntarily
preserving their Chastity out of an ardent Affection to and Desire of Wisdom;
in the Embraces and Familiarity whereof they earnestly affect to spend their
Lives; having despised all Bodily Pleasures, and desiring earnestly not a
Mortal Issue, but an Immortal; which that Mind only that loves, and is beloved
of God, can of it self bring forth.

After many other Expressions, he speaks yet more plainly thus; Their
Expositions of Holy Writ are figurative, by way of Allegories. For these Men
suppose the whole Law to be like a Living Creature; the bare Words whereof are,
as it were the Body, and the invisible Sense, that lies hid under the Words,
resembles the Soul. Which sense this Sect have and do make it their Religion
earnestly to search into and contemplate, beholding in the Words, as in a
Glass, the admirable beauty of the Meaning.

There is no necessity of adding farther here an account of their Assemblies,
of the distinct Apartments of their Men and Women, and of their several Studies
and Holy Exercises, now in use amongst us, more especially about the Feast of
our Lord's Passion, when we are wont to practice them in Fastings, Watchings,
and attentive Reading of Holy; Scriptures. All which the Man we have so often
mentioned, does relate in his Writings accurately, after the same manner in
which we only at this time observe them: Especially he mentions the Vigils of
the great Solemnity, the Holy Exercises therein, and the Hymns we are wont to
recite. And how, when one has begun to sing a Psalm harmoniously and gravely,
the rest, silently hearkening, do after sing out in Chorus, the latter parts
only of the Verses. And how throughout those Days, lying in Straw upon the
Ground, they wholly abstain from Wine, (as he has said in these express Words)
and eat nothing that has Blood in it: Water is their only Drink, and their Food
is Bread with Salt and Hyssop.

Farther he describes the Order and Degrees of their Governors, to wit, those
who perform the Ecclesiastical Offices; then the Ministrations of the Deacons;
and, lastly, the Episcopal Presidency over all. He that desires to know these
things more accurately, may be therein informed from the forementioned History
of Philo.

It is therefore apparently evident to every one, that Philo writing thus, did
mean thereby those first Preachers of the Evangelical Doctrine and Discipline,
at the beginning delivered by the Apostles.

Epiphanius, Bishop of Cyprus, concerning the same, Har. 29. 5.
HAving said that the Christians were at first called Nazarens, as Act.
24.5.2.22. and for some time Jesseans, whether from the Name of Jesse, or from
the Name of our Lord Jesus, because they were his Disciples, he adds: But thou
may find this in the Writings of PHILO, in the Book by him entitled, Of the
Jesseans, who describing their Polity and Commendations, and recounting their
Monastries near about the Lake Maria, he relates it of no other than of
Christians. For he, when he was in that Region, called Mariotis, and was by
them themselves conducted to the Monastries of that place, got much Profit by
it. For, being there in the Days of Easter, he saw both their Lives, and how
some lived without Eating all the Holy Week of Easter, some Two Days, and some
until the Evening. But all these things were done by this Man for the treating
of the Subject concerning the Faith and Manners of the Christians.

St. Hierom concerning the same, in his Book de Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis.
PHILO the Jew, Born at Alexandria, of the Race of the Priests, is therefore by
us placed among the Ecclesiastical Writers, because writing a Book of the first
Church of Mark the Evangelist at Alexandria, he discourses in Praise of our
People, (the Christians there) recounting that they were not only there, but
also in many other Provinces, and calling their Habitations Monastries. Whence
it appears, that such was the Church of the first Believers in Christ, as now
the Monks endeavor and desire to be, that nothing may be any ones own, that
is, that none claim a Propriety in any thing, that there be none amongst them
Rich, none Poor, their Patrimonies be divided among those who need; that they
all attend to Prayer, and Psalms, also to Doctrine, and to Continence, such as
Luke relates were the first Believers at Jerusalem. It is reported, that under
Caius Caligula he was in some Danger at Rome, whither he was sent Legate for
his Nation: that when he came a second time to Claudius, he there, in the same
City, spoke with the Apostle Peter, and held Friendship with him; and for this
Cause also wrote in Praise of the Followers of Mark, the Disciple of Peter at
Alexandria.

A little after, recounting the Works of Philo, among the rest, he puts in One
Book concerning the Lives of our People, that is, concerning Apostolic Men, of
which we have spoken before, which he entitled, (...), viz. because they did
contemplate Heavenly things, and prayed continually.

Johannes Cassianus concerning the same, lib. 2. de Institut. cap. 5.
IN the Beginning of the Faith there were indeed but few, but those most
approved Persons, reckoned under the Denomination of Monks, who, as from Mark
the Evangelist, of Blessed Memory, who first presided Bishop in the City of
Alexandria, they received their Rule of Living, did not only retain those Great
things which we read in the Acts of the Apostles, that the Church, or Crowd of
Believers, at first made so famous, viz.

The Multitude of them, who believed, were of one Heart, and of one Soul;
neither said any of them that ought of the things, which he possessed were his
own; but they had all things Common [Neither was there any among them that
lacked:] for as many as were Possessors of Land or Houses sold them, and
brought the Prices of the thing which were sold, and laid them down at the Feet
of the Apostles; and Distribution was made unto every Man according as he had
need.

But they even built up more sublime thing upon them. For retiring into the
most secret parts of the Suburbs, they lead a Life of so great Rigor of
Abstinence, that so severe a Profession of Life was an amazement to others. For
they applied themselves with so much Fervor to the Reading of the Divine
Scriptures, and to Prayer, and to the Work of their Hands, Day and Night, that
neither the Appetite, or Memory of Meat, unless after two or three Days, did
interrupt them by Hunger of the Body. And they received Meat and Drink, not as
what they desired, but what was necessary, and not that neither before Sunset,
that they might conjoyn the time of Light with the Studies of Spiritual
Meditations, but the Care of the Body to the Night; and other things did they
effect more sublime than these: concerning which, he who is not sufficiently
informed by the People of the Country, may satisfy himself in the
Ecclesiastical History.

Sozomen concerning the same, 1 Hist. Eccl. c. 12.
HAving spoken of the Glory of the Christian Religion, by reason of the Virtue
of its Professors, and of the Confessors then living, and of the Famous Bishop
Spiridion, he adds: But most of all did they illustrate the Church with their
Virtues, and propagated the Christian Doctrine, who exercised the Monastic
Discipline. For this kind of PHILOSOPHY coming from God, with the greatest
Benefit to Men, despises indeed many Sciences, and the Artifice of Logic as a
matter of Curiosity, and by which the Exercise of better things is supplanted;
nor is any thing of Advantage for a right kind of Life conferred by it; and
with a more natural Prudence, void of Curiosity, teaches those things which
remove wholly Vitiousness, and effect better things; but the Middle things
between Virtue and Vice it reputes not among the Good; but delights in only
Good things, and holds him for an ill Man, who, although he abstains from Evil,
yet does no Good. For it does not make show, but exercises Virtue, and makes
no account of the Glory, which is of Men, resisting the Affections of the Mind
with great Fortitude; nor does it yield to the Necessities of Nature, nor stoop
to the Infirmities of the Body; but having obtained the Powers of a Divine
Mind, it looks perpetually at the Creator of all, whom it worshippeth Day and
Night, and appeaseth with Prayers and Supplications: But having begun a pure
Religion, with Purity of Mind, and the Exercise of Good Deeds, it makes light
of Washings, and such like [Purifications.] For it judges Sins only to be
Impurities, and being Conqueror of those things which happen from without,
and, as I may so say, Mistress of all, is not diverted from her purpose,
neither by the Confusion of those things which fill the Lives of Mortals, nor
by any Necessity; neither is it provoked with Contumelies; nor being injured,
does it revenge it self; nor does it sink, being pressed either with Sickness,
or with Penury of Necessaries; but does rather triumph over those, in which she
exercises Patience, and Meekness, and Contentation of Mind all the Life long;
and, as far as is possible to Humane Nature, becomes near to God; using this
present Life as in a Passage, is neither anxious for the acquest of Earthly
things, nor does so much as think of things present, even in urging Necessity;
but perpetually prizing a Life frugal, and discharged of temporal Furniture,
respects the Felicity which it has from thence, and is always disposed for a
Blessed End: But incessantly breathing out Piety toward God; it abhors the
Defilement of filthy Speaking, not so much as enduring in Speech those things
which in Fact it has banished from its Course of Life, and by degrees
contracting the Necessities of Nature, and compelling the Body to be content
with mean things; it does with Temperance, overcome Prodigality; Injustice,
with Justice; and corrects Lying, with Truth; and in right order keeps
Moderation in all things, and orders its Method of Life in keeping Concord and
Communion with Neighbors: It provides for Friends and Strangers, communicates
its Good to those who want, confers upon every one what are commodious for
them; not being troublesome to those who rejoice, but administering Comfort to
those who are sad: But in all studiously reaching after the True Good,
discoursing with sound Speeches, and wise Thoughts void of Elegance and
Rudeness, as with certain Medicines, does cure its Auditors with Decency and
Respect, without Contention, Scorn, or Anger: For since it is furnished with
reason, it refuses every unreasonable Motion, and completely rules the
Affections both of the Body, and the Mind.

This most Excellent Philosophy was begun, as some say, by Elias the Prophet,
and John the Baptist; but PHILO, the Pythagorean, writes, That the most
Excellent of (his Nation) the Hebrews, being assembled from all Parts in a
certain place at the Lake Maria, did Philosophize in a little Hill thereunto
adjacent: but describes their Habitation, Living, and Conversation; such as we
also now see amongst the Monks now living in Egypt. For he writes, that they
who began to Philosophize forsook their Estates, and renounced both Things and
Persons belonging to them and lived without the Walls in solitary Fields and
Orchards; then that their Houses were Sacred, which they called Monasteries;
that they did devoutly worship God with Psalms and Hymns, nor did touch any
Food till Sunset; that some among them abstained for three days together or
more, and lay certain days upon the Ground; but Wine, and Things that have
Blood, they never at all used; but their Meat was Bread, and Salt, and Hyssop,
and their Drink Water: That ancient Women and Virgins dwelt among them, and for
the Love of Philosophy, (or Wisdom) of their own choice abstained from Marriage.

And Philo writing to this purpose seems to intend the Jews, who, in his time,
embracing Christianity, lived a little too much after the Jewish Manner, and
observed the Rites of their Nation. For among no others is that kind of Life to
be found: from whence I conjecture, that this Philosophy has, from that time,
flourished in Egypt: But others think that the Persecutions of those times gave
Occasion to this Religion; For, because those who escaped by Flight lived in
Mountains, and Deserts, and Woods, they contracted a Habit of this kind of
Living.

This of St. HIEROM being omitted in its proper place, (page 46.) it was
thought fit to insert it here.
MARK, the Disciple and Interpreter of Peter, entreated by the Brethren at
Rome, wrote a short Gospel, according to what he had heard Peter relate. Which
when Peter had read, he approved it, and by his Authority gave it to the Church
to be read, as writes Clemens in sexto (...) libro, and Papias Bishop of
Hierapolis. Of this Mark does Peter also make mention, under the Name of
Babylon, figuratively signifying Rome: The Church which is in Babylon salutes
you, and (so does) Mark, my Son. Wherefore, taking the Gospel, which he had
composed, he went to Egypt, and first Preaching Christ at Alexandria, he
founded the Church (there) with such Doctrine and Continence of Life, that it
enforced all Followers of Christ to their Example. At length Philo, the most
Eloquent of the Jews, seeing that first Church at Alexandria yet Judaizing,
wrote a Book concerning their Manner of Living, as in Praise of his own Nation.
And as Luke relates, that the Believers at Jerusalem had all things Common, so
does also he, what he did see done at Alexandria under Mark, commit to Memory.
He Died in the Eighth Year of Nero, and was Buried at Alexandria, Anianus
succeeding him.

Of the Ancient MONKS of Egypt, And their Original; A Relation of Piammon, an
Ancient Egyptian Abbot, and a Presbyter or Priest of great Grace and Virtue,
even to the doing of Miracles, Cassian. Coll. 18. cap. 4.
THERE are in Egypt Three sorts of Monks, whereof Two are excellent, but the
Third tepid and sloathful, and by all means to be avoided. The first is of the
Coenobites, who living together in a Religious Society, are governed by the
Judgment (and Order) of One Elder, (or Superior) of which sort a very great
number of Monks are resident throughout all Egypt. The second, is of the
Anchoretes, (or Hermites) who being first instructed in the Monasteries, and
become already perfect in their Conversation, have chosen the Secrets of the
Desert: of whose Perfection we also wish to be Partakers. The third, the
reprehensible one of the Sarabaits. Of all which we shall discourse severally
more fully in order.

The Discipline of the Coenobites took its beginning from the time of the
Preaching of the Apostles. For such was that whole Multitude of Believers at
Jerusalem, which, in the Acts of the Apostles, is thus described:

The Multitude of them, who believed, were of one Heart, and of one Soul;
neither said any of them that ought of the things, which he possessed, were his
own; but they had all things Common. Neither was there any among them that
lacked: for as many as were Possessors of Land or Houses, sold them, and
brought the Prices of the things which were sold, and laid them down at the
Feet of the Apostles; and Distribution was made unto every Man according as he
had need.

Such, I say, was then the whole Church, as it is now difficult to find a very
few in the Monasteries. But when, after the Apostles decease, the Multitude of
the Believers began to grow Tepid, and that most of all, which came into the
Faith of Christ of Foreigners and diverse Nations, of whom the Apostles,
according to their Rudiments of Faith, and inveterate Custom of Gentisism, did
require no more, but that they should abstain from Fornication, and from things
strangled, and from Blood; and that Liberty which was indulged to the Gentiles,
by reason of the Infirmity of their first Belief, began by degrees to
contaminate the Perfection even of that Church, which was settled at Jerusalem;
and the Number daily increasing, either of Natives, or of Foreigners, the
Fervor of that first Faith began to cool; not only those who came flowing in
to the Faith of Christ, but even they who were the Principal of the Church were
relaxed from that Strictness. For some thinking that, which they saw conceded
to the Gentiles, by reason of their Infirmity, to be lawful also for
themselves, believed they should suffer no Detriment, if they did, with their
Goods and Estates, (retaining them in Propriety to themselves) follow the Faith
and Confession of Christ. But others, in whom the Apostolic Fervor did still
abide, mindful of that ancient Perfection, departing from their Cities, and
from the Company of those who believed the Negligence of a more remiss Life to
be Lawful for themselves, or for the Church of God, began to reside in places,
without the Cities, and more secret, (or retired) and to exercise privately and
apart the things which they remembered to be instituted by the Apostles
generally throughout the whole Body of the Church: And so did that Discipline,
which we have mentioned, of the Disciples, who sequestered themselves from the
Contagion of the rest, come to a Settlement. Who, in process of time, by
degrees, being separate from the Crowds of Believers, because they did abstain
from Marriage, and withdrew themselves from the Company of their Parents, and
the Conversation of the World, were called Monachi, or Monazontes, for the
Strictness of their single and solitary Life. Whence it followed, that, from
the Communion of their Company, they were called Coenobitae, and their Cells
and Habitations Coenobia. This therefore alone was the most Ancient kind of
Monks, which was the prime, not only in Time, but also in Grace (and Virtue,)
and which continued inviolable for very many Years, even to the Age of Father
Paul, or Antony; the Footsteps whereof we even now see remaining in the strict
Coenobia, (or Monasteries, as now called.)

Of this number of Perfect ones, and, as I may say, fertile Root, were produced
after these also the Flowers and Fruits of the Holy Anchoretes, (or Hermites;)
of which Profession, we know, those, whom we a little before remembered, viz.
Holy Paul and Antony, to have been the Principal, or first Beginners. Who
betook themselves to the Secrets or Retirements of Solitude, not as some,
through Pusillanimity, or the Disease of Impatience, but out of Design of more
sublime Advancement, and Divine Contemplation, although the former of them is
said to have gone into the Wilderness under pretense of Necessity, while, in
the time of Persecution, he avoids the Snares of his Relations. Thus from that
Discipline, which we have mentioned, proceeded another kind of Perfection, the
Followers of which are deservedly named Anachoretae, that is, Retired, because
not content with this Victory, whereby they have avoided the secret Snares of
the Devil among Men, designing to encounter the Devils in an open Combat and
manifest Conflict, they fear not to enter into the vast Recesses of the
Wilderness, in imitation of John the Baptist, who remained in the Wilderness
his whole Life; and of Elias and Elisha, and of those whom the Apostle makes
mention of thus: They wandered about in Sheepskins, and Goat Skins, being
destitute, afflicted, tormented: Of whom the World was not worthy, wandering in
Deserts, and in Mountains, and in Dens, and in Caves of the Earth, Heb. 11.37,
38.

And when the Christian Religion did flourish in these two Professions of
Monks, but this Order also began to decline, there arose up after those, that
worst and unfaithful kind of Monks, or rather, that Evil Plantation reviving
grew up, which, by Ananias and Sapphira sprouting out in the beginning of the
Church, was cut down by the Apostle Peter; which, among the Monks, was judged
detestable and execrable, nor by any other more used, so long as the Fear of
that strict Sentence remained with them fixed in the Memory of the Faithful,
with which the Blessed Apostle not suffering the aforesaid Leaders of that New
Crime to be cured with any Penitence, or any Satisfaction, did cut off the
pernicious Sprout with sudden Death. But that Example, whereby with Apostolical
Severity it was punished in Ananias and Sapphira, being, through long
Inconsiderateness, and the oblitering nature of Time, by degrees, subtracted
from the Contemplation of some, there arose that sort of the Sarabites; who
from thence that they did sequester themselves from the Congregation of the
Coenobites, and did separately provide for their own Occasions, in the
propriety of the Egyptian Language were named Sarabites, proceeding out of the
Number of those, whom we mentioned before, who choose rather to simulate the
Evangelical Perfection, than to embrace it in Truth and Reality; being provoked
with an Emulation, or by the Commendation of those, who preferred the complete
Nudity of Christ before all the Riches of the World. For these, while either
with a weak Mind they affect a Matter of the highest Virtue, or are by
Necessity compelled to come to this Prosession, while they are eager only to be
reckoned under the Name of Monks, without any Emulation of their Studies or
Endeavors, they do not at all seek after the Discipline of the Coenobites, nor
are they subject to the Will and Ordering of the Seniors or Superiors, nor
being instructed by their Traditions, do they learn to overcome their own
Wills, or receive any Rule of Discretion by a regular Erudition, but renouncing
(the World) in outward Appearance, that is, to the sight of Men, they either
continue in their Houses under the Privilege of this Name, obliged to the same
Occupations; or building Cells for themselves, and calling them Monasteries,
they abide there in their own Power and Liberty, not at all submitting to the
Evangelical Precepts, viz. that they be employed in no Solicitude for daily
Food, in no Distractions of Family Concerns; which they only use without
Infidel doubting, who being set free from all the Goods of this World, do so
subject themselves to the Presidents of the Monasteries, that they do not so
much as own themselves to be Lords of themselves. But they, who declining, as
we said, the Strictness of the Monastery, reside two or three together in
Cells, not content to be governed by the Care and Government of the Abbot, but
principally procuring this for themselves, that being set free from the Yoke of
the Superiors, they may have the Liberty of exercising their own Wills, and of
going out, and gading where, or doing what they please, even more in their
daily Works than those, who live in the Monasteries, are (indeed) consumed (and
wasted) Day and Night, but not with the same Faith, and the same Purpose (of
Mind.) For this they do, not that they may subject (or commit) the Fruit or
Product of their Labor to the Judgment of the Steward; but that they may
acquire Money, which they may lay up. Between which, what Difference there is,
I pray you observe.

Those not thinking any thing of the Morrow, do offer to God the most grateful
Fruits of their Labor. But these extending their Infidel Solicitude not only
to the Morrow, but even to the Terms of many Years, believe God either a Liar,
or a Beggar, who either cannot, or will not, afford them his promised
Sufficiency of daily Food and Raiment. Those, with all earnestness, desire that
they may attain Nudity of all things, and Poverty: These, that they may obtain
an Affluence of all Goods: They striving with one another, labor to exceed in
their daily Works the stated Rule, for this purpose, that what is redundant
above the Holy Uses of the Monastery, may be given to the Prisons, or to the
Hospitals, or to the Poor, at the Pleasure of the Abbot: These, that what
remains of their daily Gluttony, may serve either for a more profuse
Gratification, or be hoarded up through the Sin of Covetousness. Lastly, To
grant that these things, which are with none of the best Purposes hoarded up,
may also, by them, be better disposed of than we have said; yet even so do they
not aspire to the Worth of the Virtue and Perfection of the others. For they
bringing so great Revenues to the Monastery, and daily renouncing them
themselves, do persevere in so great Humility of Subjection, that they are
deprived of the Power, as of themselves, so also of those things which, with
their Sweat, they have acquired, continually renewing the Fervor of their first
Ab-renunciation, while they do daily strip themselves of the Fruits of their
own Labor. But these, even in that which they give to the Poor, being puffed
up, do daily fall headlong. Those, the Patience and Strictness, with which they
so devoutly hold out in this Profession, which they had once embraced, that
they never fulfill their own Wills, makes them daily crucified to the World,
and living Martyrs: but these, the Tepidity and Lukewarmness of their own Wills
sinks down alive into Hell.

There is also another, a fourth sort, which we see lately to have risen in
these, who flatter themselves with the Show and Image of Anchoretes, and who,
in their Beginnings, did seem with a kind of short Fervor to desire the
Perfection of the Coenobites, but presently being cooled, while they refuse to
cut off their former Manners and Vices, nor are content long to bear the Yoke
of Humility and Patience, and disdain to be subject to the Government of the
Seniors, or Superiors, they require separate Cells, and desire to sit
Solitaries, viz. that so, they being provoked by none, they may be thought
Patient, Meek, and Humble, by Men. Which Institution, yea, Lukewarmness, whom
it once infects, it never permits to arrive at Perfection. For, by this means,
their Corruptions are not only not cured, but strengthened for the worse, while
they are provoked by none; as a certain deadly intestine Poison, by how much
the more it is conceiled, spreading so much the deeper, makes the Disease
incurable to the Party.

St. Hierom concerning the same, Epist. 22. ad Eustoch. c. 15.
THERE are in Egypt Three sorts of Monks: the first, Coenobites, which they, in
the Language of their Country, call Sauces, we may say living in Common: The
second, Anchoretes, who live alone separately throughout the Deserts, and from
thence that they have retired far from Men, are so called. The third, that
which they call Remoboth, a very bad and disesteemed kind, and that which, in
our Province, is either sole, or the first. These inhabit two or three, and not
many more, together, living at their own Pleasure and Command, and of what they
have wrought, bring all together for common Maintenance. They dwell, for the
most part, in Cities and Towns, and, as if their Art, not their Lives, were
Holy, whatever they sell is at a greater Price (than ordinary.) There are
often Squabbles among them, because living of their own Provisions they do not
suffer themselves to be subject to any one. They are wont, in truth, to contend
about Fastings; and what is matter of Secrecy, they make it matter of Victory
(or Triumph.) Among them all things are affected, their Sleeves large, their
Sandals flopping, their Garment thicker, and frequent are their Sighs, visits
of Virgins, and detraction of the Clergy; and if a Feast Day come, they fill
themselves till they vomit. These therefore being cashiered, as very Pests, let
us come to those who are more in number, and live in Common, that is, those
whom we have said are called Coenobites.

The first Confederation, or mutual Agreement amongst them, is, to obey their
Superiors, and to do whatever they command. They are divided into Decennaries,
(or Tithings) (as our Ancestors called them) and Centenaries; so that One of
Ten does preside over the other Nine, and over those Ten Presidents the
Centenarie, or Hundreder. They abide separate, but in Cells joined together,
until the ninth hour; according to their Institute, none goes to another,
except these Decanes or Deans, whom we mentioned, that if, perhaps, any of them
has any doubtful Thoughts, he may be comforted by his Discourses. After the
ninth hour they come together in common, where Psalms are sung or chanted, the
Scriptures read, as accustomed, and the Prayers being done, and all sitting
down, he in the middle, whom they call the Father, begins to discourse; while
he is speaking, there is great Silence, (and Composedness) that no one dares to
look aside, or to hawk and spit. The Excellence of the Speaker appears in the
Weeping of the Auditors: silent Tears trickle down their Faces, but their
Compunction does not so much as break out into Sighs. But when he comes to
speak concerning the Kingdom of Christ, and of the future Beatitude and Glory
to come, you may see all, with a moderate Sigh, and Eyes lift up to Heaven,
say, Who will give me the Wings of a Dove, and I will fly away, and be at rest?
After this the Assembly is dismissed, and each Tithing or Decennary, with their
Father, go to their Table, where they serve every Week by turn. There is no
Noise at their Meal, none, while eating, speaks: They live upon Bread, Pulse,
and Herbs, which are seasoned only with Salt. Wine only Old Men take, who with
Children have their Meal together, that the spent Age of some may be sustained,
and the tender Age of others not destroyed. Then they rise together, and having
sung an Hymn, retire to their Stalls. There, until Evening, each with his
Companions discoursed to this purpose: Did you see such an one, and such an
one? What Grace in him? What Silence? What decent Comportment? If they see one
weak, they comfort him; if fervent in the Love of God, they encourage him to
Industry. And because in the Night, out of the time of public Prayers, each
does watch in his own Couch, they go about to every one of their Cells, and
laying their Ear to them, diligently listen what they do. Whom they apprehend
more remiss, they do not presently reprove; but, dissemble what they hear,
visit him more often; and Beginners they rather provoke at first, than compel
to Prayer. The Work of the Day is settled, and being delivered to the Decane or
Tithing-Man, is after carried to the Steward, who himself also does every
Month, with great Reverence, give account to the (General) Father of all. By
whom also the Provisions, when made ready, are tasted; and because none may say
I want a Coat, or a Cassock, or a Mat, he so orders all things, that none
should ask, none should want. But if any begin to be Sick, he is carried to a
larger Room, and is so taken Care of by the Ministry of the Old Men, that he
desires not the Delicacies of Cities, or the Affection of his Mother. Upon the
Lord's Day they apply themselves only to Prayer and Reading; which indeed they
do at all times when their Work is done: They do every Day learn something out
of the Scriptures. Their Fast is alike all the Year, except Lent, in which only
it is permitted them to live more strictly. From Easter to Whitsontide their
Suppers are changed into Dinners, whereby both the Ecclesiastical Tradition is
observed, and they do not charge their Stomach with a doubled Portion of Food.
Such does Philo, an Imitator of the Platonic Style; such Josephus, the Greek
Livie, in the second History of the Captivity of the Jews, relate the ESSEANS
to be.

St. Austin concerning the same.
UPON John 10.11. I am the Good Shepherd. But there in Egypt, how he is the
Good Shepherd, those who know, do confess; those who know not, let them inquire
how Great a Flock he has there together, how Great a Number of Holy Men and
Women, wholly contemning the World, he there has. That Flock has so
increased, that it has expelled Superstition even from thence; all the
Superstitions of Idols, which were so powerful there, has it expelled. Sermon.
50. de Verb. Dom. c. 10.

St. Austin concerning the Anchorets, and Coenobites, and Holy Nuns of his time.
DEservedly have thou (O Catholic Church, the most True Mother of Christians)
so many Hospitable People, so many Officious, so many Merciful, so many
Learned, so many Chaste, so many Holy, so many so Inflamed with the Love of God,
that in the greatest Continence and incredible Contempt of this World they are
delighted with the Desert. What, I pray you, is it that they see, who cannot
not love Man, and yet can (live and) not see Man? Truly that, whatever it is,
is more excellent than Humane things, (or any thing of Man) in the
Contemplation of which, a Man can live without (the Sight of) Man. ( This of
Anchorets, and then, a little after, of the Coenobites.

Who knows not that a Multitude of Christians, of most exquisite Continence,
are daily more and more diffused throughout the whole World, and especially in
the East, and in Egypt, which you can by no means be ignorant of. I Will say
nothing of those, whom I mentioned a little before, who being most retired
wholly from all sight of Men, are content with Bread alone, which at certain
times is brought to them, and Water, inhabit the most barren Deserts, enjoying
Communication with God, to whom they adhere with pure Minds, and are blessed
with the Contemplation of his Beauty, which cannot be perceived but by the
Intellects of Saints. I say I will say nothing of these: for they seem to some
to have forsaken Humane Affairs more than they ought, who understand not how
much their Minds do profit in Prayer, and their Lives for Examples to others,
whose Bodies we are not permitted to see. But I think it long and superfluous
to discourse of this: For this so great a height of Sanctity, who does not of
his own accord think it to be admired and honored, who by our Speech can think
so? Only they are to be admonished, who vainly boast themselves, that the
Temperance and Continence of the most Holy Christians of the Catholic Faith
has proceeded so far, that it may seem to some that it should be restrained
and recalled within Humane Bounds: So far above Men are their Minds thought to
have ascended by those who are displeased at it.

But if this exceeds our Ability to bear, who will not admire and applaud
those, who, having contemned and forsaken the Allurements of this World, are
congregated into a common, most chaste and most holy Life, spend their Days
together, living in Prayers, Lessons, Conferences, not puffed up with any
Pride, nor troublesome with any Obstinacy, nor pining with any Envy; but
modest, bashful, quiet, do offer up to God their Lives most agreeable among
themselves, and most firmly adhering to Him, from whom they received this
Power, a most grateful Present. None possesses any thing of his own; None is
burdensome to any one. They work those things with their Hands, with which
their Body may be supplied, and they not be hindered from God. But the Work it
self they deliver to those whom they call Deans, because they have the
Oversight of Tens, that none of them may be touched with any Care of their
Body, neither in Food or Raiment, nor any thing else needful for daily
Occasions, or for any change of Health, if it happen, as is common. But those
Deans dispensing all things with great Care, and making ready whatever that
Life does, by reason of the Imbecility of the Body, require, do yet deliver all
over to one, whom they call the Father. But these Fathers are not only most
holy in their Manners, but most excellent in Divine Doctrine, eminent in all
things: They direct without any Pride those, whom they call Sons, with great
Authority of Command, and with great Readiness of Obedience in them. They meet
all at the end of the Day every one out of their Cells, while yet Fasting, to
hear that Father. And they meet before each of the Fathers, at least Three
Thousand Men: for many more live under one. They hear with incredible
Attention, and deepest Silence, signifying the Affections of their Mind, as the
Speech of him who speaks moves them, either with Sighing, or with Weeping; but
Modest, and without Noise. Then they refresh their Bodies so much as is
sufficient for Health and Salubrity, each restraining his Appetite, lest it be
greedy even of those few and mean things which are provided. In like manner
they abstain, not only from Flesh and Wine, for sufficient allay of Lusts, but
also from those things which do so much the more excite and provoke the
Appetite of the Stomach and of the Palate, by how much they may seem to some
more clean: Under which pretense, a filthy Desire of exquisite Dishes, without
Flesh, is wont to be ridiculously and filthily defended. Truly, whatever is
redundant above necessary Provision; for there is much redundant by the Work of
their Hands, and the Strictness of their Meals; it is with no less Care
distributed to the Poor, than with what it was earned by them who distribute
it. For they do by no means endeavor that these things should abound with
them, but by all means are diligent, that what does abound may not remain with
them; insomuch, that they send even Ships laden to those places where indigent
People dwell. There Is no need to say more of a thing so well known.

This is also the Life of the WOMEN, who serve God with Carefulness and
Chastity, who are separated and removed from Men as far as is decent, joined to
them only in pious Charity, and Imitation of Virtue; to whom Young Men have no
access at all, nor the Ancient neither, although most Grave and Approved,
further than to the threshold, for the supplying them with the Necessaries
which they need. They do both exercise and sustain the Body, by making Cloth,
and deliver the Garments themselves to the Brethren, receiving of them again
what is necessary for their Maintenance.

These Manners, this Life, this Order, this Institution, if I would praise it,
I am not able to do it as it deserves. And I fear lest I should seem to think
that of it self barely related it would not please, if I should think fit to
add to the Simplicity of a Reporter the Flourishes of an Orator. lib. 1. de
Moribus Ecclesiae Catholicae. cap. 30, 31.

The Direction of Piammon, to some Foreiners, who came to his Monastery.
WHo-ever desires to obtain the Skill of any Art, unless with all Care and
Vigilance he oblige himself to the Studies and Labors of that Discipline, which
he desires to learn, and observes the Precepts and Institutions of the most
complete Masters of that Art or Science, he does in vain, with vain Desires,
wish to be like them, whose Care and Industry he refuses to emulate......

Wherefore, if the Cause of God, as we believe, drew you to an Emulation of our
Knowledge, you must, abdicating the Prejudices of your Education, with all
Humility, observe whatever ye shall see your Seniors (or Superiors) do or
prescribe. Nor let it move you, or withdraw and divert you from that Imitation,
although, at present, the Reason or Cause of any Thing or Fact (which you see)
be not manifest to you. For to those who think well and simply of all things,
and do more study to imitate than examine what they see prescribed or done by
the Ancients, by their own Experience does the Knowledge of all things come to
them. But he will never enter into the Reason of the Truth, who begins to learn
with questioning things: For the Enemy seeing him rather confiding in his own,
than in the Judgment of the Fathers, does easily drive him to that, that even
those things which are most profitable and wholesome for him, shall seem to him
superfluous and hurtful: And so does the crafty Enemy impose upon his
Presumption, that he persuades him, pertinaciously adhering to his unreasonable
Determinations, that that only is Holy which he, in the Error of his Obstinacy,
thinks Right and Just. Cassian. Coll. 18. cap. 2, 3.

An Excellent Exhortation of Pinuphius to a Novice, upon his Admittance into
his Monastery. lib. 4. de Vit. Pat. cap. 31. ex Cassian.
SON, thou know after how many Days waiting before the Doors, thou art this
Day received. Of which difficulty (of thy Reception) thou ought, in the
first place, to understand the Cause: for it may advantage thee much in this
Life, which thou desire to enter into, if, understanding the Reason of it,
thou do accordingly come to the Service of Christ, and as thou ought to
do. For as infinite Glory is promised hereafter to those, who faithfully serve
God, and do adhere to Him according to the Institution of this Rule: so most
grievous Pains are prepared for them, who shall perform the same coldly and
negligently; and shall neglect to produce congruous Fruits of Sanctity,
according to what they do profess, or by Men are believed to be. For it is
better not to Vow, than to vow, and not perform: and Cursed is he who does the
Work of the Lord negligently. Therefore, for this cause, wast thou long refused
by us, not that we do not desire, with all our Hearts, to promote the Salvation
of thee, or of all, [or do not wish, even afar off, to meet those who desire to
come to Christ] but lest, being too hastily received, we should make both our
selves guilty before God of Levity, and thee of the greater Punishment, if, at
present, easily received, and, not understanding the weight of this Profession,
thou should afterward prove either a (total) Deserter, or a tepid
(Professor.) -- Know therefore that this Day thou art dead to this World, and
that, according to the Apostle, thou art crucified to the World, and the World
to thee. -- But perhaps thou will say, How can one that is Living be Crucified?
Hear briefly the Reason.

Our Cross, is the Fear of the Lord: for as one Crucified, has not the power
thereafter to move or turn his Members any way at the pleasure of his own Mind;
so we also ought to apply our Wills and Desires, not to that which pleases us
at present, but according to the Precept of the Lord, as it obliges us. And as
he who is fixed to the Tree of the Cross, does not then regard the things of
this World, nor think of his Affections, is then moved with no desire of
Possessions, and while he is yet living in the Body, reckons himself dead to
all Earthly things; so we also, by the Fear of God, ought to be crucified to
all carnal Vices, and there always to have the Eyes of our Minds fixed, whether
we ought every moment to hope to arrive. We must therefore beware that we do
not at any time resume any of those things, which, at our Renouncing (the
World) we have forsaken. For the crafty Serpent does always watch our Steps,
that is, he lays Snares for our going out, and even to the end of our Life does
always endeavor to supplant us: and therefore to have begun well profits
nothing, if it be not well finished. Wherefore, according to the Determination
of the Scripture, being entered into the Service of the Lord, stand in the Fear
of the Lord, and prepare thy Soul, not for Ease, not for Delights, but for
Temptations and Streights: for we must through many Tribulations enter into the
Kingdom of God; For narrow is the Gate, and straight is the Way, which leads to
Life, and few there are who find it.

The Beginning therefore of our Salvation, is the Fear of the Lord: For by
this, is both the beginning of our Conversion, and the Preservation of our
Virtue obtained; which, when it has once pierced into the Mind of Man, it
produces a Contempt of all (these) things, and begets an abhorrence of the
World; and by Contempt, and forsaking of our Riches, is true Humility obtained.
And Humility is proved by these Tokens: 1. If the Religious person have in him
all his Wills mortified. 2. If he conceil not his Acts nor his Thoughts from
his Superior. 3. If he commit all to his Judgment, (and reserve) nothing to his
own Discretion. 4. If in all things commanded he keep the Meekness of
Obedience, and Constancy of Patience. 5. If he do Injury to none, and also bear
patiently those done to him. 6. If he do nothing besides the Exemplar of his
Rule. 7. If to all things commanded him, he judges himself as an ill and
unworthy Workman. 8. If he declare himself inferior to all. 9. If he hold his
Tongue, and be not forward to speak. 10. If he be not apt to Laughter. By such
Tokens is true Humility discerned.

And these things also be necessary for thee to be observed in the
Congregation, viz. That, according to the Declaration of the Psalmist, thou
be as one Deaf, not Hearing; and one Dumb, not opening his Mouth:
questioning nothing, judging nothing of these things, which shall be commanded
thee. Wherefore thou ought not to hope to obtain thy Patience from the
Virtue of others, that is, that thou then only possess it, when thou art
provoked by no Body.

The beginning of our Salvation, (as has been said) is, the Fear of our Lord.
Of the Fear of our Lord, is sound Compunction begotten; From Compunction of the
Heart, proceed Contempt and Nakedness of all Riches; From that Nakedness,
Humility proceed; Of Humility, is begotten Mortification of our Wills; And by
Mortification of our Wills, are all Vices extirpated; By the expulsion of
Vices, do Virtues fructify and grow up; And by the growth of Virtues, is
Purity of Heart acquired; And by Purity of Heart, is the Perfection of
Apostolical Charity possessed. Cassian. 4. Instit. cap. 32.

The Advice of Moses, an Ancient Egyptian Abbot, for the obtaining true
Discretion.
TRUE Discretion is not acquired but by true Humility. Of which Humility, this
is the first Proof, if all things, not only which are acted, but even which are
thought, be referred to the Examination of the Elders, so that the Person, not
trusting to his own Judgment, do, in all things, acquiess in their
Determinations, and learn what he ought to judge Good or Evil by their
Teaching. Which Instruction will not only teach a Young Person to walk in the
right path by the true Way of Discretion, but will also preserve him unhurt
from all the Frauds and Snares of the Enemy. For he can by no means be
deceived, who-ever lives not after his own Judgment, but after the Manner of
the Ancients: Nor will the Crafty Enemy be able to impose upon his Ignorance,
who does not cover any of the Thoughts arising in his Heart with a pernicious
Bashfulness, but does either reject or admit them upon mature examination of
the Elders. For immediately after a malignant Thought is discovered, it
withers; and before the Judgment of Discretion be pronounced, the filthy
Serpent, being, as it were, by the virtue of Confession drawn out of his dark
subterraneous Den into the Light, and in a manner exposed and detected,
withdraws himself. For so long do his noxious Suggestions prevail in us as they
are conceiled in the Heart, and no longer. Cassian. Coll. 2. ca. 10. v. 4.
Instit. cap. 9, 39. Basil. Ascet. Qu. 26. Constable. cap. 19.

The Instruction of the Ancient Egyptian Abbot, Nestero, concerning Spiritual
Knowledge, Cass. Coll. 14.
THERE are many kinds of Sciences in this World: For as great Variety there is
of them, as (there is) of Arts and Disciplines: But though all of them are
either altogether unprofitable, or serviceable only for the Commodities of this
Life; yet is there none of them, which has not a proper Order and Method of
its Teaching, by which it may be attained by those who desire it. If therefore
those Arts are directed to be attained by certain and proper Methods, how much
rather does the Discipline and Profession of our Religion, which tends to the
contemplating of the Secrets of Invisible Mysteries, and seeks not the
Retribution of a temporal Gain, but of Eternal Reward, consist in a certain
Order and Method: Of which, the Science is twofold: the first, Practical; that
is, Actual, which is performed in the Amendment of Manners, and the Purgation
of Vices: the other, is Theoretical; that is, which consists in the
Contemplation of Divine things, and the Knowledge of most Sacred Senses. ( cap.
1.)

Who-ever therefore would attain to the Theoretick, (or Contemplative) it is
necessary that with all Study and Industry he acquire first the Actual Science.
For this Practical may be possessed without the Theoretick; but the Theoretick
without the Practick cannot be thoroughly apprehended: For there are certain
Steps so ordered and distinguished, that the mean Estate of Man may ascend to
the top: If they succeed one another in the Order which we have said, one may
by them come to the top; to which, if the first be taken away he cannot fly up.
He does therefore in vain endeavor to see God, who does not avoid the
Infection of Vices: For the Spirit of God flies that which is feigned, nor will
it dwell in a Body subject to Sins. ( cap. 2.)

But this Actual Accomplishment consists of two Branches; The first, the
Knowledge of the Nature, and of the Cure of Vices: The second, the Knowledge of
the Order of Virtues; and the Accomplishment of the Mind with them; so that it
may not serve them by the Compulsion of a forcible Regiment, but be as it were
fed and delighted (with them) as with a Good natural to it, and ascend that
hard and narrow Way with Delight. ( cap. 3.)

If your Concern be to attain to the Light of Spiritual Knowledge, not out of
vain Ostentation, but from the Grace of Reformation, you must first be affected
with a Desire of that Beatitude, of which it is said, Blessed are the pure in
Heart, for they shall see God: that ye may also arrive to that, concerning
which the Angel said to Daniel: But they, who are instructed, shall shine as
the Splendour of the Firmament; and they, who instruct many to Righteousness, as
the Stars for ever and ever. --

Wherefore, continuing that Diligence of Reading, which I perceive you have,
make have with all Industry, as soon as may be, to learn completely the Actual,
that is, the Moral Discipline; for without this cannot be understood that
Contemplative Purity, which I mentioned, which they alone obtain, as a Reward
after the Expense of many Labors and Pains, who become perfect, not by the
Words of other Teachers, but by the Virtue of their own Actions. -- If ye will
prepare a Sacred Tabernacle in your Heart for Spiritual Knowledge; purge your
selves from the Contagion of all Vices, and divest your selves of the Cares of
this Life: For it is impossible for a Soul which is busied but a little in
Worldly Affairs, to obtain the Gift of Knowledge, or to be fruitful in
Spiritual Senses, or retentive of Sacred Lessons. Observe therefore in the
first place, lest your Study in Reading, and Labor of your Desire, be
frustrated by vain Elation, that you impose Silence on your Tongue: For this is
the first Entrance of Actual Discipline; -- and that you receive the
Institutions and Sentences of all the Seniors with Attention and Silence; and
laying them up in your Heart, make have more to practice them your selves, than
to teach them to others: For from this, will grow a pernicious Presumption of
Vainglory; but from that, the Fruit of Spiritual Understanding. Do not dare
therefore to utter any thing in a Conference of the Seniors, but what either an
hurtful Ignorance, or the Cause of necessary Knowledge does compel, as some,
who, filled with the Affection of Vainglory, pretend to enquire what they know
very well: For it is impossible that he, who, out of design to gain the
Applause of Men applies himself to the Study of Reading, should obtain the Gift
of true Science. For, of necessity, he who is fettered with this Passion, must
be bound also with other Vices, and especially of Pride; and so failing in the
Actual and Moral Undertaking, he cannot at all attain to Spiritual Knowledge,
which springs from it. Neither presume to teach to any in Words, what you have
not first practiced in Deeds: For this Order has our Lord, by his Example,
taught us to observe, of whom it is said, -- Which Jesus began to do, and to
teach. Beware therefore, lest leaping out to Teach, before Practice, you be
reputed in the Number of them, of whom, in the Gospel, our Lord says to his
Disciples: What they say to you, observe and do; but according to their Works,
do not: for they say, and do not, etc. c. 9.

If therefore you would attain to the true Knowledge of the Scriptures, you
must make have first to obtain a settled Humility in your Heart; which will
lead you, not to that which puffs up, but to that which gives Light of
Understanding, or illustrates Knowledge by the Perfection of Charity. For it is
impossible that an uncleansed Mind should obtain the Gift of Spiritual
Knowledge, etc. ( cap. 10.)

Moreover, this is by all means to be endeavored, that having expelled all
Earthly Solicitude and Thought, you give your self continually to Sacred
Lessons, until continual Meditation tincture your Mind, and form it to the
Likeness of it self, etc. ( cap. 10.)

But it is impossible, as I said before, that any one unexperienced should
either understand or teach these things: For he who is not capable so much as
to conceive them, How should he be fit to teach 'em? Of which, if
notwithstanding he should presume to teach any thing, his Speech, without
doubt, would be ineffectual and unprofitable, reach only to the Ears of the
Auditors, but not pierce the Heart. ( cap. 14.)

Abbot Moses, concerning the End and Scope of a Monastic Life, Cassian. Coll.
1.
THE End of our Undertaking, according to the Apostle, is Life Eternal: so he
says Romans 6.22. Having your Fruit unto Holiness, and the End Everlasting Life:
But the Scope Purity of Heart, which he deservedly calls Holiness or
Sanctification; without which the aforesaid End cannot be attained. -- Which
Scope he elsewhere expressly mentions: Forgetting those things which are
behind, and reaching forth to those things which are before, I press toward the
(Scope or) Mark, for the Prize of the high Calling of God in Christ Jesus,
Phil. 3. -- Whatever therefore guides us to this Mark, that is, Purity of
Heart, it is to be followed with all our Might: but whatever does withdraw us
from it, is to be eschewed as pernicious and noxious. For, for this do we
undergo and act all things: For this are Parents, Country, Dignities, Riches,
Delights of this World, and all Pleasure, contemned, to wit, that perpetual
Purity of Heart may be retained. This Design therefore being resolved upon, our
Acts and Thoughts shall always be rightly directed to the obtaining of it.
Which if it be not continually set before our Eyes, it will not only make all
our Labors vain and instable without Profit, but also all our Thoughts varying
and contrary to themselves. For, of necessity, the Soul, which has not whether
to have recourse, and where principally to rest, must every moment be changed,
according to the variety of its Occurrences; and by those things which happen
without, be continually transformed into that State which next presents its
self. ( cap 5.)

For this Cause therefore are all things to be done and sought after by us: for
this, is the Desert to be chosen; for this, Fastings, Watchings, Labors,
Nakedness, Readings, and other Exercises of Virtue, we know, are by us to be
undertaken; to wit, that by them we may prepare and keep our Heart unhurt from
all noxious Passions; and by treading those steps ascend to the Perfection of
Charity. -- They are not Perfection, but the Instruments of Perfection: for in
them does not consist the End of this Discipline; but by them is the End
arrived to. -- Whatever therefore may disturb that Purity and Tranquillity of
our Mind, although it may seem Profitable and Necessary, is to be avoided as
noxious. ( cap. 7.)

This ought therefore to be our principal endeavor, this the unmovable Design
of our Heart continually to be desired, that our Mind many continually adhere
to God and Divine things. Whatever differs from that, how-ever great, is to be
judged of an inferior Nature, or of the meanest, or certainly noxious. The
Figure of this Mind or Action is very finely represented in the Gospel in the
Persons of Martha and Mary. -- In which you see that our Lord placed the
principal Good in the Theory, that is, in Divine Contemplation. Whence the
other Virtues, though we declare them necessary, yet we resolve them to be
reckoned in the second degree; because all are sought for the sake of this
alone. For our Lord saying, Thou art solicitous, and art troubled about many
things; but there is need (but) of a few, or even One; he placed the Chief
Good, not in an actual, though commendable Work, and abounding in many Fruits;
but in Contemplation of Himself; which is indeed simple, and (but) One, etc. (
cap. 8.)

To attend uncessantly to God and Divine Contemplation, is impossible for Man
encompassed with this Infirmity of the Flesh. But it behooves us to know, where
we ought to have the Intention of our Mind fixed, and to which design we may
always apply the Prospect of our Mind, which when it can obtain, it rejoices;
and from which, being distracted, it grieves and sighs; and does so often feel
her self to have departed from her chief Good, as she does find her self
separated from that Prospect, etc. ( cap. 13.)

Therefore is frequent Reading, and continual Meditation of the Scriptures,
that from thence we may have occasion of remembering Spiritual things. Therefore
is frequent Singing of Psalms, that daily Compunction may thence be obtained.
Therefore is Diligence used in Watchings, Fastings, and Prayers, that the Mind,
being refined, may not savor Earthly things, but contemplate Heavenly: Which
again ceasing, through Negligence creeping in, of necessity the Mind, waxing
gross with the Filth of Corruptions, must sink and fall into the Carnal part. (
cap. 17.) v. Col. 9. cap. 26.

Abbot Daniel, concerning the triple State of Souls, Cass. Coll. 4. cap. 19.
ACcording to the Doctrine of the Scripture, there are Three States of Souls:
the first, Carnal; the second, Animal; the third, Spiritual; which we read thus
noted-out by the Apostle: for concerning the Carnal it is said, I have given
you Milk to drink, not Meat; for then ye were not able, neither yet indeed are
ye; for ye are yet Carnal, 1 Cor. 3. And again; While there is among you
Emulation and Contention, are ye not Carnal? ibid. Concerning the Animal, it is
thus mentioned; The Animal Man perceives not the things of the Spirit of God;
it is Foolishness to him, 1 Cor. 2. But of the Spiritual; But the Spiritual
judges all things, but is judged of none. ibid. And again; Ye, who are
Spiritual, instruct those who are of that sort in a Spirit of Gentleness, Gal.
6. And therefore we must be diligent, that when, by our Renunciation, we have
ceased to be Carnal, that is, have begun to separate our selves from the
Conversation of Worldly People, and to cease from that manifest Pollution of
the Flesh, we strive presently, with all our Might, to acquire the Spiritual
State; lest flattering our selves because we seem, according to the outward
Man, to have renounced the World, or to have forsaken the Contagions of Carnal
Fornications, as if by this we had gotten the top of Perfection, we should
thenceforth become more remiss toward the Emundation of other Passions, and
more slothful; and, being detained between both, not be able to attain to the
degree of Spiritual Profit; supposing that it is abundantly sufficient for us
for Perfection, that in the outward Man we seem separated from the Conversation
and Delights of this World; or that we are set free from Carnal Corruption and
Mixture: And so being found in that Tepid State, which is reckoned the Worst,
we shall understand that we are to be vomited out of the Mouth of the Lord,
according to his Sentence, saying; I would thou were Hot or Cold; but (because)
thou art now Tepid, (or Lukewarm) I will begin to spue thee out of my Mouth,
Rev. 3.15. etc.

Abbot Isaac, concerning PRAYER, Cass. Col. 9.
THE End of every Monk, and Perfection of his Heart, tends to a continual and
uninterrupted Perseverance in Prayer, and, as far as is permitted to Humane
Frailty, strives after an unmovable Tranquillity, and perpetual Purity of Mind.
For the Enjoyment of which we unweariedly seek, and continually exercise as
well Labor of the Body, as Contrition of Spirit: And there is between these a
certain reciprocal and inseparable Conjunction. For as the Structure of all
Virtues does tend to the Perfection of Prayer; so unless all these be bound and
compacted together by the toping of it, they can by no means hold out firm and
stable. For as without them cannot this perpetual and continual Tranquillity of
Prayer, of which we speak, be acquired and perfected; so neither can those
Virtues, which prepare for it, without the Continuance of it, be accomplished.
Wherefore, neither can we rightly treat of the Effect of Prayer, or enter to
the principal End of it, which is accomplished by the Employment of all
Virtues, by a hasty Discourse, unless first all these things, which for the
obtaining of it are either to be cut off, or to be prepared, be in order
enumerated and discussed; and according to the Instruction of the Parable in
the Gospel, those things, which belong to the Building of that Spiritual and
more sublime Tower, be counted and diligently prepared for it. Which,
notwithstanding, will neither profit, being prepared; nor rightly admit those
high topings of Perfection to be built upon them, unless first all refuse of
Vices being cast out, and all dead rubbish of Passions dug up, the most firm
Foundations of Simplicity and Humility be laid upon the sound and solid Earth
of our Heart, that Evangelical Rock, upon which this Tower to be built, with
the Employments of all the Spiritual Virtues, may be both unmoveably
established, and raised up to the highest Heavens by the Consistence of its own
Firmness. -- ( cap. 2.)

And therefore, that the Prayer be made with that Fervor and Purity it ought,
these things are by all means to be observed. First, The Solicitude of Earthly
things in general, is to be cut off: Next, not only the Care, but not so much
as the Memory of any Business or Cause is to be admitted: Detractions, idle
Talk, much Talk, Jestings, are likewise also to be cut off: Anger above all
things, or the Perturbation of Sadness, are to be thoroughly rooted out: The
pernicious Food of Carnal Concupiscence, and the Love of Money, is to be
plucked up by the Roots: and these and the like Vices, which are visible even
to the Eyes of Men, being cut off and wholly thrust out, and such a cleansing
of the Rubbish, which is perfected in the Purity of Simplicity, (or Singleness
of Heart) and Innocence first made, the unshaken Foundations of a profound
Humility, which may bear a Tower reaching to the Heavens, are first to be laid;
then is the Superstruction of Spiritual Virtues to be built upon it: and from
all Discourse, (or Reasoning) and light Wandering, is the Mind to be
restrained, that so it may, by degrees, be elevated to God, and to Spiritual
Intuition. For whatever our Soul conceives before the Hour of Prayer, of
necessity it will occur to us while we pray, by intrusion of our Remembrance.
Wherefore, such as we would be found while we Pray, such ought we to prepare
our selves to be before the time of Prayer. For from the precedent State is the
Mind formed in Prayer, etc. ( cap. 3.)

The Quality of the Soul is not unfitly compared to a light Feather, which, if
it be not spoiled by some wet from without happening to it, by the levity of
its own Substance, with the help of a gentle Breath, is as it were naturally
raised up on high, and to the Heavens: But if it be aggravated with the
Accession of any wet, it is not only not raised up to any Aerial Flights by its
natural Mobility, but will be depressed down to the very Earth by the weight of
the Wet received. So also our Mind, if it be not aggravated with contracted
Vices and Worldly Cares, or corrupted with the Humor of noxious Lust, being
lifted up, as with the natural Advantage of its Purity, will, with the least
Breath of Spiritual Meditation, be elevated on high; and forsaking low and
Earthly things, will be transported to those which are Heavenly and invisible.
So that we are very properly admonished by our Lord's Precepts: See that your
Hearts be not at any time overcharged with Gluttony, Drunkenness, and the
Cares of the World, Luke 21.34. And, therefore, if we would our Prayers should
pierce, not only the Heavens, but what are above the Heavens, let us take Care
to raise our Mind purged from all Earthly Corruptions, and cleansed from all
Dregs of Passions to its natural Sublimity, that so our Prayer may ascend to
God dis-burthened of all Weight of Corruption. ( cap. 4.)

The Intention of a Monk ought always to be fixed in God; by whom even a small
Separation from that Chief Good is to be accounted a present Death, and most
pernicious Destruction. And when the Mind comes to be settled in such a
Tranquillity, or loosed from the ties of all Carnal Passions, and the Intention
of the Heart does most tenaciously adhere to that One Chief Good, then does it
fulfill that of the Apostle; Pray without Intermission, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. and, In
every place lifting up pure Hands without Anger or Disputings, 1 Timothy 2.8. For
the Sense of the Mind, if I may so say, being drenched in this Purity, and
reformed from the Earthly Filth to a Spiritual and Angelick Likeness, whatever
it receives into its self, whatever it handles, whatever it does, will be a
most pure and sincere Prayer. ( cap. 6.)

The various Species of Prayer, I judge, cannot be comprehended without mighty
Contrition of Heart, Purity of Mind, and Illumination of the Holy Spirit. --
For according to the measure of Purity, in which every Soul does proceed, and
the quality of the State, in which, either by Occurrences she is lowered, or by
her own Industry renewed, she her self is every moment new formed. And
therefore it is certain, that Prayers are by none always made of the same form,
etc. ( cap. 8.)

They who having the penal thorn of Conscience plucked out of their Heart, are
secure, ruminating the Favors and Mercies of the Lord, which he has either in
time past given, or at present does give, or has prepared for the future, with
a most pure Mind, are transported with a most fervent Heart to that ardent
Prayer, which cannot be expressed with the Tongue of Men, or comprehended. Yet
sometimes a Mind, which has profitted to that true effect of Purity, and has
now begun to be rooted in it, is wont, conceiving all the parts of Prayer at
once together, and like an incompressible and devouring Flame spreading over
all, to pour out to God ineffable Prayers of a most pure vigor, which the
Spirit it self interceeding with inexplicable Groans, we being ignorant, does
send forth to God, conceiving in that moment so great things, and pouring them
out ineffably in Supplication, as it cannot at another time; I will not say,
repeat with the Mouth, but not so much as recollect with the Mind, etc. ( cap
15.)

The higher and more sublime State (of Prayer) is formed by the Contemplation
of God alone, and the Fervor of Charity, by which the Soul being cast down,
and melted into Love of him, does very familiarly discourse to God, as its own
Father, with a peculiar Devotion. Which State that we ought diligently to
desire, the Form of the LORD's-PRAYER does instruct us, saying;

Our Father. When therefore we do confess with our own Mouth the God and Lord
of the Universe to be our Father, we do indeed profess our selves to be adopted
to be the Sons of God out of a State of Slavery: adding thereunto, Who art in
Heaven; that flying from the abode of the present Life, which we live upon
Earth, with much horror, as a Pilgrimage, and separating us far from our
Father, we may hasten rather with our utmost desire to that Region, in which we
confess our Father lives; and may admit nothing of that kind which may render
us unworthy of this our Profession, and of the Nobility of such an Adoption; or
make us incurr his Displeasure: To which Order and Degree being promoted, we
shall continually be inflamed with that Devotion, which is in good Children,
that now we shall employ all our Affection, not for our Commodities, but for
the Glory of our Father. Saying to Him, Hollowed be thy Name, etc. ( cap. 18.)

And after a brief but excellent Explication of all the parts of this Prayer,
he adds:

You see therefore, what Model and Form of Prayer is proposed to us by the
Judge himself, who is to be entreated by it; in which is no Petition of Riches,
no Remembrance of Dignities, no Prayer for Power or Strength, no mention of
Corperal Needs, or of Temporal Life contained. The Creator of Eternity will
have nothing fading, nothing vile, nothing temporal, to be implored of him. And
therefore he will do a very great Injury to his Magnificence and Munificence,
who-ever passing by the Petition of Eternal things, will rather ask any thing
transitory or fading; and by the Vileness or Meanness of his Prayer, will
rather incurr the Offense, than obtain the Favor of his Judge. ( cap. 24.)

This Prayer therefore, though it may seem to contain all plenitude of
Perfection, because either instituted or established by the Authority of our
Lord himself, yet does it promote those of his Family to that higher State,
which we mentioned before, and lead them, in a more eminent degree, to that
fervent, ineffable Prayer, known or experienced by very few, which transcending
all humane Sense, is not distinctly delivered by any manner of Words or
Expressions, but which the Mind, illustrated by the infusion of that Celestial
Light, does, not signify by humane and narrow Eloquence, but pour out
abundantly, as out of a full Fountain, in full compacted Senses, and ineffably
utter to the Lord, producing so great things in that little point of time, as
the Mind can neither easily utter, nor recovering it self particularly
remember. ( cap. 25.)

And that you may perceive the Affection of a true Prayer, I will produce to
you, not my own, but St. Antony's Sense of it: Whom we have known to have
sometimes so persisted in Prayer, that he frequently praying in an Excess of
Mind, when the Sun began to rise, we have heard him, in fervor of Spirit, cry
out; Why do thou hinder me, O Sun, who do now rise to withdraw me from the
Splendour of this true Light? Whose also was this Celestial and more than
humane Sentence, concerning the End of Prayer: It is not (says he) Perfect
Prayer, in which a Monk does understand By Prayer, these Men understand an
Elevation of the Soul to God; and they who have observed how much the Soul may
be affected and taken up in the Contemplation of much inferior Objects, will
not so confidently censure this, though they never had Experience of any such
thing in themselves. It is no more than Plato has said of Oratory in Menon.
even this it self that he prays. ( cap. 31.)

They only with most pure Eyes do behold the Divinity of Jesus, who ascending
from low and Earthly Works and Thoughts, do retire with him into the high Mount
of Solitude; who being free from the Tumult of all Earthly Thoughts and
Perturbations, and separate from all mixture of Vices, elevated with a most
pure Faith, and Eminence of Virtues, does reveal the Glory of his Countenance
and the Image of his Clarity to those, who are meet to behold Him with pure
Aspects of Soul, etc. ( Coll. 10. c. 6.)

This is the Design of a Solitary, this ought to be all his Intention, that he
may come to possess in this Body an Image of future Beatitude, and begin in
this Vessel to fore-tast the Earnest of Heavenly Conversation and Glory. This,
I say, is the End of all Perfection, that the Mind, so extenuated (or refined)
from all Carnal Dust, may be daily elevated to Spiritual things, till all its
Conversation, all its volutation of Heart, may become one continual Prayer.
And, as I said a little before: All our Love, all our Desire, all our Study,
all our Endeavor, all our Cogitation, all that we see, all that we speak, all
that we hope, may be God; and that Unity which now is of the Father with the
Son, and of the Son with the Father, may be transfused into our Sense and
Minds; that is, that as he loves us with a pure and indissoluble Charity, we
also may be joined to Him in a perpetual and inseparable Charity. ( cap. 7.)

For the Attaining and Practice of this, he recommends, from Experience of the
Seniors, the continual or frequent mental repetion of that verse, Psalm. 70.
Deus in adjutorium meum intend; Domine ad adjuvandum me festina; in our
Liturgy, O God make speed to save us; O Lord make have to help us: and largely
shows the use of it at all times, and upon all special occasions.

Abbot Theodore, concerning the right Knowledge of the Scriptures, Cassian.
lib. 5.
HE was endowed with very great Sanctity and complete Science, not only in the
Active Life, but also in the Knowledge of the Scriptures: which he acquired,
not so much by Study of Reading, or Humane Learning, as by Purity of Heart: for
he could hardly either understand or pronounce so much as a few Greek Words.
When he sought the Explanation of a certain obscure Question, he persisted
indefatigably in Prayer seven Days and Nights, until he knew the Solution of
the Question proposed, by the Revelation of the Lord. ( cap. 33.)

When certain of the Brethren, admiring his eminent Light of Knowledge,
inquired of him the Sense of certain Scriptures; he said, A Monk desiring to
attain to the Knowledge of the Scriptures, ought by no means to employ his
Pains upon Books of Commentators, but rather restrain and keep all the Industry
of his Mind and beat of his Heart to the purifying of his Carnal Affections;
which being expelled, presently the Eyes of his Mind, the Veil of his Passions
being once removed, will begin as it were naturally to contemplate the
Mysteries of the Scriptures. For they are not published to us by the Grace of
the Holy Spirit, that they should be unintelligible and obscure; but they
become obscure by our Fault, the veil of Sins over-clouding the Eyes of our
Mind; which being again restored to their Natural Sanity, the Reading of the
Holy Scriptures will even alone abundantly suffice to the Contemplation of true
Knowledge; nor will they need the Instructions of Commentaries, as these Eyes
of Flesh need the Doctrine of none to see, if they be free from Suffusion and
Dimness of Sight. For therefore is there so great Variety and Errors arisen
amongst Interpreters themselves, because the most running to Interpret them,
without using any Diligence toward the Purgation of the Mind, by reason of the
Grossness or Uncleanness of their Heart, thinking things diverse or contrary,
either to Faith, or to themselves, they could not comprehend the Light of
Truth. ( cap. 34.)

For this see in Smith 's Select Discourses, The true Way and Method of
attaining to Divine Knowledge.

Abbot Serapion of Discretion, Cass. Coll. 2. cap. 11.
WHEN I was a Child, and lived with Abbot Theon, this brutish Custom was
imposed upon me by the Enemy, that after I had eaten with him at the ninth
hour, I did every day secretly convey one Biscuit into my Bosom, which I did
after, without his knowledge, eat in secret. Which Theft, though I did
constantly, through my accustomed Incontinence, commit; yet when I had
gratified my Appetite, coming to my self, I was more tormented with the Guilt
of my Theft, than satisfied with what I had eaten. And when I was every day
compelled, to the grief of my Heart, to perform that most troublesome work,
imposed, as it were, by Pharaoh's Taskmasters instead of Bricks upon me, nor
could extricate my self from this their most cruel Tyranny, and was ashamed and
confounded to discover the secret Theft to my Senior; it came to pass, by the
Hand of God, who was pleased to rescue me out of the Yoke of this Captivity,
that certain Brothers desired to come to the Cell of the Senior for Edification
sake. And when they were refreshed, and a Spiritual Conference was begun, the
Senior answering to their Questions discoursed of the Vice of Gastrimargy, or
Gluttony, and of the Domination (and Slavery) of Thoughts kept secret, and did
explain their Nature and most dismal Power so long as they were concealed: I by
the power of this Conference being pricked, and terrified with an accusing
Conscience, as believing that these things were spoken for that Cause, that the
Lord had revealed the Secrets of my Heart to the Senior, I began first secretly
to sigh; then, the Compunction of my Heart increasing, breaking out into Sighs
and Tears, I pulled the Biscuit, which by that evil Custom I had secretly stolen
to eat, out of my Bosom, where it was concealed, and proferring it to them, I
did prostrate upon the ground with Supplication for Pardon, confess how I did
every day eat in secret, and with abundance of Tears did implore them to beg my
Absolution from this hard Bondage of the Lord. Then said the Senior; Be of good
Comfort, Child; Thy Confession has obtained thy Absolution, though I hold my
Tongue: For thou have this day gotten the Victory of thine Enemy, more
powerfully beating him down by thy Confession, than thou thy self were cast
down by him through thy Concealment. Whom not at all checking either by thy own
or any others Reprehension, thou did suffer to domineer over thee till now.
But now, after this thy Confession, that wicked Spirit shall not be able to
disquiet thee; nor shall the filthy Serpent any longer hold a hiding place in
thee, being drawn-out into the Light, out of the Darkness of thy Heart, by a
salutary Confession. The Senior had not finished these Words, and behold a
Burning Lamp, proceeding from my side, so filled the Cell with the smell of
Brimstone, that the Stink of it would not suffer us to remain in it. And the
Senior resuming his Admonition; Behold, says he, our Lord has visibly proved
to thee the Truth of my Words, that thou should see with thy Eyes the
Instigator of thy Affection driven out of thy Heart by a salubrious Confession;
and should know that the detected Enemy should no longer at all have place in
thee, by his manifest Expulsion. And so it is, according to the Sentence of the
Senior, the Domination of that diabolical Tyranny in me is, by the Virtue of
this Confession extinct, and for ever laid; so that the Enemy never after
attempted to inject so much as the memory of this Concupiscence, nor have I
ever after felt my self assaulted by any Instigation of that thievish desire.

In this manner therefore may we most easily come to the Science of true
Discretion, if following the tract of the Seniors, we presume neither to act
any thing new, nor to determine it by our own Judgment; but walk in all things
as their Tradition, or Probity of Life shall inform us. In which Institution
being settled, any one may, not only come to the perfect reason of Discretion,
but remain safe against all the Snares of the Enemy. For by no other Vice does
the Devil draw a Religious person so headlong to Destruction, as when he does
persuade him, neglecting the Advice of the Seniors, to confide in his own
Judgment, and Determination or Doctrine. For since all Arts and Disciplines
found out by humane Ingenie, and which are of no more benefit than for the
Commodities of this temporal Life, though they may be handled with the Hand,
and seen with the Eyes, yet can they not rightly be comprehended by any one
without the Teaching of an Instructor; How improper is it to believe that this
only should not need a Teacher, which is invisible and occult, and which is not
seenthrough but with a most pure Heart, wherein an Error produces not a
temporal Damage, nor what is easily repaired, but perdition of Soul, and
perpetual Death? For it has a Conflict Day and Night, not against visible, but
invisible Enemies; and not against one or two, but against innumerable troops,
a Spiritual Combat, the Case of which is so much the more pernicious to all, by
how much both the Enemy is more mischievous, and the Encounter more secret. And
therefore is the Trace of the Seniors always to be followed with the utmost
Diligence, and to them are all things, which arise in our Hearts, taking away
the Veil of Bashfulness, to be related. ( cap. 11.) v. sup. p. 79.

Abbot Cheremon, concerning the Wonderful things which the Lord does, in a
special manner, operate in his Saints, Cass. Coll. 12. cap. 12.
GREAT indeed and wonderful are the things, nor thoroughly known to any Man,
except only to those who have experience of them, which the Lord with ineffable
Liberality gives to his Faithful ones, even in this Vessel of Corruption. Which
the Prophet viewing in Purity of Mind, as well in his own Person, as in the
Person of those, who come into this State and Affection, cried out; Great are
thy Works; and that my Soul knows very well. Otherwise could not the Prophet
be thought to have said any rare or great matter, if he be thought to have
pronounced this either with other affection of Heart, or concerning other Works
of God: For there is no Man, who does not acknowledge the Works of God to be
wonderful, even from the very Vastness of the Creation. But of those things,
which by his daily Operation he does produce in his Saints, and with a special
Bounty does pour out unto them, no other can be sensible but the Soul of them
who enjoy it, which, in the secret of its Conscience, is so the only Judge of
his Favors, that it not only cannot with any Speech relate them, but not so
much as in Sense and Thought comprehend them; when descending from that
inflamed Fervor, it sinks down to material and terrene Prospects. For, Who
would not admire the Works of God in himself, when he sees the insatiable
Greediness of the Stomach, and the costly and pernicious Luxury of the Palate,
so restrained in Him, that he seldom (and unwillingly) takes scarce so much as
a little, and that very mean Food? Who would not be amazed at the Works of God,
when he feels that fire of Lust, which he before believed to be natural, and in
a manner inextinguishable, to become so cooled, that he does not feel himself
incited so much as with a simple motion of his Body? How could any but revere
the Power of the Lord, when he should see Men, before fierce and desperate, who
were provoked even by officious (or well-meant) Service to the greatest Fury of
Anger, to have come to so great Lenity and Gentleness, that now they not only
are not moved with any Injuries, but even, when any are done them, do with
great magnanimity rejoice? Who would not plainly admire the Works of God, and
with his whole Heart cry out, I have known that great is the Lord, when he
sees himself or another of Greedy, become Liberal; of Prodigal, Frugal; of
Proud, Humble; of Nice and Curious, Carleless and Homely; and even choosingly
enjoying Want and Scarcity of temporal things? These indeed are the wonderful
Works of God, which the Souls of the Prophets and such (experienced Persons) do
know in a peculiar manner, being amazed with the Intuition of so wonderful a
Contemplation. These are the Prodigies which the Lord has placed upon Earth,
which the same Prophet considering, calls all People to the admiration of them:
Come and see the Works of God, the Prodigies which the Lord has placed upon
the Earth, etc. For what can be a greater Prodigy, then, in a very little
moment, for Men of greedy Publicans, to become Apostles; of fierce Persecutors,
most patient Preachers of the Gospel, so as to propagate that Faith, which they
did persecute, even with the Effusion of their Blood. These are the Works of
God, which the Son declares that he, with the Father, daily does work, etc.
Concerning this saving Work of God, the Prophet prays to the Lord, saying;
Confirm, O God, this which thou have wrought in us. And, to pass by abscondite
Dispensations of God, which the Mind of all the Saints does every moment
perceive peculiarly exercised within themselves, that Celestial Infusion of
Spiritual Rejoycings, in which a dejected Mind is raised with the Alacrity of
an unexpected Joy, and those unknown Excesses of Heart, and as ineffable as
unheard of Solaces of Joys; with which sometimes drooping in a listless
Stupidity, we are raised, as out of a deep Sleep, to most fervent Prayer; this,
I say, is the Joy of which the blessed Apostle speaks, Which Eye has not seen,
nor Ear heard, nor has come into the Heart of Man; that is, of him, who is
still a Man stupefied with Earthly Vices, and sticks in Humane Affections, and
perceives nothing of those Gifts of God. At last the same Apostle adds, as well
concerning himself, as those like him, who have departed from Humane
Conversation; But God has revealed them to us by his Spirit. v. Cyp. Ep. 2.

THese things I thought fit to collect out of much of this kind, to give a Taste
of the Manners and Spirit of these Holy People: and lest those who are little
acquainted with these things should imagine that they were the mere Phansies of
Melancholy Monks; I will here add a Taste of the Sentiments of some others; and
instead of many, of two Eminent Bishops, Men of greatest Reputation both for
Learning and Virtue; St. Gregory Nazianzen, and St. Austin, Bishop of Hippo:
But first to begin with St. Gregory Nazianzen, it will not be amiss to add
here, to those before, his Character of the Holy Monks of his time.

St. Gregory Nazianzen, concerning the Lives and Exercises of MONKS in his time.
Orat. 9. to Julian, the Comptroller of the Customs, upon the Discharge of the
Monks.
MY Speech presents to you the Poor, the whole Choir of Priests, the Choir of
Philosophers, [Monks] who are tied down by no Band; who possess only their
Bodies, nor them wholly; have nothing for Coesar, but all for God; Hymns,
Prayers, Watchings, Tears, a Possession not to be seized on, viz. to be dead to
the World, alive to Christ; to have killed the Flesh; to have drawn the Soul
from the Body: Sparing these, or rather purely restoring to God the Worshippers
and Disciples of God, and Contemplators of Celestial things, the first Fruits
of our kind, the Pillar, the Crown of Faith, the precious Pearls, the Stones of
that Temple whose Foundation and Corner Stone is Christ, the noble
Accomplishments of the Church; most nobly indeed, both for them, and for thy
self, and for us all have thou taken Care. And such Riches should I rather wish
thee from us, than Treasure of much Gold and Silver now appearing, and after a
little while not being at all.

But what he observed in them, he elsewhere expresses more copiously, as with
great Approbation, Applause, and even Admiration, in these Particulars;
Watchings, Fastings, Prayers, Tears, brawny Knees, knockings of the Breast,
deep Sighs, nocturnal Stations, travel of the Soul to God, soft Weepings at
Prayers, a Medicine of Compunction to those who hear it; Singing, Glorifying,
Meditating on the Law of the Lord day and night; carrying Exaltations of God in
their Mouths: And also those noble Testimonials and Indications of a Life
according to God, silent Preachers: Hair foul and uncombed; Feet naked, and
like the Apostles, wearing nothing dead; decent Shaving; Raiment reproving
Arrogance; a Girdle becoming an undeck'd Body, keeping the Coat from hanging
loose, but so as though it did not gird it; an even Pace; an unwandering Eye; a
pleasing sort, or rather powerful way of Smiling, which checks the Excess of
Laughter; Discourse guided by Reason; Silence more venerable than Speech;
Commendations seasoned with Salt, not to flatter but to excite to Proficience;
a sort of Reproving, more defirable than Praise; a Mean in Compunction and
Relaxation, and a Mixture and Temperature of both Lenity with Authority and
Authority with Modesty, so that neither is debased, but rather recommended by
the other; due Measures of Converse and Retirement; of Converse, to help
others; of Retirement, to get insight into the Mysteries of the Spirit; a
Converse preserving Solitude (or Recollection) in Society; and Retirement
retaining Brotherlykindness and Charity in Solitude: And which are yet Greater
and Sublimer things than these: Riches in Poverty; Possession in Pilgrimage;
Glory in Disgrace; Power in Weakness; Fruitfulness in Celebacie, if Divine
Offsprings be better than what have beginning from the Flesh. They are such as
live deliciously, by refusing Delights; and Mean, for the sake of Heavenly
things; have nothing in the World, and (yet) are above the World; who are out
of the Flesh, and (yet) in the Flesh. Whose Portion is the Lord; who are Poor,
for the sake of a Kingdom, and Kings for their Poverty. These, my Wealth and
Banquets, while present, made me exult for Joy; and if absent, stopped the
brisk Circulation of my Blood.

Thus far his Character of these Holy Men: And now for a Taste of his
Contemplation, of which we have a Touch here, where he sets out the End of
Retirement, to get Insight into the Mysteries of the Spirit.

St. Gregory Nazianzen, concerning Divine Contemplation. Orat. 42.
I Will Stand, says the admirable Habakkuk, upon my Watch; and I with him to
day upon the Power and Speculation given me by the Holy Ghost, and will
contemplate and know what is showed, and what is spoken to me. --

I being to speak of the great Sacrifice, and of the greatest of Days, cannot
but have recourse to God. Here will I begin, and purge ye me your Mind, and
Hearing, and Understanding, who-ever relish these things; for as much as a
Speech of God is Divine; so shall ye depart with a Savor of things which do
not fade. --

God Was always, and Is, and Shall be; or rather Is always: For Was, and Shall
be, are fragments of Time with us, and of a fading Nature. But he always Is,
and so does he name Himself, speaking to Moses in the Mount. For he containing
All in Himself has a Being neither beginning, nor ceasing, as a certain Ocean
of Essence, immense and boundless, exceeding all conception both of Time and
Nature, represented with the Mind alone, and that but very faintly and
obscurely, not from what are in Him, but from what are about Him, one
Conception being collected after another into some one Image of the Truth,
flying before it be laidhold-on, and running away before it be apprehended,
illustrating only the Principal part of us, and that purified, as the Lightning
strikes the Sight without remaining; that, as it seems to me, he may with what
is comprehensible draw us to Himself; (for what is altogether incomprehensible,
is neither hoped nor attempted) and with what is incomprehensible, may become
admired; being admired, may be the more desired; being desired, may purify us;
and purifying, make us Dei-form or God-like: and these things perfected, he
may, as with Familiars, converse with us, God to God's united and made known,
etc.

To make this remarkable Discourse the more plain and intelligible, it may be
fit and necessary to add some brief Notes out of the Greek Commentators,
Nicetas and Psellus, upon it.

The Sense of the Prophet's Words is this: I will keep my Mind Pure and Entire
from all Worldly Care, and will fly into a certain Security very firm, and as a
Thought raised on high: and thence will I observe what God will speak to me,
etc. Nicetas, n. 1.

Stand signifies Firmness and Constancy, and a State unmoved, and unmovable to
meaner things; Speculate an accurate and agreeable Contemplation and Knowledge,
and that Impetus (or Earnestness) wherewith the Mind is carried to those things
which come to our Knowledge. For so he, who does emerge out of the Grossness of
corporal things, at first goes the middle way, which is called Animal; but
afterward the more sublime, which is called Spiritual. Psell.

The Watch (or Guard) is the Manner of every ones Soul, according to which he
does receive Divine Visions in a certain proportion. For if any one shall raise
himself by higher Contemplation, he will err. He calls it Power, because every
Soul raised up to a Divine Simplicity, and conversing immediately with Divine
Visions themselves, uses those kind of Sights freely, and according to this
Power, condescending to the Capacity of his Auditors, etc. He calls it
Speculation, because the Soul does not measure Divine Visions by the Will, but
by the Intellective Faculty and Measure of its Purgation. Psell. 9.

What the Sun is in Sensibles, that God is in Intellectuals: For as It does
illuminate the visible World, He does in like manner the Invisible. Moreover,
as It makes those, who look upon it, bright; so He makes them Divine and
Deiform. Nicetas.

The Presence of Spiritual Light and Divine Splendour converts the Mind of
those, who are judged worthy of such a Glory and Contemplation, from many and
various Opinions and Imaginations to that which truly is, that is to God, etc.
Nicetas.

For what the Eye is in the Body, this the Mind is in the Soul. As therefore to
behold the Lightning when it breaks out, there is need of good Eyes: so also
for this, that we may be illustrated by the Contemplation of God, is required a
Pure and Sound Mind. For as in a Looking-Glass sordid and impure, the Form of a
Face cannot be represented; so neither in a foul and unclean Mind, the Splendour
of God. Ni.

Whoever, knowing that they are only Mind, have pasled the bulk and grossness
of the Body, -- and have purged their Mind from the Stain of Vices, and
rendered it fit and meet for the Reception of the First (or chief) Mind and
Creator of all things, God is united to them. For when the Mind is Pure and
Incorrupt, he does converse with the Mind without any thing intervening, and by
it has Communion with the Soul, as again by this he is joined to the Body. But
he is united, not as He is, but as We are capable of that Union. And hence at
last he becomes known: Nor can any one otherwise know God, unless he open his
Soul to Him, and receive him in it. Psellus.

God does so much become known to Men, as he is familiarly joined to them, who
by Virtue are joined to Him. For according as is their Ascent he does descend.
And how much Man does approach to God, so much also does God become known to
Man, imparting the Knowledge of himself according to the proportion of Purity
that is in every one.

See whether the Spiritual and Divine Gradation will raise us. For from the
Incomprehensibility of the Divine Nature, as from the first step of a Ladder,
we are raised to Admiration of him, as to the second step: again, from
Admiration we ascend to more earnest Desire: then from Desire are we raised up
to Purgation: and from hence, further to Likeness with God: and, lastly, we
arrive to converse familiarly with God, and know Him more perfectly by Union.
Then, when we are made Deiform, does the true and natural God converse
familiarly with those, who by Grace are called Gods, infusing the Divine
Fulgers of his Knowledge in us as every one is purified. Nicetas.

To be made God, is to be partaker of Divine Illumination; but not to pass into
the Divine Essence. -- Since we are set in the Confines between God and Matter,
if we decline to Matter, we are Gross and Material; if we tend toward God, we
are called Divine, and thereupon Gods. Nicetas.

St. Austin concerning the same.
THE Life of the Body, is the Soul; the Life of the Soul, is God. The Spirit of
God dwells in the Soul, and by the Soul in the Body, that our Bodies also may
be the Temple of the Holy Spirit, whom we have from God. Ser. 18. de verb.
Apost. c. 6.

It is not unreasonable to say, That the Incorporeal Soul is so illuminated
with the Incorporeal Light of the Simple (or pure) Wisdom of God, as the Body
of the Air is illuminated with the Corporeal Light, and as the Air grows dark
upon the departure of that Light. 11 de Civ. Dei, c. 10.

Minds are to Souls as their Senses; but of Sciences whatever things are most
certain, they are such as are those things which are illustrated or shined upon
by the Sun, that they may be seen, as the Earth and all Earthly things. But God
is he who does illustrate; but I Reason am so in Mind, as the Aspect is in the
Eyes. The Eye of the Soul is the Mind, pure from all stain of the Body, that
is, remote and purged from all desires of Mortal things, etc. 1 Soliloq. c. 6.

It is a great and very rare thing, with the Intenseness of the Mind to
transcend all Creature, corporeal or incorporeal, being considered and found
mutable, and to approach to that unchangeable Substance of God, and there learn
from Him, that none but he made all Nature, which is not Himself. For so God
speaks with Man, not by any corporal Creature sounding in corporal Ears, etc.
but he speaks by the very Truth it self, if one be fit to hear with the Mind,
not with the Body. 11 de C. D. 2. v. ibid. Coq.

When the Soul sees that singular and true Beauty, it will the more love it.
But unless it fix on it its Eye with a mighty Love, and decline not any whether
from beholding it, it cannot remain in that most Blessed Vision. 1 Solil. c. 7.

One thing there is that I can prescribe thee: I know no more. That these
sensible things are wholly to be forsaken; and that we must greatly beware
while we act this Body, that our Wings, which we need have entire and perfect,
be not hindered by any of their Birdlime, that we may fly away from this
Darkness, to that Light, etc. Therefore, when thou shall be such, that nothing
of Earthly things does at all delight thee, believe me, in that moment, in the
same point of time, thou shall see what thou desire, etc. 1 Soliloq. c. 14.

Thou do desire to see and embrace Wisdom as it were naked, without any thing
of covering, so as she does not suffer herself, except to very few and her most
choice Lovers, etc. It is a certain ineffable and incomprehensible Light of
Minds: that vulgar Light, etc. ibid. c. 13.

Confide constantly in God, and as much as thou can commit thy self entirely
to Him. Do not be willing to be as it were thine own, but profess thy self to
be a Servant of the most Gracious and Bountiful Lord. For so will he not cease
to raise thee to Himself, and will permit nothing to befall thee, but what
shall profit thee, though thou know it not. 1 Soliloq. 14.

Hear me, my God, hear me after that manner of thine known to very few. --
Command, I beseech thee, whatever thou will, but heal and open my Ears, that I
may hear thy Voice: Heal and open my Eyes, that I may see thy Becks. -- Say to
me, which way I shall look that I may behold Thee, etc. 1 Soliloq. c. 1.

Being admonished to return to my self, I entered into my most inward parts,
thou being my Leader: and I could do it, because thou wast become my Helper. I
entered, and I discerned with the Eye of my Soul, such as it was, above the same
Eye of my Soul, above my Mind, the unchangeable Light of the Lord; not this
vulgar, and visible to all Flesh. Nor was it as of the same kind greater, as if
it grew more and more clear than it, and filled all with its Greatness. This
was not that, but another, quite another from all those. Nor was it so above my
Mind, as Oil above Water, nor as Heaven above Earth; but superior, because he
made me; and I inferior, because I was made by it. He who knows Truth,
knows it: and he who knows it, knows Eternity. Charity knows it. O
Eternal Truth, and true Charity, and dear Eternity. Thou art my God; for Thee
do I sigh day and night. And when I first knew Thee thou did assume me, (or
take me up) that I should see it to be which I did see; and my self not to be,
who did see. And thou did beat back my weak Sight, shining vehemently upon
me; and I trembled with Love and Horror, and found my self to be far from Thee
in the Region of Dissimilitude, (or Unlikeness) as if I heard thy Voice from on
high; I am the Food of grown Persons; grow, and thou shall feed on me. Nor
shall thou change me into thee, as the Food of thy Flesh; but thou shall be
changed into me. And I know that for Iniquity thou do tutor Men, and make
my Soul to pine away like a Spider. And I said, Is Truth nothing, because it is
diffused, neither through finite, nor through infinite spaces? And thou cryedst
from a far, Yes indeed, I AM THAT I AM. And I heard, as it is heard in the
heart; and there was no cause of doubt at all left; and I could easilier doubt
that I was alive, than that Truth was not, which is seen being understood by
the things which are made. 7 Confess. c. 10.

More to this purpose might be noted out of these, and others of great
Authority in the Christian Church; though it may be observed that anciently the
Christians, as well as the Jews and Heathens, were very cautious not to express
the Mysteries of their Religion to the Profane, or to such as were not
capable, according to our Savior's Admonition, Mat. 7.6. and out of that
caution, and a like caution to avoid all Ostentation and secure their Humility,
were more sparing in their Expressions of any thing of this nature in their
Writings, than those of after-Ages, who, by degrees, began to write more
openly, and at last to compose whole Books of what was before taught more
secretly to particular Persons, as they were capable to receive it; but this is
sufficient for the present.

By this Taste of the Spirit of these Holy People, together with the Testimonies
of such Excellent Persons as were contempory with them, and well acquainted
with their Manners and Exercises, we may judge of the Rashness and
Inconsiderateness of many of later times, who have made no scruple to despise,
vilify, and reproach the Monastic State in general; and the Impiety and
Wickedness of such as have industriously endeavored to rake up all the Dirt,
and raise all the Calumnies and Slanders they could against them. If the Abuses
and Corruptions, which in later times have increased among them, were such as
might provoke the Indignation of Men and Judgments of God upon them, must the
whole State from the beginning be condemned for them? If the Serpent cast out a
Flood of false and Hypocritical Pretenders, such as those described by Piammon
before, page 59. and Hierom, page 65. called Sarabites and Remoboth, to drown
and obscure the Excellence of those who were sincere, does it become Christians
to help the Serpent in that attempt? There are also (says St. Austin) who are
false Monks, and we have known such; sed non periit Fraternitas Pia propter
eos, qui profitentur quod non sunt; But the Pious Fraternity is not therefore
lost because of those, who profess themselves to be what they are not, in Psalm.
132. and in diverse other places he notes such a mixture among them; and the
Unreasonableness of those, who censure all for the Miscarriages of some. Should
we judge of Episcopacy by the Actions of too many of that Order, which might be
noted even from the time of Diotrephes, but especially after they became not
only secure, but greatly honored by Christian Princes and Emperors; or of the
Reformed Churches, by what has been acted by some amongst them; or even of
Christianity, by the Lives and Manners of too many called Christians; how
unreasonable would that be?

If we look into the more ancient times, we shall find them admired even by
Jews and Heathens, and censured and condemned by none but Infidels, Heretics,
and Apostates. Only one SYNESIVS is set up against the concurrent Judgment of
all the Great Lights of the Church, Athanasius, Basil, Nazianzen, Chrysostom,
Ambrose, Austin, and innumerable more. And who is this Synesius? A Bishop
indeed, and a Learned Philosopher; but as a Learned Doctor of this Church, and
no Friend to Enthusiasm, has observed, a better Platonist than sound
Christian; one who lived among them, and yet very ignorant of what was most
considerable in them; one who passes a harsh Censure of them, and yet in it
gives a remarkable Testimony for them. He knew indeed what every Rustic could
take notice of, that they practiced themselves, and recommended to others,
Temperance, and Continence, and great Austerities; and thereof he is an
unexceptionable Witness; but the reason thereof he knew not; and therefore
calls their Way of Living Barbarous, Adamantine, and contrary to Humane Nature;
an ample Testimony rightly understood. He knew their diligent Labor and Works,
and what was said concerning their continual Contemplation of Divine things:
and thereof is an undeniable Witness; but how that was consistent with twisting
of Reeds and making of Baskets, that he could not conceive. He knew that they
had great regard to Motions, Impulses, Transports, etc. and thereof he is a
competent Witness; but what to make of them he knew not; and therefore thought
that they did thereby hope for the End without the Means. He knew that they
were very confident of their Knowledge of Divine things; and thereof he is a
sufficient Witness; but what they were he understood not; nor how they should
attain any such Knowledge without Learning and Study; and therefore thought
they did very arrogantly assume to themselves a greater Measure of Divine
Knowledge than others had. And what wonder if he, who did not believe all the
known Articles of the Christian Faith, should be no more acquainted with such
Mysteries and Secrets in Spiritual things, as are by the Wisdom of God hid from
the Wise and Prudent, but revealed unto Babes, than some of our Learned Doctors
are at this time? Undoubtedly had those great Men, mentioned before, no way
inferior to this in any part of Learning, understood no more of these things
than he did, they had been of his Mind; or had he understood as much as they,
he had been of theirs. And so much for Synesius, a very competent Witness of
what he knew in this Case, but a most incompetent Judge of what he understood
not.

If we come nearer to our own times, and inquire into the State of the
Monasteries at the time of the Dissolution, Stow the Historian writing of the
Year 1536. 28. Hen. 8. says, The Poor did much lament the Downfall of
Monasteries, for the great Hospitality which was kept there. And it is certain,
that till after the Dissolution of Monasteries there was no Law in England to
enforce any Man to pay to the Relief of the Poor by way of Temporal Coercion.
The Stat. of Ed. 1. called the Stat. de Asportatis Religiosorum, recites it to
be one chief End of building Monasteries, that Hospitality and Almsgiving might
be exercised, and the Sick and Feeble maintained. The Clergy then scarce
pretending themselves to be Proprietors, but rather Vsu-Fructuarii: and as Mr.
Seldom says, that Parsonages and Vicarages were Elemosynae Laicorum; so it
seems they were used as a kind of Reserve for the Laity, when they fell into
Poverty again, that is, the Surplus was so: for there was always to be deducted
the Maintenance of him, who waited at the Altar, according to the Dignity and
Quality of his Person, Order, and Function. This was the Observation of a very
good Friend to the Church of England, the late Lord Chancellor Finch. But as to
the Monasteries, certainly that was an excellent Provision for the Poor, where
they might be supplied with Spiritual as well as Corporal Alms; and such as it
seems did not fail till the last; so that we needed no Law for Provision for
the Poor till the Monasteries were dissolved. Which is that Sin, whereof the
Learned and Judicious Mr. Joseph Meed says, the whole Body of the Reformation
is notoriously guilty; which, nevertheless, says he, is accounted no Sin, and
yet such a one as I know not whether God ever passed by without some visible
and remarkable Judgment. Ep. 14. p. 760. ( v. Ep. 58. p. 829. Disc. 2. p. 15,
17. and Disc. 27. p. 119...) and the Judgment he thought begun upon some, ( v.
p. 17. and 829.) and expected more to follow. And since the Righteous God is a
severe Revenger of the Indignities and Injuries done to his Saints; nor can he
be thought to have less regard to Sacred Persons than to Sacred things, I know
no reason why the great Defects of pious and a complete Christian Education,
which are now notorious in our Universities, and that Blindness, and Spirit of
Sloth and Slumber, which, from thence, seems to have seized and possessed all
Ranks and Qualities of Persons and Parties amongst us, may not be a special
Judgment of God for that Universal Prejudice and Contempt, which upon the
Scandals of some, the profane Sacrilegious Impiety of others, and the
inconsiderate Rashness and Indiscretion of many more, have raised against it.

FINIS.
THE LIFE OF St. ANTONY, Originally Written in Greek by St. ATHANASIUS, Bishop
of Alexandria.

Faithfully Translated out of the Greek by D. S.

TO WHICH The LIVES of some others of those Holy Men are intended to be added,
out of the best Approved Authors.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, for the Use and Benefit of a Religious
Society, 1697.

THE PREFACE.
THE great Prejudice, which in this last Age was raised against Monastic Life
and Monks, so greatly esteemed in the most flourishing Ages of the Church, did
proceed, not so much from any Evil in the thing, or in the persons at that
time, though much degenerated from the Virtue of the Ancients, as from the
Wickedness and Sacrilege of such as were greedy of their Revenues and Riches,
and Unwillingness of others to bear the Yoke, they had taken upon them. This is
so manifest, that whoever should proceed to that degree of Disingenuity and
Impudence as to deny it, would justly forfeit all Credit with Men of Judgment
and Impartiality afterward. It is true, there was too much occasion given for
such as had a mind to rake up all the dirt they could against them; yet even in
that scarce any who have set themselves to that work, have contained themselves
within the bounds of Truth and Modesty, much less of Charity; but their Malice
and Prejudice may be perceived upon a very small inspection into their
Writings. In this wicked Work, besides all those who were directly concerned in
it, many others engaged, partly as Advocates, in hope of some Preferment or
Advantage from such as were possessed of the Prey; partly to ingratiate
themselves with the Party; and partly through an indiscreet ignorant Zeal,
easily carried with an overflowing Stream.

The mischievous Consequences of this were many and great; of which, to pass by
others, one is no less than want of sound Education in true Christian Piety and
Virtue, even in our Universities ever since, but too manifest in the Effects:
and another no less than that, even the making the Word of God of none effect,
by discommending and disparaging, and eluding even what our Savior recommended
to all, though enjoined to none, undermining the very Principles of the most
Heroic Virtue and Piety of the most Holy Christians, by an abominable
Antichristian Presumption, requiring no less than a Public Humiliation of all
the Protestant Churches. For these, and others of this nature, it is that the
Blessing of God has not been upon the Reformation, but only a Protection, nor
is it probable ever will, till the Reformation it self be reformed; but that
they will either dwindle away, as they have hitherto, till they come to
nothing; or fill up the measure of their Iniquities, till they bring some great
Judgment of God upon them.

Such inconsiderate factious Zealotes as call this Popery, know not what they
say; but do Honor to Popery, Injury to Christianity, and Prejudice to their
own Cause. But so mad and heady have they been, that sober Men, who understood
better things, have been forced to apologize for barely mentioning the
Monasteries, as Mr. Tanner has truly observed, in his Preface to his Notitia
Monastica; who, notwithstanding, has very worthily dared to say, That
Monasteries were in those dark Ages the only Preservers of Learning, and
Maintainers of Hospitality: That Orders and Statutes for the Relief of the Poor
were never known till after their Dissolution: and, That their Founders were
Men of the greatest Honor and Virtue in their respective Ages. In his Epistle
Dedicatory.

The Antiquity of Monasteries among Christians is not certainly known. It is
very probable, which Mr. Tanner says after Sir George Mackensy, that the
Original of Monks in Britain may be dated from the first Plantation of
Christianity therein; and that some of the Druids having been converted from
the Pagan Religion, whereof they were the Priests, became our first Monks;
being thereunto much inclined by the Severity of their former Discipline. And
the same is certainly more than probable concerning Egypt, that the Therapeuts,
whatever they were before, were converted some of the first, and continued
their way of living afterward; for none could be more disposed to receive the
Gospel; nor can any other account be with any probability given of them. And
Monasteries there were in Egypt before St. Antony, as appears plainly by the
expression of St. Athanasius in his Life, (c. 3. p. 6.) and more fully by
Socrates, (lib. 4. c. 23.) who says, That Monasteries in Egypt had their
Original from very great Antiquity: but they were enlarged and much increased
by a pious Man, whose Name was Ammon; of whom Athanasius makes mention in the
Life of Antony, (c. 32.) which Socrates also takes notice of. So that the
Question mentioned by St. Hierom, in his Life of Paul, is plainly to be
understood, not who were the first Monks, nor who were the first Anchorets; but
who were the first Eremites, who retired so far as into the Desert? for
Athanasius mentions an old Man, when St. Antony began, who had obliged himself
to a Solitary Life from his Youth; and, doubtless, many such there were from
the beginning of Christianity: but such Societies there were also of Women,
before St. Antony's time; to one of which he committed his Sister, as appears in
his Life; and of whom St. Athanasius gives us a noble Testimony. Apolog. p.
698. to. 1.

But there being none of whom we have any such particular and authentic
account of their Lives and Actions, more ancient than St. Antony, none could be
more proper to begin with for Example of the Heroic Piety and Virtue of those
Ancient Christians, than his, being written by so Eminent and Excellent a
Person as St. Athanasius, whose deserved Character the English Reader may
peruse in Dr. Cave, collected out of the Ancients.

And for the LIFE it self, that it was written by Athanasius in Greek, and soon
after Translated by Evagrius into Latin, is so attested by the Ancients, as is
beyond all question; and the Agreement, and Disagreement too, by reason of the
Liberty which Evagrius says he took in Translating of it, which is between the
Greek and the Latin Copies now extant, is so remarkable, and all so agreeable
with what is said of it, or out of it, by the Ancients, as renders all little
Cavils and pretended Doubtfulness greater Blemishes to their Writings, Candor
and Integrity, who abuse People with such Pretenses, than it can be to either
the Greek or Latin Copies, which so mutually confirm the Truth of each other,
and with the concurrence of other Testimonies, make such a triple cord, as
nothing but greater regard to Factions and Parties, than to Truth and Honesty,
would ever attempt to break. Why are not some others reckoned doubtful, for
which there is more color; but that one serves their turn, but the other not?

But undoubtedly there is a certain Secret Cause of some Peoples Prejudice
against this Holy Life: His Heroic Virtue and Devotion, is a tacit Reproach to
their Laziness and Tepidity; His Miracles, to their Want of Grace; which makes
that seem incredible to them, which they see nothing of among themselves: and
hence they catch at any thing to bring all into question; as, his Combats with
Devils, (c. 7.) though certainly written by St. Athanasius, and cited out of
him by Ruffinus, Socrates, and Nicephorus; and the like related by others, and
even in our own times; the Smell of Spirits; (c. 35.) as if it was not common
for foul Spirits to leave a Stink behind them; or that we must deny Credit to
all Relations of that kind, even amongst our selves, because not agreeing with
our fine-spun imaginary Notions of Spirits: and the use of the Sign of the
Cross, both recommended to others, and practiced by himself; as if that was not
the Common Practice of Christians long before his time; and the triumphant
Erecting of Crosses ever since Constantine's time at the least; ( See Eusebius
's Life of Constantine, l. 1. c. 28, -- 31, 40. and l. 2. c. 7. --) and we had
bravely mended the matter, by setting up instead of it the Effigies of the
Dragon upon our highest Spire without, and the Ensigns of the Beast over our
Altars within, in many of our Churches, as real Emblems or Representations of
our Estate and Condition, as if there was indeed some Magical Enchantment in
them.

We may argue and cavil at such things as these; but where is the Virtue and
Divine Power, which accompanied that Holy Man? If we judge by our Savior's
Rule, we shall find little but empty Talkers among those, who exclaim most
against these things; and magnify the Active Life above the Contemplative:
What does their Activity produce? Antony, we see, converted great numbers to
forsake their Estates, and embrace the State recommended by our Savior to all,
who could receive it: But how many do we see by these Orators converted from
their Covetousness, Vanities and Superfluities, to Obedience to the positive
Commands of Christ? In Antony the Power and Spirit of Christianity shined
gloriously even in the sight of Heathens and Infidels; but our Little Morality
makes our selves suspected first, and then our Religion too for our sakes; and
gives great occasion to such as have more Wit than solid Virtue, to turn
Atheists and Deists; and such as have some sense of Religion, to turn
Separatists or Dissenters, Nay, the very Reading of this Life has produced
more noble Convertions, than all their Preachings and Writings, put all
together, who cavil at it: whereof we have particular instances in St.
Augustin's Confessions, l. 8. c. 6. And, indeed, how can they expect the
Blessing of God upon their Labors, who so unadvisedly oppose so considerable a
part of the Doctrine of our Savior in general, and resist his Inspirations in
such as consult them in their own particular cases? Is this the way to prepare
a People for the Lord? They may do well to consider what they shall answer,
when they are called to account for it; and be more wary in such cases, that
they do not obstruct the Work of God, but, as they ought, promote it.

An ABSTRACT of the LIFE of St. ANTONY out of SOZOMON, l. 1. c. 13.
WHETHER they were Egyptians, or any others, who were the first Beginners of
that (Monastic) Philosophy, this is confessed of all, That that Great ANTONY
the Monk did excellently practice that kind of Life with proper Exercises and
Actions of Diligence and Perfection; whom at that time growing famous in the
Deserts of Egypt, the Emperor Constantine, in Honor of his Virtue, received
into his Favor and Friendship, honored him with his Letters, and desired him
to write to him for what he had occasion. He was an Egyptian, Born of a Noble
Family at a place called Coma, which is a Village near Heraclea. When he was a
well-grown Youth, the Lands descended to him from his Father, he gave to the
People of the place; and selling the rest of his Estate, he distributed the
Price amongst the Poor. For he considered that it was the part of a Student of
Philosophy, not only to deprive himself of his Estate, but to dispose of it in
a decent manner. While he lived with others of his time studious of Philosophy,
he imitated the Virtues of all of them. And because he conceived that a Good
Life, although hard and difficult at the beginning, would, by Custom, become
easy and pleasant, to those measures of severe Exercise of his Continence,
which he first began with, he daily added something, and, as if he always
began, still renewed his Resolution and Alacrity of Mind, chastizing sensitive
Pleasures with corporal Severities, and resisting the Affections of his Mind
with a Wise and Divine Resolution. His Food was only Bread and Salt, and his
Drink Water, and Sunset his Dinner time. But he often continued ^^sting two
days, or more. He waked almost continually whole Nights, and continued in
Prayer even till Day; and if he did take any Sleep, it was only upon a Mat. But
for the most part he took the Ground or Floor for his Bed. He refused anointing
with Oil, and the Use of Baths, and such like things; because they, with their
Humidity, are wont to dissolve and relax the firmness of the Body. And it is
reported, that he never saw himself Naked. Book Learning he neither understood,
nor admired; but a Good Mind he commended as more ancient, and the Inventer of
it. He was very Meek, Civil, Prudent, Magnanimous, courteous to such as came to
him, and not unpleasant to those, who talked with him, even though they talked
crossly: For he did wisely, by his Behavior and Skill, allay the heat of
Contention as it arose, reduced it to Moderation, and the Persons to more
composed Behavior. When, by so great Virtues, he had obtained abundance of
Divine Foreknowledge, he did not account it a Virtue to foreknow: and
therefore neither did he advise that any one should lightly trouble themselves
about the Foreknowledge of Futurities. And he judged, that neither he, who is
ignorant of future things, should for that incur Punishment; nor he, who had
Knowledge of them, to be in that respect Happy, or to be emulated. For true
Felicity, he said, was to Worship God, and Observe his Laws. But, said he, if
any one be desirous of this Prae-science or Foreknowledge of things, let him
purify his Mind. For by this means he did resolve that the Faculty of
Foreseeing, and the Science of future things, might, by Divine Revelation, be
obtained. But neither did he endure to be idle; and he directed any who desired
to live well, to work; and day and night to enter into Examination and Account
with himself of his Deeds: and if any thing was done otherwise than it ought,
to write that down, that thenceforward he might beware of Sins, and be cautious
of himself, if he should find many such things written, as fearing lest if that
writing should be found, it might appear to others how bad he had been. He was
an excellent and most industrious Advocate for such as were oppressed; and for
the sake of such often went to Cities: For many, with their lamentable
Complaints, prevailed with him to interceed for them with Princes and
Magistrates: For all of them reckoned it a great Happiness if they could have
the opportunity to see him, hear him Discourse, and receive his Commands. But
although he was such as he was, yet did he endeavor to live unknown and in
Solitude. And when at any time he was compelled to go to the City, to succor
any in want, as soon as ever he had dispatched the Business for which he came,
he presently hasted back to his Retirement. For Fishes, said he, do live in the
Water; but Solitude is the Element for Monks: Those, if removed to dry Ground,
die; these, if they approach the City, lose their Monastic Composedness.
Toward those who looked upon him he endeavored to behave himself so, as
neither to be, nor to be judged proud.

These few things concerning the Conversation of Antony, I thought necessary to
say, that taking them for Examples, we may by them judge of the rest of his
Philosophy.

He had many very Eminent Disciples, of whom some flourished in Egypt and
Libia, others in Palestine and Syria, and in Arabia. And each of them lived,
among those where they lived, as their Master did, and instructed many in the
like Virtue and Philosophy, so that it was hard for one, who did diligently
visit Cities and Countries, to meet with his Associates or Successors: For how
could such easily be met with, who more industriously endeavored to live
conceiled and unknown, than other Mortals of the World, out of a vain Ambition
do to be known?

A Relation of Two Courtiers converted from the World to a Religious Life, by
Reading the Life of St. Antony, taken out of St. Augustin's Confessions.
TWO Courtiers at Trevers, while the Emperor was at a Public Show, diverting
themselves in some Gardens near the City, in one of them found a certain
Cottage inhabited by some Religious Men, and there the LIFE of St. Antony;
which one of them began to read, and to admire, and be inflamed, and while
reading to think of taking up such a Life, and leaving the Service of the World
to serve God. And presently being suddenly filled with a Holy Love and modest
Shame, he, angry at himself, cast his Eyes upon his Friend, and says to him,
Tell me, I pray thee, whether do we aspire to arrive by all these our Labors?
What do we seek? For what do we strive? Can our Hope be greater in the Court,
than to be Favorites with the Emperor? And what is there there not frail and
full of Dangers? And by how many Dangers do we proceed to greater Danger? And
how long shall this be? But if I would be the Friend of God, behold, I am made
so presently. This he said, and being in Labor in the bringing forth a New
Life, he turned his Eyes again to the Book, and read on, and was inwardly
changed where God only sees, and his Mind was set free from the World, as
presently appeared. For as he read, and rouled over the Waves of his Heart, he
sometimes groaned, and considered, and, at last, resolved upon better things;
and having given up himself to God, he says to his Friend, I have now broken
off from those hopes of ours, and have resolved to serve God; and this I begin
from this very hour in this very place. If thou be'est loath to follow me, do
not hinder me. The other answered, That he would stick to his Companion in so
great an Achievement, and of so great Merit. And both, now being Religious,
have built the Tower (says St. Augustine) with the proper Expense of Leaving
all and following Christ, and fixing their Heart in Heaven remain in that
Cottage.

Two other Courtiers, who had parted from them, and been walking in other parts
of the Gardens, coming to call them to return, they told them their Resolution,
and how it was wrought and confirmed in them: At which they, though not yet so
resolved, fell into Tears, and congratulating their State desired their
Prayers. But two Virgins, to whom these Converts had been contracted, when they
heard of it, did likewise consecrate their Virginity to the Lord.

And St. Augustine himself was so affected with the Relation of it by
Potitianus, who was one of those who returned, that it was a chief occasion of
his Conversion, and after many Conflicts in himself, which he expresses very
pathetically in the next chapter, he broke out at last into these earnest
Expressions to his Friend Alipius: What do we suffer? What is this? What have
thou heard? The Unlearned get up, and take Heaven by force; and we with all our
Learning, without heart, behold where we wallow in Flesh and Blood. Is it
because they are gone before, that we are ashamed to follow? and are we not
ashamed at least not to follow? And these throws of the New Birth never ceased
till his Conversion was perfected.

The LIFE of St. Antony, Originally Written in Greek BY St. ATHANASIUS, Bishop
of Alexandria, TO The Pilgrim Brethren.
YOUR Design of not only keeping pace with, but also of out-stripping the
Egyptian Monks in a virtuous Ascetick Course of Life, is an Entrance upon a
very generous and laudable Enterprise. You have at length, I find, got
Monasteries of your own, and a Platform of Monastic Discipline by you. There
is no one but must in Justice commend your Design; and no doubt but God will
bring it to Perfection, in case ye be but instant and constant in Prayer for
his Blessing.

And since you have an earnest desire of being informed, How St. Antony first
entered upon an Ascetick way of Living; and what manner of Man he was before;
and what sort of End he made at last; and whether the Reports that have passed
about him are true; in order, I presume, to bring your selves to an Emulation
of him; and hereupon have thought fit to request an Account of his Conduct from
my hands: Be ye hereby satisfied, that I have received your Command, and
received it with great Affection too; for the Truth of it is, the bare
Remembrance of St. Antony, is a Matter of great Advantage to me: Besides too, I
am very well satisfied, that when you have had an Account of this Man, you will
admire him so, as to rival and transcribe his Example; which indeed is a
Pattern so exact, that any Monk may form his Solitude by it; and therefore I
dare advise you not to dis-believe whatever you may have heard concerning him;
but rather to look upon common Reports, as strange as they may seem, to fall
far short of what St. Antony did and was: for truly his Fame does not come near
his Worth. And I must needs say, that what I send now to you concerning him in
this Letter, by reason of the Urgency of your Request, is only an imperfect
Relation of some few Passages of his Life, which are still fresh in my Memory.
And I desire you by no means to leave off Enquiring about him of Passengers
from all Quarters; for I am persuaded, did every one speak what they knew of
him, his Life would be found a Task too great for any Biographer to undertake
to perfect it: For which reason, as soon as your Letter had reached my hands, I
thought fit to send for some of those Monks who used frequently to visit him,
that by their Information my Narrative might be a little fuller than it is now.
But because the scantiness of the Seamens time and the have of the Pacquet-Boat
straightened me so, that I could not tarry till they came; I have used my utmost
Diligence to acquaint your Reverences with all that I knew my self, (for I have
often seen him) and could learn from a Person who was his Servant no small
time, and used to pour the Water on his Hands when he washed. I have all along
eyed the Truth, so that who-ever hears more than he will find here, may safely
give Credit to what he hears. Who-e'er knows less of him cannot choose but have
great Thoughts of St. Antony; but how-ever, cannot revere him so much as he
ought who Reads this.

1. ST. Antony was Born in Egypt, both of Rich and Noble, (and what is better
than both) of Christian Parents. And indeeed his exact Christian Life was a
clear Evidence of his Christian Birth. During his Childhood he was always kept
at home, being an utter Stranger to every Body but his Father's Family. And
after he was a little grown up, he could not endure to go to School, purely
because of an inbred Aversation to keeping Company with other Children: For he
had a strong desire to live, as we read of Jacob, like a plain Man dwelling in
Tents. When his Parents used to carry him to Church, (though but a Child) he
did not appear Listless or Lazy: Neither, as he grew up, did the least sign of
a refractory Spirit appear in him: But he was always very Obedient to his
Parents, and Attentive to the Prayers and Homilies, and strictly careful to
reap some Profit to his Soul from what he heard. Though he saw his Parents had
a great Estate, yet he never was concerned for dainty Victuals, or variety of
Dishes, being not in the least solicitous about matters of that kind; but was
always pleased with whatever was provided, and never desired any thing else.

2. At about Eighteen or Twenty Years of Age, at the most, he was left an
Orphan, with an only and very young Sister, and trusted by his Parents,
(notwithstanding he was so young) when they died, with the Management of the
whole Family and Estate, and the Education of his Sister. Before Six Months
after their Decease was expired, as he was going (according to his Custom) to
Church, and ordering his Faculties into a fit frame for Devotion, that Text (
Matt. 19.27.) of the Apostles leaving all to follow their Savior, came
particularly into his Mind in the midst of his Walk; as also concerning those
who in the Acts (Act. 4.35.) Sold their Estates, and brought and laid them at
the Apostles feet, to be distributed as every one had need; and what, and how
great an Hope remains laid up for them in Heaven: With these Thoughts he went
into the Church. Now it happened on that Day, that that part of the Gospel was
read where we read our Lord saying to the Rich Man, Matt. 19.21. If thou will
be perfect, Go sell all thy Possessions, and give unto the Poor, and then come
and follow me, and thou shall have Treasure in Heaven. This Lesson St. Antony
applied (as particularly directed to him) to himself; and hereupon embracing
the Remembrance of the generous Example of those Saints, as injected into his
Mind by God himself, accordingly parted with the Estate of an ancient Family,
in all 300 Measures (which the Egyptians call Arours) of very rich and fertile
Land, and distributed the Money, for which he sold it, among the Inhabitants of
the Village where he lived; that neither his own nor his Sister's Mind might be
encumbred with it any longer. His Movables he also Sold, and gave the Money to
the Poor.

3. And having reserved some small matter for his Sister, the next time he went
to Church he heard our Lord say in the Gospel, Matt. 6.34. Take no thought for
the Morrow: And therefore, without any more delay, he even went out
immediately, and distributed that too among the Poor. And having given her in
Charge to some experienced and trusty Virgins, to be Educated in their
Cloisters, he betook himself to an Ascetick Life without doors, keeping a very
close eye upon himself, and leading a very rigid and absteinous Life; for at
that time there scarcely were any settled Monasteries in Egypt, neither did any
Monk live in a remote Wilderness: But whoever had a mind to order himself very
severely, exercised himself in some solitary Place not far from his own Town.
At this time there was an Old Man in a neighboring Village that had obliged
himself to a solitary Life from his Youth. St. Antony having observed him, was
inflamed with Emulation, and at first continued alone in some place or other
that was hard by the Village. And wherever he heard of any studious and
zealous Courter of Virtue, like a provident Be, he would be sure to go and
find him out, never returning to his own Abode till he had seen him, and could
bring something back with him, which might serve for part of a Viaticum to bear
up his Spirit in his Progress to Heaven. After he had continued thus some time,
he squared his Mind with such exactness, as to resolve never to return again to
the Place where his Ancestors Seat was; nor so much as to bear the secular
Concerns of his Relations in his Memory any longer; that he might entirely
apply his Mind and Affections to a vigorous Assiduity in Asceticks. And
therefore he wrought with his own Hands, because it is written, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10.
Let not the Idle eat. Part of what he got by his Labor he subsisted on
himself, and part of it he gave to the Poor. He Prayed continually, because he
had learnt that we ought to pray incessantly in private. He attended so
diligently to the Scriptures, when read, that nothing fell to the ground from
him, but he held it so fast, that his Mind was as good as a Library to him. For
the sake of his Demeanor, he was beloved by all: He submitted, with great
readiness, to all virtuous Persons whom he visited: He would, with great
diligence, by himself mark every virtuous Person's Virtue, for which he was
peculiarly Eminent, and stamp them upon himself. In one, he would observe an
Obligingness of Carriage; in another, an unwearied Fervor in Prayer; in a
third, Calmness of Spirit; in a fourth, great Condescension and Charity: He
would very affectionately eye this Person's great Sprightliness, Vigilance, and
moderate use of Sleep; and another Man's Affability, Delight in the Scriptures,
and Readiness in Conferences on Spiritual Subjects: Here he admired one for his
Fortitude, Magnanimity, Patience, and Courage; there another for his Fastings,
hard Lyings upon the Ground, and other such like Arts of subduing the Body: But
principally, and above all, he would seal on his Heart and Soul that Piety and
vehement Affection for Christ, and stream of mutual Love, which was very
obvious and legible in them all. Thus he used constantly to go back to his own
Cell always fraught with such useful Observations as these; making himself the
Repository of all those Excellencies he could spy in others; whence he was wont
to elicit and display them in a bright and exemplary Conversation. All the
Contest he had with those of the same Age with himself, was, to be second to
none of them in Christian Discipline: In which sort of Victories he behaved
himself so modestly, that no body fretted at him for Envy; but rather, on the
contrary, took delight in taking Notice of him; insomuch, that the whole
Neighborhood that had any regard for Virtue, and all with whom he conversed,
observing his Goodness, used to call him Theophiles, or God's Friend: The
Elder, calling him Son; and the Younger, Brother.

4. But the Devil, who is envious, and hates every thing that is commendable,
could not endure to see such a noble Purpose in so young a Person; but made it
his Endeavor to thwart all his Designs to his Disadvantage.

At first he strove to bring him off of his Ascetick Course of Life, by
throwing into his Mind a Remembrance of his Estate, of the Nearness of his
Relations, and a Solicitude for them; a Love of Money, and Desire of Glory;
great Varieties of Pleasure, and other such Recommendations of the Methods of
the World; as also, Thoughts of the Ruggedness of Virtue, and how much Labor
it costs a Man to obtain it; and, to mention no more, of the Weakness of his
Body, and the long Remainder of his Life. In short, the Devil raised a great
deal of dust in his Thoughts, that by bemudding and disordering his Mind, he
might make St. Antony let go his Design. But as soon as the Enemy saw himself
too weak to foyl St. Antony's Resolution; and quite contrariwise, that he
himself was emasculated by the Holy Man's Steddiness, supplanted by a mighty
Faith, and fallen by reason of his continual and earnest Prayers, he assumed a
new Boldness and Confidence in those Weapons which he knows every Man carries
about him in his own Flesh against himself; for here he mostly lies in Ambush
against the Souls of the Young. Accordingly he renews his Assault against the
Youth, Night and Day attacking him with great Turbulence; insomuch, that
standers by could easily discern a Combat between them; for the Devil threw
filthy Thoughts into his Mind; and the Young Man routed them out as fast by
Prayers: the Adversary used his Policies to make his Body dissolute, and
rebellious; on the other hand, St. Antony fortified his Soul, and used his Body
hardly, and kept it under by Faith, and Fastings, and Tears, and earnest
Addresses to God. But still the Devil, though worsted, was very hardy, and
appeared to him in the Shape of a Woman, represented Beautiful in all respects,
only to impose upon St. Antony. But Antony, by placing the noble Extract of his
Spirit and intellectual Power in a clear view before himself, quenched this
Firebrand of Deceit. Nevertheless the Devil would yet be hinting the Softness
and Affectingness of this Pleasure; on the other hand, Antony, like an enraged
and exasperated Person, by revolving in his Mind God's Menaces of Fire, and the
Toil of those Furrows which the never-dying Worm ploughs in the Consciences of
the Damned, escaped free without being hurt, or so much as singed by his
Temptations. All which dashed the Enemy mightily out of countenance; for, he
that once thought of being equal with God himself, was now slighted and balked
by a Young Man; and he that generally vaunts and vapors so insolently over
Flesh and Blood, was now over-thrown by a Man, even whilst he wore his frail
Body of Flesh: For our Lord, who wore Flesh Himself for our sake, and gave the
Body a Conquest over the Devil, wrought and wrestled together with this Holy
Youth. So that every one who strives in good earnest with the Devil, may, with
good reason, say, Not I, but the Grace of God with me, 1 Cor. 15.57. At last,
the Devil perceiving that he could not overthrow and discourage Antony by this
Device, gnashing his Teeth, and being like one beside himself to see himself
drove out; he, who is really black in his Nature within, appeared in the form
of a Black Boy to Antony, and as it were lying at his Feet, (for the crafty
Spirit being turned out of his Heart, now no longer invaded his Thoughts)
assumed an Humane Voice, and said; I have deceived many, yea, verily, I have
worsted and deceived very many: But having now exerted my Strength against
thee, as against many others, I have been weakened and overcome. Who is this
(said Antony) that talks thus to me? The Devil answered in a wretched whining
Tone; To this Day I have plied soft fleshly Allurements in Young Persons, and
have been called, The Spirit of Fornication. How many, when willing to be
Sober, have I deceived? How many have I, by Hypocrisy, and sense-affecting
Motions, drawn aside? I am he of whom the Prophet speaks, Hos. 4.12. Ye have
been deceived by the Spirit of Fornication: 'Twas by me that they were tripp'd
up: I am he who have so often disturbed thee, and as often been humbled by
thee. Antony therefore having paid his Thanks to God, and being become more
valiant in Spirit, said; Hence it is plain that thou art very contemptible, for
thy Soul is black and swarthy, and thou art weak as a Child; neither will I,
for the future, give way to any Solicitude upon thy Account; for the Lord is my
Helper, and I shall look down upon mine Enemies with scorn; which he had no
sooner said, but the Black Monster fled away, being afraid to speak or come
near the Hero.

5. This was St. Antony's first Conflict with the Devil; or rather, (to speak
properly, and as I ought) this was our Lord's first defeat of the Devil in
Antony, who, Romans 8.3, 4. Condemned Sin in the Flesh, that the Righteousness of
the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not according to the Flesh, but the
Spirit. But for all this St. Antony did not neglect himself, as if the Devil
were entirely under his Feet: Nor did the Enemy, as though vanquished, desist
from forming Stratagems; for he ranged about, like a roaring Lion, seeking out
some pretense against him. Antony had learnt from the Holy Scriptures that the
Wiles of the Devil are many continually, and therefore continually gave himself
to exercise; considering, that since the Devil could not deceive his Heart by
Pleasure, he would try the more subtlely and diligently to do it by other
Methods; for the Devil is Sin's sure Friend. Wherefore Antony tamed his Body
more and more, lest after he had conquered in some Combats, he should be
dragged a Captive by him in others. Hence he resolves to accustom himself to
severer Discipline still. At which Resolution many were startled through
surprise. But however, he went through with it very patiently; for the bent of
his Soul having lasted a long time, wrought such a good habit in him, that he
seized on every, even the least Occasion of exerting his strenuous pursuit
after Virtue.

6. He watched so very much, that oft-times he lay without Sleeping all Night
long; and this not once, or so, but very often, to admiration. He eat once a
Day, after Sunset; sometimes but once in two Days; nay, and sometimes but once
in four Days. His Diet was Bread and Salt: His Drink only Water. Instead of a
Feather-Bed, he lay on a Mat; and sometimes on the bare Ground. He never
anointed himself, because he said 'twas more proper for the Younger to addict
themselves to Ascetick Exercises, than to seek out those things which
effeminate the Body: They should rather accustom themselves to labor, and to
bear the Apostle's saying in their Mind, 2 Cor. 12.10. When I am weak, then I
am strong; for then (said he) the Vigor of the Spirit is renewed, and becomes
Athletick, when the Pleasures of the Body languish and are impaired. This also
was an admirable Thought of his, (viz.) That he did not think it proper to
measure our Progress in Virtue, by the length of the Time we first set out, or
by our Retirement, so much as by our Divine Desires, and Longings, and the
Increase of our Holy Purpose. And therefore he would not remember the Time
past; but every Day, as though it were the first, he would express a more
ardent Thirst and Endeavor after a further Advance. Speaking by the way of
Soliloquie, that of the Apostle, Phil. 2.14. Forgetting that which is behind,
and pressing forward. And remembering the Voice of the Prophet Elias, who says,
2 King. 18.15. As the Lord of Hosts lives, before whom I stand, I will surely
show my self to day: for he observes from the Prophet's saying, To day, he did
not take a measure of the Time past; but every day, as if it were, laying the
first Foundation of his Virtue, he studied to approve himself such an one as he
ought to be before God; pure in Heart, and ready to obey his Will, and no ones
else. Every Christian Ascetick (said he) ought to see and learn within himself
his own Life from Elias, as in a Glass.

7. Antony having by this time, and by these means, recollected and simplify'd
himself, Traveled to the Tombs, which were at a considerable distance from
that Town, having first acquainted one of his Acquaintance with it, who
supplied him with Bread enough to subsist upon a good while. When he was got
thither, he went into one of the Tombs, and shut the door over his Head, and
tarried within there by himself.

Now the Devil not being able to away with this, and afraid lest, in a little
time, the whole Desert should be filled with Asceticks, came one night with a
great company of Devils, and beat and bruised him at that fearful rate, that he
lay a long time Dumb, because of the Extremity of his Torments; for he
protested his Pains were so great, that 'twas impossible Men should be the
Instruments of the like. But, by the Providence of God, (for the Lord does not
forget those who hope in Him) the Day after an Acquaintance came with some
Loaves to him, who, as soon as he had opened the door, seeing him lying along,
like a Dead Man upon the Ground, took him up and carried him to the
Town-Church, and laid him upon the Pavement, where many of his Relations and
Towns-People sat by him, (as they there used to do about the Corpse of the
Dead.) Now about Midnight Antony came to himself, and awoke, and saw all asleep
but himself and his Acquaintance that brought him from the Tombs. Antony
therefore becken'd to him, and desired him to carry him back to the Tombs,
without disturbing any of them. Accordingly his Friend carried him.

8. And when he was returned thither, shuting down the Tomb-top, he tarried
within there as before; and not being able to stand, because of the Stripes the
Devil gave him, he prayed lying prostrate; and after he had prayed, he said
aloud, I Antony am here; I don't run away for your Strokes or Terrors: For
though you inflict more upon me, nothing shall separate me from the Love of
Christ. Then he sung that of the Psalmist, Though Hosts encamp against me, yet
shall not my Heart be afraid. Thus did Antony think and speak: But the envious
Enemy, and hater of all Good, wondering to see him appear so confident in
spite of all that he endured, sounded his Hounds together, and being burst
with Envy, said; See here, we have not tamed nor tired this Man, either with
the Spirit of Fornication, or with our Stripes and Buffetings: on the contrary,
he is grown the more daring against us; let us therefore set upon him some
other way, (for the Devil has always new Schemes ready at hand to promote his
malicious Designs.) Wherefore, not long after, they came and made such a great
Noise in the Nightime, that the whole Monastery seemed to be shook, and the
Walls of the Cell to be broke through by the Devils transforming themselves
into the Shapes of all sorts of Beasts, Lions, Bears, Leopards, Bulls,
Serpents, Asps, Scorpions and Wolves; every one of which moved and acted
agreeably to the Creatures which they represented; the Lion roaring, and
seeming to make toward him, the Bull to but, the Serpent to creep, and the
Woolf to hare toward him, and so, in short, all the rest, according to their
Natural Motions; so that Antony was tortured and mangled with them so
grievously, that his Bodily Pain was greater now than before: However, he was
unmoved, composed, wakeful, and himself: He groaned indeed for Bodily Pains,
but he had a sober undisturbed Mind, and, as't were, laughing, he said; If ye
had any Strength, it would be enough for only one of you to come against me;
but because the Lord has enervated you, therefore ye thus try to scare me by a
Multitude; and (which is a manifest Indication of your Weakness) ye have put on
the Shapes of irrational Creatures. If ye have any Power, if ye have received
any Authority, don't delay, but seize me: But if ye have not Ability, Why do ye
trouble both me and your selves in vain? My Faith in God is a sufficient Seal
and Security of his standing by me. The Devils therefore having assaulted him a
long while to no purpose, gnash'd their Teeth at him; for they found they
mocked themselves more than they mocked him.

9. Moreover, the Lord did not forget Antony's Bravery at this time, but came
to his Help; for as Antony looked up, the Roof of the Cell was as it were
opened, and there was a Beam of Light shooting down, as it were, upon him;
whereupon the Devils straitway became Speechless; Antony's Pain too presently
ceased, and the Roof closed again. Now Antony being sensible of the Ease that
had been sent him, and that he had gained Breath, and respite from his Dolours,
spoke respectively to the Vision, and said; Where wast thou before? Why did
thou not appear at first, that thou might assuage my Pain? And a Voice said
unto him, Antony, I was here; but I waited to see thy Behavior under this
Trial; and since thou have valiantly gone through it, and have not been
conquered, I will always be thy Helper, and make thee famous in all Places.
Having heard this, he rose and prayed, and grew so strong, that he perceived he
had more Strength now in his Body than he had before; being now near the 35th
Year of his Life.

10. The Day following, as he was walking out, he found himself stronger bent
to the Exercise of Religion; and he went to that Old Man (whom I mentioned
before) that Night, and would fain have co-habited with him in the Desert: But
the Old Man refusing, because of his Age, and the Unusualness of the thing,
Antony immediately fled into the Mountain. Now the Enemy again observing his
Zeal, and being willing to retard it, laid the semblance of a large piece of
Plate in his way. Antony perceiving his Craft, and spying the Devil in the
Dish, chid it after this manner: Whence should this Dish come hither? This is
no beaten Road, neither is here any Traveller's tread: If it had been lost,
it is too big not to be recovered again presently: Doubtless it would have been
found if they had returned; and, doubtless, had any one lost it, he would have
returned, because the place is so solitary. This is certainly one of the
Devil's Tricks: But, however, thou shall not impede my Holy Purpose so: May it
perish with thee. No sooner was the Word uttered, but the Plate dis-appeared,
like Smoke before the Fire.

11. Another time he saw not only a resemblance, but real Gold thrown in the
way: Whether it was a bad Spirit, or some good Power that laid it there to try
the Hero, and to show the Devil that he did not value real Money, he neither
told me, nor do I know any more of it then that it was really what it appeared
to be. Antony wondered at the Abundance of it, and leaping over it, as a Man in
a Fright over a Fire, never stood so much as to look back upon it; but run away
so fast and so far, that he was latent a considerable Time after.

And now St. Antony continuing still more and more intent upon his Purpose,
placed himself in an empty Castle that was on the other side of the River;
though before he came 'twas full of reptile Creatures, yet when he went in the
Serpents left the Place, as though it had been haunted by an Enemy. Here, after
he had stopped up the Entry, he laid in Bread enough to serve him half a Year,
(which the Thebans often do; nay, sometimes they will continue without moulding
a Year together) and having a continued supply of Water within, he winded up
his Soul to God. There he continued always in his Monastery, having entered it,
as a Holy Chancel; neither stirring out himself, nor taking Notice of Comers;
only once in six Months he took in some Loaves at the top of the House.

12. Some of his Acquaintance came often to him, and because he would not let
them in, lived often without doors whole Days and Nights by him, and seemed to
hear a tumultuous rout within, bawling and wailing from within, and crying, Get
away from our place; What have you to do in the Wilderness, since you
countenance none of our Devices? Those that were without thought it might be
some Travelers that had got into him by Ladders at the top of the Castle; but
after they had leant down and peeped through a little crack and saw no body,
they concluded they were Devils; and being afraid, they called to St. Antony;
but he heeded the Devils more than them; and whereas they expected to have seen
him dead, they heard him saying, Let God arise, and his Enemies be scattered:
Let them vanish, as the Smoke vanishes: As the Wax melts before the Fire, so
Sinners shall perish from the Presence of God. And again; All Nations compassed
me round about; but in the Name of the Lord I stav'd them off.

13. Thus did he lead Twenty Years in private Exercise, never stirring out, or
seen by any one. But, at last, many others desiring to imitate his Ascetick
Life, and other Acquaintance coming to him, and breaking open the Door by
force, Antony came out of the Castle, as out of an inaccessible Sanctuary,
being matriculated a Member of the Heavenly Jerusalem, and become full of God.
The Spectators, when he came out, were in an Amaze, to see his Body, that had
been so belabour'd by Devils, in the same shape in which it was before his
Retirement. The Temper of his Soul was very pure; neither clouded by Sadness,
nor shattered by Voluptuousness: Neither Laughter nor Melancholy held him in
their Chains: The sight of the Multitude did not disturb him; nor their Praises
make him vain: But he was entirely smooth and regular, steered by Reason and
Revelation, and fixed in the primitive State of Nature. Our Lord healed many
Sick Persons by him. He also cleansed many that were possessed, comforted many
that were grieved, and reconciled many that were fallen out, charging them all
to prefer none of the Things of this World before the Love of Christ;
discoursing and exhorting them to be mindful of future Goods, and of the great
Philanthropy of God, who spared not his own Son, but gave Him up for us all. He
persuaded many to choose a solitary Life; and by this means there came to be
many Monasteries in the Mountains: So that now the Deserts were turned into a
City by Monks that left their Estates and Houses, and entered themselves Members
of the Heavenly City.

14. Once he had an Occasion to pass over the Trench of the Arsenoites, to see
some of his Brethren Monks; which Trench was very full of Crocodiles; but St.
Antony, and all that were with him, by the pure Virtue of Prayer, went over
unhurt. When he returned to his Monastery, he obliged himself to very severe
and youth-like Enterprises. By his Conferences he would be continually
increasing the Fervor of other Monks, and exciting many others to the Love of
Exercise; and by the magnetism of his Discourses many more Monasteries were
erected; all looking upon him as their Father.

15. One Day among the rest, as he was walking out, he told the other of his
Brethren Monks, (who came to him with a desire to hear him) in the Egyptian
Language, that the Holy Scriptures are sufficient for Instruction: But,
nevertheless, it is decent for us to confirm one another in the Faith by
Exhortation, and to cheer and anoint each other's Spirits by mutual Discourses.
Wherefore do ye, my Sons, bring your Father what ye know; and I, who am your
Elder, will communicate to you what I know by Experience: But besure, in a
peculiar manner, to take care to be communicative and unanimous; and that now
ye have begun, ye don't grow slack, nor faint in your Warsare; nor say with
your selves, We have laid out so much; item. so much Time upon Exercise: But
rather, as beginning every day, let us enlarge our Resolution; for the Life of
Man altogether is very short, if we compare it with future Ages: All our Time
is nothing to Eternal Life. Every thing else is Sold for its Value, and like is
Exchanged for like: But the Promise we have of Eternal Life is a cheap
Purchase. For it is writ, The Days of our Life are Seventy Years, and if by
great Strength we reach Fourscore, or more, they are but Labor and Sorrow.
Now, if we spend Eighty Years in Exercise, we shall not reign an Hundred Years
for it; but instead of an Hundred, we shall reign for ever and ever. Again;
After we have contended on Earth, our Inheritance will not be upon Earth; but
we hold Promises of Heaven. Again; After we have laid aside a Mortal Body, we
are clothed with an Immortal One. Wherefore, Children, let us not faint;
neither let us think we lay out much Time for God, or do any great Matters; for
the Sufferings of this present Life are not worthy to be compared with the
Glory that shall be revealed. Neither let us think that we have parted with
great Possessions; for the whole Earth is very small, with respect to Heaven.
For just as one who parts with a Mite, for an Hundred Broad Pieces: So, were
any one Lord of all the Earth, and parted with it for Heaven, he parts with a
Mite, and receives an Hundredfold. But if all the Earth is not worth Heaven,
then, certainly, he who leaves a few Acres for it, does, in a manner, leave
nothing at all. If, therefore, any of us parts with a Mansion, or with Gold, he
should neither vaunt nor despond: But we should rather consider, that if we
don't leave them for the Sake of Virtue; yet, afterward, when we Die, we often
leave them to whom we would not; as the Preacher has minded us. Shall we not
therefore leave it for the sake of Virtue, to inherit a Kingdom? Let us have a
Thirst after true Possessions; for, What does it signify to possess those
things which we cannot carry away with us? Let us rather acquire those Goods
which will follow us into the other World; such as are Wisdom, Justice,
Sobriety, Fortitude, Spiritual Prudence, Charity, Love of Wordly Poverty, Faith
in Christ, Freedom from Anger, Delight in Hospitality; if we possess these, we
shall find they will procure us a Mansion in the Land of the Meek. These things
duly considered no Person can be Negligent, especially if he consider that he
is the Lord's Servant, and ought to serve Him. Since therefore every one is his
Servant, no one should dare to say, I do not work to day, for I wrought
yesterday; or by measuring the time past, to be idle for the time to come. But
every day a true Disciple of Christ will show the same Readiness of Mind, that
(as it is written) he may please his Lord, and not run a risque in the Concerns
of his Soul. So also let us every day persevere in Exercise, knowing that if we
are Negligent one day, we shall not be pardoned for it, because we did well the
day before. No, God is offended with such Negligence as we read in Ezekiel. So
also Judas, by one Night's Impiety, lost the Fruits of his time past. Let us
therefore, Children, adhere to Exercise, and not suffer our Spirits to be
bejaded: for herein the Lord is our Fellow Laborer; as it is written, The Lord
co-operates for Good with every one that wills and works Good. Now, in order to
our not being Negligent, there is a Noble saying of the Apostle, on which we
should often meditate, 1 Cor. 15.31. I die daily: for if we so live as those, who
consider they may die every day, we shall not sin. Whence we learn every Day,
when we rise, not to reckon upon our stay till the Evening; and again, when we
lie down to sleep, to suppose we shall not rise; because our Life is uncertain
by Nature; which Providence daily measures out to us. By being thus disposed,
and living so every day, we shall not offend; nor lust after any forbidden
Object; or be angry with any one; or lay up treasure on Earth: But thus dying
every day, we shall be possessing nothing, and forgive all Offenses, being
freed from all desire of filthy Pleasure; reputing it as transeunt; always
striving, and having the Day of Judgment in our Eye: for a great fear of
Eternal Torments takes off the Appetite from excess of Pleasure, and rears up
the Soul when it begins to stoop. Wherefore, having set foot in the path of
Virtue, let us advance faster and faster: and that we may be Masters of all
Opportunities before us, let none of us look back, as did Lot's Wife; for our
Lord has positively said, that No one that puts his hand to the Plough, and
looks back, is fit for the Kingdom of Heaven. Now, by the Expression look back,
is meant nothing else but to change our Thoughts, and to relish the Things of
this World. Be not startled when ye hear any thing of Virtue; neither think
strange of the Name; for it is not far from us, nor without us; but the work is
in our Power, and an easy matter, if we have but an hearty Resolution. The
Greeks travel and cross the Seas to learn Letters; but we need not travel for
the Kingdom of Heaven; or to cross the Seas for Virtue; for our Lord has told
us before hand, Luke 17.21. The Kingdom of Heaven is within you: Wherefore
Virtue stands only in need of the Will, since it is within us, and built up out
of us: For Virtue consists of a Soul which has a primitive Natural Temper. Now
the Mind is so when it has that Temper wherein it was created. 'Twas created
very beautiful and upright; for which reason Jesus the Son of Nave bid the
People, Joshua 24.23. Incline your heart unto the Lord God of Israel: as John
also; Make strait your paths; for the Soul's being strait or upright, does
consist in its having its intellectual Faculty in that posture in which it was
created. Again; When the Soul bends, or is crooked, from Nature's posture, then
the Soul has Evil imputed to it: Wherefore, the Business is not so difficult as
some make it; for if we continue as we were made, we are in a State of Virtue:
But if we purpose things that are wicked, we are arraigned before God for
wicked Persons. If this Accomplishment were such, as that it must necessarily
be procured from without us, it would be difficult: But since it is within us,
let us keep our selves from evil, filthy Purposes; and having received so great
a Trust from God, let us keep our selves for God, that he may own his Work,
when he sees it such as he made it. Let us contend earnestly, lest Wrath
tyrannize, or Lust domineer over it; for it is written, The Wrath of Man works
not the Righteousness of God: But Lust, when it has conceived, brings forth
Sin; and Sin, when it is finished, brings forth Death.

But since the Case is so with us, let us be sincerely sober, and, as it is
written, Keep our Hearts with all Diligence: for we have shrewd and subtle
Enemies, even wicked Devils. To which I add, with the Apostle; We wrestle not
against Flesh and Blood; but against Principalities and Powers, against the
Rulers of this World, against Spiritual Wickednesses in high places; for there
is a vast rout of them in the Air against us: Nor are they far from us: But
there is a great difference in Devils.

But to speak of their Nature and Diversity would take up too much time: A
Narrative of that kind must be the work of greater Abilities: That which lies
upon us, as necessary to be known, is, their various Subtilties against us. And
here be it known, that the Devils were not by Nature, what they are by Name:
For God made nothing Evil: But they were created Fair and Good: But having
fallen from an Heavenly Prudence, and now wheeling about the Earth, they
deceived the Gentiles with their Fantasies. And now, that they envy us
Christians, they leave no stone unturned to hinder us from Entering into the
Kingdom of Heaven; lest we should get thither whence they fell: Wherefore we
stand in need of much Prayer and Exercise, till we obtain the Gift of
discerning of Spirits; for when once a Man has obtained that, he may be able to
know, which of them is more, and which less Wicked; and whither their different
Endeavors mostly tend; and by what Means every one of them may be conquered
and cast out: For they have several Wiles and Stratagems. Hence came that
Saying of the Apostle, and his Followers: For we are not ignorant of his
Devices, 2 Cor. 2.11. Since therefore we are tempted by them, we should be
setting one another's Souls to rights. Wherefore, I having partly experienced
their Wiles, do now, but as a Child, speak something to you about them. Well
then; If they observe any Christians, especially Monks, laboring hard to make
a considerable Progress in Virtue, they assault and tempt them, by laying
continual obstacles in their way, (viz.) evil Thoughts. But, however, we should
not be afraid of their Threats; for by Prayer, and Fasting, and Faith in God,
they quickly fall. But after they have been thrown, they don't desist; but
presently come again subtlely and deceitfully; for if they cannot cheat our
Hearts by gross Pleasures, they will assault us another way, striving to
terrify us by false Appearances, and transforming themselves into the Shapes
of Women, Beasts, Serpents, Bulky Bodies, and Armies of Soldiers: Even then
our Hearts should not mis-give us; for they are nothing, and presently
dis-appear; especially, if the Christian immures and fortifies himself with the
Faith, and the Sign of the Cross: But still they are very bold and impudent:
for when they have been thus vanquished, they set upon us another way, and
pretend to Prophecy, and foretell things to come: Also to scare us, they will
represent themselves so Tall, as to touch the Cieling, and proportionably
Broad, that they may steal those away by such Delusions, whom they could not
deceive by their Sophistry. But if they find a Soul so secured with Faith, and
that Hope which attends true Repentance, as to resist them still; at last they
bring the Prince of the Devils.

16. He said also that the Devil often appeared just as he is described in Job
41.18, 19, 20. His Eyes are like the Eyelids of the Morning. Out of his Mouth
go burning Lamps, and sparks of Fire leap out. Out of his Nostrils goes Smoke,
as out of a Seething-pot or Caldron. When the Prince of the Devils makes such a
figure, the old Impostor strikes Terror upon Flesh, and speaks very big. And
therefore he is upbraided, where we read; He esteems Iron as Straw, and Brass
as rotten Wood, and looks upon the Sea as a Pot of Ointment, and the deep Abyss
as his Conquest; even the Abyss is to him as a Walk. And by the Prophet, Ezekiel.
15.9. the Enemy said, I will, and will overtake. And again by another Prophet,
Isa. 10.14. I will grasp the whole Earth in my hand like a Nest, and take it up
like forsaken Eggs. And to speak all in one Word, they often make such Brags
and Promises only to deceive those who worship God. But we that are Faithful
should not fear his Appearances; nor give ear to his Words; for he is a Liar,
and speaks not a true Word: For, in truth, notwithstanding all his Vaunting,
our Savior draws him, like the Leviathan, by a Hook. Job 41.1. Like an Ox, he
has an Halter upon his Head, and his Nostrils are bored with a Ring, and his
Lips with an Hoople of Disgrace, like a Fugitive. He is tied, like a Sparrow,
by the Lord, so that we may justly deride him. He and his Crew crawl now like
Serpents: So that now he may be trod upon by us Christians. This is a certain
Sign that our way of Living mads and crosses him; for he, who before vapour'd
that he would make the Sea like a Pot of Ointment, and clinch the Earth in his
Fist, lo! now he cannot so much as hinder you from Exercise; or keep me from
speaking to you against him. Wherefore we mind not what he says; neither do we
shrink for his Objections and Lies; for there is nothing but a seeming light in
them: They are only, as it were, the Portraitures of the Fire prepared for
them. They would fain fright us with those Fires with which they will be
tormented themselves; but they are quickly detected in their Falacies, and do
not hurt the Faithful: But only give us a semblance of that Fire with which the
Wicked will be tormented. Wherefore, it behooves us not to fear; for all their
Devices, through the Grace of Christ, come to naught; for they are full of
Guile, and ready to be transformed into all Shapes. Hence it is that they often
pretend to sing Psalms, and cite the Scriptures; and sometimes whilst we are a
Reading, they give us Echoes of what we read; and often, in our Sleep, raise us
up to Prayers. And this they will do continually, not suffering us to rest:
Nay, and sometimes they will put on the Religious Habit of Monks, and talk like
Religious Persons, that they may deceive us by such Appearances; and when we
are deceived, lead us whither they please: But we should not give ear (or
listen) to them at all. No; though they wake us to pray, and advise us not to
eat at all; or pretend to condemn and deject us for those Matters in which they
before encouraged us: for they don't do this out of a Principle of Religion, or
Truth; but that they may bring the Simple into Despair, and make them apt to
say, Exercise is unprofitable, and so make them nauseate a Solitary, as a very
grievous and burdensome way of Living, and may entangle those who have entered
into a Course of Self-Government. Wherefore a Prophet, whom the Lord sent, has
declared such Miserable: Hab. 2.15. Woe be to him who offers his Neighbors
thick dregs to drink; because such Schemes and Purposes do turn us out of the
Path that leads up to Virtue: for our Lord Himself muzzled the Devils, though
they spoke Truth, and commanded them to be silent; for they did speak Truth
when they said, Thou art the Son of God, Matt. 8.29. Mark 1.25. lest with the
Truth, they also slily sow their Perverseness with the more Advantage; and that
he may accustom us not to hearken to them, though they seem to speak Truth; for
it is very unseemly for us, who have the Holy Scriptures, and Deliverance by our
Savior, to be taught by the Devil, who kept not his own Station, but studied
Disorder: For this Reason he is forbid, Psalm. 50.16. to quote Scripture; Unto
the Wicked, said God, wherefore do thou utter my Statutes, and take my
Covenant in thy Mouth: for they do pretend, and disturb all things to delude
the Simple: Sometimes they stamp, sometimes they laugh, and sometimes they
hiss. But when one regards them not, then they weep and lament, as vanquished:
For this Reason the Lord God muzzled the Devils. We therefore having learnt
this from the Holy Scriptures, ought to resist them, and imitate their
Resoluteness and Stratagems against us. Pray eye the Example of David, Psalm.
39.2. Whilst the Wicked was before me I was deaf, and still, and held my
peace, even from good Words: And again, Like a deaf Man I heard not, and as one
who is dumb I opened not my my Mouth: I became like a Man who does not hear.
Wherefore let us not hear them, as being Strangers to us; nor obey them,
although they wake us to go to Prayers, or talk about Fasts: But rather let us
attend to the Purpose of our Exercise, and not be deceived by them, who always
act with Deceit: Neither let us be afraid, though they should come with Force
against us, and threaten to kill us: for they are weak, and can do nothing but
threaten: But this by the By: But now I think of it, I must not think much to
speak more largely of these matters to you; for a Remembrance of them will be
safe for you. When our Lord was a Pilgrim upon Earth, the Enemy fell, and his
Forces were weakened. For this Reason he, a Tyrant, though fallen, is not at
rest yet; but threatens us with Words. Think of this all of ye, and despise the
Devil. Were they confined to such Bodies as these, they might possibly say, Men
lie hid, and we do not find them: But when we do find them, we make work with
them. But if the Case were so with them, we might hide our selves, by shutting
the Doors against them: But since it is not so; but their Nature, on the
contrary, is such, that they can enter in even when the Door is shut, and they
themselves are all over, and all about us in the Air, together with their
Principal, the DESTROYER; and do always will Mischief, and are ready girt to do
it; and the Devil, as our Savior has told us, the Father of Mischief, John
8.44. is a Murderer; and we now live a Life of War against him: it is plain now,
that notwithstanding they are not embodyed, they have no Strength; and
therefore their Weakness cannot be imputed to the Confinement of Bodies; for no
Place hinders them from laying their Snares; neither do they spare us because
we are their Friends; neither are they Lovers of Good, to rectify us: But they
are rather more Wicked. And there is nothing about which they are so
solicitous, as to mischief us, and all the Friends of Virtue, and of the true
worship of God. But because they are able to do nothing, therefore they are
continually pretending and threatening: Could they do any thing, they would not
delay; but they would put their Mischief in Execution; for their Design against
us is inveterate. Ye see we are here together, and speak against them in spite
of their Teeth, and they do know that they are weakened by our Proficiency in
Virtue. Had they Power and Authority, they would not suffer one of us
Christians to live; for Piety is an Abomination to a Sinner. And having not
such Power, they wound and vex themselves the more, because they cannot put
their Threats in Execution: This should often be in our Thoughts, that we may
not be afraid of them. Had they any Power remaining in them, they would not
have came in such a Multitude, or put on such Appearances, or have transformed
themselves for Stratagems sake. Were it otherwise, the Strength of one would
have sufficed to have done what he list. For a Wicked Being, that is invested
with Power, does not kill in Effigy, or terrify by Multitudes, but abuses his
Power as he pleases: But the Devils being stripped of their Power, like Actors on
a Stage, shift themselves into many Shapes, which only fright Children: And
therefore their Weakness should render them contemptible in our Eyes. The true
Angel, (of whom we read, 2 Kings 19.35.) who was sent by the Lord, stood in no
need of Multitudes, or outward Appearances, or Shoutings, or Clappings, but
made use of his Power without Noise; and strait-way killed an Hundred and
Eighty Five Thousand. Only weak Angels strive to terrify by Phansies.

17. But if any one here should have Job's Case in his Thoughts, and ask, How
came the Devil to do so much against Job? He plumed him of his Estate, killed
his Children, and struck his Body with a grievous Ulcer. I answer such an one,
the Devil had no Power; but God gave it him for the Trial of Job: Being able to
effect nothing of himself, and without leave, he requested Power, and got it:
And therefore the Devil is the more to be despised, because he had not Power,
so much as against one Righteous Person; for had he had it, he would not have
requested it. His having begged it, not only once, but a second time, shows
that he had not Power. And truly we need not wonder that he had no Power
against Job; for he could not hurt mere Brutes, without God's Permission. Matt.
8.31. He has no Authority, no not so much as over the Swine: for it is written,
that they entreated the Lord, saying, Suffer us to go into the Swine. Now, if
they have no Authority over the Swine, much less over Men, who were made after
God's Image: God alone ought to be feared: As for Devils, they should be
despised, not dreaded in the least. The more they level against us, the more
intent let us be upon Exercise; for an upright Life, and Faith in God, is a
very serviceable piece of Armor against them. They are afraid of the Fasting,
the Prayer, the Vigilance, the Meekness, the Contentedness, the Contempt of
Money and Glory, the Lowliness and Love of Poverty, the Alms and Meekness of
Asceticks; but principally, of their Piety to Christ. This is the Reason why
they make such a bustle, that there may be none to trample on them: For they
are very sensible that Christians have Grace given them by our Savior against
themselves: For He himself says, Luke 10.19. Behold, I have given you Power to
tread upon Serpents and Scorpions, and every Power of the Enemy. Whenever
therefore they pretend to foretell future things, let no one presume to regard
them: For sometimes they tell us of Brethren, that meet us some Days after, and
accordingly we meet them. But this they do without any principle of Kindness to
them, to whom they tell it: For they do it only to persuade them to believe
them in other Matters; and having once got them in their Clutches, they, at
length, find an Opportunity to undo them. Therefore we must not give them the
Hearing, but reject them, and tell them, We do not want to know such
unnecessary Matters. Besides too, What wonder is it if they, whose Bodies are
so much finer than Men's, when they have seen Persons set out upon a Journey,
get before them, and give Notice of it? Has not an Horseman the same Advantage
of one who travels on Foot? We need not therefore admire them for this: For
they do not foretell of things that are not; God alone knows things before they
are. To how many do these Devils run, like Thieves, beforehand, and tell them
what we are now a doing, and how we are Discoursing against them, before any of
us depart hence, and acquaint others with it? but, Cannot any that runs do the
same trick by one that walks gently? To make this familiar by an Instance;
Suppose a Person begins to walk from Thebes, or any other Town, and the Devils,
before he begins to walk, don't know that he will walk; but when they see him
walking, run beforehand, and give Notice of it before he is come, and
accordingly he comes at the time mentioned; Can this be called a Prediction?
nay, oftimes when those who began to walk return back, they deceive them. In
like manner they trifle about the River-Water; for having seen many Rains fall
in some Quarters of Egypt, and thence conjecturing, that the River will
overflow before the Water come to Egypt, they run and give Notice of the Flood:
Which Men might easily do if they could run so fast. They are just like David's
Spies, who (2 Kings 13.14.) went up to the top, and saw a Person coming, before
him that tarried below. This is to foretell things that are already upon the
Anvil, instead of foretelling future Events. Thus these Spirits tell one
another, Such a Person is Sick, or the like, only that they may deceive:
Whereas, should Providence (as He can) decree any contrary Accident concerning
the Waters, or the Travelers, the Devils have falsify'd, and those that minded
them are deceived. Thus the Prophesies of the Greeks were packed together, and
they were deceived by the Devil in former times; and, at length, a period was
put to their Deceit: for the Lord came and brought the Devils with their
Subtleties to naught. For they see nothing of themselves; but, like Thieves,
carry away what they see from others: So that they are rather Conjecturers,
than Foretellers. Let no one therefore admire them, if they speak Truth
sometimes: For just so Physicians, after they have observed in others the same
Diseases, by Symptoms and comparing, give Notice of them in their Patients. So
also Mariners and Husbandmen observe the Temper of the Air, and, by Use,
forebode that there will be a Storm, or a Calm, Now, no one says, such foretell
from Divine Providence; but from Experience and Custom. Wherefore, if the
Devils do so, they neither deserve Admiration, nor Attention: for, What
Advantage can it be to know such things beforehand, if they be true? for such
Knowledge as this neither contributes to Virtue, nor Good Manners. No one is
judged for what he does not know of this kind, nor benefitted by having learnt
it: But every Man is judged by God and himself, whether he has kept the Faith,
and observed his Commands: To this we should give great Attendance. Our
Exercise and Contention should be, not to foreknow; but to walk well-pleasing
in God's Sight. And we ought to Pray, not that we may foreknow, nor to request
this as the Reward of our Exercise; but that our Lord may work with us toward
our obtaining a Victory over the Devil.

But if we find our selves solicitous to foreknow, [indeed] let us be pure in
our Minds; for, I do believe that a Soul, in every respect pure, and brought to
its primitive Frame, may become so discerning, as to see, by the Revelation of
our Lord, both more and remoter Events too, than Devils. Just so the Soul of
Elisha saw Gehazi, 2 Kings 5.25. and the Hosts standing before him, 6.17.

18. When, therefore, they come in the Night, and are willing to tell things,
or say, We are good Angels, believe them not; for they lie: Or, if they praise
your Exercise, or call you Happy, believe them not; neither submit so far to
them as to hear them. But rather cross your selves and your Families, and pray
together, and ye shall see them vanish: for they are dastardly, and dread the
Sign of our Lord's Cross, because by that our Savior made them bare, and
publicly exposed them, Col. 2.15. Moreover, if they grow more and more
Impudent, and leap about wantonly in various Shapes, don't be afraid, or attend
to them as good Spirits; for, by God's Assistance, 'twill be possible, nay
easy, to distinguish between the Presence of a Good and a Bad Spirit: For, the
Appearance of Holy Spirits is not with Disturbance and Disorder, Matt. 12.19.
for, He will not strive, nor cry, neither does any one hear their Voice. But a
Good Spirit visits in such a sweet and delectable manner, that Joy, and
Transport, and Confidence, presently cover the Soul that is visited: For, the
Lord is with them, who is our Joy; and the Power of God the Father. Besides
too, when they visit, the Thoughts of the Soul are free from Consternation and
Wavering: For the Soul, being enlightened by such a Vision, views with Ease the
Spirits that appear. Furthermore, it has a certain desire of Divine and future
things seizing it, and is willing to join with the Spirits, and to go out with
them. And if those, to whom they appear, be afraid of the Vision, they
presently take away the Fear by Love, as Gabriel did from Zachary, Luke 1.13.
As also, the Angel which appeared to the Women at the Divine Tomb, Matt. 28.5.
A Testimony of this Truth too, is, that saying of the Shepherds in the Gospel,
Luke 12.10. Be ye not afraid: for the Fear of Good Men is not a Fear of
Pusillanimity; but it proceeds from the Sense of the Advent of superior
Beings. So much concerning the Nature of the Vision of Good Angels.

But the Incursion and Appearance of Evil Spirits is disturbed with Noise, and
Clamor, and Brawling, like the Hurlyburly of untaught Boys, or High-way-men:
whence proceeds Timidity of Soul, Confusion, and Ataxy of Thoughts, Grief,
Hatred of Asceticks, great Despondence, Tediousness, Remembrance of Relations,
and Fear of Death: in short, Lusting after Evil things, Wearisomness of Virtue,
and Disorderliness of Morals. Wherefore, after you have been frighted with a
Vision, if your Fear be presently taken away, and there succeed in the room of
it a Joy unalterable, and you find within your self Cheerfulness, and
Confidence, and Refreshment, and Composedness of Thought, and all the other
things which I mentioned before, as Manlyness, and Love toward God, take
Courage and pray; for Joy and Steddiness of Soul discovers the Holiness of the
Spirit that is present. Thus Abraham, when he saw the Lord exulted, John 8.56.
And John, when he heard a Voice from Mary, Mother of God, leaped for Joy: But
if there be Confusion in those that appear, and Noise from without, and Wordly
Fantasies, and Threatenings of Death, with the other Disorders abovementioned,
then know that it is the Sally of Wicked Spirits. Let this be a Common Rule, If
the Soul be fearful, there are Enemies in sight; for they are Devils that don't
take away that Fearfulness, as the great Archangel Gabriel did from Mary, and
Zachary, and the Angel that appeared at the Tomb from the Women: But Wicked
Angels, when they see Men afraid, they increase their Fantasies, that they may
dread them the more: and so, at last, they assault them, and jeer them, and bid
them fall down and worship. Thus they deceived the Gentiles. By this Means they
that were not Gods, were falsely called Gods. But our Lord has not suffered us
to be deluded by the Devil, whom he rebuked, when he was exciting such Fancies
in Him, Luke 4.8. Get thee behind me Satan: for it is written, Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and Him only shall thou serve. Let therefore the
crafty one be more and more despised: For what our Lord spoke, he spoke for our
sake, that the Devil, hearing the same Words from us, may be overturned by the
Power of the Lord, who so rebuked them then.

19. But when we have cast out Devils we should not vaunt, neither when we have
cured Diseases should we be lifted up; or admire one that casts out Devils, or
despise one that does not cast them out: But, let every one mind every one's
Discipline, and either imitate or emulate it, or rectify it. For doing of
Signs and Wonders is not our Business: This belongs to our Savior. Hence, Luke
10.20. He says to his Disciples, Rejoice not because the Devils are subject
unto you; but because your Names are written in Heaven: For our having our
Names written in Heaven is a Testimony of our Virtue and regular Life: But to
cast out Devils is the pure Gift of our Savior, who gave it. Whence we read,
Matt. 7.22. that to those who glorying, not in their Virtue, but in Signs,
said, Lord, have we not cast out Devils in thy Name? and in thy Name done many
Wonders? Our Savior said, Truly, I say unto you, I know you not: for the Lord
knows not the ways of the Ungodly. In short, as I said before, we should always
pray for the Gift of discerning of Spirits, that, as it is written, (1 John
4.1.) we may not believe every Spirit.

20. I thought, indeed, now to have concluded, and been silent of what
concerned my self, and to have contented my self with giving these Memento's.
But that ye may not think I speak these things idly, but do declare them from
Experience, and a Knowledge of the Truth, therefore (though I become as a Fool
thereby, however, the Lord knows the Purity of my Conscience, and that I do not
do it for my own sake, but out of Love to you, and to encourage you,) I will
further acquaint you with some of them. As often as they applauded me, when I, in
the Name of the Lord, cursed them: when they would be foretelling the Overflow
of the River, and I asked them, What need you concern your selves about that?
when once they came threatening and surrounding me, like Soldiers accoutred and
horsed; and another while filled the House with Wild Beasts and creeping
Creatures, and I sung Psalm. 19.8. These in Chariots, and they on Horses; but we
will rejoice in the Name of the Lord our God; they were presently routed by the
Mercy of Christ. Another time when they came and made an Appearance of Light in
the Dark, and said, We are come, Antony, to lend thee our Light: but I prayed,
shutting my Eyes, because I disdained to behold their Light, presently the
Light of the Ungodly was put out. A few Months after they came singing, and
talking out of the Holy Scriptures; but I, as though Deaf, hearkened not to
them, but prayed that I might abide unshaken in my Mind. After this they came
and made a Noise, and hissed and danced; but as soon as I prayed, and lay along
singing by my self, they presently began to wail and weep, as though they were
spent: But I glorified God, who plucked down their Boldness, and exposed their
Fury. Once there came a Devil, very tall in Appearance, that dared to say, I am
the Power of God, and I am Providence, What would thou have me bestow upon
thee? But I spit upon him, and, having named the Name of Christ, endeavored to
beat him; nay, and I seemed to beat him; and he immediately, at the Naming of
Christ, as great as he was, disappeared with the rest of the Devils. And when
he came, as I was fasting in a Monk's Habit, with Loaves in his Arms, and said,
Eat, and take some Refreshment (you toil more than you need) otherwise you will
grow weak; for you are a Man: But I observed his Stratagem, and rose up to
Pray; which he not enduring to see, presently failed, and, going out of Doors,
disappeared like Smoke. As often as he laid Gold before me, to touch it, and see
it, I fell to Psalmody; and then he would pine. As often as they beat me with
Stripes, I said, Nothing shall separate me from the Love of Christ; and after
that they beat one another. However, it was not I that vanquished them, but the
Lord, who said, Luke 10.18. I saw Satan falling, like Lightning from Heaven.

Now I, my Children, being mindful of the Apostle's Saying, applied this to my
self, that ye may learn not to faint, nor be afraid of the Devil and his
Agents. And since I have been a Fool in telling this, receive from what I have
said a Spirit of Fear, and believe me; for I don't lie. Once one of them
knocked at the Door of my Cell, and when I opened it, I saw a tall Figure; and
when I asked him, Who art thou? He answered, I am Satan: said I, What makes you
be here? He answered, Why do all the Monks, and other Christians, blame me
undeservedly? Why do they hourly curse me? said I, Why do thou trouble them?
said he, I don't disturb them: But they trouble themselves; for I am weak.
Surely they have not read, Psalm. 9.7. O thou Enemy, Destructions are come to a
perpetual End; and thou have destroyed Cities. I have no longer a Place, an
Arrow, or a City: There are now Christians every where; and, at last, the
Desert is filled with Monks. Let them preserve themselves, and not curse me to
no purpose. Then I admiring the Grace of the Lord, said unto him, Thou art
always a Liar, and never speak Truth: Thou have spoke the Truth to me (now)
against thy Will: for Christ being come has made thee weak and bare. After he
had heard the Name of our Savior, which scorched him so that he could not
endure it, he disappeared. If therefore the Devil himself owns that he is weak,
it is our Duty always to despise him and his Agents. Thus ye see how many Wiles
the Enemy, with his Hounds, has against us: But I, having learnt his
Weaknesses, have showed my Contempt of him those several ways which I have
mentioned to you. Don't let us sink in our Minds, or form or entertain Fears
within our selves, saying, Lest the Devil come and overthrow us, and, of a
sudden, take us up, and throw us down, and put us out of Order. Let us have
none of these Thoughts, nor be Sorrowful, as though we were perishing: But
rather let us rejoice and be glad, as being in the Number of those who shall be
saved; and consider with our selves, that the Lord is with us, who have
triumphed over Devils, and put them to flight; and let us always think, that,
the Lord being with us, our Enemies can do us no harm: for they deal with us
differently, according as they find us differently disposed; and according to
the Thoughts which they find within us: Thus, if they find us dastardly and
disturbed, they form strange Fancies within us; just like Cutthroats and
Robbers; they presently seize upon the place which they find unguarded.
Whatever we think of our selves, to that they will be sure to add; If we are
dejected, they increase our Timerousness, by injecting Fancies and Threats; and
so the miserable Soul is tortured by them. But if they find us rejoicing in the
Lord, and discoursing of Matters that do relate to Him, seeing the Soul fenced
with such Thoughts, they are confounded and turn aside; because all things are
in the Lord's Hand, and a Devil prevails not against a Christian. When the
Enemy saw Job immured thus, he run away from him: But when he found Judas
destitute of these, he took him Captive. So that if we would despise the Enemy,
we should always think of the things that relate to the Lord; and our Souls
would be always rejoicing in Hope; and we should see all the Devil's ludicrous
Tricks be like Smoke, and they themselves rather flying than pursuing. For, as
I told you before, they themselves are very fearful, always expecting the Fire
prepared for them. Take this therefore for a Sign not to be afraid of them;
When any Spirit appears, faint not for Fear; But be the Vision what it will,
first boldly ask, Who art thou, and Whence? and if it be the Appearance of a
Good Spirit, thou will presently be strengthened with Plerophory, and turn thy
Surprise of Fear into Joy: But if it be a Diabolical Appearance, it presently
fails, when it sees thy Mind strong; for thy asking, Who, and whence art thou?
is a Sign of the Ataxy of thy Mind. Thus Joshua the Son of Nave, Josh. 5.13.
learnt by asking: and the Enemy was not concealed when Daniel asked.

Antony having discoursed after this manner, they all rejoiced, insomuch, that
their Love of Virtue was increased, and the Negligence of some was shook off,
and the Opinionativeness or Self-Conceit, and Vainglory of others ceased; and
all were persuaded to despise the Devil's Treachery, admiring the Grace that
was given to St. Antony by our Lord for his Exercise.

21. The MONASTERIES now were like so many Sacred Tabernacles, full of Divine
Choirs, singing and delighting in Holy Conferences, and Fasting and Praying,
and exulting in the Hope of future Goods, and working to give Alms, and
Exercising mutual Love, and unanimous Symphony among themselves. So that you
might see there, of a Truth, a Land of Piety and Righteousness by it self: For
there was neither an Injurious nor an injured Person, neither any Complaint of
the Oppressor: But a Multitude of Asceticks, having one and the same Ardour
for Virtue; insomuch, that one amongst the rest of the Spectatours, seeing such
Monasteries, and regular Discipline, could not forbear crying out, as we read,
Numb. 24.5, 6. How goodly are thy Dwellings, O Jacob, and thy Tabernacles, O
Israel! As the shady Vales are they spread forth, and as the Parks beside the
Rivers, and as the Tents which the Lord has fixed, and as the Cedars by the
Waters side.

22. St. Antony therefore, often retiring himself into his Monastry, daily grew
Vigorous in Exercise, and groaned, longing for Mansions in Heaven, because he
longed for them, and observed the frail Life of Man: Whenever he was about to
eat, or drink, or sleep, or serve any other Bodily Necessities, he blushed; for
he thought upon the Dignity of his Intellectual part: So that oftentimes, when
he was going to eat with other Monks, and called to Remembrance his Spiritual
Food, he refused, and retired to eat alone, thinking he should blush if he was
seen Eating by them. When he eat alone, 'twas purely out of Necessity:
Sometimes, though very seldom, he eat with his Brethren: But, though 'twere
with Blushing, he took the Liberty to acquaint his Brethren, for their Benefit,
that they should lay out their Leisure rather on their Soul, than their Body,
lest it be weighed down by the Pleasures of the Body, which ought to be in
Subjection to it. For our Savior has said, Take no thought for your Life, what
you shall eat; nor for your Body, what ye shall put on: Do not seek what ye may
eat, nor what ye may drink, neither aim at high things; For all these things
the Nations of the World seek; for your Father knows that ye need them; and all
these things shall be added unto you.

23. Not long after the Emperor Maximinus Persecuted the Church; and some Holy
Martyrs being carried to Alexandria, he left his Monastry and followed them,
saying to his Friends, Let us also go and combat; or see those who do: for he
was Ambitious of Martyrdom. But, not being willing to deliver up himself, he
ministered to the Confessors in the Mines and Prisons, and showed great
Diligence in the Court of Judicature, comforting and spurring on those that
were called to it, and attending them till they were Crowned Martyrs.
Wherefore, the Judge observing the Fearlesness and Assiduity of Antony, and of
those that were with him, ordered that no Monk should appear in the Court, nor
so much as live in the City; so that all the rest seemed to abscond that Day:
But St. Antony took this so much to thought, that he washed his Scapulary the
cleaner the Day after, and stood foremost on an high place before the Judge's
Face. And though all Persons admired at it, and the Governor, as he passed by
with his Train, took Notice of it; yet he stood unmoved, showing the Readiness
of the Christians to die: For, as I said before, he wished to die a Martyr, and
appeared very much grieved because he did not. But the Lord preserved and
reserved him for our Benefit, and the Advantage of many more, that he might be
a Teacher to many, by the Exercise which he learnt out of the Holy Scriptures;
for the bare sight of his Discipline inflamed many others to imitate his Life.
Wherefore, he again visited the Confessors, as he used; and, as it were bound
up together with them, he labored to serve them. But after that Persecution,
in which the Blessed Bishop Peter suffered Martyrdom, ceased, he pilgrimag'd
and retired again to the Monastry, where he was daily a Martyr in Conscience,
and fought the Combats of Faith: For there he used himself to much and stricter
Exercise; for he always fasted. His inner Garment was Hair-cloth, his upper of
Leather; which was the Habit he wore to his dying Day; neither washing the dirt
off his Body, no, nor so much as his Feet, unless they were wet by chance, when
he waded through Water on a Journey.

24. Now, when he had thus retired, and resolved to continue in that State some
time, without ever going abroad, or entertaining any Company. There came to him
one Martinian, a Colonel, who had a Daughter troubled with a Devil, and was
very troublesome to him; and after he had stood a long while knocking at the
Door, and entreating him to come, and pray to God for his Daughter, Antony
would not suffer him to break open his Door; but leaning out of the top, said,
Man, Why do thou stand crying thus? I am a Man as well as thou: If thou
believe, pray to God, and it is done presently. The Colonel therefore prayed
to God with Faith, and went his way, and his Daughter was cleans'd from the
Devil. Many other things did our Lord by him: Wherefore we do not read in vain,
Matt. 7.7. Ask, and it shall be given you. For many that were Sick, and only
sat without the Monastry, by Faith and Prayer were Cured. But as soon as he saw
himself thus disturbed by a great many People, and not permitted to retire,
according to his Purpose and Desire, and fearing lest, from what the Lord did
by him, he should be lifted up, or any one else, upon that account, should
think of him beyond what he ought, he thought, and was resolved to go to the
upper Thebais, where no body knew him; and having took some Loaves of his
Brethren, he sat down by the River Banks, watching for a Vessel to get over. In
the mean while came a Voice from Heaven, saying, Antony, Whither go thou,
and wherefore? Antony, without any Commotion, or Disorder of Mind, (for he was
used to such extraordinary Occurrences) said, Since the Multitude will not let
me be at rest here, I have a mind to retire in the upper Thebais; and so much
the rather, because they require things above my Strength. Then replied the
Voice, Should thou go thither, thou would have double the Trouble to
undergo: But if thou would be quiet, indeed, go into the inner Wilderness.
But, Who (said Antony) shall show me the way, for I don't know it? And the
Voice presently directed him to some Sarazens that were traveling that way.
Whereupon Antony made up to them, and requested to walk with them to the
Wilderness. They, as it were by the Order of Providence, received him readily.
By that time he had traveled with them three Nights and three Days, he came to
a very high Mountain. Now, under the Mountain there was fine, clear, cool,
sweet, trembling Water; and without the Plain, a few Wild Palm Trees that had
been neglected. Antony, as being sent thither by God, was in Love with the
Place; for this was the Place of which the Voice (that spoke to him upon the
Banks of the River) gave him Notice. Having at first took with him some of his
Fellow-Travellers Loaves, he tarried alone in the Mount, no Body at all
conversing with him. There he kept looking upon it as his own Home. The
Sarazens having observed his Intent and Proposal to himself in Living there,
designedly passed often that way, and gladly supplied him with Bread. He had
also a little Refreshment from the Palms.

25. And afterward the Brethren, like Children mindful of their Father, took
care to send to him. But Antony considering that some were toyled upon the
account of bringing him Bread, and being willing to spare the Monks that
trouble, deliberated with himself how he might prevent it; and so, at last,
desired those that came to him to bring him a Spade, and a Mattock, and a
little Corn. When he was supplied with Materials, he walked a little way, and
having found a little piece of Arable Ground, he Tilled it; and having Plenty
enough of Water to water it, he sowed his Grain there; and thus, ever-after, he
was supplied with Bread enough every Year; rejoicing because he was troublesome
to none, and could keep himself without being burthenfome to any one. After
seeing some coming to him again, he Tilled some more Ground, and Planted a few
Herbs, for the Refreshment of any tired Traveller. At first the Wild Beasts of
the Desert came, out of pretense for Water, and damaged his Standing-Corn. One
Day, therefore, he pleasantly took hold of one of the Beasts, and said to them
all, Why do ye hurt me, since I don't hurt you? Get ye gone, in the Name of the
Lord, and come no more near this Place again; and from that time they, as it
were, receiving his Command, never came again: So he kept alone in the inner
part of the Mountain, attending to Prayer and Exercise. But his Brethren came
and ministered unto him, entreating him to let them come once a Month and bring
him some Olives, Beans, and Oil, because he was now grown Ancient. Whilst he
lived there, how many Conflicts he under-went, (not with Flesh and Blood, but
with Devils, his grand Adversaries,) we know very well from those who went to
him, who heard Tumults, Voices, and Noises, like those of the trampling of
Horses, and clashing of Arms, and saw the Mount full of Wild Beasts in the
Night, and him as it were Fighting and Praying against them: But he emboldened
the Hearts of those that came to him, and strove upon Bended Knees in Prayer
with the Lord. And it is worth our while to consider, with Admiration, that he
(though all alone in such a great Wilderness) was not afraid of the Devil's
Assaulting him, nor of the Fierceness of many Wild Beasts and Creeping
Creatures; but did literally (as it is written) trust in the Lord, like Mount
Sion, having a Mind unmoved, and void of Fluctuation: So that (as it is written)
Job 5.23. the Devils fled, and the Wild Beasts were at Peace with him. The
Devil, therefore, (as David sings, Psalm. 34.16.) gnash'd upon him with his
Teeth when he saw him. But Antony was comforted by our Savior, and continued
unhurt, notwithstanding all his Subtleties and Stratagems. The Devil sent all
the Beasts and Snakes out of their Holes and Dens gaping upon him, and
threatening to bite him. But he understanding the Device of the Enemy, said to
them all, If ye have received any Authority over me, I am ready to be devoured
by you; but if ye are suborned by the Devil, tarry here no longer, but get ye
hence in an Instant; for I am Christ's Servant: and they fled at his Word as
fast as from a Whip.

26. A few Days after that, as he was at work, (for he always took Care to
labor) one standing at the Door, trained after him with his Heels some of his
plyant Twigs which he had wrought together; (for he made little Baskets, and
exchanged them with those that came to him for what they brought him) and as he
stood up, he saw a Beast, down to the Thighs like a Man, but with Legs and Feet
like an Ass. Antony only signed himself with the Sign of the Cross, and said, I
am a Servant of Christ; If thou art sent hither against me, lo! I am here. But
the Beast with his Devils fled so fast, that he fell and died for Haste. Now,
the Death of the Beast signisy'd the Overthrow of the Devils; for they did all
they could to bring him out of the Wilderness, but could not prevail.

27. Soon after this he traveled with some of his Brethren Monks that came to
see him, and requested him to come and live with them a little while. Now the
Monks had a Camel to carry their Loaves and Water, (for that Desert was
Waterless, neither was there any drinkable Water thereabouts, but by the Mount
where his Monastery was, and thence they had the Water that they took with
them.) Wherefore, their Water failing them whilst they were upon their Way, and
the Heat being very great, their Lives were in Danger; for having searched all
the Places thereabouts, and found no Water, they were not able to walk any
longer, but lay down upon the Ground, and dismissed the Camel to shift for its
self, despairing of their own Lives. Now the Old Man seeing them all in Danger,
was very much troubled and groaned, and having stepped a little way aside and
knelt and prayed, the Lord presently made Water spring forth out of the Place
where he had prayed; and they all drank and revived, and filled their Bottles,
and having sought the Camel found him; for (as it happened) the Halter twined
about a Stone, and held him fast; so they brought him, watered and loaded him,
and traveled safe to their Journeys End. And as soon as he came to the Outer
Monasteries, they all came and saluted him, as a Father. And now there was Joy
again in the Mountains, and a new Emulation of Proficiency and Consolation by
mutual Love and Faith. It rejoiced Antony mightily to see the Forwardness of
the Monks, and his Sister grown old in Virginity, and become a Governess over
other Virgins. In a short time after he returned to his own Mountain, whither
many that were Diseased came to him.

28. He would be continually charging all the Monks that came to him, to
believe in the Lord, and love Him, and to keep themselves from filthy Thoughts
and carnal Pleasures, and (as it is written in the Proverbs) not to be deceived
by the Fullness of the Belly, and to avoid Vainglory, and to pray continually,
and to sing before Sleep and after Sleep, and to lay up the Precepts of the
Holy Scriptures in their Breasts, and remember the Acts of the Saints, that the
Soul being minded of those Precepts, may be conformed to their Zeal: but
especially he advised them to have St. Paul's Saying in mind, Let not the Sun
go down upon your Wrath; and to apply this in Common to every Precept, that the
Sun may not only not go down upon their Wrath, but upon any other Sin
whatsoever; for it is but fitting, that the Sun should not condemn us for any
Wickedness in the Day, nor the Moon by Night, for any Sin or Thought. If we
would be truly Beautiful, St. Paul's Advice must be kept, 2 Cor. 13.5. Judge
your selves: Try your selves. Let, therefore, every one of you take an Account
of both his Day and Night Actions; and wherein he has offended, let him leave
off; and wherein he has not, let him not glory; but let him continue in that
which is Good, and not be Negligent, or contemn his Neighbor; neither Let him
justify himself till (as the Blessed Apostle says) the Lord come, who
searches into the most secret things; for we are often, even to our selves, in
the dark; as to what we do we are ignorant; But the Lord comprehends all
things. Wherefore, yielding and ascribing Judgment to him, let us be Patient
one with another, and bear one another's Burdens, and Judge our selves; and
whereinsoever we are behind hand, let us strive to fill up our Defects. And
pray let me desire you to take this Rule as a Preservative against Offending:
Let all of us mark and write down all our Actions and Motions, in order to
declare them to one another; and ye may be confident, that if we always blush
to be known, we shall forbear offending, nay, so much as thinking any ill
thing; for, Who would Sin a Sin for which he must presently undergo open Shame?
By this Means, who-ever offends cannot be secret without lying. By this Means
we should never fornicate, as being always in one another's Sight. But by
writing and communicating our Thoughts, we shall keep from inward Impurity,
through Shame of having it known. Let our Paper therefore serve us instead of
the Eyes of our Fellow-Asceticks, that our blushing, when we write them down in
order to be seen, may prevent our Lusting amiss in any case. By keeping close
to this Model of Discipline, we shall have Power to subdue the Body, and so
please the Lord, and to tread the Wiles of the Enemy under Feet. This he said
to all that met him. He used to sympathize and pray together with all
Sufferers; and in many Cases the Lord heard him. When he was heard, he did not
boast; and when he was not heard, he did not murmur: But he always, and in all
Circumstances, gave Thanks unto the Lord. He exhorted Patients to
Longsuffering, and made them know, that Healing was not from him, or from Men,
but of the Lord, who acts as he pleases, both as to what he does, and as to the
time when he does it: Such Discourse as this was to them as a Cure, none
despising his Lectures: But those whose Illness continued, learnt from him to
be patient; and those that were Cured, not to give Thanks to him, but to God
alone. Among others, one Fronto, a Courtier, (having a terrible Sickness, which
eat his Tongue, and just affected his Eyes) came in the Mount, and desired
Antony to pray for him: St. Antony, at his request, prayed to God for Fronto,
and bid him be gone, and he should be Healed.

29. But Fronto having got into his Cell by Violence, and tarrying a whole Day
there, Antony said, Whilst you tarry here you cannot be cured. Be gone, and by
that time you come within Sight of Egypt, you shall see a Sign wrought upon
you. St. Antony speaking so positively, he was satisfied, and went his way; and
as soon as he saw Egypt he was rid of his Malady, and became a Sound Man, as
Antony had assured him. There is another Remarkable Cure which I must not omit.

30. A certain Virgin of Tripolis had a very terrible and foul Distemper; for
her Tears, and her Snot, and the running of her Ears, turned into Worms after
it fell upon the Ground; besides too, she was very Paralytical, and had very
unnatural Eyes. Her Parents having been informed of St. Antony by some Monks
that were traveling to him, and trusting in our Lord, who (as we read, Matt.
20.) cured an Issue of Blood, requested that she might travel with them: They
granting her request, the Child and her Parents went with them; and when they
came, tarried without the Mount with Paphnutius, a Confessor and a Monk. The
other Monks went in to St. Antony, and just as they were going to acquaint him
with it, he prevented them, and told them of the Child's Disease, and her
Traveling with them. Hearing this, they requested the Child might be permitted
to enter; but St. Antony denied their request, and bid them go out, and they
would find the Child either Healed or Dead: For (said he) Healing is not an Act
of mine; Why should she come to me, who am a miserable Man? To Cure is the
Property of our Savior, who exercises Mercy in every Place, over all that call
upon Him; and therefore has favored her and her Prayer, and has manifested
this particular Instance of his Philanthropy to me, (viz.) that he will cure
the Child's Disease there. This caused great Admiration amongst them; and they
went out and found the Parents Rejoicing, and the Child Healthy from that time.

31. About this time, there had Two Brethren entered upon a Journey, and for
want of Water, one died upon the way; and the other was not far from Dying too,
and therefore, having no Strength to travel, he also lay upon the Ground,
expecting to die. Now Antony was sitting upon the Mount, and called Two Monks
to him that were hard by, and said to them, Pray take a Pitcher of Water, and
run Egypt Roadway; for one of two Fellow-Travellers is already dead, and the
other will die too unless ye make haste; for this was discovered to me as I was
a Praying. Accordingly the Two Monks went and buried their dead Brother, and
revived the other, and brought him to their venerable Father, who was at the
distance of a whole Day's Journey from them. If any one should ask, Why Antony
did not speak before the other died? he asks an improper Question; for the
Sentence of Death did not belong to Antony, but to God, who determined Death
for the one, and a Recovery by Antony's inter-Agency for the other. That which
is to be admired in Antony, is, That he had a Soul so stayed and sedate, as to
be showed things at such a distance by the Lord upon the Mount.

32. And a little after, as he was sitting again upon the Mount, he saw one
lifted up on high from the Mount, and a great deal of Joy in all that met him:
He could not but admire, and call the Company Blessed, and prayed to know what
that might be. Then presently came a Voice, and told him, that 'twas the Soul
of Ammun, a Monk of Nitria. Now the distance between Nitria and that Mount is
Thirteen Days Journey. The Monks seeing the Old Man (for he continued an
Ascetick to his Old Age) in such a Maze, desired to know the reason of it. St.
Antony told them that Ammun was dead: For this Monk was very well known among
them, because he often came thither, and many Miracles were done by him; of
which, this is one. Having once an Occasion to go over the River Lycus, (which
was a great Inundation of Waters) he desired Theodore to go at a distance from
him, that they might not see one another Naked, as they swam over. Then
Theodore withdrawing, he blushed to see himself again Naked: And as he was
blushing and solicitous, he was of a sudden conveyed to the other side.
Theodore therefore (who also was a very Religious Man) having seen him got
over, and not at all wetted with the Water, requested to know the manner of his
Passage: But finding him loath to tell him, he took hold of his Feet, and
protested he would not let him go before he knew. Ammun observing the
Earnestness of Theodore, for the sake of his Protestation, consented to tell
him, after he had engaged him to tell no Body before he was dead; and so told
him how he was carried over after an invisible manner, and laid on the other
side: He did not walk on the Water, nor was the manner of it possible to Men,
but only possible to those whom our Lord permits; as he did St. Peter. This
Theodore told after Ammun's Death. But to return to St. Antony. The Monks to
whom St. Antony told what he saw noted down the Day in a Book: And some
Brethren that returned from Nitria inquired about Thirty Days after, and
brought word that Ammun died the same Day and Hour in which Antony saw the Soul
lifted up on high; and they greatly admired the Purity of Antony's Soul, and
wondered how he should immediately know what was done at Thirty Days distance,
and how he saw the Soul carried up a-loft. But we have fresh Matter of Praise
and Wonder from St. Antony still.

33. For Archelaus Comes having found him praying by himself in the Outer
Mount, entreated him on the behalf of Polycrateia, (who was an admirable
Virgin, and full of Christ) for she had a Pain in her Stomach and her Side, by
reason of extreme Exercise, and was very weakly all over her Body: Wherefore
Antony prayed, and Archelaus marked down the Day whereon Antony prayed; and
when he returned to Laodicea, he found the Virgin well; and having asked them
what Day she was first released from her Weakness, he took out the Paper in
which he writ down the Time when Antony prayed for her, and immediately showed
them the same time writ down in his Paper: So that they were all convinced that
the Lord delivered her from her Pains when Antony was, by Prayer, forwarding
the Goodness of our Savior toward her.

34. He did also oftentimes give Notice, many days before hand, of Persons that
were coming to him: Nay, sometimes he would tell the reason of their Journey a
Month before hand; as that some came only to see him, others because
Distempered, others because Possessed. And this we all know of all, That none
that came to him thought the Labor of his Journey a Trouble, or a Loss; for
every one returned from him with a Sense of some Benefit received: But
notwithstanding he spoke and saw such strange things, yet he would not have any
one admire him for it; but rather to admire the Lord, who, by his Power, has
granted us (though but Men) a Capacity and Liberty to know Him.

35. Another time having went down to visit the Outer Monasteries, and been
prevailed upon, by request, to go into a Vessel and pray with the Monks, He and
He only perceived a wretched and terrible Stink; the Company said there was
some salt Fish in the Vessel; but he perceived another kind of Scent: And
whilst he was speaking, a Young Man that had a Devil, and had entered in before
them and hid himself, cried out, and the Devil was rebuked by St. Antony, in
the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and came out of him, and the Young Man was
restored to his Wits: And then they all knew that 'twas the Devil that stunk.

36. There came to him also a Nobleman that had a Devil. Now that Devil was so
terrible, that the Person that was Possessed was not so much as sensible that
he came to St. Antony, and ate his own Ordure. Wherefore, they that brought him
begged of St. Antony to pray for him. Antony commiserating him, prayed for him,
and sat up with him all Night; and the Noble Youth, on a sudden, run against
St. Antony and hunch'd him. Now those that came with him were very much
disturbed at it: But Antony said, Don't ye be angry with the Youth; for it is
not he, but the evil Spirit within him: (for being rebuked, and commanded to
post away into some waterless Places, he was enraged, and did this) Therefore
glorify God for his doing thus against me; for that is a Sign that he is a
going out. No sooner had Antony said so, but the Youth was well and himself,
and knew where he was, and saluted the Old Man, giving Thanks to God.

37. Many other such like things did the Monks tell of him; and they all agreed
in their Relation. But as wonderful as these things are, there are stranger
things yet to be related; for, as he was going to pray before he eat, about the
Ninth Hour, he was in a Rapture; and (which is a Paradox) as he stood up, he
saw himself without himself, and some other Beings by himself, as it were in
the Air; and, afterward, some other bitter and terrible Beings standing by him
in the Air too, and willing to stop him, so that he did not pass: But the
Angels, his Guides and Convoys, withstanding them; they pretend to exact an
Account of him, to see whether he was not liable to them. Now, they would have
took the Account from his Birth: But St. Antony's Guides would by no means
allow of that; and told them, That the Lord had blotted all Faults since his
Birth: But ever since he became a Monk, and promised to God, they might exact
an Account. Then they having accused him of what they could not prove, the
Passage became free, and presently he saw himself, as it were come to himself,
in a standing Posture, and whole again. Hereupon, having forgot to eat, he
continued all the remaining Day and Night Groaning and Praying; for he wondered
to see how many we fight against, and through how great Difficulties any Soul
must needs pass through the Air. He could not but, upon this Occasion, call to
mind that Saying of the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.2. According to the Prince of the Power
of the Air: for, here it is that the Enemy exerts his Power in Fighting, and
attempting to stop those who pass through: for this Reason he the more earnestly
exhorts Christians, Ephesians. 6.13. Take ye the whole Armor of God, that the Enemy
having no Evil thing to say of you, he may be ashamed: But we, when we had been
informed of this, remembered the Apostle: Whether in the Body, I know not; or
out of the Body, I know not: God knows. St. Paul was wrapped up as far as the
Third Heaven, and heard unutterable Words: But Antony saw himself going up into
the Air, and contended till he was free.

38. He had also another particular Favor: for, as he was sitting on the Mount
in a Praying posture of Soul, and perhaps gravelled with some doubt relating to
himself (for not long before he had been conferring with some who had been
conversant with him about the State of his Soul, and what place it should have
after this Life) in the Nightime; (so that we may truly say, he was one of
those Blessed Men, who are taught of God) one called to him from on high, and
said, Antony, Rise, go forth and look; So he went out (for he knew whom he
ought to obey) and saw a certain terrible, tall, deformed Personage standing,
and reaching up to the Clouds, and, as it were, winged Creatures ascending, and
him stretching out his Hands, and some of them he saw stopped by him, and others
flying beyond and above him, and those that passed them carried higher still,
without the least Solicitude; upon these the Tall Person gnash'd his Teeth; but
over those that fell, he rejoiced. And the Voice said unto Antony, Consider on
what thou have seen. And his Understanding being opened, he perceived that
'twas the Enemy of Souls, who envies the Faithful, and seizes on (and hinders
the Passage of) those who are accountable to him; but that he is not able to
seize on those who were not persuaded by him; for they get out of his reach.
Being minded by such a Sight again, he strove the more to make a Proficiency in
his Holy Purposes.

39. But I must do him Justice, by acquainting you, that he did not tell of
these things willingly. But being he was long at his Prayers, and admiring with
himself, those that were with him would be importunately asking him; so that he
was forced, as a Father who could not hide them from his Children, to tell
them: Besides too, he knew the Purity of his own Conscience, and that the
Declaration of them would be profitable for them; for hereby he showed the
Blessed Fruit of Perseverance in Exercise, and that in great Difficulties God
condescends to tender Consolation to his Servants, even by Visions. I might
also tell you, how Patient he was under Afflictions, and how Humble of Soul,
and how that Frame of Spirit made him revere the Canons of the Church with a
peculiar Tenderness of Disposition, and how willing he was that every
Clergyman should be preserr'd before him; for he was not ashamed to bow the
Head before Bishops and Priests: And whenever a Deacon came to him, to be
benefitted by him, he discoursed usefully to him: But he would resign the
Exercise of the Ministry, by Prayer, to him, not being ashamed to learn
himself: for oft-times he proposed Questions, and condescended to give Ear to
all that conversed with him, and owned himself benefitted, if any one spoke any
thing that was useful.

40. There was much and wonderful Comeliness in his Face. If he was present
with a great many Monks, and any one seemed uneasy, that he might have a full
View of him, though he did not know them before, yet, passing by the rest, he
would run to him, as though he were drew by the Person's Eyes. He did not
excel others in the height or breadth of his Body, but in the Constitution of
his Morals, and the Purity of his Soul; for his Soul being free from tumult, he
always had his outward Senses free from Disorders; so that his Countenance
derived Cheerfulness from his Soul, and the Temper of it was discernable from
the Motions of his Body; (as it is written) Prove. 15.13. A glad Heart makes a
cheerful Countenance: But a sorrowful one makes it sad. Thus Jacob discerned
Laban to have some treacherous Design in his Mind, and said unto the Women,
Genesis 31. Is not the Face of your Father toward me as yesterday, and the day
before? Thus Samuel knew David; For he had cheering Eyes, and Teeth white as
Milk. Thus also Antony was known; for he never looked disturbed, because his
Soul was always at Peace. His Mind was constantly in a rejoicing Posture, and
therefore he never had a louring Look. He was also very admirable and strict as
to his Faith and Piety.

41. He would never hold Correspondence with the Meletian Schismatics, because
he knew their Wickedness, and Apostasy from the Faith; nor with the Manichees,
nor with any other Heretics, in a Friendly manner, any otherwise than to
advise them to turn to Piety; for he judged their Friendship and Conversation
to tend to the Mischief and Destruction of the Soul. He abominated the Heresy
of the Arians, and charged all not to go near them, or to hold with their
wicked Tenets. Some of the Areiomanites having once came to see him; as soon as
he perceived what they were, he chased them out of the Mount, alleging their
Discourses to be worse than Poison. And when the Arians told a Lie, (as though
he were of the same Judgment with them) he expressed great Indignation against
Arius; and being sent for by the Bishops, and all the Brethren, he declared
against them in Alexandria, telling them that this was the last Heresy, and
the forerunner of Antichrist; and he added, That the Son of God was not a
Creature made of the things that are not, but the invisible Word and Wisdom of
the Father's Essence. Wherefore, it is impious to say, there was a time when he
was not; for He was always the Word co-existent with the Father. Wherefore,
have ye no communication with the Arians; for Light has no fellowship with the
Darkness: For ye, who are pious, are Christians; but they who impiously say,
that the Son and Word of God, who is of the Father, is a Creature, differ not
at all from Heathens, who serve the Creature more than God, who created them.
But do ye believe, that all the Creation groans against them, because they
reckon the Lord and Creator of all things, by whom all things that were made
were made, a Creature.

42. So publicly did all the People see that Heresy which so opposes Christ
anathematis'd by this great Man, and therefore abominated them: And all of the
City ran together to see Antony. The Greeks also, and those that were called
their Priests, came to the Temple, saying, We desire to see the Man of God; for
all called him so. Also the Lord cleans'd many that were Possessed, by him, and
healed many wounded Persons, and others that were wounded in their
Understandings: And many Greeks desired to touch the Old Man, believing they
should be benefitted thereby. By this means there were as many Christians in a
few Days, as used to be made in a whole Year. Some Persons thought the Crowd
was too troublesome to him, and therefore kept Persons from pressing upon him:
But he was not disturbed with them, and said to them, The People are not more
in Number than those Devils with which I have contended in the Mountain. When
he went away, we went before him.

43. And as we were just at the Gate, as it were, a Woman cried out, O Man of
God, pray tarry a little, for my Daughter is grievously troubled with a Devil;
Tarry, I pray thee, lest I also fall into some danger, by running after thee.
When the Old Man heard her, he willingly tarried at our Entreaty; so the Woman
drew near, and the Maid fell upon the Ground; and when Antony had prayed, and
mentioned Christ, the Maid rose up very well, for the Unclean Spirit was gone
out of her; and the Maid blessed God, and all the Spectators gave Thanks, and
St. Antony himself also was very glad, and returned to his own abode in the
Mount. He was also very prudent, and, which is very strange, though illiterate,
he was a very piercing and judicious Man.

44. Once there came to him Two Greek Philosophers, with a design to try him
(now, at that time, he was in the outer part of the Mountain.) St. Antony
perceived what kind of Men they were by their Looks, and spoke thus to them by
an Interpreter, O ye Philosophers, Why did you trouble your selves to come to
such a simple Fellow? But they replied, That he was not so, but very prudent.
If ye come to a silly Fellow, said Antony, your Labor is lost, and to no
purpose: But if ye think otherwise, become such as I am; for we should imitate
all things that are fair and commendable. Had I come to you, I would have
imitated you. Since therefore ye come to me, become such Men as I am; for I am
a Christian. But they admiring, withdrew, for they saw the Devils dreading
Antony.

45. Others also met him there, thinking to scoff at him, because he had not
learnt to read. Said Antony, pray answer me one Question; Which think ye is
first, the Mind, or the Alphabet? Whether of the two is the Author and cause
of the other, the Mind of Letters? or, Letters of the Mind? They answered, The
Mind is first, and the Inventer of Letters. Well then, says Antony, Whosoever has
a sound Mind, stands in no need of Letters. Which Answer astonished them, and
all that were with them; so they went away, admiring to see so much
Understanding in a private Man; for though he grew Old in the Desert, yet he
was not Savage in his Carriage, like a Mountaineer; but he was Courteous and
Civil. His Mind and Discourse was seasoned with Divine Salt, so that none
envied him; but all that visited him took delight in him.

46. After this, some Pretenders to Wisdom among the Greeks came to him, and
demanded of him an account of his Christian Belief, and made offers to dispute
subtly with him about the Divine Cross, in order to mock him. St. Antony
having paused a while, and pitied their Ignorance, spoke very well to them by
an Interpreter, to this Effect: Which of the Two is more laudable, to confess a
Cross, or to charge those whom ye call Gods with Adulteries and Sodomies? For
our Confession is a sign of Manliness, and Contempt of Death; but yours are the
Passions of Lasciviousness. Which is better to say, That the Wisdom of God was
not changed, but for the sake of Salvation and Beneficence to Men, assumed an
Humane Body, that by Communion with the Humane Race, he might make Men partake
of a Divine and Intellectual Nature; or, To liken the Deity to Irrational
Beings, and so worship four-footed Creatures, and creeping things, and Statues
of Men? For, these are the Adorations of your Wise Men. Moreover, How dare ye
deride us, who say, That Christ did appear a Man; when ye, deriving the Soul
from the [Divine] Mind, say, That it wandered and lapsed from Heaven into the
Body? and I wish it did not pass, not only into an Humane Body, but into
four-footed and creeping Creatures. Our Faith says, That Christ came for the
Salvation of Men; but ye erring, say, The Soul is not generated. We consider
the Power and Philanthropy of God, because this was not impossible with God;
But ye saying, That the Soul is the Image of the Mind, yet attribute Lapses to
it, and fable it to be changeable, and, by consequence, introduce the Mind as
changeable by the Soul; for, such as was the Image, such must that of which
it is the Image necessarily be: But when ye have such Thoughts as these
concerning the Mind, pray consider that ye blaspheme the Father of the Mind
himself. And as for the Cross, What can ye say of it? When ye see wicked Men
ensnare us, ye see we are ready to endure the Cross, and to contemn Death,
whenever or wheresoever forced upon us. Alas! the Fables of the Rovings of
Osiris and Isis, and the Treachery of Typho, and the Flight of Saturn, and
Gormandizings of Children, and of Paracide; What are these? Yet these are your
wise Contrivances and mighty Foundations. But, moreover, How comes it to pass,
that when ye despise the Cross, ye don't admire the Resurrection; since those
who speak of one, have also writ of the other? or, Why are ye, when ye remember
the Cross, silent of the Dead raised, the Blind who had their Sight restored,
the Sick of the Palsy who were healed, and the Lepers that were cleans'd, and
the walking a Foot on the Sea, and other Signs and Wonders, which show Christ
not to be mere Man, but God also? Truly, to my mind, ye do your selves wrong,
and have not read our Writings with Sincerity: But, pray read and see that the
things which Jesus did, show Him to be God, pilgrimaging upon Earth for the
Souls of Men: But, pray tell us of your great Signs.

47. What can ye plead for Irrational Gods, and their Savageness? Ye may, if ye
please, fly to shelter by Allegorising: Let Proserpine, be the Earth; Vulcan's
Lameness, the Fire; Juno, the Air; Apollo, the Sun; Diana, the Moon; and
Neptune, the Sea: But, nevertheless, this does not make it any more the Worship
of God: This is to serve the Creatures more than the Creator; for ye have
compacted these Stories out of the Consideration of the Creation's being
Beautiful: These Works should be admired, but they should not have been made
Gods; for, by this means, ye have given the Architect's Honor to the things
that he Built; which is just like paying that Honor to the House, which is due
to the Builder; or, the mis-placing the General's Honor, on the Common
Soldiers. Come, answer me these Questions, that we may know why Christ's Cross
should be derided: But they hesitating and looking this way and that way, St.
Antony smiled, and said, These things are their own Proof at first Sight. And
seeing ye lean so much on demonstrative Reasons, and therefore are not willing
we should worship without rational Demonstration; first of all, satisfy me
about these matters, and, especially, How the Knowledge of God is discerned? by
Demonstration of Reasons? or by the Energy of Faith? and, Which is the Elder,
Faith by Energy? or Demonstration by Reason? But they answering, That Faith by
Energy is the Elder, and the truly exact Knowledge. Very well, said St. Antony;
for Faith springs from the Disposition of the Soul; but Logic is one of those
Arts which are composed by the Soul: Wherefore, Demonstration is not necessary
for them, who have Energy by Faith; nay, it is superfluous; for what we perceive
by Faith, you build by Reasoning: So that oft-times you have not Words to
express what we see within. Wherefore, Energy by Faith is better and firmer
than your Sophistical Syllogisms.

49. We Christians have not this Mystery by the Wisdom of Greek Reasonings, but
by the Power of Faith, given us by Christ Jesus from God. And that ye may see
what we say is true; behold, we, who have not so much as learnt to spell, do
believe in God, known by his Works, and a Providence over all things. And that
our Faith is operative within, is evident; for we are supported by Faith in
Christ; but ye by Sophistical Strivings of Words. Your Spectre-Idols are
brought to naught; but our Faith is extended every where. Notwithstanding your
Syllogisms and Sophisms, ye don't persuade any from Christianity to Paganism;
but we, who preach Faith in Christ, weaken your Superstition; knowing very
well, That Christ is God, and the Son of God. By your Oracles ye don't hinder
the spreading of Christ's Doctrine; but by but Naming Christ Crucified, we chase
those Devils whom ye honor as Gods; wherever the Sign of the Cross is, there
Magic is weak, and Sorcery has no power. Tell me, Man, Where are your Oracles?
Where are the Enchantments of the Egyptians? When did all these cease, and
vanish before the Cross of Christ was? Does this therefore deserve so much
Derision? or, Do not rather the weak things that are brought to naught and
baffled by it? This also is strange to observe; Your Followers were never
persecuted, but honored by Men in the City; but Christ's Disciples are
persecuted, and yet they multiply and flourish more than yours. Your Tenets,
though celebrated and applauded, are broke; whereas the Faith and Doctrine of
Christ, though derided by you, and often persecuted by Kings, has filled the
World. When did the Knowledge of God shine so bright? or, When did Temperance
and eminent Virginity appear so much? or, When was Death so despised, as since
the Cross of Christ? But no one doubts of this when he sees the Martyrs
despising Death for Christ's sake, and whole Churches Virgins keeping their
Bodies pure and undefiled for Christ's sake: Which are powerful Signs, and such
as do show that the Christian Faith is the only true Faith for Piety. Lo! ye,
at this very moment, don't believe, but seek Syllogisms from Logic; but we, as
our Teacher speaks, 1 Cor. 2.3. Not by the Persuasion of Wisdom in Greek
Eloquence; but by Faith, do effectually persuade those that were used to the
Artificial Structures of Reason. See, here are some afflicted with Devils, (for
at that time there were some such present) do ye, by your Syllogisms, or
Magic, or any other Method that you please to choose, and by invoking your
Idols, cleanse them, or your selves; or, if ye cannot, lay aside your Quarrel
against us, be unprejudiced, and ye shall see the Power of Christ's Cross: And
having said so, he invoked the Name of Christ, and signed the Afflicted Persons
with the Sign of the Cross a second or third time, and the Men were presently
whole, and in their right Minds, and gave Thanks to God; and the Philosophers
were amazed at the Understanding of the Man, and the Miracle which he did. But
Antony said, Why do ye wonder at this? We don't do it, but Christ by those who
believe in Him: Do ye therefore believe, and ye shall see that we have not an
Art of Reasoning, but a Faith wrought by Love for Christ; which also ye may
have; and when ye have it, ye will not seek Demonstrations of Eloquence; but
then ye will reckon Faith in Christ sufficient. These were St. Antony's Words;
but they estranging at this went away, saluting him, and owning that they were
benefitted by him.

50. And now St. Antony's Fame reached the Ears of Kings and Princes; for
Constantine Augustus, and Constantine and Constans, his Sons, having heard this
writ to him, as a Father, and entreated him that they might receive an Answer
from him: But he did not set an high Value on their Letter, but was the same
Man that he was before they sent to him. When the Letters were brought to him,
he called the Monks, and said to them, Don't wonder that the King writes to us,
for he is a Man; but rather, that God has writ us a Law, and spoke to us by his
own Son. Wherefore he was unwilling to receive them, saying, He knew not how to
answer such Letters: But being warned by the Monks that they were Christian
Princes, and if they were neglected might be offended; he suffered them to be
read, and sent an Answer, Commending them because they adored Christ, and
advising them of Matters relating to their Salvation; as that they should not
regard present Grandeur, but rather bear the future Judgment in mind; and
should know and remember that Christ only is the True and Eternal King: And he
also counseled them to be courteous, and to take care of Equity and the Poor.
When they received this Letter, they were very glad. He was so obliging to all,
that all looked on him as a Father.

51. After this, he returned to the inner Monastry, and stuck to his former
Exercise; very often, as he was sitting or walking with his Visitants, he was
very silent, (as it is written in Daniel, Dan. 4.16.) and after an hours pause
he would discourse with the Brethren very regularly: But those that were with
him frequently perceived some Vision. Once he told all the Affairs of Egypt to
Bishop Serapion, who was sometimes within with him, and saw him engaged with a
Vision. Another time, as he was sitting, he was, as it were, in an Ecstasy, and
frequently groaned in the midst of his Theory; and, in an hour's time,
returning to his Friends, he first stood and prayed trembling, and then kneelt,
and continued so a good while; and when the Old Man rose he wept. The Company,
trembling for Terror, requested to know the Reason of it, and were so
importunate with him, that he was forced to speak, after he had fetched a great
sigh: Better had it been for me, if I had died before I saw that Vision. Then
they urging him to be particular; he said, Wrath will seize upon this Church,
and it will be betrayed to Men who are like Brute Beasts; for I saw the
Lord's-Table encompassed with Mules standing round about it, and Hounds barking
within, and all manner of Beasts making a disorderly Noise. Ye saw how I
sighed. I heard a Voice, saying, My Altar shall be abominated. This was the Old
Man's Vision. And, about Two Years after, there was an Incursion of the Arians,
and the Plundering of the Churches, when they took the Holy Vessels by Force,
and made them be carried by Heathens, forcing them out of their Shops to join
with them, and doing what they pleased in their Sight. Then all of us knew,
that the Noise which the Mules made pre-signignify'd to St. Antony what the
Arians now, like Wild Beasts, are a doing. But as soon as he had done saying
that, he went on, and said; My Children, don't be cast down; for as the Lord
was angry, so will he again heal, and the Church will quickly again recover its
Beauty, and shine as it used; and ye shall see the Persecuted resettled, and
Impiety again retreating into private Lurking-holes, and true Faith delivered
boldly everywhere with great Freedom: Only, take heed not to defile your
selves with the Doctrine of the Arians; for their Doctrine is not that of the
Apostles, but the Doctrine of Devils; for they are not of a right Judgment, but
Barren, and Irrational, like the Brutishness of Mules.

52. Neither should ye be Faithless, or distrust such Wonders being brought
about by a Man; for it is our Savior's Promise, John 16.23, 24. If ye have
Faith, but as a grain of Mustard Seed, and shall say to this Mountain, remove;
it shall remove, and nothing shall be impossible to you. And again, Matt.
10.18. Verily, verily, I say unto you, if ye shall ask any thing of the Father
in my Name, he shall give it you: Ask, and ye shall receive. It Is he that says
to his Disciples, and all that believe in Him, Heal the Sick, cast out Devils:
Freely ye have received, freely do ye give. Antony did not Cure Majesterially
and Self-ascribingly; but he made his Prayer to, and named the Name of Christ;
so that it was manifest, that it was not he himself, but the Lord working and
showing Love to Men by Antony: Only Prayer and Exercise was St. Antony's; for
the sake of that he sat on the Mount, and rejoiced in the Contemplation of
Divine things.

53. He was very much troubled to see himself disturbed by so many, and when he
was dragged to the outer Mount: For the Judges desired him to come down into
the outer Mount, (because 'twas not possible for them to come into the inner
Mount, because of the Multitude of Clients that followed him) entreating him
that they might but just see him: But he first refused to come to them.
However, they tarried, and sent some Persons that were in Custody to allure him
to come upon their account. Being therefore necessitated, by Compassion, when
he saw them waiting, he came to the outer Mountain. This troublesome descent of
his was not Useless, but very Advantageous to a great many. He did good to the
Judges, by minding them to prefer Equity before every thing, and to fear God,
and to know, that with what Judgment they do judge, they shall be judged. Now
the Judge and others urged him mightily to tarry there some time, and discourse
concerning Matters relating to Salvation. But he having done Violence to
himself, at the request of the Judge, and the Necessitous, in coming down told
them he could not tarry with them any longer, and appeased their Urgency with
him by a pleasant Simile: As Fishes die upon dry Ground, so Monks when they
converse with you grow loose and faint: Wheresore we must hasten to the Mount,
as Fishes to the Water, lest by tarrying without some time, we forget what is
within. The Judge having heard this, and such like Sayings from him, wondered,
and said, This Man is truly a Servant of God; for, Whence should such a private
Person have such and so great Understanding, unless he were beloved by God?

54. But there was a certain great Officer, Namely, Balacius, who bitterly
Persecuted us Christians, because he was bigoted for the detestable Arians; He
was so cruel, that he stripped the Virgins, and scourged the Anachorets naked.
So Antony writ him a Letter to this Effect; I see Wrath coming upon thee, cease
to persecute the Christians, lest it fall upon thee, and take hold of thee in
an instant; for it will come. But Balacius grinn'd, scornfully flung the Letter
on the Ground, and spat upon it, and abused the Messenger, and bid him say to
Antony, Since you are so solicitous for the Monks, I will also give you your
self a Visit. And before five Days expired, Wrath seized upon him; for Balacius
and Nestorius, the under-Governour of Egypt, went out together on Horseback to
the chief Seat or Manor of Alexandria, called Chaerea, (now the Horses were
Balacius's, and the gentlest of all that he kept) and before they came to the
Place, began jocularly to repartee together, as they used to do; and, on a
sudden, the gentler of the Two Horses, which Nestorius rid, bit Balacius, and
fell upon him and mangled his Thigh with his Teeth; so he went strait-way back
into the City, and died in Three Days time. They all admired to see Antony's
Prophecy so soon fulfilled. This was his Way of Admonishing the Bitter and
Obdurate.

55. Others that came to him he instructed so excellently, that they forgot
their Lawsuits, and called those Happy that retired from a popular Life. He
behaved himself in the case of the Oppressed, as if he himself, not they were
the Sufferers. He had Power enough to do good to all, insomuch, That many
Soldiers and others, who had Possessions, laid aside the Burdens of Life, and
presently became Monks: In short, He was, as it were, a Physician bestowed upon
Egypt by God. What grieved Person did not go back Rejoicing from him? What
Person came to him Mourning for Deceased Relations, and did not lay by his
Sorrow? What angry Person came, and was not turned into Love? What Poor Man,
who saw and heard him, did not despise Riches, and find Consolation in his
Poverty? What Negligent Man went away from him, and was not stronger and more
Fervent? What Youth came to the Mount and saw Antony, and did not presently
deny his Pleasure, and love Sobriety? Who came to him tempted by Devils, and
was not relieved? Who came troubled in his Thoughts, and had not his Mind made
serene by him? For, this was one great Benefit of Antony's Exercise, namely,
That, as I said before, having the Gift of discerning of Spirits, he knew their
Motions: Neither was he ignorant which way their Affection and Impetus bent.
And not only he himself was not imposed upon by them; but he also comforted
those who were troubled in Mind, and instructed them how they might baffle
their Wiles, explaining the Weakness and Subtleties of the Devils working in
them. Every one therefore, as animated by him, departed, daring the Devices of
the Devil and his Party. Virgins also who had Suitors, having only seen St.
Antony at a distance, continued Virgins to Christ. There came also some from
Foreign Parts to him, who were dismissed from him, as from a Father, with great
Benefit. When he died, they were all his Orphans, comforting themselves with
his bare Memory, and holding fast his Admonitions and Instructions.

56. And now it is but decent and fitting to acquaint you with the Nature of the
End of his Life; for, indeed, 'twas such as does deserve Emulation.

Near his Death, he did (according to his old Custom) visit the Monks in the
outer Mountain, and being informed, by Providence, of his End, he spoke to them
thus: I make this as my last Visit to you, and shall admire if we should see
one another again in this World. It Is time for me now to let go my Body, for I
am near an Hundred and Five Years Old. At this saying they wept, clung about
him, and saluted him. But he, just as it became one leaving a strange Place for
his own Country, rejoiced, and charged them not to be negligent in Labors,
nor to faint in Exercise; but to live, as dying daily, and, as I said before,
to keep their Souls from filthy Thoughts, and to have a Zeal for the Saints;
but not to go a-near the Meletian Schismatics; for, said he, ye know their
wicked and profane purpose; nor to have any Correspondence with the Arians;
for their Impiety is manifest: Neither when ye see their Judges in Power be ye
troubled; for 'twill cease, and their Opinion and Splendor is mortal, and of a
short standing; wherefore, keep ye your selves pure from them, and hold the
Tradition of your Fathers, and principally a pious Faith in our Lord Christ
Jesus, whom ye have learnt in the Holy Scriptures, and have often been put in
mind of, even by me.

57. When he had said this, the Brethren urged him to tarry and die there: But
that he would not, he showed by his silence, as for many Reasons, so especially
for this: The Egyptians love to bury the Bodies of Zealots, and especially of
Martyrs, and wrap them up in fine Linen. Now they don't bury them in the
Earth, but lay them upon Couches, and keep them in Repositories by themselves,
thinking thereby to honor the Deceased: But Antony often besought the Bishops
to warn the People against it, and also reproved many Laymen and Women for it,
saying, That that was neither Lawful nor very Holy; for the Bodies of the
Patriarchs, to this Day, are preserved in Sepulchers; nay, even the Body of our
Lord Himself was laid in one, and a Stone was laid upon it, and hid it till he
rose again; whereby he showed them that they transgressed the Law in not hiding
the Bodies of the departed, although they be Holy; for, What is greater or more
holy than our Lord's Body? Many therefore afterward buried under Ground, and
gave Thanks to God. Now St. Antony knowing the Custom. of Egypt, and fearing
lest they should do so by his Body, hasted his Departure, and took his Leave of
the Monks in the Outer Mount, and went into the Inner Mount, where he used to
live.

58. A few Months after he fell Sick, and having called to those that were with
him, (for he had Two within with him, who had been Asceticks with him Fifteen
Years, and served him because of his extreme Old Age) he said to them, I now
(as it is written) go the way of my Fathers, for I see my self called by my
Lord; but be ye sober, and finish a long-lived Exercise: Be as earnest to hold
fast your Purpose, as though you were just beginning: Ye know the Devils are
plotting against you: Ye know they are fierce in Will, but weak in Power; don't
therefore be afraid of them, but breath Christ, and believe in Him, and live as
dying every day, taking heed to your selves, and remembering my Exhortations:
Hold no Communion with the Schismatics, nor the Arians; for ye know how I
declined them, because of their Heterodox and Christ-opposing Heresy. Do ye
study principally to cleave unto Christ and his Saints, that after Death they
may receive you, as Friends and Acquaintance, into Everlasting Habitations.
Think upon and relish these Counsels; and if ye have any regard for me, and do
remember me, as a Father, don't suffer any one to take my Body into Egypt, lest
they lay me in their Houses; for for that reason I came hither: Ye know how I
have rebuked those who did it, and charged them to do so no more. Do ye
therefore bury my Body under Ground, and mind my Words, that no Body but your
selves may know where I am buried; for I shall receive my Body incorruptible
from my Savior in the Resurrection. And pray do ye divide my Clothes; Give one
Leathern Garment to Bishop Athanasius, and the Blanket which he gave new to me,
but is now grown old; and the other Leathern Jacket to Bishop Serapion, and
take ye the Hair-Cloth and save it, my Children, for Antony passes away, and
is no longer with you.

59. Having said this he saluted them, and gathered his Feet, and, as it were,
seeing Friends come unto him, and rejoicing because of them, (for he looked
with a cheerful Countenance as he lay) he left us, and was added unto the
Fathers. So, in fine, the Monks wrapped him up, and buried him under Ground,
according to his Command. And no Body, to this Day, except the Two Monks, knows
where he was Buried. The Vestments being distributed, according as he ordered,
every one kept them, as a great Purchase; for he that sees them does, as it
were, see Antony; and he that puts them on, carries his Admonitions about him
with Joy.

60. Such was Antony's Exercise, and such the End of his Life in the Body: And
if these things are small, in comparison to his Excellency, judge ye what sort
of Man of God he was, who, to so great an Age, from his Youth up, kept close to
his rigorous Discipline; neither conquered by Variety of Food, upon the Account
of his Old Age; nor changing the Habit of his Raiment, for want of Vigor; or
so much as washing his Feet; And yet, in all respects, he was sound and unhurt;
for he had his Eyes clear, seeing very well; not one of his Teeth was lost,
only near the Gums they were worn, because of his great Age: He was also sound
in his Hands and Feet, and much clearer in every part than those who use
several Diets, Bathings, and Variety of Garments; and as to Strength too, they
were much more ready.

61. St. Antony lived and died admired and celebrated by all every where, and
longed for by those who never saw him: A great Sign of his Virtue, and of a
Soul that truly loved God; for he did not get his Learning by Books, nor
external Wisdom, nor any Art: But Antony was renowned purely for his Devotion
to God. No one can deny that this was the Gift of God. How came he who was hid,
and sat in a Mountain, to be heard of in Spain, France, Rome, and Africa,
unless God had made his Name known every where, who promised this to Antony at
first; for although such Heroes act secretly, and are willing to lie concealed,
yet the Lord shows them, as Lamps to all, that they may know that his Commands,
which he has given to reform us, are practicable, and thence may derive a Zeal
for the ways of Virtue.

62. Read ye this to others, that they may know what sort of Life the Life of
Monks should be, and may be persuaded, that our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ
will glorify those who glorify Him, and serve Him unto the End; not only
bringing them to the Kingdom of Heaven, but making them, notwithstanding they
hide and retire, celebrated here for their Virtue, to the Benefit of others.
And, if there be a Necessity, read it to the Heathens, that they may know not
only that our Lord Jesus Christ is God, and the Son of God; but that those
Christians who serve Him truly, and believe in Him piously, reprove those
Spirits whom they account Gods, and tread upon them, and chase them, as those
who are the Deceivers and Corrupters of Men; and this they do by the Grace and
Strength of Christ Jesus our Lord; to whom be Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Theologia Mystica: TWO DISCOURSES CONCERNING DIVINE COMMUNICATIONS To Souls
duly disposed.

I. The Antiquity, Tradition, and Succession of Mystical Divinity among the
Gentiles; with Notes and Observations to distinguish Illusions; and Directions
of Spiritual Writers concerning Prayer. II. Of the Guidance of the Spirit of
GOD: The Doctrine of the H. Scriptures, of the Catholic Church, and of the
Church of England in particular, upon a Discourse of Sr. Matthew Hale
concerning it.
LONDON, Printed for the Author, for the Use and Benefit of a Religious
Society, 1697.

ADVERTISEMENT.
ASCETICKS: or, The Heroic Piety and Virtue of the Ancient Christian Anchorets
and Coenobites, (wherein the Beginning and Progress of Contemplative Living and
Religious Societies is briefly discoursed; and a true Account of the Esseans,
Therapeuts, and ancient Egyptian and other Monks, collected out of the most
Authentic Records.) Also the LIFE of the Famous Saint ANTONY, written in Greek
by St. Athanasius, faithfully Translated into English. All Printed for the
Author, for the Use and Benefit of the Society aforesaid.

THE PREFACE.
THE latter of these Discourses was Printed as part of a Preface to that Book
of Sr. Matthew Hale's, from whence the beginning of the Discourse is now taken;
but why it was not Published with it, I know no reason, unless that, which is
the Universal primary Obstacle to all Good, that Satan hindered it. And that, I
make no question, was the principal moving Cause, which set the others on work.
That wicked, envious Spirit, who had raised up all the Evil he could, both
against him, and against me, in our several Families in his Lifetime, has not
ceased to do so still since his Death. By what he got such Advantage against my
self, I know very well, and intend to declare it. But by what he got such
Advantage against that good Man, is a Secret I know nothing of. But this I
know, that he has been Unhappy in his Family, both in his Lifetime, and since
his Death, and particularly in what I am now saying. I long looked upon him as
a Man raised up by the Special Providence of God to be an Illustrious Example
of Virtue and Piety in this degenerate Age: And therefore, that People might
not be deprived of the Benefit of such an Example by their Ignorance of his
Principles, (as I found by Experience many were) I did in his Lifetime publish
a Volume of his Contemplations, even after I had earnestly pressed him to
consent to it, and he refused: Indeed, I knew him, and he knew me, so well,
that I did not fear any misconstruction from him: and after his Death, I
desired to have done Honor to his Memory for the same purpose, by the
Publication of such of his Writings, as were most necessary and seasonable,
that the Benefit of his Labors, as well as of his Example, while yet fresh in
Memory, might be communicated, as much as might be, to all, and they might
mutually recommend each other for the greater Benefit of all. But, alas! that
wicked Spirit, which had so prevailed in his Family in his Lifetime, as made
him tell some of them, That Satan, or the Devil, did ride them, as an Ape would
do a Mastiff-Dog, has likewise prevailed hitherto upon such as vainly gloried
in their Relation to him, to obstruct that good Design for Twenty years
together, without due regard either to that Service of God, those Benefits to
Men, the true Honor of his Memory, (in which they vainly gloried) or the
Performance of his Will according to his Mind. For though he had not expressly
ordered the Publication of one or other in particular; yet had he made this
Provision in a Codicil concerning the Publication of any of them, that he had
nominated the Bookseller, who should have the Printing of them, paying as much
as another would in reason for them: and of the Profits, appointed one part to
one, for his Care and Pains in overseeing and ordering the Publication; another
part to another, for Writing and Correcting; and the rest, among his Servants;
and told them what he had done for them: so that besides the Injury done to
their Country, they have done a double Injury to his Memory, not only by
hindering the Honor due to it, but by Dishonouring it, and giving occasion to
a Blemish and Reproach to it, provoking some not only to think, but to speak
hardly of him, as if he had abused them in some of the last Acts of his Life:
and all this out of a sordid Humor to get or keep what he had otherwise
disposed of. And though thus they exercised their Malice and Spite against the
Memory of the Good Man, yet was not this the chief part of their Work and
Triumph, that they had raised this Injury against his Memory, and, besides, had
deprived his Country of the Benefit of much of his Labors in his own
Profession: But there is a greater matter in the bottom, and of greater concern
to them, which these Wicked, Subtle Agents had a principal regard to. The Good
Man had taken great Pains in examining and considering the Grounds and
Evidences of Religion, both Natural and Revealed: And he was excellently well
qualified for it, both by Natural Sagacity, by Exercise of his Parts in his own
Profession, (which affords as much and good Exercise for such a purpose as any)
and by Freedom from Prejudice, either of Education or of Temporal Interest. For
though he had a Religious Education, yet it is certain, that after he came to
maturity of Thinking and Judging, he became, as he found reason, in many
things, of a different Judgment from the Notions and Sentiments he had first
received; by which it appeared, that his Religion was the Religion of his
Judgment, and not of his Education. And being no Ecclesiastic, but a Man of a
Civil Employment, he stood fair to be looked upon as an Indifferent Judge, and
not as an Advocate or Party, (as Clergymen generally are reputed by some) and,
by consequence, his Writings upon such Subjects, besides the weight of his
Reason, would have a double Weight of Authority, (if we take in his Example
too) above others, to make them successful upon such as have received prejudice
from the Scandalous Practices of too many Professors and Preachers of the
Christian Religion; which has been a principal Cause of Atheism heretofore,
and of Deism at present, and of the Contempt of the Clergy, and more effectual
and prevalent than any of those which have been assigned in Print; though by
Scandalous, I intend here nothing but Zeal for Preferments, and a cold
Indifferency in Matters of Religion. For as it has been rightly observed, When
Virtue fails in the Priests, Faith will fail in the People; be their Preaching
what it will. Now, by how much greater was the Advantage that the Writings of
this Man had above others, to have done Service in this Cause, so much the
greater was the Gratification which these Wicked Spirits received in the
Suppression of them.

I know nothing so sordid that ever appeared in his Life. But that this has
been ordered by the Malice and Subtilty of those Wicked Spirits, who had gotten
Advantage against Him, or his Family; (however some particular Dispositions in
Persons might make it more feasible) as I verily believe, so I am well
satisfied, he would not at all have doubted, had he been living, and to have
spoken his Judgment in a like Case. He and I both, before he died, had had
Experience enough to satisfy us concerning such matters. And I wish his, and
all other Families, who are fallen into any such Snare, may consider well of
it, and be well advised how to recover themselves out of it, if it may be. Many
such have I known, and though the Burden be sealed upon some, and the Decree
fixed, yet in others there seemed to be a Door open, if Opportunity was not
neglected. Men's Belief or Disbelief will not alter the Truth of things: But
Disbelief of things that are true is often the Cause of great Unhappiness: and
they who disbelieve such things as these, are not the less obnoxious to their
Malice, but more secure in their Power. So much as this is not impertinent to
be said concerning the Malice and Subtlety of the Evil Spirits, before a
Discourse of the Gracious Conduct of the Good. And I think my self specially
obliged to declare my Sentiments of both, upon any just Occasion. And, indeed,

I confess the Preface was not written so much for the sake of the Book, as the
Book Published for the sake of the Preface, as an Occasion to write on that
Subject, which I thought my self obliged to do, as an Act of Penitence for an
Unhappy Miscarriage, whereby my Enemy got that Advantage against me, which I
mentioned before, and shall here repeat in the Words then Printed, as follows:

I must not here forbear upon this Occasion to add, not my Opinion, but my own
certain Knowledge, upon great, and long, and in some respects in a great
measure woeful Experience, in an Humble Confession of my Fault, to give Glory to
God, Testimony to his Truth, and Warning to Men. I have had Experience of this
Divine Conduct, and of the Blessings and Curses attending Obedience and
Disobedience to it; so that I have plainly perceived that the Conduct of the
Children of Israel out of Egypt through the Wilderness into the Promised Land,
was a visible Manifestation or Representation of the Secret Spiritual Conduct
of Souls out of Slavery under the Powers of Darkness, through the Wilderness of
this World, into the Land of Rest: and the very same thing in Action and
Representation, which is delivered by way of Doctrine and Admonition in the
Book of Ecclesiasticus, iv. 11, -- 20. and vi. 18, -- 31. The Crosses,
Disappointments, and Afflictions, which I have gone through, have been very
grievous, and many of them known to the World, though nothing has appeared in
my Life, to which they could be imputed by others as a Cause in any respect. I
must therefore declare, that while I did act in a ready Compliance with that
Conduct, I not only had great Peace and Serenity of Mind, but all things went
strangely prosperous and successful with me; and I had extraordinary Answers to
my Prayers, not only for my self, but for others also: But whenever I have done
contrary, I always had trouble in my Mind, and what I did, was either blasted,
or unsuccessful, and often of such evil Consequence, as I did not foresee. This
I have found so, by great and long Experience, and in some of the great
Businesses of my Life, wherein I acted not only upon my own Reason and
Judgment, but also upon the Advice and Persuasions of very considerable
Persons. And after considerable Experience of this, I was once so unhappy in my
Disobedience to this Conduct, upon a special Occasion, having none to advise
with, and yielding too much to the Sentiments of our Anti-enthusiasts, which
was a Temptation to me, that (as I have special reason to believe) it was like
the Sin of Adam to me, an Inlet unto all the Unhappiness that has since
befallen me and my Family: And I have been as it were turned back into the
Wilderness ever since. The Things wherein I had this Conduct were not matter of
Duty in themselves, or not in the particular Circumstances; but either were
such as were in Humane appearance so indifferent, that I might have used my
Liberty, or the Conduct was much different from the Wisdom of the World. And
though I cannot say whether the Afflictions I have suffered were so ordered as
a Punishment for my Miscarriage, yet I am assured they were a Consequence
thereof, at least such as we often fall into, when we neglect the Good Counsel
of our Friends. And they have been such, as I am persuaded it is my Duty upon
this Occasion to make this public Penitential Confession, whatever Prejudice I
may suffer thereby from Men: If I can but thereby obtain the Favor of God, and
benefit Men, I shall accept that as part of my Punishment.

For the Certainty of this, I can truly affirm, That I had immediately upon my
Miscarriage as sensible Notice of the Evils which have since befallen me, as I
can have of any thing by any sense I have; as plain as if a Sentence had been
pronounced against me. And what I have suffered, has had Two several Marks as
exactly agreeable to my Miscarriage, as the print of a Seal upon the Wax to the
Seal it self. I cannot say but other Sins or Miscarriages might be Ingredients
in this Case: but I know full well that this was the Inlet unto all those
Evils, which I am satisfied had been prevented, had I continued at that time in
the way I was in. And it often recalls to my mind part of the Eighty first
Psalm, and other Passages of the Old Testament, which have been fulfilled in my
Case; and therefore I have great reason upon such an Occasion to confess my
Fault, that I may have other more comfortable Passages made good to me
hereafter.

And here I cannot but remember, that I scarce knew the Man at that time to
confult with in these things, who was not more likely to have put me out of the
way, than to have directed me aright, how to proceed in it. And this I note for
the sake of such Spiritual Guides as are consulted in such Cases: If they be
not very careful and considerate to avoid the Common Errors on both sides, and
neither encourage nor discourage the Attendance to such Impulses and
Impressions, etc. in general, but carefully endeavor to distinguish and to
direct aright, they may bring great Trouble upon those who consult them, (as I
have known some do;) and perhaps greater upon themselves, when they are called
to give Account of their Stewardship, either here or hereafter.

Thus far was printed before: to which I must now add: Whether these things (as
perhaps some others) were not permitted to befall me for Admonition to others,
I know not: but this I know by Experience in others, and even while this is
Printing, that there is great need of Good Admonition. For I find, by diverse
such Experiences, that God is pleased at this time to give some sensible
Notices of his Conduct to many, who are in some sort in the Case of Samuel, 1 Samuel 3.7. who then did not know the Lord, neither was the Word of the Lord yet
revealed to him; and when they come to the Priest, who should be as Eli to
them, to direct them how to behave themselves, are by him put quite out of the
Way, and either dismissed to the Physician, to be cured of Melancholy; or
advised to some cheerful innocent Conversation; or to mind their Business in
their Callings; or to reject the Impressions they feel as Fancies, and vain
Fears and Scruples. And many Cases there are, wherein some of these Directions
might be proper; but there are many others, wherein they are all quite out of
the Way; and wherein great Faults have been, to my knowledge, and, I doubt, are
daily committed by Learned, and otherwise able and good Men; partly through
Ignorance in these Matters, or common Prejudice against them; partly for fear
of encouraging what they see many abuse to their own hurt, and to the Scandal
of others; and partly for fear of bringing upon themselves the Censure and
Reproach of inclination to Fanaticism or Enthusiasm; and thereby at once the
Grace and special Favor of God is rejected, the poor Soul greatly
disappointed, at least, if no worse happen to it; and the Director must be
accountable for both.

But to make a matter of so great Importance the more plain, it may not be
amiss to propose an instance or two of some Cases: A Person wants an
Employment, and an Employment is offered; but the Person has strong
Impressions, either not to accept it, or not to continue it, being otherwise
supplied for the present; and thereupon repairs to some noted Divine for
Advice: The Divine considers that the Person needs an Employment, and upon
Examination can discover nothing unlawful in the Employment, nor unfit for the
Person; and thereupon confidently advises to reject the Impression, and
embrace and continue the Employment. Such Advice as this proves, in the event,
to one, unsuccessful all his time; to another, his Ruin and Undoing as to his
Temporal Estate; to another, the Occasion of the Loss of his Life; and to
another, the hazard, if not loss, of his Soul; and all this by such Means and
Occasions as could not be foreseen or discovered by any Mortal; but are plainly
seen and foreseen by some kind invisible Friends concerned for us.

Again, a young Woman, who is not at all proud, if we will believe her, only
she desires to be like other-Folks; but she finds something within her that
tells her, or suggests, that she will be damned if she wear such a Dress.
Hereupon she goes for Advice to a Divine. He being more cautious in such cases,
tells her, that since she may both lawfully and decently wear another meaner or
plainer, she should have a care that she does not reject such Motions in her
Mind: For many times things which are not damnable Sins in themselves, may be
Occasions and Inlets to such as are, and Hindrances of Graces, and so produce
such unhappy consequence at last. But not liking this Advice, away she goes to
another of greater note; and he tells her, that since that Dress is not
unlawful, it cannot be a Damnable Sin to wear it; and therefore whatever it
was, it could not be the Spirit of God that did so fright her; but she must
have a care of such things, lest she run into Fanaticism, and I know not what.
And this she likes and follows till the tricking up of her Natural Beauty
proves a Snare to her self and others; the kind Impressions, which she formerly
had upon occasion, cease; her Devotion grows cool, and she relapseth again into
the common Course of the World, and what will be the end of it, God knows.

What I have had experience of in my self and my own Family, partly for want of
due regard to such Notices, and too much yielding to Motives of Moral Prudence;
and partly by such unhappy Resolutions of Cases by others, would be too long to
relate particularly. I have had no less than four Sons undone in this City, all
as likely Youths as any, and all, after their disappointments, by their
Behavior gaining the Favor and Kindness of all they conversed with: and in
the placing of them spared neither Cost, nor Pains, nor Care, and took the best
Advice I could have; at first made choice of such for Masters, as I expected to
act upon Principles of Religion; afterward, such as I expected Friendship, at
least Moral Honesty and Humanity from them; but was disappointed in all. And I
know assuredly that all did proceed from such Causes as I have in general
mentioned already; and had notice of it in general before.

It is a great Unhappiness to this Church and Nation at this time, that we have
so few of any considerable Experience in these things, especially among those,
who should be Guides to others. And it is their Great Sin, and, without due
Repentance, will prove Damnation to many, that they have been so bug-beared by
a fluttering, Sadducean, Atheistical Humor, and base prudential Compliance of
some of greater Name than genuine Christian Virtue, as to be ashamed or afraid
to assert, or own so great and noble a Principle of the Religion they profess.
And therefore, besides my own special Obligations, and concern for the Honor
and Service of God, and of our Holy Religion, Pity to the many Souls, which I
perceive destitute of true Spiritual Direction, and Indignation at the
Baseness, Folly and Madness of so many Prudentialists amongst us, has made me
for some time to long for an Opportunity to bear my Testimony in the Case. The
Motive in my collecting the other Discourse, (which, though written last, and
by the by, according to its proper order, is here first) was to detect a
Misapplication of Truth, and retort his Argument against himself, who had so
grossly and rudely treated the Business of Fanaticism, without due regard to
that Sacred Principle of Religion, which is pretended in it; or to the most
noble and heroic Professors and Observers of it. But in this degenerate Age
God has not left himself without Witness, but raised up some of a more
generous Spirit; such as Mr. Smith of Cambridge, the late profound Dr. Cradoc,
whom I much esteemed for his Generosity, as well as Judgment, in Preaching up
this Doctrine, who told me, he had Preached 20 or 30 Sermons upon it; and that
if we deny that, we may burn our Bibles; for he knew not (he said) what
Religion would signify without it; and the Learned Mr. Matthew Scrivener, who
has left us a Discourse concerning Mystical Divinity, Entitled, The Method
and Means to a true Spiritual Life, and others; to say nothing of some I know
now Living, whose number I pray God increase, and make them perfect and
complete in all Graces and Virtue, to his Honor and Glory, and the Happiness
of this Church and Nation.

OF THE Antiquity, Tradition, and Succession, of Mystical Divinity Among the
GENTILES, FROM THE Testimony and Confession OF AN Eminent Adversary.
AS Adam was the common Parent of all Mankind from the Creation, so was Noah
the common Parent of all Mankind who have lived since the Flood. And of Noah
it is recorded, that he was a just Man, and perfect in his Generations, and
that he walked with God, Genesis 6.9. And that he was 600 years Old when the Flood
of Waters was upon the Earth, Genesis 7.6. From whence we may reasonably believe
that he could not but be well acquainted with all the Knowledge of his
Ancestors. And what this Walking with God does imply, we may understand from
the rest of the History, and the Apostles Observation, Heb. 11.7. viz. not only
a careful Observance of all the General Rules of Righteousness transmitted from
Adam to his Posterity, but a ready Obedience and Conformity to all special
Declarations and Manifestations of the Will of God to him. Instances of which
are those Commands of God, and his Obedience thereunto; in Building the Ark,
which undoubtedly exposed him to much trouble, by Questions concerning it, and
to various Censures, Genesis 6.14, 22. He did, notwithstanding, according to all
that God commanded him, so did he; and in going into it with the several sorts
of Creatures, Genesis 7.1, 5, 7, 9. and in going out again at the Command of God,
Genesis 8.16, 18. In his Walking with God in this manner, he could not but,
besides all the Knowledge which he had received from his Ancestors, learn much
more by the immediate Teachings of God. And it is not to be questioned, but, as
he was instructed by his Ancestors, so he was careful to instruct his Family
and Posterity in all necessary Knowledge; amongst which, that of Walking with
God was some of the chief. And this being so, I see no reason, Why other
Nations should not have derived their Knowledge, with their Descent, directly
from Noah? or, Why we should suppose the other Branches of his Posterity to
have all received their Knowledge, of Divine and Sacred things especially,
collaterally from that of Abraham, rather than directly and lineally from their
common Ancestor Noah. As Noah offered Sacrifice, Genesis 8.20. and Abraham offered
Sacrifice; so we find Priests and Sacrifices among other Nations. Such was
MELCHIZEDECK, a Priest of the most High God, Genesis 14.18. And certainly it was
by Revelation from God, or some Divine Means, that PHARAOH understood that it
was because of Sarah, Abraham's Wife, that the Lord plagued him and his House,
Genesis 12.17. as we find it expressed afterward in the like Case of ABIMELECH,
Genesis 20.3, 6. God came to Abimelech in a Dream by Night, and said to him,
Behold, thou art but a dead Man, for the Woman which thou have taken: for she
is a Man's Wife. And another PHARAOH acknowledged Joseph to be a Man, in whom
was the Spirit of God, Genesis 41.38. and when he raised him to the greatest
Preferment in the Kingdom, gave him for a Wife the Daughter of an Egyptian
Priest, ibid. v. 45. And Moses Married the Daughter of a Priest of Midian,
JETHRO, Ex. 2.16, 21. who was a good Man, and a Worshipper of the true God, as
appears, Ex. 18.9, 10, 12. And the Means then to Inquire of the Lord were
common to them, and to other Nations: As REBEKAH, Genesis 25.22. So BALAAM, Numb.
22.8, 9, 18, 19, 20: 23.4. went to inquire of the Lord, and received Answers
from Him. And about this time JOB is believed to have lived, who was a Holy
Man, and offered Sacrifices, and had Visions.

By these Instances, and others that might be noted, we may understand, that in
those ancient times it was believed, in all Nations, that there were Means,
whereby Men and Women might come to have some Acquaintance and Communication
with God; and what these Means were, is well worth our Inquiry.

That the JEWS had anciently their Schools or Colleges of Prophets, we may
observe in the Sacred Scriptures. And though what were their Institutions, and
their Instructions, and Orders there prescribed, is not in the Scripture
particularly related; yet in the Particulars mentioned they seem to have been
much the same with what was practiced by the Ancient Christian Anchorets and
Coenobites.

If we inquire amongst other Nations of most ancient Note and Fame for
Knowledge in Divine matters, the Egyptians and Chaldeans are the most
considerable. And the Means recommended by them do so well agree with the
Mystical Divinity delivered by diverse Christians, that some Opposers of this
Divinity think they have sufficient ground to derive it from them; and
supposing that a Prejudice to it, have taken the pains to do it. If the
CHALDAICK ORACLES (says one of considerable Learning, Name, and Place) were
still extant, which were frequently quoted by Plotinus, Jamblicus, Porphyrius,
and Proclus, (who did wholly approve the Chaldaick Theology; and from them in a
great measure the Fragments were preserved) we might more fully manifest these
things; yet as they are, they give us sufficient ground to draw the
Fundamentals of this Mystical Divinity from thence. For they speak of God's
being united to the Soul, by the Soul's clasping God to herself; and that not
by any act of the Understanding, but by the Flower of the Mind; (the very
Phrase used by Proclus, and the same which the Mysticks call, the Fund of the
Spirit;) of the Soul's being inebriated from God, (which Plotinus calls, being
drunk with the Divine Nectar) and Psellus explains, of Divine Illuminations and
Ecstasies; of Abstraction from the Body, and extending the Mind upwards, and
hastening to the Divine Light and the Beams of the Father; with several other
passages to the same purpose.

And for the EGYPTIANS, the same Author tells us, That Jamblicus, in his Book
of the Egyptian Mysteries, (which he writ in answer to an Epistle of Porphyry
to an Egyptian Priest, and wherein Proclus says that he writ like a Man
inspired) discourses at large concerning Divine Ecstasies, and Visions, and
Inspirations; in which he describes the Persons just after the Mystical way, as
no longer leading a humane Life, or having any Operations of their Senses or
Understanding, but their Mind and Soul is only in the Divine Power, and not in
their own, being acted and possessed wholly by it. Afterward he sets down the
several Degrees and Kinds of those; in some, they have only Participation; in
others, near Communion; and in the highest of all, Union. In some of these, he
says, the Body wholly rests, and sometimes breaks out into Singing, and all
expressions of Joy: sometimes the Body is raised up from the Ground, (as M.
Teresa thought hers) sometimes it swells into a greater bulk, and sometimes the
contrary. Then he lays down Rules to know Divine Inspirations by: viz. by
Enquiring, In what manner God appears? Whether an appearance of Fire come
before Him? Whether he fills up and acts the whole Soul, so that there is a
Cessation of all its own Acts? For this he makes the main Character of a Divine
Inspiration, that the Persons are wholly taken up and possessed by the Deity;
from whence follows an Ecstasy and alienation of the Senses: But if either the
Soul acts, or the Body moves, then, he says, it may be a false Inspiration. No
Man can express himself more emphatically concerning the Excellency of
Contemplative Prayer than Jamblicus does: This quickens the Mind, inlargeth its
Capacity, opens the Secrets of the Divinity, and fits it for Conjunction and
Union with God; and never leaves Men till it has carried them to a State of
Perfection; and by degrees does alter and change Men, that it makes them put
off Humane Nature, and bring them into such a State of Dei-formity, that they
become Gods. The first degree of Prayer, says he, brings to a State of
Recollection, and has some Divine Contact, which helps our Knowledge: The
second carries the Soul to a nearer Communion with God, and excites the Divine
Bounty to freer Communications to it: But the third is the Seal of the
ineffable Union, which makes our Mind and Soul to rest in God, as a Divine Port
or Haven. And he concludes his Book with saying, That this Union with God is
Man's greatest Perfection, and the End of all Religion among the Egyptians;
whose Mysteries his Design was to explain and vindicate. Many other Passages
might be produced out of him, concerning the Knowing of God by Divine Contact,
and the Insufficiency of any Act of the Mind for this ineffable Union: but
these are enough to show how well acquainted Jamblicus and (if we believe him)
the Egyptians were with the profoundest Secrets of Mystical Divinity.

There is a Book translated out of Arabic, entitled, Of Divine Wisdom
according to the Egyptians, wherein are many things to this purpose; but our
Author takes notice but of one passage in it, which he sets down as the Words
of Plato. But before we come to Plato, it is fit to be noted, that PYTHAGORAS
and the PYTHAGORIANS could not but be well acquainted with this Mystical
Theology, though they did not ordinarily deliver it in such express terms; but
in a more occult manner. For it is known and confessed, That Pythagoras himself
was from his Youth greatly inclined to an Inquisition into Religious Rites and
Mysteries: That he traveled into Egypt to hear their Priests, was there 22
Years, had recommendations from the King to the Priests, and was permitted to
acquaint himself with all their Learning; entered into the Egyptian Adyta, and
was instituted in things unexpressible touching the Gods; gave himself exact
Information concerning Persons and Things, not omitting any Person eminent at
any time for Learning, or any kind of Religious Rites; or any Place, where he
conceived he might find somewhat extraordinary: That he went thence to Babylon,
and continued there 12 Years, conversed with the most Eminent of the Chaldeans,
as also with the Persian Magi, who entertained him very courteously, and gave
him insight into their more hidden Mysteries, and Religious Rites; and, without
doubt, with the most Eminent for Knowledge of the Jews, in both places; and
likely enough, as Seldom and others think, with Ezekiel in particular.

That he made Theology, or the Knowledge of God, the First most Universal
Being, the Center of all his Philosophy: That he was by way of Eminency called,
(...); and his Philosophy, (...); because he treated chiefly of God, his Nature
and Worship: That he was a great Devoto, or Advocate for God, his Worship, and
Sacred Institutes: That the Confederation of his Coenobium (for so they called
it) or College, had reference to some Divine Temperament, and to Union with
God, and to Unity with the Divine Soul: That the Institutions of his Society
and Sect, for the Admission and Probation of Disciples, distinction of Persons,
Reverence to their Elders, Celibacie, Communion of Goods, Retirement from the
World, etc. were very much the same with those of the Esseans, and the
Christian Coenobites afterward: That of the differing Sects afterward none did
Pythagorize more than Plato, especially in Divine matters, as Aristotle and
Laertius have observed: yea, that the choicest of his Metaphysick
Contemplations seem to be traduced from Pythagoras and his Followers: and that
Plotinus did more clearly explicate the Principles of the Pythagorick
Philosophy, as well as of the Platonic.

And from all this put together, we may very reasonably conclude, especially if
we take in what is related by Jamblicus, That he continued 3 days and 2 nights,
at one time, in the same Posture, without taking either Meat, or Drink, or
Sleep, lib. 1. cap. 3. That he must have been well acquainted with this Mystic
Theology, which was in such Esteem with both; those, from whom he recieved
Instructions; and those, who received from him: and that in Plotinus and
others, we read the Pythagorick as well as Platonic Principles; and that in
both was a mixture of the Judaick, and what was derived by all from the Common
Parent Noah. To this I will add only a Passage or two of his, out of Demophilus:

Being born of God, and rooted in Him, let us cleave to our Root. For the
Streams of the Waters, and the Sprouts of the Earth, if they be cut off from
their Root are dried up and wither away, p. 11. Is not this the very Doctrine
of our Savior, The True Light, which lights every Man, who comes into the
World, of being born of God, and abiding in the Vine?

It cannot by any means be, that one and the same Person should apply himself
to Pleasures, to the Body, to the getting of Riches, and also to God. And is
not this also the very Doctrine of our Savior; Ye cannot serve God and Mammon?
But he goes on: For he who is given to Pleasures, the same will also be careful
for the Body; but he who is careful for the Body, he will also study to get
Riches; and he, who studies to get Riches, will necessarily be Unjust: But he
who is Unjust, is both impious toward God, and unjust toward Men: and
therefore, although he sacrifice (whole) Hecatombs, he is (but) the more
impious, and far from God and all Religion, and deliberately Sacrilegious:
Wherefore it behooves to avoid every voluptuary Person, as impious and
sacrilegious, p. 12.

You cannot well say that he is a happy Man, who relies upon Friends, or
Children, or any transitory and fading thing; for all these are instable
things: But to rely upon ones self and upon God, that only is firm and stable,
p. 12.

A wise Man sent hither Naked, will naked (or stripped of all) invoke Him, who
sent him: for God hears him only, who is not encumbered with Impertinences, p. 9.

A Divine Sense ((...)) solidly joins us to God: For like must necessarily be
joined with like, p. 9.

The same which I have said of Pythagoras, may in effect be said of SOCRATES
also, both as to the Disposition of his Mind, as to his Travels for acquiring
of Knowledge, and as to his Principles, from the Observations and Confessions
of such as were no Friends to Mystic Theology: They were Scholars in the same
Schools, and received the Tradition of the same Doctrine, as did Plato also
from thence, and from them; so that I may dispatch this in a few Observations
of what is known and confessed concerning him.

That he had as clear Notions as any touching God, his Nature, Unity, and other
Sacred Mysteries, which he could never have attained unto, but by some borrowed
Tradition, etc. That he asserted, That Virtue is neither by Nature, nor by
Teaching, but by Divine Inspiration: and that all true Knowledge of God comes
by Divine Infusion; and called God his Tutor: That while Man is subject to, and
under the Impression of Corporal Images, sensible Forms, and terrene
Affections, he is not rightly disposed for Divine Contemplation, which requires
a Mind defecated, etc. That Divine things and Mysteries cannot be comprehended
but by a refined Judgment, by such as have their Souls abstracted from all
Corporal Images, Impressions and Affections; and therefore Men should be very
intent on getting a Reformed Life, that the Mind being exonerated of its
depressing Lusts, might, by a natural Vigor, lift up it self to Eternals, and
by that Purity of Intelligence, contemplate the Nature of that Eternal
Incommunicable Light, where the Causes of all created Natures live in
Stability, v. Aug. de Civ. Dei, lib. 8. c. 3. And as to his own Life, That he
instituted his whole Life, even from his Childhood, by the assistance of his
Divine Inspiration, which he called a Demon, a Voice, a Sign. And that Plato
reports of him that he stood a whole day without any alteration in the same
posture, his Mind being abstracted with pure Contemplation; and that Favorinus
in A. Gellius says that he did this often.

And now to return to our principal Author, and the Words of PLATO in him,
which are these: Being often in the Depth of Contemplation, my Body being left
behind, I seemed to enjoy the Chief Good with incredible pleasure. Wherefore I
stood as it were astonished, finding my self to be a part of the upper World,
and to have obtained Immortality, with the clearest Light; which cannot be
expressed with Words, nor heard with Ears, nor understood by the Thoughts of
Men: and then he describes the Sadness he felt at the decay of that glorious
Light, and the pleasure which returned with his former Ecstasies. The Words are:
At last my Intellect being wearied with this Contemplation fell back into
fantasy, and then that Light failing I became somewhat sad: But again having
left my Body, returning thither again, I perceived my Mind abounding with
Light, and that flowing then into the Body then raised above it.

Nor of Plato himself does our Author take any more notice then of that one
passage; but of the later Platonists, Plotinus, Jamblicus, Porphrygius, and
Proclus, who, as he says out of Psellus, did wholly approve of the Chaldaick
Theology: he gives us some larger Tastes; and particularly,

The short account of Plotinus his Hypothesis, is this; That the Soul of Man
being immersed in the Body suffers very much by reason of its Union with it; by
which means it is drawn to the Affections of the Body, and to a Conversation
with Sensible things, and so becomes Evil and Miserable: That its Good and
Happy Condition lies in being like to God, not in regard of Understanding, but
a State of Quiescency: That the Practice of the Virtues of the Active Life is
insufficient for Assimilation to God; but in order to it, those which are
properly Intellectual are most necessary, whereby the Soul draws it self off
from the Body. Thus for the Soul to act by its self, is Wisdom; Introversion,
is Temperance; Abstraction from Matter, is Fortitude; to follow Reason, is
Justice: That by the Practice of these the Soul purifies its self, i. e. casts
off the things without its self, and so recovers its Purity, by bringing those
things into Light again, which lay hid under the rubbish of Sensible things
before, so that the Soul did not know them to be there; but for the Discovery
of them, it was necessary for the Soul to come near a greater Light than its
self: and to bring the Images which are in it to the true Originals. The way of
Purifying the Soul, he calls by the Names of Abstraction and Recollection;
which he elsewhere expresses by awakening the Soul out of Sleep, wherein it
was disturbed by sensible Images; not as though the Soul had need of any other
way of Purifying, but only restraining it to its self by taking away that load
of Matter which oppressed it; and then it naturally endeavors after the
nearest Union with the first Being; which he calls the True Being, and the
super-Essential Being. And he says, When the Soul endeavors after this Union,
it must lay aside all sensible and intellectual Images of things, and make use
only of the purest and supreme part of the Mind; (or the Fund of the Spirit)
that God then is not to be considered under the Notion of Being, but as
something above Being; and that we are not either to affirm or deny any thing
of Him: that, Our Contemplation of Him is not by Knowledge, or any Intellectual
Operation; but by a Divine Presence, which far exceeds any Knowledge: for
Knowledge, he says, hinders Union: therefore we must go beyond Knowledge, and
be abstracted from all other Objects; and be united to Him only by the Power of
Divine Love; from whence follows a clearer Light in the Soul: And in this
State, says he, there is not only a Cessation of Passion, but of Reason and
Understanding too: neither is the Person himself, (...), like one in a Rapture
or an Ecstasy he enjoys God in that State of Quiescency, as in a silent
Wilderness; which he calls, being in God; and in other places, seeing God in
themselves, being the same with God, being one with God; and which is the
highest of all, being God: which is the perfect State of Dei-formity.

Of Porphyry, who was a Disciple and Confident of Plotinus, the same Author
gives us this account: That he looked upon the Theurgick Way, as liable to
deceit, and not capable of advancing the Soul to highest Perfection. Which
Theurgick Way lay in the initiating of Men in some Sacred Mysteries, by
partaking of certain Rites and Symbols, by which they were admitted to the
Presence of some of their Deities; the End whereof, as they pretended, was,
reducing the Souls of Men to that State they were in before they came into the
Body. So St. Austin tells us from Porphyry, That they who were purified after
this manner did converse with glorious appearances of Angels, which they were
fitted to see: but Porphyry himself, as he did not utterly reject this Lower
and Symbolical way; so he said, That the Highest Perfection of the Soul was not
attainable by it; but it was useful for purifying the Lower part of the Soul,
but not the Intellectual. By the Lower part he understood the Irrational, which
by the Theurgical Rites might be fitted for Conversation with Angels; but the
Intellectual part could not be elevated by it to the Contemplation of God, and
the Vision of the things that are true. And herein he placed the utmost
Perfection of the Soul in its return to and Union with God in this upper part,
or Fund of the Soul: for the utmost the other attained to, was only to live
among the Aetherial Spirits; but the Contemplative Souls returned to the
Father, as he speaks, which, as many other of his Notions, he borrowed from the
Chaldaick Theology. To show what this Intellectual or Contemplative Life was,
that should bring Men's Souls to this State of Perfection, Porphyry writ a Book
on purpose, Of the Return of the Soul, as St. Austin tells us, who quotes many
passages out of it; and this particular Precept above all the rest, That the
Soul must fly from all Body, if it would live Happy with God: which is all one
with Abstraction of Mind, and pure Contemplative Life. In that Book he
complains that there was no Perfect Way yet known to the World for this End:
not the Indian, Chaldaick, or any other. But what that was which he meant,
appears by what he says near the end of the Life of Plotinus, where he has
these Words: The Scope and End of his Life was Union and Conjunction with God
over all: and four times, says he, when I was with him he attained to this
Union, by an unexpressible Act of the Mind: which he before sets forth, by a
Divine Illumination without any Image or Idea, being above the Understanding
and all intelligible things. And he says of himself, that he was once in this
State of Union, when he was 68 Years of Age. Which Holstenius understands of an
Ecstasy he then fell into; and imputes it to the depth of his Melancholy joined
with his abstracted and severe Life, his frequent Watchings, and almost
continual Exercise of Contemplation. For all these things were remarkable in
him: and Eunapius says of him, That he was so little a lover of the Body, that
he hated his being a Man; and being in Sicily, he was almost famished by
Abstinence, and shunned all Conversation with Mankind: as he begins the Life of
Plotinus; That he was like one ashamed that his Soul was in a Body. So that we
find the Foundation here laid, (says our Author) not only for the Mystical
Union, but the Abstraction of Mind necessary in order to it: and that it does
not lie in any Intellectual Operations, but rather in a Cessation of these
Acts, is likewise expressly affirmed by Porphyry. Many things, says he, are
said of Understanding things that are above the Mind; but the Contemplation of
those things is better performed, (...), otio and vacatione Intellectus, as
Holstenius renders it, rather by the Rest and Cessation of Operation in the
Understanding, than by the Exercise of it; as many things, while a Man wakes,
are said of him that he does when he sleeps, but the Knowledge and Perception
of them is by Sleep; for things are best understood by Assimilation. And
elsewhere he says, That our manner of Understanding all things is different
according to their Essence; those things above the Mind are to be known, (...),
in the way of unknowing, and after a super-essential manner; where we see the
very Phrases of Dionysius used by him; and in many places he speaks of the
Minds abstracting and loosing it self from the Body, and drawing it self nearer
to the First Being; of the Souls being in God; of the pure and clear Light,
which follows the Abstraction of the Mind; of the State and Life of
Contemplation, and the Virtues necessary thereto; such as Abstinence from the
Actions of the Body, and from Affections to it, which, says he, raise the Mind
to the super-essential Being. And he very much disparages the Active and
Political Life in comparison with this; the End of one, being only Men's living
according to Nature; but of the other, Assimilation to God: He that lives
according to Practical Virtues, is only a Good Man; but he that lives the Life
of Contemplation, is a God. From whence we understand the Deiformity of the
Mystical Divines, being attainable by the Life of Contemplation. The Way laid
down by him for Purifying the Soul is this: 1. The Foundation of it is for the
Soul to know it self, i. e. to consider, that it is in a strange place, and
bound to a thing of another Substance. 2. Recollection, or gathering it self up
from the Body, to be free from the Affections of it: In order to which he
advises to deny the Body in its Appetites and Pleasures, and to show as little
Care of it, and Concernment for it, as may be: by degrees to lessen all sense
both of Pleasure and Pain; and so to come at last to a Freedom from the
Passions of the Body. Then he describes the Superlative Being, and says, that
it is neither Great, nor Little, but above both; and is neither Greatest nor
Least, but above all; and that his Presence is not Topical, but Assimilative;
and that the only Way for our Souls to recover themselves, is, to bring them
into themselves; by which Means the True Being is present with them, and we
become united to God. Which Union of the Soul with God, Holstenius thinks it
very probable that Porphyry understood by the Book which he mentions in the
Life of Plotinus, called, (...), the Sacred Nuptials, because both Plotinus and
he supposed this Union to be wrought by the Power of Divine Love, as well as
the Mystical Divines; and Porphyry says, upon the reading of it, some thought
him Mad, because there were several things spoken in it after a Mystical and
Enthusiastical manner; for which he was highly applauded by Plotinus.

Jamblicus was Porphyry's Disciple, but out of him our Author recites no more
than what is set down before concerning the Egyptian Mysteries: but out of
PROCLVS, another Platonic Philosopher, who lived long after these, and of whom
Marinus gives this Character, toward the Conclusion of his Life, That his Soul
was so recollected and drawn into its self, that it seemed to be separated from
the Body while it remained in it; he has this passage: In the beginning of his
Theology, says he, he distinguishes between that Intellectual Faculty in us,
whereby we are capable of Understanding the Nature and Difference of
Intelligible Idea's, and that which he calls (...), the Summity, as the
Mysticks speak, and pure Fund of the Spirit, which, he says, is alone capable
of the Divine and Mystical Union; so he calls it, (...). For, says he, though
there be many Intellectual Powers in us, yet it is by this only that we can be
united to the Divinity, and be made partakers of it. For we cannot reach the
Divine Being either by our Senses, or by Opinion, or by Apprehension; no nor
yet by Ratiocination, (...). It remains therefore, that if the Divine Nature
can any ways be known by us, it must be by the Essence of the Soul. For the
Soul being drawn into its own Unity, and removing from it self the Multiplicity
of its Powers, it ascends to the greatest height of true Contemplation. While
the Soul looks about on things below it, it sees nothing but Shadows and Images
of things: When it comes to a State of Introversion, then it sees its own
Essence and Operations of the Understanding: But when it searches deeper, then
it finds the Mind within it self, and the several Orders of real Beings: When
it goes yet farther into the most secret Closet of the Soul, there it
contemplates, as it were blindfold, the Divine Beings, and the first Idea's or
Unities of Beings. And this, says he, is the most excellent Operation of the
Soul, in the Rest or Quiescency of its Powers, to stretch it self toward the
Divine Nature, and dance, as it were, round it, and to raise up the whole Soul
toward this Union with it, and abstracting it self from all Inferior Beings,
to rest upon, and be conjoined with that Ineffable and Super-essential Being.
And by this means the Soul comes to have the truest Understanding of all things.

All these Notions, (says our Author) both among the Chaldeans, and the
Platonic Philosophers, are built upon a very ancient Hypothesis, but very
different from that of Christianity; which Hypothesis being granted, this
Mystical Divinity appears with some face of Reason, and color of Probability.
-- It was this; That the Souls of Men did exist in another World long before
they came into the Body; that in their Descent to the Body they had an
Aetherial Vehicle joined to them; which upon the conjunction of the Soul and
Body became the Means of Communication between them, and takes up its chief
Seat in the Brain, which is the same which we call the Imagination: that the
Soul being in this state is apt to be much inveigled with Kindness to the Body,
and so forget its Return home: that the Body is capable of doing the Soul
mischief no other way, being it self under the power of Fate, then as it draws
it downward: that the Mind, being the upper part of the Soul, is always acting;
but we know not its operations but only by the Impressions they make upon the
Fancy: that the Mind has the true Idea's of things within it self; but we
are deceived by the Representations conveyed by our Imagination; and therefore
our Ratiocination is very short and uncertain: that our only way of Recovering
our Souls, is by drawing them off from the Body, and retiring into themselves;
and that upon this the Mind has the Divine Being so nearly conjoined to it,
that it passes into a Divine Nature, and recovers its former State, when it
parts from the Body. But because it is not to return alone without the
Aetherial Vehicle it brought with it, therefore the Chaldeans and Egyptians had
several Sacred and Symbolical Rites for the purifying of the Vehicle, as they
called it, which they made necessary for this End: and with them Jamblicus
joins, but Porphyry thought them not necessary, but that Philosophy and mere
Contemplation would purify enough without it. This is the true Account of
their Hypothesis, as may be fully seen in Hierocles and Synesius, without going
farther; and was the first Foundation of Mystical Divinity, which I will not
deny to be well enough accommodated to it. But it is as remote from
Christianity, as the Hypothesis it self is.

This is said by our Author to disparage Mystical Divinity; because he
supposes it will not be consented to by any that are Friends to it. But how
does it appear that this Hypothesis was the first Foundation of Mystical
Divinity; which, for any thing he has showed to the contrary, may be more
ancient than it? His bare affirmation in his own Case certainly is not to be
admitted for Proof. But in case that were admitted, how is that different from
Christianity; for he would not say contrary; though, no doubt, many of his
Readers would be apt to take it so? The Jews did believe it before our
Savior's time; the Apocrypha does favor it; the Apostle's Question concerning
the Man, who was born Blind, does favor it; nor does our Savior's Answer at
all contradict it, but rather suppose it: and it has been asserted by Learned
Men, both of the Church of England and other Protestants, from Proofs of
Scripture, as well as Reason. His Conclusion also is observable, that Mystical
Divinity is as remote from Christianity, as the Hypothesis it self; such
another cautious Expression not to expose himself, but by which the generality
of his Readers may easily be imposed upon. Truth is a very venerable thing; and
Divine matters ought to be treated with great Reverence; the very Heathen
Mysticks would have thought so, whatever our Rationatists think.

Besides these ancient Philosophers, our Author takes notice of the like
Notions and Practices among other Gentiles, even at this day; but of what
antiquity amongst them he says not. It is taken from a Letter of Monfieur
Bernier to Monsieur Chaplain, dated 4 October. 1667. concerning the Gentiles of
Indostan, wherein he gives an account of certain Orders of Religious among
them, who make Vows of Chastity, Poverty, and Obedience, living in Convents
under Superiors, who are commonly called Jauguis, i. e. united to God, who used
themselves to many Hardships, and were looked on as so many Eremites by the
People, being accounted true Saints, illuminated and perfect Jauguis: These are
People that have entirely abandoned the World, and sequestered themselves into
some very remote Corner or Garden, like Eremites, without ever coming to the
Town. If you carry them any Meat, they receive it; if they do not, it is
believed that they can live without it, and subfist by the sole Favor of God
in perpetual Fasting, Prayer, and profound Meditations: for they sink
themselves so deep into these Raptures, that they spend many hours together in
being insensible, and beholding in that time, as they give out, God himself,
like a very bright and ineffable Light, with an unexpressible Joy and
Satisfaction, attended with an entire Contempt and forsaking of the World. For
thus much one of them, that pretended he could enter into this Rapture when he
pleased, and had been often in it, told me; and others that are about them
affirm the thing with so much seriousness, that they seem to believe it in
earnest, that there is no Imposture in it.

To these others might be added, who have had the like Notions, and used the
like Exercises, as well anciently, as at this time. Such as the Indian
Brachmans or Gymnosophists, the Persian Magi, and the Druides, who are said by
some to have been as ancient as Abraham's time. The Character given by
Bardisanes Syrus of the BRACHMANES, that they neither worship Images, nor eat
what is animate; neither drink Wine, or Beer; are far from all Malignity,
attending wholly to God; is comprehensive enough to take in both the
Austerities and Contemplations of those beforementioned. But the religious
Care of the Ancients to conceal their most Sacred Mysteries from the Vulgar,
and their communication of them principally by successive verbal Tradition, is
a great reason that we have so little of this in any Writings, not only of the
rest, whom we call Heathens, but even of the Jews, and Christians. However, it
is plain by what is collected by our Author, that these Notions and Exercises
were not first introduced by Plotinus and his Disciples, but derived to them
from the Egyptians, and the Chaldeans. And if it be inquired from what Original
they derived them, it will be hard to discover any other than either Abraham
and his Posterity, as many assert; or at least the common Parent Noah; so that
what our Author has collected to disparage Mystical Theology, being well
considered, will prove a notable Recommendation of it. For as it is most
reasonable to believe that Noah did instruct his Posterity in all things of
greatest Importance to them; and that the Knowledge of them was transmitted to
after-Generations, and in particular to the Chaldeans and Egyptians in some
sort or other; but to the Jews entirely, and without Mixture of Corruptions; so
it is not to be doubted, but such inquisite Persons, and especially into Divine
Mysteries, as Pythagoras, Socrates, and Plato, Men of such extraordinary
qualifications, and so favored as they were, must have obtained a complete
Knowledge of them from all these Nations; and especially at that time, in and
after the Captivity, when they seem by Divine Providence to have been carried
away out of their own Country for that very end and purpose, that God's
dealings with them might be more fully known to other Nations. For the
Posterity of Abraham was undoubtedly designed by Almighty God to be a Light and
Admonition to the Gentiles, even from the beginning in all their various
States; in Egypt, in the Wilderness, in the Land of Canaan, in their Captivity,
and in their Dispersion to this very day. Nor do I at all doubt but there was
so much Knowledge of Truth derived from them to other Nations, as together with
what is observable in the Works of God, and what was received from the Common
Ancestors, was sufficient for the Salvation of all, who used and improved the
same as they ought; and for the just Condemnation of the rest, who neglected
it. And therefore, if we find that these Men were acquainted with the Mystic
Divinity, that is, with the thing, whether under that Name or any other, it
matters not; if we find undeniable Evidence of it among the Chaldeans and
Egyptians, and others before; if we find the most ancient Christian Asceticks
well acquainted with it, and much, or rather altogether in the Practice of it,
before Dionysius his Theologia Mystica was known in the World; this put
together is such a Constellation of concurrent and corroborating Evidences,
that whencesoever that Name, and some Terms and Expressions, which seem
somewhat uncouth, came in after Ages, yet that the thing it self must have been
derived from some very ancient common Original to those Nations; and to those
Christian Asceticks, not from the Collections of the Adversaries of
Christianity, (which is a mere groundless Oratorical Fiction to expose it) no
more than from Dionysius, whom our Author does not believe to have been so
ancient; but either from some of the first Converts of the Jews, or, which
seems more likely, from a Divine Conduct and Inspiration: for they were many of
them unacquainted with Humane Learning. Nor do I see any reason to think that
the Institutions of the Sons of the Prophets among the Jews were much different
from the Mystical Theology, which is thus opposed by our Author; but rather
that the same Institutions were conveyed, as Secrets, by Tradition to some
principal Men of all Nations, from the Common Parent Noah.

And indeed, if we do but fairly, that is heartily and without Prejudice,
consider that Account of this Divinity, which our Author has chosen for his
purpose to collect from a late Author, Father Austin Baker and Mr. Cressy's
Preface, I suppose it will sufficiently recommend it self, as no improper or
unlikely Method to have been used by the ancient Prophets. Let the Reader judge
of it (says he, and so say I) by these Passages in his ( viz. Mr. Cressy's)
Preface 1. The only proper Disposition toward receiving Supernatural
Irradiations from God's Holy Spirit, is an Abstraction of Life; a Sequestration
from all Business that concerns others; and an Attendance to God alone in the
Depth of the Spirit. And a little after: 2. The Lights here desired and prayed
for, are such as do expel all Images of Creatures, and do calm all manner of
Passions to the end the Soul being in a Vacuity, may be more capable of
receiving and entertaining God in the pure Fund of the Spirit. Thus far our
Author out of Mr. Cressy. But I think fit to add to these two, the rest of his
Characters of Divine Inspirations whereby they may be distinguished from
Fanaticism. 3. The Prayer here acknowledged to be the most effectual Instrument
to procure Divine Light, is a Pure, Recollected, Intime (or most inward) Prayer
of the Spirit. 4. Here are no new Speculative Verities or Revelations of
Mysteries pretended; no private new-found-out Interpretations of Scripture
bragged of. 5. Here the Established Order of God's Church, and the Unity
essential thereto is not prejudiced. Yea, the Inspirations expected and
obtained by Pure Internal Prayer do more firmly and unalterably fix Souls under
this Obedience, and to this Order and Unity. 6. Our Lights teach us to attend
only to God and our own Souls, and never to interess our selves in any Care or
Employment about others, till evidently God's Inspirations force us, and
External Authority obliges us thereto. 7. Our Lights make us to fear and avoid
all Super-eminence and Judicature, all sensual Pleasures, Desires of Wealth,
Honor, etc. 8. And lastly, Our Lights, if they should chance sometimes to be
mistaken by us, no Harm at all would accrue to others, and not any considerable
prejudice to our selves; because, as has been said, the Matters in which they
direct us, are in their Nature indifferent, and are ordered only toward a more
perfect Loving of God, and withdrawing us from Creatures.. 33. The contrary or
different Characters of phanatick false Lights, I pass by for brevity sake.

Out of Father Baker himself he produces these amongst others: Such
(contemplative) Souls are not of themselves much inclined to External Works, (
except (says Father Baker, which our Author leaves out) when God calls them
thereto by secret Inspirations, or engages them therein by Command of
Superiors) but they seek rather to purify themselves, and inflame their Hearts
to the Love of God by Internal Quiet, and Pure Actuations in Spirit by a total
Abstraction from Creatures; by Solitude, both external and especially internal;
(...) disposing themselves to receive the Influxes and Inspirations of God,
whose Guidance chiefly the endeavor to follow in all things. Tr. 1. S. 1. c.
2. 3.
And, The prope^ End of a Contemplative Life is the attaining unto a^ Habitual
and almost uninterrupted perfect Union with God in the supreme point of the
Spirit; and such an Union as gives the Soul a Fruitive Possession of him, and a
real Experimental Perception of the Divine Presence in the Depth and Center
(...) the Spirit, whith is fully possessed and filled with him alone; not only
all deliberate Affection (says Fa. Baker) to Creatures being excluded but in a
manner all Images of them also, at leas^ so far, as they may be distractive to
the Soul. And he adds: The Effects of this blessed Perceptab^^ Presence of God
in Perfect Souls are unspeakab^^ and Divine: For he is in them both as a
Principal of all their Actions Internal and External, being the Life of their
Life, and Spirit of their Spirits and also as the End of them, directing both
the Actions and Persons to himself only. He is All i^ all things unto them: A
Light to direct securely all their Steps, and to order all their Workings even
those also which seem the most Indifferent the which, by the Guidance of God's
Holy Spirit, do cause a farther Advancement of them to a yet more immediate
Union. He is a Shield to protect them in all Tentations and Dangers; an
internal Force and Vigor within them to make them do and suffer all things,
whatsoever his pleasure is they should do or suffer. They not only believe and
know, but even feel and taste him to be the Universal Infinite Good. By means of
a continual Conversation with him they are reduced to a blessed State of a
Perfect Denudation of Spirit, to an absolute Internal Solitude, a Transcendency
and Forgetfulness of all created things, and especially of themselves, to an
Heavenly-mindedness and fixed Attention to God only, and this even in the midst
of Employments to others never so distractive; and, finally, to a gustful
Knowledge of his Infinite Perfections, and a strict Application of their
Spirits by Love above Knowledge, joined with a Fruition and Repose in Him with
the whole extent of their Wills: So that they become after an inexpressible
manner Partarkers of the Divine Nature; yea, One Spirit, One Will, One Love
with him, being in a sort Deified, and enjoying as much of Heaven here as
Mortality is capable of.

The special Means for obtaining such spiritual and extraordinary Favors from
God, are doubtless very desirable to be known; and these our Author sets down
in the Words of O. N. who purposely writ in Answer to him upon this Subject,
viz. ( besides a watchful Guard, says he, for keeping the Conscience clean, as
much as may be, not only from Mortal, but also Venial Sin) Much frequent and
continued Vocal or Mental Prayer; much Solitude, and Mortifications of our
Flesh; and Abstraction of our Thoughts and Affections from any Creature; much
Recollection, and withdrawing from abroad into our selves; much Meditation on
such selected Subjects, as may rather inflame our Affections than increase our
Science; and when once we find these enkindled, the Endeavoring a Quiescence,
as much as we can from former Discourse, (those actions of the Brain and
Intellect now hindering the Heart and Will) and the bringing of our selves
rather to a simple Contemplation, to exercise Acts of Love, adhere to, sigh
after, and entertain the Divine Object thereof. And here (says he) if his
Divine Majesty please to advance us any higher to such Unions with Him, as are
not in our power, and wherein we receive rather than act, and he operates in us
rather than we our selves, we embrace them with all Humility and Gratitude; if
otherwise, we acquiesce in our best endeavors, and longing after him with
Patience, though enabled also to these only by his Grace. This our Spiritual
and Mystical Masters teach us; and thus, after this way, which these Men style
Fanaticism and Enthusiasm, we endeavor to procure a more strict Acquaintance
and Converse with God, and herein to follow the Example of our Forefathers.

Elsewhere, says our Author, he (Fa. Baker) describes the Progress toward
this State of Perfection thus; That he who would come to it must practice the
drawing of his External Senses inwardly to his internal, there losing, and, as
it were, annihilating them: then he must draw his Internal Senses into the
Superior powers of the Soul, and there annihilate them likewise: And those
Powers of the Intellectual Soul he must draw into that which is called the
Unity; and to that Unity, which alone is capable of perfect Union with God,
must be applied and firmly fixed on God, wherein the perfect Divine
Contemplation lies. It is true, these words are in Father Baker; but they are
but what he says we read in other Authors: and besides he adds: Now, whether
such Expressions as these will abide the strict Examination of Philosophy or
no, I will not take on me to determine. Certain it is, that by a frequent and
constant Exercise of Internal Prayer of the Will, joined with Mortification,
the Soul comes to operate more and more abstracted from Sense, and more
celebrated above the Corporeal Organs and Faculties; so drawing near to the
resemblance of the Operations of an Angel or Separated Spirit.

By this we may perceive, that it is not difficult, as our Author says, to put
together some of their Words and Phrases, as an Account of their Divinity; (p.
285.) and what Account that is. But besides these, there are some other
passages which he recites; and in them some, which he construes, as he does
these and other things; and some Expressions, which may seem hard Sayings to
one, who is not willing to understand them, or consider them as terms of Art,
and allow them a candid Construction; and may afford Matter for Exercise of Wit
to such as are disposed to sport themselves with Matters of Religion. The
wicked Spirit does easily insinuate himself into, and impose upon Persons
engaged in Controversy; they are ordinarily like Soldiers engaged in War, act
as if all was Lawful, whereby they can incommode an Adversary, without due
regard to Charity, Truth, and that fair Dealing and Kindness which Christianity
enjoins to Enemies; and too often behave themselves like such Soldiers, as are
loath to have an End of a War lest they should want Employment, trifling and
skirmishing at a distance, with vain Words and Shows: and the consequence in
each is frequently the baffling and disparaging of the Cause they are engaged
in, and giving advantages to their Adversaries. And I wish this Author, by his
management, has not given too much Advantage, or at least Occasion, to the
common Adversaries, Infidels and Deists. But as to this cause, O. N. has so
fully answered all Cavils at the Terms of Art, that it seems he left little to
be replied to: and therefore, for Answer, our Author is reduced to these two
shifts: 1. To inculcate the Unintelligibleness of Mystic Theology, from the
cessation of the discursive Faculty at the time of Contemplation, (which is all
that the Mystic Writers intend) as if all Men, in the very act of intent
listening to Sounds, or beholding something extraordinary, did not the like in
a great measure. 2. To make a great Bravado, as if he had the Authority of the
whole Church of Christ against all Visions, immediate Revelations, Ecstasies,
etc. in the case of Montanus; Whereas what was condemned in Montanus and his
Companions, was not the pretending to Visions and Revelations; but pretending
such to be Divine, which were not; but Diabolical, as appeared both by the
Manner, and by the Matter, being Heresy: as is very plain in the ancient
Writer in Eusebius, l. 5. c. 16. When the Faithful throughout Asia had met
often, and in many places of Asia, upon this account, and had inquired into
this New Doctrine, and determined it to be profane, and rejected this Heresy,
they were expelled out of the Church. And before he relates how Montanus his
Ambition gave the Enemy an Entrance into himself, and he was filled with the
Devil, and of a sudden possessed with a furious and frantic Temper of Mind, etc.
So he says of Theodotus, that he was possessed with a false Ecstasy, which
plainly implies true ones believed then, contrary to what our Author does
pretend. To say that it has no Foundation in the Christian Doctrine, and yet
to pass by so many Testimonies of Scripture produced for it, with no better
answer than what amounts to a Concession, deserves no other reply than only to
note it. To mistake and mis-represent Men's Words through Ignorance, is a Fault,
but more especially in Men pretending to Learning and Knowledge; yet has that
some excuse, by reason of the Humane Infirmity incident to all. But to do it
wilfully, deliberately, and seeking Occasions, is not only different from, but
contrary to the Spirit of Christianity. But what is it then, if it be in
despite of that which is really true, and the Operations of the Spirit of
Grace? To say that the Case of Montanus was the very Case of Mystical Unions;
and that the Spirit of Montanus was rejected in the Christian Church as a
Fanatic Enthusiastical Spirit; as if the Case of Mystical Unions was the Case
of that Spirit so rejected, with other expressions to like purpose, are fit to
be considered afterward, if they were not well considered beforehand. There is
a passage, which he recites out of the Spiritual Exercises of the Jesuits, p.
31, 32. edit. 1574. viz. It is the great Perfection of a Christian to keep
himself indifferent, to do what God shall reveal to him; and not to determine
himself to do what he has already revealed and taught in the Gospel: which is
very gross indeed, if the meaning be what he would have us to believe; and
indeed so gross, that it is not to be believed to be their meaning, if it be to
be found there, and fairly translated: but since it is capable of another
construction, viz. not to confine ones self to what is revealed in general; but
to be indifferent, as to things not determined, but left indifferent, to do as
God shall direct: I know not what can be said of any weight against it: Such a
Construction had been but according to their own Rule: Christianum unumquemque
pium debere promptiore animo Sententiam seu Propositionem obscuram alterius in
bonam trahere partem, quam damnare, etc. Exercit. Spirit. p. 65. edit. Ant.
1676. 8o. which had been more worthy of our Author's Observation. Nor do I see
any reason to allege, as an Instance or Proof of their Fanaticism, that Custom
of Ignatius and his Companions, related by Orlandinus, lib. 1. n. 111. viz. In
any matter of Debate they were to join together in Prayer; and after seeking
God, what Opinion the most were of, that they resolve upon. Where was the Fault
in this? in joining in Prayer? or in agreeing with the Majority? If the Odium
of the Name will excuse any thing with the vulgar; yet it becomes neither
Christianity, nor Ingenuity, nor is it consistent with true Prudence, to
condescend to such mean Objections. Over-doing does often spoil a good Work,
and disparage and discredit the Author. The Errors and Miscarriages of Devout
People ought to be pitied, mentioned with Grief, and not exposed beyond Truth
or Necessity: For that makes sport for the Devils and wicked Men; gives Scandal
to weak Men; promotes Uncharitableness and Irreligion; and discomposeth and
disordereth the Spirit of him that does it. He who judges others, ought to
take care that they rise not up in Judgment hereafter against himself. How will
that Fanaticism, which carries Men to the farthest part of the World for the
Conversion of Infidels to Christianity, rise up in Judgment against them, who
suffer their own Parishes and Diocesses of professed Christians at home, to
sink into Infidelity, for want of due Care and sufficient Instruction? And how
will the Excess of Devotion (if it be so) in some Spiritual Writers, rise up in
Judgment against such as will be found to have given occasion to Tepidity,
Carelessness, and Neglect of the most Spiritual Exercises of Religion?

NOTES and OBSERVATIONS to discern Illusions, from Divine Inspirations.
THERE is another part of the Quarrel, which our Author has to this Mystical
Divinity, besides that, that it is unintelligible, as he says, viz. That it
leads Persons into strange Illusions of Fancy; which he takes to be a great
Injury, not only to those Melancholy Souls that are led through this Valley of
Shades and Darkness; but to the Christian Religion it self. Which, if true, is
a just Cause of Quarrel indeed: But if well considered, no greater Cause than
others have against the Holy Scriptures, because some wrest them to their own
Destruction, 2 Pet. 3.16. It is true, many Persons have been imposed upon by
their own Fancies; and many more by Satan transformed into an Angel of Light:
but must we therefore deny that there are any true Divine Illuminations,
Inspirations, Motions, or Communications? It is therefore very necessary to be
well considered, How they may be distinguished. And because O. N. in the Book
which our Author answers, has a Discourse on that Subject, which has passed
his Examination without any hard censure, which is an implicit Approbation,
that may not improperly here be added.

FOR the discerning of such Illusions, proceeding from Satan, from the true
Inspirations of God's Holy Spirit, we affirm, That many Notes and Observations
there be, whereby they may be known, if not certainly whether Divine, as to
their Original; (where no Spirit of Prophecy or Miracles:) yet whether
containing Truth, and advancing Virtue, as to the Matter; and whether any way
noxious and hurtful, either to the Person that receives them, or others. And
this is abundantly sufficient. Now for these Notes of discerning them, I need
referr the Reader to no other Book then to the Doctor's Martyr, Sancta Sophia,
(though he was pleased to take no notice of them there) in the Preface, from.
29. to. 35. Again, in the third Treatise, p. 268. from. 9. to. 22. where, after
directing a strict Observation to be made concerning the Person, whether, 1.
viciously inclined; 2. arrogant and proud; or, 3. curious; 4. or much addicted
to melancholy, there are particularly cast off, and marked out for Satanical
Illusions; among others, these: All such pretended Inspirations or Revelations
as do invite the Person to say or do any thing contrary to the Catholic Faith,
Obedience, Humility, Peace, and Unity, Honesty, Purity, and any other Divine
Virtue: but especially contrary to the Catholic Faith, or Obedience; for
instance, as the attempting to make any new and seditious Reformations; as
likewise, when the Persons obstinately believe these Revelations to be of God,
after they have been condemned by experienced Superiors and Directors. All
such, I say, are condemned for Satanical Illusions, which cuts all the nerves
of all such pretended Revelations as can any way disturb the Church's Faith, or
Peace; and most of all, of those Enthusiasms and Fanatic Frenzies which have
been so common among Protestants. --. 14.

Lastly, in all these Pretensions, where there is any greater difficulty of
discerning the Good and Divine from the Bad and Satanical Spirit, we have a
judge to repair to, the Governors of the Church; The Spirits of the Prophets,
says St. Paul, are subject to the Prophets. --. 15.

But there are other Influences and Inspirations of the same Spirit, directing
us also in Actions in their own nature Indifferent, or of Counsel, and on
either side lawful, and free from Sin; some of which Inspirations cannot be
tried, or distinguished from Enthusiasm, by any such way as the former; which,
because they are much spoken of by the Mysticks, and are very necessary for
advancing Christians in the way of Perfection, it seems requisite, for the
freeing these also from Mistakes, to give the Reader here some account of
them.. 18.

1. We must know then (as Sancta Sophia, Tr. 1. p. 57. and others have
discoursed more at large) that there are two Spirits within us; (that is, all
the Regenerate) the Holy Spirit, and that of Corrupt Nature assisted with the
Suggestions of the Devil, who took a kind of Possession of us upon Adam's Fall,
Ephesians. 2.2. That this last Spirit is never totally expelled or silenced in us
during this Life; but tempts us still, Gal. 5.17. And that its Suggestions may
appear many times like the Motions of God's Spirit; pretending Good Ends, the
performing some Duty to our selves or our Neighbor, our advancement in Virtue,
and the like: That the Effect of the first of these Spirits, Sanctifying Grace,
received in our Regeneration or justification, is, in its infusion, ordinarily
but as a small S^ed, 1 John 3.9. 1 Pet. 1.23. Mat. 13.31, 33. or spark, capable
of a daily growth and increase; and which, with the cooperation of our Free
will, and further Aids, that are from time to time received from God, works in
us at length a total Reformation, and Christian Perfection; which so many among
the Regenerate as do attain, are said in a more special mannner to be Spiritual
Persons, and to have the Spirit of God: And i^ this sense the Apostle writes to
the Corinthians, -- (...) Brethren, could not speak unto you as to Spiritual,
but as (...) Carnal, and as to Babes in Christ, 1 Cor. 3.1. an^ so, ver. 3. For
ye are yet Carnal, and Walk according to Man: that is, ye are Babes only in
Christ, and i^ in some degree Carnal, and walking according to the natural Man
still, and not as yet entirely Spiritual And frequent mention we find in the
Scriptures (...) these several Degrees and Growths in a Regeneral Condition.
(It being God's Pleasure, that the Ne^ Man, as the Old, should grow by degrees,
and not b^ made complete in us all at once.) Mention, I say of some Babes and
little ones, and to be fed as yet only with Milk: Of strong Meat, and Wisdom,
and higher Mysteries, only to be delivered to, and spoken amongst, the Perfect.
See Heb. 5.12, 13. 1 Pet. 2.(...) 1 Cor. 3.1: 1.2, 6. Of growing in Grace, and
receiving Increase from God, 2 Pet. 3.18. Col. 2.19 Of the new Man being
renewed day by day, 2 Cor. (...).16. Of arriving to a perfect Man unto the
measure (...) the Stature (or Age) of the Fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.13. Of the
Apostles laboring to present every (...) perfect in Christ Jesus, and that
they might stand perfect and full in all the Will of God, Col. 1.28: 4.12. and
of this Perfection still containing in it higher and higher degrees; Not as if
I had already attained, says the Apostle, Phil. 3.12.

Though therefore by this Principle of a New Life, and the infusion of the
habitual Grace of Charity, we are already translated from the former being of
corrupt Nature to a Divine being of Supernatural Grace, freed, at the first,
from the former state of Mortal Sin, and from the Slavery and Captivity we
suffered under its Dominion; yet has not this Spirit as yet attained such a
sovereign Empire and Mastery over the importunate Solicitations of
Concupiscence, and the natural Inclinations of our Will and Affections, as that
we do not still fall frequently into many lesser, and those called Venial Sins;
or at least, as to Actions that are not sinful, but in their nature
indifferent, or lawful, that we do not, for the most part, still prosecute
those that are more grateful, or advantageous to our present Carnal desires,
and our Sensual or secular designs: Though such Actions are no way expedient
for us, nor acceptable to the Holy Spirit, in which now we live; nor do conduce
to our growth in Grace, but are great hindrances thereof; and though these
Acts, contained indeed within the compass of lawful, yet often expose us to
Occasions of Sin. Now, so long as we stay here, and advance no further, we
appear but as Infants, and Babes in Grace, it having not as yet obtained its
perfect Reign in us, either over our Concupiscence, which carries us still into
frequent venial Sins; or over our Nature and Will, which carries us, in other
matters lawful, to those satisfying our natural Condition. But, when we are
come to have potestatem voluntatis nostrae, as St. Paul expresses it, 1 Cor.
7.37. come once to act seldom according to (...), Concupiscence, to fall seldom
into Venial Sin, especially with advertency and unsurprised; and the Holy
Spirit to have a more absolute power over Sense, Reason, our own Will,
Propriety, and Self-love, as to these things lawful but not expedient; when
come to St. Paul's omnia mihi licent, sed ego sub nullius redigar potestate 1
Cor. 6.12. and to his corpus in servitem redigo 1 Cor. 9.27. and to act more
constantly according to the Spirit, moving now more perceptibly in us, and
giving the Law to us, when Grace is, as to these non-expedients, also
predominant, and sole Mistress; ordering all things (without our reluctance, or
also with our zeal,) to the greater Love, Praise, Honor of God, and the doing
of all things in order to his Will, so far as it is made known to us by this
his Spirit, then are we arrived to a full growth, to a complete Man in Christ,
to a state of Perfection, such as this Life attains: but few Regenerate there
are that do not, by their own disorders, die in their Spiritual Youth, before
they come to such a mature Age. As therefore, in our Regeneration, a Man is
removed from the state of Sin into the state of Grace, so the Church desires in
that which is called (from some high Mysteries it speaks of as to the supreme
Effects of this Grace) Mystical Theology, to advance those, already in the
state of Grace, to that of Perfection; and from the Spirit Dwelling, to it more
absolutely Reigning in us, which finds so many great Rewards, not only in the
next, but this present Life.. 19.

2. We must know therefore, That to such end this Holy Spirit received in our
Regeneration assisteth and works in us, not only as to affording generally to
all good Christians that seriously endeavor to save their Souls, such internal
Illuminations and Motions as are sufficient to direct them for the resisting of
any sinful Temptation, or to perform any necessary act of Virtue, in
Circumstances wherein they are obliged to it; but also, in affording us Light
and Ability in all indifferent Actions and Occurrences, (with which may be also
joined all the Acts of Christian Virtues, when no necessity obliges us to do
any of them, and so when it is lawful for us, without Sin, to do or omit them)
whereby we are guided to make such a Choice, as is more conformable to God's
Will, and, particular Circumstances considered, may much more advance us in the
Love of God, and Christian Perfection, and whereby we may avoid such other of
them as may be suggested, either by corrupt Nature, or the evil Spirit, under
pretense also of some Good End, but to defeat a Better. For the Holy Spirit
excites us and assists us, not only in doing Duties of necessary obligation, or
in the avoiding what is prohibited, and performing what is commanded by God
under penalty of Sin; but in all these Acts also, that may any way tend more to
God's Glory, or to our greater Perfection; though these be such as we may
without sinning choose or refuse.

For in this I may say, that the Holy Spirit in us is like to Concupiscence in
us; the one continually exciting us unto that which is Better, as the other to
that which is Worse. See the Apostles description of these two inmates, Romans
8.1. etc. and Gal. 5.16, 17, 18. where he says, v. 7. that Spiritus
concupiscit adversus Carnem, and Caro adversus Spiritum -- and that sibi
invicem adversantur. And ibid. v. 18. as also Romans 8.14. That those who are
God's Children, or Regenerate, aguntur Spiritu, are acted by the Spirit: It
guides us into Truth, Jo. 16.13. brings things forgotten to our Remembrance,
Jo. 14.26. gives Knowledge and Arguments to one, Act. 6.10. Utterance and
Eloquence, and the power to persuade, to another, Act. 2.4. To another Wisdom,
or a good Judgment, 1 Cor. 1.5: 12.8, 9, 28. Prudence in Governing, in
executing another Commands, Romans 12.6, 7. To another Courage, and Boldness,
Act. 4.29, 31. It opens Men's Understandings and Hearts, and renders them
docile, and apt to believe, Luke 24.8. Act. 16.14. Ephesians. 1.18. What is there
that is not done in us by this Holy Spirit, when we are employed about any
thing that tends to the Glorifying of God, the Father, or the Son? So is our
regenerate Life wholly managed by this Spirit, as the Natural is by the Soul;
and, if not obstructed, works in us a continual growth in Grace, till we come
to a perfect Man in Christ, 2 Pet. 3.18. Ephesians. 4.13. Therefore the Apostle
exhorts his Converts, Gal. 5.25. that as they live (their new Life) in, or by,
the Spirit, so they would walk in it, (according to its directions:) And that
they would mind or affect the things of the Spirit, (or the things it minds
them of:) Because, (...), within them is Death in the end; but the (...),
within them is Life and Peace to them: Exhorts them also, Ephesians. 4.30. with no
corrupt and fruitless Communication to contristate or grieve this Spirit. --
Tim. 4.14. not to neglect it. -- 1 Cor. 15.10. That it should not be void (or
idle) in them -- 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. not to quench it. Ephesians. 5.18. To replenish
themselves with it. And 2 Timothy 1.6. continually to revive it -- Romans 12.11. to
be fervent in it; without which the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 3.5. we cannot think
a good Thought; and our Lord Jo. 15 5. that we can do nothing.. 20.

3. These Actions of the latter kind, we are now speaking of, that may be
lawfully done, or omitted, the one or the other performed, without any guilt of
Sin, are either such, as, by the Evangelical Counsels, and the dictate of
rectified Reason, are clearly discerned by us; the one to be better, and more
to lead to Christian Perfection than the other; or such, where we have some
doubt of these two Actions, good or lawful, which is the better, or more
expedient. In the former of these we may safely conclude, that that which is
manifest to us to be the better, as to our Perfection, is the motion in us of
the Holy Spirit; and that the doing it, is the doing the Will of God in this
matter; and that so often as we reject or neglect this, so often we contristate
the Spirit, (that would thus conduct us to Perfection,) and refuse to do God's
Will, when this is known to us; whose Will it ought always to be presumed to
be, that we should do that which is clear to us, all things considered, to be
best, for his Glory, and our Good, to be done; though such omission or neglect
amounts not to a Sin, but to a Failing so much in Perfection. And indeed the
not vigilantly observing these Motions of the Spirit within us, and the not
hearkening to and obeying them when evident to be such, or also the not
preconsulting by Prayer what it advises, but rather precipitating our Action
to prevent it, is the reason of so many their no greater Improvement in the
Spirit, and that they are such strangers to it, and It to them, is a check to
the further and stronger operations of it in the Soul; (for, Who would offer
Counsel, seldom or never accepted, or asked?) abates the Fervor and Solace
that there would be in prosecuting its Suggestions, and leaves us guilty of
much Unkindness and Ingratitude. For, as St. Bernard, Cum hae Sancti Spiritus
circa nos dispensatoriae quidem vicissitudines vigilantissime non observantur,
fit, ut nec absentem desideres, nec presentem glorifices, in Cant. Sermon. 17.
When these condescending vicissitness concerning us are not most watchfully
heeded, it comes to pass that thou do neither desire him when absent, nor
glorify him when present.

But in the latter Actions, wherein we have some cause of doubt, which is best,
and yet wherein the making a good choice may be exceedingly beneficial to us,
(according to the variety of our Temper and Condition) to the better ordering
of our Life and Service of God, such Illumination and Direction of the Holy
Spirit, or also a clear discerning thereof, is obtained especially by much
Purity of Conversation, and Abstraction from Worldly things; by frequent
Recollection, and Introversion, and attendance on God, in the perfectest
Practice of Prayer we can attain to. For God has graciously declared to us in
the Scriptures; That the effectual Prayer of a Righteous man (as that of Elias)
avails much, Jam. 5.17. That he hears not Sinners, but if any one be a
Worshipper of him, and does his Will, him he hears, Jo. 9.31. That all things
whatsoever we shall ask in Prayer, (that is, such Persons) not doubting, but
believing, we shall receive them, Mat. 21.22. Mar. 11.23. That if we abide in
Christ, and he in us, ask what we will, and it shall be done unto us, Jo. 15.7.
(because indeed such ask by the Spirit of Christ, who lives in them, and so
ask according to God's Will.) That if we keep his Commandments, and do what is
pleasing in God's sight, whatever we ask we receive of him, 1 Jo. 3.22. That
if we ask any thing according to his Will he hears us, (and grants our
requests,) 1 Jo. 5.14. that though we know not what we should desire, or pray
for as we ought, Romans 8.26, 27. (that is, as to temporal Prosperity, or
Afflictions, or such like things, of which St. Paul there speaks, what therein
is best for God's Glory, or our own Proficiency) yet the Holy Spirit within us
with unutterable Groans and great Ardour interceedeth for us according to God's
Will; and that God knows its Mind, (though not expressed in Words) and
grants its requests: that the same Spirit searches the profound things of
God, (and what is his Will) and reveals them to us; that natural Reason is
not able to understand them, but they many times seem Foolishness to it: but
the things of the Spirit are discerned only by the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.10. etc.
Most of which Texts seem to be spoken, not only of our petitioning God
concerning the necessary means of our or others Salvation; but more universally
of all sorts of Requests concerning the things of this Life, and any things
that are in their nature indifferent, and lawful; and of his Spirit directing
us to ask and do in them what is his Will; and of his granting those to us
which may be best for us; wherein God hears, and grants the Petitions of
his Saints much sooner than of others.. 21.

I say then, since God in the Scriptures has declared these things, and made
these Promises, that he will not deny what we ask according to his Will, we may
rationally presume and be piously confident, that he will grant our Request,
when this is, only to know his Will, that we may do that which is according to
it; and we may safely take that for his Will, to which, after such Addresses,
and other due Preparations made, we shall find our selves more strongly
inclined; and also take such Inclination to proceed from the Operation of God's
Spirit, either illuminating sometimes our Understanding, in discovering to it
some Reasons not so well discerned; or else disesteemed, and thought
inconsiderable before; Or sometimes more confirming to us the Judgment our own
Reason made of the thing before: Or sometimes effecting a strong and suddenly
injected Inclination in the Will, so swayed without any preceding Reasons, or
discourse of the Intellect presented (to) it: Or sometimes causing an
extraordinary Tranquillity, Consolation, and Satisfaction to accompany such our
Election; (According to the Rule of Abbot Isaac in Cassian, Collat. 9. c. 32.
Cum orantes nos nulla interpellaverit haesitatio, si obtinuisse nos in ipsa
orationis effusione, quod poscimus, senserimus, non ambigamus preces nostras ad
Deum efficaciter penetrasse; where note, that the Devil, or any Creature,
cannot work so immediately and intimately on our Understanding and Will, as
God's Spirit does; but by the use of Phantasms, or Images; of the Spirits,
Humors, etc.) Or, where no such preponderation to any side is perceived in the
Soul, then we may presume this to be his Will, that, making use of our best
Reason, or others Advice, without any Solicitude, we take either side.. 22.

Now, in the discerning of these Divine Illuminations and Inspirations, from
Enthusiasms; or the Motions of the Good, from those of our own, or a Bad
Spirit, in these matters; as any one has attained to a greater Perfection in
Prayer, and Mortification and Purity of Life, they attain hereby a greater
measure of God's Spirit, and hence its Illuminations and Inspirings in them are
also much greater and stronger, and more intimately effective on the Soul, than
any other Motions, from whencesoever they come, can be; and so also these
become more evident to such, and many times are so clearly discerned by them,
from the Supernatural impression they make upon the Soul, as that it cannot
resist, disbelieve, or any way doubt of them, that they are Supernatural and
Divine. So St. Austin relates of his Mother Monica, that she clearly knew such
Supernatural actings in her from her own Imaginations; Dicebat enim, discernere
se nescio quo sapore, quem verbis explicare non poterat, quid interesset inter
revelantem Te, and animam suam somniantem, Confess. l. 6. c. 13. For she said,
she did discern, by I know not what Savor, which she could not explain in
words, what difference there is between Thee revealing, and her own Soul
dreaming. And indeed, if such interior Divine Operations were not sometimes
certainly discernable, how could St. Paul be assured, when he intended to
Preach the Word in Asia, and again in Bithynia, (a most Charitable design!)
that the Spirit forbad it; and not rather the Enemy of the publishing of the
Gospel? Act. 16.6, 7. or, That it was by Revelation, and not a Fancy of his,
that he ascended to Jerusalem, Gal. 2.2. or, That it was the Holy Spirit that
testified, and not Men's Fears, that much Affliction should happen to him there?
Act. 20.23. How the Corinthians knew, when they had a Revelation, that it was
not a work of their own Imagination? since all these things were transacted
only interiourly in the Soul, and it was the Holy Spirit only, that in all
these gave the Evidence to it self. A certain Assurance then, it cannot be
denied, that some at sometimes may have of Divine Operations in them. But yet
it is not affirmed here, that all Persons, less advanced in Prayer, and Purity
of Life, or also the greatest Saints at all times, discern the Operations of
the Holy Spirit within them so clearly in this sort of Actions, as not to be
sometimes mistaken; and it is sufficient, that Persons piously disposed, and
frequent in Prayer, may have a rational presumption of it, as has been said.
Neither is any more communicated unto them, perhaps, for the better preserving
of their Humility. And that no absolute Certitude is herein to be expected, is
a thing often confessed by Sancta Sophia. See 1 Vol. p. 139. and p. 137.. 23.

4. But in case such Divine Inspirations be sometimes mistaken, yet can no
damage come thereby, I mean as to committing any Sin; 1. The Subject of them we
speak of here being Matters in themselves indifferent, and on any side lawful.
See Sancta Sophia 1 Vol. p. 143. 2. No Command of Superiors in these any way
neglected. 3. No Neglect, besides using Prayer, in practicing any other means
of making a secure Choice, either in weighing Reasons on all sides, or taking
Advice from others: Only the devout Soul, in using these endeavors, yet relies
not on them, but on the Directions of God's Holy Spirit, working continually in
the Regenerate, both by prevenient and subsequent Grace; makes no sudden
Resolutions, nor rushes hastily upon any Action; but diligently hearkens first
to this internal Guide, what it may tell her is best; desiring faithfully, all
natural Passions and Self-love laid aside, to correspond with all its Motions;
the careful Observers of which, with a pure Intention of Mind, may be justly
presumed seldom to want them, though they do not so certainly know them; and
mean while such Persons, if not free always from Mistakes, yet are secure in
this sort of Actions we speak of, from entertaining any sinful Enthusiasm; or
such, as any other Person (except by Divine Inspiration) can either censure or
discover.. 24.

Here the Author proceeds to another Discourse, which being no less necessary
for this purpose, than pertinent to the Subject of Mystic Divinity, it may be
both proper for this place, and also useful and grateful to many devout People,
to add part of it. It is of

Directions given by Spiritual Writers concerning Prayer and Devotion.
FIRST for Preparation for Prayer, they are advised (1.) to a serious Endeavor
at all times to keep their Conscience clear from all Sin, even the least, as
much as Humane Frailty permits; and to a Care of avoiding the Occasions
thereof; without which Endeavors our Devotions cannot be acceptable to God, as
to the receiving from him any great plenty of his Grace: And (2.) at times of
Prayer to Abstraction from all Secular Business, Recollection of the Mind and
Thoughts from all Creatures, and all Objects of the Exterior Senses.

And then to begin at first with Forms for all Occasions of Vocal Prayer, where
Novices, says he, begin, and which the most perfect also frequently return
to.. 25.

From these they are led on to Mental Prayer; in which the Cessation from
External Action renders the Inward more attent and affective; more free from
Distraction of the Senses, and from the Wandering of the Thoughts. For this many
useful Subjects of Meditation are recommended, chiefly touching our own Misery,
the Mysteries of our Salvation, and the Divine Perfections.: 1. Of their
Natural Condition, the Heinousness of Sin, the Divine Justice, the bitter
Passion of our Lord in Satisfaction for Sin, the Terrors of Death, Judgment,
and Hell, to plant in them the Due Fear of God, and advance in them all sorts
of Mortification and Purification from all Habits of Sin. 2. Of the Life of our
Lord, and the Lives of his Saints, for Imitation and Growth in Virtue. And, 3.
of the Divine Perfections and Benefits, both received and promised; of the
Graces and Operations of the Holy Ghost in us, and the Abilities for doing Good
and pleasing God restored to Man by it, if attentively observed and obeyed; to
advance them in all Spiritual Grace and Christian Perfection, and to enkindle
in them an ardent Love of God; the Acquisition of which Love, and not of
Knowledge, being chiefly designed in them.. 26.

When by the Practice of these Meditations they are well prepared, they are
directed, by laying more aside their former Reasonings and Discoursings of the
Brain, (with the frequent strokes of which they have already kindled this Fire
in the Heart) how to exercise these Affections now, in that Lesson of Loving
God with all the Heart, and all the Soul, and all the Mind, and all the
Strength, Luke 10.27. in a more simple and quiet Intuition and Contemplation,
Advertency and Admiration of the Divine Beauty, and Perfections; and in more
fervent and amorous Colloquies with God; in Praising, Thanking, Solacing her
self with him, whilst she casts her eye upon his infinite Mercies past and
promised; in many Resolutions for the future to serve him better, and no more
so to grieve and offend him; in offering all she has, she can do, or suffer,
to his Service; and in putting her self in a posture of Silence and Attention,
to hear what he may be pleased to speak to and in her: speak to her, not only
in Guiding and Admonishing in all necessary Duty, but also in things
indifferent, or also good, but not necessary, when several of them happen to
fall under deliberation; in which she also desires to be instructed by him,
that she may still choose and do, that which may better please him, and wherein
his Holy Will may be more perfectly accomplished.. 27.

Which Acts of Love, when once to a competent degree facilitated in us, as they
fill the Soul with great Consolations, so they exceedingly help to advance it
in all Christian Duties and Virtues. For Love will not be idle, and works in us
now with much more Fidelity and Alacrity, as doing all things not out of Fear,
but Affection; and not to obey, but please her Beloved, and gain from him also
a reciprocal Love. And when a Soul is arrived so far, through the constant
Exercise and Custom of Prayer, and other Mortifications necessary to it, that
these Acts of Love, and of the Will, (of which there are many several Degrees
surpassing one another) are rendered easy and frequent, and upon every
Occasion speedily resumed, without any or much preceedent meditation; which
Acts before were difficult and rare: And when the Soul, by reason of the
greater Sweetness she finds in this latter affective Meditation, as I may call
it, returns not to the former inventive Meditation without some reluctance,
this is the first Entrance into that which is styled a State of Perfection,
such as Humane Industry attains; namely, wherein the Will assisted with Grace
excites it self to these Acts of Love and simple Contemplation. Of which
Practice thus St. Bernard, De interiori Domo, c. 14. Jam fortasse ascendisti,
jam ad cor tuum rediisti, and ibi stare didicisti: nec hoc sufficiat tibi;
Disce habitare, and mansionem facere; and qualicunque mentis vagatione
abstractus fueris, illuc semper redire festina. Absque dubio per multum usum
quandoque tibi vertetur in oblectamentum in tantum ut absque ulla laboris
difficultate possis ibi assiduus esse; quin imo poena potius tibi sit alibi
quam ibi moram aliquam facere. Thou have now perhaps ascended; thou have now
returned to thy Heart; and have learned to stand there: Nor let this suffice
thee: Learn to dwell, learn to make thy abode (there.) And with whatever
Wandering of Mind thou shall be withdrawn, make haste always to return thither.
Without doubt by much use it will at one time or other be turned to Delight to
thee, insomuch, that without any laborious Difficulty thou may be there
continually; yea, rather it will be a Pain to thee to make any stay any where
else than there. Thus He; yet is the Soul not directed here to remain idle,
stupid, or unactive, but to return to its wonted Meditations; and if neither
fitly disposed for these, to Vocal and set Forms of Prayer; or also to Reading,
when the Sweetness of such Contemplation cease.. 28.

Devout Souls advanced hitherto are directed and provoked to yet much higher
flights, and by their continued Devotions to prosecute a further Fruition of
that Object, which has no bounds. To this purpose, for their Encouragement, is
declared to them, from Persons experienced therein, the many rich Rewards of
Prayer; the Supernatural Elevations that God is pleased to advance some Souls
to, who have been much practiced in this Holy Exercise, and the more free and
familiar Manifestations of himself that he makes to them in several manners
mentioned before; wherein the Soul does not now act so much, as, in a great
Quietness, Silence, and rest of its former natural Operations, is more
immediately moved and acted by a more special Presence of God in it, who
sometimes with the Touches and Influences of an extraordinary Grace does
illuminate, inflame, and ravish the Soul, and causes in it an ineffable and
transporting Delight in Contemplating what is showed to it of the Divine Beauty
and Perfections; perceiving in it self a most ardent Love, and this
Supernaturally infused; when also are communicated to it many times Celestial
Secrets, and Divine Mysteries, and future Events, by internal Words and
Revelation. All which things are received by it with a great Tranquillity, and
Attention, and Cessation of the Natural use of its Faculties, Sensitive or
Intellectual: Nor seems it in its own disposal whilst it has these Touches,
but both does and must see, and think, only what his Divine Majesty will have
it; and this only so long as he pleases. Nor can any of these things by any
Art or Industry of the Soul be attained or procured when she will, but all is
Supernatural, and as well above the Operations of common Grace in us, as of
Reason. In which Supernatural and Extraordinary Divine Impressions upon the
Soul, the Experienced also observe two sorts of Motions in it: Either a very
intimate Retreat and Recollection of the Soul from Exterior Objects, as it were
into some interior part of it self, removed from the Thoughts or Remembrace of
Creatures or Worldly things; which is often joined with a Retiring also of the
Vital Spirits, more or less, from the outward parts of the Body left sometimes
in such Recollection without Sense, Motion, or Heat. Alienatio Mentis a
Sensibus Corporis, S. Augustine (in Psalm. 67.) calls it, ut Spiritui quod
demonstrandum est demonstretur. Such perhaps was that Ecstasy of St. John, when
he is said to have been in the Spirit, Rev. 1.10. Or, 2. an Elevation, Rapt, or
Flight of the Soul as it were above it self, and as if it were to depart
presently out of the Body, and the Person to suffer a present Dissolution.
Avolatio Mentis, as S. Bernard expresses it. Such seems that of St. Paul, 2
Cor. 12.. 29.

These things are not handled as Rules of Devotion, but as a Reward of it; and
as things only in God's, not our Power. Yet are these Rich Gifts of God and
Pregustations of the State in the World to come recommended to signify the
many noble Effects and powerful Influences, which such Favors have upon those
who receive them, as to the completing them in all Christian Perfection; that
is, in the perfect Love of God; all these Divine Inactions tending still to a
clearer Manifestation of God to the Soul, and so to the wounding it more deeply
with the Love and Longing after him, and after the Suffering and Doing any
thing with all Alacrity for him; and the Graces that are received disposing us
still to others higher, if the Soul correspond to them as she ought. If I
persevere (says S. Bernard (in Cant. Sermon. 69.) speaking of these Favors) to
correspond to this Condescension, as much as I can, with meet Affections and
Actions, and the Grace of God be not in vain in me, the Father and the Son will
ever make their Abode with me.

We are also told, That, though upon no Preparations and Predispositions in us,
whatever such Favors do necessarily follow, yet without these God does not
usually grant them: That Active Contemplation is the ready way to Passive; and,
That though in the higher degrees of them they are but rare, and given to few,
yet in some inferior degree they are communicated to many: and however, That an
Active Contemplation and Fruition of God by Love, (spoken of before) and the
Great Advancement in all Christian Virtue gained thereby, (if we be admitted to
no higher things, of which true Humility always esteems its self unworthy) is a
sufficient Recompense in this World for any Pains of ours in Purging of our
Life, and close Attendance on God in Solitude and Prayer, which is undertaken
for it.

Lastly, since such Christian Perfection chiefly contains in, and depends upon
the Exercise of the Affective part of the Soul, and not on high Knowledge or
Speculation, therefore it is recommended as attainable by all Sexes and
Conditions, and all are equally encouraged in the Prosecution of it. For the
Grace of Contemplation, as S. Gregory observes, in Ezekiel. hom. 17. is not given
to the high, and not given to the low; but this do often the highest, and often
the lowest; more often those who are remote, that is, from Worldly Cares, but
sometimes those who are in a Married State receive.. 30, 31.

More of this he has afterward, which I shall here add, as follows:

Of the Steps, in order to the highest State of Perfection, which this Life
arrives to, mentioned in Sancta Sophia, p. 32. 1. The first, is the way of
External and Imaginary Exercises of Prayer; that is, using the Discourse of the
Understanding, and Meditations, as also Vocal Prayer; then which Step, Sancta
Sophia observes, many go no further, but end their days in it; that is, in such
Meditations is taken up the most part of their Devotions.

2. The second Step is, the Exercise of the Will and Affections, which, after
long practice, breaks forth into continual Aspirations and Elevations thereof.

3. The Third, is, Divine Inaction, or the extraordinary, and supernatural, and
more sensible Operations of God's Spirit in the Soul, wherein God acts more
than she, and which are not in her power at all to procure sooner, or retain
longer, then God pleases: of which much has been said before.

4. After which usually, in the Intervals of these Celestial Visits, do follow
great Desolations of Spirit, as the Experienced have described them; partly
arising from the sense of her Loss, and an impatient longing after these
Favors, once tasted; and partly out of a great nauseating, and disrelish that
she has now of those entertainments of the Creature, from which she formerly
received some Content. Such we may imagine was that of the Prophet David, whe^^
he said; Heu mihi, quia incolatus meus prolongatus est. And Concupiscit and
deficit anima mea, in atria Domini^ And after a Non movebor in aeternum, (Psalm.
29.) an Avertisti faciem tuam, and factus sum conturbatu^. 63.

But not only this; but God also sometimes with draws even from his greatest
Saints, and that for some long duration of time, any sensible assistance at all
o^ his Grace, leaving the Soul as it were in its pur^ Naturals, and as if he
were quite departed from it in great Aridity, Obscurity, Solitude, Pressure and
Heaviness, disgusted with all things, she knows not why; performing still her
Devotions, and accustomed Duties of Piety, and the Service of God, as formerly,
but without any sensible comfort in such Performance; Meditation, Aspiration,
Reading, very difficult, sterile, insipid, and seeming without Fruit; only
forbearing her Consent to any Sin, Vanity, or Sensuality, and not seeking any
secular Consolations. Much discouraged also at such times many are, in
imagining, that God has so deserted them, for Failings in their Duty, or for
something wherein they have offended his Divine Majesty, which doubles this
Anguish. Or, if not this, at least they imagine it to be caused by some great
Indisposition of Body, (as it is granted sometimes partly it may) so as some
begin therefore to dispense for a time with the former Exercises of their
Devotion, and other pious Employments. But notwithstanding many times in these,
the poor Soul is mistaken; and this strange dejection of Spirit comes, without
any such respects, merely from the sole Will of God, and is the ordinary course
of his proceeding with those also, who are by his former Graces well grounded,
and arrived to some degree of Perfection, and is sent only for their much
greater Advancement therein, and the rendering them more capable of higher
Favors; and therefore ought, as such, to be entertained with all Equanimity,
Patience, Resignation, and Conformity to his Will.

These Consolations and Desolations take, as it were, their certain turns in
them, as they do, in a lesser degree, in all the Regenerate; they have by
course a Day, and a Night; an Ascent toward God, and a Descent, and decadence
into themselves; a Vivification by and in him, and a Mortification in
themselves; a Summer, wherein the Branches shoot forth, and Fruit comes to
Maturity; and a Winter, when the Root spreads more, and the Tree becomes more
surely fixed. To all God's Children do these Vicissitudes happen; but these in
a higher degree to the further advanced in Perfection; and the greatest Favors
are preceeded with greater Desolations; and these ordinarily proportioned one
to the other. And always necessary, less or more, are such Purgations and
Refinings of the Soul by these interior Crosses, because always something in
them is amiss and as yet imperfect. Our natural Corruption is still producing
something in us to be amended; and some Self-will and Self-love to be parted
away by this sharp Remedy, whilst we are in this Life. And the Benefit of these
Desolations, if rightly complied with, as well as of Divine Consolations, is
very great in many respects.. 64.

For herein it is, that the Soul comes most perfectly to know it self, and all
other Creatures; to see it own Nothingness, and to be most perfectly purged and
cleansed from all Self-love and Propriety: and herein it is most especially
taught -- non quiescere i^ donis Dei, sed in Deo; -- and Adorare Deum in
Spirit^ and Veritate; not, in Devotione: and Exercere se a^ Deum in adversis,
sicut in prosperis; the seeking Gust and Suavity, and Consolations, even in
Spiritua^ things, being one of its Imperfections, since these are not God
himself. Herein it is, that the Soul (...) preserved amidst such Divine
Favors, which a^^ apt to inflate it, in a due and necessary Humility ( Angelus
Satanae colaphisans, ne magnitudo Revelatio^ number extollat me, says the Apostle
after his Rapt.) Herein its true Love and Adherence to God; ( Quveniendo
adjuvat; and then, derelinquendo probat Donis firmat; and then, Tribulationibus
tentat; says St. Gregory, Moral. l. 20. c. 19.) its Perseverance and Loyalty
are especially discerned, in keeping constant in the Service of him, when
deprived of all Consolation in it; avoiding any application to the Comforts of
the Creature, when God has thus as it were dismissed, and cast it off: But
resigning it self, and loving its Misery for his Sake, and because it is his
Will that it should be so. -- An Exercise wherein our Lord himself was pleased
to be tried, (that he might become a merciful High Priest before God, and
experimentally) that he might compassionate our Infirmities in the great
Desolation he underwent in the Garden, the Night before his Passion, Heb. 4.15:
2.17. Where, caepit pavere and taedere, says the Evangelist, Matt. 26.37, 38.
And that sad Expression came from him, Tristis est anima mea usque ad mortem:
Tarry here, and watch with me, Mark 14.34. Yet these Desolations also, in a
Soul thus far advanced in Grace, are not void of a mixture of Joy and
Satisfaction, that it has always in God's Will being performed in them; which
Will of God now, in whatever happens, is a constant Consolation to it; and the
Apostles Precept, 1 Thessalonians. 5.16, 17. of Semper gaudete, is thus accomplished in
such a Soul, as well as his orate sine intermissione; and go together. For
there cannot want Content, where the Mind has its Desire; nor does such a Mind
want this that is unanimous with the Divine Will: the want of which Conformity,
is only from the loving of something that is against his Will. Worldly Sorrows,
says St. Gregory, affligentes cruciant; but these Spiritual, reficiunt dum
affligunt. In the one is, In afflictione maeror; but in the other, In merore
laetitia, Moral. l. 23. c. 13. Nay, more true Sweetness in these Sorrows, than
in the other Joys: And the abstaining in such a sharp Trial from all Sin
against God, or seeking Comfort from any thing besides Him, or giving over her
accustomed Exercises of Piety, argues also then a close Union of the Soul with
God, though not so sensible; and that when it thinks it self farthest from him,
it is in some sort nearest to him. Lastly, by and upon these Spiritual
Desolations ordinarily it is, that the Soul afterward receives higher sensible
Visits, and Caresses from God, then any former were; for which the Soul seems
best prepared by this her extreme Poverty and Lowness; and then it is, if ever,
the Soul receives them with more Gratitude; and both highlier values them, and
villifies its self. And it is God's ordinary way to exalt us in proportion to
our Humility, and to be Adjutor in tribulationibus, as in opportunitatibus,
when also the Soul is more endeared unto him by her Sufferings. All this I have
said, to show that these Spiritual Desolations (of which this Author Ironically
says, Then, when one would least expect them, follow, etc.) are a necessary
part of the Way to Perfection; and that the resistance of such Pressures when
they come, or a noncompliance with them in showing much Irresignation and
Impatience, in seeking to relieve such Spiritual Desertions with some secular
Contents, in relaxing former Holy Practices, and the like, disappoints the Soul
of those following Consolations, which are the proper Reward of these
Sufferings, and disturbs God's Work in her, and good Intentions toward her; and
hinders her Growth in Virtue, by her retaining still those Imperfections, and
that Self-love, which these, rightly received, would have purged and mortified.
This of the fourth Step to Perfection, Desolation.

5. The Fifth, is a State more settled, constant, and tranquil, where neither
these Desolations are so fequent or necessary; nor those Celestial Visits so
violent, or so short.. 65.

To these I shall add two or three of his Answers, to Objections and Cavils,
such as I think most pertinent for Common use: and first, whereas upon the
first Step his Adversary descants thus: A sad Case to end our days as Christ
and his Apostles did, who used this low dispensation of Praying to the last.
But, alas! they never understood these Unions with God in the Fund of the
Spirit; they taught Men a plain and intelligible way of Serving God, and bid
them look for Perfection in another World. To this he replies;

I ask, Did our Lord and his Apostles end their days only, or chiefly, in the
first Step here, that of Meditation, and Discursive or Vocal Prayer, and never
ascend to the second Step, exercising more therein the Will and Affections in
Aspirations, and Elevations of the Soul to God? What think we of the most
exalted Disciple St. John, every where discoursing so much of Love? and of our
dwelling, by Love, in God, and God in us? 1 John 4.16. What of those Precepts,
Pray without ceasing, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. Watch and pray always, Luke 21.36. And
with all Perseverance therein? Ephesians. 6.18. Are these to be understood only of
Vocal and discursive Prayer, the first Step; or not rather of Effective Prayer,
the second; (according to that, Qui semper desiderat semper orat;) which latter
is also much easier to be continued? Again; What think we of our Lord's
spending so long time in Prayer, often mentioned in the Gospels? Rising up a
great while before day, for this purpose, Mar. 1.35. Again; retiring into the
Wilderness, for a great vacancy to it, Luke 5.16. Before the day of the
Election of his twelve Apostles, (the twelve Foundations of his Church)
ascending into a solitary Mountain, and there spending the whole Night in
Prayer, Luke 6.13. His ascending again into another Mountain, before he took
his last Journey to Jerusalem, for the accomplishing of his Passion, taking
three of his Disciples with him, where all the Night again was spent in Prayer;
for it is said, he descended not from the Hill till the next day: and that
there the three Disciples were surprised with Sleep, Luke 9.37, 32. In which
Prayer they saw his Countenance changed, and an anticipated appearance of his
Glory, such as he shall have when he comes to Judgment, 2 Pet. 1.16. and an
Apparition also of Moses and Elias, they by a supernatural Illumination knowing
also who the Persons were, Matt. 16.28. and his Disciple Peter in such an
Extatick Joy, as that he cried out, Bonum est esse hic, etc. Luke 9.33. not
knowing, says the Evangelist, what he said. So, in our Lord's being in Prayer,
presently after John's Baptizing him happened the Vision of the Heavens opened,
the Holy Ghost descending upon him in a Bodily shape like a Dove, seen by the
Baptist, Luke 3.21, 22. and a Voice from Heaven speaking to him, as here, Thou
art my beloved Son, Luke 9.35. And then a Rapt of the same Spirit that carried
him into the Desert; where also we may rationally imagine his time to have been
wholly spent in Prayer and Devotion, and this in such a degree, as to suspend
and supercede the ordinary Functions of Nature, as to Eating and Drinking; and
in these his Prayers the Tempter to have assaulted him. What think we again of
our Lord's Infremuit Spiritu, once and again, in his Prayer to his Father for
the Resurrection of Lazarus? Joh. 11.33, 38. of the ravishing Expressions of
his Love, and tender Affection, and Aspirations after a perfect Union of all
his with Him, and his Father, in his Prayer after his last Supper, delivered,
Joh. 17. from ver. 20. to the end. And, lastly, of his (...) in the Garden,
with few Words, but much Passion, being in an Agony, and sweating Blood, and
making frequent acts of Resignation, and Conformity to the Will of his Father.
What think we again of St. Peter's Extatical Prayer, and his Vision on Simon
the Tanner's Housetop, Act. 10.9. and again, St. Paul's in the Temple, Act.
22.17. Whilst I prayed, I was in an Ecstasy, etc? Did our Lord and his
Apostles, in the Devotions here mentioned, not ascend at all to that which the
Mysticks make the second Step to Perfection, the Aspirations and Elevations of
the Will and Affections; but only stay on the first Step? and, Did they
understand nothing of that the Mysticks call passive Unions with God? Their
Ecstasies and Raptures, and their being in the Spirit, their (...), 2 Cor. 12.4.
and (...), Romans 8.26. argue otherwise. But then are Passive Unions the obscure
and unintelligible way of Serving God, that the Church teaches in her Rules of
Devotion; or, the end rather which her plain and intelligible way sometimes
attains to? Lastly, Is there not in some sort a State of Perfection also in
this World? 1 Cor. 2.6. we speak Wisdom among the Perfect. And Phil. 3.15. let
us, as many as be perfect, be thus minded. And Luke 6.40. Every one that is
perfect, shall be as his Master, (that is, in Sufferings like him.) The Author
may do well to review this passage of his.. 66.

The repairing to Prayer, in the best manner we can make it, is a proper,
natural, and most efficacious way to obtain a supernatural Light (from God's
Spirit) to discern his Will in all our Actions; speaking of such as are
indifferent, and such wherein neither we, nor any others, have any external
certain Rule, all Circumstances considered, whereby we may be guided, as we
have in all such other Actions, the Lawfulness of which is doubted of; which
yet is not said, as if Prayer were the only means of our direction in these, so
as to exclude the making use of either our own Reason, or other Men's Advice, as
is said before.. 76.

This is not making Enthusiasm, but Prayer, a means to obtain the Illuminations
of God's Spirit, to show us, in two things suggested to us, which of them comes
from It, or which is more conformable to God's Will, that so we may follow and
obey it: and, What a Christian is he, that being doubtful, especially in two
assairs of much concernment, which to make choice of, does not retire to his
Prayers, desiring God to direct him in such a particular, and promising to do
that which he shall be pleased, by any way, to signify to him to be more
conformable to his Will, and more conducing to Christian Perfection, (as
certainly the one may be much more than the other, although both contained
within the general bounds of Good, or indifferent?) And then, what Illumination
he Prays for, why may not he also expect? Again, Who is there, much frequenting
Prayer, that does not perceive in them some Illustrations and Influences
entering, and injected as it were into his Mind, without his own procurement,
touching a more perfect knowledge of himself; or the immense Love of God to
Mankind; or some acceptable Service he may do to God or his Neighbor; or
secret Reprehensions for some Faults; or Admonitions for the better ordering of
his Life; Spiritu (as our Lord says, Jo. 3.8.) Spirante ubi vult, and he not
knowing whence such things come, or how they pass away? yet these things, we
are assured, must be from God's Spirit, because no good Thought is from our
selves. And why may not we imagine the same (a due Preparation being supposed)
of the Thoughts injected in our Doubtings, and Requests concerning Actions left
free, and undetermined by the Divine declared Will, what way in these we may
rather take, the better to serve and please him? God forbid that the Name of
Enthusiasm should deterr Christians from such a Practice, or hearkening to this
internal Language; or (as Mr. Cressy expresses it in his Preface) should render
Prayer, and by Prayer the obtaining of Divine Grace, a suspicious Exercise. And
I wish the Author would a little better weigh his Words, and the malign
Influence they may have on others. We say then, Divine Inspirations are
necessary (for Grace, as well furthers as prevents us) to distinguish the
Motions of the Good and Bad Spirit in our Minds in matters purely indifferent,
(which may be proposed to us by either of these Spirits, for a different end,)
where we have no other external Rule to judge these Motions by, as we have in
all internal Suggestions concerning such other matters as are either directly
commanded or prohibited by God's Law.

I shall conclude my Collections out of this Author, with the Explications of
some of the Terms of Art which are quarrelled with, as follows:

Divine Inaction is, in plain English, the acting of God, or his Spirit in us,
which, in the Perfect, is more extraordinary, sensible, and manifest.. 48.

Passive Unions, are called Passive, not that when ^erein a Soul contemplates
God, she may not be said (...) some sort Active; but, Because when God is
pleased (...) graciously to communicate himself to the Soul, the Soul is taken
out of her own Disposal, and does and must see and think only what God will
have her, and this no longer then his good pleasure is such. Neither can any
Dispositions or Preparations that the Soul can use assuredly procure it. Thus
Sancta Sophia explains this Word And the Expression is secured by such like
Scripture Language; Qui Spiritu Dei aguntur, Romans 8.14. Not I live, but Christ
in me, Gal. 2.20. Not (...) work, but the Grace of God which is with me, 1 Co^^
15.10. Not ye that speak, but the Spirit of you^ Father that speaks in you,
Matt. 10.20. So th^^ Spirit, that is in us, is said to interceed for us wi^^
Groans unutterable, Romans 8.26. etc.. 48.

Deiformity and Deification are words not of lat^ only, but anciently used,
signifying an Union wit^ God, not in Essence, but by Grace; and this Union
still more intimate, as the Grace more extraordinary: secured by like Scripture
Language. F^^ Deiform, Renewed to the Image of our Creator, Col. ^.10. Changed
into the Image of our Lord, 2 Co^. 3.18. Transformed by the renewing of our
Min^^ Romans 12.2. For Deification, Partakers of the Div^^ Nature and of the
Powers of the future World, Heb. ^^ 4, 5. The Lord and we made one Spirit, 2.
Pet. 1.^^ Filled with all the Fullness of God, 1 Cor. 6.17.

I have no more, but to acquaint the Reader, who t^^ O. N. was, out of whose
Book I have collected the things; his Name was ABRAHAM WOODHEA^ a good Man, who
with great Modesty and Solidity h^^ vindicated Mystical Divinity against the
Quarrel ^^ one who charged it to be Fanaticism. His Charact^ may be seen more
at large in Mr. Wood's Oxford Actiquities.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
WHEREAS it is feared by some, that what is in the foregoing Discourse related
concerning Plotinus and Porphyrius, who lived in Gospel Times, and yet were not
Christians, but the latter a grand Adversary of the Christians, and of
Christianity, may too much gratify some called Quakers, to their hurt, who are
great Magnifyers of the Gentile Dispensation: I do declare, that I should be
glad to gratify any People for their Good, but not any to their Hurt: And
therefore, to prevent any such misuse of what I have written for a good
purpose, which I have mentioned in the end of the Preface, they must know,

1. That as the Actions of Witches, and their Familiars, if the matter of fact
be evident and undeniable, are good Evidence against Atheists and Sadduceans:
and the Real Inspiration of any Spirit, if proved, is good Evidence against all
such Anti-enthusiasts, as deny the Reality of Inspiration, and that there is
any thing more in it than merely the actings of Peoples Imaginations; so the
plain apert Declarations by these Men of the Mystic Divinity, which was more
occultly delivered by the Ancients, is good Evidence of the Tradition and
Succession of these Mysteries, though they should be found to have erred in the
Use and Application of it: And for this purpose was that Collection made.

2. That though Porphyry and Plotinus, and some others of them, might receive
some Lights, Powerful Attractions, and Sensible Consolations, etc. from some
considerable Spirit, yet was not that the Spirit of Christ, or any Good
Ministering Spirit; not such as that of Socrates, under the Gentile
Dispensation; for Porphy^ ridiculed it; ( v. Soc. Hist. l. 3. c. 23.) but a
Spirit of Antichrist, and of Satan transformed as appears most manifestly in
Porphyry, who was a Renagado, and Apostate from Christianity; and that not upon
any Grounds of Reason, but upon Passion for some Reproof, as Valesius
understands it; or some more severe Discipline, he received from some
Christians possibly for some abuse by Scoffing, to which he was much addicted;
and thereupon became not only an Apostate, but a spiteful Adversary, and the
more impudent, through the Countenance of the Emperor Julian, who was also an
Apostate, and such another Scoffer. This might be abundantly showed, if it was
needful here, and may be upon some other occasion: but this is sufficient for
this And this may serve for another purpose, in respect of the Quakers; viz. to
undeceive them, and let them see plainly by what Spirit they have been
deceived, even this very Antichristian Porphyrian Spirit, and no better. The
Spirit, I doubt not, is the very same, or of the same kind, only the Appearance
is somewhat different, more barefaced then, upon the Encouragement of an
Apostate Emperor; but more covert now in this, being a Christian State. But as
that soon ceased, so will this, I am well satisfied, to the Shame and Confusion
of those, who obstinately persist in their Errors; but especially those, who
not only are deceived, but presume to take upon them to be Ministers of Christ,
and deceive others; when it shall appear that they are only Ministers of this
Porphyrian Antichristian Spirit, that is, of Satan transformed; as I nothing
doubt but it will in due time, and that ere long, by undeniable Moral Evidence,
if not also by manifest Divine Vengeance upon some of the Obstinate; which I
have sincerely endeavored to prevent; and should still be glad to help them
out, if they would humble themselves, and give Glory to God, as their Case does
require: otherwise they will certainly be called to account for neglected
Divine Favors.

As for the Gentile Dispensation, there is plainly a Fallacy concerning it put
upon them by the Subtilty and Fraud of that Spirit, which acts so sensibly
amongst them. For as the Israelites were chosen to be, as it were, of God's own
Regiment, and are therefore called his Peculiar people; yet were they, for
their Sin, delivered over to the Conduct of an Angel, Exodus 33. so were other
Nations committed to the Conduct of certain Angels, probably of inferior
Orders. And as the Israelites, after they were settled in the Promised Land,
under the immediate Government of God, ( v. Sam. 8.7.) were often,
notwithstanding, for their Backslidings and Transgressions, delivered into the
hands of their Enemies, (which was plainly a Representation of Spiritual
matters:) so the other Nations, though they were committed at first to the
Regiment of Good Angels, though of an inferior order, yet when they came to
yield to the Inspirations of Apostate Spirits, (which was a real, though
Spiritual Fornication and Defilement) were left in theirPower to be abused, and
ridden, and led Captive by them at their pleasure. And those who continued
under their Conduct to the last, without Repentance, are like to have their
part with them hereafter. And this is the Mystery of Iniquity whereby these
People are imposed upon by the Subtilty of this Porphyrian Spirit. For,

There is a twofold Gentile Dispensation, or two parts of the Gentile
Dispensation; the one of Grace, under the Good Angel, which is God's Deputy;
the other of Judgment, under the Apostate Spirit, which is God's Executioner of
Vengeance. And this is it, which St. Paul tells us concerning the Seduced by
the Spirit of Antichrist, that God should send them strong Delusions to believe
a Lie, because they received not the Love of the Truth; that they all might be
damned who believe not the Truth. Now, whatever become of the rest, who have
not the Favor of the Gospel communicated to them, but yet desert not the
Conduct of the Spirit, by God set over them; yet those who have the Gospel in
all Simplicity offered to them, and either through Pride and Conceitedness, or
through the Inspiration of any Spirit, are drawn from it, their Case is very
dangerous: for no Good Spirit would dare, or would offer any such thing: and
then it must needs be some wicked Spirit in disguise, how specious soever his
appearance be, which for some Spiritual Sin, at least, if not Carnal or
Worldly, in them or their Parents, has gotten Advantage of them: And such are
very officious to offer themselves, and very subtle to deceive: And their
Neglect of the Offers of Grace is like to prove fatal to them. But none are in
greater danger than they, who are so unhappy as to become the Agents and
Ministers of such a Spirit, whatever they may think of themselves at present.

This, I hope, may serve for this Occasion; but having for diverse Months past
been endeavoring, by private Conferences with, and Letters to, the Chief of
their Ministers, to set this People right, in what they are out of the way, I
intend ere long, if no less will serve, by the Grace of God, to discourse these
matters more fully at some public Meetings, upon sufficient Notice, and there
to give a true Account of my Proceedings with them hitherto, and to discourse
the Great Question now depending between us:

What that Spirit is, by which the Party has been generally and principally
acted and conducted? Whether the Spirit of Christ, or any Good Ministering
Spirit; or the Spirit of Antichrist, or some Porphyrian or Apostate Spirit?

And in the mean time I only recommend this Advertisement to all, That the Holy
Scriptures and the best Spiritual Writers give great Caution to beware of false
Spirits, and Directions to Try the Spirits: and if the Leaders of the Quakers
do not so, they are the more to be suspected; also, That it is commonly agreed
by such Writers, that there is often much Deceit and Delusions of Evil and
Seducing Spirits, in seeming Illuminations, and Sensible Impressions and
Inspirations. See Sancta Sophia, Tr. 3.. 4. chapter 5. etc.

FINIS.
Enthusiasmus Divinus: THE GUIDANCE OF THE Spirit of GOD: The Doctrine of the
Scriptures, of the Catholic Church, of the Church of England in particular,
upon a Discourse of Sir Matthew Hale's concerning it.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, for the Use and Benefit of a Religious
Society, 1697.

OF THE GUIDANCE OF THE Spirit of GOD.
The Judgment of Sir Matthew hale concerning it, in his Contemplations on the
Magnet, c. 15. p. 132.
THE Magnet has not only its intrinsic, active Principle, its Form from which
its Motions proceed; but there is also a common Magnetism of the Earth and its
Effluxes, that greatly assist, excite, and direct its Motions.

Animals and Vegetables have not only their intrinsic, specifical, vital
Principles of their specifical Motions and Operations, but the Sun and its Heat
and Influence is an universal, adjuvant, exciting Principle of all vital and
sentient Operations.

And not only the ancient Philosophers, as Aristotle and Plato, and their
several Commentators, as Simplicius, Themistius, Alexander Aphrodiceus, Avicen,
and Averroes, but also the Jewish Doctors, and the Christian Philosophers and
Divines for some Ages after Christ, did think, that, besides the individual
intellectual Soul of every Man, there was also a certain Common Intelligent
Nature, or Being, substituted by Almighty God, whose Office it was to
illuminate the humane Soul, to excite actual Intellection in it, and to
communicate unto it these common intellectual Principles, which ordinarily and
generally obtain in all Men, and stood in relation to the humane Intellectual
Soul, as the Sun and its Light and Influence stands in relation to vital
Natures in the Lower World: And this they call Intellectus Agens, which
Averroes supposes to be Vltima Intelligentiarum separatarum, and deputed to
the actuating and exciting of Intellection in Men.

This Opinion has been (possibly upon Reasons probable enough) laid aside for
many Ages in the Christian Church: the Use therefore that I make of it only is
this, That though this Opinion seems to be dark and obscure, and not bottomed
upon a clear Evidence, yet it carries with it and under it an Adumbration of a
great and real Truth, though they attained not a full, clear, distinct
discovery of it: Therefore as the Apostle elsewhere in another Case told the
Athenians, that that God, whom they ignorantly worshipped, Him declare I unto
you, Acts 17.23. so, with some variation, I may with humility say, that secret,
unseen, and spiritual Power, which these ancient Philosophers did not
distinctly understand, but groped after it, and celebrated by the Name of
Intellectus Agens, I am now endeavoring to declare.

Almighty GOD, as he is every where by his Essential Presence, so he is every
where by his Powerful Influence; and as he is the Universal Productive and
Conserving Cause of all things in the World, so he is more intimate unto, and
effective of every thing in the World by his Efficacious Influence, than any
second created Cause in the World; for they are all but his Instruments, and
therefore their Causality is still but in and from the Virtue and Influence of
the first Cause.

And this Influx of the First Cause, the prime Efficient, Almighty God, is by
him ordinarily communicated, effused, and proportioned according to the several
Natures of Created Beings; though, according to his wise good Pleasure, he
sometimes is pleased to do it in a different manner for excellent Ends, pro
Imperio Voluntatis.

And therefore in Matters that are simply natural, this ordinary Efflux of the
Divine Influence is suited to that common Law of Nature, that he has settled
in the World, and governs such things according to those instituted, regular,
natural Laws.

But unto an Intellectual Nature, such as is that of Man, endued with
Understanding and Will, this Divine Efflux is communicated in a kind
proportionable to those Faculties of the humane Soul; and therefore these
Effluxes of the Divine Influence are communicated in two kinds: 1. By way of
Illumination, in relation to the Understanding Faculty. 2. By way of
Persuasion, Inclination, and Incitation, in relation to the Will and
Affections, although there are many other kind of Effluxes of the Divine Spirit
and Influence: as the Gift of bodily Strength, as that of Samson, Judges 16.20.
the Gift of curious Workmanship, as that of Aholiab, and Besaliel, Exodus 36.1.
the Spirit of Majesty and Government, as that of Saul, 1 Samuel 10.9. the Gifts
of Prophesying, Tongues, Miracles, 1 Cor. 12.4, 9. for these were extraordinary
Effluxes given out upon special Occasions, and for special Ends, though even in
most of them, and other extraordinary Gifts of the like nature, the
Understanding and Will were much concerned and wrought upon.

1. As to the Illumination of the Understanding, certainly what the Sun is to
the sentient Eye, that, and much more, is Almighty God to the Mind of Man:
Psalm. 36.9. In thy Light shall we see Light. John 1.9. This is the true Light
that enlightneth every Man that comes into the World.

2. As to the Inclination and Bending of the Will, it is true, the Will is
naturally free, but yet it is essentially subject unto the God that made it;
and the operation of the Divine Influence upon the Will ordinarily is but
persuasive, and therefore ordinarily resistible: thus the old World resisted
the merciful striving of the Divine Influence, Genesis 6.3. My Spirit shall not
always strive with Man. Acts 7.51. Ye always resist the Holy Ghost: but the
Powerful God has so great an Efficacy, and has so intimate an access into the
Minds of Men, that he can when he pleases, and doubtless sometimes does,
irresistibly bend and incline the Will unto himself, according to his good
Pleasure, Psalm. 110.3. Thy People shall be willing in the day of thy Power. It
is an excellent Expression, Prove. 21.1. The Heart of the King is in the Hands
of the Lord, as the Rivers of Water he turns it whithersoever he will. A good
Artist will guide a Stream of Water to what place, and in what manner, he
pleases, in the same Level, and yet without any violence offered to the
natural Motion of the Water, which in all those Motions is kept entirely
suitable to its Nature: And with the same and much greater facility the God of
Heaven can, and often does, infallibly Guide the Hearts of Men, yea, of Kings,
and yet without Force or Violation of its natural Liberty.

There was never any Age nor People in the World that was wholly destitute of
this Divine Efflux upon their Understandings and Wills: it is as Universal and
Common as the Light and Influence of the Heavens; only upon some in all Ages it
was more special and effectual than upon others, even in the Gentile World. I
have always esteemed those excellent Men among the Heathen famous for Wisdom,
Justice, Piety, and Knowledge, as Men illuminated and guided by this Divine
Influence, though possibly communicated to them in a more signal manner than to
other Men: Such were Socrates, Plato, Zeno Citticus, Solon, Lycurgus,
Pythagoras, Tully, Seneca, Aristotle, and diverse other excellent Philosophers,
Moralists, and Lawgivers, among the Gentiles; who were by the Influence of the
Divine Spirit excited, illuminated, and instructed for the Benefit of
themselves and the rest of Mankind, and to prepare the Heathen World for the
Reception of greater Light.

When it pleased God to select unto himself and his special Government, the
Family of Abraham, and his Descendants, the Jewish Nation, he sets them in the
middle of the Habitable World, like a Beacon upon a Hill, to be a kind of
Common Instruction to the rest of Mankind; and for that purpose, made them
signal to all the World by his special Government over them, by Miracles, Signs
and Wonders; by giving them Laws from Heaven in great Majesty and Terror; by
committing to them the Divine Oracles; by raising up Prophets and Men specially
inspired by an Extraordinary Spirit, and by effusing among them a greater
Measure of the Influence of his Sacred Spirit. For (that I may say it once for
all) it has been always the Method of the Divine Wisdom and Goodness, when he
sends out the greater Measure of this Influx, whereof I speak, the Divine
Providence accompanies that Efflux with suitable external Means to render it
the more effectual, and the more agreeable to the manner of the Reception of
the humane Understanding: But when the Messiah came into the World with the
Message of the Glorious Gospel, the Sun was as it were in its Meridian; and as
the means of Illumination and Conversion of the World unto God was more
effectual and universal, so was also the Efflux and Irradiation of the Divine
Influence upon the Souls of Men more vigorous, diffusive, and universal.

And as the miraculous Gifts of the Spirit of God appeared in the Miracles of
Christ and his Apostles, the Gifts of Tongues, of Healing Diseases, of
Prophecy, and the like, to confirm and establish Men's Minds in the Faith,
Belief, and Obedience of the Gospel; so neither was this all: but the secret
and effectual Influence of the same Blessed Spirit appeared in Illumination of
the Minds of Men, in persuading and mightily subduing their Wills to the Belief
and Obedience of the Truth, in converting Men's Minds unto God, and placing them
in they just and due Habitude to Almighty God. And this, according to the
various Workings thereof, is sometimes called the Spirit of Regeneration, the
Spirit of Renovation, the Spirit of Sanctification, the Spirit of Holiness, the
Spirit of Adoption, the Spirit of Prayer and Supplication, the Spirit of Life,
etc. according to the various Energies that this great Effusion of the
Influences of the Blessed Spirit had upon the Minds of Men.

And this great and more diffusive and effectual Effusion of this Influence
under the Gospel was no other than what was prophesied of by the ancient
Prophets, Isa. 25.7. I will destroy in this Mountain, the covering cast upon
the Face of all People. Isa. 11.9. The Earth shall be filled with the Knowledge
of the Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea. Isa. 54.13. All thy Children shall be
taught of the Lord. Isa. 59.20. This is my Covenant that I will make with them,
my Spirit, that is upon thee, and the Words which I have put in thy Mouth,
shall not depart from thee, nor from thy Seed, nor from thy Seeds Seed. Ezekiel.
36.27. I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes,
and keep my Judgments, and do them. Isa. 44.3. I will pour out my Spirit upon
thy Seed. Joel 2.28. I will pour out my Spirit upon all Flesh. And this Energy
of the Divine Influence appears, 1. By a secret Irradiation and Illumination of
the Understanding. 2. By a powerful Persuasion and Inclining of the Will; both
which, as they were with a more vigorous and effectual Dispensation under the
first breaking out of the Light of the Gospel, so they do accompany the
Publication of it unto this day, and shall unto the end of the World; though by
reason of the Corruption of the Lives and Manners of Mankind, not with equal
Success in all Ages.

We have here the Judgment and Belief of this Great and Good Man of a Divine
Efflux upon the Understandings and Wills of Men, and that even among the
Heathen, those so famed for Wisdom, Justice, Piety, and Knowledge, were
Illuminated and Guided by a Divine Influence. And we have here also the Ground
of this his Judgment. 1. Observations in Nature. 2. The Sentiments of Learned
and Understanding Men, Philosophers in all Ages. 3. The Authority of the Sacred
Scriptures; to which, he elsewhere adds his own Experience. And whereas he had
in some things changed his Opinion, as he saw cause, from what it was in his
younger time, this he received early, as appears by some of his First Writings,
and retained constantly to the last, as appears by his Treatise of Humility,
which he wrote upon my Motion, not long before his last Sickness.

In his Treatise of Wisdom, and the Fear of God, after other particulars of the
Wisdom of the Fear of God, he adds, in the 10th place: But besides all this,
there is yet a Secret but a most Certain Truth, that highly improveth that
Wisdom, which the Fear of the Lord brings, and that is this, That those that
truly fear God have a Secret Guidance from a higher Wisdom, than what is barely
Humane; namely, by the Spirit of Truth and Wisdom, that does really and truly,
but secretly prevent and direct them. And let no Man think that this is a piece
of Fanaticism. Any Man that sincerely and truly fears Almighty God, relies upon
Him, calls upon Him for his Guidance and Direction, has it as really as the
Son has the Counsel and Direction of his Father: and though the Voice be not
audible, nor the Direction always perceptible to Sense, yet it is equally as
real as if a Man heard the Voice saying, This is the Way, walk in it. And this
Secret Direction of Almighty God is principally seen in Matters relating to the
Good of the Soul: but it may also be found in the Great and Momentous Concerns
of this Life, which a Good Man, that fears God, and begs his Direction, shall
very often, if not at all times, find. And in his Treatise of Humility,
speaking of this Guidance and Direction of Almighty God, in relation to a
double End; 1. The Salvation and Happiness of the Soul. 2. In all the Walk and
Concern of this Life; as to this latter he says; The Air does not more
naturally yield to our Attraction in Respiration, or to insinuate it self into
those spaces that are receptive of it, than the Divine Assistance, Guidance,
and Beneficence does to the Desires, Exigencies, and Wants of an humble Soul,
sensible of its own Emptiness and Deficiency, and implering the Direction,
Guidance, and Blessing of the most Wise and Bountiful God. And then adds, I can
call my own Experience to witness, that even in the External Actions,
Occurrences and Incidences of my whole Life, I was never disappointed of the
best Guidance and Direction, when in Humility and Sense of my own Deficiency,
and diffidence of my own Ability to direct my self, or to grapple with the
Difficulties of my Life, I have, with Humility and Sincerity, implored the
Secret Direction and Guidance of the Divine Wisdom and Providence. This he
speaks of the secret Guidance by the Spirit of Truth, by Illumination of the
Understanding, and Inclination of the Will; but there is another Secret
Guidance by a Providential Disposal of Occurrences, which he does not here
exclude, yet seems more especially to intend, when he afterward appeals to the
Experience of others.

I have also observed, as well from what he has said upon several Occasions,
as from diverse Passages in his Writings, that he had from his younger time, in
all his Life, not only a great respect to this secret Guidance of the Spirit of
God, but also so great a Sense of the Malice, Subtlety, and Energy of the Evil
Spirits, as made him very vigilant against them. And I doubt not but his
constant and reverend Attendance to that Holy Conduct, and his Vigilance
against the Wiles and Devices of those invisible Enemies, were a principal
Means whereby he became so Great and Good a Man as he was.

This is genuine Christianity, and therefore it cannot but move Indignation in
the Hearts of True Christians, to see so Great and Noble a Principle of their
Religion to be so unworthily exposed, contemned and reproached, as this has
been in our Times, partly by sensual Bruits, partly by conceited animal
Pretenders to Reason, and partly by inconsiderate Opposers of Enthusiasm. Nay,
it is a Principle not peculiar to the times of the Incarnation of the Eternal
Logos, and succeeding Ages, but made manifest by that Light which enlighteneth
every Man that comes into the World, unto all pious and virtuous Souls from
the beginning: and it is a dangerous sign of an empty, bewidowed, deserted
Soul, for any Man to speak flightly or irreverently of so Holy a Principle.
That Excellent Philosopher and Emperor Antoninus, besides diverse other Passages
to the purpose, has expressed himself in one place in the very words before
used by our Author. Seneca affirms it; Bonus Vir sine Deo nemo est; besides
many Passages to this purpose: And Cicero, besides what more largely elsewhere,
Nemo vir Magnus sine aliquo Afflatu Divino unquam fuit. Socrates is notorious,
and Plato, and his Followers Plotinus, Porphirius, Jamblicus, Proclus, etc. are
known and confessed to have been of the same Judgment; as also the Chaldaick
and Egyptian Philosophers. The same is observed of Democritus, That he thought
that there were no Men Wise besides those who were inspired with a Divine
Influence: And Theophrastus, and indeed all the better Philosophers, are noted
to have had the same Sentiments. And even Aristotle himself, as great a
Rationalist as he was, has plainly expressed himself to have been of the same
Judgment, in several places. In one among the rest to this effect: They who are
moved by a Divine Instinct ought not to consult Humane Reason, but follow the
Interior Instinct; because they are moved by a better Principle than Humane
Reason. And that the same Sentiments were among the Gentiles in very ancient
times, we may observe in the Sacred Scriptures, Dan. 4.8. and 5.11. and long
before, Job 32.8: 33.14, 15, 16. and Genesis 41.38. and 39.3. and before, 26.28.
and before that, 21, 22. And for the Jews, it is very plain that in those
Excellent Books of Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus, by the Name of Wisdom, this
Divine Influence and Conduct is intended.

And for the Christians, the Doctrine of our Savior and his Apostles is so
express to this purpose, that they who would evade the genuine Sense of their
Words, are forced to strain their Wits to the utmost, and their Consciences
too, I doubt, if they be not stupefied before hand. I need not recite the
places, which every one may have recourse to at pleasure; and therefore it may
be sufficient to note them under several Heads; as, I. The Predictions of the
Prophets, Isa. 44.3: 54.13. (recited by our Savior, Jo. 6.45.) Jer. 31.33, 34.
Ezekiel. 11.19: 36.26, 27. Joel 2.28. recited by St. Peter, and applied not only
to the Christians then, but to those also who should come after, Act. 2.17:
33.39. Zech. 12.10. Mat. 3.11. II. Promises of our Savior, Luke 11.13. Jo.
7.39: 14.16, 17, 23, 26: 15.26: 16.7. Lu. 24.49. Act. 1.4, 8: 2.38. III. The
Accomplishment of these Predictions and Promises. 1. In the Original visible
Effusion on the day of Pentecost, upon the Apostles and Primitive Christians,
Act. 2.2, 3, 4, 33. 2. By a Ministerial Communication, Act. 8.15, 17: 10.44:
19.6. Gal. 3.2, 5, 14. 2 Timothy 1.6. 2 Cor. 3.6, 8. 3. By internal Residence and
Operation, Illumination and Sanctification, Romans 8.9, 11. 1 Cor. 3.16: 6.19.
Ephesians. 2.22. 2 Timothy 1.14. 1 Jo. 3.24. Gal. 4.6. 1 Thessalonians. 4.8. 2 Cor. 13.5. Phil.
2.13. 4. By special and particular Manifestation and Conduct, variously
exhibited; as, 1. By Visions and Revelations, Act. 9.10, 12: 10.10: 11.28: 16,
9: 18.9: 22.17. 1 Cor. 11.23: 12.4, 6, 10: 14.6, 24, 29, 30, 31. 2 Cor. 12.1,
2, 7. (v. Lu. 2.26.) Gal. 1.12: 2.2. 2. By Allocutions, Act. 8.29: 10.19: 13.2,
4: 23.9. 3. By Impulses and Excitations, (v. Lu. 2.27.) Act. 4.8, 13, 31: 5.20.
4. By Prohibitions, Act. 16.6: 20.23: 21.4, 11. and Restraints, Act. 16.7.

IV. Admonitions. 1. How to obtain it, Jo. 14.15, 16, 17, 23 Act. 5.32. Lu.
11.12. Ja. 1.5. Rev. 3.20. 1 Pet. 4.13. 2. To follow and obey it, Romans 8.1, 4,
5, 9, 13, 14. Gal. 5.16, 18, 25. Ephesians. 4.30. 3. To try the Spirits, 1 Jo. 4.1: 1
Cor. 14.29.



More might be added, but these are more than enough. And to these it would not
be hard to add a true Catholic Interpretation and Comment, that is, The
Sentiments of the most ancient Christian Writers, and others of the most
Eminent of after Ages; such as Hermas, Justine, Tatian, Irenaeus, Tertullian,
Cyprian, Novatian, Hilary, Nazianzen, Ambrose, Hierom, Austin, and many others;
but it would be too long for this place and occasion. And therefore to make
short Work, instead of that, I will here represent their Sentiments in some
short Notes of an Eminent and most Learned Annotator, who was well acquainted
with them, and does sometimes intersperse some of their Testimonies in his
Writings: It is the Famous Hugo Grotius. These, says he, upon Mat. 18.10. (who
dedicate themselves to God with a true Faith, and thereupon are accounted his
peculiar People) God, as he does favor them with a peculiar Providence, so he
seems to give to each an Angel Guardian to guide and assist them, either
perpetually or certainly, until they come to the full Possession of the Divine
Spirit: For so I see the Ancient Christians did believe. And in his Pref. to
his Annot. upon the Epistle to the Romans. Into the Heart purified by Faith, as
into a clean Vessel, God does infuse his Spirit; I mean the Spirit of Christ
full of Love of God, and of our Neighbor, and of all Goodness. -- Those who
have this Spirit of God, and carefully keep it, God does account as born of
Him, and like unto Him; to them he gives a certain Right to Heavenly and
Eternal Good Things. -- Neither is the Heart purified but by Faith in Christ;
nor is the Spirit infused but into a Heart so purified; nor does he plainly own
for his any but who are endowed with that Spirit. Upon Luke 22.3. As they who
religiously obey the Divine Admonitions, at length receive the Indwelling
Spirit; so they who readily consent to the Suggestions of the Devil, at length,
God deserting them, become the Slaves of Satan. Upon Jo. 5.45. Those (to whom
the Gospel is Preached) become taught of God, that is, if they would, if they
be greedy of it, if they do not reject the Benefits offered, and even forced
upon them. They will have no need to have recourse to Learned Men, that from
them they may learn the Mysteries of the Old Testament. Upon Ephesians. 1.17. The
Spirit of God which is given to Believers, does, among other things, imprint
also Wisdom in their Souls, not that of the things of this World, of which
Philosophers did boast, but of those things which conduce to a better Life. The
same Spirit does reveal also to those who are his, things future and secret,
which cannot be known by humane Means. Upon 1 Jo. 2.20. The Spirit does suggest
to us in all Circumstances, both the Precepts of Christ, and such Hints or
Notices as are meet for the Occasion. v. 27. What we are to do in every
Circumstance: For there are certain Differences, which Times, Places, and
Persons, require. Therefore is there often need of Admonition to hit the way of
our Duty. See Jer. 31.34. Jo. 6.45. and, if you please, Seneca Epist. 94. And
upon 1 Thessalonians. 4.9. The Holy Ghost teaches you concerning all things to be
done. By how much the more there is of the Spirit, so much the less need is
there of Prescripts. This Place is not to be understood of the General Precept,
but of special Determinations, as all Things, Persons, and Times do require.
And Gal. 5.18. Those who are led by the Spirit, as now of Age, have no need of
the Law, the Guardian of their Youth. And Romans 8.4. Those who walk after the
Spirit, he interprets, those who having obtained the Holy Spirit, do constantly
obey its Motions: and afterward, v. 5. They that are after the Spirit, he
interprets, those who are possessed by the Spirit of God; which does not now
come to pass, but by Christ. And, v. 12. he notes, God has given his Spirit
that we should use it; and again, So great a Guest will be treated with Care;
otherwise he will bid farewell to his Lodging. And to conclude, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
Spirit here, says he, is that Holy Spirit, inhabiting in the Souls of
Christians, and if it be carefully kept, adhering to Souls unto Death, and
after Death even to the Resurrection; and then referrs to what he had said, 1
Cor. 15.44. to Hierom upon Gal. 5. and recites, to the same purpose, the Words
of Philo, Irenaeus, Tatianus, Clem. Alexandrinus, and Tertullian. More might be
added; but this is enough to show the Mind of this great Man, concerning the
Necessity of our having the Spirit of God dwelling in us, the Effects of his
Residence in Light and Conduct, and our Duty how to treat it.

And that this is also the Belief of the Church of England, (however some of
late have commonly presumed to speak, if not despitefully and reproachfully,
yet too slightly of so great and holy a Principle of our Religion) may appear,
by the most Authentic Evidence that can be, her most solemn Addresses to
Almighty God in diverse Collects for this very purpose: As, for all Persons to
be Baptized, before they be Baptized, to give his Holy Spirit to them, that
they may be born again, etc. and after they be Baptized, to give his Holy
Spirit to them, that they may continue his Servants, and attain his Promises:
So likewise for all Persons Confirmed, to strengthen them with the Holy Ghost,
and daily increase in them his manifold Gifts of Grace: before Imposition of
Hands, and then again together with the Imposition of Hands, that they may
daily increase in his Holy Spirit; and again afterward, that his Holy Spirit
may ever be with them, and so lead them, etc. and lastly, for all the
Congregation upon several Occasions; as, upon the Nativity of our Lord, that
they may daily be renewed by his Holy Spirit. Upon the 19th Sunday after
Trinity, that his Holy Spirit may in all things Direct and Rule our Hearts.
Upon the first Sunday in Lent, that we may ever obey his Godly Motions. Upon
Easter Day, that as by thy special Grace preventing us, thou do put into our
Minds good Desires; so by thy continual Help we may bring the same to good
Effect. Upon the fifth Sunday after Easter, that by his Holy Inspiration we may
think those things that be good, and by his merciful Guiding may perform the
same: and others to the like Effect; as, upon the Sunday after Ascension,
Whitsunday, the 13th Sunday after Trinity, the Collect at the beginning of the
Communion Service. And at every Morning and Evening Service, all are admonished
to beseech him to give us his Holy Spirit. And in the Coll. for Grace, we pray
to God, that all our doings may be ordered by his Governance: and in the
Litany, to indue us with the Grace of his Holy Spirit, to amend our Lives
according to his Holy Word. In the Ordering of Deacons, this Question is first
to be asked by the Bishop, Do you trust that you are inwardly moved by the Holy
Ghost to take upon you this Office and Ministration, etc? In the Ordering of
Priests, the Bishop says, Receive the Holy Ghost for the Office and Work of a
Priest in the Church of God, etc. And in the Consecration of a Bishop, the
Archbishop says, Receive the Holy Ghost for the Office and Work of a Bishop,
etc. and at each is sung the Hymn, Come Holy Ghost, etc. And in the Exhortation
in the Commination, this is mentioned as one of the Conditions of our Pardon,
viz. If we will be ordered by the Governance of his Holy Spirit. And in the
Articles of Religion, Art. 17. are mentioned together Godly Persons and such as
feel in themselves the Working of the Spirit of Christ, mortifying, etc.

To this Authority of the Church, I will subjoyn the Judgment of one of her
Sons, who, though at first it seems he was carried away with the common
Prejudice of the Age, yet afterward, upon better consideration, extricated
himself, and recovered a better Judgment, and has in few words said what is
much to the purpose.

That God himself affords his Intimacies and Converses to the better Souls,
which are prepared for it.

I confess the proud and fantastic Pretenses of many of the conceited
Melancholists in this Age, to Divine Communion, have prejudiced diverse
intelligent Persons against the Belief of any such happy Vouchsafement; so that
they conclude the Doctrine of Immediate Communion with the Deity in this Life
to be but an high-flown Notion of warm Imagination, and over-luscious
Self-Flattery: and I acknowledge I have my self had Thoughts of this nature,
supposing Communion with God to be nothing else but the Exercise of Virtue, and
that Peace and those Comforts which naturally result from it.

But I have considered since, That God's more near and immediate imparting
himself to the Soul that is prepared for that Happiness by Divine Love,
Humility, and Resignation in the way of a Vital Touch, and Sense, is a thing
possible in it self, and will be a great part of our Heaven: That Glory is
begun in Grace, and God is pleased to give some excellent Souls the happy
Antepast: That holy Men in ancient times have sought and gloried in this
Enjoyment, and never complain so sorely, as when it was withheld and
interrupted: That the Expressions of Scripture run infinitely this way, and the
best of modern good Men do, from their own Experience, attest it: That this
spiritualizeth Religion, and renders its Enjoyments more comfortable and
delicious: That it keeps the Soul under a vivid sense of God, and is a grand
Security against Temptation: That it holds it steady amidst the Flatteries of a
prosperous State, and gives it the most grounded Anchorage and Support amidst
the Waves of an adverse Condition: That it is the noblest Encouragement to
Virtue, and the highest Assurance of an happy Immortality. I say, I considered
these weighty Things, and wondered at the Carelessness and Prejudice of
Thoughts, that occasioned my suspecting the Reality of so glorious a
Privilege: I saw how little Reason there is in denying Matters of inward
Sense, because our selves do not feel them, or cannot form an Apprehension of
them in our Minds: I am convinced that things of gust and relish must be judged
by the sentient and vital Faculties, and not by the noetical Exercises of
speculative Understandings: And upon the whole, I believe infinitely, that the
Divine Spirit affords its sensible Presence, and immediate Beatifick Touch to
some Rare Souls, who are divested of carnal Self, and mundane Pleasures,
abstracted from the Body by Prayer and Holy Meditation; spiritual in their
Desires, and calm in their Affections; devout Lovers of God and Virtue, and
tenderly affectionate to all the World; sincere in their Aims, and circumspect
in their Actions; enlarged in their Souls, and clear in their Minds. These, I
think, are the Dispositions that are requisite to fit us for Divine Communion:
And God transacts not in this near way, but with prepared Spirits, who are thus
disposed for the Manifestation of his Presence, and his Influence; and such, I
believe, he never fails to bless with these happy fore tastes of Glory. But for
those that are Passionate and Conceited, Turbulent and Notional, Confident and
Immodest, Imperious and Malicious; that dote upon Trifles, and run fiercely
into the ways of a Sect; that are lifted up in the Apprehension of the glorious
Prerogatives of themselves and their Party, and scorn all the World besides;
for such, I say, be their Pretensions what they will, to Divine Communion,
Illapses, and Discoveries, I believe them not; their Fancies abuse them, or
they would us: For what Communion has Light with Darkness, or the Spirit of
the Holy One with those, whose Genius and Ways are so unlike Him? But the other
Excellent Souls I described, will as certainly be visited by the Divine
Presence and Converse, as the Chrystalline Streams are with the Beams of Light,
or the fitly prepared Earth, whose Seed is in it self, will be actuated by the
Spirit of Nature.

There is a late Writer of no mean Learning and Parts, and Authority too among
those of his own Party, who reckons the Despising of the Holy Spirit, and his
Operations now, to be a Sin of the same Nature with the Apostasy of the Jews by
Idolatry of old, and afterward by rejecting of our Savior at his coming: and
yet in detestation of Enthusiasm, utterly abandons all Impulses and Motions to
Things and Actions, which are not acknowledged Duties in themselves, evidenced
by the Word of Truth, etc. under the Name of Irrational Impressions, and
violent Inclinations: and what some Men intend by Impulses, he says, he knows
not. Indeed they who reject all such things, reject they know not what. And did
they thereby only hurt themselves, it might be thought a just Punishment: but
such confident Assertions in Print may not only be hurtful to Men, but also
injurious to the Wisdom and Goodness of God, which is not to be limited by Men's
Conceits. The Jews heretofore had the Favor to inquire of God, and receive
Answers and Direction in their special Exigences: and if the Christians are not
allowed that Favor now, it may be thought that the State of Christians is
inferior to that of the Jews then, in a Matter of great Importance; or that the
Christians now are, as the latter Jews were, fallen from the Integrity of the
true Christian State: Nor can I conceive any reason why Christians should not
have some such Means for this purpose, as the ancient Jews had, but that every
Christian ought to have a Divine Oracle in his own Breast, by the Residence of
the Spirit of God there, if we were indeed such as our Profession does require,
and oblige us to be, that is, truly Spiritual, and Heavenly-minded. It does
therefore concern us to inquire, whether the Fault be not in our selves, if God
does not answer us, as it was with Saul, when God was departed from him, rather
than to dishonor our Profession, by arguing against the Truth to cover our
Shame? and since the Lord's Ear is not heavy that it cannot hear, whether our
Sins have not interposed between our God and us, that he will not hear?
Certainly we often need a Wisdom more than Humane in many Cases, wherein the
General Prescripts are not sufficient.

For, as many things are lawful, which may not be expedient; so many things may
be expedient, or necessary, which may not be acknowledged Duties in themselves,
evidenced by the Word of Truth, the written Word; and to the successful
Performance of acknowledged Duties certain Circumstances may be, and often are
so necessary, that unless duly observed, all Endeavors would be frustrate: and
all these Expediences and Circumstances may be, and frequently are, such as are
not discernable by us Mortals, without some Notice from more Intelligent
Beings. If therefore the All-seeing, Wise, and Gracious God, be pleased, either
immediately by his own Spirit, or mediately by any of the Invisible Ministers
of his Providence, to afford any such Divine Favors to such Mortals as are
duly disposed for the same; if taking notice of the Sincerity of his Servant,
he be pleased, by any secret Impression upon his Heart or Mind, or other
Notices, to conduct him in these things, or in any thing of his Will and
Pleasure, though without manifesting the Reasons of it, to exercise his
Reasonable Creature to the Subjection of his Intellect to the Divine Wisdom, as
well as his Will to Obedience to his Pleasure: as he who after competent
Experience of this, should be disobedient to any such Notice, would certainly
incurr Sin more or less, and justly deserve Correction; so it would be no less
Impiety against that Holy Majesty, and Mischief to Men, to raise amongst them
any Scandal or Prejudice against it, and thereupon a great Indisposition for
it, by any undue Opposition of Fanaticism, without sufficient Distinction and
Caution, than it is Impudence and Inconsiderateness in others, to expose
themselves and their Followers to the Delusions of Evil Spirits by high
Pretenses to such Divine and extraordinary Favors, without any Regard to, or
Notice of those special Qualifications, and Cautions for Trial of Spirits,
which are necessary to capacitate them for such Favor, and to secure them
against such Delusions. It requires therefore no small Caution, (to use this
Author's Expression) that under an invidious Name they reject not such Favors,
or calumniate such an Holy Conduct: and, that they especially who reproach
others with limiting the Holy Spirit, do not themselves in this, what in other
things they condemn in others, with less Reason.

And certainly great Caution is likewise to be used on the other side, that we
presume not to attribute to the Holy Spirit of God, what is merely the
Imaginations or Effusions of our own Spirit; what is merely Humane Invention,
or Artifice; and even the Inspirations and Delusions of Satan transformed into
an Angel of Light. By this means is great Indignity commonly done to the Holy
and Pure Spirit: and great Sin contracted by Men's arrogating to themselves
those Gifts and Graces, which they have little of, and recommending themselves
and their Performances upon such high Pretenses; and great Scandal given to
People to think meanly of so great a Principle of our Religion.

There are three Great-Means which God has provided for us to lead us into all
necessary Truth: Natural Reason, Supernatural Revelation communicated by
Persons authorized by Divine Commission so to do, and Special Illumination and
Direction of the Holy Spirit. And they who carefully use all these in their due
Order, cannot err. But they who set up these one against another, do usually
run themselves and lead others into great Errors. And hence it is that so great
Disorders and Mischiefs have through the Subtilty and Energy of Satan been
brought into the Church by Persons pretending to some one of these in a kind of
Opposition to some other of them: either of Right Reason, or of the Pure Word
of God; or of the Spirit and Spiritual Worship.

I do not doubt but they who pretend most to Right Reason, in opposition to
Inspiration, are even therein very strongly inspired, but by the subtle Spirit
of Opposition, and are in effect as great and pernicious Fanatics as any,
though they least suspect it. But not only those unhappy Atheistical Pretenders
to Reason, who despise all Revelation and Revealed Religion; but such as
profess themselves Christians; and not only that insolent and presumptuous
Sect, who assert the Divine Authority of the Scriptures, and yet make no
scruple to strain and wrest them to comply with their pre-conceived Notions;
but more Moderate Men, and such as pretend highest to the Pure Word of God, and
to the most pure Spiritual Worship, and cry out against Man-made Divinity, and
against Fanaticism too; by indulging too much to their own Conceits, have
brought such Disorders and Mischiefs into the Church, as are not much to be
doubted were the Fruits of the Influences and Impressions of the Spirit of
Delusion upon their Mind. Hence are many run from Superstition into
Profaneness; from Idolatry into Sacrilege; from Formality into Contempt or
Neglect of the most Solemn Christian Worship; from beggarly Rudiments and
Carnal Ordinances, to make light of the Institutions of Christ; from Monkish
Austerity, as they call it, into common Indulgence and Gratifications to Sense;
from Popish Merit into Carlessness, Worldly-mindedness, Selfishness, and little
Concern for the Honor of God, or Salvation of Souls; from the Traditions of
Men and Popish Pretenses, to deny all, even of the Apostles, the Authority of
the Catholic Church, and the Catholic Sense and Interpretation of diverse of
the Evangelical and Apostolical Precepts and Directions; and, at last, to limit
our Savior's Sermon upon the Mount to the times of Persecution, till, at last,
by those means, we are grown ripe for a Persecution, or some other severe
awakening and purging Judgment. All this, and more that might be noted, we
cannot impute merely to the Weakness and Corruption of Men, unless we can
imagine that all the Powers of Darkness have been all the while mere idle
Spectators. But if they have been so subtle and active thus to deceive the
Gentiles in these latter times, and the best of Men have not been exempt from
their Assaults, it concerns all to beware that they be not deceived by a Spirit
of Delusion under any of these Appearances, either of the Good Spirit, or of
the Scripture, or of Reason: that they embrace not false Conclusions instead of
Right Reason, their own Conceits, or the Novel Opinions of some Sect, instead
of the Genuine Sense of the Scriptures, or Satan transformed for the Spirit of
God; least, by any means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his Subtilty,
their Minds should be corrupted from the Simplicity that is in Christ.

And there is no way possible to escape this but by the Aid, Illumination, and
Conduct of the Holy Spirit of God. Nor are any to be believed to be led by that
Spirit, when they go out of the way prescribed by Christ, and by his Apostles,
who were Commissioned by Him: for it is the Spirit of Christ, and of his
Fullness we all receive. As the Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us unto
Christ, so is Observance of the Prescripts of the Gospel designed for our
Tutourage, to bring us to the Spirit. To that we must come, or we are none of
his: but that way we must come, and in that way we must keep, or else we shall
be led by the Spirit of Error, and mistake that for the Spirit of Truth. If we
do well consider the Holy Scriptures, the Nature of the Holy Spirit, and the
Fruits of the Spirit, we may learn what Qualifications are requisite to obtain
that inestimable Treasure; and by what Signs and Characters it may be known and
distinguished. And thereby we may discern that many, who pretend highly to the
Spirit, are much out of the way of the true Spirit of God; and many led by the
subtle Spirit of Antichrist, under the appearance of an Angel of Light, to
undermine the Gospel and Institutions of Christ; to do despite to the Spirit of
Grace, and to raise Scandals and Prejudices against the Holy Doctrine, which
they pretend, and it may be think to assert, and to indispose Men for the
Reception of those Graces, which those envious and malicious Spirits may know
to be ready to be communicated to them. And this should make others the more
cautious, that they be not subservient to, and be made the very Tools of these
wicked Agents in their Opposition, least at last they be involved with them in
their Condemnation.

The True way to reduce the misled People, is, not to deny or dissemble the
Holy Doctrine, much less to villifie or reproach it; but plainly to assert the
Truth, and show them wherein, and by what Means they are misled from it: 1.
That the Spirit of God is the most precious and desirable thing in the World,
and absolutely necessary; but it is to be desired principally to transform us
into its own Nature; to lead us into all necessary Truth; to endue us with
Power to overcome all our Corruptions, and all Temptations, and to adorn us
with all those Graces, which ennoble Humane Nature, and raise it above its
self, and so make us Christians indeed; and to conduct us in all the important
Occurrences of our Lives: but to desire it for Matters of Ostentation, to glory
in Divine Communications, or over-earnestly seek after the Consolations,
through impatience of bearing the Spiritual Cross, are great Signs that such
Souls are either quite out of the way, or have made but little Progress. 2.
That Satan is often transformed into an Angel of Light; and therefore we must
be careful to try the Spirits. 3. That whatever is contrary to Sound Doctrine,
1 Timothy 1.10: 2.1. to the Doctrine, which is according to Godliness, ibid. 6.3.
the Doctrine taught by the Apostles, Romans 16.17. Gal. 1.8. to the Faith once
delivered to the Saints, Jud. 3. cannot be from the true Spirit, the Spirit of
Christ. 4. That such Spirits as lead into Divisions, Separations, and Sects,
lead out of the way of the True Spirit of God: and whatever lead into contempt
or disrespect of the Sacred Scriptures, or any of the Ordinances or
Institutions of Christ, are certainly Spirits of Antichrist, how specious
soever their Pretenses may be: for the Conscientious and Reverend Use of these
are the very Means whereby Souls are prepared for the Communication of the
Spirit of God, and whereby it is ordinarily communicated to them. Cui Veritas
comperta sine Deo? Cui Deus cognitus sine Christo? Cui Christus exploratus sine
Spiritu Sancto? Cui Spiritus Sanctus accommodatus sine Fidei Sacramento? says
an ancient and eminent Christian, Tertul. de Anima, c. 1. To whom is Truth
discovered without God? To whom is God known without Christ? To whom is Christ
manifest without the Holy Spirit? To whom is the Holy Spirit granted without
the Sacrament of Faith? that is, Baptism. 5. And more particularly in respect
to some amongst us; That they who assert this Doctrine without Distinction or
Caution, are not much to be regarded; and if they be Men of Learning, and may
be presumed not to be ignorant what Cautions and Rules are given by Learned and
Experienced Christians, to distinguish the Impostures of Evil Spirits from the
Conduct or Motions of the Good, are much to be suspected to serve another
Interest then what they pretend to those they mislead; and that they all expose
People to the Delusions of Evil Spirits, which readily embrace such Advantages.
6. That there were special Reasons why God ordered Moses to smite the Waters
and the Dust with the Rod, and to take handfuls of Ashes from the Furnace and
sprinkle it toward the Heaven, and to erect the Brazen Serpent in the
Wilderness, etc. to produce the intended effects; and why our Savior made Clay
with Spittle, and anointed the Eyes of the Blind Man, and then bad him wash,
and many other such things, for which perhaps no Man did nor does know the
reason; and yet, undoubtedly, if these Orders had not been observed, the Effect
had not followed. 7. That it is but reasonable that God should give Orders,
without declaring the Reason, for Trial and Exercise of the Subjection of the
Intellectual Faculties of his Creatures; and that in such Case, if the Orders
be not observed, it is not likely the Effect should follow: and that if there
were no more than this Exercise of humble Submission to the Wisdom of God, in
the Christian Sacraments, it could not be imagined to be the Spirit of Christ,
that should lead People to despise or neglect these Orders and Institutions of
Christ: But in them there is more; for Instance, in that of Baptism, it is the
Solemnity, and external Act of Declaration of our Engagement in Covenant with
Christ: and the Refusal of it is as much as to refuse to Seal and Deliver a
Bond; which whoever should refuse to do, and yet pretend to give Bond, might be
looked upon as a Knave or a Cheat: and in that of the Holy Communion, there is
a great and Solemn Duty of Recognition of the absolute Dominion of the Father
by Right of Creation, and of the Son by Right of Redemption, over us and all we
are and have; a Symbolical Oblation of our selves and of all we have to God, in
a Commemorative Sacrifice and Representation of the Passion of Christ before
the Father, as the Great Propitiation for the Sins of the World, of as full
import to all intents and purposes to Christians, as were all the Sacrifices of
the Jews to them, which were but Types of the same; a Holy Rite of Address to
God the Father, by Christ the Mediator, through the Merit and Satisfaction of
his Passion, by which alone our Prayers and Thanksgivings have acceptance with
him; and of Spiritual Communion with God in Christ, whereby a Divine Power and
Virtue is as really communicated to Souls duly disposed, as Virtue went out of
him and healed the People, and the Woman who touched the Hem of his Garment.
And these have been the Sentiments, and this the most solemn and peculiar
Worship of the Christian Church, all over the World, from the rising of the Sun
to the going down of the same, performed every day in most of the great
Churches, and every Lord's Day in all, from the times of the Apostles till the
last Age. It is an Ordinance of so great Honor to our Savior, and Benefit to
Souls duly disposed, that there can hardly be a greater Evidence of the
Prevalence of the Spirit of Antichrist, and of Satan transformed, than
Disrespect and Neglect of it, under pretense of a more spiritual Worship: For
nothing can be more grievous to that envious and malicious Spirit, than to see
that Passion, which he had most maliciously procured, to be so honored all
over the World, and applied to his Confusion; and therefore has he opposed it
with all the Subtilty and Malice he could possible. Besides, for People to
slight it under pretense of Christ being come to them in the Spirit, is a
manifest and dangerous piece of Spiritual Pride so to set up themselves above
the Primitive Christians, and St. Paul himself, who had so great a
Manifestation of the Spirit with them; and therefore another pregnant Evidence
of the Spirit of Delusion. And if we do well consider what decays of Charity
and Unanimity among Men, and of Piety and Devotion to God, has in all parts
attended the Neglect of this Holy Ordinance, that may be another Evidence of
what Spirit they are of, who do neglect it, whatever their Pretenses be. But
for all Separatists and Sectaries in general, it is matter of great Caution
that the Scriptures are so full of Admonitions and Prohibitions against Schisms
and Divisions, and of Predictions, both by our Savior himself, and by his
Apostles, both of the Variety of them, and of the Danger, in that some of them
have that specious Appearance, as to deceive, if it were possible, the very
Elect. And if we look into the History of the Church in former times, we shall
find little or nothing of the true Spirit among any of any Party of
Separatists, but much of the Spirit of Error or Delusion. And therefore when we
find a Manifestation of the Presence or Energy of some Spirit, and a
Concurrence of diverse of these Indications or Signs, we may be assured and
confident that it is an Antichristian Spirit, be its appearance never so
specious in other respects. And in these two things especially, have such as
have been partakers of the true Spirit, found themselves to be sometimes
strangely assaulted and tempted by the subtle Adversary, viz. to Spiritual
Pride, and undervaluation of other Persons, and to neglect of the Ordinances of
Christ, as needless to them.

The Way, whereby the ancient Religious Christians were generally preserved
from these and such like Snares, was, that they were trained up, as the Sons of
the Prophets of old, under ancient experienced Christians in all kind of
Exercises of Humility, Subjection both of Mind and Will, and constant discovery
of the Dispositions and Motions of their Hearts to their Superiors, and of all
Grace and Virtue. But where both Doctrine and Practice has been neglected, it
is not strange that amongst many Appearances and Pretenses there should be
found little of Solidity; especially where those noble Heroic Virtues of
Abstraction, and Contempt of the World, Heavenly-mindedness, and continual
Attendance to God, etc. are rejected as Monkery and Superstition; but all their
goodly Appearances and Pretenses end, at last, in Emptiness and Scandal. And
therefore it concerns all, who have any Care of their Souls, to beware of all
such as are out of the Way and Method of the Ancients.

But, on the other side, to take such Offense at the Miscarriages of such as
have been led into Error by any seducing Spirit, as therefore to oppose the
Conduct of the Spirit of Truth, or any of its Operations, and elude the Holy
Scriptures, and undermine the Doctrine thereof, is as certainly the Effect of
the Operation of the Spirit of Antichrist, and, in truth, as much Fanaticism as
the other, in the contrary Extreme. For the Good Spirit is as absolutely
necessary to be had, as all others to be avoided; for without it we cannot be
genuine living Christians, but mere empty formal Professors; of which sort, it
is much to be feared, are the greatest part both of Conformists and
Non-Conformists amongst us, if Judgment be made according to our Savior's Rule
of their Fruits, and Fruitfulness.

But lest any well-minded Soul should be troubled with any doubts in this
respect, we must distinguish between Having the Spirit, and the Manifestation
of the Spirit; and between the Operations of the Spirit, the Gifts of the
Spirit, and the Graces of the Spirit: and know, that as there may be the
Operations of the Spirit, where there are not the Gifts of the Spirit; and the
Gifts of the Spirit, where there are not the Graces of the Spirit: so, on the
other side, there may be the Residence of the Spirit, where there is no
sensible distinguishable Manifestation of the Spirit. For the Operations and
Communications of the Spirit are often so subtle and secret in the manner,
both in Illumination, and Power, and Inclination of the Will, as are not
manifest by Sense, but by Faith only, and we know not how they are wrought in
us. But as the most desirable Graces of the Spirit are Regeneration and
Effectual Sanctification, so the Fruits and Effects thereof are the most
infallible Notes of the Presence of the Good Spirit, which always leads to
Mortification of all Carnal and Earthly Affections, and to the Perfection of
all Celestial, Angelick and Divine Dispositions in the Soul. But to Souls duly
prepared, purged and disposed for it, that Blessed Guide does often manifest
his Presence by Sensible Attractions and Restraints upon the Heart, and plain
Suggestions to the Mind; and to such as once find that, I can give no better
Advice then what we have, Ecclesiasticus 4. -- and 6. -- which, I believe, was
part of the Mystic Theology of the Ancients.

FINIS.
AN APOLOGY For, and an INVITATION To, the PEOPLE called QUAKERS, TO Rectify
some ERRORS, which through the Scandals given they have fallen into.

WHEREIN The true Original Causes, both Humane and Divine, of all the Divisions
in the Church, and Mischiefs in the State, and among the People, are plainly
and briefly opened and detected.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1697.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THAT whole Bodies or Societies of Men are subject to the same Infirmities,
which the Individuals, of which they consist, are, and often Sick of the same
Diseases, and the very worst of all, those of the Mind, Blindness,
Conceitedness, Perverseness, Obstinacy, Incorrigibleness, and Impatience of
Reproof, or even Friendly Admonition, the Experience of all Ages does
abundantly manifest; but in none is it more manifest, than in the People of the
Jews, whom God raised up to be an Example, Admonition, and Warning, to the rest
of Mankind. Their whole History, and all their Prophets, are Testimonies of
this all along from first to last; and of this height of the Disease to be most
offended and enraged against their best Friends, such as most earnestly desire,
and most faithfully seek and endeavor their Good and Recovery; They reckon
them their Enemies, who tell them the Truth, Isa. 29.21. make a Man an Offender
for a Word, and lay a Snare for him, who Reproves in the Gate, that is,
publicly, for National Sins, and those of the Great Ones. Act. 7.52. Which of
the Prophets have not your Fathers Persecuted? says Saint Stephen. Besides
this common Infirmity, it is very obseravble, in the unhappy Divisions which
are now among Christians, that generally in all, there is a greater Zeal and
concern for their own Church or Party, than for the common Interest of
Christianity, and the real Service of God, and Salvation of Souls. And this
being so, What Entertainment is such a Discourse as this like to meet with in
the World? But if it be considered for what End, and for whose Service it is
written, that may be sufficient for Encouragement to the Author, and for
Caution to the Reader, how he treats it. And that, with the Lesson now to be
read, (December. 18.) may serve for sufficient Advertisement, Isa. 50.7, 8, 9.
The Lord God will help me, therefore shall I not be confounded: therefore have
I set my Face like a Flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed. He is near
that justifies me, Who will contend with me? let us stand together: Who is
mine Adversary? let him come near to me. Behold the Lord God will help me, Who
is he that shall condemn me? lo, they all shall wax old as a Garment: the Moth
shall eat them up.

Some things but briefly mentioned here upon this occasion, which may seem
doubtful or obscure, are intended, upon another more proper, to be more fully
explained and cleared.

An Apology for, And an Invitation to, The PEOPLE called QUAKERS, To rectify
some ERRORS, which through the Scandals given, they have fallen into, etc.
ALmighty God does in many things govern the greater Collective Bodies of Men,
as he does the lesser of Families, and single Persons: and therefore what is
the Duty of single Persons, or of the Heads of Families, under several
occurrences of the Providence of God, the very same is the Duty of the
Governors of those greater Bodies, whether they be Civil, or Ecclesiastical.
And therefore again, as when any Cross or Affliction befalls a Person, if he
have any Sense of God and Religion in him, he ought not to neglect it, as an
insensible Creature, or a brute Beast; nor to look upon it, as a mere Accident
and Misfortune, like an Atheist or Infidel; but to acknowledge the Hand and
Providence of God in it, examine himself, and consider well for what intent or
purpose, it may have been ordered or permitted by the Righteous, Wise, and
Gracious Overruling Providence of God, and without delay apply himself to do
and perform what that Dispensation does appear to him to call for.

When Divisions, Schisms, and Separations of Parties do fall out in a Church,
these are such Afflictions, as ought to be looked upon, as the Loss of one in a
Family, or of a Member in a particular Person; and therefore not to be made
light of, or passed over as Misfortunes and Accidents, but to be well
considered, as ordered or permitted by the Special Providence of God, with
great Justice and Wisdom, and therefore for some special End to be inquired
into, taken notice of, and observed by his Church, that they may thereupon
apply themselves to what he requires of them for his Service and their own
Good. When this is neglected, all other Means usually prove not only
ineffectual, but productive of more or greater Evils.

What was written afore-time, was written for our Admonition and Instruction:
and as we are plainly told, that in the Division and Separation of the Ten
Tribes from the House of David, the Cause was from the Lord, 1 Ki. 12.15. So in
that great Division of the Eastern and Western Churches, and breach of
Communion between them; and in the Western Church that great Division and
Separation of all those Churches, called Reformed; and in the great Division
again amongst them into Lutheran and Calvanist, and the several Sub-divisions
of several Parties and Sects amongst them; and lastly, to come nearer home, in
all the Divisions, Sub-divisions, Sects and Parties, which have separated from
the Church of England, and afterward one from another, there is as certainly
the Hand of God, and did we consider it well, we might plainly see that the
Cause is from the Lord.

This we can all see in the Great Division, and Separation of all these
Churches called Reformed, from that of Rome; but she her self either cannot or
will not see it: And this, to say no more of the Foreigners here, our
Dissenters at home think they see, and do see; but we of the Church of England
do not see, or will not see, to any purpose as we ought. But as they of the
Church of Rome lay all upon the Heretics, and will acknowledge nothing amiss
among themselves; so we of the Church of England lay all upon the Separatists
and Dissenters, but will acknowledge nothing amiss among our selves. And that
which dazzles the Eyes, and blinds the Minds of People in both, is chiefly the
Pomps and Vanities of the World (which are renounced at Baptism) without, and
the God of this World, who blinds their Minds, within. The things of this
World, to Earthly-minded People, are like Sugar-Plumbs to Children, which stop
their Mouths, and satisfy them that all is well with them.

But if things were more narrowly looked into, it might be perceived, That
there is scarce any Party of Separatists or Dissenters, that has not something
of Truth peculiar to them; and that there is something in particular amiss in
the Church, which gave Occasion to that Separation, and whereof something
peculiar in that Sect may serve for Admonition. And therefore, that in all
there is a secret Providence of God, ordering or permitting them for Judgment,
Correction, Reproof, and Admonition to reform, unto the Church, and unto those
very Parties, in which any such Division and Separation has been made. But
generally all they, who should have taken the Admonition, have had their Mouths
so stopped, and been so bribed and enchanted with the Devil's Sugar-Plumbs and
Baits of Preferments, that while all was so well with them, as they thought,
they could see nothing amiss in the Church, but magnified it, as a most
glorious Church, and laid all the Fault upon the Dissenters and Separatists,
who they thought only wanted what they were possessed of; and the Scandal of
their Ambition, Pride and Covetousness, and Neglect of a due Care of Souls,
has, by their Preaching, I doubt, betrayed more Souls into the Snares of the
Devil, than all their Preaching has rescued out of them, and thoroughly
converted unto God. It is a sad Truth, but Truth it is, and a Great one too,
and very manifest to all, whose Eyes are open, That our Universities, and
Church Preferments, which were designed by our Pious Ancestors, for the
promotion of true Piety, as well as Learning, are, by the Subtilty of Satan,
and Neglect of true Piety and Devotion to God, become very subservient to the
Kingdom of Darkness, less to the Kingdom of Light; From which corrupt Fountain
has proceeded, one way or other, not only all our Divisions, but most of all
the Evils, which do now afflict either the Ecclesiastical or Civil State: and
if some very good Care be not speedily taken, more and greater yet are more
like to ensue, than these be removed.

Of all the Sects which have sprung up amongst us, there is none more
considerable in this respect, whereof I am speaking, or less considered as it
ought to be, than that of the QUAKERS, as they are abusively called; begun by
GEORGE FOX, a young Man, born of mean, but honest and religious Parents, at
Drayton in Leichestershire, in the Year of our Lord 1624. and educated from his
tender years in the Fear of the Lord, but to no more Humane Learning than only
to read English, and write indifferently. He was in his Youth disposed to
Virtue and Piety; and when upward of Nineteen retired from his Relations and
Acquaintance, and lived in diverse places, where he was not known, working at
his Trade of a Shoemaker, with his hands for his Livelihood, but exercising
his Mind in serious Meditations, both while at his Work, and at other times of
Leisure especially. In the Year 1646. he understood, That University Learning
was not enough to qualify Men to be Ministers of Christ; and thereupon,
instead of hearing them, used to retire with his Bible into Solitary places,
joining neither with the Ministers of the Church, nor with the Dissenters, but
relying wholly upon the Lord Jesus Christ for his Inward Teaching. At another
time he understood, That God, who made the World, did not dwell in Temples made
with Hands, but in his Peoples Hearts. And in the Year 1647. having been for
some time exercised with Temptations and Troubles in his Mind, he came farther
to understand, That all was done, and to be done, in and by Christ; and, How he
conquers and destroys the Tempter. And some time after he went among the
Professors at Duckenfield, and Manchester, and declared Truth (as he calls it)
amongst them, and also at Broughton in Leichestershire, and Mansfield in
Northamptonshire; and then People came far and near to see him. And here his
Preaching seems to have commenced. And in 1648. were diverse Meetings of Friends
in several Places. And this was the Beginning of that Sect, which is now become
so considerable in outward Appearance, and I wish more considerable in a true
inward Power than it is. For as all Mankind are apt to relapse and sink down
again from the Elevation to which God at any time raised them: so I doubt are
this People now relapsed very much into a Form, only of a different sort and
appearance.

The Beginning of George Fox seems to have been by and under a true Divine
Conduct; such as Abraham was led by; such as Moses was driven by from the Court
of Pharaoh into the Wilderness; and such as the Holy Prophets of Old, and
greater numbers of Holy Christians afterward, were partly led, and partly
driven by into the Wilderness, Solitary places, and Retirement from Relations,
Friends and Acquaintance; as our Savior says, to forsake Father and Mother,
Brother and Sister, and House and Land, for his sake: and in those Retirements
he did receive Openings, as he calls it, of Truth indeed: and when he came from
his Retirement, and went into the Meetings of Professors, he did declare Truth
indeed, as he expresses it. For it is a certain Truth, that University
Learning, that Preaching and Praying at Churches, or elsewhere, that the
Studying of the Holy Scriptures, that the Profession of Faith in Christ, the
Use of the Sacraments, and most frequent and constant use of the great and
chief Solemnity of the Christian Worship; nay, even Zeal for Christ, and doing
Miracles in his Name, and Reliance upon his Merits, are all, though good in
their kind, and very necessary, and some absolutely necessary; yet are all
short and deceitful to those, who rest in them, and seek not in all and above
all, that inward Principle of Light and Life, which is Christ in them, who
receive him in Sincerity and Purity, and retain it by faithful and ready
Obedience to his Conduct.

This George saw very well and rightly. And if he did, in the heat of Disputes,
either through Transport, or any humane Infirmity, or through the Subtilty of
Satan getting any Advantage of him, over-shoot himself, it is no more than what
Luther and Calvin, and the rest of the Reformers, have done; who, whether they
have reformed or deformed most, may very well bear a Dispute; and he and his
Party deserve to be pitied, and helped out by gentle and kind means. And great
reason there is for it, upon two accounts at the least. 1. Because the Scandals
given were the occasions of their Errors. 2. Because Christianity having before
been pulled to pieces, and no where complete, entire, and clear from
Corruptions and Abuses to be found in any Church or Party of People in the
World, they of all the parts chose the better, the Soul, leaving the Body, as a
dead Carcass to the rest.

It is true, this is in a great Measure to be imputed to those, who by their
Empty Formality gave the Occasion; yet it was a Fault in Them, who took such
Offense at it. What God has joined together, Man must not presume to put
asunder: If the Leaper be commanded to wash in Jordan, (2 King. 5.10.) he must
not think that to wash in the Rivers of Damascus will do as well: If the Blind
Man be commanded to wash in Siloam, (Jo. 9.7.) or even Moses to cast up Ashes
into the Air, ( Exodus 9.8.) the Command must be obeyed and observed, or the
Effect shall not follow: If People be commanded to be Baptized in the Name of
the Lord Jesus, that their Sins may be forgiven, and that they may receive the
Holy Ghost, ( Act. 2.38, 41.) if they presume to neglect and cavil at the
Command, their Sins are more like to be increased and faster bound, than
forgiven, and they more like to receive Satan transformed in a Spirit of
Delusion, than the Holy Spirit of God; and to die in their Sins, though with
many false Comforts, than to come to true Rest in the Lord, in any other way
than he has prescribed. God's Command, if it be but the forbearing of an
A^ple, ( Genesis 2.17: 3.3, 6, 11.) or the doing that, which our Reason cannot
understand, must be observed punctually. Disobedience to the Wisdom of God, is
no less a Sin than Disobedience to his Will. And therefore I dare not excuse
this People in this; for their Sin may be greater, and their Case more
dangerous, than they or I can imagine: but I cannot but pity them, be ready to
help them, to hope the best, because they were led into it, and did it through
Ignorance, Prejudice, and the Scandals of others; and to speak comfortably to
all that will receive it, and submit to the Call of God, humble themselves
before Him, and return to their Duty. But the Sin of those, who shall refuse,
and go on obstinately, will be greatly aggravated, and their Case more
dangerous and difficult. If they fall into the Ditch, the company of a blind
Guide will not save them: If they die in their Sins, it will be but a sorry
Comfort to them that their Blood must be required of another.

But to help them out, I know no better and more effectual way, than to detect
the Snare and Stratagem whereby they fell, and the Stone at which they
stumbled. And it was no other than what I have mentioned already in general,
the Scandal given by others, and Offense taken by them: but it will be
necessary to consider it more particularly: and the first particular, that I
observe in the Journal of G. Fox, was an empty Formality void of the Power of
Godliness, that he perceived and felt in all Parties, the Professors as well as
the Priests, as he calls them: that they were Ministers not of the Spirit, but
of the Letter only, 2 Cor. 3.6. that their Preaching was but with Wisdom of
Words, 1 Cor. 1.17. with the enticing Words of Man's Wisdom, ibid. 2.4. or at
best but a Ministration of the Letter, not of the Spirit. (I do not write his
Words, but his Sense.) And this was an undeniable Evidence, and Demonstration
of the insufficiency of University Learning alone (alone I say) to qualify Men
to be Ministers of Christ; for there were of both sorts, those who wanted not
that, if that had been sufficient: And if we inquire into the true reason of
that, how that comes to pass, since a principal End of our Universities is to
qualify Persons for that Service, we shall presently discover that, which is
the Root, and true Cause, both of that, and of almost all the Unhappiness of
this Nation; and that is a great Defect, and Neglect of Teaching and Learning
the best and chief part of all Learning and Knowledge; of true Heavenly Wisdom.
Their Learning is plainly such an ineffectual Learning, which does deceive
their Souls, being void of the chief solid Food, like Chaff without the Corn,
and Husks without the Kernel: it stops the Mouth, satisfies the Stomach; but
famisheth the Soul: and not only so, but, like unwholesome Food, breeds only
Wind and Crudities, a Knowledge that pusseth up, and Diseases; a superficial
Notional Business, without any thing of true Culture and Food of Souls: a Form
plainly without the Power; such a Cheat and Deceit, as the most virulent
Expressions of any called Quakers, could not exceed; but even Indignation would
extort almost as much from a sober Man duly sensible of it. It deceives
themselves; it deceives the People, whom they undertake to feed; and it
deceives the whole Nation.

The Teaching here is agreeable to the Design of those who come to learn; a
mixed Design of an unnatural Composure, Heaven and Earth, or rather Earth and
Heaven; not so much God and Mammon, (which, according to our Savior's
Doctrine, are inconsistent) but Mammon and God; for the principal in the Design
in this Case ought first to be named: and it is visible in their Actions which
that is; and even in their Common Expressions: for if one propose a Place with
all the Advantages of doing Good that may be, presently comes this filthy
fulsome Question; But what Encouragement is there? as if an Advantage for doing
Good was not Encouragement enough to a Christian to enter into the Service of
God, without some humane assurance of I know not what temporal Income. And
Preferments are not only thought, but plainly asserted to be the Encouragements
of Learning; and I doubt they have their Reward. What unsatiable Greediness is
observable generally in all, to be scandalous in almost the best, that can come
at them! And what is the Use they make of them, when they have with great
Study, and Pains, and Solicitations, and Compliances, and Flatteries, and
Costs, at last obtained them; but Pride, and Luxury, and Extravagancies of
Wives, and Children; to which all v. Fa. Paul, Of Matters Beneficiary, N.
236,237. and f. a Sin to mispend that which exceeds the moderate Necessity of a
Clergyman.
That must be sacrificed, which was designed for Provision for true Food of
Souls; of which Thousands are daily famished, for want of a competent number of
duly qualified Laborers in the Lord's Vineyard, in the great Parishes about
this City, and other parts of the Nation, where there is Maintenance enough, if
such Persons were employed, as did indeed make that their Business, Care and
Concern. All their Learning raises but few above the Sensual, to the Animal
State; but none to the truly Spiritual: if any attain to that, it is by such
Means as may be used any where else, as well as at the University, as things
are there ordered at present; and not by University Learning, which, as it is
ordinarily used, does more hinder than further it. Nor is it likely it should
have much better Effect upon others, which has no better upon themselves: For
in the Spiritual Generation, as in the Carnal, Men beget their like; the
strong, such as are strong; and the weak and infirm, such as themselves are.

But if we look farther into the Concerns of the whole Nation, and their Duty
to their Great Master in that respect, are not they to be both severally and
jointly, not only Pastors, but Watchmen; severally over their own particular
Charges, and jointly over the whole Nation? But what an insignificant
Generation are they, even the Chief of them in that respect, not only far short
of the Generosity and Magnanimity of genuine Christians, and the more immediate
Servants of the Great Jehovah, but even of the natural Genius of their own
Nation; as if their Preferments had some Narcotick and stupifying quality, or
some secret Enchantment in them: And so in truth they have; they are like the
Trojan Horse; when they think they have got a great Prize, they themselves are
surprised and captivated by, they little think what, invisible Enemies. When
they return to the Pomps and Vanities of the World, which they had renounced in
their Baptism, they desert the Heroic Christian State, and enter into the
Power of the Enemy; and their true Christian Strength departs from them: they
have no longer any real strength to serve the Lord Christ, but only such an
Appearance of it, as serves to deceive themselves and others; and make them the
more effectually subservient to that Interest, which they do not design to
serve: for their Actions and Behavior render their Preaching not only
ineffectual, but scandalous to Men, and ridiculous to the invisible adverse
Powers, who are not a little gratified with the spectacle of it. It puts a
Slight and Contempt upon the great and noble Examples of our Savior, and the
Ancient and most Heroic Christians; but spreads the Devil's Snares, and decoys
Men into them; promotes Christian Idolatry, which is Covetousness, to be as
effectually destructive as any of the Jews ever was, or any of Papists can be;
and tempts the World to believe, that either Earthly-mindedness, or to mind
Earthly things, is consistent with Christianity, or that they are no
Christians, and do not themselves believe what they Preach unto others.

But to speak a little more distinctly, there are two things to be considered
in our English Clergy; what they have originally from Christ, and what they
have originally from Man. From Christ they have Authority to preach the Gospel,
to teach and instruct the People, to administer the Sacraments, and offer to
God the solemn Prayers of the Church, to admonish, correct, and execute
Ecclesiastical Discipline, where there is occasion, and to receive the
Oblations of the People for maintenance of themselves, and for Pious Uses; and
a right to all the Respect and Submission which is due to the Ministers of
Christ in so Holy an Employment. And from Man, they have Houses, and Lands, and
Revenues, and Titles, and Honors, and Civil Power and Authority, and Charges
and Encumbrances. And these are some good and useful; and some evil,
pernicious, inconsistent with their Christian State; and, to be plain,
Antichristian. The Houses, Lands, and Revenues may be of good use, if they be
used as they should be; but the rest are Antichristian, under pretense of
Honoring, Degrading; and under pretense of enlarging their Power with what
they had not, debasing and abridging what they had, and subtly enslaving the
Ministers of Christ to be Servants of Men; and not the outward Man only, but
their very Minds and Spirits. And here lies the very Mystery of Iniquity. They
are deprived of one part of their Christian Authority, and their Hands bound,
under pretense of State and Grandeur, by having Chancellors, like the Grandees
of the World. They are subjected to the State by their Acceptance of their
Honors and Dignities from thence, (the very Temptation that was offered by the
Devil to our Savior, and a betraying of the Rights of the Church of Christ.)
And the Papal Enchroachments and Usurpations being transferred to the Crown,
and all Ecclesiastical Preferments coming from the King, this is first a Bait
to allure Ambitious Minds, and then an Enchantment upon them, that they dare
not displease the Creator of their Grandeur, though for the Service of their
true Lord and Master, and the Savior of their Souls. So that we are like to
have a continual Succession of Flatterers of Princes, instead of faithful
Monitors, as become the Servants of the great God to be; and Nurseries of false
Loyalty, instead of true Piety and Devotion to God; and of Instruments of
incessant Dissentions between Prince and People, instead of Healers of our
Breaches; a just Judgment or deserved consequence of Sacrilege and Usurpation
upon the Church of Christ. And here, if I be not much mistaken, lies the Root
of all the Unhappiness of this Nation, and at this time in particular.

The Providence of God has not at any time been wanting to us; but we have
been always wanting to our Duty to Him, and to our own true Interest. And
though all have been wanting, yet the beginning of this deficiency has been in
them, who should have better attended to, and wisely considered the Motions of
Providence, and been the first active vigorous Movers to the rest to have
corresponded with it: But, alas! they attended more to the Motions of Men, and
to please them, or at least not displease them, for their own Advancement or
Security; and this is called Prudence forsooth: And sohave we lost a most
favorable Opportunity put into our hands. When Men turn from God to Men for
Counsel, or Assistance, or Advancement, that Divine Power which does ordinarily
accompany the Ordinances and Orders of God, does usually depart from them,
though chosen, or regularly commissioned by him; as it did from Saul: And then
they are ready to fly to any mean things for support or safety.

The Church of England has been in Bondage, under the Civil Power, ever since
it was discharged from the Roman Usurpations, which were not totally abolished,
but too much reserved to another Master; and a Slavish Spirit has ever since
possessed it. It did quietly acquiess in the greatest Sacrilege that ever was
committed: It contentedly suffered the most solemn part of its Liturgy,
composed by English Bishops, and, as was declared by Act of Parliament, by the
aid of the Holy Ghost, to be dismembered, disordered, and defaced, and the
Christian Sacrifice abolished by Foreigners, and a Factious Party, which have
ever since been Thorns in their Sides, without the concurrence of the English
Clergy. The true Christian Discipline they never had the Courage to attempt to
restore, though an Office was prepared for a Memorial, with a Wish to have it
restored, from the beginning, which King Charles II. observing upon an
Ash Wednesday, asked, Why do they not restore it? Who hinders 'em? And for the
Worship of God, we have ordinarily only Mattens and Vespers, and that too only
on the Lord's Day, and in that too the Prayers short and deficient, either to
excite, or to express the Devotions of the People, where there is any; and
besides all this, what we have, commonly read with so little Devotion, as gives
Scandal to many, and no little disturbance to others. And our very Sacraments
and most Holy Things, no less than Holy Days, are scandalously profaned.
Baptism, which is the Solemnity of our engaging in the Christian Covenant, not
only permitted, but even forced upon such as do not desire it, either for
themselves or their Children; but bring their Infant Children either for fear
of the Apparator, or out of Custom to be like their Neighbors, without any
sense or understanding of so much of the Christian Religion as was required
anciently of Catechumens, before they were admitted to Baptism. And that other
Sacrament, the Holy Memorials of our Savior's Passion, which, from the rising
of the Sun to the setting of it, that is, all over the World, has, in all
Assemblies of Christians, for the solemn Worship of God, till the last Age,
been presented before God, as a solemn Recognition of our Redemption by Christ,
and Subjection to him as our Lord, has been not only most shamefully
neglected, and so treated, both in Sermons from the Pulpit, and in Printed
Books, that it appears few amongst us rightly understand it at this day; but
most horribly profaned, not only by common admittance of all that will to it,
but even forcing the most wicked and profane Officers to it, upon the Penalty
of losing their Places. And so unhappily have some of our Controversies with
Papists and Fanatics been managed, and so superficially and impertinently our
Preaching been generally throughout the Nation, that we have disputed one part,
into disbelief of the Scriptures and Infidelity; another, into contempt of one
of the chief Principles of Christianity; and generally all, into Neglect and
Contempt of the Examples, Precepts, and Counsels of greatest Perfection in the
Christian Religion; and together with that, preached the People generally into
a careless tepid state of Indifferency; so that in the Country especially, it
is rare to meet with two or three good sensible intelligent lively Christians
in a Parish. And who of our principal Clergy can deny any of this? And if it be
all true, why is it not reformed? If they cannot reform all, why not as much as
they can? Why is not the Christian Worship restored in their Cathedrals? And if
those be so burdened by profane Officers imposed upon them, that they fear to
expose it, why do they not reform their own Families, and restore it at least
in their own Chapels? What Account will this Glorious Church, as carnal
Flatterers call it, give of their Neglect of Propagating the Gospel in Foreign
parts, at least in our own Plantations, and suffering them to be such
Nourseries of Scandals to the Infidels? What Account of the many things fit to
be done at home, for the Service of their Master; and fit to be considered by
them jointly in a Body, and promoted in Parliament; which yet are neither
studied, nor considered, nor so much as thought on by any of them, no more than
if they did not belong to their Care, or were not of any Concern to their
Master, though they sit Session after Session in the Parliament? But how can it
be expected that they should ever extend their care to things so remote, who
take no more care of what does concern them in their own Chapels and Families?

It is an amazing thing for one whose Eyes are open, to consider these things.
But it fairs with collective Bodies of Men, as with single Persons: they are
subject to the like Diseases: the State of this Church is plainly a Tepid,
Scorbutic, Latitudinarian, Laodicean State, quite sick of the Prudentials; and
has been so in a manner from the first Settlement of the Reformation. And to
speak freely, as becomes an honest Man, though there was great need of a
Reformation, when it was begun by Luther, and long before; yet has that great
Work been so ill managed, with more of the Antichristian than Christian Spirit,
that I cannot see, by any growth in Grace and Virtue, that the Blessing of God
has ever been with it; only he seems to have preserved these Reformations
rather as Judgments and Corrections for the Obstinacy of that Church which
would not reform: and raised up and preserved the several Sub-divisions of
Parties amongst us for the very same cause and purpose. For the True Cause of
all the Divisions and Separations amongst us, is no other but our Scandals,
Abuses and Corruptions; both by way of Natural Causation, and by the special
Judgment of God, to awaken us, if it be possible. And though the Blessing of
God, the true Spiritual Christian Blessing, be not upon them, because he does
not favor Schisms and Divisions, yet is his Protection over them, as his
Instruments in the Nature of a Judgment, and in some things to raise an
Emulation in those of the Church, if they would lay it to heart and understand
it. For there is none of them all, but there is some thing in them, which may
serve for Admonition and Notice of something amiss in the Church.

This which I have now said, may be of use not only to them of the Church, but
also to all the several separate Parties, and deserve their very serious and
deep Consideration. For it is not a light matter to Make a Schism or Division
in any particular Church, or in the Catholic Church. It has been looked upon,
in all Ages, to be a damnable Sin: and who-ever does well consider the several
weighty Admonitions in the Scriptures concerning it, if he have not a benumed
Conscience, will not make light of it; nor yield to plausible pretenses: there
is nothing so bad, but the Wit of Man and subtle Suggestions of Satan can put
a color upon it; nor so good, but they can mis-represent it and disparage it:
but it is dangerous and very imprudent to play tricks with Sacred things. Any
thing else may be more safely meddled with in that manner.

This does concern them all in general; and I must add a word or two more:
There are none of the best of them, that I have yet talked with, that could or
would deny that their Party was much sunk in Piety and Virtue from those
degrees of it, which was in those before them of the same Party. And this being
so, it concerns us all to consider well, whether the Apostasy foretold be not
an Apostasy in Practice, as well as in Principles? and, Whether, while we are
gazing to see the Judgments of God upon it abroad, it may not be found amongst
us at home; and we feel, in a surprise upon the Nation at home, what we expect
to see elsewhere, at Rome; as was upon this City in sixty six. And certain I
am, that there are not only Antichristian Principles amongst us all, but whole
Antichristian Sects and Parties, which, deceived by the Subtilty of Satan,
under the most specious appearances of the most pure and refined Christianity,
do undermine and enervate the true Genuine Christianity, and the Power of
Godliness. It is one of the Devil's most subtle Policies, by abuse of
Scripture, and mis-application of certain Truths, to impose upon People, and
overturn them. So he began with our Savior, and so he goes on with Professors
to and at this day. The Holy Scriptures are abused, the Honor of God is
abused, the Merits of Christ are abused, the Guidance of the Spirit is abused,
the Moderation and Condescension of the Gospel is abused, and whatever is most
Excellent and Admirable is abused by the Subtilty of the Enemy, and the supine
Negligence, and Inconsiderateness and Folly of Men. And woe be to them who dare
presume to be the Instruments and Leaders in these Abuses and Doctrines.

It is certain that our Savior gave Instructions to his Apostles for the
Settling of his Church; and that they accordingly in all places, where there
were a competent number of Converts, did ordain Elders, and gave Authority to
others to do the like; and so settled a Succession in the Church, which has
continued all over the World to this day. And it is certain, that the State of
the Jews was so corrupted in his time, as provoked the Judgment of God upon
them, so that they are a Monument thereof all over the World to this day; and
yet neither He, nor his Disciples, did ever refuse communion with them, till
they were cast out; and so far was he from allowing them to separate, that he
foretold their being cast out of the Synagogues, as part of the Persecution
they were to suffer. It is also certain, that our Savior did foretell that
many false Prophets, that is, false Teachers, should come in his Name, and
deceive many; and gave great Caution not to go out or believe them; and that
his Apostles did the like, and did with great earnestness exhort all to beware
of Divisions, Schisms, and Separations in the Church: And accordingly, in all
Ages, for Men to take upon them the Office of Elders or Ministers of the
Gospel, without a Regular Ordination, derived by Succession from the Apostles;
or to draw away people after them, and engage them in Separate Parties, has
been looked upon as a heinous Sin; and whoever have done so have been Infamous
in the Church ever since. And therefore, if our Dissenters did continue daily
with one accord at our Temples, as the primitive Christians did, and did
continue their Assemblies at their own Meeting-places, for Instruction and
Edification, without any Separation from the Church, provided there was nothing
but true Christian Doctrine taught amongst them, I do not see but they might be
of very good Use, and deserve not only an Indulgence, but Encouragement from
the Public Authority. But they, who make a Trade of it to engage Separate
Parties, I do verily believe have much to answer for before God: and those who
desire to be Christians indeed, had need to beware of them. And this I must in
justice say, after all I have said concerning what is amiss amongst us, that,
thanks be to God, we have those amongst us, who, for good Learning, for
profitable Preaching, and for sincere Piety, Devotion, and all Virtue, are no
way inferior to any of the Dissenters, if to be equalled by any of them: and
yet I cannot say they are so many, but there may be reason enough to receive
those Laborers also into our Lord's Harvest. And I heartily wish it was well
considered, How they may be made more serviceable in so important and needful a
Work, without any thing of a Separation: and that they would consider, Who They
are, who sit in Moses, or rather the Apostles Seat, and, What our Lord does
require in that respect.

And now, to come more particularly to the PEOPLE of that Party called Quakers,
I must first acquaint them, that I have not only had several Conferences, with
the Principal Persons of their Party, whom they call Ministers, but have also
sent them several Letters and Papers to their Second Days Meetings: And as our
Conferences have hitherto been managed in a very friendly manner, so I do
desire to proceed in the same manner with them also: and therefore, what is
directed at first only to the second days Meeting, I shall desire them now to
receive, as intended from the first for them all, though I thought it most fair
and decent to proceed in that order. And it is as follows:

To William Penn, and the rest of the Friends with him, at their second days
Meeting in Grace Church Street.
William, and the rest of the Friends with thee,
MY Hearts desire and Prayer to God for you all, is, that ye may be saved: for
I am persuaded that you have a Zeal of God, at least many of you, though not
according to Knowledge in some things. Nevertheless, whereto ye have attained,
in that I desire ye may be established, and that God will be graciously pleased
to reveal the rest to you, that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing.
For which purpose I come, I trust, by the Grace of God, with a Message of Grace
and Peace to you. I am well satisfied that it is no mere Humane Project or
Artifice, that at first raised you up, and has conducted you hitherto: but a
Supernatural Power, and that it is of the Lord, some way or other, (as was the
Separation of the Ten Tribes from Rehoboam, 1 King. 12.) for Correction and
Reformation of something amiss in this Church. And therefore I dare not
presume, either upon my own head, or by my own Ability, to intermeddle in it.
But my Heart is enlarged toward you upon these Considerations: 1. That ye do
assert one of the Great and Chief Principles of the Christian Religion, which I
have observed to be very unworthily and even despitefully treated by too many,
who have gotten into, or seek, Preferments and Employment in the Church,
without Check or Reproof; and so unworthily deserted by most, for fear of
reproach, or disgrace, or hindrance in their Preferment, that I have not known
it generously asserted by above two or three in the Pulpit, (but those great
Men indeed) though it be plainly a Doctrine most authentickly and solemnly
professed and declared in the Church of England. 2. That ye do bear a good
Testimony against other Abuses connived at, or tolerated amongst us. 3. I am
moved with Pity toward you, that you should have so great Causes of Offense or
Scandal given you, against the Holy and Established Institutions and Ordinances
of Christ, for the Ministerial Office; for the Admission of Proselytes; and for
the great Solemnity of the Christian Worship, which has been so long abused
with Controversies, that I know very few Persons now amongst us, who do rightly
and completely understand it; and even against the Person, Satisfaction, and
Merits of Christ himself. But when I consider your Notions and Sentiments
concerning these things, though I am well satisfied that you are under the
Conduct and Energy of some Spiritual Power; yet, What that Spirit is? and,
Whether One or Diverse? in my Judgment, does deserve very good Consideration. Ye
know what Spirit it was, which God sent between Abimelech and the Shechemites,
Jud. 9.23. and what that was, that was sent from the Lord to Saul, 1 Samuel 6.14.
and what that was, that was commissioned by God in the case of Ahab, 1 King.
22.22, 23. and what that was, in the midst of the Princes of Noph, Isa. 19.14.
which was from the Lord too. And that such a Spirit has been among some called
Quakers, is manifest both by their Actions, Speeches, and Writings; nay, the
very Spirit of the Devil, and of Antichrist, is apparent and undeniable, from
the Indignities offered both in word and deed, to Holy things. But that is not
the thing now to be considered, what Spirits may have appeared among them. For
even among the Apostles, Satan had power to enter into Judas; and it is not
improbable but those, whom our Savior told, Ye know not what Spirit ye are of;
and even Peter himself, when our Savior said to him, Get thee behind me,
Satan, might not at the time be free from some Impressions of Evil Spirits.
That, it is likely, was a Peculiarity of our Savior's, for the Prince of this
World to have nothing in him. But the thing to be considered, is, What Spirit
that is which at first excited, and has now the Conduct of the whole Body of
this People? And, not, whether it be sent, or commissioned from God? but,
Whether it be one of the Ministering Spirits sent forth to minister for them,
who shall be Heirs of Salvation? or, One of those Seducing Spirits, to whom, in
the latter times, that some would give heed, was, in the times of the Apostles,
expressly said by the Spirit of God? And great Reason there is to take this
into very deep Consideration: 1. Because of the many and weighty Cautions given
by our Savior and his Apostles, and left upon record in the Sacred Scriptures,
for our warning in these latter times, to beware of them, and not to go out
after them; with Admonitions concerning their Subtilty, their Energy or Power,
and their strong Delusions to deceive, if it were possible, the very Elect; and
that even Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of Light, that is, puts on
the Appearance of an Angel of Light, (2 Cor. 11.14.) and, lastly, that we
should try the Spirits, (1 Jo. 4.1.) 2. Because, if the Trial be by Agreement
or Disagreement with the Doctrine, Institutions and Ordinances of Christ, and
his Apostles authorized by him, they may seem to have apostatized and gone off,
or, at least, fallen short of them, in matters of great Moment, and special
concern, those before mentioned; and therefore to be Seduced by some Spirit of
Error: For I doubt not but the Devil himself has that Malice and Envy against
the Man Christ Jesus, by whom he has been Conquered and Vanquished, and
against the Solemn Memorial of that Victory, that could he but keep people from
engaging in that Holy Covenant with Him by Baptism, and from the Solemnity of
that Memorial, he would be willing himself to lead them into all other Truth,
upon that condition, rather than fail. Yet notwithstanding, since they are a
Sober People, have received, retained, and do act upon one of the chief
Principles of Christianity, and have diverse commendable things in them; and
what Errors they have fallen into, have been occasioned by the Scandals and
Offenses given by those of the Church, who will have a sad account to answer
for it: I do hope in the Mercy and Goodness of God, that if it be a good
Spirit, which has the Conduct of them, he shall lead and dispose those who are
Sincere amongst them, to the acknowledgment of the Truth in those things,
whereto they have not yet attained; and if it be otherwise, he shall be forced
to resign the Conduct of them to a more powerful and better Guide; and that we
shall see such a Society of Complete Christians come out of this despised
People, as are at this time hardly to be found in any part of the World, that I
know of. These are my Thoughts, and Hopes concerning this People in general at
present. And Hopes, I say, grounded upon the Mercy of God, and Power of God,
which no Good Being would oppose; nor no Evil Power can stand before. And in
His Name I come unto you, knowing assuredly that neither I, nor any Humane
Ability, is able to prevail against the Power that is amongst you,
notwithstanding the Certainty of the Truths that I have mentioned already, and
shall endeavor, by the Grace and Assistance of God Almighty, through our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, more fully to explain unto you in due time: But, as I
said, if it be a good Power, it will favor me and assist me in it, and rejoice
in it too: and if it be an Evil Power Commissioned, it must cease, and submit
to that Victorious and All-Conquering Name: Its Enchantments must be dissolved,
and its Sophistry and Falacies detected. I therefore, as an Ambassador of
Christ, in the Spirit and Meekness of Christ, beseech you, Be ye reconciled to
the Truths of God, and receive them with that Reverence and Gratitude that is
meet, without Cavelling, or regard to any Temporal concern. I do not invite you
to return to the Abuses and Corruptions which you have forsaken, but to those
Truths, and to the due use of those Holy things, against which you have been
Scandalized by those Abuses and Corruptions. Nor do I invite you to dissolve
your Society, or to leave off your Meetings, and drown your selves in a
promiscuous Multitude. No, you have in part born a good Testimony, and I would
have you do so still: But I invite you only to make your Testimony more
Complete, Illustrious, and Irrefragable, by bearing your Testimony to the whole
Truth; and not any longer a Testimony like the Feet of Daniel's Image, partly
strong, and partly weak, by a mixture of Truth with Falsehood; for that cannot
stand long together; but to strengthen the things that remain, and set in order
the things that are wanting, that ye may stand; for otherwise ye will certainly
be Broken to Pieces. I invite you but to what I am doing my self with a small
Company of Poor people, that is bearing a Testimony for God, and manifestly
under his Conduct: But it is neglected by them, to whom it has been offered
for a sufficient Time, and in a sufficient Manner, considering their Learning,
and pretense to Knowledge: And now it is offered to you, a despised People,
that God may humble the Proud and High-minded, and confound the Wisdom of the
Wise, by mean and despicable things, in the sight of Men. Be Wise, and neglect
not the Opportunity, and you, who were last in the Worlds account, shall be
first. What ever you do, you will find there is solid Truth in the Proposal,
and I wish you may receive it to the Honor and Glory of God, and your own
Comfort and Salvation; and you will then find me to have been

Your Sincere and Cordial Friend, E. S.
31 Aug. 1696.

After this there were other Letters and Papers sent, which may be taken notice
of hereafter, as there may be occasion; but the last contained certain
Questions, which I think fit now to propose to the Consideration of all, who
are sincere, and do desire not to deceive themselves, nor be deceived in a
matter of so great Importance, as the Will and Service of God, and the
Salvation of their own Souls. If any notwithstanding will presume to go on in
any false or Erroneous Ways, they must answer for it, and their Blood, if they
miscarry, must be upon their own Heads. For the Design and Use of these
Questions is, to examine the case, What Spirit they are of? the Spirit of
Christ, or the Spirit of Antichrist; the Spirit of Truth, or some subtle
Spirit of Delusion? Whether they be Christians indeed, or counterfeit
Christians, that is, Antichristians? Whether Hypocritical Professors in Words,
but Renagadoes in Deeds, refusing the Solemnities of his Covenant and Worship,
and the Orders of his Church, or such sincere Christians as are ready to follow
the Guidance of his Spirit out of their own Wills, and out of their own Wisdom
and Imaginations, and Errors and Mistakes, into all Truth? and, Whether they be
in the Way of Salvation, or of Delusion and Perdition? The Times of this
Ignorance God winked at, but now commands all Men every where to Repent.

QUESTIONS PROPOSED To the People called QUAKERS, First to their Ministers, at
their second days Meeting; and now, to them All; for the better Examination,
and rectifying some Errors and Mistakes amongst them.
I. WHether there be not a great Party of fallen Angels and wicked Spirits,
which are Enemies to Mankind, and with all the Power, Activity, and Subtilty
they can, do continually endeavor to hinder their Salvation, and Communion and
Union with the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit? II. Whether the Word, which in the
beginning was with God, and was God, was not made Flesh and dwelt amongst Men,
being born of the Virgin Mary, and called Jesus, which signifies a Savior, and
Christ, the Messiah, the anointed of God, and Jesus Christ of Nazareth? III.
Whether his Appearance in Mortal Flesh was not to destroy the Works of the
Devil, the Prince of that Party of fallen Angels and wicked Spirits; to be a
Prince and a Savior to Mankind, and the Captain of their Salvation to all who
receive him, and subject themselves entirely to his Teachings by his Example,
and by his Doctrine, and Precepts, and Orders recorded in the Holy Scriptures,
and by the Motions of his Holy Spirit upon and in their Hearts and Minds? IV.
Whether he be not the Only Mediator between God and Man; so that Man can have
no Communion with the Holy God, or Participation of the Spirit of Holiness, but
by and through Him? V. Whether that Party of fallen Angels and wicked Spirits,
knowing this, do not above all things endeavor, by all means, to withold
people from closing and uniting with that Holy Mediator, and to withdraw as
many as they can as much as they can from Him? VI. Whether their most dangerous
and subtle Actings in this Opposition be not principally, by Way of Deceit,
under the Appearance and Pretense of Good to Man, and of Good Spirits? VII.
Whether it has not been foretold, that, in the latter times especially, there
should be many false Teachers, who, with such specious Pretenses and secret
Energy, should endeavor to draw away People from the Faith, as to deceive, if
it was possible, the very Elect; and Warnings given to beware of them, by
Christ and by his Apostles? VIII. Whether the Spirit of God and the Spirit of
Christ be not the same, and a Holy and Pure Spirit, a Spirit of Truth and
Righteousness, leading into all necessary Truth, and from all Fraud, Deceit,
and Falacy, Cavils, and shuffling Evasions? IX. Whether it be not reasonable
that Christ Jesus, who had done so much for Man, should prescribe what Manner
he pleased for his Peoples engaging with Him; and for their recognizing Him,
and making their Solemn Address to the Father by Him; and what Orders he
pleased and would have observed and continued in his Church? X. Whether to
oppose such Appointments, Prescriptions or Orders, or to cavil at them, seek
Evasions or Pretenses to neglect them, and yet pretend to be Christians, be not
a great Evidence of Insincerity, and of a subtle Antichristian Spirit of Satan
transformed into an Angel of Light? XI. Whether Jesus Christ, besides his
General Command to his Apostles after his Resurrection, to go to the Gentiles,
and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, etc. did not for forty days show himself to them,
speaking of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, until the day in which
he was taken up, after that he, through the Holy Ghost, had given Commandments
unto them, and in or with those Commandments give them sufficient Instructions
and Directions for the Constituting his Church, which he purchased with his
Blood? XII. Whether the Apostles did not in all things faithfully pursue his
Commands and Directions? XIII. Whether besides his express Commands and
Directions, they did not also receive the Holy Spirit, according to his Promise
in an extraordinary manner, and had the same residing in them, and manifesting
his Presence with them, by extraordinary Operations, to guide and assist them
in their Work? XIV. Whether they having received the Command to make Disciples
in all Nations, (whether Jews or Gentiles) baptizing them, as aforesaid, and
teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever he commanded them, did not in
all places preach the Gospel, exhort the People to believe and be baptized, and
baptized with Water those, who did believe, though baptized before with John's
Baptism, and though they had received the Holy Spirit, whether Jews or
Gentiles? XV. Whether the Apostles, and the People converted by them, after
they had received the Holy Ghost, did not, when they came together in one, or
assembled for the Solemn Worship of God, break Bread, and eat the Lord's
Supper, and do as their Lord did, and commanded them to do; and that so
constantly, that there is not known any Assembly of Christians in the time of
the Apostles, nor in many Ages after, to have been held for the Solemn Worship
of God without it? XVI. Whether the Apostles did not ordain Elders, and appoint
others, by special Appointment, to do the same, in every City; by such
Authority, that none did presume to take the Office of Elder unto himself, but
who was so ordained; or the Office of Ordaining Elders, but who was so
appointed, either in the times of the Apostles, or afterward, but who have been
infamous ever since? XVII. Whether seeing that our Savior himself, though he
needed not, would notwithstanding be baptized with Water, to fulfill all
Righteousness, and thereupon had sensible Approbation from Heaven, did also by
his Apostles baptize with Water; and that it is plain by their Practice, that
his Apostles, and the whole Church of Christ, did understand his Command to
baptize all Nations, of Baptism by Water, and as necessary for Forgiveness of
Sins; and that Baptism with the Holy Ghost was peculiar to himself: whether, I
say, this being so, it be not a forced and strained Interpretation, without any
sound ground, and contrary to the most authentic Means of explaining Words, to
restrain that Command to Baptism by the Holy Ghost only? XVIII. Whether, if
such Construction be by any Spirit more than humane, it be not the Spirit of
Antichrist or Satan transformed, to withold Men under his own Dominion, from
solemnly engaging with Christ, and from Forgiveness of their Sins in his Name?
or, If it be only by Opinion of Men, such Opinion obstinately persisted in, be
not a Damnable Sin, contrary to subjection of all Imaginations to the Obedience
of Christ, and subverting of Souls, and such Teachers to be abominated and
anathamatized by all sincere Christians, as Seducers, and the Ministers and
Instruments of Satan, though they appear in Sheeps clothing? XIX. Whether, it
having been the constant belief of all Nations, (whether Jews or Gentiles) that
they had a real, though Spiritual, Communion with the Gods they worshipped, in
their Participation of their Sacrifices, as St. Paul intimates, 1 Cor. 10. and
may be proved by good Authority; and Christians duly disposed, having a like
Communion with Christ in the participation of the consecrated Bread and Cup, as
St. Paul affirms; and the solemn Worshipping of God, by presenting our Prayers
to the Father, with those Memorials of our Savior's Passion, being plainly a
Recognition of our Redemption by Christ, and of his Dominion over us, acquired
by his Passion, and that that is the only Propitiation, and He the only
Mediator, by which, and by whom we Mortals born in Sin can have Access to, and
Acceptance with the Father; and St. Paul having received the Doctrine of what
he taught concerning this, from the Lord; and the ancient Christians
frequenting this Ordinance, after they had manifestly received the Holy Ghost:
Whether, I say, this being so, to reject these either as Types and Shadows,
(which are indeed Antitypes, as the Grecians express it, Solemn Memorials, and
Sensible Declarations before God, Angels and Men, of present internal actions
of our Minds, for the greater Manifestation and Notoriety of the Fact) be not
mere Sophistry, Shuffle and Evasion; or as needless, upon pretense that Christ
is come to them in the Spirit; or of their having the Substance; be not to set
up themselves in Pride above the Apostles and Holy Christians, who had so
manifestly the Spirit of God; nay, above Christ himself, viz. to reject that as
needless, which he instituted as necessary; and a plain Evidence of the
Subtilty and Delusion of Satan, to oppose Christ, and detain and withdraw
people from his Solemn Worship, and under the most specious appearance of the
Spirit of God, by sensible Motions to things appearing Good, and by False
Lights, to corrupt and adulterate them, and get and keep a residence in them,
as if it was the Spirit of Christ? Whether such Obstinacy, such Fallacy, in
such a Matter, of such Importance in Christianity, and yet so easy to Man, and
void of all Exceptions, be not plain Evidence of a Mystery of Iniquity in it?
XX. Whether to deliver those things in the Name of the Lord, as immediately
from the Lord, and by his Spirit, which may be plainly perceived and detected
to proceed either from a humane Spirit, or a Spirit of Error, be not a great
Presumption against the Holy Majesty of God, and a great Scandal to the Holy
Doctrine of the Guidance of the Spirit of God, and therefore a double and great
Sin; the Sin of the False Prophets of old, and that which in Germany formerly,
and since in this Nation, raised so great a Prejudice against the Truth?
Upon the perusal of these Questions, it may be supposed that some Answer was
returned, and therefore some account of that may reasonably be expected; and I
should have been glad to have been able to have answered so reasonable an
Expectation more fully: but the truth in short is, that eight of the first ten
were answered affirmatively, but the other two were answered indeed, but with
Answers not to the Questions: and the other ten remain yet to be answered; but
I hope upon due consideration will be answered at last, not with words only,
but with deliberate solemn Actions. Nor are my Hopes without rational Ground.
For in the several Conferences I have had with them, seven or eight at a time,
of the principal leading Men of their Party, they behaved themselves, as became
serious considerate Persons; heard patiently and attentively, replied gravely
and calmly, none interrupting either me or any of their own party while
speaking; and our Conclusion was friendly, though not altogether agreeing in
the same Sentiments. And this is my Ground in respect of the Persons.

And for the Matter it self in question, That they have been led into Error and
Mistake in some things, the due Consideration of these Questions will in a
great measure make them sensible. And when, besides, they shall consider by
what Means they, who misled the rest, came to overshoot themselves, and fall
into those Mistakes, viz. through the Scandals beforementioned, and that
common Infirmity incident to us Mortals, to run from one Extreme into another;
this will farther satisfy and confirm them in the truth of it. And if to these
Considerations be added a clear Explication of the Truth, which they did not
rightly apprehend before; this, with the Grace of God, will farther inlighten
the Mind of those, who are sincere, and regard Truth more than any temporal
Concern, with much Satisfaction, viz. That Baptizm with Water, and that Noble
Solemnity of the Christian Worship, are not needless Types and Shadows of
things past and fulfilled, as they imagine, but Solemn Expressions and
Declarations, more comprehensively and remarkably significative than Words,
before God, Angels, Devils and Men, of present Acts of the Mind, of what is
internally and invisibly at the same instant acted in Spirit; the one, of our
Engagement in an Holy Covenant with God in Christ, by putting off, by
Repentance, our Pollutions through Sin, and Dedication of our Selves to the
Holy Trinity; the other, of our Recognition of our Redemption by Christ, by his
Death and Sacrifice upon the Cross, and of his Dominion over us, and our
Subjection to Him, even to lay down our Lives in Obedience to Him, as he did
His in Obedience to his Father; which is done by making our Solemn Address, and
presenting our Prayers to the Father, with the Memorials of his Passion, as the
Great Propitiation for the Sins of Mankind, and Participation of those
Memorials, being Consecrated not only by a Separation to a Holy Use, but by a
real Sanctification through the Spirit of God at the Prayers of the Church,
whereby the Faithful have a real and Spiritual Communion with Him, and one with
another. This is the pure Offering of the Gentiles, foretold by Malachy, That
it should be Offered by them from the rising of the Sun, even unto the going
down of the same. And this is the Sense and Meaning thereof received and
retained by the Church of Christ all over the World, till Calvin's new Notions
became received as the Pure Word of God, and made this most Sublime, most Holy,
and most August Sacrament, as it is deservedly called by Dr. Morton, be taken
in effect for a needless Ceremony, or of no great Importance, by others besides
the Quakers, and used, or rather neglected, accordingly even to this day. These
are the great things in it, which I have now mentioned, but rare to be found in
our Books now a days, or heard of from our Pulpits: Nor can it conveniently
here be explained as it deserves. But as to both these, what is said before,
page 13, 14. ought to be considered. These things, I say, well considered,
cannot choose but make great Impression upon the Minds of those who are
sincere, and have a due sense of their own Spiritual and Eternal concerns.

But when they shall also understand, That the great Principle of the Guidance
of the Spirit of God, is not so peculiar to themselves as they imagine, but the
constant Doctrine of the Church of Christ in all Ages, and of the Church of
England in particular, (as I have showed in a Discourse of Mystical Divinity,
and some others under the Title of Asceticks, or the Heroic Piety and Virtue
of the Ancients,) and notwithstanding the Extravagancies of some inconsiderate
Opposers of Fanaticism, asserted by most eminent Men of this Church, as the
profound Dr. Cradock, lately deceased, (who himself told me, he had Preached
twenty or thirty Sermons upon that Subject) and others now living; and that
there are and have been, before George Fox appeared in the World, Persons in
the Communion of the Church of England, as well acquainted with Spiritual
things as themselves; and, by consequence, how little necessity there is of
venturing upon the Sin of Schism for that cause: And moreover consider, that
Christ appointed an Order of Men for his Ministerial Office to succeed in his
Church by an external Call and Commission; and notwithstanding the Corruptions
of those who sat then in Moses's Seat, would not suffer his Disciples to break
Communion with them, or disregard their Authority; and by consequence how
dangerous it may prove in the end, for Men to presume to set up Parties, and
draw People after them contrary to his Orders, and to continue so to do, after
fair Warnings and unanswerable Admonitions to the contrary.

To conclude, When they shall farther consider, how horrid a Sin it must needs
be to presume to attribute to the Holy Spirit of God, the Workings of their own
Imaginations, or perhaps the Subtle Suggestions of some wicked Spirit of
Delusion; and to expose and scandalize the Holy Doctrine of the Guidance of the
Holy Spirit, by denying of certain and manifest Truths; and using such little
Shifts and Evasions to oppose plain Evidence, as an honest and ingenious Lawyer
would scorn and be ashamed to use for his Client: When all these things, and
more that might be observed, are well understood and considered, why may I not
with reason hope that all, who are really such as they have appeared, in the
several Conferences I have had with them, to be, should answer the End of my
Letters and Questions, with more than civil and kind Words, in real and solemn
Actions? Why should I not hope that no private Interest, nor any Temporal
Concern, should hinder them? Why should I not hope, that since God has
apparently again concluded all under Sin, (which all Parties confess of all
others but their own, and is true of all without exception) that all should
humble themselves before Him, return to mutual Charity one with another, and
subject themselves, and all their Imaginations, to his Wisdom, as well as their
Actions to his Will, to the intent that he may have Mercy upon all? Why should
I not hope, I say, since God has done this, and for this End, that they, if
they be indeed partakers of his Holy Spirit, should be the first in giving
Glory to God, by such a just and reasonable Humiliation before his Divine
Majesty, and Acknowledgment of our Humane Infirmity, if never so little left to
our selves, or but steping aside out of the Order of his Holy Conduct; and
subject themselves entirely and readily to all the Orders he has appointed in
his Church? No sober wise Man will expose himself, and lead others into Danger
or Hazard, when he may without any Difficulty or Encumbrance put himself and
them into Safety and Security: Nor will any ingenious Man, if he have committed
a Mistake, stand it out and maintain it against a Grave and Judicious Man: Much
less will any considerate Man, who has any sense of God, and regard to his
tremendous Majesty, dare to persist in Opposing or Disputing his Institutions
or Orders: and therefore I shall here conclude this.

But because I have received certain Questions concerning these Matters, but
without any Name of any who sent them, or to whom I should return Answer,
though I shall forbear to expose them, by making them public; yet because I am
debtor both to the wise and to the unwise, for their Satisfaction, who are
either moved with such Scruples, or rely upon such infirm Grounds, I shall
return a brief comprehensive Answer to the Eight Questions in these following
Assertions.

The Holy Scripture of the Old and New Testament is the only Rule of Faith and
Practice, rightly understood and used: But it is in many Cases only a General
Rule, leaving the special Application in some, to all Persons; in others, to
certain determinate Persons. And therefore to require Express and Plain
Scripture for Faith and Practice in all things, does proceed from Ignorance and
Weakness in some, but too often from a disingenuous Spirit of Contention, a
dishonest Design, or Satanical Delusion.

The Practices of the Primitive Christians were some Permanent, to continue in
the Church; others Temporary, and Alterable, according as there might be
occasion, for Order, Decency, and Edification, and did vary from the beginning
in several Churches and parts of the World; whereas the others were truly
Catholic, according to Vincentius Lirinensis his Rule, that is, universally
observed without any known beginning since the Apostles.

The Spirit of God was poured forth upon all Flesh, when the Gospel was
Preached to all Flesh, or to every Creature, that is, not only to the Jews, but
to the Gentiles also. But as to individual Persons, it was never so poured out
upon all Flesh, but there were some things pre-acquired; as Faith in Christ
Jesus, and ordinarily Baptism with Water, Obedience, and Prayer, etc. Nor was
the Manifestation thereof ever given to every one; but to every one to whom it
was given, it was given to profit withal.

As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God: and, If any
Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, Romans 8.14, and 9. But it
is to be known and remembered, that a great and principal, and the most certain
Leading of the Spirit of God is not sensible, or easily perceivable how it
comes; but it is generally a Secret Illumination of the Mind to perceive the
Excellence of the things of God, and the Emptiness and Deceitfulness of the
things of the World; from which proceeds an Appetite to those, and an
Indifference to these; and in particular actions a like secret Illumination of
the Mind, to apply the general Rules of the Scriptures to the particular Sense,
and an Inclination of the Will to what is so perceived to be the Will of God.
And in more sensible Motions, Impressions, and Openings, as some call them, the
Trial is by their Agreement with what is agreed to proceed from the Spirit of
God; that is, the Holy Scriptures; what is contrary to that is to be rejected,
as coming from the Enemy: what is not inconsistent with that ought to be
followed; or if doubtful, be referred to the Judgment and Determination of the
Elders, according to the Observations of the Ancients; or of the most
Experienced Christians, especially of such as by their Office and Place are
authorized, and obliged to be Guide of Souls. And those who have presumed to
reject these Ordinary Means, which God has appointed, and established in his
Church, have frequently fallen into Mischief.

There are many of the Mind of Simon Magus, Act. 8.18. they are desirous to
purchase it, but not at the Price our Savior set it, Mat. 13.44, 46. And there
are many false counterfeit Spirits, very officious to offer themselves where
they find hopes of Reception; and they always suggest and instigate to the
following of their Leading, which is insensibly, and as they find their
Followers disposed, from the Holy Scriptures, and from Christ; and when they
cannot prevail with them in that manner, they endeavor to fill them with
Spiritual Pride and Conceitedness, make them admired by others, as
extraordinary and very Holy Persons, that they may make them think better of
themselves than they ought, and so get advantage of them that way. And there
are generally two great Faults committed by most Pretenders to the Guidance of
the Spirit. 1. They do not well consider themselves, and teach others the
necessary Qualifications pre-acquired for the obtaining of so great a Divine
Favor. 2. They neither consider nor teach others the necessary Cautions and
Directions for Trial of Spirits. In general the Conscientious Observation of
the Holy Scriptures, is a principal thing for both. For as the Law was our
Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, so the Conscientious Observation of the
externally revealed Will of God, which is Obedience, is our Schoolmaster to
prepare us for, and bring us to the true Spirit of God. But for more particular
Cautions and Directions, that is a Subject too large for this Occasion, and
has been largely treated of by others.

The Questions concerning Baptism with Water, and the Eucharist or Holy
Communion, are even such as that of Naaman, 2 Kin. 5.11, 22. But they who make
them are not like the Servants of that Heathen, who gave him this prudent
Admonition: If the Prophet had bid thee do some great thing, would thou not
have done it? How much rather when he says unto thee, Wash and be clean? May
they at least take Example from that Heathen, who received the Admonition even
from his Servants, even with the like blessed Success. And this, with what I
have said before, is as much as I apprehend necessary to be said to the
Questions, for such serious considerate Persons, as are willing to be satisfied
and informed of the Truth: and I shall be ready to give them all further
Satisfaction, when I understand where any real Scruple does remain.

THE REVIEW.
WHAT I have written, I have written with all Plainness and Simplicity, with
all Candor and Impartiality, and Good Will to all; without any other Design
than for the Service of God, and the Good of all; and without any Affectation
of any Ornament, as becomes the Majesty of the Truths of God: Yet can I not
expect but I must incurr the Censures of most in one thing or other, when I
consider the general Corruption of Men's Minds and Judgments, as well as of
their Manners, at this time; not only of the Scandalous and Profane, or
Hypocritical Professors; but even of such as are sincere in many things, and
deservedly esteemed in the World both for Parts and Honesty; and yet in others,
not so complete as might be wished, partly through the Bias of their own
Dispositions, and partly through the Common Cheat of Honorable Names; such as
Prudence, Moderation, Discretion, Charity, etc. and their Contraries, calling
Good, Evil; and Evil, Good; and partly through certain False Notions,
undermining the Integrity of the Evangelical Doctrine of Christ, as the
Pharisees did the Law of Moses, and rendering it of none Effect in many things;
which have been introduced and recommended to the World, by a late Sect
appearing in a very plausible Form, but, in truth, generated by an unnatural
Copulation of Church of England with some Socinian Principles, setting up their
own Corrupt Humane Reason in the place of the Divine Wisdom, and wresting the
divinely inspired Scriptures to a Compliance with it; persuading themselves and
others that the Noble Heroic Virtues, so much studied and practiced by the
ancient Christians, such as Humility, Contempt of the World,
Heavenly-mindedness, etc. were for times of Persecution; but we are under
another Dispensation; as I my self have been told by a Principal Author and
Promoter of it; and encouraging such Temporizing Compliances, under the
specious Pretenses of Moderation and Prudence, as are not only Inlets to Sin,
and Hindrances of Graces, but inconsistent with the Practices and Sentiments of
the best Christians of all Ages, with the Doctrines and Instructions of the
Apostles, the Example and Precepts of our Savior himself, (to say nothing of
Evangelical Counsels in this Age) our Baptismal Engagements, and the Genuine
Spirit of Christianity, and the Interest of the Kingdom of Christ in this
World. What Glosses they make upon our Savior's Sermon upon the Mount, I must
leave to others better acquainted with them, to consider. But, What can be
expected from persons so levened, but as severe Censures of this Writing as
they take this to be of others? but that reasonable Expressions of just
Indignation at Abuses and Corruptions in Matters of Religion, or at abuse of
Scriptures to patronize Vanity, and by persons professing Religion, should be
censured for Passion? but that such warm Expressions and Charges, as were
necessary to awaken such out of a Deadly Slumber, as Experience had proved,
could not be moved by gentler touches, should be censured as Incharitableness?
and necessary plain Dealing with Mortals, for the Service of God, the Good of a
Country, and the Salvation of Souls, be censured as Indiscretion, Disrespect
to Superiors, and Sauciness?

But to leave such as are ready to wish, and to talk, but will do nothing but
what may serve to recommend themselves to those whose Commendations are most
desirable; are willing to use others, as the Cats foot, but will not touch the
Work with one of their Fingers; nor intermit the complement of a Dinner to
consult of what themselves profess to be matter of great Importance; whose
Prudence prefers to countenance Religion with Perukes, and Laces, and Topknots,
and Servants in Livery, rather than to bear the Reproach of Christ, in bearing
Testimony against the Vanities of the Age, by the tacit Reproof of them in a
decent but plain and a little unfashionable Attire; who prefer Charity at
home, in providing for the temporal concerns of themselves and their Families,
with some little creditable Acts of Charity, as we call it, before trusting to
Providence in more liberal Contributions to unfashionable Good Works: to leave
such, I say, and to come close to the business, to the State of the Church, (of
which I am yet a Member, and am not satisfied to separate while I live in the
Nation, notwithstanding all I dislike in it) for this is the Root of all, and
principally to be considered; and they are to take care of the Dissenters: If
we consider the Great things belonging to the Charge of the Governors of this
Church, both severally in their particular Diocesses, the State of the Clergy
and People there; and jointly to them all as one Body, viz. The Court, and the
Nobility; The Universities; The Parliament, so far as Religion is concerned
there; The Prisons, (which might be made Schools of Virtue, but are now
Nourseries of all Vice and Wickedness) and Condemned Persons there; (for whose
Assistance they of the Roman Communion employ the ablest and best qualified of
their Clergy, and we the most ordinary, though they are not a few, who are
every Year Executed in this City, and throughout the Nation; The Foreign
Plantations, and the Propagation of the Christian Religion by that Means
abroad; for our Neglect of which the Monks, and Jesuits, and Quakers, and such
as we call Phanaticks, will rise up in Judgment against them; and the
Dissenters at home; for they also belong to their Care, to remove all just
Occasions, give all reasonable Satisfaction, and to use all truly Christian
Means to reduce them: If all these, besides diverse others, which cannot
presently be thought on, be considered, What Account can be given that may
reasonably pass with a considerate Mortal Man, of any of these? and, What
Account then can be given of all to the Immortal, All-seeing, Righteous God.

These are Generals, of each of which a particular and clear Account must be
given by every one of that Order, what sense he has had of his Duty in that
respect, and what Care and Endeavors he has used in discharge thereof? To
these I will add but one or two Particulars, of Occurrences in this Reign: One,
of a Bill for Suppression of Vice and Debauchery, drawn indeed at their
Request; but after it had been perused and perfected, not only by able Counsel,
but by all the Judges then in Town, particularly the Lord Chief Justice
Polexsin, the Lord Chief Baron Atkyns, Mr. Justice Dolbin, Baron Letchmare, and
I think one or two more, and fair written out put into their hands, and a
Motion made by the Bishop of Chester to bring it into the House, and granted by
the Lords, and yet stifled and suppressed in their hands. Another, a Needful
and Hopeful Reformation, begun by the Authority and Encouragement of the QUEEN,
and not only vigorously prosecuted here in Middlesex, but in a hopeful way in
many other Cities and Counties all over the Nation, and this stopped first by a
Combination of Middlesex Justices, (I need say no more) but at last more
effectually in a Judicature of Equity, in the Presence of no less than seven of
our Reverend Prelates, by two wicked Men, the one Speaker, and the other a
Member of Parliament, the Mr. Ralph Hartley, who is still a Sufferer between a
Succession of City Magistrates, and a Combination of Surry Justices, and some
other persons, and shamefully oppressed by them.
Justice of the Peace, who had been most diligent, and other persons concerned
in the Promotion of that Good Work, checked, vilified, and abused, without any
just cause, to the discouragement of the Execution of the Laws, and Contempt of
Her Majesty's Authority; and all in the Presence of those Bishops, who came on
purpose to countenance the Cause of Reformation, were satisfied of the Iniquity
of the Proceedings against it, and yet not one of them ever appeared after in
it, to any purpose more than in one little printed Discourse in Vindication of
the Gentleman so abused, as aforesaid. And what Account can be given of these
things?

It is a great Truth, That neither King, nor Parliament, nor Bishops, of
themselves and their own Motion, have done any one Act, that I know of, worthy
of the Name of Christian. And where lies the Fault of all this, but at their
door, who, instead of Admonishing, and Exciting, and Animating to due Returns
of true Gratitude in Fact to God, for his admirable Providence, have, by their
Neglect, and the consequences of it, provoked the Favors of Providence to
withdraw, and to leave us to our selves, and to eat the Fruit of our own
doings? And whence comes this Neglect of so many so obliged, but from a common
Defect of Good Education at the Universities, and the Enchantment of their
Preferments?

But is not this Great Uncharitableness, may our Grave Prudential Gentlemen
say, thus to lay open to the World the Nakedness of our Governors, and of the
Church? Doubtless as great as for a Physician to prescribe a bitter Potion to a
tender Patient; or a Surgeon to cut or burn, after trial of more gentle
means, what is found otherwise incurable. It is that they, at whose door lies
the Root of all our Evil, may give Glory to God, by taking Shame to themselves,
and giving Good Example of Humiliation and Reformation to others. But if they
will not, I hope the despised Quakers will be so wise, as to accept the Honor
of beginning the Example. For all have sinned, and come short of the Glory of
God.

But, Who called You to this Office? may our Prudentialists say: By what
Authority do Thou this? and, Who gave Thee this Authority? He who gave me
Eyes to see, and a Heart to be sensible of it, and a Mind to be Faithful to
Him, who called me and led me, by his Hand, to his Holy Service, not for filthy
Lucre's sake; not to make a Trade of it; not to seek the World in the Church;
but to serve Him in the Service of all Men, in the best manner I can.

FINIS.

