portrait of John Shower Mr: John Shower


Of The Day of Grace: OR, A DISCOURSE Concerning The Possibility, and Fear of
its being Past, before Death.

SHOWING The groundless Doubts, and mistaken Apprehensions of Some, as to their
being finally Forsaken, and left of God. With the Dangerous Symptoms and
Approaches of Others to such a sad State.

In Four SERMONS From Psalm LXXXI. 11, 12.

By JOHN SHOWER.

London, Printed for Abraham Chandler, and to be Sold by John Butler in
Worcester. 1694.

TO THE READER.
THe following Sermons were preacht-at the Earnest Desire of an unknown Person
sent me in a Letter, expressing a more than ordinary Concern and Fear, lest the
day of Grace should be past, and the Holy Spirit finally departed, so as to
Return and Strive no more. Many Upright Christians after aggravated
Backslidings, or under Great Temptations, or in deep Melancholy are apt to
conclude thus hardly of themselves. Such as these I have endeavored to
Convince, that this is not the state of their Case, or ever like to be.

I have also shown, who have reason to Apprehend themselves in Danger of this
Judgment in the Text. For it is possible, and more than possible, that after
long Resistance and Obstinacy, God may Judicially let Men Alone, and give 'em
over. Though their Lives be prolonged, they may be sealed up to Wrath, and
reserved to Judgment. Four Generations filled the Measure of the Amorites Sin,
though five past before they were destroyed. And though Pharoah's time expired,
it is thought, at the Sixth Plague, God upheld and hardened him, (principally by
suffering him to harden himself) till the Tenth was past. The sins of Jerusalem
and the Jewish Nation were full at the Murder of the Messiah, but they were not
destroyed till forty years after.

I must Confess, that we cannot tell positively when this is true concerning
any particular Person: Nor is any man bound to believe it concerning Himself;
but is always obliged to believe, that if he do truly Repent, he shall find
Mercy. For though God may prescribe Limits to his own Grace, we ought not to
bound it. Shall any man say, Divine Patience has waited on me, (or on such a
one so long,) it can wait no longer. Such Despair ^f Grace, while in the use of
God's Appointed Means, is very Insolent Presumption. You are obliged, (as a
Thing highly grateful to him) to Hope in his Mercy.

In short, whatever your Doubts and Fears are, if you firmly purpose to go on
in the Way which leads to Life: if you will not turn a side from following the
Lord; if you Resolve, Come what will of it, I will never give over praying,
seeking, striving, wrestling, etc. Let him do what he will with me, I Will not
desist; I Will run after him, I Will fly to him, I Will call upon him, as long as I
live, etc. A Blessing from the Author and Purchaser of all Grace may be
undoubtedly expected by such a one. Prove 8.34. Blessed is the man that hears
me, watching daily at my Gates, waiting at the Posts of my Doors. For whosoever
finds me, finds Life.

If you hear him, and wait, Dr. O. Meditations and Discourses of the Glory of
Christ, applied to Unconverted Sinners, 8o p. 18.
(says Dr. O) though you have not yet Admission, but are kept at the Gates and
Posts of the Doors, yet in the Issue you shall be Blessed. The rule in this
Case is, Hos. 6.3. Then shall we know, if we follow on to know. Are you in the
way of knowing Christ in the use of means, hearing the Word, and Sincere
Endeavors in Holy Duties; though you cannot yet attain unto any Evidence, that
you have received him, have closed with him, (nay tho you question whether ever
he will Receive you,) Nothing can R^ine you but giving over the way wherein you
are; for then shall you know, if you follow on to know the Lord.

These Discourses are printed almost verbatim as preached; which I hope will
rather promote, than lessen their Usefulness unto Such, who are most like to
read 'em, and to whose Case they are most suited. The Day of Reckoning is near;
Death and Judgment are at hand: May I then find mercy of the Lord! Give an
Account of my Stewardship with Comfort! And be found in Christ to the Glory of
God. Beg it for me; as I do and shall thy profiting by this, and all the many
other Helps to further thy Salvation.

J. S.

Four SERMONS ON Psalm LXXXI. 11, 12.
The First Sermon.
Psalm. LXXXI. 11, 12. But my People would not hearken to my Voice, and Israel
would none of me, so I gave them up to their own Hearts lusts: and they walked
in their own Counsels.


THE Jews have a Tradition, that at stated times of the year God does lament
and complain over their ruined Temple at Jerusalem; that Temple that was once
the Seat of his Glory, and the Place of his special Residence for so long a
time. Their own Value, and affection for it, made them fondly imagine, that God
himself could not behold its Ashes and Dissolution without Resentment: Not
considering that the Wickedness of the People called by his Name, and entrusted
with the Privileges of his House, had provoked his most righteous severity to
lay it waste. This was a weak and groundless Fancy of the carnal Jews: We have
other Measures whereby to Judge of the blessed God. We are fully assured that
his Thoughts are not as ours in such matters; That it is a far sadder spectacle
in his Eye, to behold the Hypocrisy and Carnality of those that worship in his
Temple, than to see it laid in Ruins; a far more dismal sight, to behold the
offers of his Grace refused, and slighted; to have the Invitations of the
Gospel, and the glad Tidings of Peace rejected, by those who can be saved no
other Way; and who must perish if they neglect this great Salvation: To see
Multitudes of such continue under the Power of sin, wilfully choosing the way
of Destruction, and hardening their own Hearts against all the gracious Methods
of their Recovery; This in the Judgment of God, who Judges Righteous Judgment,
is by far the more astonishing, and deplorable Object.

For we never read of God's complaining of any Thing so much as of this. And
how often, and in what passionate Expressions does he complain of the
Obstinacy, Unteachableness, and Wilfulness of the Jews, his ancient People, Oh
that they were wise! O that they would consider! how long will you not be
purged? when shall it once be? why will ye dye* etc. And the Prophet Isaiah
introduces Christ, and his Apostles, complaining to the like Purpose, Who has
believed our Report and to whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed? Isa. 53.1.
This was that which our compassionate Redeemer resented even unto Tears,
concerning Jerusalem in the Days of his Flesh, when he beheld the City and
wept over it saying. O that thou had known, even thou, in this thy day, the
Things that belong to thy Peace, etc. And in the verse following the Text, Luke
19.41.
O that my People had hearkened to my Voice, and walked in my Ways. This is the
Subject Matter of the complaint of these Words, which is attended with a
Threatening, of one of the heaviest Judgments that can be inflicted: My People
would not hearken to my Voice, and Israel would none of me: So I gave them up,
etc.

Here is, First, A most Reproaching Complaint. Secondly, A most Terrible
Threatening. The Complaint is in the 11th verse, My People would not hearken to
my Voice, etc.

The most significant Words are used to awaken Shame, and Indignation in the
guilty Persons against themselves, for refusing to hearken to the Voice of God.

First, Their Fault is aggravated from their near Relation to God, My People.
Israel, the beloved Nation, my peculiar People, favored above the Rest of the
World with many special advantages, They did not hearken to me.

Secondly, From their Wilfulness, They would not hearken to me. They would none
of me. For though the first Expression in the Hebrew, be only thus, My People
did not hearken to me, yet the latter Words, They would none of me, does lay
the Blame upon their own Wilfulness, and does sufficiently Justify our
Translation of it.

It is aggravated, Thirdly, From what their not hearkening to Gods Voice did
imply, and carry in it, That they would none of God; they refused to have God
for their God. They cared not for any Relation to him, or Acquaintance with
him, or Instruction from him, or Happiness by him; They would none of me.

Secondly, unto this Complaint in the 11th verse is Subjoyned a terrible
Threatening, ver. 12th, So I gave them up to their Hearts Lusts, to walk in
their own Councels.

In the Hebrew both Expressions are in the Future, that for their former
Provocations God would do so, and the latter is the Consequence of the former.
The walking in their own Councels, is the Fruit of their being given up to
their own Hearts Lusts.

There are two Things may be collected as the Sum of both Verses, to be
discoursed of from them.

First, That it is Matter of Just Complaint and Reproach, when a People, or
Person, will not hearken to the Voice of God.

Secondly, That for such wilful Persons to be given up to their own Hearts
Lusts, so as to be left of God to walk in their own Councels, is one of the
most fearful Judgments that can be threatened, or inflicted in this World.

Something I would speak to the former though in order to the latter, which is
principally designed. And what Subject more seasonable, or more likely to be
useful, unto those who have the Voice of God repeated to them Week after Week,
with such Frequency, and Variety, as you have it in this City.

First, That it is Matter of Just Complaint, and Reproach, for any People, or
Person not to hearken to the Voice of God. And here it will be proper to show,
1. What it is, not to hearken to the Voice of God 2. How this appears to be
such Just Matter of Complaint from God, and Reproach unto us, who are guilty of
it.

First, What it is not to hearken to the Voice of God. By the Voice of God
here, we are to Understand, that of his Word; as is manifest from Jer. 7.23,
28. Verses. This thing commanded I them, saying, Obey my Voice, and I will be
your God. But they hearkened not, ^or inclined their Ear, but walked in the
Councels and Imaginations of their own evil Hearts; therefore shall thou say
unto them, this is a Nation that Obeys not the Voice of the Lord their God.
His instructing and informing Voice, is here meant, That which discovers the
Nature of God, and our Duty, the wretched state of our Case by the first
Apostasy, and the Method of our Recovery to the Image and Life of God, and
Communion with him. It is also his commanding Voice, unto the Authority
whereof, we all owe utmost Obedience and subjection. It is that Voice of God
which warns us of our Danger; invites us to Terms of Peace and Reconciliation;
directs us what we ought to do, that we may be saved, etc. And have we not all
the Obligation in the World, to hearken to this Voice? carefully to attend to
it? to consider its Authority? to make a Judgment about its Necessity, and
Importance, about the Reasonableness and advantages of our Obedience? etc.

Now there be many that Openly, and Expressly refuse to hearken to thi^ Voice.
But the Number is greater of such, who do it Vertually, and in Effect: either
by their groundless Cavils and Objections against the Word of God; or by their
frivolous Excuses, and toolish Delays of complying with it; or by Obeying the
contrary Dictates of the Flesh and the World, and hearkening to the Voice of
Satan; by all which they manifest their Unwillingness to hearken to the Voice
of God.

But, Secondly, How does this appear to be such a Matter of Just Complaint and
Reproach? To this Purpose we may consider, 1. Whose Voice it is you^ refuse to
hearken to: Heb. 1.2.
the Voice of God by his Son, Whom he has appointed Heir of all Things, and by
whom he made the World, the Brightness of his Fathers Glory, the Express Image
of nis Person. Heb. 2.2.
If Disobedience to the Word spoken by Angels, received a Just Recompense of
Reward, How shall we escape, if we neglect, and slight, and will not hearken to
that Word of Salvation which began to be spoken by our Lord himself. See
therefore (says the Apostle) that you refuse not him that speaks; Heb 12.25.
ver.
for if they Escaped not who refused him that spoke on Earth, Much more shall
not we Escape if we turn away from him that speaks from Heaven. I might
amplify this by Considering the Authority, the Veracity, the Wisdom, the
Kindness and Condescension, of him that speaks; and to whom we are called,
and Obliged to hearken.

I might aggravate it, by Considering how all our Senses, and our Reason, our
Power of Hearing, and Understanding are all from Him: And how often he has
heard our Voice when we have cried to him in our Distress. And how ready he is
to hear us in every time of need, when none else can help or save us: And how
severely he can punish our Refusal: For in his hand is our Life and Breath, and
all our Ways. It is he who has Power to save or to Destroy and shall we refuse
to hearken to his Voice? Yea further, he designs our Good, and intends our
Happiness, by what he speaks. He can have no Accession to his own by our
Felicity, but might glorify himself in our Ruin, if we decline the Invitations
of his Mercy, and refuse to hearken to his Voice.

Secondly, Consider, not only who it is that speaks, but what kind of Voice it
is. How gentle, how obliging, how beneficent, and condescending. He does not
now speak to us with Majestic Terror, in Thunder and Lightning, with such an
amazing Voice as upon Mount Sinai, to the People of the Jews: When he made the
Mountain shake, and the People Tremble, Heb. 12.26.
and even Moses himself exceedingly to do so. But imploys Messengers like our
selves, to speak in his Name. He considers our weakness, and the Necessity of
our Case, and promises to accompany the ordinary Preaching of the Gospel, with
the Power of his Spirit. That the great and necessary truths published,
explained, and pressed, by a serious Ministry, shall be the Power of God unto
Salvation. He requires those that are entrusted with this work, to instruct, to
exhort, to warn and reprove, to beseech and entreat you in the Name of Christ,
with Earnestness and Importunity, that you would not receive the Grace of God
in vain; that you would be reconciled to God, praying you in Christ's stead
that you would be so, least the Things that concern your Peace should be for
Ever hid from your Eyes.

Thirdly, Consider, Who They are, that are said to refuse to hearken to the
Voice of God. My People Israel. My First born, more nearly related to me, more
peculiarly favored and privileged by me than the rest of the World. We
Christians succeed in their Privileges, not only as Domestic Servants, but as
Children, visibly related to God, as our Father, by the Covenant of Baptism.
And shall not Children receive the Instruction of a Parent? Deuteronomy. 21.18.
a stubborn Son that refused to hearken to the Voice of his natural Parent, was
under the Law, to be stoned to Death: and all the Men in the City, were to have
a Hand in bringing such a Monster to that deserved Punishment.

Fourthly, That the Complaint and Reproach is Just, will appear by considering,
what is Connected with it, in the Words that immediately follow, Israel would
none of me, that is, if they will not hearken to my Voice, they declare they
will have none of me. God offers himself to enter into a Covenant, and to be
your God; only obey my Voice and I will be so But they inquire not after him.
There is none that says, where is God my Maker? They will none of me, i e they
will not have me to be their Lord and Ruler, they will not have me to be their
Portion and Chief Good. It is plain they will not, because they refuse my
Teachings, and Guidance; they will not hearken to my Voice.

Now this being duly attended to, will sufficiently Justify the Divine
Severity, v. 12. toward such who will not hearken to the Voice of God. For
thereby they do in Effect bid him depart from them, they tell him, we desire
not the Knowledge of thy Ways. And if hereafter he should bid them depart from
him into Everlasting Fire, with the Workers of Iniquity, the Sentence would not
be more dreadful than Righteous. If he say, Depart from me, you unthankful
despisers of my Grace; I would have instructed, and sanctified, and saved you,
but you would not; I called, but you refused, and turned the deaf Ear; I
exhorted, and beseeched, and entreated you to have Pity on your selves in Time,
but you would not hearken to my Voice. I faithfully warned you of your danger,
but you made light of it. I offered to be your God, and to make you happy and
blessed for Ever, if you would but accept my offer; but you would none of me.
Therefore if he should speak to them hereafter in his Wrath, and vex them in
his sore Displeasure: if he then be Deaf to their Cries, who now refuse to
hearken to his Voice, their Sentence will be Just.

And no less would it be if God should inflict the heavy Doom mentioned in this
Text: which is the Beginning of Hell, where it continues without Remedy, and
timely Relief is not admitted. Such as will not hearken to the Voice of God;
the Language of whose Heart is thereby manifest, that they will none of him,
Such as these, God may Justly give up to their own Hearts Lusts; and leave them
to walk in their own destructive Councels. And this brings me to consider the
Second Proposition.

That for wilful Sinners to be given up to their own Hearts Lusts, and to be
left of God to walk in their own Councels, is one of the most tremendous
Judgments that can be threatened, or inflicted in this World.

First, What is it for God to give up any to their own Hearts Lusts.

Secondly, What is his usual Method of inflicting such a Judgment.

Thirdly, Wherein does the Terror and Dread of such a Judgment appear? or what
Considerations will manifest this to be such a dismal Judgment? What I shall
speak under these Three Heads will make way for the practical Application.

I must grant that there is an unsearchable Depth in the divine Judgments;
especially in his Methods of Severity toward the Souls of Men: And therefore
when we have gone as far as Scripture and Experience will direct and lead us,
we must yet cry out, O the bottomless Depths of the Divine Councels: how
unsearchable are his Judgments, Romans 11.33: Deuteronomy. 32.4.
and his ways past finding out? However, we must hold to this, that all his
Works are perfect: and that he is a God of Truth, and without Iniquity; his
Ways are Judgment, Deuteronomy. 29.3, 4.
and Just and Right is he. And it is remarkable that this is spoken after a
terrible Expression a little before concerning the Jews, that after having seen
the Signs and Wonders and Miracles that God wrought among them, yet has he not
given you a Heart to perceive, and Eyes to see, and Ears to hear, unto this Day.

But whatever Obscurity there may be in the Manner, yet such a Thing as Gods
leaving Men to themselves must be acknowledged; yea, Isa. 10.29. Mar. 4.12.
his pouring out a spirit of slumber and deep sleep upon Men, closing their
Eyes in righteous Judgment, after they have wilfully shut them.

Never was any People so punished in this Manner, as the Nation of the Jews.
After having long resisted the Spirit, neither Word, nor Rod could awaken them,
but the Things of their Peace, were hid from their Eyes. But we must not
conceive of this, as an Act merely of Will and Pleasure in God; without Respect
to their former sin. But consider it as an act of Righteous Judgment, upon
great Provocation. This Doom never goes before the Fault; when they will not be
purged, they are left to be filthy still. After long striving and Resistance
God lets 'em Alone. We must view it as something Judicial toward those who had
highly deserved it, by former Refusals of his Grace, and disobeying his Voice:
And therefore when God is said in the 4th of Exodus to harden Pharaoh, let us
consider who he was, and what he had done: Was he not guilty of the most
profane contempt of God, Who is the Lord, that I should obey his Voice? I know
not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go, Exodus 5.2. And was he not guilty of
the most barbarous Injustice, and Cruelty against the People of God? Had he not
for many years oppressed, and inslaved them? were not He and his Subjects
resolved to destroy those whom God resolved to preserve? etc. He is three times
said to have hardened his own heart. Exodus 8.15, 32. And chap. 9.34. Tho ^e had
sufficient means of Conviction, ^y Aarons Rod swallowing up those of ^e
Magicians, 7 Exodus 1.2. And by the Magicians being non-plust in their Art;
^oncerning the Judgment of Lice, Exodus ^.18. And they themselves were ^mitten
with Boils, Chap. 9.11, 12. And now and then Pharaoh had some Relentings, chap.
9.27, 10. chap. 16.17.

So the Jews in our Savior's Time, concerning whom the like Expressions are
used, John 12.40. They were such as hated the Light, as would not accept of
Christ, or his Forerunner the Baptist, but said of both, that they were
possessed of a Devil. In this Case we may use the Apostles Expression, Is God
unrighteous, who takes Vengeance? Romans 3.5.
God forbid. Here indeed is very dismal Severity, but there is no shadow of
unrighteousness.

This being premised, we may consider, First, What these Lusts of Men's Hearts
are? Secondly, What it is to be given up Judicially to them.

The Lusts of our Hearts unto which some are given up by God, may Comprehend
the false Imaginations, and undue Conceptions of Things that are framed in the
Soul, concerning God, and our selves, Sin and Duty, Happiness and Misery, etc.
And our Irregular Desires, and Inclinations; with all the wicked Projects, and
Contrivances of the Soul, concerning the gratifying and fulfilling the Lusts of
the Flesh, the Lusts of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life.

Now for God to give up any Men to these Lusts, so as not to hinder them from
walking in their own Councels, is not to be supposed as if he gave his
approving Consent, that they should obey these Lusts: Not that he gave them
leave to sin, or approved what they did, in serving diverse Lusts, but that
which is chiefly comprehended in it is,

First, That such Persons are cast out of Gods special Protection and Care, and
so are exposed to wander and go astray: Hos. 4.16.
To walk as a Lamb in alarge Place, and so are more easily assaulted, and
Overcome by the Devil, who seeks whom he may destroy.

Secondly, That they are left of God under the Dominion, and Power, and Tyranny
of their own Lusts; He that (...) filthy let him be filthy still. Romans 22.^1.
He that hears let him hear; and he ^^at forbeareth let him forbear, for ^hey
are a Rebellious House. Ezekiel. 3.27.
So that the Restraints and Checks that they were formerly under, by the
Motions of his Spirit; or by External Providence, should no ^onger hinder them
in the Prosecution of their Lusts. Mar. 4.11. Joh. 12.34. Eze. 24, 13.16, 4.
Hos 4.14.
They shall not be smitten any more, nor their way hedged up with Thorns. The
Spirit of God shall not strive with them any more; at least not to such a
Degree as formerly.

Nay further, we read of Men's being given up, after sins against Light, unto a
Romans 1.28, 29, 30, 31.
Reprobate unteachable Mind, to vile affecti^ons, to unnatural Lusts. Yea,
delivered up to 2 These. 2.11.
strong Delusions of Satan, that they may believe Lies, that they may be
damned. But remember this is an Act of Justice and Righteousness in God; for
the Persons thus given up are describ^d to be such as would not receive the
Truth in the Love of it.

That there is such a Judgment as this, besides the Express Testimoni^ of
Scripture, is manifest by sad Experience. For what tolerable account can be
otherwise given of the Generality of professing Christians, with whom the sense
of Duty, the Honor (...) Christ, the Interest of his Kingdom have so little
Influence, to a conscientious governing their Hearts an^ Lives? Yea how else is
it? That notwithstanding Mercies and Judgments notwithstanding providential
warning and gracious Calls, notwithstanding many Convictions and Resolutions
and good Beginnings, notwithstanding many severe Rebukes for pas^ Backslidings,
and some Experience how evil and bitter a Thing it is^ and has been, to
forsake God that yet in Despite of God, and Conscience, and all these Obstacles
in their way, many have forsaken the Way of Righteousness, and wallowed again
in the Pollutions of the World, after they had escaped it. And whatever Hazard
they run by it, whatever Difficulties they meet in their way, whatever Methods
have been used to recover and save them, yet on they will go: and from a
seeming Zeal for God and Godliness, and constant day^^ Exercise of the
principal Duties of Religion in their Families, and Closets, ^hey come at last
to live without any ^f these; in the total Neglect of such Duties, and in
allowed Practices of Drunkeness, Uncleaness, and Unrighteousness, with the
Contempt of the Means of their Conversion, and a secret Enmity against the true
Interest of Christ in the World, and against the serious Profession and Power
of Godliness.

My Friends, The Case of such Apostates, and the more common Degeneracy of many
Others, after good and hopeful Beginnings, who have sinned themselves into a
quiet peaceful Conscience, or rather into stupidity and Hardness of Heart,
notwithstanding the Daily Commission of great Abominations; the deplorable
Case, I say, of such Persons, and the Frequency of such Cases, makes it
manifest that there is such a Thing as men's being left of God, and given up to
their own Hearts Lusts.

But remember, I call it a deplorable Case, not an irrecoverable one. For I do
not think, as to all such Persons, that their Day of Grace is past; that the
Things of their Peace are so hid from their Eyes, that it is impossible for
them to be renewed to Repentance. There are Degrees of Gods forsaking Men;
there is a total and there is a partial Obduracy and Hardness of Heart But I
shall speak more of this afterward.

We should Secondly, Consider by what Method God does for the most part
proceed, to inflict and Execute such a Judgment as this. But

Thirdly, For the present let us briefly consider the Severity and Terror of
this Judgment. According to the Degrees of this Punishment inflicted on any, so
is the Wretchedness of their Case in Proportion to be estimated. For a Man to
be totally left to the Hardness and Obduracy of his own Heart, there is no
Judgment in this World so severe: and therefore says Owens Dominion of Sin,
Page 73.
Dr. Owen, it is never Executed, but toward those that are habitually and
obstinately wicked, and do out of choice harden themselves in their sins.

You may Consider the Dread and Horror of such a Judgment by reading Prove.
1.23. Heb. 10.26, etc. Very much may be gathered from Luke 19.41, 42. Where we
have (...) most significant Representation of such a dismal Case, in our Lords
affectionate Bewailing of the Misery of Jerusalem, as forsaken and left of God.
He beheld the City, and mingled his Lamentations over it with his Tears.
Saying, O! Jerusalem, Jerusalem, if thou had known, even thou, at least, in
this thy Day, the Things which belong unto thy Peace! but now they are hid from
thine Eyes. He knew how deplorable the Condition of such Persons must needs be,
and what was due to so great a Calamity, or he would not have lamented it with
Tears. He knew the aggravation of their Guilt, and the Severity of the Divine
Justice, and the Value of Immortal Souls, and the Depth of Misery, into which
such guilty sinners are sinking; he perfectly knew these Things, or he would
not have bestowed Tears upon this Occasion.

And which yet is most See Mr. How Is Redeemers Tears. Page 149.
Dreadful to consider, when Persons are becom^ incurably Obstinate, and
Impeniten^ unto Perdition, the Redeemers Tea^ may Express his Compassion, but
will not abate their Misery, or asswag^ their Torment. They that have rejected
and despised his Mercy, and trampled upon his Blood, shall ye^ have his Tears
of Compassion. The former would have saved them, bu^ the latter only bewails
their Folly, and their Misery, what they have los^ because they would not be
saved. They neglected God's season and he departed, Hosea 5.6. They shall go
with their flocks and with their herds to seek the Lord: But they shall not
find him: He has withdrawn himself from them. So John 8.21. The^ said Jesus
again unto them, I go my way, and ye shall seek me, and shall die in your sins:
Whither I go, ye cannot come.

It is impossible for me to describe the Horror of their Case, with whom
Matters are come to this Issue: That God resolves to let them alone, to give
them up into the Hands of their own Counsels, to leave them to their own Hearts
Lusts, to the Dominion and Tyranny of their vile Affections and Inclinations,
that they shall be holden in the Cords of their own Iniquity, and without
further Instruction, or Restraint, Prove. 5.22, 23.
in the midst of their Folly, be left of God to go astray. When because they
would not be purged, they shall not be purged, till the Divine Fury be made to
rest upon them. God will let them Alone, and say, if they will go on to
treasure up Wrath against a Day of Wrath, e'ne let them do it; If they will
harden their Hearts, if they will dye, if they are so intent upon their own
Ruin, as that they refuse my counsel, and slight my Reproofs, and resist my
Spirit, and hate to be Reformed; let them take their Course, let them walk in
the Ways of their own Heart, and in the Sight of their Eyes, let them prosecute
their own foolish Choice; I will do nothing to hinder it: My Gospel shall not
instruct and heal them; My Spirit shall not to any good purpose longer strive
with them; that which is the Savor of Life, and the Power of God unto
salvation unto Others, shall have a deadly Savor unto them.

No words can express the Horror of such a Case. And such a Case is possible,
but we have no certain Rule given us whereby to determine our Judgment
concerning any particular Person, so as to enable us to say positively, This is
the sad condition of such a Man, or such a Woman: But because many fear it is
their own Case, and the Person, who by a Letter desired me to preach on this
Subject, is afraid lest Things may already be come to this Issue, I will not
now close without some Application.

And Passing over several Uses that may be made of this, I shall hence take
Occasion to Exhort to three Things.

First, To take heed not to pass a definitive Sentence against your selves,
concerning the state of your own Souls, as to this Judgment. Secondly, However
to apprehend the Danger of approaching to it, if you are under any ill Symptoms
of that kind, and beware of those Things that have a Tendency to so sad a Doom
Thirdly, Diligently to improve the Means you are yet under, by the Warnings of
the Word, convictions of Conscience, and the Motions of the Divine Spirit, that
you may Effectually prevent it. That as it is not your Case for the present, it
never may be so.

First, Take heed of passing a definitive Sentence against your selves in this
matter. There is a Time even with the Impenitent and Unconverted, when God may
move their Hearts more strongly unto Conversion, than afterward. And when such
a Time is over with thee, thou may be apt to think that God has utterly
Abandoned, and Forsaken thee; and be ready to conclude Thy Day of Grace is
past. In this Sense it may be past with many long before their Death, and yet
their state not be irrecoverable. This is like enough to be the Case of many of
you present; but you need not thereupon question but you shall be accepted of
God, if you are now willing to return to him. You have no ground to question
whether Christ will receive you, if you are willing to come to him; or whether
pardoning Mercy may be had if you penitently forsake your wicked ways, and turn
to the Lord with all your heart.

Men that formerly had some Motions and Helps to Repentance, which they
neglected and misimproved, and obstinately resisted, may be so given up to
their Obstinacy, as never to have such Motions more; and so on that Account the
Day of Grace may be past with diverse. But such Persons are hardened in Sin, and
hate an Holy Life, oppose serious Godliness, and the Means of their Recovery,
etc. But the Day of Grace is never so past in this Life with any Man, as that
he shall not be accepted and pardoned, if he do truly repent. Therefore for a
penitent returning Sinner to fear his Day of Grace is utterly past, or that his
Repentance, if it be true, does now come too late; This is to contradict the
whole Tenor and Scope of the Gospel. Your Case may be more dangerous than that
of most others, and yet not Irrecoverable. Be sure it is not, if you have not
sinned that Sin which cannot be pardoned; which in the general, I firmly believe
no man is guilty of, who is afraid lest he has been, or is so guilty.

Our Obstinate continued forsaking of God, is the great sign of our being
forsaken of him: And where that is not the Case, you should not Judge so
concerning your selves, or others. And even where it is so, for the present,
the Grace of God may be rejected for many years; and yet we may hope that some
Persons may afterward be converted by that Grace, which before they rejected.
So that we cannot tell what God will do as to particular Persons. Neither would
it be any advantage for us to know if such and such, be so far forsaken of God,
as that they shall never be recovered, but continue in their Obstinacy and
Impentiency to the End of their Days. God has Mr. How Is Redeemers Tears, page
82.
not made it any Man's Duty to believe this concerning himself, nor to believe
it concerning any other particular Person.

Some of those whose Hearts were once as hard as yours, who slighted Christ as
much, and as long, as you have done, who despised many awakening Warnings, who
refused and turned their Backs upon many Invitations and Calls of the Gospel,
and resisted the Spirit of Grace for a long Time, have afterward been made the
Triumph of the Power, Love and Grace of God. Therefore don't pass a definitive
Sentence against your selves.

To pass a Judgment upon our State, and to believe it concerning our selves, is
to nullity the Gospel, and to make it impossible for us to Repent and Believe,
which God has made to be our Duty. It is a sinful prescribing limits to the
Grace of God, to say, It has waited on me so long, it will, it can wait no
longer.

Secondly, However Apprehend the Danger of the present Case, if you are under
any such Symptoms as have a Tendency to so severe a Judgment as this is. It may
be you have sinned your selves into hardness of Heart; that you are not
affected with the Word Preached as formerly; that you do not find such
Impressions by it; that the Operations of the Spirit, with the Word, that were
formerly strong, do now seem to cease. You are not so affected with the Evil of
Sin, with such hearty Sorrow, and bitter Repentance as formerly, tho thy sins
be most highly aggravated; And are little affected with the sins of others; you
are more senceless, stupid, and secure under the Guilt of great Provocations,
than formerly: And this, notwithstanding some Tokens of God's Displeasure by
afflictive Rebukes of Providence. It may be you have taken up with a fruitless,
barren, empty Profession of Religion, for a long Time; joined with the Neglect
of the inward Spiritual Part of Godliness, Mortification of Sin, Watchfulness
over your Hearts, Government of your Thoughts, Passions, and Senses, etc. And
have gone on in a formal Course and Round, of some external Duties; without
Heart, or Life, or Quickening; and this contrary to your Convictions,
Resolutions, and repeated Promises, etc. This case is exceeding sad, and
sinful, and God only knows where it will Issue, if deep and timely Repentance
do not awaken you. You ought to apprehend it to be indeed a very provoking, and
dangerous Case, but not quite desperate.

Nay, let me go further, Secret Prayer, it may be, has been neglected for a
Time, or performed with so much coldness, that you now Tremble to think how low
you are sunk: Or which is much worse, it may be you do not Tremble. The Power
of Conscience is in a great measure lost, both in restraining from Sin, and in
checking for it. You can now more easily stifle Convictions, rebel against
Light, and venture upon a known sin, indulge a secret Lust, and allow your
selves those Things from day to day, which formerly you could not without sharp
Rebukes of Conscience: And such Preaching, and such Helps as did once startle,
awaken, and quicken you, have now little or no such Effect; This is indeed
unspeakably dismal. O! how low are such fallen? how difficult, how sorrowful
must be the awakening and Recovery of such Backsliders? What can be said to
such Persons? and why should they not fear the Judgment of this Text? lest God
give them up to their own Hearts Lusts. I am so far from discouraging such a
Fear, that I would by all Means awaken it. Therefore I say it would be Just
with God, to cast thee off, and God would be Righteous, if he reject thee
utterly, if he forsake thee for Ever, if he never strive with thy Heart more,
if Never Providence or Sermon do thee good more. This would be Just. But at the
same Time let Hope be intermingled with Fear; there is much Cause to Fear, but
there is none to Despair, the one is a Duty, and the other a Sin: And if the
Consideration of your sin and Danger, begin to melt and mollify your Heart,
then know that Christ came not to call the Righteous, but Sinners, to
Repentance; and mercy may yet be had; he takes pleasure in them that hope in
his Mercy; it is by hope we are saved. Therefore aggravate your sins, and the
grounds of your Fear, and the Danger of your perishing to Eternity: But don't
sit down in Despondency; don't yield your selves to perish, without striving to
prevent it. Fall down before his Mercy-Seat, study the Nature, and Promises of
the Covenant of Grace, and fly to Christ, according to the general Invitation,
and Call of the Gospel to that End.

Thirdly, if your Hearts begin to melt, and move within you, who have
apprehended your selves in Danger of this Judgment, if you are yet under the
strivings of the Spirit, (as your very Solicitude and Fear about it, and
Desire of Assistance, does Imply,) then I would beseech you to set presently to
work out your Salvation with all Diligence. Let not the Dictates of an awakened
Conscience be hushed, and silenced: Cherish and obey the holy Motions of the
Spirit: Let not your present Convictions and Resolutions become abortive, for
want of Meditation, and Prayer, and advising with your Ministers, and
Judicious, Faithful Friends. Especially take heed of extinguishing the
Sentiments of an awakened Conscience by new Guilt, and fresh Transgressions.
While Conscience is thus at Work, your Conversion is more probable, and hopeful
now than formerly: If you quench not the Motions of the Spirit, and provoke him
to leave you. If you will but hearken to his Voice and follow his Counsel, and
not again harden your Hearts: If you would now earnestly implore, and
thankfully entertain, and carefully improve his holy Influences.

Is it not of highest Importance, that you do so without Delay? When your
Breath is in your Nostrils, and the Day of your Life, and your Day of Grace,
may both be ended before to morrow Morning. Should not the Kindness of God
overcome you? That Mercy is offered ^o such returning Backsliders? should (...)
not be a melting, transporting Thought, for such as you to consider, that
Christ invites you to come to him, ^f you are weary and heavy laden, and
^romises Rest. Read Judges, 10th the ^atter End, for your Encouragment, where
God having delivered his People, and they yet forsook him, it is said, that he
would deliver them no more, but ^id them go to the Gods they had ^hosen: But
they cried to him, and ^urned from their evil Ways, and his ^oul was greived
for them, and he did ^eliver them. They cried heartily, Lord, ^o unto us what
seems thee good, only de^ver us, so do you in like Manner, and ^here is yet
Hope; Go in ^ecret, and ^ell him, that it is the Desire of your Souls, now to
return to him, beg his ^anctifying Spirit with utmost impor^unity, plead the
Virtue of the Blood of Christ, say unto him, Lord do with ^ne what thou will;
afflict me how thou please, strip me of all my pleasant Things, if that may
serve the Ends of thy Glory; only let not thy holy Spirit forsake me; only
deliver me out of ^he hands of my Lusts; break these my Chains, knock off these
Fetters; save me from my sins, and from the Wrath; accept me for thy Covenan^
servant, write thy Law upon my Heart, that I may walk in thy Ways. And whatever
thou give me, or whatever thou deny me, Lord, for Jesus Christ's sake, never
give me up to my ow^ Hearts Lusts, that I should be left to wa^^ in my own
Counsels. Amen.

The Second Sermon.
Psalm LXXXI. 12. I gave them up to their own Hearts lusts: and they walked in
their own Counsels.


WE can never look back to our primitive state, considering how richly and
plentifully the Bounty of our Maker ^ad provided for us, without admi^ing
Thoughts of his Beneficence and Kindness: And yet, if we view the Divine
Compassion unto guilty and ^ebellious Man since the Fall, and ^ow many
obstacles his Grace over^ame; This latter will be Judged to surpass his former
Bounty to Innocent Man. For before the Entrance of sin, the Current of Divine
Love met with nothing to obstruct its passage, the^ was nothing to discourage
its Exe^cise toward an Innocent and Obedient Creature: But now sin has made a
great gulf betwixt God and us; We are in a state of Enmity, and Hostility
against Him; which sets a value upon the Power, and Freenes^ of the Grace
employed to Recove^ and save us.

And yet, after all this display of the unsearchable Riches of Grace, and Love
in the Work of our Redemption, it is a question whether our willful, provoking
Obstinacy against God be not more astonishing, than his undeserved Compassion
and Love to us that in contradiction to all the Princ^ples of Reason, and
Interest, we should slight his Kindness, and despise his glorious Love, and
refuse his Grace, the only Remedy that can save us. That when he offers to be
Reconciled to us, and Entreats us to be Reconcile^ to him, we will not hearken
to his Voice: That we should persist in our chosen Distance, and Estrangment,
and say, We will have none of him; Let him depart from us, we desire not the
Knowledge of his ways; We care for ^o Reconciliation to him, or Communion with
him, or any share in the Happiness he offers to confer upon ^s. Were not this
very highly pro^oking, the Blessed God would not Complain of it, as he does*
and Repreach ^s with it, as he also does, in many ^laces, and particularly in
this, My People would not hearken to my Voice, and ^srael would none of me; so
I gave them ^p, etc. Both Expressions are in the ^uture, though we translate
them as al^eady inflicted: The Original signi^^es that God would deal so
severely ^ith them. The Aggravations of his Complaint of God concerning Israel
have been already mentioned. What I propose now to discourse of ^s this.

First, That it is matter of most Just Complaint, and most heavy Re^roach, when
any People or Person will not hearken to the Voice of God.

Secondly, That for any wilful sin^ers to be given up by God to their own
Hearts Lusts, and left to walk in their own Counsels, is one of the most
fearful Judgments that can be threatened, or inflicted.

In speaking to the Second General, I proposed to show, First, What it is for
God to give Men up to their ow^ Hearts Lusts. And that such a thing there may
be, and is, as Gods giving men over to their false Imaginations and Conceptions
of things; their inordinate Desires and irregular Passions* their wicked
Projects and Contrivances for the fulfilling of their variou^ Lusts, etc. When
he gives them up to these Lusts, he casts them out of hi^ special Care and
Protection, so as they become an easy prey to the Devi^ And the Hebrew word
which we translate give up, is often used for the casting out a People out of
their Country, as in 44. Psalm. 2. Such Persons a^ also left of God under the
Tyranny and Dominion of their Lusts, without those Restraints of Providence an^
Grace which before they had. Wha^ more may be intended in such an Expression,
will appear in speaking to the Second Head, viz.

To show by what steps and Degrees, God does execute, and inflict such a
Judgment upon them. And then, Thirdly, I shall speak something further of the
Dreadfulness of this Judgment, and so Apply the whole.

II. By What steps or Degrees the Blessed God does usually proceed in
inflicting such a Judgment as this. For the better understanding of this, I
must premise by way of Caution.

1. That Whatever Method is taken in the Execution of so severe a Doom, we must
remember there is a great depth of Obscurity in these Judgments of God; There
is so in all his works of Judgment, but especially in such as do more
immediately relate to the Souls of Men. We know very little of the manner of
Gods Influence upon men's Spirits, and therefore should be very humble and wary,
modest and cautions in our Expressions about it. And yet from what we observe
of such spiritual Judgments, we may cry out with the Apostle, Romans 11.33 O the
depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How unsearchable
are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out! We know very little of the
manner of the Holy Spirit's Influence, in forming the Image of God upon the
Soul; and much less concerning the manner of this Punishment in the Text;
whereby men are hardened in sin through the righteous Judgment of God, to their
Eternal Ruin. However,

2. Remember, This is a Judicial Act in God, not an arbitrary thing, that
depends upon mere Will and Pleasure, without any respect to the Aggravations of
Men's wilful Rebellion, and sinning against Light. It is such a Judgment as
supposes very heinous Provocations to precede it. The Instance of the Jews does
abundantly prove this; with whom the Patience of God did long bear, and his
Spirit strive; But they always resisted the Holy Ghost, Acts 7.51. From
generation to generation, maintaining the war against the Divine Spirit, till
he turned to be their Enemy, and fought against them. Isa. 63.9, 10. And then
their Doom is pronounced in a most solemn manner, with terrible and astonishing
Preparations for it, Isa. 6. By a glorious Apparition of the great God in the
Temple, which made the Prophet cry out, I am undone, etc. The fearful message
he was to deliver, to that People, was that 9, 10. v. Hear ye indeed, but
understand not; see ye indeed, but perceive not; make the Heart of this people
fat, and their ears heavy, and shut their Eyes, lest they see with their Eyes,
and hear with their Ears, and understand with their Heart, and convert, and be
healed. This Doom we find with great Awfulness repeated in the new Testament by
our Savior, Mat. 13.14. Luke 8.10.12. John 40. And afterward by the Apostle
Paul when he was testifying against the obstinate Infidelity of the Jews at
Rome, Romans 11.8. We may therefore clear the Righteousness of God in this
matter, by considering the true Account and Character of Those, whom we find in
Scripture, or believe by Experience, to have been given up to their own Hearts
Lusts. The Wickedness of Pharaoh was risen to a very provoking height, before
God is said to harden him, which was not till after the sixth Plague. The
impenitent Cananites had 430 Years, before God gave them over, and their
measure was full, Josh. 11.19. This therefore, as it is one of the severest
Judgments, so it is one of the last.

This also may admit of Degrees with reference to several Persons. For there is
a partial, as well as a total forsaking of God, and being forsaken of him.
There are some who sin against their Light, and refuse the Grace of the Gospel,
and may for a time be forsaken and left of God, and yet his Spirit afterward
strive again; Whereas with others he may never strive more. However in all
these Cases there is great Provocation that does precede, so that we may say
with the Apostle, Is God unrighteous, that he takes Vengence? Romans 3.5.

3. I would also premise, That the Holiness of God must be cleared, as well as
his Justice. Though he give them up to their own Hearts Lusts, it is not by a
consenting, approving Act, with reference to the sins they afterward commit;
much less that God inclines their Hearts to sin, or infuses, or suggests evil
to them. It is not that He gives them Indulgence and Leave, with his Consent
and Approbation, to serve and fulfill any of those Lusts. The spotless
unchangable Purity of the Divine Nature, which hates every sin, cannot consist
with this. He cannot be tempted with Evil, neither tempts any man to evil.

Therefore such Expressions as Ezekiel. 20.39. As for you, O House of Israel, thus
says the Lord, go you now every one and serve his Idols. Such Expressions must
be taken in an Ironical sense. That is, Go see whether the Objects of your
Trust, and Confidence can save you in a time of Calamity: Go to the Gods that
you have served, and see whether they will help you, for I will not. It is like
the Expression, Matthew. 26.46. Sleep on now, and take your Rest, for behold he
comes, by whom the Son of man is to be betrayed. I desired you to watch with
me, but you would not; and that season is now past, Sleep on now, if you can.
When Satan blinds the Minds of men, he does it by strengthening of their sin,
he does it by sinful suggestions, and the like: But the Blessed God does not
thus give men up to sin: No such Darkness can come from the Fountain of Light.

These things being premised, let us Consider some of those steps, by which God
preceeds in this matter, as Scripture, Reason, and Experience may direct us;
Though after all, there is a Depth in these Judgments of God, which none are
able fully to Explain.

1. When God forbears to Afflict, and to restrain men from sin, by the Rod of
Correction, and the Rebukes of his Providence: Or does not sanctify such
Rebukes for their Reformation. We little think whither we should wander, if God
did not hedge up our ways with Thorns, Hos. 2.6, 7. If he did not by his
Providence make a Wall that we should not be able to find our sinful Paths;
that we should not be able to make Provision for our Lusts at an easy rate, or
have so much fuel for them as we desire. My People Israel, says God by the
Prophet, was resolved to go after her Lovers; but God says I will make her
return back in confusion. She shall find an impassable hedge of Thorns in her
way; I will stop her Course, I will make a Wall, and a Wall, as in the
Original, and she shall not find her Paths. Tho she follow after her Lovers,
she shall not overtake them, she shall seek them but shall not find them.

The like Expression you have 3. Lament. 7, 9. He has hedged me about that I
cannot get out, he has enclosed me with ^ewen stone. Some by the Fetters of
Education, as they call it, and are glad when they can shake them off; Some by
the want of Money, or Interest, or Power, to accomplish their wicked Purposes,
have their Way hedged up. Sometimes by bodily Pains, and sickness, God opens
the Ears of men, and seals Instruction to them, that he may withdraw Man from
his Purpose, and hide Pride from Man, Job 33.17, 18. God is herein very
merciful to many. Young Persons especially should consider it, to whom it is a
Kindness to have sin made difficult to them: For if they had so much Liberty as
they would desire, and so much Money at command as they could wish, and were
let alone by their Superiors to do as they please, and live as they list,
without any check, or fear of losing the favor of those on whom they depend,
or from whom they have their Expectation* If things were thus with them, they
know not unto what Excess and Height of sin they should run. So for Health, and
Bodily strength, the abating of these may be a merciful Restraint from some
sort of sins. The very weakness of our Constitutions, may be a means to save us
from some kind of Temptations, which others in vigorous Health do struggle
with, and are overcome by. So for disappointments in the World, Discountenance
and Disgrace, and other such things, that are apt to humble and afflict the
Mind. The more of these Restraints God is pleased to take from us, it may so
fall out, that the more Angry he therein appears to be. Especially if former
afflictive Rebukes of Providence, have been misimproved: There being hardly a
more terrible place in the whole Bible, than that threatening of God, Hos.
4.13, 14. Your Daughters shall commit Whoredom, and your Spouses shall commit
Adultery; And I will not punish your Daughters when they commit Whoredom, nor
your Spouses when they commit Adultery. O quanta Paena, nulla Paena! It is the
greatest Judgment, or the fore runner of that which is so, when God abstains
from punishing, when by timely Chastisement he does not awaken to Repentance,
and stop sinners in their career; when the way to Hell is plain, and easy to
them; when there is no Thorn, no Obstacle in the way, but they may smoothly go
on, and walk after their own Counsels, in the Paths that lead to the Chambers
of Death.

How many Young Persons has God been kind to, by those Restraints of
Providence, which he takes off from others? How has he hedged and walled up
your Way? He has made it more difficult for you to sin: you cannot do as
others, without suffering more than they; either in your Reputation, or your
temporal Interest, or your Health, etc. And yet we find, notwithstanding all
this, many such will not be divorced from their beloved Lusts. As one of the
Ancients speaks concerning Philotimus, who had weakened his Constitution, and
impaired his Health, as the Effect of his Intemperance and Riot: And being told
by the Physicians, that if he would not forbear, and presently break off his
licentious Course, that he must certainly lose his Eye sight: There was no help
for him, but in a little time he would be Blind: He presently answers the
Physician thus, Valeat lumen amicum, Farewell, O pleasant and desirable Light,
rather than not sin on, as I have done, I am content never to behold the Light
of the Sun more. Will the Blessed God, think you, be unrighteous, if he condemn
such resolved sinners to everlasting Darkness? Or to give them up now to those
Lusts, that they are so madly set upon?

But where he has Designs of Mercy to any, he will not leave them to go on
without Correction. As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten. If you will not be
reclaimed by one Rod, you shall have another, and a third and a fourth. If you
will not for all this turn to the Lord, I will yet punish you seven times more
for your Iniquities, Levit. 26.18. In these Cases, God does not spare that he
may spare; he does not seem to have Mercy, that he may have Mercy; He does not
forbear his Rod, that we may forbear our sins; He will not let us alone, that
he may not be forced utterly to abandon us: He will rebuke and chasten, that we
may not harden our selves unto our Eternal Ruin.

Whenever you behold a wicked Person thrive and flourish in the World, when you
see him prosper in his Trade, and boasting of his Riches, priding himself in
his Power; when you see him strong and healthful, surrounded with all that is
desirable to flesh and blood, flourishing with all variety of outward
Blessings, personal and family Advantages, etc. And ^et neglect God, and wallow
in all ^^anner of carnal Impurities, restrain Prayer from the Almighty, in his
Family, and in his Closet, and live like a Beast, without God in the World;
When you behold such spectacles, think of the Accomplishment of such like
Scriptures, where God threatens in Anger to forbear to punish such and such
men. This is the first Method, his forbearing to afflict.

2. By taking away the External Means of Knowledge and Grace, or otherwise
disposing of Persons so as they cannot enjoy such seasons. Acts 19.9. When
diverse were hardened, and believed not, but spoke evil of that way before the
multitude, he departed from them. God continues not the outward means in such
places, or the persons remove into remote parts of the world, where the Gospel
of Christ is not known. Thus when lewd and disobedient Youths have sinned
against God and their Parents, to that degree, that they know not what to do
with them, they either go of themselves, or are sent into the Fleet, or Army,
or to the Indies, to such Places, where the Gospel is not preached. And by this
means men are left to walk in their own Counsels; The Public Ministry of the
Word being the ordinary Means of Sanctification. And so it is no wonder if they
greedily fulfill their brutish Lusts. Therefore if God withdraw such a
Ministry from the Place where you reside, or you run madly and without a call,
or warrant, to dwell in such places where it cannot be had, (I mean such a
Ministry as is proper to enlighten and awaken, and strive with you in order to
your Conversion and your salvation;) it is one step to your being given over,
and left of God, and to have the things of your Peace hid from your Eyes. I
wish Merchants, and Traders, and Parents that have undutiful Children, and some
Others, who are resolved They will be Rich, would consider this.

But if you have sat under a convincing lively Ministry, but you begin to
dislike it; in that case it looks very ill. Especially the more you were
affected with it formerly, and now disrelish it, or despise it. In such Cases,
the means of holy Knowledge and Sanctification not being continued, or
improved, it looks fearful as to such Persons: More especially if They be
unaffected, and unconcerned it their own Danger in these Circumstances.

3. God is said to pour upon men a Spirit of Slumber, and deep Sleep, to suffer
them to harden their Hearts, and stupify their own Consciences the more, by
every thing they enjoy; so that though the external Means be continued, yet
none of the divine Messages will be received, nor the most useful Ministry do
them any good: nor the Providential goodness of God lead them to Repentance.
All their earthly possessions, and temporal Blessings shall become snares, and
stumbling blocks, Jer. 6.21. Therefore thus says the Lord, behold, I will lay
stumbling blocks before this People, and the fathers and the sons together
shall fall upon them: The neighbor and his friend shall perish. But this is
after they have wilfully hardened themselves. So it was with Pharaoh when he
had obstinately hardened his own Heart, Exodus 7.14.8. chap. 19, 32. ver. After
that, upon his continued Obstinacy, God declares that he hardened him, 9. chap.
12. and 16. ver. And caused him to stand up, or raised him up, that is, kept
him alive, when he deserved to be cut off by a quick and sudden Destruction;
for this very end, that he might show in him his Power. So provoking was his
former Obstinacy, and Incorrigibleness. Thus are men the faulty Cause, by
chosen wilful Blindness and Hardness, before they are forsaken, and left of God
under such a Judgment.

4. Another step is God's righteous Refusal to continue that Influence of the
divine Spirit, with the external Means of Grace, which men have abused and
forfeited. Without this Influence there cannot be a Day of Light and Power
under the Gospel Dispensation: Both which are necessary to make our day of
Grace. But when any People or Person have rebelled against God, and vexed his
holy Spirit, he may cease to strive with their Hearts by any gracious
Influence: When he has knocked often, and they would not open; such inward
Motions of the Spirit, as they formerly had, they may have no more; and so they
are forsaken of God. But whether totally and finally, so as not to return
again, is more than we can say of particular Persons, till the Event show it.
But it is that which Men have reason to fear, according to the ordinary Methods
of Gods proceeding, who now disobey the Voice of his Word and Spirit. He might
Justly withdraw the Influence of his Spirit from them, and seal them up to
Destruction; and so it is possible their Day of Grace may be ended before they
dye; and their not believing or being converted, will certainly follow, John
12.39, 40.

5. Another step is, when God sends strong Delusions, whereby men believe Lies,
that they may be damned, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. This is severe indeed, but being after
obstinate Refusal of his Grace, it is righteous severity. For this is
threatened as the Punishment of backsliding Christian Churches, against such
who would not receive the Truth in the Love of it. The Deceived and the
Deceiver are his, Job 12.16.

Now God may do this two ways: First, By permitting Deceivers, and false
Teachers, to speak and act at that rate of Cunning, and color of Truth, that
it is very difficult to resist or withstand the snare. And therefore we read of
the coming of the Man of sin with all signs, and lying Wonders, or with Wonders
to confirm those Lies. This God foretold and warned the Jews of before hand.

2. God may give Men up to strong Delusions, by taking away the Assistance of
Reason and a clear Judgment, to distinguish between things that differ. Thus
Men wrest the holy Scriptures to their own Destruction, 2 Pet. 3.16. Which they
could not do without his Providence, and Permission. And when the Gentiles had
sinned highly against the Light of Nature, God gave them over to a Reprobate
Mind, Romans 1.26. or to a mind incapable of Judging, as the word imports; a
blind unjudicious Mind, that could not examine, or distinguish between Truth
and Falsehood. This is as consistent with the Justice of God (considering it as
the Punishment of former Guilt,) as the depriving us of any of our senses would
be.

And without some such thing as this, it will be impossible to give an Account
of the Growth, and Prevalency of the many ridiculous, absurd Doctrines, and
Practices of Popery. It cannot otherwise be accounted for, that such Fooleries
as are to be found in their Opinions and Worship, should ever be received,
believed, complied, with, and pleaded for, by Men otherwise of Judgment and
Learning; But it is to be feared that they are given over to strong Delusions
to believe Lies.

There are many others that are no Papists, whom this may concern, who, after a
great Profession, have fallen back into secret Wickedness, and at last into
more open Crimes, against Convictions and Resolutions, Promises and former
Experience. Many such in the last Age, and some in this, have been thus left of
God, to run into strange Enthusiasm, and real Fanaticism, to receive the most
extravagant, and sometimes blasphemous Opinions; to espouse and plead for them,
against the plainest Reason, and the most express Scripture that can be. But
usually it may be observed, the Doctrines they receive, and the new Lights they
follow, are such as tend to Licentiousness, to encourage the Gratification of
their Lusts, that they can sin on by the help of these Opinions, with greater
Security and Peace. This is another step, whereby men are given up to their own
Hearts Lusts.

LASTLY, When God gives special Permission to the Devil, the great Enemy of
Souls, to exert his Power, and Malice in blinding and destroying Sinners.

We do not sufficiently consider what we owe to Gods Restraint of Satan, that
we are not more succesfully tempted to deny the Faith, and cast off the yoke of
Christ When the Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, an Evil Spirit from the
Lord is sent to trouble and punish him, and Satan filled his heart with Rage
and Cruelty, 1 Samuel 16.14. Some evil Spirit had leave from God to seduce Ahab,
1 Kings 22.21, 22. Who acted his part succesfully to deceive and destroy. If
our Gospel be hid, says our Apostle, it is hid to them that are lost, 2 Cor.
3.4. Whose eyes are blinded by the God of this World.

HE is ready to do us all the mischief he can, if God restrain him not. What a
Power had he over the Bodies of some Men, in the days of our Savior! He would
manifest as much over their Souls too, if God did but give him leave. The Red
Dragon went out to deceive the Nations, we read in the Apocalypse. As to those
who are judicially left of God, and given up to their own Hearts Lusts, it may
come to this, and sometimes does so; that God leaves them to the Power of Satan
to deceive and ruin them, and they are led captive by him at his will. How
dismal must the Case of such Persons be! Which brings me to consider.

III. THE Severity of this Judgment. Besides what has been said concerning it
already, let me add a few Particulars.

1. The Severity of this Judgment will appear, if we consider that it is never
inflicted but after many preceding Provocations, upon habitual and obstinate
sinners. For sins against Light and Knowledge, presumptuous and repeated
Transgressions, such for which there was no sacrifice appointed under the Law,
Numb. 15.30.

2. The Severity of this Judgment may be argued from the Subject of it, it
falls upon the Soul, it does especially respect that, as its immediate Subject.
The dismal Effects of it reach to the Soul: The Beauty and Comeliness of the
Soul is hereby spoiled: For what more dismal Spectacle can there be, than such
a man thus left of God? The Honor and Dignity of the Soul is hereby debased;
for men given up to their own Hearts Lusts are almost transformed into Beasts.

3. Because the most dishonorable Slavery follows upon it. They are left under
the Power and Rage of their own Lusts; and did you know what a Slavery that is,
you would rather beg of God that you might fall into the Hands of the most
barbarous and cruel Tyrant in the World, than to be left under the Dominion of
your own Lusts.

4. Because they are left to walk in their own Counsels, as the fruit of their
being given up to their own Lusts. And these are, First, The most foolish blind
Guides that can be, that fill men with vain Projects and Designs. As the rich
Fool in the Gospel, Luke. 16. He would pull down his Barns, and build greater,
and say, Soul take thine ease, etc.

Secondly, They are false and treacherous Guides. They promise Peace and
Happiness, but procure nothing like it; Promise Ease and Rest, but can by no
means perform what they promise; but leave a man to wander and go astray unto
his own Destruction, Prove. 5.31.

Thirdly, They are cruel and pernicious Guides, as well as deceitful ones. Such
Persons will walk in the way that leads to Destruction: He that walks after
his own Counsel, will find the End of that way to be Death.

Lastly, The Severity of this Judgment will appear, in that it can never be
inflicted but in Anger. This is the Fruit of divine Wrath. All other Calamities
and Afflictions may be the Fruit of Love, may be sanctified for our good, may
turn to our Advantage: But this Calamity has no such Original, and no such
Effect. A man may be given up to Satan for the Destruction of the Flesh, that
the Soul may be saved; But to be given up to sin is a thousand times worse,
because that is the Fruit of Divine Anger, in order to the Damnation of the
Soul. Here God wounds like an Enemy, and like a cruel one: And we may boldly
say, God never punished any Man or Woman, with this Spiritual Judgment, in
Kindness and Love.

The Third Sermon.
Psalm LXXXI. 12. So I gave them up to their own Hearts lusts: and they walked
in their own Counsels.


UPON the Rehearsal of some terrible Threatening, when Judgment is denounced, or
signified to be approaching, but the particular Persons are not named, who are
to be the Subjects of it, we may use the Words of the Prophet Daniel, chap.
4.29. Before he opened to the King the Import and sense of his ominous Dream;
The Dream be to them that hate thee, O King! and the Interpretation thereof
unto thine. Enemies. But such is the Severity and Horror of this threatened
Judgment in the Text, that we should not, we ought not to wish so much Evil to
our worst Enemies; but do what we can to prevent it. For of all Calamities that
can be threatened, or inflicted in this World, what can be worse than for a Man
to be given up to his own Lusts, and left to walk in his own Counsels? Two or
three things we may observe by way of general Inference, before I speak to some
particular Cases and Questions that relate hereto.

1. HOW Much to be pitied is the Ignorance and Folly of sinners, that are
afraid of any other Calamity more than this. I gave 'em up to their own Hearts
Lusts, is a thousand times worse than if God had given 'em up to the Syrians to
spoil 'em, or to their most enraged Adversaries to oppress 'em. Men are ready
to quake and tremble, and their Hearts to be moved, as the Trees of the Wood
are moved with the Wind, if a thick or dark Cloud hover over them, as to
public or private Affairs. If their Health and Ease, their Liberties and
Estates, their outward Privileges and Advantages are threatened and
endangered, they presently apprehend themselves concerned to look about them,
and do their utmost to prevent it. But if sin be the greatest Enemy, to be
given up to sin is the greatest Judgment, and should be more feared than
Plague, or Pestilence, or Famine, or War, or any of those Calamities that
Nations and Persons do commonly dread as most Formidable Evils.

2. Is it the greatest Judgment to be given up to our own Hearts Lusts? How
unreasonable is the Displeasure and Anger of Men at the sharpest Methods of
Divine Grace, that would bring them to Repentance, and thereby prevent this sad
Catastrophe? The most smart Reproofs of the Word; the most close Exhortations,
and Admonitions of Ministers, that are now accounted troublesome, the most
pungent and uneasy Convictions of Conscience, and the most afflictive Rebukes
of Providence too, that have this merciful Design and Tendency, they are the
real Effects of Kindness, as preventive of a greater Mischief, even this, of
being left of God, and given up to our own Hearts Lusts.

What Enemies therefore are they to their own Interest, who use such Language
as that of the Stubborn Jews, Isa. 30.10. saying to the Prophets, Prophecy not
unto us Right things, speak unto us smooth things, and prophecy Deceits. Till
God in righteous Judgment resolve, and say, as he did afterward, Ezekiel 3.26.
Thou shall no longer be unto them a Reprover, Thou shall be dumb, and thy
Tongue cleave to the Roof of thy mouth, for they are a rebellious House. When
such as would convince and awaken Men by necessary Reproofs, are disliked, and
their Preaching reckoned a Burden, because the Earth is tormented with their
Words, Revel. 11.10.

3. HOW wretched and dangerous is their Mistake, who think their Case good,
because their Consciences now trouble them no more. They have sinned themselves
into such hardness of Heart, and searedness of Conscience, under such Judicial
Blindness and stupidity, that the sin, which was formerly burdensome as a
Mountain, they now feel not; they bewail it not. Conscience, that did rebuke
them, is now silent and fast asleep. All things are at peace with them, they
say, and they are glad of it, and so is the Devil too.

God lets them prosper in the World, they have no rub in their way, to Hell.
But in the mean time he has given them over, that they shall not be smitten
any more: that they shall not be troubled with the strivings of his Spirit any
more. Neither Word nor Rod shall do them good more. They applaud themselves in
this, and rejoice in it: But if to be given up to our own Hearts Lusts be the
greatest Judgment, there is no storm more dismal than such a Calm, or more to
be dreaded. No Trouble but is better than such Peace: No Sickness but is
preferable to such Health: No Sorrow but is rather to be chosen than such mad
Joy.

Doubt. 1. BUT because I would not break the bruised Reed, or quench the
smoking Flax, or sadden the Hearts of those whom God would not have saddened;
but rather awaken the Joy, and assist the Consolation, and promote the
spiritual Peace of those unto whom it does of right belong: I shall therefore
consider some of the Doubts, and Objections of several weak, or melancholy,
dejected Christians, who on all Occasions argue against themselves, and
conclude hardly of their own State, from every word of Threatening and Terror
against the Ungodly: As melancholy People can hardly hear any Disease talked of
or described, but they presently imagine they have some of the Symptoms of it in
their Case.

WHAT I have said of the Nature and Terror of this Judgment, and of the
Methods o^ Divine Justice in the Execution of it, may make some ready to say.

I fear lest God has given me up, for I have resisted many of the strivings of
the Spirit of Grace, and now I think he does not strive with me any more. I
have been under the Rod, and not bettered by it, the Spirit of slumber and of a
deep sleep seems to possess me. I have outstood many Calls to Repentance, and
stifled many Convictions of Conscience, and contradicted many good Resolutions,
and broken many Vows and Promises; I have backsliden and revolted from God
after very hopeful Beginnings: Therefore the Punishment of Apostates may Justly
be inflected on me. I, that have casted the good Word of God, and of the Powers
of the World to come, may well fear being left of God, so as it should be
impossible for me to be renewed by Repentance, Heb. 6.7.

My Day of Grace is over, says Another, my accepted Time past, there is
nothing so bad but I may Justly fear it: For I find I grow worse and worse,
instead of making progress in Holiness: whereas if my Grace were true it would
be growing. But I find my Corruptions exceeding strong, my heart very dead and
hard, etc.

Doubtless God has withdrawn his Spirit from me, will Another say, I have not
the Covenant Blessing of a soft Heart, a Heart of Flesh; I cannot weep a Tear
for my sins, as once I could: I am good for nothing, unfit for any spiritual
Duty; None in the World have such a treacherous vile abominable Heart as I
have, I am afraid God has given me over; I do not know but I may have sinned
the sin unto Death, the unpardonable sin, the sin against the Holy Ghost, which
shall never be forgiven.

Answ. THIS being a complicated Case, comprehending the objections of several
People, wherein are some things that deserve Pity, and others that need
Reproof; there being somewhat very sad in it, and somewhat very faulty too; It
is manifest that my Reply must be mixed: It must in part be monitory and
reprehensive, and in part consolatory. For Reproof and Counsel are necessary,
as well as Encouragment and Comfort. I shall endeavor to intermix both; in the
following particulars, by way of Answer.

1. CONSIDER, That to be under very great Darkness, Doubts, and Fears, so as to
create much Trouble and Torment to your selves, will not of it self conclude
your Case desperate, and your Souls finally forsaken. There are many Reasons
for Soul trouble, the Children of Light may walk in Darkness. You may Judge and
condemn your selves for Unbelievers and Reprobates, and yet unjustly do so. You
may refuse to be comforted, and say all that the Devil speaks against you to be
true, and that it is impossible for such a one, as you, to find Mercy: And yet
all this may be false and faulty, and those Clouds may afterward vanish, Light
appear, and Joy return. The Examples in Scripture, and the Experience of every
Age will testify this.

It may be your mistake about the Nature of Faith, and make it to consist in
Assurance, not distinguishing between the direct and the reflex Act of Faith.
Whereas if true Faith consist in Assurance, and without Faith there is no
salvation; A Man must be assured of his Salvation, or else he must necessarily
be damned. And this is to suppose that a Man must First be sure of Heaven,
before he can be capable of it. But you may be in Christ, and have the Image of
Christ, and the Characters of his Children, and shall be kept by the Power of
God unto Salvation; though for a time you may distrust, and despair of it, walk
mournfully, and refuse to be comforted. Your own Doubts and Fears will not
prove that you are given over, but rather the Contrary. For,

II. If you are given up to your own Hearts Lusts, how is it that you thus
mourn, and greive at the Apprehension and Fear of it? Do you not value his
Favor more than Life? And dread his Displeasure more than Death? and fear
nothing more than that God should forsake you? And is it likely that Such are
left of God, who hereby discover that they love him in Sincerity? Your very
Solicitude, and Fear, and Disquiet, lest God should finally reject you, and
cast you off, is an Argument that he has not; and, if you continue of this
Mind, that he never will.

Believe it, O doubting Christian, if thou art from thy Soul unwilling to leave
God, and of all things in the World do dread and deprecate his leaving thee,
He has not left thee, or given thee over. For be assured of this, God never
did, or will forsake any, but those who first f^rsake him, and are unwilling to
Return. Where do you ever find, or how can it possibly be, that such a Man's Day
of Grace is past, and the time of his Visitation over, that God has Judicially
left him, and given him up, who values the Presence of God, and fears nothing
more than to Sin against him, or to provoke him to cast him off? Is such a Man
lost, and given over, who thirsts after God, and can be satisfied with
nothing short of him? Where do you ever find, that God did ever finally leave a
Man, and leave any such Grace behind him?

Is such a Man lost, and given up by God? Who prefers the Light of his
Countenance before Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and all the Riches, Treasures, and
Honors of the World; Who had rather live in the most mean miserable afflictive
Condition on Earth, with the Love and Favor of God, than enjoy the greatest
Abundance of all things without it. I shall amplify this more presently under
the sixth Head.

III. LET me ask you, Are you not resolved to hold on your Fight and Warfare
against sin? To continue and maintain your Conflict, notwithstanding all your
Doubts, and all your Complaints? You may sometimes take being tempted for being
overcome. But though Temptations have been too prevalent, and many of your
Resolutions and Purposes against sin have been broken; Are you resolved to
struggle no more, to resist no longer? Dare you say upon serious Deliberation,
Well, now I see my Case is hopeless, I will use no more Means against the Devil
and sin, I will pray to God no more, I will hear, and read his Word no more, I
will attend upon the Ordinances of the Gospel no longer, it is all to no
purpose? I know you durst not say this, nor talk at this rate.

Besides, when you have fallen into sin through the Prevalency of a Temtation,
do you not make haste to rise again by bitter Repentance? Do you not freely
confess, and aggravate your sins in the Presence of God, and not palliate,
cover, or excuse them? Are you not uneasy, and restless under your Declensions?
Desirous to make your Peace with God, and to be reconciled through Christ? Do
you not double your Guard, and Watch afterward? Do you not still love
Holiness, and the Image of God, wherever you see it? Do you not check, and
chide, and find fault with your selves, for your ungrateful Carriage to the God
of Love? Are you not displeased with your selves? And ashamed of your selves?
And glad of any Help and Assistance that leads to your Recovery? If this be
your Case, be assured your Day of Grace is not past, you are not left of God.

IV. YOU say, you cannot weep, and mourn, and express your Repentance, as
formerly, and as some others you know do; Yet consider that it is the hatred of
sin and watchfulness against it, that is the truest sign of Repentance and
godly sorrow. For to use the words of Mr. B. He that will be at the greatest
Cost and Pains to be rid of sin, or that he had not sinned, or that he might
sin no more, though he have not such command of Tears as Others, is the truest
Penitent. You cannot weep for sin as Others, but you would give all the World
to be rid of sin; you could wish that when you had dishonored God by Sin, you
had spent that time in Suffering, and if it were to do again, upon the same
Reasons and Inducements, you would not do it. And if you might but please and
obey God more than formerly, and be kept from disobeying him, you would be
content with any thing Judge your selves by this.

Besides See Dr: Collings Cordial for a Fainting Soul, part 1. Sermon. 2.
God has not told us just what degree and measure of Humiliation and Sorrow
for sin is absolutely needful. Some have more, and others less even of true
Penitents.

TAKE heed of mistaking the Case concerning the Day of Grace being over, and
sinners being finally left of God. For it is never true in this Life, that any
are so left of God, and their Day of Grace so over, as that if they truly
repent, and turn to him, he will not accept them. This would be against the
whole tenor of the Gospel Covenant: For whosoever turns to God by true
Repentance, and Faith in Jesus Christ, shall not perish but have eternal Life.

But there is another sense of such Ex^ressions, that is, when men have so ^^ng
resisted the Spirit, and refused the ^ffers of Gods Grace, and rejected the
Yoke and Government of Christ, that God resolves to let them alone, never ^o
give them the prevailing Grace of his Spirit, but in righteous Judgment ^o
abandon them to their own Hearts Lusts, to walk in their own Counsels.

Because they would not turn at my Reproof, they shall call, but I will not
answer, seek me earnestly, but not find me, Prove. 1.28. If men harden their
Hearts, and will not hear and obey the voice of God, He may swear in his Wrath,
that they shall not enter into his Rest. Heb. 3.11.15, 18. Number. 12.22. Ezekiel.
24.13. It may be this very day, or hour while now thou art called by God to
Turn and Live, if thou refuse now, thy Day may be over, and past for ever. To
morrow God may say, Let him Alone, he shall not be purged, he shall dye in his
sins. Isa. 42.14. Hos. 4.17. This is a possible Case, but who can tell when it
is thus? How can this be known of particular Persons when it is so, though some
Approach nearer to it than Others? How can it positively be said of any, that
God will never give such Persons Repentance unto Life? You may be sure, that if
you find your Hearts Penitent, and willing to return to him, that it does not
reach you: It is not your Case. Therefore,

VI. YOU that thus complain and fear, have you not many of the Fruits of the
Spirit visible, and manifest in you? Therefore the Spirit of Christ has not
left you; God has not given you over. Do you not esteem and prize the GRACE of
the Gospel? Do you not cry to Heaven for the Spirit of Grace? Are you not
earnest in the seeking the Spirit of Holiness from day to day? Whence is it,
but from Grace, that you have an Heart to prize and seek it? They that have
outstood the Day of Grace, they despise it; they are sunk into Carnality, and
Forgetfulness of God; they are insensible, and stupid, and unconcerned about
his Grace. But for you that value it, and seek it, your Day of Grace cannot be
over: For it is from Common Grace, at least, which has a tendency to Special,
and shows your Case not to be like those, who are given up of God.

But with most that thus complain, there is more than common Grace: There are
Fruits of special Grace visible. You do unfeignedly Repent, and mourn for Sin;
and desire to give up your selves to Christ. Now what but Grace has made you
to see the evil of sin, and hate it? What but Grace has made you willing to
Accept of Christ, for your Lord and Savior? What but Grace has made you value
the Favor of God, and a holy Heart and Life, above all the World? How is it
that you are brought to love God, and delight in him, to seek after him, and
desire to please him, and to be troubled that you can do so no more, no better?
For such as you to say your Day of Grace is over, is as absurd, as one
expresses it, as for a Man to come into our Assemblies, and hear the Sermon,
and then go away lamenting that the Sermon was done before he came. You have
received that Grace, which you complain you want.

You know it is otherwise with Many. Were you like them; Did you find your Lusts
and Passions lead you captive at their pleasure; had you no Affections stirring
after God, and Holiness; did you despise Christ, and all Regard and Duty to
him; and could not persuade your selves to hear, or read, or pray, or think of
another World, or do any thing to provide for it, you might then fear indeed
what the issue of your Case would be.

But that is not the Case I am now speaking of; nor of any, I hope, that now
hear me, your Appearance in these Assemblies is some sign of the contrary: And
though as yet you may be unconverted, and unsanctified, if you are so far Awake
as to look after Reconciliation to God; if you are touched with a sense of your
sin and Danger, so as to desire to be assisted, and enabled to Repent, and turn
to the Lord; how bad soever your present Case be, it is not Desperate, and
Remediless: For you are in the way of Mercy, and nothing but your own wilful,
impenitent refusal of Mercy, can deprive you of it.

VII. As to the Complaint of an Hard Heart, Remember it is the Impenitent, and
the Vnperswadable Heart that is the only hard Heart you need to fear. They that
are obstinate, and disobedient, intractable and incorrigible; as the People of
the Jews were, that neither regarded the divine Threatenings or Promises, or
minded his Precepts; These are they that are under Hardness of Heart. This is
the Judgment you ought to fear, to be left under such a Temper. But you find it
otherwise with you, that the voice of God does awe and command you: Your Wills
are bowed unto Subjection to him; you are willing to take upon you the Yoke of
Christ, or have taken it; and renouncing all Competitors, you desire to choose
Christ for your Lord and Savior, and that God in Christ should be your Ruler,
and your Felicity. If it be thus, you may be sure you are not left of God.

VIII. THAT Sight of sin, and sense of the Burden of Corruption, which you
complain of, as the Ground of your fear, will argue the direct contrary to what
you allege it for. For sin has always the greatest strength where the sinner
is the least Apprehensive and Sensible of it. There is more hope of a sensible
Patient, that feels his sickness, and complains of it, than of one that feels
nothing, but is confident all is well. Is not their Case much worse, who feel
nothing of the Evil of sin, to whom the Power of it is not troublesome, nor the
Pollution of it lothsom, nor the Guilt of it butthenfom? While it is otherwise
with you, you may be assured you are not given over, and left of God, and your
Day of Grace past: it is yet Day with you or else how came you by so much Light
to see the evil of sin more than formerly and to see so many things to be sin,
which before you did not?

Though there may and will be a Conflict between Flesh and Spirit, Corruption
and Grace, in the best, while in this World; yet which Party do thou side
with? Which has thy most willing Consent? Which way is thy prevailing Desire,
Love, and Choice? Do thou not bewail the Body of sin and Death? And wish to
be delivered from Corruption more perfectly? To gain a more entire Victory?
Do thou not watch, and wrestle, and strive, and pray against it from day to
day? Is this the true state of thy Case? Then never think thou art left of God.

As to Some of you, I may go further; and desire you to look back upon your
former Humiliations for sin, when First you turned to God. Though all have not
the same sensible Degree of Humiliation; yet has not the Spirit of Grace
convinced you of the Holiness and Equity of the Law of God? And of your own
wretched, accursed Condition under the Guilt of sin? Have you not been brought,
to tremble at the thoughts of his righteous Vengence? So as to disrelish all
the Pleasures of this World, by reason of the sense of sin; seeing no way out
of this Perplexity, but by the free, and unconceivable Mercy of God in Christ;
and therefore Renouncing all things that might separate between Christ and
thee, ready to part with all thy Lusts, and Pleasures, and Profits, and
Honors, Thou were made willing to accept of his Mercy on his own Terms; crying
earnestly for pardoning, and sanctifying Grace, acknowledging thy Unworthiness
of the least Favor; owning the righteousness of God, if he should condemn
thee; and yet, upon the Invitation and Call of the Gospel, looking up to his
Mercy-seat with Hope, Resolving there to anchor and take no Denial.

Now after all this, and the Covenant Dedication of your selves to God in
Christ, that followed upon it, and some Calmness and stability of Soul
consequent thereto, will you question all again? Because Corruption is not
quite mortified, nor Sin quite destroyed? Even that sense of remaining Sin that
you make the matter of your Objection against your selves, is an Argument for
you, and will conclude the Contrary to what you allege it for.

IX. THO You cannot say so much, as to present sense, of your Hatred of sin and
Loathing of it, as you desire; yet examine your selves as to the Sins of
Others, and what sense you have of the Dishonor of God by them. We may
sometimes gather matter of Comfort this way, concerning our own Sincerity, and
Love to God, when we cannot so well have it nearer home. As bad as thou art, or
think thy self to be: Art thou not tender of the Honor of God? Art thou not
concerned for his Interest and Glory? Does not thy soul tremble, and thine
Heart ache when the Being of God is denied, or his Sacred Name blasphemed, or
the Glory of the Mediator Struck at, and the Authority of his Gospel
questioned, by the Atheists, and Saduces, and Infidels of the Age? Or the
Progress of it obstracted?

Does not thy Heart rise within thee, if thou happen into wicked Company, where
the Word of God, his Institutions, his Ministers, and Servants are vilified and
reproached, and bold Impieties vented, and vile Impurities boasted of? etc.

X. BUT I do not Grow, I rather wax worse, will some say. As to that, Consider,
that though there be Precepts, Promises, and Examples of growing in Grace, that
show what is Gods usual way, and the Proper Tendency of the Spiritual Life; yet
those Promises are not so Absolute, without any Condition, as that there is no
true Believer who does not always grow in Grace: For Experience shows, that
some decline and lose their first Fervor, and need to be awakened to
Repentance. The Promises of Growth and Faithfulness are not absolute, but
depend on the Improvement of Grace received, and the Performance of many
Duties, with great watchfulness and Diligence in our whole Christian Course.
And many Christians, live not up to the Condition of the Accomplishment of such
Promises, as concern the Growth and thriving of Spiritual Life. They decay, and
decline through their own Carlesness, and Negligence.

Sensible Affections be sure, and vigorous Increase in that respect, is not the
true Measure, whereby to Judge of growth in Grace. For different Ages, and
Tempers, and Circumstances of our condition in the world will make a great
Difference in sensible Affections.

You may grow in Grace, by a more Judicious Esteem, and value of God and
Holiness, Love to Christ and his Grace, and Glory, so as it may be harder for
the Devil to draw you off from God, than before; even when you think you do not
grow, you may be more stable and resolved, though not so lively and
affectionate. And the decay of natural strength, and vigor of parts by old age
or sickness, may make a Difference with some. Your Humility, your self denial,
and Patience may increase, when you think otherwise. And he who grows more
humble thrives in every other Grace, whether he believe it, and take notice of
it or no. But if you are declined, the Remedy must be to Awake, and to use Gods
appointed Means to make you, grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ. You cannot thereupon conclude that you have no Grace,
much less that you are left of God, and given over. Such as enquire not whether
they grow or decay, who have little or no Concern about their own Case as to
these things, have most reason to fear it of themselves, whilst such as do
really grow, for a time, may not discern it. And sometimes others may observe
it, when they themselves disown it, or perceive it not.

But if you are under some declension, Remember the cause, that it is from
sloth and negligence in the use of God's appointed means for Increase; from the
want of daily Mortification of sin, and Watchfulness against it; from
countenacing some Lust, so that its power is increased, suffering the Love of
the World to steal upon you, and conforming to it; giving way to Formality, and
carelessness in divine Worship, and the Duties of Religion; and Apply the
Remedy by Repentance, Mortification, and doing your first works, Rev. 3.1,2.
But make not hasty, unjust Conclusions concerning your final state.

XI. MOREOVER Consider, there may be much more of Blame and Faultiness, of
Guilt and sin, in your unbelieving Objections, and Despondency, than you are
aware of. Therefore while you complain of sin, take heed you do not increase,
and add to your sin by disobeying the command of God to Believe and Hope. God
has made Hope a positive Duty, and Gods Command were enough, if there were
nothing else in your Case. Your Despair, as if your Case were desperate, and
your Condition hopeless, that God had finally given you over, is a plain sin:
And will you justify it? He obliges you to hope; he has not bid the Devil or
the damned to hope, as he has commanded you. It is by hope we are saved; and
he takes Pleasure in them that hope in his Mercy.

But to convince you of this sin, consider what a Representation of the blessed
God your Objection makes, as if he were not a God of Grace, pardoning Inquity,
Transgression and Sin, upon Repentance, which is what he has declared
concerning himself. Now is it not a sin to believe God to be such an one, as is
directly contrary to the Character he has given of himself? That though I never
so much desire his Favor, and value it as my Life; though I desire to my
utmost to comport with his Mind and Will, so far as he has, or shall reveal it
to me; to believe that yet he has cast me off, or will cast me off: What a sad
Account of God does this give? What a Reproach upon him would this bring? Is
not this to take the Devils Representation of him to be truer than his own?

There is likewise further sin in your Objection, and Doubt, by misrepresenting
the Tenor of the Gospel Covenant. Whereas that says, Take God in Christ for
your God, and give up your selves to be his, and he is, and will be yours; you
add something more out of your own Head as necessary, and so alter the Terms of
Life and Death. And what is this but to make a new Gospel? The Blessed God has
said, on such Terms Souls shall be saved, you add others as necessary: And say,
I shall never be saved, unless it be thus and thus with me; which God has
never said. Though I do accept God for my God, and Christ for my Savior, and
consent to be his, and endeavor to please him, yet he will not save me. This
is to give God the Lie, and there is more Guilt in it than we think. Therefore.

XII. LAY this as a Foundation Truth, and keep it, That you can never be more
willing to Come to Christ, than he is to Receive you. If you think otherwise,
your seeming Humility in Doubting has much of Pride in it. If you are willing
to have Christ and his Grace on his Terms, He is yours. If you are willing to
have Christ for your Savior, and your King, to receive him as Christ Jesus the
Lord; and the blessed Spirit as your Sanctifier; and had rather have his
Favor, and Love, and his holy Image, than all the riches of this World; you
are then His: If your Willingness be prevailing, and more than your
Unwillingness.

For Christ, be assured, is Willing; He has first shown his Willingness, He
dyed to manifest it, and has drawn up, procured, and published a Covenant of
Grace, wherein he declares his Consent, and calls for yours. Therefore if there
be not a Covenant Union unto Eternal Life between him and you, it is through
your Refusal, not his.

Now if you are not willing to Accept his offered Grace, to be sanctified by
him, and blessed in him; why do you complain, for the want of that which you
would not have, and are not willing of? For I tell you again, He is willing to
Receive, and Accept you, and to be Yours in an Everlasting Covenant never to be
broken, if you are sincerely Willing to be His Covenant Servants. Moreover,

XII. AS to the Doubt concerning the sin against the Holy Ghost, I think such
as make that Objection do not well understand wherein it lies. Read the 12th of
Matthew throughout, and Mark 3.28, 29, 30. And you will find that the Sin
against the Holy Ghost never to be forgiven, was to this purpose; That when,
notwithstanding the Miracles of Christ, which confirmed his divine Commission,
and proved him to be the Messiah, They who saw those Miracles of Christ, and
could not deny them to be true; yet did not believe him to be the Son of God,
or his Doctrine to be true, though attested by those Miracles. But rather than
own him to be the Christ, they blasphemously ascribed his Miracles unto the
Agency' of the Devil, the unclean Spirit; That were wrought by the Power of the
Holy Ghost.

They therefore who own Christ to be the Messiah, and his Gospel to be true;
who do not take him for a Deceiver, but acknowledge him as their Lord, and
honor and worship him as the Christ of God; they are not Guilty of the sin
there mentioned, called The sin against the Holy Ghost.

I deny not but some may be guilty in our days of such Sins, as make Approaches
unto this, and are somewhat like it; As when, notwithstanding clear Evidence of
the Truth of the Gospel, Men resist the Light, and rebel against it, and turn
open Apostates, and Persecutors, if not down right professed Infidels. But the
sin against the Holy Ghost, there described by the Evangelist, seems to imply a
Man's taking Christ for a Deceiver. Be sure none who own the Gospel to be true,
and Christ to be the Savior of fallen sinners, are guilty of that Sin, though
they may make dangerous Approaches to it.

Much less are they Guilty of it, who fear the guilt of this sin: But such
doubting fearful Persons, who make this Question concerning themselves, because
of some blasphemous Suggestions of Satan, etc. They would have been afraid of
the Guilt of any other sin as well as of this, if they had ever heard, or read
such dreadful things declared against any Other sin, as against This: But they
seem not to understand the Nature of it.

See Mr. Howe's Append. to Redeemer's Tears.
I do not deny but there may also be an equivalent Evidence of the Divinity of
Christ, and of the Truth of the Gospel, that the Infidels of our Age may sin
against; Equivalent, I say, to what the Scribes and Pharisees who where guilty
of this sin, did sin against. And therefore our modern Deists, who reproach the
blessed Redeemer, and the Holy Spirit of God, had need look to it, lest they
approach unto the unpardonable sin, and God should give them over to their own
Hearts Lusts. But as to poor doubting Christians, that fear they are guilty of
the sin against the Holy Ghost, mentioned in the Gospel, It is plain enough,
that they fearing the Guilt of it are not in danger of it for the present, or
like to be so.

LASTLY, To bring the whole matter to a short Issue, and to put it out of
question, that your day of Grace is not over, and that God has not left you,
or given you over to your own Hearts Lusts; I do now tender you the Grace and
Salvation purchased by Christ in his Name. If now you are heartily willing to
accept it, the Case is determined: and determined in the best manner that can
be. Therefore to put all out of doubt, Accept the present offer of Gods Grace,
which is this day made you. Oppose not the greatness of your sins past, or the
Aggravations of your present Unworthiness, but penitently, and humbly, and
thankfully accept the Pardon that is offered you in the Name of Christ.

Do you think, in contradiction to the whole Gospel, that your sins are so
many, or so great, that Christ did not, could not satisfy for them, and that
he will not forgive them, if you Repent, and turn to God, and Believe on the
Name of his Son? You are condemned by the Law; Christ came to save sinners, and
such as were lost; and he requires no Worthiness, or Price in your Hands, but
that you unfeignedly Consent to be his, to accept an offered Savior, and his
Salvation according to the Ends and Uses of the Covenant of Grace: That he may
illuminate and teach you, sanctify and guide you, govern and rule you, by his
Word and Spirit. This is the Condition of your Title to the Blessings of the
Covenant, and consequently must be the Evidence of your Title, and should be a
satisfactory one.

But if you are Unwilling to forsake sin, and return to God by Jesus Christ; if
you are unwilling to receive him as your Teacher, Sanctifier, Savior and Lord;
you have reason to doubt your state indeed, or rather the matter is past doubt,
you are unsanctified, and as yet unreconciled to God.

Whoever theresore, upon the account of their former Resistance of the Spirit,
stifling Convictions, violating their good Resolutions, etc. Do question their
State, whether God has not given them over; yet let them Consider they are now
invited, and entreated to put it out of question that their Day of Grace is not
past, by letting this be Their Accepted time, the Day of their Salvation; by
now heartily accepting an offered Savior, and giving up themselves unto him.
And then, notwithstanding all your former Refusals of his Mercy and Grace, if
now at last you will return and submit, and take his yoke upon you; there is
Ease, and Rest, and Pardon, and Comfort, and Life, Eternal Life to be had.

To conclude, Instead of Doubting, and Complaining, and questioning any longer,
Reduce all that which is Doubtful with you, to that which is Plain and Certain.
It is certain that God has sent his Son into the World to save sinners; It is
certain that you are some of those lost, miserable, guilty Creatures that need
this Salvation; It is certain that he has published the glad Tidings of the
Gospel to such, that whoever believes shall be saved; Is is certain that God
cannot lie, it is therefore inconsistent with his Nature, that such as come to
him in the Exercise of Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus
Christ, should not be Accepted with him.

Therefore dispute, and question, and complain no longer how matters have been,
or how they are with you, but come in upon the Call and Invitation of the
Gospel Grace: Remember the Covenant thou have made with God the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost in Baptism; Resign, yield and give up thy self with all thy
Heart and Soul to be his, resolving that thou will throw thy self into the Arms
of his Love, and Mercy, because it is the Command of God that you believe on
his Son; Resolve that through his Mercy and Grace, by the help of his Spirit of
Grace, you will now do so, whatever come of it.

Do not perplex your selves about the Question, whether you did it not
formerly, four, or five, or ten years ago? But do it again; Blessing God that
you may now do it; that he has not repealed his Gospel, and that he never will
repeal it to the end of the World. I may Accept of his Son now, as well as so
many years ago. Blessed be God, the Invitation, the Command, the Promise is the
same now as it was then; And to as many as Receive him, he will give the
Privilege to become the Sons of God, even to as many as believe on his Name.
Blessed be God for Jesus Christ, and the Covenant of Grace.

The Fourth Sermon.
Psalm LXXXI. 12. So I gave them up to their own Hearts lufts: and they walked
in their own Counsels.


I Come now, in the last place, to consider the Case of such, who make
dangerous Approaches toward such a Judgment; Who have provoked God to that
degree, that it would be no wonder if he should give them up; yea, concerning
whom, there is Reason to fear it, if speedy Repentance do not prevent.

HAVING therefore, spoken 1. To the Nature of this Judgment, And Secondly,
considered the steps and Methods, whereby God does ordinarily inflict it, And
Thirdly, the dreadful Severity of it, in Comparison of any other Judgment in
this World; I proceeded to the Case of those who Fear they are thus left and
given up by God: Several Things I named which they alledg as the ground of
their Fear, which yet will not prove that God has forsaken 'em: At the same
time there are many other Things that will evidence the Contrary.

It remains therefore, that I may faithfully give every one his portion,
Comfort to whom Comfort, and Terror to whom Terror is due; That I also speak
to the Case of Such whose Guilt may quickly infer this Terrible Judgment, or
concerning whom we may fear, whether they be not already under it, or left of
God. There are several things with relation to this Case, which ought to be
Considered.

I. THE First dangerous Symptom is Security, or a False, ungrounded Peace of
Conscience. This is frequently the Prologue, and Forerunner of Judicial
hardening. It is often a part of it, and an Evidence of it Their Case therefore
is exceeding dangerous, with whom Conscience is a Asleep, or Feared. When that
sin which formerly thy Conscience would reprove thee for, thou can now commit
without Remorse, or Difficulty: When such, or such a Lust can be freely
indulged, and thy Heart not reproach thee, thy Conscience not fly in thy Face,
or speak with any smartness, and Authority against it, as formerly it was wont
to do: When the Neglect of such or such Duties, was a daily Trouble to thee
heretofore, but now thou can let Them alone, and thy Conscience will let Thee
alone, without rebuking thee, or calling thee to Repentance, as it was wont to
do. Or if Conscience do speak, it is with much Faintness, without any such
Impressions of Fear, and shame, and sorrow, as were wont to be produced by it.
This speaks as if God had already given thee up in some degree, or thou art
very near what is worse, in very great danger of this dreadful Judgment.

This Security and Quiet, notwithstanding the neglect of known Duty, and the
Commission of sin, I grant has it is Degrees. There are some Degrees of it, into
which a good Man, through the Prevalency of sin and Temptation, for a time may
fall. Particularly as to the Duty of Prayer, and the spiritual Performance of
it. But then such Persons, supposing them Upright in the main, who are under
such Backslidings are far from approving themselves in this Case, or from
having any settled Peace. They have many an unpleasing Thought about their own
Case, many Resolutions of Repentance, that they may be Recovered. They often
say within themselves, We will go and return to our first Husband, for then it
was better with us than now; And every Providence of God, whether of Mercy or
Affliction, they regard, as a Call from Heaven to awaken them. And if the Word
preached come home to their particular Case, they receive the Warning, and do
not reject it, or oppose it.

But the Persons I speak of, as in danger of this Judgment, are such,
especially who are Secure, and Quiet under the Guilt of great Transgressions
unrepented of, and under the continued Omission of plain Duties. They are lost
as to any sense of Sin, and they approve themselves so far in their wretched
Course, as to speak Peace to themselves notwithstanding the repeated and loud
Calls, and Warnings of God to repentance.

Conscience did formerly speak, but they have so long checked, and stifled, and
discouraged, and silenced the Voice of Conscience, as to have lost one of the
greatest Blessings in the World, viz. Tenderness of Conscience. They have
either silenced their Conscience by main Force, or they have disheartened it by
a slighting, disobedient Carriage; or bribed it by a Form of Godliness, an
empty barren Profession: And so it gives way to a delusive destructive Peace,
either to flatter them in the way to Hell, or not truly to inform them of their
danger of it.

Such persons little Apprehend the danger they are in. For it is much better to
have an Awakened Conscience, that roats against thee, than a Sleepy, silent
Conscience, that does not reprove thee. It is better thy Conscience should not
speak a good word to thee; than, how great cause soever there be, that it
should speak nothing but good. That Conscience should speak Peace, when God by
his Word speaks Terror, is dreadful in it self, and more so, as to what it
signifies, and has a tendency to.

Neither is such a Spirit of Slum ber and Security only dangerous, as to the
Persons themselves, in regard of the State or their own Souls; But these
spiritual Judgments, where they prevail as to great numbers of Professing
Christians, (as it is observed by many,) are usually followed with some
terrible strokes of Temporal Judgment too. For as the first and greatest part
of the Deliverance of the Church is Spiritual, by the pouring out of the Divine
spirit; and the Recovery of the Life and Power of serious Religion, and the
more plentiful success of the Gospel Ministrations; and this makes way for
public National Blessings, even those of another kind, and is usually attended
with them: So the first Entrance into public National Judgments, as to
Temporals, is by spiritual Judgments, on the Body of the People. The abounding
of such spiritual Judgments, as we are now speaking of, opens the Door to
temporal Calamities, and is the usual Forerunner of the most terrible ones,
even of that kind.

So it was with the old World, so with the Jewish Nation before their
Destruction by the Romans; And so, says Salvian, was it with the African
Churches before the Inundation of the Goths and Vandals; And the like in later
Instances, I believe; among our Neighbors. I wish there be no moral
Prognostications of a Day of Evil on this Nation upon the same Account. We
ought to apprehend the danger of such a thing, We may on these moral grounds
very well fear it.

But it is the Case of Particular Persons I have now before me: And the more
Security and false Peace of Conscience any have under great Guilt unrepented
of, or known Duty continually neglected, the nearer do any such approach to the
danger of being given up of God to their own Hearts Lusts: If they are not
already entered into that dismal State. And yet how many such bless themselves
in their Hearts, and please themselves, that they are now free from the Fears
of Hell. They do not trouble themselves about the State of their Souls, as
others do, and as they formerly did: They have few or no sad, and serious
Thoughts, what shall become of them in the Everlasting World. Of all Others,
these are nearest to such a Judgment as that in the Text: For when they say
Peace and Safety, sudden Destruction shall overtake them as Travel on a Woman
with Child, 1 Thessalonians. 5.3. They now speak Peace to themselves, but the next Day
or Hour, they may know and feel the Truth of the divine Threatening. That there
is no Peace to the wicked. There are an hundred threatenings in the Book of God
against such, and not one Promise of safety for one Hour. And yet they can lie
down, and rise, and go up and down Securely. They are not afraid when they lie
down to sleep, that they shall awake in Hell before the next Morning. They are
not afraid when they arise and go abroad in the Morning, lest the Wrath of God
should overtake them before Night. Read the description of their sin and Danger
in that terrible passage, Deuteronomy. 29.18, 20.

II. ANOTHER Symptom of this Judgment, or dangerous Approach unto it, is when
the Ministry of the Word, and Gospel of Christ becomes a tastless, insipid,
ineffectual thing; not attended with any such spiritual Impressions as
formerly. Heretofore you hardly heard a Sermon without some Convictions of sin,
and Resolutions against it; the Word was quick and powerful, to give an
humbling sense of sin, and to excite your Resolutions to set upon neglected
Duties; but now there is no such thing. Yea, further, it may be the very
external Worship of the Gospel, the Ordinances and Institutions of it, the
Dispencers of them, and they that value and Mind these things, are now scorned
and reviled by you; For this is the Case of some Backsliders, after great
Pretenses, and an high Profession.

In such a Case you will find your spiritual Appetite to the Food of your
Souls, (which consists in Desires after the sincere Milk of the word that you
may grow thereby,) to be much abated and lost; and that Spiritual Savor and
Relish in the Food of your Souls, which followed those Desires, is lost too.
Your Preparations, Desires, and Designs in coming to such Institutions, are
otherwise than formerly. Though upon some Considerations you have not thought
fit to abandon the public Worship, yet you have no such Appetite or Taste, no
such Desires, and no such Relish, as to these things, as formerly you had.
Neither do you of late experience any of those excellent Effects, which the
Dispensation of the Gospel is designed to produce upon the Minds, and
Consciences, and Lives of Men. Though there is difference in the degree of
these Declensions, yet this is the high Road to Obduration, Hardness of Heart
and final Impenitence. And therefore, to use the Words of a learned Person
concerning such Apostates, Dr. Owen, Dominion of sin and Grace, p. 89.
The Calls of God unto such Backsliders in heart, for a return by Repentance,
are multiplied, and the Reasons of it are innumerable; and without it, it is
certain, that they shall perish Eternally, and they know not how soon they may
be overtaken with that Destruction, Prove. 29.1. He that being often reproved,
hardens his Heart, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without Remedy.

If Men once come to this, that, under the most searching, lively Sermons, they
can continue secure, and wilful in known sins; they may fear lest they be left
to go further; even to the hating of Godliness, and good Men; Or at least to be
so far stupefied, as not to feel any thing of the force of Gods Terrors, or the
sweetness of his Promises; but to make a Jest of sin, and think a Life of
Godliness a needless thing. Such Persons, when it comes to this, especially if
they grow old in this Course, have Cause to fear lest they be forsaken of God,
and given over to their own Hearts Lusts, sealed up under Judicial Blindness,
and Hardness of Heart.

III. WHEN The Spirit of Grace gives over striving with the Souls of Men. This
is a most dangerous Case: For except He return, they are irrecoverably lost.
There is an absolute necessity of the Influence of the Divine Spirit to the
Beginning, Progress, and Continuance of the Spiritual Life; and there is no
Opposition in the Soul, but this Spirit of Life and Power can overcome. But
when he gives over striving with men how deplorable must their Case be! And
this he does with many, after they have resisted the Spirit, and rebelled
against the Spirit, and vexed the Holy Spirit of God, as we read of some that
did, Acts 7.51. Now if this blessed Spirit move not upon the Soul of a
Backslider, he can never be recovered. And when he has often been repulsed and
grieved, and quenched, he may withdraw in Anger; and God may justly resolve, as
concerning the old World, that his Spirit shall strive no more, no longer with
them.

Especially when after a great Profession of Christianity, men turn Apostates,
and despise Preaching, and the other Institutions of the Gospel; having done
despite to the Spirit of Grace, Heb. 10.29. Which, though spoken of open, final
Apostates, should make Others that approach thereto to tremble. And of how much
soever Punishment shall such be thought guilty, that do thus Despite to the
Spirit of Christ, who bears Witness to his Person and Doctrine! Who can tell
the Dreadfulness and Horror of their Punishment? The Constitution of the Law
of Moses reached but to a temporal Death without mercy: But besides temporal.
Judgments, such a Guilt will expose them to Eternal Wrath; For the greatest sin
will have the greatest Punishment.

No wonder then if the Holy Spirit strive no more with Persons that come under
this tremendous Guilt; that sin against the Holy Spirit, even as a Spirit of
Grace; doing Despite to the Spirit of Grace, who did invite, and woo, and
draw them unto Christ, to bring them under the Bond of the Covenant. My Spirit
shall not always strive with men, Genesis 6.3. Heb. 3.13. Luke 13 7. When the
Spirit of Grace, and Love, and Benignity, has shone in upon their Minds, and
often touched their Consciences; and secretly whispered, Sinner, Will thou not
yet turn? What, have thou no Inclinations to return to me? O do not go on and
perish, etc. Now to despite this very Spirit of Grace, must needs be attended
with great Aggravations of Guilt, because it is after some Experience of his
Influence and Power. This must be one of the most dangerous Symptoms of a
perishing lost Condition: The Gospel must needs be hid unto such, because,
without the Light and Influence of the Holy Spirit, it can have no saving
Effect. If our Gospel be hid, says our Apostle, it is hid to them that are
lost, 2 Cor. 4.3. Whose Minds are blinded by Satan, lest the Light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ should shine into their Hearts.

Though I must here add, that no Man, I believe, can determine, what Degree of
this Guilt as to particular Persons, does distinguish those who are
Irrecoverably lost, from such as are Recoverable, and may be called to
Repentance.

IV. THOUGH The Spirit have not done striving; yet when the preaching of the
Word, though you cannot resist the Light of divine Truth, but somewhat of it
shines into the Mind and Conscience; if yet your Hearts stand out, and will not
yield, this is a dangerous Case. For men may be convinced by the Word, of the
sinfulness and Danger of their Condition; they may come to determine and to
pronounce Judgment upon themselves, that what God requires of them is but Just
and equal, and that hitherto they have not complied with his Call. One thing or
other, from day to day, has hindered them from coming up to the terms of the
Gospel, from a covenant Closure with the Son of God upon the Gospel Call: They
may say, and own it before God and Men, That they are deeply convinced such a
thing ought to be done; But I have not yet found the time, or the Leisure, or
the Heart, to retire into a Closet, and consider it, and set about it in good
earnest, and give up my Soul to him; I am convinced I must do it, or I cannot
enter into Heaven; I am convinced I must turn, or I shall dye; I am satisfied
this my present Course must issue in my Ruin, my Eternal Ruin; that if I go
on and dye in this Case, I am lost for ever. But yet, notwithstanding such
Convictions, with many, still the Heart holds out against all that can be said.

The highest and the most important matters that can be named, though
propounded with the clearest Evidence, and represented as of the nearest
Concern to them, yet do not effectually prevail with them. Though we propose,
in the Name of God, the Incouragment of that Blessedness, and Privilege, which
no man, that understands and believes, but must desire; Though we flash the
Fire of Hell before them, and endeavor by the Terrors of the Lord to persuade
them; yet they have heard of these things so often, that they are not moved by
them to yield themselves to the Lord. All that we speak in the Name of Christ
is as a Tale that is told, they have heard it so often it makes little
Impression: Things are come to that sad pass with them, and they are
Scrmon-proof to that Degree, that (to use the words of a Great man,) unless we
could speak of greater things than Heaven and Hell, we cannot move them. And
though their Minds are enlightened, and some Convictions begun; yet their Lusts
carry the Day against their Convictions: Conscience is baffled, or kept under
by the Power of vicious Inclinations.

And while men go on at this rate, who can tell but God may say, Let them
alone? but that he may give them up to those Lusts they have chosen, and so
their Condition be desperate: Though they themselves do not apprehend it to be
so? And as to individual Persons we cannot distinctly tell when it is so; but
so it may be, and God be clear in his Righteousness herein: because it is
penal, and after great Provocations, and it was lately otherwise with them: But
they sinned away their Mercy, and outstood their Day. There was a time when he
would have been found of them, but now he will not. O that thou had known in
this thy day the things that belong unto thy Peace! Now they are hid from thine
Eyes: A little while ago they were not.

But to prevent mistake, Remember, that though the Spirit retiring from such,
does infer their Day of Grace to be past, if he return not; and for ought you
can tell, he never may; yet he does not Darken their Minds by putting any ill
thoughts into them, or any ill Disposition of Mind. God retires, and the Spirit
leaves you, after you have provoked him, and so you are lost. He only says,
This wretched Creature will not be prevailed with, he persists in a careless
Neglect of me, and my Son and Spirit; we will leave him, and let him alone to
his own Lusts, to walk in his own Counsels. O dreadful Doom! how should the
Danger of it startle us!

V. THERE are Others, whose Case is exceeding dangerous, who, after some trial
in the ways of God, for want of that sensible Joy and Comfort which they
expected, grow weary of them, and leave them off. They were formerly diligent,
and constant in the outward performance of such and such Duties of Worship, in
public and private; but now have laid them aside. Some of these, I believe,
have now and then a sentence of Condemnation within themselves, but Others are
hardened past feeling. They tried a while, and began hopefully, and made a
little Progress; But their Convictions did not presently end in peace of
Conscience, they did not presently meet with that comfortable settlement, and
Establishment which they hoped for; either through their own Ignorance, or want
of Advice, and Counsel concerning the state of their Souls, or from the Power
of Temptation, etc. But not finding such Peace and Joy as they expected, or so
soon, they give over, and go back to their wonted Course of sin, and Neglect of
God.

This is the Case of many convinced in their Youth. They follow the Tendency of
that for some time, they hope for a good Issue, and that their Trouble of Soul
will be quickly over: They pray and read, and confess sin, and mourn for it,
etc. But find not presently the Peace they expected, they find their Lusts to
strive and stir still, and sin and Satan not to be overcome, and it may be some
Corruptions are more strong than formerly, or they are more sensible of their
strength, and Acting: Hereupon the Devil suggests to them matter of
Discouragment, and their own Hearts are ready to make them say, in a timorous
Despondency of Spirit, I see I am entered into a melancholy course of Life; I
see no end of these Troubles, I fear I shall never attain to Peace as long as I
hearken to my Conscience: If I thus let every sin trouble me, I shall never
have a days Quiet: If I am thus nice, and scrupulous, and tender about sin and
Duty, I shall never while I live get out of these Perplexities. Therefore I
will even cast all off, I will give my self more Liberty, and hearken to my
Conscience no longer; I will take my Pleasure as I see others do, and not wait
any longer for those Pleasures of another kind, which I was told of, but
despair of attaining. I give up all for lost, as to any of these things, I
shall never reach them; therefore I will do as well as I can for the present; I
will drive away my melancholy Thoughts by Company, and Wine, and Mirth, etc.

Hereupon such Persons come in a little while to dislike all such Books, and
Preaching as would revive their Convictions, and to avoid the very Company of
those who knew any thing of the state of their Souls, while under Conviction,
and are like to speak to them about it. That Ministry that will not let them
alone, and suffer them to be quiet in the Enjoyment of their Lusts, they cannot
relish; and in a little while they care for none at all; unless their Credit,
and Reputation, or Temporal Interest, or some such Motive, engage them to
attend it. Or else they cure themselves by some false Doctrines, that put an
end to their Convictions, and make them easily persuade themselves that they
are Elected, and that Christ is theirs, and their Sins are pardoned, or were so
from all Eternity, etc. But this is a hazardous and dreadful Case, when Persons
arrive to this pitch, they had need look about them, and Return quickly, lest
God should give them over.

VI. WHEN men continue in sin, and put off their Repentance and Turning to God,
with this Thought and Intention, that they will some time or other Repent, and
turn to God, but not yet. One can hardly tell, whether the provoking Guilt, and
Danger of such a Case, be greater than the horrid Absurdity of it. And yet this
is a Delusion that has ruined Thousands, and made ample Harvests for the Devil.
They have some Tremblings under the Word, as Felix when the Apostle discoursed
of Righteousness, and Temperance, and Judgment to come; But the convenient time
for their complying with their Convictions, and performing their good
Resolutions, is not come, but they intend it, they resolve it.

I would fain ask such Persons, that now continue in known sin, unreconciled to
God, who yet intend to Repent; whether they indeed think that God will Accept,
and forgive them when they do Repent, or that he will not? If they say, as
doubtless they will, We think and hope he will forgive us, and whenever we
truly Repent, he has promised to receive us. Yet,

1. IS it not then the basest, and the most horrid Ingratitude that can be, to
continue longer to abuse the Grace of God, to assront him, and rebel against
him, and delay your Return to him, with this Thought? Dare you say to the God
of all Grace, who has born with you so long, Lord, I have dishonored thy Name
for so many years, I have slighted thy Authority, I have disobeyed thy Calls, I
have refused thy Grace, I have exposed my self to thy righteous Anger all my
Life hitherto; O let me alone to do so thus much longer, and then I will
Repent, then I will ask thee forgiveness. How ungrateful, how absurd is such a
Speech!

2. WILL Not the same Argument that keeps thee from Repenting now, be as strong
hereafter? For after all the little objections against Repenting, and Reforming
at present; the only one at the bottom is, because it is Present; and that will
still hold: So that your Turning to God will be as improbable at any time
hereafter, as now.

It ought to be very well considered in this Case, That whoever continues in
sin with this Thought, and Design of Repenting hereafter; the Devil is sure to
prosper in any Attempt against that Man. For when that time comes to be
present, unto which he has adjourned his intended Repentance, the Argument will
be as strong against repenting then, as it is for delaying now. He will then
adjourn it to some distance season.

3. DO You know what Repentance is, that you will venture upon sin with a
Design to Repent? That is, that you will continue to do that, which you^
resolve and intend, to wish you had never done; to be heartily sorry that you
were such Fools as to do it. You resolve to do that, which you resolve to be
ashamed of, and to loath your selves for, and would give all the World, if it
were in your Power that you had not done it: For this is implied in Repentance.
Now is it becoming the Wisdom, and Reason of a Man, thus to act?

4. ART Thou sure to live to that time, unto which thou delayest thy
Repentance, and Turning to God? With how many every week is that the Case, who
intend to Repent, some time or other, but dye before the time comes?

VI. WHAT If God should give thee over to thine own Hearts Lusts? May he not
justly leave thee to the hardness of thine impenitent Heart? Does not such a
Carriage of thine deserve it? If thou will go on from Month to Month, from year
to year, in the neglect of known Duties, under the Convictions of Conscience,
that thou art not yet turned to God, or recon^iled to him; thou will, I say,
yet go on, and continue as thou art, though thy Heart tell thee, if thou dye in
this Condition thou must perish; and thou have nothing to relieve thee in this
sad Case, but only an Intention to Repent some time hereafter: O how Justly may
God deny that Grace to Thee, which thou have so long abused, and forfeited, and
wilt not now Accept! How righteously may thou be sealed up to Destruction, by
Gods forsaking of thee!

VII. THERE is another sort, whose Case is exceeding dangerous, viz. Who often
fall into the same sins, which they Repent of, and are sorry for. After they
have sinned, they Repent of those sins again; and after some Repentance, they
commit the same sins again; and so have the Aggravations of sinning against
Knowledge. Now to him that knows to do good, and does it not; that knows
what is evil, and forbears it not, to him it is sin with a Witness, Jam. 4.7.
He that knew his Masters Will, and did it not, shall be beaten with many
stripes, Luke 12.49.

It is a dreadful passage, though spoken of Apostates from the Profession of
Christianity unto Judaism or Heathenism, Heb. 10 26, 27, 28, 29. That such as
sin after the Knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more sacrifice for such
sins. For what further Guilt may not such sins against Knowledge bring them to,
and issue in? Doubtless the more you know, and have considered the Issue and
Consequence of such sins, (as by renewing your Repentance is implied, that
something of this kind has been done;) the more aggravated is your Sin
afterward, and the more dangerous your Case. And the more struggle and striving
there has been of Conscience against Corruption; and yet thy Lusts have carried
the day and got the victory over Conscience; The more Vows and Promises of
Amendment that you have made, and broken, and sinned against; repenting of your
Repentance, as Pharaoh did; the greater is your sin and Danger: The more
Warnings you have had of God by his Providence, and the more awakening Calls of
his Word, and yet you continue this Course of ^^^ning, and repenting, of
repenting, and sinning still; the more dangerous is your Case. Especially under
a professon of Religion. For in a little time Conscience thus affronted is like
enough to be hardened, and to be seared as with an hot Iron, 2 Thessalonians. 2.12. And
God may give you up to an impenitent Heart, leaving you to commit the grossest
Abominations, without shame or Remorse, as he did the Gentiles, Rom 1.21, 24,
26, 28.

If such be ever awakened to Repentance in this World, this very Consideration
will pierce them to the Heart; this will make them ready to despair; That, as
the Apostle said of himself, I did it ignorantly, therefore I obtained Mercy;
They will be ready to cry out against themselves, I did so and so, but it was
against Knowledge, therefore there is no Mercy for me. There remains for such,
without Repentance a most fearful Punishment, And a fearful looking for, and
Expectation of such Punishment, in the Consciences of those who have sinned at
this rate. And there be very Few of those who have lived long under the
preaching of the Word, and continued to sin thus against Knowledge, and
Conscience till they were old; very few such are recovered to Repentance.
Certainly the greater the Knowledge is you sin against the more you provoke God
to give you up to a reprobate Mind, and to leave you to hardness of Heart.

VIII. WHEN, Notwithstanding the Profession of Religion, and outward Attendance
on the Duties of it, yet sin has the Dominion and Mastery in the Soul; and
sensual Inclinations are indulged without restraint, even as to gross and
notorious sins. There are some Backsliders, who would formerly have started
back at such or such a Temptation, who can now boldly enter into it, readily
yield, and are easily overcome, without Concern or struggle. Sin has the
Mastery and Dominion in the Soul, they go on to commit it without Check or
Fear. They consent to its Rule, they are willing subjects: For to whom you
yield your Servants to obey, his Servants ye are, Romans 6.6. And that victory
which Sin has got by your own Consent, may justly, as it commonly does in the
swent, bring that Bondage and Slavery under sin, which is Judicial, and Penal.
That slavery to sin which at first was voluntary, afterward becomes
unavoidable. You are held in the Chains of your own sins, you are captivated
and ovrecome by your own lusts. While they promise themselves Liberty, says the
Apostle, they are the Servants of Corruption: for of whom a Man is overcome, of
the same is he brought into Bondage, 2. Pet. 2.19.

There is less hope of such Men that are grown loose and sensual, after they
have been forward Professors: And they are harder to be recovered than any
others. For they are more likely to be left of God. Some have unwarily said,
that an open profligate debauched Person is nearer the Grace of God and
salvation by Christ, than a moral honest Man, that is kept from the grosser
Pollutions of the World. But such Expressions should not make us think, that
God will invite and woo us the more earnestly, the further our sins have
divorced us from him. Dr. Hammonds Sermons, p. 275.
It is true, the Holy Ghost can cleanse and adorn, and prepare himself a room
in any Heart, and soften it, and not be repulsed by the most habituate sin, or
Devil. And some have been thus snatched like firebrarnds out of the Fire, and
changed from incarnate Devils to incarnate Saints. Yet those extraordinary and
rare Examples must not be thought a Rule. Therefore in ordinary charitable
Reason, we ought to Judge more hopefully of those Men, who have not run into
the grossest sensualities, and Corruptions of the World; of such especially,
who by any common Influence of the Spirit, with the Word, have been kept back
from great Transgressions; so that by the Knowledge of Christ, they have
escaped the Pollutions of the World; and by the Advantage of their Education,
and common Grace, and Providence, have been restrained from foul Miscarriages.
If such as these do afterward become profane, and loose, and sensual, and
grossly carnal; it is said of them, their latter End is like to be worse than
their Beginning. And it had been better for them not to have known the Way of
Righteousness, than, after having known it, to turn from the holy Commandments.

That some Men may sin themselves into a state of Incurable Impenitence, is
very plain from Scripture. Your neglect and Provocations may put Christ to his
Irreversible Oath, and make him swear as he once did, that you shall not enter
into his Rest, Heb. 3.11. And that this is of force in the times of the Gospel,
is more than intimated, v. 12. Exhorting professing Christians at that time, to
beware of an Evil heart of Unbelief, from the Example of the Israelites. That
Terrible place. Isa. 6.9. Is quoted no less than six times in the New
Tastament, as if it belonged to them, who sit under Gospel Light.

As to that difficult passage, Heb. 6.4, 5. Concerning those who had been made
Partakers of the Holy Ghost, and tasted of the good Word of God, and of the
Powers of the World to come, and yet did fall away; it is said, it is
impossible to renew them again. In the ordinary way it is not to be expected.
Though that Passage do especially respect such Apostates as openly renounced
Christianity, crucifying the Son of God afresh: Yet such as, after a plausible
Profession, turn to a loose and notoriously wicked Life, whether they keep that
Profession still, or abandon it, they are greatly in danger of the like
Judgment. For the Earth that drinks in the Rain that often comes upon it, and
yet brings forth nothing but Briars, is rejected, and is nigh unto Cursing,
whose end is to be burned, as it there follows, 7, 8. V. Their Case is next to
hopeless and desperate. And what reason have all Backsliders to fear, lest they
sin themselves into such a dismal state.

Use. 1. And let that be the first Improvement I would make of this Discourse,
To awaken Apostates, and Backsliders to Consider their Danger. It may be you
have gratified your Lusts, notwithstanding the Light of Conscience, and the
Motions of the Spirit; Now, it may be, you can sin with less Regret, and don't
feel the Wounds you give your selves by your Transgressions? Can you say but
that the Blessed Spirit is retired in great measure already? And is it any
Wonder, after so many struggles and Conflicts, if he should for ever Retire,
and leave you to the full uncontrollable Dominion of your own Lusts? If he
should say, he that is filthy, let him be ^^thy still; because you would not
bepurged, you shall not be purged, till I make my Fury to rest upon you.

Awake therefore, and consider your Danger. You that find any of these things
agree to your own Case beware lest you be in the Number of those that draw back
unto Perdition, in whom God says his Soul can take no Pleasure, Heb. 10.38.
Take no Pleasure, that is, whom he loathes, and detests. Were we not under some
great Declension, some sad degree of Hardness of Heart our selves; how should
we pity the Case of all such Persons who are near this Judgment? With what
hearty Concern for them, should we endeavor their Recovery, did we know
better, and believingly consider more, what it is to be left of God, and given
over! With what hearty Grief should I mourn over such Persons! With what
Groans, and Tears of Compassion should I warn them, and try to awaken them, if
my own Heart were not under somewhat of this Hardness, which they are like to be
totally given up unto!

I confess, at first, I was loath to preach, or publish these things, lest I
should drive some to Despair. But upon more serious Consideration, I do not
think that the Generality of People are so very apt to Despair. They have ten
thousand ways to flatter themselves, and they will hope for the most part, in
despite of all Arguments to the Contrary. In all the Scripture there is but
one Example of a despairing Man, and that was Judas; Who did not despair by
reason of any terrible Doctrine which was preached to him, but because of the
Load of his own foul sin and the Weakness and Pusillanimity of his own Spirit.
But for one who despairs, O what Multitudes are there who live in sin, and yet
Sibi suaviter benedicunt, think themselves in a good Condition, and that all is
well; Though the Scriptures say, that the Righteous shall scarcely be saved,
and that the Gate is straight that leads to Life; yet every Body almost hopes
to be saved, in the Course they are in, though it be the broad way.

YOU that are under any of these dangerous Symptoms that approach to such a
Judgment, take heed of Encouraging your selves in a false Hope of ^vation.
Bethink your selves, ap^nd your Danger, and awake to prevent the dismal Issue.
Make haste, and escape for your Life, if yet there be Hope of your Recovery. It
must be speedy Repentance, now, while it is called to day, before the Master of
the House be gone, and the Door shut: For then many shall seek to enter, and
shall not be able. For so we read, Luke 13.24, 25, Verses connected, without a
full stop between them, as in our Translation.

If you are not yet sealed up, and given over, (as the Motions of the Spirit
yet striving with you, and some Concernedness about your own Case, is a good
Argument that you are not) O awake, and call upon God! Remembering whence you
are fallen, and repent presently: For if you resist, and refuse this Call of
God, you may never have Another, or never have Grace to hearken to another, and
then the Issue will be the same.

I would hope, that none of those to whom I now speak are so Lost but they may
be Recovered (And I cannot think that any who reads this, is in so hopeless a
Case, but he may find Me^cy, if yet he will seek it.) He has (...) sinned the
sin unto Death, who is afraid left he be guilty of it You are not absolutely
given over and forsaken of God, or sure that you shall finally be so, that this
Spirit will no more return, though in some Degree you are forsaken; If you are
brought to consider your Danger, and to resolve to use Means to prevent the
fatal Issue: You are not finally left of God, whatever dangerous Approaches you
have made to such a Judgment. In the Consideration therefore of your Danger,
awake to use Gods appointed Means. And here,

1. I might advise, that you Watch carefully lest you enter into Temptation. 2.
That you take heed of slight Thoughts of sin. 3. That you labor to have right
Apprehensions concerning the Attributes of God, and the tenor of the New
Covenant by Christ Jesus. 4. That you attend the Ministry of the Word, with a
Desire and Design of some spiritual Advantage, suitable to your own Case. Take
heed of being slight and careless in the use of those Means, that must cure a
hard Heart, if ever it be cured. 5. In the (...) of all Means, look up to God
for (...) Influence of the divine Spirit. Apprehend the Necessity of it, for
the Cure of a hard or backsliding Heart. 6. Call your selves often to an
Account how matters stand between God and you. 7. Engage more heartily,
seriously, and constantly in the use of secret Prayer. 8. Improve the sickness
and Death of others, as Warnings to awaken the Thoughts of your own. 9. In any
Doubt and Difficulty of Conscience, (especially under Temptations to Despair,)
do not scruple to open your Case to some faithful Minister of Christ, that may
enlighten and and guide you. 10. Labor to understand distinctly what that
Repentance toward God is, and that Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, which are
the stated Terms of Life, and the Condition of the new Covenant. And never give
over the use of Means, till you are brought to Repent of all your sins against
God, and truly to believe in Jesus Christ with all your Heart; evidencing your
unfeigned Faith by new Obedience. Therefore take heed by what Marks and Signs
you Judge your selves, lest all your Soul Trouble should end in a false Peace.

I connot conclude without repeating the Admonition against that false Peace,
which one great Work of our Ministry is to destroy. For there are Multitdes of
People who pretend to love God, and to love good Men, and to trust in Christ
that he dyed for them, and to rely on Christ, and to cast themselves on Christ,
and think they believe on him, and that they shall be saved. Who will tell you
that as for Obedience, they mind it as they can, though they be not as good as
others; their Hearts are good, and they mean well, and they know their own
Hearts better than Ministers do: they are sure they believe in Christ; and they
will conclude that all is well, etc. Tho it is notorious of Many such, that they
are Ignorant of God, and strangers to Christ, and live in the common allowed
practice of great sins. Yet they will thus Hope well of themselves, and speak
Peace to themselves.

NO Wonder if they do so now, when even at the Day of Judgment some are brought
in disputing with Christ, till the Heart of their Hopes (...) broken by his
condemning Sen^ce. Not as if those that now dye (...) ^^enitence and Unbelief,
should not know, or believe that they shall perish for ever, till after the
general Judgment. But matters seem there to be represented, as applied to the
Persons of those who shall be found alive at the End of this World, or whose
Eternal State in the next World is concluded, by what their Case is when they
leave this state of salvation.

SEE Therefore that your Hopes be of a right Kind, grounded on Scripture
Evidence, pur^fying the Heart, conquering the World, exciting thy Desires after
Christ and Heaven, making thee to sin less, and to please and glorify God
more. Such an Hope you may hold fast, it will not make you ashamed. But of all
things fear a false Hope. Dread it as you would the sin of Despair; yea as the
most dangerous of the two, because more common. I mean not a Despair of the
sufficiency and Willingness of Christ to pardon and save thee, if thou repent,
and believe, and obey him; Nor a Despair of finding Mercy, if thou heartily
seek it. But despair thou must of ever seeing God without Holiness. Despair
that Christ will ever be the Author of eternal Salvation to any, but such as
believe and obey him: Despair of escaping Eternal Death if thou live after the
Flesh: Despair of entering into Heaven if thou will not seek it in the first
place: Despair of escaping the Doom of perishing with the Ungodly, except you
soundly Repent, except you turn to God, and Holiness, from sin and the World;
except you penitently and thankfully accept of Christ, obey and follow him as
your Lord and Savior. Despair therefore of ever being saved in the state thou
art in, with whom it is not thus.

GOD will ere long deal plainly with thee, and let thee know the Truth. And
what will it avail thy perishing Soul, for Ministers to deceive, and flatter
thee with vain Hopes; when, without Repentance and turning to God in Christ,
there is none? Nay if any thing keep thee out of Heaven, (I speak of the Case
of most ordinary Hearers, and Professors,) If any thing keep thee out of
Heaven, it is a ^se and groundless Hope of coming thi^^er.

CHRISTIANS, We must (...) speak plain. Would you have us be unfaithful to God
and you: We must be accountable to God ere long, as well as you: We must stand
before his Judgment seat as well as you. Why should we give you Hopes, if God
do give you none? I therefore say it again, that, without speedy and sincere
Repentance toward God, and Faith in Jesus Christ, evidenced by cordial
faithful Obedience to him, there is no Hope, for any one of you. And they that
hear often of these things, and will yet go on in sin; it is Just with God to
leave them, and give them up to their own Hearts Lust. Therefore (...) away
your Transgressions, return to the Lord with all your Hearts, and yield your
selves to the Claim, and Call of Christ without Delay, while Mercy invites you,
and Grace may be had, for why will you Dye, O House of Israel?

FINIS.
Books Printed for Abraham Chandler.
THe Mourners Companion, or Funeral Discourses from several Texts, 8^ price
bound 1 s. 6 d.

Death a Deliverance, in a Funeral Discourse from 2 Cor. 5.4. fit to bind with
the Mourners Companion.

Sacramental Discourses on several Texts before and after the Lords Supper,
together with a Para^^ ^n the Lords Prayer, 12o, 1 s.

Practical Relfection (...) are Earthquakes in Jamaica (...) Malta, etc. With a
Particular (...) Account of those, and Diverse other Earthquakes, 8o, price
bound 1 s. 6 d.

Serious Reflections on Time and Eternity, with some other Subjects Moral and
Divine, to which is Annexed an Appendix concerning the first Day of the year,
how observed by the Jews, and may best be employed by a serious Christian.

All five by Mr. John Shower.


